K
'1,-m
^■^J*
f^r
'' %-<
Si--'
»#'<"'   i
' ,1
<♦■%'
^   ><^
'"-    X r-
'^e^"-   ''
.^.
-t   4 4
'^^'^-y
■^^^^'" L'l'^*^^-
Afghanistan. 107
anotlier succeeded in establishing their dominion over the
whole of the Asiatic continent, with the sole exception of
China. These rulers of the East have a way of puzzling the
unlearned, by appearing in history under the varying names
of Tatars, Usbegs, Moghuls, and Turcomans, but by whatever
name they may be called, they are all of one race—a race
which for many centuries gave despotic rulers to both India
and Afghanistan.
The first Turkish Sultan of both these countries was
Mahmoud Ghuzni; and since his time the rich and hapless
land of India has suffered from no less than six principal
invasions of Turks from Central Asia, who have swept down
from Cabul to devastate the fertile plains of Hindustan.
Until the days of British rule in India, whoever wore the
crown of Cabul held the crown of India, if not in his hand
at least within his grasp. One invasion, therefore, after
another followed in quick succession—the invaders being
all alike animated by a thirst for plunder, a deadly religious
hatred of the ancient Hindoo creed, and a tierce determi¬
nation to sack their villages and destroy their temples.
We give the dates of the six principal invasions to which
we have already referred:—
In 1002 A.D. The Turks under Mahmoud of Ghuzni.
1303 A.D. The Moghuls under Genghis Khan.
1398 A.D. The Turks under Tamerlane.
1525 A.D. The Turks under Sultan Baber.
1739 A.D. Nadir Shah's Invasion.
1761 A.D. Ahmed Shah's Invasion.
These are, no doubt, some of the most noted invasions of
India from Cabul, but in point of fact the highlanders of
Afghanistan looked upon the plains of Hindustan as the
Goths looked upon Italy, and their attacks were continual.
Mahmoud of Ghuzni alone, made no less than thirty forays
into India ; and these incessant wars never ceased until
the British Government acquired permanent possession of
Northern India.
Afghanistan itself has remained meanwhile beneath the
undisputed rule of its Asiatic conquerors; and there—as
formerly in India, as now in Europe—Turkish rule has caused
ceaseless rebellion and internecine war; it has ended in tlie
permanent oppression and grinding poverty of the people.
It is true that the Turks of Central Asia, like the Turks of
Europe, have the virtues of a military aristocracy, and are
generally  both  brave and  truthful; but their whole civil
MORRISON AND GIBB,   EDINBURGH,
PRINTERS  TO  HER  MAJESTY'S  STATIONERY   OFFICE.
CONTENTS.
Afghanistan, by Delta, 
Archbishop's Visit, The, by A. G. V. S., 
At Home and Abroad —
A Dutch Sketch and a Dutch Fair.—III., by Mr.s. F. Carew,    .
Four Sunny Weeks at Blankenberge.—IV., by H. L. R., .
In the Pyrenees.—V., by M. Humphrey 
Life in a Desert Island.—VI., by M. D., .... 440,
Notes from Savoy. —II., by the Author of ' Vera,' etc..
Bank Directors'Trial, The, by L. D., 
Beggar of Capo di Monte, The, by the Author of ' Mabel's Cross,'        25,
124, 160, 208, 270, 308, 355, 395, 466, 497,
Byeways of History.—I., Life of Halfred Ottarson, Chap. I., by E. J.
Cackle, by H. A. Duff, 
Coffee-Houses, Extension of, by C. L. Johnstone,
Country Subjects and Pursuits—
Afloat, by Y. 0.,      .
Among the Red Deer, by M. M. C, .
Botany.—I., by L. H. Rogerson,
Botany.—II., by C. M. Yonge,
Dairy, The, by M. M.,     .
Field Geology, by Charlotte Carmichael,
Fishing for Ladies, by E. J. 0.,
Fox-Hunting, by E. J. 0.,
Garden Games, by Nono, .
Gardening, by L. H. Rogerson,
Hedging and Ditching, by Constance O'Brien, .
Manners and Customs in the Henyard, by M. S. T.,.
On the Ice, by the Hon. Mrs. Greenhill Gaixlyne,
Debates of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society, .
Edinburgh Association for the Uinversity Education of Women, by
One of the Council, 
Education in the Arctic Circle, by Catherine Ray,
Female Novelists, Our—
-Tulia Kavanagh.—XXV., bv B. C. J. D., .
Mr.s. Gaskell.—XXIV., by A. D.,     .
Ghost, A, by M. E. F. T.,
Impressions of Theophra.stus Such, by G.,
' Is the Influence of Browning advantageous to English Literature ?'—
I., by A. G.,
,, ,, ,, II., by J. M.,
' Is the Theory of Evolution necessarily opposed to Christianity ?'—
II., by Jeanie Morison 
Letter from Sandwell, A, by J. A. Winscom, 
Library Table, Our, 46, 91, 141, 187, 234, 282, 330, 378, 427, 477, 523,
Life and Letters of James Hinton, by the Hon. Mrs. L. Tollemache,
PACK
106
371
174
262
295
487
49
132
61,
559
0.,
529
182
547
385
433
204
289
246
481
145
73
341
337
534
116
15
44
326
79
97
1
39
505
193
241
56
277
569
323
IV
Coiitetits.
Maxims and Aphorisms from the Writings of Goethe, by the Hon
Mrs. L. Tolleniaciie, ....
Jlusical Season, Our, by J. ]\I.,
My Shoes, or a Month in a Life, liy Nono,
Night after the Ball, The, by Helen MacEwen,
Notes on the Exhibition of the R. S. A., by L. D.
Notices to Correspondents,      48, 96, 144, 192, 240, 288, 336,
On Originality, by the Hon. Mrs. L. Tollemache,    .
Ower True Tales—
I.—Ghost of Henly Cottage.    Part I., by Nono,
Poetry—
Ballad of the Ideal, A, by E. J. 0., .
Christmas Chimes, by L. D.,    .
Death, by M. E. F. t.,    .
Empty, by E. J. 0.,
Hymn for Travellers, by the Hon. Mrs. L. Tollemache,
In Memoriam, December 14th, by L. D.,
In Memoriam, Lieut. Coghill, by M. Humphrey,
In the Churchyard—Cannes, by H. A. Duff,
Night, by H. M. L.,
Noah, by the Hon. Mrs. L. Tollcmache,
Nothing to Do, by 6.,
Ode from Euripides, by M'xfyafiTn:, .
Our Tea Party 
Pour Passer le Temps, by H. M. Lloyd,
Remembrance, by C. M. Williams,   .
Sea Chimes, by Helama,   .
Siege of Strasburg, The, by Mrs. H. King.
Thirteenth Guest, The, by L. I).,      .
To my Old Piano, by Alma Glen,
Too Late, by H. A. Duff, .
Translation from Heine, by Duma?,   .
Written in Dejection by the Sea, by E. J. 0.,
Quakers, A Sketch of the, by a Quaker,   .
Question Series, 47, 94, 142, 189, 237, 285, 333, 381, 430, 478,
Robinson's Heiress, by Nono, .
Story of Roumania, The, by C. L. Johnstone,
Stray Notes,     .        .      95, 143, 191, 239, 287, 334, 382, 431, 479,
Studies from Shakspere—
' Is Lady Macbeth a fiend-like Queen ? '—V., by A. D.,    .
Minor Characters in Richard III.—III., by Constance O'Brien,
Shakspere's Witches.—IV., by Charlotte Carmichael,
Trellan Mystery, The, by Mrs. Sheringham,    ....
University Education for Women in Scotland, by L. D., .
Working Ladies' Guild, The, by H. A. Duff, 
384, 432,
528
b-Zo,
281
214
450
177
231
480,
572
424
538
202
568
370
496
377
1
160
123
522
33
461
90
186
324
214
251
82
293
308
282
354
394
409
570
252
346
571
406
152
304
83
512
222
EEEATA.
Page 283, line T-,for kokangel, read kakangel.
Page 308, line 21, for buried fire, read varied fire.
THE LADIES' EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.
In JHemoriam.
December 14, 18G1; Decembek 14, 1878.
Cold on our hearts, like chill December's snows.
Sad fell the tidings on our nation's ears,
Turning the memory backward through long years
To a dark day, when Britain's wail arose.
And for her Eoyal widow fell her tears.
Once more Death breaks upon a nation's mirth;
Bids us through tears our Christmas anthems raise.
Still, mourning Queen and mother! Britain prays
That He who took our griefs by human Birth,
Will mete thy strength unto thy sorrowing days.
L. D.
©ur J?cmalc ilobeltsts.
XXIV.
MES.   GASKELL.
h. 1810; d. 1865.
The immense increase of serial publications of every degree
during the last tlurty years is certainly a marked charac¬
teristic of these giddy-paced times, and the question whether
this increase has, on the whole, been favourable or unfavour¬
able to the literature and culture of our days, is one which
cannot easily or briefly be answered. There are those who
complain, with even too much truth, that the rising genera¬
tion will never know that solace of so many ills of mind,
body, and estate — the friendship of books ; that except
among the really studious, who will always be the few,
No. 49.—January 1879. .
2 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
general culture W'ill be a shallower thing when ordinary
readers gain their knowledge exclusively from a host of
magazines and reviews, to the neglect of more solid mental
food. We will not pursue these reflections, whatever our
private opinion may be, lest our editors should consider a
discourteous use to be made of the Ladies Edinhurgh Maga¬
zine. We will only remark, ere proceeding to the imme¬
diate subject of this paper, that we probably owe to the
increased number of monthly and weekly serials the
development of much talent which might otherwise never
have found an outlet. There is no denying that our present
over-abundance of magazines does foster the production of a
lamentable quantity of hasty, indifferent, and trashy writing;
but to set against that, we think that some important gains
to literature would have been lost to the world had several
of our higher-class periodicals never existed. We should
not, perhaps, have been enriched by so many admirable
works of ]\[rs. Gaskell's genius if Llouscliold Words and
other similar publications had not afforded her a field for
the practice of the author's craft, and a means free from
risk, trouble, and publicity of addressing a large circle of
readers. The facts known to the public about this dis¬
tinguished novelist are scanty indeed, and in her quiet,
inconspicuous life there are probably few to know: we must
gather our opinion of her mind, character, and education
from her books. Her maiden name was Stevenson, and she
was born in 1810 at the little country town of Knutsford, in
Cheshire. Much of her early life was passed under the care
of an aunt at Aldeiiey Edge, a pleasant spot in the same
county, where many wealthy manufacturers have their villa
residences. Tlie ' Edge' rises abruptly to an elevation of
about 360 feet from the generally flat plain of the surround¬
ing country; the pure sweet breezes blow over miles of green
undulating pasture-land from the stormy Irish Sea, the
glorious Welsh mountains, and the rugged Derbyshire hills;
and it commands a wide prospect of rich, quiet, English
beauty refreshing to ears, eyes, and minds, jaded by the toil
and smoke of the neighbouring human hives of industry.
Her father was a Eev. William Stevenson, and probably had
some ministerial charge at or near her birthplace; and her
girlhood seems to have ebbed peacefully by among just such
scenes and in such society as she has endeared to us in
Cranford. Nor was more intellectual company wholly out
of her reach ; and topics of liigher interest than those which
satisfied dear Miss Matty and her congeners cannot have
Our Female Novelists. 3
been wanting to tlie conversation when Elizabeth Cleghorn
Stevenson, ]\Iiss AVinkworth, and a few such friends met, as
they often did, in social intercourse. In the neighbourhood of
her early liome there are many old Halls and Manors, where,
in spite of the vicinity of democratic Manchester and other
manufacturing towns, such unadulterated Toryism lingered
as she has described with such a kindly pen in the characters
of Squire Hatnley and my Lady Ludlow. Quiet, uneventful
wedded life succeeded these years of insensible education and
formation of opinions. About the year 1832 she became
the wife of the Eev. William Gaskell, minister of a Unitarian
chapel in Cross Street, Manchester, and there she was
brought into immediate and personal contact with the rest¬
less, intelligent population of that centre of the manufactur¬
ing districts, at a time of great political agitation and of
grinding public distress. Her position as a minister's wife
no doubt gave her many opportunities of becoming intimately
acquainted with the middle and artisan class, of which she
writes so well; and in Manchester she made one honoured
friend, Avhose life-work and experiences may perhaps have
given that tinge of sadness which so largely pervades all her
books.
In Mary Barton she writes thus :—
' " Sick, and in prison, and ye visited me." Shall yon or I receive
such blessing. I know one who will. An overseer of a foundry, an
aged man with hoary hair, has spent his Sabbaths for many years in
visiting the prisoners and the afflicted in Manchester New Bailey ;
not merely advising and comforting, but putting means into their
power of regaining the virtue and peace they had lost ; becoming
himself tlieir guarantee in obtaining employment, and never desert¬
ing those who have once asked help from him.'
These words can refer to no other than Thomas Wright,
the' Manchester Prison Philanthropist,'who, following in the
steps of the reformer Howard, gave himself during the
greater part of his hard-working life to the Christ-like work
of seeking and saving the lost. Until the year 1852 he
earned his bread in the sweat of his brow, spending his
scanty leisure and more than a third of his weekly wages in
the w^ork of mercy he had chosen. At the age of sixty-three
a public subscription was set on foot, to provide him with an
income sufficient to release him from the necessity of daily
toil. Upwards of £3000 was raised, and Thomas Wright was
thus enabled to devote his declining years entirely to the
work he loved so well, in which, we believe, his labours had
been blessed with a large amount of success.    Perhaps Mrs.
4 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Gaskell's marvellous fertility iu tale-writing, as well as the
picturesqueness and tragic cast of most of her stories, may
owe something to her friendship with this ' Son of Consola¬
tion,' and embody many an ' ower true tale.' She has her¬
self described the personal experience which, year after year,
wrought in upon her soul that deep impression to which we
owe her first and most powerful novel.
' For three years past trade had been getting worse and worse, and
the price of provisions higher and higher. This disparity between
the amount of the earnings of the working classes and the price of
their food, occasioned in more cases than could well be imagined
disease and death. Whole families went through a gradual starvation.
They only wanted a Dante to record their sufferings, and yet even
his words would fall short of the awful truth : they could only
present an outline of the tremendous facts of the destitution that
surrounded thousands upon thousands in tlie terrible years 1839,
1840, and 1841. It need excite no surprise, then, to learn that a bad
feeling between working men and the upper classes became very
strong in this season of privation. The most deplorable and enduring
evil that arose out of the period of commercial depression to which I
refer, was this feeling of alienation between the diflerent classes of
society. It is so impossible to describe, or even faintly to picture,
the state of distress which prevailed in the town at that time, that I
will not attempt it, and yet I think again, that surely in a Christian
land it was not known even so feebly as words could tell it, or the
more happy and fortunate would have thronged with their sympathy
and aid. In many instances the sufferers wept first and then they
cursed.'
Mrs. Gaskell lived to see Lancashire pass through such
another season of widespread distress, when, through the
total failure of the cotton supply during the American war,
mill after mill stood closed and silent, and ' the famine was
sore in the land;' but with what noble patience and manly
reasonableness was the suffering borne, and with what
sympathy and thoughtful tenderness did all classes combine,
from the Sovereign and the peer to the meanest peasant, to
alleviate, as much as might be, the pressure of the calamity !
Mrs. Gaskell was one of the foremost in counsel and in action
for relief, and must surely have felt that among the influences
which had created a kindlier feeling between gentle and
simple her pen had done some service. Mary Barton and
North and South had not been written in vain.
It would be interesting to know—but we are unable to
satisfy our own or our readers' curiosity on this point—
whether Mrs. Gaskell had early been in the habit of com¬
position, or had for any time cherished the ambition of
becoming an author. Though Mm'y Barton is not absolutely
free from some faults of inartistic construction, it strikes us
Ottr Female Novelists. 5
as being too powerfully written for the work of an entirely
unpractised hand. Yet if that be true which we have heard
reported, concerning the impulse which launched Mrs.
Gaskell on the career of a successful novelist, this book was
literally her first essay in print. About the year 1832, a
young aspirant after fame, to which literature seemed to
open the readiest way, turned his attention more directly to
public life and to politics. Vivian Grey and subsequent
novels had made the name of Benjamin Disraeli already
well known in literary circles, and when, some years after
the readjustment of the electoral system, he attained the
object of his ambition, a seat in Parliament, he again took
up fiction to give expression to his views. We have heard
that Mrs. Gaskell read with deep interest Mr. Disraeli's novel
of Sibyl, which entwines with its story so many of those
questions between rich and poor, labour and capital, employer
and employed, with which her Manchester life made her
familiar. And it seemed to her, who had spent years among
these toiling, suffering men and women, misunderstanding
one another and misunderstood, that though the brilliant
novelist and politician had not succeeded amiss in the study
of his subject, yet there were points he had not dealt with,
depths which he had not sounded;—why should not she,
with her more intimate knowledge, seek from the world a
hearing for ' truth embodied in a tale' ? She seems, however,
to have found it hard to shake off her dislike to any sort of
publicity. The book was published anonymously in 1848, a
year marked by revolution abroad and Chartist alarms at
home; and it soon gave rise to as hot debate among
reviewers regarding the sex and intention of the author as
had been waged not long before over Jaiie Eyre. Reading it
now, when time has soothed down the asperities of that day,
we can see how unjustly the writer was charged with one¬
sided and partial advocacy; but considering all that was then
felt and feared, we can hardly wonder that the book appeared
to some a bit of special pleading, all the more dangerous
from its undoubted power and fascination. But to our
mind, though we should probably have differed from Mrs.
Gaskell on many subjects, she has always seemed to us a
very fair and tolerant writer. She takes her side vigorously,
it is true, and the opinions she holds are just what we should
naturally look for in one formed by the influences she was
subjected to, and by her position and surroundings ; but we
think that a strong characteristic of her writings is a kindly
willingness to regard debateable matters from another's point
6 The Ladies Edinbtirgh Magazine.
of view, not only admitting that there are two sides to a
question, but really endeavouring to do justice to her
opponent's reasoning and sincerity. There are many passages
in her books where she seems to hold back the full meed of
censure, as if restrained by the feeling which has been thus
beautifully expressed:—
' Yet teach me, God, a milder thought,
Lest I, of all Thy blood liatli bought,
Least honourable be ;
And that which moves me to condemn.
Be rather want of love for them
Than jealousy for Thee.'
It is, however, 'certain that the Lancashire magnates of
that day were by no means flattered by the picture she drew
of them, and denounced Mary Barton as a mischievous book,
calculated to inflame ignorant and excitable minds. Yet it
made her fame, and from that time forward, even before her
name became generally known,' a new novel by the author
of Mary Barton' was an intellectual pleasure eagerly antici¬
pated at brief intervals by a large circle of readers, while its
repeated issue in numerous editions testifies to its undying
popularity. It can hardly be necessary here to recall the
outlines of any of these charming books, which, happily for
the increase of goodness, of instruction, and delight, are
entering on a new lease of life in Messrs. Smith & Elder's
attractive series of green volumes. Having once broken
silence, she continued to publish at such brief intervals as to
suggest the idea that authorship mi;st have long been an
intention in her mind, and that she had ample stores of
material laid by for future use. She certainly had the gift
of telling a story in a high degree, and it is only since her
death, and from the collections which have been made of her
minor tales, that we have really any idea of the astonishing
activity of her pen.
In 1850 she published, still anonymously, the exquisite
little tale of TJie Moorland Cottage. It is scarcely so well
known as others of her minor tales, and until its reproduction
in later collections of these, it was not very generally con¬
nected with her name. This seems strange, as it is quite on
a level with others, such as Cousin Pliyllis, which obtained
much favour among her admirers, the reason being, probably,
that it came out before she had secured the vantage ground
of a popular writer. The story, as it approaches its culmin¬
ating point of interest, is perhaps rather improbable; but
the characters are excellently described, and the true-hearted
Oil)' Female Novelists. 7
heroine carries out a thought Mrs. Gaskell was fond of dealing
with—a woman's self-sacrifice in behalf of a selfish and un¬
worthy subject; unworthy, that is, as regards his personal
deserving. Mrs. Gaskell is too deep a thinker to confuse the
duty involved by that relationship which is ' born for adver¬
sity ' with the unworthiness of the particular individual, or
to permit her clear-sighted Maggie to go beyond self-sacrifice,
and offer up her lover too, without reference to him. The
story would have been the better of more elaborate treatment:
it is like the first sketch of a picture, too large for its canvas,
and unequally worked out in its details; but it is full of
charming bits, especially in its opening chapters. Mrs.
Gaskell must have had a strong love for the face of nature,
and her descriptions of scenery are always true and vivid,
whether she writes of the storm-beaten cliffs and dreary
Fells of Monkshaven, of the green woods and parks where
toiling factory hands spend a Whitsuntide holiday, or of
such a spot as Maggie Browne loved to haunt, which must
surely e.xist, in very truth, near her biographer's early
home.
' Just beyond the court lay the rocky moorland, almost as gay as
that with its profusion of flowers. If the court had its clustering
noisettes, and fraxinellas, and sweetbriar, and great, tall, white lilies,
the moorland had its little, creeping, scented rose, its straggling
honeysuckle, and an abundance of yellow cistus; and here and
there a grey rock cropped out of the ground, and over it the yellow
stone-crop and scarlet-leaved crane's bill grew luxuriantly. Such a
rock was Maggie's seat. I believe she considered it her own, and
loved it accordingly ; although its real owner was a great lord, who
lived far away, and had never seen the moor, much less the piece of
grey rock in his life.'
In the same year Mrs. Gaskell formed that connection
with magazine literature which henceforth gave her the
opening for which she would probably have been glad some
time before, of addressing a large circle of readers. Charles
Dickens was then at the height of his popularity, won by
his successful use of the serial form of publication, through
which the immortal Pickwick, Sam Weller, Mrs. Gamp, and
a host of other never-to-be-forgotten celebrities had been
introduced to the world. Mrs. Gaskell had probably already
become personally acquainted with the ' Mr. Boz' who had
made such a refreshing variety at the tea tables of the
Cranford of her youth, and had shaken the allegiance of even
its conservative society to Dr. Johnson as the model of
English writers of fiction. Any way, she knew that the
magic words, ' Conducted by Charles Dickens,' would prove
8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
a passport everywhere, and at once became a frequent con¬
tributor to Household Words until its untimely end. Cran-
ford, North and South, and very many of her lesser tales,
were published in this and other serials. Cranford came out
separately in 1853, and is, by many, considered her best
work. It is certainly a marvellous bit of portrait-painting, and
preserves for our grandchildren a vivid impression of scenes,
persons, habits, and society which find no place in these rest¬
less, hurry-skurry days. But perhaps our successors will fail
to appreciate the fidelity of the description as we can do,
who- have known just such innocent, garrulous old ladies,
with their dutiful regard for propriety, their' elegant economy,'
and their true refinement and lady-like delicacy of feeling.
We have lately learnt with pleasure that this charming
book was the one of all her works which the author herself
loved best—doubtless for the sake of ' auld lang syne.' A
gentleman has told us, that at the house of the late Miss
Stirling Grahame he was introduced to Mrs. Gaskell, and on
expressing to her his thanks for the pleasure her books had
given him, especially Cranford, her face brightened, and she
replied, ' Oh, I'm glad you like Cranford; I confess to a
liking for it myself. It is the only one of my books that I
have pleasure in re-reading, and sometimes, when confined
to bed, I read it still.'
Before we say more of the novels, let us make a few
remarks on her one other book of any note, her Life of
Charlotte Bronte. She undertook tl)e task with the chival¬
rous desire of doing justice to a beloved and misunderstood
friend. But perhaps she would have done more wisely if
she had reflected, that though
' Wild words wander here and there,
God's great gift of speech abused
Makes thy memory confused ;'—
yet the w^oman she had loved so dearly was beyond the strife
of tongues.
' Thee nor carketh care nor slander,
Nothing but the small, cold worm
Fretteth thine enshrouded form ;
Let them rave. \
Light and shadow ever wander
O'er the green that folds thy grave ;
Let them rave.'
The book was written too soon for justice to be done to
all parties, too soon even for the author to have full
information at command. In the freshness of lier sorrow for
her friend, and in the imperfection of her knowledge, she
Our Female Novelists. 9
was led to make statements and reflections which she was
afterwards compelled to recall, and drew down upon herself
much painful criticism. Yet her story of the strange, sad
life of Charlotte Brontii is full of power and beauty, and it
certainly achieved her object—the correction of the world's
harsh but not unnatural judgment of her friend.
To return to her novels. Butli appeared in 1853, and was
almost as hotly discussed as Mary Barton had been. By
some it was pronounced a most improper book, faulty as to
its moral, and incorrect as a piece of art. To others it seemed
' admirable as to the temper of the tale,' ' marked throughout
by perfect simplicity and truthfulness,' ' a good, righteous,
and true book.' There must have been, we imagine, some
strong reason why Mrs. Gaskell's thoughts dwelt so per¬
sistently on the perplexing question round which she has
woven this very touching, and in many respects beautiful
story—a question which reappears, too, in several of her lesser
tales. Perhaps the experiences of her good old Manchester
friend had interested her deeply in more than one ship¬
wrecked life, which might have been saved from utter despair
if some timely hand had been held out—if the lost one had
met with some heart capable of that patience of Divine pity
which ' doth devise means that His banished be not expelled
from Him.' But though the story is full of lessons of
Christian charity, and though the deepening and purification
of Euth's character is beautifully worked out, we agree with
the critics who find fault from an artistic point of view; and
we cannot but feel that the main question of the book is not
divested of one of the difficulties which surround it. We do
not think, as some do, that Mr. Benson's conduct is unnatural
in one so sincerely religious. Short-sighted mortals, how¬
ever good they may be, are too apt, under strong pressure
in order ' to do a great right,' to ' do a little wrong.' But we
think that one so personally holy would hardly have carried
the deception to the length he did (in the matter of Mr.
Bradshaw's situation), and would have been more chastised
by conscience after the painful discovery. In spite of the
general tone of sadness which pervades it, this novel contains
some of Mrs. Gaskell's choicest bits of humour. Miss Faith
is a delightful contrast to her gentle brotlier; and their old
servant Sally, with her fidelity, shrewd common sense, and
crabbed tongue, is one of our author's best creations. We
must give ourselves the pleasure of quoting her lecture to
the heavy-hearted Euth on doing service with good-will.
' There's a right and a wrong -nay of setting about everything. . . .
10 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Making a bed may be done after a Christian fashion I take it, else
what's to come of such as me in heaven, who've had little enough
time on earth for clapping ourselves down on our knees for set
prayers. When I was a girl ... I took to praying and sighing and
giving up the world ; and I thought it were wicked to care for the
flesh, so I made heavy puddings, and was careless about dinner and
the rooms, and thought I was doing my duty though I did call my¬
self a miserable sinner. But one night the old missus (Master
Thurstan's mother) came in and sat down by me, . . . and says she,
"Sally, what are you blaming yourself about and groaning over?
We hear you in the parlour every night, and it makes my heart ache."
"Oh, ma'am," says I, "I'm a miserable sinner, and I'm travailing in
the new birth." " Was that the reason," says she, " why the pudding
was so heavy to-day ? " " Oh, ma'am, ma'am," says I, " if you would
not think of the things of the flesh, but trouble yourself about your
immortal soul." And I sat a-shaking my head to think about her
soul. "But," says she, in her sweet-dropping voice, "I do try to
think of my soul every hour of the day, if by that you mean trying to
do the will of God ; but we'll talk now about the pudding. . . . Did
it answer God's purpose and serve Him, when the food was unfit for
a child to eat, and unwholesome for any one ?" Well, I would not give
it up, I was so pig-headed about my soul; so says I, " I wish folks
would be content with locusts and wild honey, and leave other folks
in peace to work out their salvation ;" and I groaned out pretty lovid
to think of missus' soul. I often think since she smiled a bit at me,
but she said, " Well, Sally, to-morrow yon shall have time to work
out yonr salvation ; but as we have no locusts in England, and I
don't think they'd agree with Master Thurstan if we had, I will come
and make the pudding, but I shall try and do it well, not only for
him to like it, but because everything may be done in a right way or
a wrong ; the right way is to do it as well as we can, as in God's sight;
the wrong is to do it in a self-seeking spirit, which either leads us to
neglect it to follow out some device of our own ends, or to give up
too much time and thought to it, both before and after the doing." '
It is curious to find how Mrs. Gaskell has clung to
favourite little touches, or has reproduced in her more im¬
portant works ideas which first budded in some of her
smaller tales. In My Lady Ludlow we find another Sally,
who takes a fit of negligence under the guise of devout
anxiety,
' talking about the state of her soul and that sort of thing. But when
I found the meat all roasted to a cinder, I said, " Come, Sally, let's
have no more praying when beef is down at the fire. Pray at six
o'clock in the morning and nine at night, and I won't hinder you."
So she sauced me and said something about Martha and Mary, im¬
plying that because she had let the beef get so overdone . . . she
had chosen the better part. ... So when tea-time comes, there
enters my maid with her hump on her back, and her soul to be saved.
" Please, ma'am, did you order the pound of butter ? " " No, Sally,"
I said, shaking my head, " this morning I did not go round by Hale's
farm, and this afternoon I have been employed in spiritual things."
. . . And when she had had her butterless tea, and was in none of
the best of tempers, because Martha had not bethought herself of the
Our Female Novelists. 11
butter, I just quietly said, "Now, Sally, to-morrow we'll try to hash
that beef well, and to remember the butter, and to work out our
salvation all at the same time, for I don't see why it can't all be done
as God has set us to do it all." '
It was to the mind of this practical lady that the idea first
occurred of the extreme 'convenience of a gentleman,' which
we afterwards find similarly appreciated by worthy Mrs.
Goodenough in Hollingford.
' For that matter, we're all o' us fond o' turning the best breadth
o' the gown to the front. I remember, speaking o' breadths, how
I've undone my skirts many a time and oft, to put a stain or a grease-
spot next to poor Mr. Goodenough. He'd a soft kind of heart
when first we was married, and he said, says he, "Patty, link thy
right arm into my left one, and then thou'lt be nearer to my heart."
So I always put my damaged breadths on the right hand, and when
we walked arm in arm, as we always did, no one was never the wiser.'
North and South, which succeeded Butli in 1855, was
evidently intended to put forward the manufacturers' view
of the antagonism between labour and capital. It has all
the charms of Mrs. Gaskell's writing in the liveliness of the
dialogue, the spirit and interest of the scenes, and in the
excellent portraiture of character. But it is by no means as
strong and successful a plea as was its predecessor, Mary
Barton, on the opposite side, and the story is, in many
respects, an ill - constructed one. In spite of her being
retained in the cause of the manufacturer, she is obliged to
ruin her hero before she can overcome the aversion between
North and South, and unite him to his scornful lady-love.
Mr. Hale's religious scruples, too, are but a clumsy expedient
for transplanting him and his family to Milton. Mrs.
Gaskell here writes under some constraint, or else enters
upon subjects she does not sufficiently understand, both here
and in those parts of the story which concern the exiled son.
A longer gap than usual (during which the Life of Charlotte
Bronte came out) intervened before the publication of the
next novel, which, with two other tales of exceeding merit,
form a group in what we may call Mrs. Gaskell's later style.
In Sylvias Lovers, Cousin Bhillis, and Wives and Daughters,
we find all her earlier excellences enhanced by the develop¬
ment of her maturer powers. Praise and popularity do not
always stimulate authors to such improvement as distin¬
guishes the three last works of this gifted writer. As a well-
constructed dramatic story, the first-named is superior, we
think, to any of its predecessors, not excepting Mary Barton,
though perhaps it possesses less of the charm of delicate
humour than some of the others.    But the absence of this
12 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Alagacine.
(j^uality is in keeping with the fitness of things. There is a
healthful, breezy freshness about the story, redolent of the
salt-sea waves, but the colouring is grave and sombre on the
Monkshaven cliffs, and tliere is little of mirthful fancy among
tlie rugged, matter-of-fact northern farmers, or tlie hardy
toilers of the sea, whose lives and loves and sorrows are
described with such true pathos. The period in which the
story of Sylvia's Lovers is laid is well chosen, and it is some¬
what curious that it has not been made more use of by
novelists. The press-gang and its powers are a strange
episode in our history. Though they have furnished a few
incidents to nautical romance writers, Mrs. GaskeU is the
only one, so far as we know, who has made them the subject
of such thrilling interest, and the central idea upon wliich
her story turns. Tliis novel would be well worth reading,
even if it possessed no other merit, for the sake of the vivid
picture it gives us of a state of things now entirely passed
away and forgotten; and Mrs. G-askell has done well to
expose the misery inflicted by the legalized tyranny of the
terrible press-gang, which bore so hardly on some of our
countrymen less than a hundred years ago. Yet here is an
instance of what we have already noticed, her singular
moderation of tone even while condemning a flagrant abuse.
Her womanly pity for the victims does not blind her to the
spice of right and justice on the other side, tlie right of
Government to call upon those wlio live under its protection
for defence and service in time of need. She can look at
the subject from all points, and is able to show how the
original design did not purposely intend the utter disregard
of all considerations beyond the main one, i.e. the efficiency
of the navy; nor is she led away by justifiable indignation
against a bad system, to confound its irresponsible agents
with the rulers who were really accountable for the state
of the law and its consequences. The characters in this story
are a series of lifelike portraits, and the little heroine Sylvia
one of the most charming in the whole range of fiction:
' A rosebud set with little wilful thorns,
And sweet as English air could make her—she.'
Winsome is the word that describes her best, her great
faults notwithstanding, and her name fits her nature as
though Shakespeare himself had given it to her. Then with
what skill the two lovers are contrasted,—the handsome
dashing sailor with a love in every port, until the fresh
girlish lieart he has won wakens his own to passion and
loyalty: he is just the man to attract her youthful fancy,
Our Female Novelists. 13
which cannot compreliend the far deeper and more enduring
love with whicli she is sought, a love which, unlike that of
Kinraid, outlives the crash of failure and the death of hope.
It is a great triumph in the author's craft to represent with
such power the fall from such a moral height as Philip
Hepburn's, and, while never attempting to palliate the base¬
ness of his sin, to retain our interest in him, and our pity
for the bitterness of his punishment. Very striking, too, and
very true to nature, is the gradual opening of Sylvia's eyes
to the worth of the heart she has Hung away; and in the
beautiful character of Hester Rose we have an example of
that love which seeketh not her own, to which alone is
granted full and satisfying peace.
When the CornMll Magazine began its career, ISIrs. Gaskell
became one of its regular contributors. One would like to
know who were the originals, if any such there were, in that
sweet picture of country life in the short story of Cousin
Phillis. The farmer - minister and his daughter, whose
relaxation from the homely toil of the plough and the dairy
is sought for in the society of Virgil and Dante, are a rare
and quaint pair. The story is a very old and simple one—
of how a maiden's heart was won and cast away as a worth¬
less toy by him who might have worn it, and of liow, when
personal joy and hope have been swept away, the strong,
brave, unselfish natux'e can arise from their grave to face life
once more and its duties. Mrs. Gaskell is evidently of the
opinion expressed, we think, by the heroine of North and
South, that ' the blighted beings of fiction would be much
the better of something to do ;' and many a healer of souls
or bodies in real life would do well to commend the
following bit of homely good sense and truth to the attention
of some such sufierers :—
' Now, Phillis, we ha' done a' we can for yon, and th' doctors ha.s
done a' they can for you, and I think the Lord has done a' He can for
you, and more than you deserve, too, if you don't do something for
yourself. If I were you, I'd rise up and snuff the moon sooner than
break your father's and your mother's hearts wi' watching and wait¬
ing till it pleases you to fight your own way back to cheerfulness.
There,—I never favoured long preachings, and I've said my say.'
There are many charming touches in this pretty tale. The
railway which figures incidentally in it, must, we fear, have
long since swept away the quaint old farm, and certainly
must have substituted quite another race of people for its
patriarchal family, of which the ox and the ass are as much
a part as human creatures, and where the old dog Rover, in
14 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
his sickness, is 'remembered in the household prayers.'    But
we pass on to speak of Wives and Daugliters, the last, and, ou
the whole, the most minutely finished of all this long series.
It was running its course in the Cornhill in 1865, and though
we believe that Mrs. Gaskell's advancing years were marked
by some degree of impaired health, there is no sign in this
book of any decline of her literary powers.    The  plot is
worked up with greater care tlian in almost any preceding
story, and though it is concerned only with the simplest
incidents   of a  few very commonplace lives, none of her
characters  present more  strongly  individualized  portraits
than the personages in this her most finished novel.    Sweet
Molly   Gibson,  and   her   manly,   single - hearted   father,
Cynthia, with the good and evil so entwined in her nature,
and her smooth, selfish, caressing, double-minded  mother,
have a  finislied perfection about them which few authors
have attained to.    Indeed, the study of ' Clare' we consider
one of the most masterly things in fiction.    Miss Austen is
unrivalled (except by Shakespeare)   in  her  portraiture   of
fools; Mrs. Gaskell has more than equalled her in drawing
the character of an utter  humbug.     There  is  marvellous
skill, too, in Mrs. Gibson being described, not so much as a
conscious  liar  of malice   i^rcjpense,  but  as  one   of   those
strangely double-minded people who really do not seem to
know the difference between truth and falsehood—to wliom
a single motive in word or deed and a straightforward aim
are perfectly incomprehensible.    Cynthia's captivating nature
comes of this bad stock, and does not entirely escape the
taint of duplicity ; but she at least can appreciate the crystal-
clear uprightness of Molly and her father, though incapable
of the strain of matching herself with one like them.    Yet
Mrs. Gaskell's kindly feeling shows itself in the skilful way
in which she shields the weak, insincere woman from our
detestation, if not from contempt, by the veil of folly which
is thrown around her.    We ' put up ' with INIrs. Gibson as
her husband learns to do, and resign ourselves to her inca¬
pacity for speaking or acting truthfully.    In this, her last
work, Mrs. Gaskell returns to the scenes of her youth, and
describes   with all her former spirit and playful wit  the
secluded, narrow - minded, yet withal  friendly and happy
society  of another Cranford.    The country - town  life, its
gossip, its petty excitements, are as cleverly drawn as ever,
but we have, besides, a connected and interesting story skil¬
fully told, and a far more varied group of characters in this
last legacy from the author who has charmed us so long.
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 15
' We bring our years to an end as a tale that is told.' We
think of that as a completion,—a winding-up, with full time
and circumspection,—but not so did Mrs. Gaskell end her
life and story. There is no sign in those fascinating pages of
any failure of her ripened genius. But on November 15,1865,
while reading aloud to her daughter, she lay quietly back in
her chair—dead, with no sign or warning; the last chapter
of her tale unwritten. We cannot do better than close this
imperfect notice of a great writer, holding a high place
among the teachers of the age, by quoting from the deserved
tribute to her as woman and author, in which the editor of
the Cornliill expressed the general feeling :—
' While you read any one of the last three boolcs we have named,
yon feel yourself caught out of an abominable, wicked world, crawling
with selfishness, and reeking with bad passions, into one where there
is much weakness, many mistakes, sufferings long and bitter, but
where it is possible for people to live calm and wholesome lives ;
and what is more, this is, at least, as real a world as the other. The
kindly spirit which thinks no ill looks out of her pages irradiate ; and
while we read them, we breathe the purer intelligence that prefers to
deal with emotions and passions which have a living root in minda
within the pale of salvation, and not with those that rot without it.
This spirit is more especially declared in Cou.iin PhiUis and Wives and
Danghfers, their author's latest; they seem to show that for her
the end of life was not descent among the clods of the valley, but
ascent into the purer air of the heaven-aspiring hills. ... It is
unnecessary to demonstrate to those who know what is and what is
not true literature, that Mrs. Gaskell was gifted with some of the
choicest faculties bestowed upon mankind ; that these grew into
greater strength and ripened into greater beauty in the decline of her
days ; and that she has gifted us with some of the truest, purest
works of fiction in the language. And she was herself what her
works show her to have been—a wise, good woman.'
(Countrg Subjects anti pursuits.
Country subjects ! What pleasant suggestions are conveyed
by the words! Visions of larch-tassels and primroses, of
shady lanes, of quiet streams where the trout love to lie,
of crowing cocks and well-filled stackyards, flit before us
as w-e listen, and we willingly yield ourselves to the charm
which, since the early days when our planet was young, has
ever woven itself about the simple pursuits of rural life.
The old adage, ' God made the country, and man made the
town,' is often quoted, and often questioned; but though man
has certainly had a great deal to do with making the country
16 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
what it is, there is, nevertheless, a deep truth which underlies
the saying. True, man ploughed the fields and reaped the
grain; he planted the hedgerows; he brought larches from
Norway, and covered the bare Scottish hill-sides with woods ;
he has trained, pruned, guided, and, according to his ideas,
improved. But in all this he has been working, as it were,
on the lines laid down by Nature ; and the Lord of Nature has
recompensed him by giving him rich increase for his labours,
has made his sleep sweet, and permitted him to have glimpses
of all the lovely shows which Nature, ' the grand old nurse,'
can reveal to her children. The second part of the proverb
cannot surely be gainsaid. ' Man made the town'—dark
houses in 'long unlovely' streets—wearisome reiteration in¬
stead of endless variety—gloom and leaden atmosphere instead
of skies beautiful whether in storm or sunshine. Our minds
grow and ripen in the intellectual hotbed, which forces on
their development, often too rapidly; but who does not
weary at times of this ' crowded loneliness" ? who could bear
to be told tliat he should never more enjoy a summer holida}',
wlien, lulled by the hum of bees and the low murmur of
flowing water, we, too, in these northern climes, may taste
the dear delights of Doing Nothing ?
O CO
I. ON THE ICE.
We of the present generation are fortunate in the number
of out-door amusements which tempt us to spend a great
part of our days in the open air.    In olden times, English
gentlemeu who were condemned to visit Scotland, sighed for
the shades of Primrose Hill, and shrank from those gloomy
and hideous solitudes where now their descendants delight
to chase the red deer and follow the roe.    And assuredly
the ladies shared the same  tastes.    The stately dames of
Watteau's age might indeed  step  forth on the terrace, or
appear before the gaze of their admiring cavaliers with the
crook and straw hat that bespoke the shepherdess.    Marie
Antoinette, debarred from a more mettlesome steed, might
join the chase on a donkey;  but country pursuits, as we
understand them, simply did  not exist.     To the days of
powder and patches, saques and high-heeled shoes, succeeded
an affectation of extreme simplicity.    But a muslin gown
made low did not form an inviting garb for exercise, even
though a little shawl might be thrown over her shoulders by
the wearer, when forced to leave the warm fireside; and thin
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 17
shoes tied with ribbon formed no protection against wet; so
that an airing in the close carriage, or, at most, a gentle turn
up and down the garden path, must have satisfied all the
requirements of open-air existence for our grandmothers.
But those days are past. Ladies no longer think it interest¬
ing to scream at the sight of a cow; we are not afraid of
a shower of rain; and can brave any amount of country
mud in the course of our walks. Possibly the pendulum
has now oscillated too far the other way, and there is a
danger that, having found out they are not made of sugar
or salt, according to the old nursery adage, young ladies
will hardly be persuaded that neither are they made of
iron.
It would not be easy to decide which is the best game to
be played out of doors, so much depends on fashion, season,
and personal prowess. Few, we think, would now vote for
croquet; though it is fair to ask, were we so foolish in former
years, when every lawn could boast its array of hoops, and
no summer's day was complete without an hour or two spent
on the croquet-ground, or are we so fickle and fanciful nov),
that we speak with such pitying contempt of our former
favourite ? Lawn tennis would have many ardent advocates.
It is a splendid exercise of skill and agilit}'; thougli it
appeals to a more select few than did croquet, which had the
advantage, or disadvantage, that almost every one could join
in it. Golf, again, is pronounced by its own special votaries
the king of games; and far be it from us to question the
charms of that manly and national sport, though, perhaps,
they are only to be understood by the initiated. It is recorded
that in the midst of one of the finest hunting runs that even
Leicestershire could show, a Scotch gentleman was heard to
observe,' This is nearly equal to a game of golf!' ' What is
Golf,' exclaimed his English friend,' that it should be worthy
even of mention beside such sport as this ?' And forthwith
he gave up all his other engagements that he might study
golf at its principal home, St. Andrews ; and deponent further
saith, that he was perfectly satisfied with the result of the
experiment.
Less common than any of these, yet claiming a high place
among open-air recreations, is the game of Curling. We
appeal to all keen curlers, and to all with whom the curling-
pond is a familiar scene, whether there is not a fascination
about the ' roarin' game' with which few other pastimes can
compare ? The beauty of the winter landscape, the exhilara¬
tion of spirits produced by the keen bracing air, the real
No. 49.—January 1879. B
18 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
science and play to be found in it, all seem to endue curling
with an attractiveness of its own. It is not a ladies' game—-
it requires too much sheer strength of muscle and sinew.
But the Curling-pond is a pleasant object for a walk, and we
are sure to be welcome there.
It is a glorious winter's morning, the cloudless sky shows
pure and delicately blue against the snowy foreground,—for
a little snow has fallen in the night,—and as we take the path
through the woods, we find ourselves transported into a new
world. Every tree has been outlined in frosted silver: the
great spruce firs stand out dark beneath the masses of snow
which rest on their branches ; the glossy leaves of the ever¬
greens peep brightly from under their snowy covering, while
the bare boughs of the other trees meet and cross each other
like the most exquisite fretwork. The burn looks black and
sullen in the midst of the universal whiteness, and its waters
seem to flow sluggishly, as if they felt the cold. The frost
is not hard enough to freeze the running water; but here and
there, in a still reach, we may find a sheet of ice; and here,
where the current has undermined the bank, the moisture
that trickles from overhanging tree-roots has been caught by
the frost, and forms a fringe of icicles. And hark! what is
that sound—a dull roll, broken every now and then by a
sharper crash—a sound which, once heard and understood,
can never be mistaken ? There are some other sounds which
carry conviction to our ears when once we have become
familiar with them. Such are the roll of drums, or the
peculiar swing and beat of the oars on the rowlocks of a boat.
And the characteristic ring of the curling-stones, heard to a
great distance through the frosty air, sends a thrill to the
hearts of all true lovers of the game.
What a pretty winter picture greets us as we emerge in sight
of the ice ! It is a large piece of water, requiring a good sharp
frost to make it safe. The artificial ponds, which are shallow
and can be flooded at pleasure, will often freeze after two or
three nights' frost; but it is always a great event when the
large, natural sheet of water will bear. Formerly, no doubt,
it was a snipe-bog; but, with the general improvement of
farming in the district, it has been drained to form a little
loch; and, with its irregular, broken banks, and sheltering
clumps of fir-trees, beyond which we may catch a glimpse
of snow-clad summits glittering in the sunshine, it is as
picturesque a spot as we need wish to find. All the world—
some twenty or thirty players and a few spectators—seems
gathered on the ice.    There are enough players to form several
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 19
•separate rinks, or sets of the game. At this moment the
interest is all concentrated at one end. The 'skips,' or
leaders of each side, have given their orders, have encouraged
and criticised their followers; now they themselves are going
to play, last and most important stones of the end. The
game is not difficult to understand, and it is intensely in¬
teresting to watch ; cold, hunger, fatigue, all are forgotten or
unfelt. No one who has not spent long hours on the ice
Avould believe how mild and pleasant the winter days can be,
how_ cheering the brief hours of suusliine, how crisp and
bracing is the frosty feeling in the air, after the sun has gone
down in a sky brilliant with gold and rosy tints, and only a
clear green light lingers in the west. Or, if it becomes really
cold, the stove is lit in the little curling-house where the
stones are kept, for they are apt to split in severe cold if care
be not taken. There is even a whisper of baked potatoes!
and no one who has ever eaten potatoes cooked under such
circumstances would dream of feeling cold !
Curling is not unlike bowls, only more complicated, the
object being to reach a goal, something like a red candlestick,
called the Tee, or to lie within a certain distance of it, by
sending the heavy, highly-polished granite stones gliding over
the ice. Let us come closer and watch, and we shall soon begin
to enter into the eager interest with which the bystanders
follow the course of the game. The first player sends his
stone straight and true in the right direction, but falls a little
short. His adversary fails to knock it away,—perhaps he
does not even reach the hogg-score (a line drawn across the ice
about half-way up),—and is ignominiously thrust to one side,
in spite of vigorous sweeping on the part of his friends. For
a broom is a necessary feature of a curler's equipment, and
a very efficient weapon it can be, on occasion. Now the first
player comes again. His second stone, touching the other
gently, sends it on to the wished-for goal, and lies just behind
it, acting as a guard. This is fine play; and as another and
another guard comes up, the winning-stone is almost hidden
from the sight of the succeeding players. But here a special
feature of curling intervenes, in which it may be thought to
resemble billiards, and which entirely changes the face of
the game. A well-directed shot will cannon off the interven¬
ing stones, and fly right to the centre of the whole. Very
nice calculation of angles is often necessary, in order that
this may succeed. Then what cheering, what excitement,
what a looking out for toes, as the massive stone comes
crashing into the midst, driving all the others right and left
20 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
before it, completely breaking up the position that looked so
secure !
It is most amusing to hear the directions and criticisms
which are shouted from side to side in the broadest of
Scotch : ' Just play to nia broom,'—' A dra-awn shot to the
tee,'—' Eh, man, ye're awa' north, ye're awa' a'thegither!'
' Dinna soup, dinna soup,' cries an anxious player to his over-
zealous friends, knowing he has put impetus enough into his
stone to send it where he meant it to go. There, conspicuous
by his bushy beard, is the champion player of the club.
Keen eye, steady hand, strong arm, are all combined in him,
and make him an adversary with whom few can compete,
when his blood is up and he is playing his best. In his
eagerness he throws himself flat on the ice after he has
delivered his stone, the better to watch its course. He is
come of a race that was ever stout and true; his forefathers
have been on the estate for generations; an ancestor of his
was out with Prince Charlie, and yielded up his life on
Culloden Moor, falling side by side with his chief
Another merit possessed by Curling is the genial friend¬
liness it engenders.    As Norman Macleod sings :
' In fine frosty weather let a' meet thegither,
Wi' a broom in their hand, and a stane by the tee ;
And then, by my certes, ye'U see how a' parties
Like brithers will love, and like brithers agree !'
The members of the curling club have their Annual
Meetings, their dinners of beef and greens, traditional
curlers' fare. Perhaps they wear some approach to a
uniform,—a dark-blue coat, tartan waistcoat, and scarlet
cherry in the broad Kilmarnock bonnet, lends an element of
brightness and colour to the scene. Probably the laird has
ere this been presented with a silver-mounted broom, or a
handsome pair of stones with an inscription, as a mark of the
appreciation felt by his tenants and neighbours for his help
and encouragement in their favourite game, and in token of
the good-will and fellow-feeling which is promoted by these
meetings on the ice. And in the present day, when the
separation of classes widens and deepens, it is not a trifling
good to find any interest which may bind gentle and simple
one to another, and fill them with such kindly impulses as
are expressed in the hearty tones with which the last good-
nights are exchanged in the gloaming, and all go cheerily to
their homes, while the wintry moon shines dimly through
the rising mist.
It  is  a  curious  fact  that curling  is not indigenous to
Country Subjects and Pursnits. 21
Scotland, though it has taken such firm root there. It
seems to have been introduced by some Flemings, who were
brought over about the sixteenth century to encourage the
wool trade, and give instruction in weaving. The whole
nomenclature of the game is evidently of Dutch or Gothic
origin, and it is interesting to trace the derivation of its
terms. Curling itself is referred in Jameson's Dictionary to
the Teutonic krullen, to glide, to twist. Skip is evidently
from the same root as skipper, Dutch schipper, person in
charge of the ship; hence skip, in charge of the game. In-
vjick—out-ivick, the angle from which the stone glances off;
Icelandic, vik-ja, to give way, to bend. Eink, or renk, a
course; Icel. firingr, A. S. hrincg, a ring. Icelandic, hring
leik, a game in which the players stood in a ring; this would
soon become rink. Then there is the word honspiel, signify¬
ing a match between two districts, which, with its apparent
blending of French and German, must often have puzzled
those who were curious, without being learned, in the history
of words. Jameson derives it from the Belgian bonne, a
village, a district, and spiel, play; or it might be allied to
the old English boon, a petition (A. S. lene; Icel, bon-ord,
wooing, courtship), one party being req^uested or petitioned
to play another.
In this changeable climate of ours, everything that
depends on ice must lead at best a precarious existence. It
is mortifying for keen curlers when the frost of to-day is
succeeded by the thaw of to-morrow, and they are reduced
to stand in a sort of slushy compound, or to coax up every
stone by sweeping through rivulets of water. It is perhaps
still more tantalizing for those who are adepts at skating,
and who, having overcome the first difficulties, begin to appre¬
ciate the delights of an exercise of all others the most akin
to flying. Full of ease and grace, with its sinuous curves
and swift gliding motion, it seems thoroughly adapted to
ladies. For those who begin young, there is really no danger
of serious falls; weak ankles become strengthened, and the
exertion imparts a glow of health and vigour which enables
its votaries to bid defiance to the cold. Here again, dwellers
in towns are at a disadvantage; learning to skate in public
is by no means an inviting idea, and even to those who
have served their apprenticeship of falls, skating on a small,
crowded pond robs it of half its enjoyment. The true ideal
of skating is very different, and is, indeed, seldom to be met
with in this country. But skimming down the winding
reaches of a frozen river, or following the bays and wooded
22 TJie Ladies' Edinbitrgh Magazine.
shores of a lake, this must truly realize the poetry of motion !
Such skating as Wordsworth has described in 'The Prelude,'
a passage which, as the poem is but little read, we may be
excused for quoting at length. He tells us how, in the frosty
season, when the cottage windows blazed in the sunset, he
and the other lads of the village, newly released from school,
met together, a happy time for all; for him especially, with
his passionate love of nature, ' it was a time of rapture :'
' Clear and loud
The village clock tolled six,—I wheeled about.
Proud and exulting like an untired horse
That cares not for his home.    All shod with steel,
We hissed along the polished ice in games
Confederate, imitative of the chase
And woodland pleasures,—the resounding horn,
The pack loud chiming, and the hunted hare.
So through the darkness and the cold we flew,
And not a voice was idle.     With the din
Smitten, the precipices rang aloud ;
The leafless trees and every icy crag
Tinkled like iron ; while far distant hills
Into the tumult sent an alien sound
Of melancholy not unnoticed.    While the stars
Eastward were sparkling clear, and in the west
The orange sky of evening died away,
Not seldom from the uproar I retired
Into a silent bay, or sportively
Glanced sideway, leaving the tumultuous throng.
To cut across the reflex of a star
That fled, and, flying still before me, gleamed
Upon the glassy plain ; and oftentimes.
When we had given our bodies to the wind,
And all the shadowy banks on either side
Came sweeping through the darkness, spinning still
The rapid line of motion, then at once
Have I, reclining back upon my heels,
Stoi)j)ed short; yet still the solitary cliffs
Wheeled by me—even as if the earth had rolled
With visible motion her diurnal round !
Behind me did they stretch in solemn train,
Feebler and feebler, as I stood and watched
Till all was tranquil as a dreamless sleep.'
Not often are we permitted to enjoy such a skater's
paradise as this; yet once and again it happens, even in our
mild and moist islands, that Winter asserts his empire, and
we meet with scenes worthy to be called Arctic. It is no
light boast to say that we have crossed the river Earn on the
ice; and most rare and fantastic was the Frost-king's handi¬
work. A sort of weir ran across the river at that point.
Above this stretched a level glassy pavement, the fields of
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 23
ice extending from shore to shore, firm, solid, beautifully
clear; but below, where a little island divided the current,
and the waters were wont to chafe and fret in their narrowed
channel, the ice was piled up in great masses, forced one
against the other, and broken by the pressure — regular
hummocks, eight inches or a foot thick. The effect was
particularly striking, because there were all the familiar
features we knew so well, yet changed, and as it were
stamped with a new impress at the touch of the enchanter,
Cold. There were the wooded banks, and the islet, and the
big boulder, but where was the swift flowing stream that
should rush with such speed and fury over the weir ? And
how strange, and even oppressive, tlie dead silence that had
succeeded to that unceasing sound that thrilled through the
summer air, the roar of the falling water!
Another winter picture will never be forgotten by those
who saw it. The scene was a Highland loch, surrounded by
high, dark mountains; fed by many springs, it had never
been known to freeze. Christmas-time came; the frost set
in clear, calm, intense ; the low sun even at mid-day scarcely
overtopped the frowning hills. It was profoundly still, not
a breath, not a ripple; for three days the reflection of snow-
covered slopes and rocky ridges where the snow found no
holding, of waterfalls arrested in their downward career, of
feathery birches crowning the point, never wavered, never
trembled, in the mirror of the bay.
' Whene'er I looked, that image still was there.'
And on the fourth day we awoke to find the loch trans¬
formed into a land of ice. It is a large piece of water,
perhaps four miles in length. It was not entirely frozen over;
far out in the centre we could see a dark line of open water.
About two-thirds might be ice, apparently of the most sub¬
stantial description; but unfortunately, though it looked so
perfectly safe, prudence forbade our making too many
experiments, for no one wished to risk their lives in drawing
the line between safe and unsafe. But what beautiful ice it
was! ' Clear as crystal' is the common expression, but this
was really clear as air. In parts, but for the sensation of
the ice under your feet, you could not have told that you
were not walking on the pebbles you saw so clearly under¬
neath. Around brooded the guardian mountains, silver-
sheen against the clear pale sky, with shadows of the most
transparent softness. Their snowy mantles did not conceal
the details of woods and corries, which were sketched as with
24 The Ladies Edmbiirgh Magazine.
a rough pencil, a veritable ' Harmony in black and white,'
diversified here and there by a patch of russet ferns, or by
the hollies, rich with such clusters and festoons of scarlet
berries as may scarcely be seen elsewhere, which clothe the
side of the loch. It was a picture full of character, full of a
beauty so strange and unaccustomed, a poet or a painter
would have felt himself well repaid for months of solitude,
and would have watched untiring till the last flush of sun¬
set died away, and the mighty Bens stood out weird and
ghostly in the moonlight.
Then the wind began to blow, the keen, bitter wind that
sweeps in winter down the mountain gorges. Out in the
centre of the loch was a line of dark indigo blue, where the
waves, chafing, dashing ceaselessly, were driven with all the
strength of the wind against the barrier of ice. We could
hear, in miniature, the thunder of the surf; we even fancied
we heard the ice crushing and grinding under its force.
Two or three days passed; the water still kept lapping up
against the edges of the ice, which ever receded before it.
Then came a morning when only the crescent of the bay
remained; the water was very near, the ice had become
grey, dirty, and quite changed. An hour afterwards we
looked again, and lo ! it was gone. The whole surface of the
bay was covered with a tumbling, seething mass of mingled
ice and water. The ice had broken up indeed; and soon its
remaining blocks were piled high on the gravel, and the
waters were free. It was a complete illustration of what
one often reads of in books of Arctic travel; but it is rare in
this country to see the action of ice so perfectly exemplified.
Such are the pleasures of winter; and if it be said that
there is a reverse to the medal, comprising such items as
getting up by candle-light,—chilblains,—being snowed-up on
the Highland line,—we can but answer that, according to the
Avise law which rules our memory, these passing discomforts
are forgotten, while such scenes as we have been describing
remain to be our permanent possessions, and to adorn our
mental picture-gallery. There is a pure and ethereal beauty
about a winter's day, which, as a German poet says, springs
from Heaven and Heaven alone; and those who turn to
Nature for companionship during the winter months will
not be unrewarded. A. G.
Tlie Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    25
2D1)C Bcgpr of Capo Di fHontc: a ^alc of Sixtjj^onr.
By the Author of 'Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE  I.
' " CoEPO DI Bacco ' " has not the old tyrant yet sated his
appetite, that he lets not his pearl of a daughter and her
buxom Duenna come forth to refresh their drooping spirits
in the breeze, now curling the blue waves in the bay ?
They should have passed ere the sun dipped behind Ischia.
Hark! in another minute the gun will have fired, and all
Naples will be astir.'
The appearance of the person giving utterance to the fore¬
going sentence was strongly at variance with his speech, for
his bent and squalid   figure, wrapped  rather than dressed
in the filthiest rags, bespoke him one of the lowest grade
in that seething  caldron  of human  infirmity, Neapolitan
mendicancy.    Intellect and imagination, however, flashed in
his dark restless eyes, that gleamed from beneath the greasy
folds of a  brown   and  yellow handkerchief twisted  into
something of a cap.    The poetry of language seems inherent
in the humblest of Italian peasantry, and what would appear
strained and unnatural in people of a colder clime, gushes
forth from these southern children in all the fulness of their
passionate natures, and their vivacity and sanguine tempera¬
ment seizes readily on tlie imagery which presents itself at
every point.    On a high bank, half-way down the beautiful
drive leading from Capo di Monte, bordered by acacias heavy
with bloom, lay, half rolled up, with a short crutch at his
side, the speaker we have just described.    He was apparently
gazing on the lovely scene that laj' before him, but in truth
was  keeping  watch over  some large  iron  gates that  led
into one of those palatial residences crowning the summit
of the hill,—a glorious scene it was, now lighted up by the
golden clouds, rendered almost transparent by the burning
sun behind them, seeming to group themselves in exquisite
forms, as if to do honour to the God of Day; the deep blue
of the sea reflected as in a mirror the endless shipping and
small craft on its bosom, some of which, with flapping sails,
were impelled lazily along by fishermen returning from their
daily toil, and blending the rich tones of their mellow voices
with the measured oars, as they chanted their Evening Hymn.
Vesuvius, falling back as  it were in solemn majesty, rose
26 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
calm in the evening purple, save when an occasional wreath
of dark smoke rising against the glowing sky, showed that
the serpent within still lived. Nestling at its feet many
villages peeped out from the rich foliage which enshrined
them, all unconscious of their dangerous proximity to the
volcanic force above their heads. Beyond, and gently
receding, lay the graceful line of coast with its convent-
crowned heights and sweeping bays, forming the outward
curve of the crescent, with Capri and her sister isles hanging
as if in air, so translucent was the water they rested on.
These and a thousand lesser charms, bathed in that flood of
rosy light, lay at the feet of the beautiful city, towering like
a royal diadem above. There was a breathing stillness in
the balmy air, redolent of perfume, for the breeze which so
lately dimpled the waters of the bay, suddenly sank, and the
beggar, who lay listening to every sound, recognised with
impatience certain signals from the shore, telling him he
was waited for.
' Curses on the dolt-headed fool! what makes him break
his wonted custom ? Hark ! St. Elmo peals forth its evening
voice, and still they come not. Filippo will scarce believe I
have not seen them, and I may dread his vengeance.'
The beggar half started from his lair as the booming of the
gun rolled through the stillness, waking the echoes of the
different heights, then dying softly away. Scarcely had the
air ceased to vibrate with the sound, when every bell in the
city rang out the ' Ave Maria.' At that sound the beggar,
though furious with anger the moment before, crossed him¬
self devoutly, and murmured a brief prayer. It was the
effect of habit rather than devotion, for almost with the same
breath his lips uttered a fresh string of imprecations ere he
exhausted the horrible category. A sound of carriage-wheels
broke on his ear, and in another minute the huge gates with
their gilded ornament slowly opened, and a handsome equipage
began to descend the hill at an easy pace. The carriage was
an open one, and in it were seated a gentleman and two
ladies; on the driving-box beside the coachman sat a gay
cliasseur, with his cocked hat decorated with long green and
white plumes. As the carriage drew near, the beggar seized
his crutch, and swinging himself down the bank came
forward with that rolling gait so peculiar to the Italian
beggars, and clinging to the handle of the door as he ran by
the side of the carriage, commenced the usual cryof'Qualche
cosa per la carita!' at the same time holding up what
appeared the shattered stump of an arm.    The gentleman,
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    27
who looked considerably above middle age, and stern and
haughty in his aspect, bade the beggar let go his hold,
rinding that he still obstinately clung to the handle, he seized
his cane, saying, in an angry tone:
' Away with you, you scurvy varlet, ere you frighten my
horses! and do you not see already your hideous form has
paled the cheek of my daughter ? Begone, sirrah ; let go the
door, or your head shall pay the forfeit of your impudence ;'
and with this he struck at the beggar, who, however, adroitly
bent his head, and received the blow on his bundle of rags.
' Dismount, Fernando,' cried the old man in a passionate
tone, ' and kick this knave out of my sight.'
Fernando, though a Milanese, and bearing no good-will to
the Neapolitans, hesitated; for there was something in the
beggar's eye that threatened vengeance, and the cowardly
heart of the chasseur sank beneath its glance. The beggar,
taking advantage of this hesitation, once more grasped the
handle, and called on the ladies, in a voice of earnest entreaty,
to give him a carline for the sake of the Holy Virgin.
Again was the old man's hand raised to strike, when the
younger of the ladies, a lovely girl of some eighteen years,
caught her father's arm, and in trembling accents besought
him to forbear.
' Do you not see his poor shattered limb and squalid
poverty, dear father ?' At these words the beggar's face
turned in an instant towards the young girl with an expres¬
sion and an earnest and searching gaze she could not account
for. The carriage was now passing the entrance of one of
the narrow streets diverging from the high road, when
suddenly appeared a funeral procession; the priests chant¬
ing and carrying a huge crucifix, while the bearers of the
corpse, surrounded by lighted tapers, came slowly on. A
sight so unexpected startled the high-spirited horses, and,
plunging and rearing, they became quite unmanageable.
The screams of the ladies added to the terror of the poor
animals, and in another moment they would have overturned
the carriage as they bounded down the steep descent, had
not the beggar flung himself rapidly forward, and at the risk
of his life seized the horses by their heads. The coachman,
who had lost all self-possession, threw himself from the box,
and lay rolling and shouting on the road, while the cowardly
chasseur, roused at length by the approaching danger, tried
to unloose the traces of the frightened horses, now kicking
at the pole of the carriage trying to liberate themselves from
the strong grasp of the beggar.    The old nobleman, though
28 TJic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
thankful for their escape, had not yet recovered his temper,
roused by the impudent boldness of the beggar, and felt the
fresh annoyance that in all probability the safety and pre¬
servation of their lives was due to the promptness of this
wretched being before them. This was, however, not the
time for selfish feelings; for his daughter had apparently
swooned from fright, so,turning hastily to Fernando, he desired
him with all speed to return to the Casa Torcelli and bring
assistance. The coachman, who had now recovered from his
fright, contrived to soothe and disengage the terrified horses.
After a few moments the fainting girl began to recover,
and the beggar, seeing he was no longer needed, was turning
somewhat sulkily away, when the elder of the ladies, at a
look from her young friend, beckoned him to her side, and
was taking out her purse to reward him for his gallant
conduct, when Count Torcelli interrupted her, saying:
'Nay, Signora Carlotta, this is my business;' and turning
towards the beggar, with a proud and haughty manner, as if
still reluctant to acknowledge the services of the poor out¬
cast, tossed his purse towards him:
' Here, sirrah, take this, and remember it is for thy help,
and not for thy importunity.'
The beggar seemed to hesitate for a moment, and his face
glowed with a pride scarcely less than his who so ungraciously
offered the reward, then stooping down and picking up the
purse, he held it in his palm as if to judge its weight. A
cunning leer passed over his countenance, and he was about
once more to retrace his steps, when the Signora Carlotta
again beckoned him towards her companion, who had now
taken her seat in the carriage. In a soft low voice she
thanked him heartily for having so nobly risked his life for
their preservation, and, blushing slightly, said, ' I would know
the name of our deliverer, and in what and how we can help
you?'
A gleam of pleasure lit up the bronzed face of the beggar
as he bent his head in a reverential manner before her, and
replied, ' Lady, I am called Matteo, the poor beggar of Capo
di Monte. I lost my arm in the coral fishery, and now am
obliged to live on the charity of the passer-by, noble lady.
May the Holy Mother bless you for your goodness to a poor
afliicted one.' The lady, who had taken off her glove, and was
holding her purse in her hand, took out a gold piece and
offered it to Matteo ; but, to her surprise, he would not take
it. As she continued holding it, the beggar, pointing to a
small ruby ring which glittered on her hand, said :
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    29
' Give me that ring, lady, if you would pay me more.
Gold I have received from your noble father ; but I would
fain have some remembrance of yourself, gracious lady, for
your goodness to the poor beggar.'
'Nay, nay,' said tlie young lady, deeply blushing, 'your bold¬
ness is too great; anything but that;' and she looked at the
ring as if it understood the meaning of her words. Seeing
the beggar still lingered, she took a little silver crucifix from
her neck, and, giving it into his hand, bade him remember
her in his prayers.
' Prayers from such unhallowed lips as mine, sweet lady,
would do thee little service; nevertheless, shouldst thou ever
be in trouble, and mortal aid can help thee, IMatteo will not
fail thee at thy need.'
The Count Torcelli, who liad been occupied in examining
the traces, and seeing that all was right again, was ignorant
of this scene between his daughter and the beggar, and now
called to him to follow Fernando and bid him return with
all speed, as the horses were now quite tranquil, and they
should continue their drive. Waving his hand to the ladies,
the beggar, resuming his accustomed gait, was soon seen
ascending the hill. The young girl followed him with her
eyes for some minutes, then, turning to her companion, said
in a low voice:
' Carlotta, I cannot understand that man; he is, I am sure,
no common beggar.'
' In truth,' said Carlotta, laughing,' I agree Mitli you, he
is indeed no common beggar. To think of the varlet's
impertinence and boldness in asking for your ring as a
remembrance, and such a ring !—as if no other trifle would
please the saucy knave, forsooth—the Eudolph's troth pledge.'
' You mistake me, Carlotta,' answered the young girl, now
blushing deeply at the name j ust spoken; ' it was his manner
and his words that struck me. What other beggar, think
you, would have refused a piece of gold thus offered, and
desired a bauble in its stead, that had little value except for
its donor's sake ?'
Here a sigh escaped her, and after a moment's pause she
resumed:
' Matteo is not what he seems, or I have no skill in reading
faces.'
' Heaven shield me from ever again looking on such a face,'
said the lively Carlotta; 'it would haunt me in my dreams
had he addressed me in those filthy rags. Faugh ! even now
they seem to taint the sweet air.'
30 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Ungrateful woman,' rejoined the younger lady; ' but for
his timely aid our lives had been lost.'
'Perhaps,' continued Caiiotta, 'he knew of the funeral
procession's coming through the street at that time, and ran
by the side of the carriage in hopes of gaining some guerdon
on his chance of helping us. Nay, do not look so horrified
at ray suggestion. What is the value of such a wretch's life
compared with the hopes of gain ?' ' Concetta, sweetest, you
are too young in the world to know much of its wickedness,
more especially the Neapolitan world.' Seeing Fernando
running down towards them, she ceased speaking; Count
Torcelli came to the carriage, and expressing a hope that
his daughter's fears were calmed, took his seat, and they drove
on. Turning to Signora Carlotta, the Count said, 'I know
you are too courageous to have suffered much from our late
alarm, though it might have proved more serious. The
beggar's impudence and importunity stood us in good stead
as it happened.'
'These were my words just now,' said Carlotta, glancing
archly towards her young companion, who turned her face
away quickly that her father might not observe the heightened
colour Carlotta's glance had called up. Probably he might
have remarked it, had he not at that moment leaned forward
to look at the horses, and seeing they went quietly down the
hill, he desired Fernando to drive them to the Chiaia, as the
evening was too far advanced for a longer drive. Concetta
having satisfied her father's anxious inquiries as to her
being able to remain out longer, leaned back in the carriage
silent and apparently lost in thought, while Carlotta en¬
deavoured by her lively remarks to remove any disagreeable
impressions left in the Count's mind by the evening's
adventure.
CHAPTER  II.
Tliree days passed since the incidents we have described, and
all Naples lay prostrate under the baneful influence of a fierce
sirocco. At length the wind changed, and, taking advantage
of the freshness of the early morn, tlie carriage of the Count
Torcelli might be seen with its precious burden rolling
towards the pretty village of Torre del Greco. The little town
looked out smiling from its rich vineyards and chestnuts, all
unconscious of the fearful catastrophe even then impending
over it. The bells of the different churches chimed sweetly
in the balmy air, and many a peasant was seen making his
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    31
way to the early mass.    As the carriage came down the hill
from Capo di Monte, the Signorina Concetta looked furtively
round to see whether Matteo was watching their progress
as before.    Carlotta, who was again the companion of the
young girl, remarked the stealthy glance, and would have
rallied her on the impression made by the beggar had not
the Count been present.    Apparently Count Torcelli was not
in an amiable temper: he was annoyed at being obliged to
quit Naples ; but the drooping state of his daughter's health
required the change, and she was ever his first consideration.
The Count, who was a proud Lombardian, had few sympathies
with the people with whom he was at present associated.
Although he had been chosen by the Sardinian Government
to uphold the liberties of the people, and act in concert with
the military authorities, he was as great a despot in heart as
their late ruler, Francesco Secondo.   There were persons who
did not scruple to say his own sovereign had been glad of the
pretext of an honourable appointment to remove him from
his own court.    Few persons knew much of his domestic
history, but that his married life had been brief, and he
returned from Vienna a widower, with an only daughter, after
- an absence of sixteen years.    For some time after his return
to Lombardy he took no part in public affairs, occupying him¬
self chiefly in the improvement of his patrimonial  estate.
As soon as the war broke out between Sardinia and Austria,
he sought employment in the service of the state, and soon
gave evidence that however he was connected by his marriage
with the latter country, she had not a more vindictive enemy.
No one cared to inquire the reason of the bitter hatred, though
it might have struck an unprejudiced person as somewhat
strange that one who had formed an alliance with a daughter
of one of the highest Hungarian nobles should display such
bitterness against the sister country.    Count Torcelli was a
stern, reserved man, who suffered no questioning, and had few
intimates.   His daughter was as unlike her father in person as
she was in disposition.    Her fair skin and golden hair, with
deep blue eyes, formed a marked contrast to the dark eyes and
sallow complexion of the Count, hence it was inferred her
mother was descended from a Saxon race. . The Signorina
Concetta was sweet and gentle in her demeanour, as we have
already remarked in her bearing towards the poor beggar;
but, though scarcely eighteen, she had none of the vivacity
of youth, and a pensive expression on her brow and in her
eyes led one to suppose her life was not a happy one.    In
quitting Austria, all ties of affection between herself and her
32 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
mother's family were broken; and the attachment which
had sprung np between a nephew of her mother and herself
was positively forbidden, under the penalty of her father's
severe displeasure. No reason was assigned for this per¬
emptory command, and all entreaties were fruitless. The
(Jount had suddenly broken up his establishment at Vienna,
and left the country without a word of explanation. As
Concetta was little more than sixteen at that period, her
father imagined that a new life and change of scene would
soon obliterate every youthful fancy towards her cousin
Eudolph; but hers was a nature for deep, lasting affection,
and the solitude of their country home did but encourage
the remembrance of her love. She had exchanged rings of
betrothal with the young Count unknown to their parents,
and they had parted with mutual promises of confidence in
each other's love and faith. The remarkable beauty of the
Signorina Concetta soon attracted manysuitors for her hand,—
and when the Count accepted service in the state and made
his residence at Turin, many scions of the noblest houses
sought her in marriage,—but slie swerved not from her first
affection. Concetta's secret sorrow preyed upon her mind
so as to affect her health; and, wearied with the heartlessness
of the scene in whicli she took no interest, she looked with
thankfulness to the change which the appointment of the
Count at Naples would afford. Though the separation be¬
tween Eudolph and herself seemed widened by the increased
distance, she would be comparatively free from the irksome
shackles of court etiquette, and the ever-recurring topic of
the ' hated Austrians.' One friendship, and one alone, she
had formed since their quitting Vienna. The Countess Car-
lotta, the lady described as her companion in the preceding
chapter, was a Milanese. Her parents had been early friends
of Count Torcelli. Carlotta was now an orphan, and being
sincerely attached to Concetta, and lively and amiable, the
Count begged her to accompany them to Naples, and remain
with his daughter as her friend and companion. She was hand¬
some but not rich, and gratefully accepted the Coimt's offer,
both for the sake of Concetta, who clung to her for sympathy,
and for her own happiness. They were now on their way to
pay a visit of some length to a Neapolitan family with whom
they were on terms of intimacy, and were spending the
mlleggiatura'^&i a pretty villa in the suburb of Torre del Greco.
Signer Ciprani was one of those who had suffered much from
the oppressive tyranny of the Bourbon rulers, and hailed
with intense satisfaction the overthrow of the old dynasty.
Noah : A Dramatic Poem. 33
The gardens of the Villa Ciprani extended far down the ridge
on which the house was built, and here Concetta would sit
for hours in one of the open summer-houses with overshadow¬
ing roofs, so common in that part of Italy, watching the small
barks as they left the little pier below laden with fruit or
fish. Signor Ciprani, like many of the Italian gentlemen,
was engaged in commerce, and owned many large vineyards
and mulberry plantations in the Island of Isetica. There was
constant communication kept up between his agent and him¬
self, and a small vessel belonging to Signor Ciprani now lay
at anchor in the bay to take him to the island. In a sportive
mood he challenged the ladies to accompany him ; and Car-
lotta, to whom anything in the shape of novelty was accept¬
able and delightful, became so persuasive in her entreaties,
and so convinced the little voyage would benefit Concetta's
health, that the Count Torcelli, after ascertaining if it would
give pleasure also to his daughter, consented to her being of
the party, only stipulating that he should be excused from
accompanying them. It would give him, he said, time to
return to Naples for a day or two to prepare for their journey
to the mountains a little later, as had been recommended by
the physician who attended Concetta, and who had advised her
spending the hot months at La Cava. Madame Ciprani was
much pleased at the arrangement, as it gave her an opportunity
of seeing her parents, who resided on the island.
{To be continued.)
lioaf): ^ ©ramatic l^otm.
(Noah, MiRAH his wife; Shem, Ham, Japhet, a«(Z their ivives.)
In the arh on Mount Ararat.
Mirah.   When the dark raven earthward flew with
joy>
Leaving this lofty island mount where we
Are prisoned still, all our thoughts went with it.
Pining for sunny pastures we had left.
Ah ! 'Twill be sweet to hear the goatskins flap
In the fresh desert breeze, and through clear air
Look once again; these mists and clouds that float
Around this peak are baneful, hiding light
Of sun that soon would wake the drowsy beasts.
Now lying still, as drugged by sleeping draught.
No. 49.—January 18T9. C
34 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
'Tis well, perchance, that this chill twilight broods
Over the earth to calm th' impatient birds,
Who else had beat their wings against the roof
Of this great ark, Noah, thy work of faith,
A mighty sign of thy firm trust in God.
Each living soul such token once must give;
'Twas mine to enter with a quiet faith
This ark, to leave the world I knew and loved.
Trusting thy word, for still I held that God
Spoke through thee, and I listened to His voice.
Never through those long years of toil did I
Hinder thy work, nor mock as others would.
Turning deaf ears to thy stern, warning words.
Thy very toil reproached them.    ' Must we die ?'
They cried.    ' Then let us live our life of ease
Until the end.'    I shudder now—the end—
The fearful end that came at last—Ah, me •
I dare not picture that again.
Noah. Poor wife!
Look forward now, the rain is past, and hope
Must plume her wings to heaven.    'Twas well for us
That this safe refuge on the waters' whirl
Floated; have we not seen dark phantoms pass
On seething wave, and knew they were the forms
Of neighbours, friends, who perished in the doom
Of waters, having shut their ears too long
To mutterings of the distant storm, too deaf
To hearken to my voice calling them back
To purer ways of life !    The earth grew foul
With their dark deeds: it once was good and fair.
Is it washed clean ? and shall we see again
Such gardens as that Eden, Adam's home ?
Ente,r Ham, Shem, Japhet, and their wives.
Ham. Father, the raven has not yet returned ;
Send forth the eagle now with stronger wings.
Shem. No, take this tender dove that I have trained
To seek my breast whene'er her flight is done;
The raven comes not back, but gloats on prey.
Th' unburied dead lie thick, he picks their bones.
Japhbt. Yes, father, let her fly, this gentle dove,
A nest of young ones here will call her home.
(The dove is let y?y.)
Noah: A Dramatic Poem. 35
{The wives o/Shem, Ham, and Japhet si7ig in choi-us.)
We in sadness, Noah's daughters,
Here must tarry while you roam;
Fly full swiftly over w^aters,
Tell us where shall be our home.
Not in narrow ark our dwelling
Through the days to come shall be;
Be our prophet, soon foretelling
Happy days to set us free.
Bring our sad liearts joyful tidings,
Say if now the tender green.
Under drownM meadows hiding,
May above the flood be seen.
From this gloomy ark outpeeping.
We are looking far and wide;
Great Jehovah, in His keeping
Let us now and aye abide.
{Seven days later.    NoAH and MiRAH.)
MiEAH. Hail! day of rest, here on this holy mount
We worship God, and lo! the dark clouds drift,
Once more the heavens are blue, and shooting rays
Of sunlight reach dim corners of this ark
That moves no .more, but is a stranded boat.
Perchance our messenger may yet return
With tidings hopeful as this clear blue sky.
Unter Shem.
SiiEM. Mother, a moving speck I see afar.
Where the mist ends, and rocky peaks appear
Below this mighty crest whereon we stand.
Can it be her, my dove ? or driven cloud
Before the morning w^ind that sweeps below ?
MiiiAH. Go, call your brothers here, their eyes are keen
As hawks, and soon will spy your gentle dove.
Ah ! now my aged eyes can tell her flight:
It is the dove; see, Noah, what she brings.
A leaf—how many weary days my eyes
Have longed for such to rest on; in my dreams
The waving boughs twinkled in morning light,
And fruit and flower gladdened the dell again !
36 77^1? Ladies' Edi?tbtirgk Magazine.
Noah. This leaf is from a happy temperate clime
Where we may plant, and sow, and reap with joy;
0 blessed hope of life and light, and shine
Of faithful sun, returning day by day.
Your tears no m.ore shall mingle with the rain.
Poor women, sing us now a thankful song.
{The wives of Shem, Ham, and Japhet sing in chorusy
The Lord reigneth over the waters,
The Lord maketh the flood to cease;
Sing we joyfully, Noah's daughters.
The Lord giveth His children peace.
Heaven, her blue dome now revealing,
Leads our longing eyes above,
Where His face no more concealing,
He renews His ancient love.
Days of awful wrath are ended,
Once again this earth we tread ;'
Through the raging storm defended,
Through the surgins billows led.
^O       "    "   ""'D-^'O
The Lord reigneth over the waters, '
The Lord maketh the flood to cease ;
Sing we joyfully, Noah's daughters,
The Lord giveth His children peace.
(Some days after, Noah and his family before an altar outside
the ark.)
Noah. Lord, hearken to my earnest vows this day.
All that I have I dedicate to Thee;
From Thee it came, I cannot call it mine.
Such as I have I offer, shedding blood
Of lamb in token that the life is Thine;
My life I offer, yielding all my days
To serve and honour Thee; this new-washed earth,
May never sin of mine, or those who stand
Around Thine altar, make it foul again.
Shem. The many-coloured bow is shining still;
Was it indeed God's voice that lately spoke
And said,' I set my bow in yonder cloud,
Fear not the storm of thunder nor the rain.
Noah : A Dramatic Poem. 37
My hand shall hold them, lest they should destroy
This earth once more' ?    Father, I will not fear,
Though once I trembled, when against the ark
The floods descended and the waters rose ;
God is as mighty now as then, His arm
Has brought us safely to this blesskl land
Where figs, and vines, and olive trees abound.
Japiiet. Brothers, we cannot tarry longer here
AVhile the lean flocks untended lie around ;
We must bestir ourselves, for not for naught
Is this fair fruitful land before us set,—
Kich increase must it yield in crops and herds.
Ham. I weary of my father's prayers, and long
For merry times such as we had of yore,
When through the woods we chased the nimble deer,
Or watched to lure the ivory-tuskW herds
Into our snares; shall I guard silly sheep.
And milk the herds ? 'Tis woman's work, not mine.
Noah, (aside) Is strife beginning now between my
sons ?
{aloud) Come, let us join once more in thankful feast
Ere we be scattered to our tents again.
{Some weeks later, Noah alone)
Noah. Out of the depths of sorrow, Lord, I cry.
I scarce dare lift my shamed eyes to Thee ;
Canst Thou not save me now as from the flood ?
Deep waters of affliction drown my soul.
I thought no more to sin after such love
And mercies shown.    Show me Thy mercy now
Still stronger : I have sinned, and need an ark
Of refuge for my soul; be Thou, 0 Lord,
My refuge in this storm, forgive and save.
Save, too, my son from sin who mocked me now,
Seeing his father's guilt; alas ! thus oft
One sin begets another, bringing doom
Upon the race.
Mi RAH {coming in with a babe).
Dear husband, wake and see
This tender babe I bring, Shem's firstborn son.
38 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Noah. Not healthful sleep it was that closed my eyes,
But shame, my bitter shame, thou knowest all,
It bows me down ; would I were pure of sin
As this frail babe that comes, a blessed gift.
The firstborn of the new-washed earth, which I,
Alas ! have fouled with sin.    Gome near,
And let me kiss the babe, then bid them name
Him Joshua, this in mem'ry of the ark.
Bringing salvation to our house from God.
MiRAH. It shall be done, and mothers oft shall tell
Their little ones what means the blessed name.
{Chorus of ANGELS is heard)
He who reigneth over angels
Shall descend from bliss above.
As a babe with new Evangels,
Words of mercy and of love.
And in peaceful water laving,
From their sins He maketh pure
Those whom in deep billows saving,
He doth succour and secure.
Then the rainbow, richly glowing,
Every colour shall declare :
' Many hues are we, yet showing
God's own light is shining there.'
He who reigneth over angels
Shall return to bliss above.
And His manifold Evangels
All are writ in words of love.
(Noah dying; his ivife and children round him)
Shem. Alas! How feeble grows our father now !
Is this pale death standing above his couch ?
Japhet. And yet a smile is on his lips; no fears
Haunt his departing soul, but peaceful joy
Fills him, as one who sees the evening star
Eise on his work just finished,—thus he looks.
Noah. My trust is in the Lord, as when of old.
Leaving my country, all familiar life,
A Ghost. 39
Into the ark I stepped, and closed the door.
Ah, dreary days! when all was hid from me
In torrents falling from God's store of wrath;
Then, the first anguish o'er, the time of doubt,
Lost deatli had only lingered on his way,
Keeping the ark for tomb.    Was there a world
Outside, I asked, where I might live again,
And sent the raven forth ; but the wild bird
No answer brought from the dim water's span.
Seven days I waited, then I cried for help.
And lo ! the dove I sent brought a green bough,
Message of peace and hope ; there wa.s a world
Of life;—now I go forth still trusting Him
Who brought me from the deep to earth again.
He, too, can save in death's dread hour, and give
An olive leaf of fresh green hope and trust.
My life is in His hand, as once the ark;
Whither I go I know not, for the flood of death
Eises and bears me on its unknown wave;
Lord, lead my bark to shore.
MiRAH. Now, raise thine eyes,
And see the rainbow gleam, it arches o'er
The valley, lovely now as when it shone
That day we touched the land; raise, Noah, raise
Thy drooping eyes, the blessed hope shines on.
Beatpjx L. Tollemache.
31 (5I)0St.
I ARRIVED late at the house, the ghost story of which I am
about to relate. It was a December afternoon, I had been
travelling all day, the snow lay thick on the ground, and I
felt cold and numbed and weary. Will the road never end,
I thought. Seven miles' drive after a long railway journey,
the road heavy from snow, a tired horse, and, as it seemed to
me, a never-ending hill.
The driver was not certain of his destination, and as we
proceeded on our way he stopped at the occasional cottages
we passed, but always met with the same answer: we were
right as far as we had gone, but we had not yet gone far
enough. At last the road became more level, and from the
intense darkness I discovered we were passing under an
40 Tlic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
avenue of trees; then—^joyful sight!—a glimmering lamp in
the distance, a moment's stoppage to ask if we were riglit,
and we turned within the gates, the gravel cruncliing
sharply beneath our wheels; then another weary hill. I
began really to despair.
But there is an end to all one's troubles, and the bright
fire, comfortable chair, hearty welcome, and last, but not
least, the warm cup of tea, soon made me forget my sorrows.
The party assembled was a large and merry one, and in
laughing sallies the hour previous to dinner passed away.
Then we all dispersed, and through winding passages I was
at last brought to my resting-place.
'Is any one near me ?' 1 asked rather nervously, for the
room seemed wonderfully distant from the inhabited world,
and—miTst I own it ?—old Scotch houses always make me
feel eerie.
There was a laugh from the two daughters of the house,
who had conducted me thus far.
' Yes; my room is next door,' said the youngest; ' and
besides, you need not be the least alarmed, this is not the
ghost part of the house.    You are all right!'
So there was a ghost; my worst fears were realized.
' Tell me about it,' I asked, awestruck.
'Not just now, it is nearly dinner time. You must be
shown the room afterwards; and then Meta can tell you all
about it.    It is her den !'
' Surely you do not sleep there ?' The idea made me
shiver.
' Oh, yes !' laughed Meta. ' We are accustomed to her
ways. We have been brought up with her. It was our
nursery when we were children.'
Then the sisters disappeared, and I was alone. Two
things I had discovered :—There was a ghost, and it was a she.
I was all impatience until after dinner. I longed to hear
more. We ladies had scarcely left the dining-room when I
begged to haA^e my curiosity satisfied.
' Come up to my room, then,' said Meta, ' and you will see
the place that the uneasy spirit haunts !'
Then they all lauglied again. A person who was afraid
of ghosts was an anomaly to them.
' We have to make as much of our surroundings as
possible,' said some one; ' for really you know there is
hardly anything to tell. We don't consider her much of a
ghost.'
While this was going on, some of us had separated from
A Glwst. 41
the others and were following Meta. We had mounted four
flights of stairs; at the entrance of a twisted wooden passage
our leader stopped.
' You must begin to be awed now,' she said. ' You are
entering the world of ghosts. Lady Anne haunts this
passage, and the three rooms beyond, especially the one
at the top of the tower. I do hope you may see her; we
have never done so. We only hear her, and for weeks
together sometimes she is silent.'
We passed through the passage. On our right, as we
emerged, were two doors, then a narrow cork-screw wooden
stair. It creaked uneasily as the party ascended up about
twenty steep steps. My amazement was becoming greater.
Does the ghost inhabit an attic ? I asked myself. Imagine
my surprise a moment afterwards at finding myself in a very
lofty and large room, with no approach to it but this wooden
stair. A fire burned brightly in the grate, and partly
illumined the kingdom of the ghost. Doors and windows
all round as far as I could make out; a rounded roof also
I noticed as my eye took in details, and surely I was not
wrong ! No, the fire brought out into strong relief a group
of faces looking down on us. On the ceiling was fastened
an enormous picture, life-sized portraits of some dozen men.
Attired in their silken gowns and dainty ruffles, scanning
us with calm scrutiny as we entered the room, they cer¬
tainly might have been impersonifications of ghosts of the
past.
' Lady Anne has chosen well,' I said. ' What a ghostly
apartment! I would not spend a night here alone for
worlds.'
We drew our chairs round the fire, and Meta prepared to
tell the tale. Outside the wind moaned in the trees, and
the ivy rattled on the window panes. Within we relapsed
into silence, and Meta began her story.
' I will tell it to you as tradition goes,' she said. ' The
facts, which have been told us since we were children, come
down to us from past centuries. Some of the details have
been questioned by contemporary historians of this matter-
of-fact age, to whom the charm of the supernatural is
nothing, even though it bring antiquity to plead for its
respectable origin.
' Some three miles from this place stands the ruin of an
old castle. A rapid stream passes close below the rock on
which it is situated, and woods hem it in on every side.
The date of the tradition takes one back as far as the year
42 Tlic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
1570, when the castle now in ruins was the principal
dwelling-house of this barony; the house in which we now
are being only second, or, as some suppose, the dower-house.
' iMary, Queen of Scots, was in prison, and her brother,
the Eegent Murray, was at the height of his power. The
castle was in possession of a powerful vassal of the Queen,
and from his loyal adhesion to her cause had gained the
enmity of the Eegent. Such a distinction was not one to
be envied. The Eegent could not see a man in a position of
such importance, and yet one who would not acknowledge
him as master. He determined to be revenged on his
enemy for having gained so much of royal favour.
' To the house, sheltered amongst all the beauties of low¬
land scenery, the then proprietor had brought home his
bride. Scarcely more than a year previously, and there,
with everything that could make life pleasant, she had
watched the seasons follow one another. There, also, at last
her child was born, and her happiness completed. What
mattered it to her now even if her husband did leave her
at times on some warlike raid ? She was no longer alone—
the child needed her care.
' And so it came to pass that once more, as he had often
done before, her husband left her. It was only for a few
days' separation. He could safely leave his treasure hidden
among the woods. But the Eegent was made aware of the
fact, heard of the house only guarded by the mother and her
infant, and felt his time had come.'
Meta paused a moment in her narration, and the soughing
wind was heard in the silence. She had told her tale with
graphic force. Who shall blame me a moment afterwards,
when a strange, unearthly sound struck on my ear, that my
heart stood still, and a cold chill crept over me ?—
' What is that ?' My voice sounded forced, even to
myself.
' Owls !' exclaimed tlie youngest of the sisters. ' Are not
they nice ? We have lots of them here, and they add so to
our ghostliness that we delight in them.'
My heart beat again more regularly; but I could not help
the hope rising that the owls would remain silent. I turned
once more to Meta, and she continued.
' The Eegent lost no time in putting his plans for ven¬
geance into effect. He despatched at once messengers of
his own armed with a writ for the confiscation of the pro¬
perty. They arrived at the castle to find the proprietor still
absent, and no one  to  hinder them in their treacherous
A Ghost. 43
designs. The night was wild and stormy, but it did not
matter to them. Out into the woods, exposed to the fury of
the storm, they turned Lady Anne and her child, clad simply
in the thin white robes they had surprised her in. Cowering
in terror under the neighbouring bushes, she saw the work
of vengeance completed. The wind served but to fan the
Hames which were steadily devouring her much-loved home.
The deed was done, and the perjoetrators of the cruelty
escaped unpunished. Better far for Lady Anne had she
perished in the flames; her life for the time was saved, but
her reason was gone. Day followed day, and the white
iigure roamed in the woods, starvation creeping steadily on.
Still she haunted, with awful persistence, the charred and
blackened ruins of her home. Then at last death came,
and mother and child were at rest.'
' But not the ghost,' murmured the preternaturally grave
voice of the irrepressible youngest.
' Hush !' said Meta ; ' it is not time for that yet. I must
finish it properly. In due time the proprietor of the castle
returned. Who can describe the madness of despair and
revenge which seized on him, when, on riding through the
woods with his followers expecting a warm, glad welcome
from his wife on his safe return, he found nothing but a
pile of ruins and one gaunt, black gable standing out sharp
against the sky ? A little farther search and the worst was
revealed to him. Not far from his home his wife lay dead,
still clasping to her breast her child.'
' And her ghost haunted the ruins ?' I asked.
' Yes; constantly the form of a woman clad in white with
a child in her arms was seen. And so it was that her
husband could no longer bear the site of so much sorrow.
He had the stones of the burnt house removed, and with
them added to the tower we now are in. Even the name of
this house was changed. We have the charters which
transfer the rights of barony, and the name of the old castle
to this place; thus it became the principal dwelling-house
of the property.
' That is all the historical fact,' Meta continued, ' except
that Lady Anne's murder was revenged. Her husband, one
year after, shot the Eegent dead from a window in the
streets of Linlithgow.'
' Surely you can tell me more about the ghost ?' I asked
anxiously; my curiosity was not half satisfied. Meta's voice
dropped to an awestruck whisper.
' She came up in the stones,' she said; ' but she is never
44 TIic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
seen now, only we hear a step coming along the wooden
passage, she knocks at the two doors we passed, then the
creaking is heard as she ascends the cork-screw stair, then a
moment's pause and she knocks loudly at the door.'
' Do you really mean to say that you have heard this, and
are not afraid to sleep here ?'
' I have' often heard it,' answered Meta, ' and so have the
others. Not only at night but in broad daylight; and then,
thinking it was a child who could not get in, I have opened
the door to find nothing, and to remember that I might have
saved myself the trouble, for it was only Lady Anne !'
So Meta finished her tale. Silence fell on us for a few
minutes. The storm was raging outside, and the bats and
ivy were fluttering on the window panes. Suddenly came a
lull in the wind, and in the silence a slow, soft step came up
the stair. "We all heard it, and looked at each other—no one
spoke. Then came the dreaded sound—a loud sharp rap
against the panels.
I turned white with fright.
' There is no use asking her to come in,' said Meta, ' for it
is the Ghost!'
And so it was. M. E. T.
©cbatcs of tf}c tallies' (!Htimburcj|j iLitcraru .Society.
OuE debates have, during the past year, been remarkable for their
practical character. There has been no plunging about in the deep
waters of philosophy, no elevated feminine views have been elicited
(in ethics or politics, no historical puzzles have been propounded,
hardly any abstract questions handled. Are we growing prosaic or
Positivist as we grow—for such a Society—venerable ? One literary
and one artistic debate represent all the ideal parts of our discussions ;
the others are considerations how best to educate, to dress, to cook,
to spell, and so on.
In January we asked the question whether a thorough English
education was attainable without a knowledge of Latin ; as the voting
gave 22 to 13 in favour of Latin, it seems evident that our Society
should flock to attend the badly supported Latin classes of the
Ladies' Educational Association. But although we suspect few of
them are accomplished Latinists, they do not ask—perhaps buoyed
up by the ambiguity which perplexed the voting—the question how
much Latin is necessary ; possibly only some knowledge of Latin
derivations. In February we took up the question of the deteriora¬
tion of the servants of the day as compared with those of former
times, a subject on which all were qualified to speak. We only
regret that no servants were present at the lively discussion, from
which they might have taken some useful hints. A resume of it—
amusing if not quite correct—was given in the April number of the
Debates of the Ladies' Edmbiirgh Literary Society.    45
Magazine, written by a stranger who was present.      There was, in a
large meeting, a small majority against the servants.
In March, again, we had the practical question of the influence o
educational prizes on the moral character.   A large majority took the
pleasanter view, that we may still hope for and enjoy rewards for
superior work, including work done as scholars, without fear for the
lowering of our moral standard.
For April there were interesting papers read in praise respectively
of Chaucer and of Spencer, two grand poets, whose beauties would
probably have been less known to our company before we shared the
advantages of the literary education of the University. Many of our
members had good reasons to give for their votes, showing much
appreciation of the old poets. May brought a rarity, a musical
debate, and one, too, on a real question—a question hndaute. It is
curious what fervour the pro and con Wagner parties throw into their
disputes ; and it says something for the educational influence of our
debates that the discussion was carried on, though with strong
opinions, without undue exaggeration or vehemence. The paper in
defence of Wagner dealt chiefly with his theory, declining to assert
that Wagner had carried it out successfully. The reply assented to
his own asserti<m that he had succeeded in setting forth his ideas,
but took the view that he had failed to find the noblest form of art
in his combination music-dramas. The leading papers were printed
in the July and August Magazines. Three other interesting papers
were read, for which we regret there was no room in the Magazine.
The voting showed that the audience were not yet ripe for the Music
of the Future. In June the question of home or school education for
girls found most people of the same mind in preferring a good school,
combined with home life, in day-boarders.
In July there was, as usual, no debate ; but descriptions were
given, written or spoken, of the most beautiful sights the speakers
remembered to have seen. Three good poems were read,—one
describing the 'Midnight Sun in Norway,' one on the star shower
in November 18CG, the third on a display of fireworks at the Crystal
Palace,—curiously enough, all on what might be called Celestial
Phenomena.
The October debate had for its subject the dress of the present
time, its tastefnlness and appropriateness ; and in a lively conversa¬
tion, which followed the extemporary speeches, the majority were of
opinion that the dress of ladies may at present be both graceful and
convenient, but that the usual masculine costume was, if convenient,
now hardly susceptible of being made tasteful or ornamental.
November was signalized by an assault on the spelling of the English
language, which was stoutly defended on historical and intellectual
grounds by the other side. On the whole, the meeting seemed con¬
vinced that our arbitrary spelling was in great measure unavoidable,
as the language itself had grown from such difi'erent roots, and been
developed by such various means. Some went so far as to maintain
that it was such good training for the youthful mind to encounter
dilEculties, that our odd spelling was rather an educational advan¬
tage than otherwise ; others said it was too arbitrary to be a good
means of cultivation, and also that there were necessary difficulties
enough in life without keeping up superfluous ones for practice. As
to the language, — formless, gramniarless, disastrously lawless in
orthography,—yet it remains our dear old English still, a free and
46 TIic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
easy speech, like an old suit of clothes wide everywhere, and yielding
freely to the grand movements of the literary athlete, while it
cramps as little as possible the awkward gait of the neophyte ; and
if the spelling is hard upon foreigners, that is only one of the many
misfortunes of not being born British, which we are not bound to
take into consideration. In December, owing to the pressure of
business, the debate on the study of Italian had to be adjourned.
One word more. In olden times, when the Ordeal of Battle was
still in vogue, there might generally be found loitering near convents,
villages, and such peaceful abodes, a few battered veteran men-at-arms.
When a quarrel was up they were ready to give their services to the
peaceful communities or citizens who would not or could not fight
themselves. They had often very little personal interest in the dis¬
pute, and were quite used to encounter each other with the good
humour of old friends as well as old foes. So with us. It is
remarkable on looking over the minutes to see how the same names
occur again and again in the debates, the members in general holding
back, and a few encountering each other's arguments on a dozen
different matters on which they think sometimes almost alike, but
agree to differ, as otherwise there would be no debate. The debates
are best when from the clash of different opinions, and different
habits of thought, some new views, and often new sympathies with
the other side, are elicited ; and of such subjects, affording scope for
pleasant discussion on both sides of the question, we shall endeavour
to have a copious list from which to select our topics for the year
1879. Ex Cathedra.
©ur Hibrarg ^ablc.
The Bikket Foster Portfolio of Gems.
Published by Raphael Tuck, Fine Art Publisher, 177 City Road,
London, E.C.
This is indeed worthy of its name, and is commended to the
notice of all who at this season are looking out for Christmas
presents. We all know our obligations to Mr. Birket Foster for
many hours of pleasure, his exquisite illustrations lending, as they
do, fresh charms to all our favourite books, and bringing out the
beauty of English scenery and rural life. The present little collection
of eight coloured lithographs from Mr. Birket Foster's drawings,
representing scenes in childish country life, reflects great credit on
the taste and skill displayed by Mr. Tuck in their selection and
reproduction. We scarcely know whether the little rustic figures, in
their truthful and powerful drawing, give us more pleasure than the
beauty of the background landscape in each picture. Our own
favourites are 'Feeding the Ducks,' with its delicate distance of
water and trees, and the ' Seaweed Gatherers,' with the blue-green
billows surging behind them, as the little bare feet trip over the
oar-weed and tangle. The skeleton drawings corresponding to each
picture give a delightful field for the paint brush of the young
amateur, and the whole collection, in its tasteful envelope, will fur¬
nish a charming Christmas gift for an art-loving young friend—
whether boy or girl—or a pretty ornament for a lady's table.
Question Scries. 47
dursttoit Series.
SPECIAL NOTICE TO COMPETITORS IN 1879.
In beginning our new series with the year, we call attention to the
k)lIowing changes :—1. There will be only one Question each month,
and double space allowed for the Answer. This is fixed at a
maximum length of fifty lines (twelve words to a line). 2. In place
of confining our Questions to two subjects, they will be entirely mis¬
cellaneous, so as to spread, we hope, the interest over a wide circle.
3. We offer prizes to the first, second, and third, in the list of com¬
petitors. 4. The Answers must be sent, not later than the 5th of each
month (thus allowing five weeks for each answer), to Qu. C, care of
Messrs. Murray and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. We beg
special attention to this change of date and address, and also must
request that the real name and address of the sender, besides the
pseudonym, may be placed on the first paper of the series. The
name will be strictly confidential. We recommend a pseudonym, not
initials, which are confusing from their identity in so many cases.
As the lengthened space will give scope for good writing, we shall
henceforth be critical of the style as well as of the matter ; and while
consultation of authorities is encouraged, we deprecate 'copying,'
which is sure to be detected, and vitiates the best answei'.
We shall_announce in February the Prize-holders for 1878.
. I.  Give a short account of the Venetian School of Painting : name
and characterise any three of its great painters, and describe anj"^
picture as a type of the school.
Answers, not over fifty lines, to reach. Qu. C, care of Messrs.
Murray and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not later than Feb.
5th. The best Answer will be inserted, and the two next best
named, in our next issue ; and Prizes are offered to the first, second,
and third of the competitors at the close of the year. The real name
need only accompany the first paper. Answers only to be written on
one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO NOVEMBER SERIES.
In History: Heathek, best; M. B., excellent; B., Ekomaet,
Spider, May-Fly, very good; Beetwalda, good; Hilda, requires
care in style and diction.
In Literature: Claribel, best; Eromart, Heather, excellent;
Hilda has copied, and so spoiled a promising answer.
I. The surname of Bell-the-Cat was given to Archibald Douglas,
Earl of Angus, under the following circumstances :—
James III. of Scotland, a prince of artistic tastes but weak
character, provoked discontent among his nobles by surrounding
himself with low favourites. Among the minions thus promoted to
the trust and affections of the monarch was Cochrane, an architect,
who, by his address and boldness, acquired a great influence over the
mind and policy of James. About this time the mismanagement of
the king drove his brother, the Duke of Albany, into rebellion.
Obliged to quit the kingdom, he sought and obtained help from
Edward IV. of England, who sent an army, which took Berwick, and
proclaimed Albany king. Upon this James raised forces, and marched
to Lauder. In the church there the chief nobles consulted together
to devise measures for removing the favourites, and recovering their
48 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
own authority. Lord Gray then related the fable of the mice, who,
disturbed by the depredations of the cat, held a council, in which one
suggested the plan of hanging a bell to the cat's neck, to give warning
of her approach; but when from discussing they came to executing
the scheme, no mouse was found bold enough for the deed. Upon
this Angus, stung by the implied taunt, exclaimed, ' I am he who
will bell the cat.' Just then Cochrane himself entered, when Angus
boldly advanced, and, assisted by others, seized him, carried him
before the king, and demanded with loud menaces that the rest of
the detested favourites should be given up to them. James, terrified,
yielded the unhappy men to their fury, and all six were hanged next
day on the bridge of Lauder without any trial, a.d. 1482.
Heather.
II. Each of these words, which are immediately derived from the
Latin, contains a metaphor crystallized. They all refer to former
visible realities, which are recalled now only by research into their
construction and original meaning ; and they are all examples of the
formation of abstract ideas from concrete notions. Dexullorii, derived
from a technical word used in the ancient circus. Equcn desultorius,
or (lesultor, meaning a rider who served as a kind of outrider in a
chariot race, or one who leaped from the back of one running horse
to another. Hence the adjective is applied to people who are
changeable or unsettled in their studies or habits.
Ambitiov, Lat. ambio, I go round. Derived from the old custom in
Rome, that the candidates for popular favour or offices should walk
about soliciting the votes of the people.—Candidate, Lat. candere, to
be white. Those who solicited the votes of the people in ancient
Rome were accustomed to chalk their togas ; hence the phrase cretata
ainhitio, and hence our word for an aspirant to offices bestowed by
the public.
Trihidation, from Tribninm, the threshing instrument in use among
the Romans. The primary sense of trlhulut'w was the separation of
corn from chaff. Hence, probably owing to the figurative language
of the Old and New Testaments concerning the winnowing of corn,
the word came to be used by the early Latin Church writers as itself
indicative of the moral winnowing and purification of man through
suti'erinw and trial. Clakibel.
Notices to Corrrspontifnts, tit.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
tlie Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society
will be held on Saturday, 4th January, at 4 Oxford Terrace. Debate
—arranged for December, and then unavoidably postponed—' Is the
present neglect of Italian for other languages, in the education of
girls, to be regretted ?'
A( Home and Abroad. 49
St l^omr anil atiroaU.
No. II.—NOTES FROM SAVOY.
Every book of travels takes its colour quite as much from
the character of the author as from the country which it
describes. We read of many lauds, but we always have to
see them more or less reflected in the eyes of many men,
and in the opinions of many minds. Hence the dashing
' Rides,' the pensive ' Rambles,' the classical Tours, the
' Bubbles' from mineral Brtinnen, the publications of the
Alpine Club, and the Log-letters- and Sketch-books, which
identify the places seen with the cavalry officer, the sports¬
man, the doctor, the artist, the sailor, the tutor, or even with
the pleasant idler wlio describes them.
I offer you some notes about Savoy. I have spent ten
months there; yet these notes can, alas! describe no mountain
peaks, and no gloomy mx)iiastery. They will at best trot along
what the French call Us routef^ carrossaUes; for I visited
Savoy as an invalid, toa lame to ramble,, and too prudent to
go in search of any adventures.
Yet in ten months even an invalid may see, hear, read,
and think of a great manj' things; and to Savoy, past and
present, to its history, its wild-flowers, its ruins, its baths, its
authors and poets, its vineyards and its peasants, I owe
many pleasant hours, and sensations sweet ' felt in the
blood.'
I said that I had never gone in search of adventure, and
yet I once entered the country in a sufficiently adventurous
way. We were leaving Geneva, and having sent the luggage
by train to the custom-house at Bellegarde, we determined
ourselves to go by diligence to Bonneville, and thence to
proceed in the same fashion to Annecy, where we meant to
sleep. Bonneville we reached in safety on a fine September'
afternoon; but being the only passengers for Annecy, the
parsimonious owners of the Migience then declined to send its
lumbering weight any farther on our account. A ehar-a-hary
was produced, with a lad in a blouse seated on one of its
shafts, and as it was already four o'clock there was no redress
to be had, and no use in wasting daylight in arguments;
so we got into the vehicle, and started. Our road lay
np a long incline, with splendid views over the Voirons
district. Presently the sun set, and we asked how far we
were from Annecy ? ' We have got three or four hours to
go,' was the reply.    Then the sunset glories faded, and we
No. .50.—February 1879. j)
50 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
crossed the watershed of the streams, and began to descend.
There was no moon, but the stars shone, the hills closed in
all round us; it was dark, only the river beside us made a
sort of milky trail down the sides of the hills; and in this
way, seeing nothing but the tail of the white horse that
drew us (and our fortunes), we entered Annecy.
Travellers, however, do not generally approach Savoy from
this side.
When going from Paris to Turin they only do so after
having left behind them the plains of Burgundy, and the
homesteads of Bresse. People ought certainly to stop at
Bourg, and see the tombs of the Burgundian Dukes in the
Eglise de Brou, and note the wonderful hats of the peasant
women, with their horns and long lappets. All their lace
comes from the neighbouring district of Velay, where the
workers are very proud of their patterns, many of which have
been in use since the days of Mary of Burgundy. The
station at Bresse is full of coops and baskets, for Bresse
exports the best poultry in the world. All its crops are
devoted to this purpose, and innumerable drills of maize
and millet, of potatoes and sunflowers, form the wealth of a
peasantry which has a curious dialect of its own, and is
proud of its industry and traditions.
You are now in Savoy, and in a district anciently known
as Le Bugey. Bonnivard was a native of it, though he has
become so exclusively connected in our minds with Chillon
that it is not usual to think of him as a Savoisien. The
train now stops at Culoz, a little village in the Ehone
Valley, which stands at the head of the marshes of Lazaurs.
Close above it are the ruins of Virieu, and to the right is
the Canal of Savieres, while to the northward opens the
province of La Semille, with the vineyards of Seyssel, and the
wild, rocky defile through which the waters of the Pier join
the great current of the Khone.
It is five o'clock, and Culoz presents a curious spectacle.
Three mail trains are being made up, and the three plat¬
forms are crowded with groups of passengers. Those who
stand next to us are on their way, via the tunnel of the
Mont Cenis, to Turin, Brindisi, Alexandria, and Bombay.
Those to the left will leach Paris to-morrow morning, and
are speaking lightly of their further journey to London, or
even to Edinburgh. And well they may, considering that
the friends of whom we have just taken leave are prepared
to start this evening from the north platform, via Geneva,
Bale, Berlin, and Warsaw, for Kiev, and for a property many
hours to the north-west of Odessa, where the new sugar
A t Home and A broad. 5 ^
factories on Prince B. D.'s estates demand his attendance.
But these leave-takings are all over, the doors are shut, and
the three trains are started in their different directions.
Ours is soon running southwards along the edge of the Lac
du Bourget. This is the ' Lwc' of Lamartine's elegiac muse,
and of Medermeyer's music—the lake which we shall know
for so many weeks, since our headquarters are to be fixed
at Aix-les-Bains for the summer.
You come to Aix an invalid and a cripple, and its waters
soon reduce you to a state of still greater suffering. The
doctor smiles blandly, and assures you that this is all right,
since these waters ' viennent frapper a toutes les portes.' It
may be so, but in the meantime, through the long, hot days
and the hot nights, you must have something to distract
your attention from all these pains.
So you send for some books, and you hope for great things
from them.
What have they sent us from Bolliet's Library ? First,
a guide to the Grande Chartreuse. Ah ! that will never do.
Getting up at six the one day, to return after dark the next,
after having seen the desert and the cascade, and the terrible
mountain wildernesses that lie between Chambery and Gre¬
noble, is not to be thought of It makes one tired even to
hear of it, or of excursions to the Semnoz-Alpe, or to the top
of the Dent du Chat either. So that book may be sent back.
Then try Lamartine's Raphael, which is a very sentimental
description of Aix and its environs. Yes ; and take also
the volume of his poems; we can read them on the brows
of the Tresserve under the big chestnuts, or of an evening
on the jetty in the lake, when the little cue-owls hoot, and
the evening star hurries down behind the black rampart of
mountains that shuts in Savoy on the side of the district of
Belley. Lamartine being accepted, we turn next to the
works of Ducis the academician, whom Napoleon used to
call the plre Ducis, and whose family still inhabit Chambery.
Then we had better secure that volume of Noel's, in Bressan
dialect, for these carols are authentic as well as curious.
And we cannot go wrong in keeping the last number of the
Revue des deux Mondes, whose editor, Buloz, had a country-
house down below Le Bourget, not far from La Serraz, or
from that little white house at Bissy, which still belongs to
the family of De Maistre.
And what is there to be had besides all this, and the
works of the two De Maistres ? Ah ! a volume of the letters
of St. Francis de Sales. Certainly, let us keep that also: only
I shall not read it till I have seen the castle near Annecy,
52 77/1? Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
from which the true-hearted bishop went forth, and where
the family of De Sales still dwell.
Is that all ? No; there is a monograph on Les Abimes de
Myaus, and on the shrine of the wonder-working Virgin
there. That may go: but the pamphlet about the tombs at
Hautecombe we will keep, for we went there yesterday.
We rowed over to the Abbey, visited the tombs of the
Kings, heard the monks chant the offi,ces des Morts, saw the
famous well (which is intermitting, and has caprices, just
like any woman), ate cherries in the woods, lay on our oars
under the shadow of the rocks, and then rowed back, and
landed in a creek full of water-lilies.
How beautiful this Savoy is ! How rich, too, in souvenirs !
Wedged in between the Alps and the Elione, it now forms
only a province of France, but it once had a history of its own.
One is tempted to regret that its last king, so true to the
interests of Italy, should have forgotten his country and his
father's house, and have ceded Savoy to the ambition of a
Napoleon. In extenuation of this act, it is now said, ' Oh ! but
French is the language of the country, and was always spoken
in Savoy by every one above the rank of a chimney-sweep.'
That is true. Only the shepherd in the mountain pastures,
or the labourer who treads the winepress, or the boy who
drives the kids, speaks in patois. French was the language
of St Francis de Sales, of Ducis, of Eapin, of Vaugelas, of
Bonnivard, of Berthollet, of Cardinal Tournon, of General
Lallee, of De Boigne, of Mde. de Warens, of Buloz, and of
the two De Maistres. Yet to draw from this any inference of
dependence on France would be to err. Though conquered by
the Eomans, though held as a fief by the German emperors,
though watered with Saracen blood, though often coveted
by Burgundy, and attacked by France, though sometimes
possessed of Geneva and sometimes deprived of it, though
absorbed by Piedmont, though united to Sardinia, though
conquered by one Napoleon and finally sold to another, stiU
Savoy has had a i-vle of her own in history. Though a small
state, she has played a great part, and it has been her good
fortune to have in government, as in race, and in physical
geography, both merits and charms of her own.
Her climate is delightful. She has her mountains, upon
whose crests lies the perpetual snow, and whose frontiers are
sought alike by tourists, and artists, and men of science. Her
valleys stand full of the corn and wine and oil of the South.
Her bright-running ' Nants'^ would entitle her to be called
"the Wales of the Continent, were it not that the uplands of
' Or streams, as the Nanthruid, and le hon Nant.
A t Home mid A broad. 5 3
tier Semnoz-Alpe vie with the best pastures of Switzerland.
On the other hand, her midsummer days recall Italy to our
minds; their temperature is very high, and the blue black¬
ness of her midnight skies has a magic of its own.
Her people are able and courageous, and Savoy, unlike
Wales and Switzerland, can boast of many brave and dis¬
tinguished sons. In the Gallo-Celtic race of the Allobroges,
as among the sub-Alpine populations of Piedmont, many fine
qualities are to be recognised. There is perhaps less personal
beauty to be seen here than in Turin, but some of the women
are very handsome, and the men have the same energy and
tenacity of purpose. With all this, they have shown respect
for discipline, and a strong religious sentiment.
Thus it happens that the poor little kingdom which used
to send off its yearly swarm of chimney-sweeps to Paris, has
given princes to the church, saints to the calendar, ambas¬
sadors to distant courts, generals to foreign armies, models
of style to literary France, and a king to united Italy.
The history of the princes of Savoy and Savoy-Carignan
reads like a romance. Every chapter of it is interesting,—
from the origin of the family at Aiquebelles to its ascension
to the Capitol,—from the reign of Humbert the Whitehanded
to that of Humbert the Second, King of Italy, crowned in
Rome. They belong to a hardy, stout-hearted race, whose
battle-cry was ' Savoie en avant!' and who knew how to dare
as well as to endure.
In Savoy the religious element has always been strong,
and society here was built up by the churchmen, as the
cells in a hive are built up by its bees.
This was a highly favoured land where St. Bernard and St.
Francis lived. Savoy was also ambitious for her clergy, and
she sent to the Holy See the Popes Nicholas II.i and Inno¬
cent v., as well as the anti-Popes Clement VII.^ and Felix
V.^ The Cardinals Brogny, Tournon, and Gerdil, were men
of eminence in politics and literature; and so was their
modern representative, Felix Dupanloup, the venerable
Archbishop of Orleans, who might often be found taking a
holiday in his native Savoy. So much for the purple and
the mitres and the cardinals' hats to be discovered among the
families of Savoy.
Nor did its calendar lack saints and martyrs. There was
a St. Anthelme, and a St. Pierre II. du Tarentaise, a Bien-
1 Nicholas II.    Gerald de Chevron-Vilette.    Elected 1058.
^ Clement VII.    Robert de Geneve.   Born at Annecy; elected 1378.
' King Amadeus VIII.    Abdicated 1434; elected by the Counoil of
Basle, 1439.
54 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
heureux Jean de Maurienne, and that learned archdeacon of
Aosta, who wrote the life of St. Bernard, the patron of the
Hospices. There was St. Emilian, bishop of the Maurienne,
and Hormisdas, sixth bishop of Geneva, exiled by the Arians,
after the Council of Milan, because of his fidelity to the
Oeed of Nicea. These, however, were all eclipsed by the
good St. Bernard. Born at Menthon in 925, his life was
spent in works of faith and charity. His mother, who came
as a bride from Duingt, on the opposite side of the lake of
Annecy, educated him with care. His youth was pure, and his
manhood devoted to the spread of religion. He overthrew
the temples of the heathen gods, and lived to build among
the snows of the Alps the two great Hospices that have made
his name a household word in Christendom. His castle, like
that of Duingt, still exists. The vineyards cluster about its
base, and the winter winds buffet its towers; but the little
room from which the saint fled to embrace the religious life
is now used as a chapel; and the traveller who visits it will
not learn without emotion that the last chdtelaine of
Menthon died (1871) of her over-exertions in a hospital, after
the disastrous flight of Bourbaki's army into Switzerland.
The gentry of this little mountainous kingdom resembled
the ancient Scottish gentry in their poverty, learning, and
love of adventure. They were all closely intermarried, and
many of them have possessed their estates for centuries.
Their standard of manners and acquirements has often been
far higher than their fortunes, and it would be rare to find a
house that has not had its ecclesiastic, its author, or its
soldier. On the other hand, it would be rare to find a family
of which the rental amounted to £1000 a year; and it is
this which makes it so creditable to them, that they have
refused to become, like the Swiss, a nation of mercenaries.
They have been, as a rule, truly attached to their country,
their dynasty, their simple manners, and their homes.
The home, in the case of a Savoisien gentleman, was
generally twofold. First, a house in the streets of Aix,
Annecy, Eumilly, or Chambery, represented the winter life,
the legal or senatorial duties, and all the social ambitions
of the family. Its summers were spent at the chateau.
This is generally a tall whitewashed house, rather high
and narrow, and flanked either by a strong, square tower,
or by two big turrets. The steep roof is decked with leaden
boiiquets, or finials, and the small window panes are probably
set in clumsy leaden frames. There are also strong outside
shutters, for the winter makes wild work among these hills;
and from those limestone ledges miniature avalanches will
A t Home and A broad. 5 5
often come crashing through the walnut woods and among the
orchard trees. When close-shuttered and abandoned, such a
house can look triste, enough, but in the time of vintage the
Savoisien and his chateau are both truly gay. The vine¬
yards that slope down to the lake are dotted with peach
trees. Behind the manor-house stands its big, cavernous
remise, in which the sheep and oxen are sheltered from the
storms, and from under its huge brown eaves there now
hangs a golden fringe of maize. Baskets of vacheries dangle
from all the windows, and the picturesque disorder of the
courtyard must be seen to be believed. Urchins, with wine-
stained legs, drive the sweet-breathed kine out of it down to
the reedy margin of the lake, where the lazaret fishers are
hanging their nets to dry. The garden is fragrant from the
quince trees, the hedges are black with brambles, and while
the children glean among them, their mischievous kids either
prance about in fields purple with the meadow saffron, or
browse in the hazel and medlar coppice. The whole country
is fuU of fruits and mirth, and such sights and sounds form
the setting of a Savoisien country gentleman's life.
Money, however, is scarce in his house. The revenues of
the little estate come in mostly in kind: in the corn which
gives the daily bread, in the walnuts that supply oil for the
lamp, in the wine that ferments in big vats under the terrace,
and in the flax and buckwheat that cover the higher fields
with blue or rosy flowers. Such a landlord can only enjoy
competency as the result of careful management, and of a
modest success in some profession. If his sons wish to
enjoy the same, they must earn it for themselves in some
more or less remunerative career. As for the daughters, one
—at the most two of them—may hope to marry, but for the
rest the convent opens its doors. Perhaps one goes to the
Ursulines at Grenoble, or one is sent to that convent of the
Visitation at Annecy which had St. Francis of Sales for its
founder, and a daughter of President Fabre's for its first nun,
and there she will see life only through the gratings, while
she prays beside the relics of the sainted founder.
Just such a family as I have described was that of the
President de Maistre, and he lived just such a simple
primitive life as this with his wife (Mdlle. de Molz) when
their eldest son Joseph was born to them at Chamb^ry, on
the 11th of April 1754. Joseph de Maistre was born when
Mirabeau was five years old; when Voltaire, at Ferney, was
sapping the foundations of the old order, and of all the
beliefs on which society in Europe had reposed; and when
Jean Jacques Eousseau was composing the Nouvelle Heloise.
$6 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magasine.
'What is Chambery without Eousseau?' asks Lamartine;
and certainly if we look on Eousseau as the first and greatest
author of the romantic school, Lis Cliarmettes deserves a
visit. Deep buried in the lanes, at about an hour's drive
from Chamlaery, it is a rustic manor-house, little altered since
the days of Mde. de Warens, and its garden is a wilderness
of vines and peach trees, of sunflowers, and of the large
white convolvulus that wanders from tree to tree. Beyond
Chambery, and on the line of railway that goes by Uriage to
Grenoble, is the castle of the Chevalier Bayard, a small ruin,
which, it is said, the Due de Berri once intended to purchase
and restore, but of which enough still remains to show the
room in which, in 1476, the Chevalier was born who knew
nor fear nor blame. The baths of Allevard are at no great
distance, and still nearer are those of Challes, places which
attract a good many visitors in summer, but which must be
very cold in winter when the chains of the Maurienne and
Tarentaise, like that of the Grande Chartreuse, are all covered
with snow. It may be said that winter commences in these
countries about the 20th of October, but by the 20th of
April fine weather begins, while after the 20th of May the
temperature becomes high, and by the 20th of June it is
generally found to be too warm for exercise in the sun.
September is the month which will give the greatest pleasure
to an English visitor or artist in Savoy.
By the AuTHOii of ' Vera,' ' Blue Eoses,' etc. etc.
Is tfje Efjeorg of 3Ebolutton ttfcfssartlg oppostti to
C|)risttanitg ?
Before beginning an answer to this question, I wish to
define my own ground by stating,—first. That I am not my¬
self by any means convinced of the truth of the evolution
theory. It seems to me that before that theor)'- can expect
or deserve deliberate acceptance, much more of positive proof
is needed than its upholders can at present produce.
Second, That it is not with its truth or falsehood, or with the
presence or absence of proof in its support, that I have to
deal, but simply with the bearing which—on the supposition
of its truth coming eventually to be proved—it would have
on that religion which we all revere. The question I under¬
take to answer is this, and nothing more. Would the truth
of the evolution theory (supposing it to be true) affect any¬
thing essential to our belief as Christians ?
Is the Theory of Evolution opposed to Christianity?    57
In the first place, then, AVhat bearing has this theory on
the fundamental question of all religion, on the existence of
One self-existent' I am,' ' of whom, and through whom, and
to whom are all things'? In my view, on this first and most
important of all questions, evolution has absolutely no
bearing. We have familiar instances of evolution around us
on every hand, which, just because our minds are habituated
to their idea, it never occurs to us to imagine could in any
way affect that great question, except, indeed, as added proof
of the power and wisdom of the Creator. We do not think
of the 'full corn in the ear' as less His workmanship,
because we know that it has sprung from the tiny seed buried
in the bosom of the earth. We do not think of ourselves as
less ' His offspring,' because we are the offspring of our human
parents too, because our mode of individual entrance on this
strange life of ours is a birth, and not visibly or individually
a direct creation by the hand of God. Nay, on the other
hand, is it not rather our impulse to adore and wonder the
more at the infinite power and wisdom which could M'rap vl])
in germs apparently so insignificant, such wondrous poten¬
tialities of development into life or beauty ? Now, the growth
of the tiniest plant from its parent seed, our own birth from
human ancestors, are as truly instances of development as
any theory that Darwin can propound. The argument here,
then, is this. Granted that we accept the growth of a plant
from its seed, and our own birth from human parents, as in
no way detrimental to, but, on the contrary, confirmatory of,
our belief in an all-wise and all-powerful Creator, then we
are bound to carry our principle further, and allow that all
development must stand on the same ground, as only an
added proof of the power and wisdom of the Framer of these
laws which have wrapped up in them such wondrous issues;
for, be it observed, however far back the mighty chain may
reach, were it proved to-morrow that this universe, with all
its diversities of life and beauty and intelligence, sprang
originally from mere parent atoms, you have still to seek a
Creator for these atoms with their latent potentialities—a
Lawgiver for the laws of their development.
But it may be objected, grant all that, grant that the
theory of evolution does not touch the theistic idea,—that
for the atom-germs of a universe we require a Creator as
much as for a completed universe itself,—does not this theory
contradict the narrative of the creation given us in that Book
which we as Christians recognise as the Word of God ?
Must we not, if we accept evolution, reject the first chapter
of Genesis ?     To  this also  I  return  a negative  answer.
58 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Evolution, as well as other better proved scientific facts, may
indeed modify the sense in which we have been accustomed
to understand the Bible narrative of creation; but to my
mind, all the facts already proven, while modifying our
understanding of it, have only brought out its fundamental
truth in new and brighter light. For example, it is to be
noted that the narrative in Genesis, the proved facts of
geology, and the theory of evolution, run in strangely
parallel lines of gradation from the lower to the higher.
The sequence in each case is essentially the same.
Let us suppose, with an eminent Scottish geologist, that
the narrative of creation, as given to us in the Bible, was
presented to the mind of the inspired writer, not in spoken
words, but in acted vision,—in a series of pictures, in which
he saw, one by one, the successive steps of creation,—not
the mode of God's creative action, but the successive crea¬
tions that resulted from it, as in the changing scenes of a
panorama. First the void darkness of the mighty deep ;
then the grey light glimmering over the waste of undivided
waters; then the mist of parting waters rising like a mighty
veil from the face of the watery waste, and a firmament
dividing the ' waters from the waters;' then the dry land
emerging from the lower deep, wrapped in its gorgeous
mantle of living green; then lights shining out from the
risen mist in the iirmament of heaven, the sun to give light
by day, and the moon and the stars by night; then the
seemingly void waters quickening into life immeasurable,
' moving creatures that had life' sporting in their boundless
depths, and sea-birds dipping their white wings in their
waves ; then the earth, too, before but green and fair in the
unconscious beauty of herb and flower, is seen again instinct
with conscious life, from the creeping thing and the beast of
the field, till the long gradation culminates at last in a being,
made indeed of the dust of the earth, yet bearing the image
of the Creator. Do not these visions or panoramic pictures
follow strangely the sequence claimed by the evolutionist ?
Of the Tiiode, of creation the Bible says absolutely nothing,
save that man was formed of the dust of the earth ; and that
would remain equally true were the evolutionists to succeed
in proving that he was the culminating point of a long
gradation of being, of which the first germs were to be found
in his primordial atoms,—nay, the Bible statement would
rather have gained a scientific confirmation, for the ' dust of
the earth' would be the literal element from which he
sprung.
I have tried to show, then,—first, That the evolution theory
Is the Tli£0)'y of Evolution opposed to Christianity ?    59
would in no way touch the theistic idea, the eternal necessity
for a Creator; and second. That it would not, in my view,
in any way affect the fundamental veracity of the Bible
narrative. There is yet another objection which is often
raised, of which I should like to speak. It is said that, on
such a theory, the soul of man would be necessarily but an
improved edition of that of the beasts that perish,—that to
believe it, it would be necessary to discard the idea of man's
moral responsibility, the possibility of a Fall, the need of a
Eedeemer. Weighty objections indeed, if they can be justly
brought against the theory. But can they ? I think not.
To me it does not seem that the mode of man's creation
touches any one of these points. Is there really any greater
difficulty in conceiving of moral responsibility as the attri¬
bute of a creature whose physical being has been a slow
growth from the dust of the earth through a long gradation
of lower stages of being, than of conceiving it as the attribute
of one springing direct from that primordial dust ? But
it is objected, Wliy should man be more responsible than the
ancestors from whom, on this theory, he has risen by almost
imperceptible gradations ? Is not what we call sin necessary
imperfection merely ? We do not say that a sea-jelly sins
because it cannot walk like a man ; why should we say that
a man sins because he cannot live like a God ? Is not this
struggle, of which we are all conscious, between what we call
good and evil, only the necessary antagonism between what
has been and what will be, in a creature sprung from lower
antecedents and going on to higher developments ? If it be
so, what book, let me ask, dwells with such passionate earnest¬
ness as the Bible on this old struggle between the flesh and
the spirit ? But to make this an objection to man's re¬
sponsibility seems to me to spring from a certain confusion of
thought as to the real nature of that responsibility and the
real sphere of its operation. Moral responsibility seems to me
to mean the duty which every creature owes to its Creator,
to live up to the highest laws of its being. The sea-jelly is
not responsible that it cannot walk as a man, because that
is not according to the laws of being impressed upon it by
its Maker; and we cannot conceive of a sea-jelly blaming
itself for such inability, any more than we can conceive of a
man feeling remorse because he cannot fly. Neither does a
man feel remorse because he cannot live as a God, for he
cannot even conceive what it would be so to live ; but he can
conceive what it is to live up to the manhood—the Divine
manhood—which has been stamped upon him by his Creator;
and he is conscious that in so far as he fails to do this he
6o TJic Ladies' EdinburgJi. Magazine.
sins. But it may be said. Where does this moral responsibility
begin in the long line of ascent, if, as this theory maintains,
man is but the apex of a graduated pyramid? At which of the
almost imperceptible steps does the creature become morally
responsible ? The limit of perception of the laws of its being,
possible to any creature, seems to me the limit of its respon¬
sibility ; and any lapse from this perceived ideal is not neces¬
sary imperfection, but sin. Wherever this perception begins
in the graduated scale, there also we have the beginning ot
moral responsibility. We are, indeed, the apex of the pyramid,
and our duty to the great Father is infinitely the highest, the
noblest, and the closest, for we are made in His image; but
if in any of His lower children there exists the power of
choice to follow or to forsake the laws He has stamped upon
their lower being, then in their lower degree they, too, are
responsible to Him. The theory of evolution does not seem
to me to make any difference in this matter; for moral
responsibility does not depend, in any degree, upon the pro¬
cess by which this perception has been attained, but on the
existence, of the perception; and the difference in degree, or,
if you will, in kind, between this perception in man and in
the lower animals is neither increased nor diminished by the
truth or falsehood of the theory. Neither, therefore, does it
introduce any new difficulty into the idea of a Fall or lapse
from this ideal, or of a restoration to it by a Eedeemer.
Let me sum up, in closing, the three points which I have
tried to prove. 1st, That the theory of evolution would in
no way interfere with the theistie idea, for a Creator is as
much needed for its primordial atoms, with their wondrous
latent potentialities, as for a completed universe springing
direct from the creative hand. 2d, That it would not inter¬
fere with the fundamental truth of the Bible narrative, in
which no mode of creation is specified, and with the sequence
of which it runs strangely parallel. And 3d, That it has
no bearing on the Bible view of man's responsibility,—his
fall and his redemption,—because on it, as on any other
theory, the limit of a creature's responsibility does not
depend upon the mode of his creation, but upon the per¬
ception possible to him of the ideal law of his being, his
lapse from which is sin, and his restoration to which is
salvation. Jeanie Moeison.
Tlie Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    6i
Ci)e 33fggar of Capo Di iflonte: a ^Tale of Sixtg^one.
By the Author of ' Mabel's Ckoss,' etc.
CHAITEII  III.
It was on one of those lovely summer days when everything
in nature combines to wrap the senses in delight, that the
])arty left Torre del Greco. There was just enough breeze
left to fill the sails of the felucca, which bounded over the
blue water ' like a thing of life I' As tliey passed over the
coast, Signor Ciprani pointed out its various beauties, witli
which he was so familiar. In a few hours the wind sank
suddenly, and the vessel lay almost motionless on the glassy
sea. Concetta, not feeling disposed for conversation, sat a
little apart from the rest, and seemed quite unconscious of
any change in the movement of the boat. In truth, her
thoughts were far away, and she indulged herself, unobserved
as she believed, in recalling similar pleasures on the Danube,
on the shores of which her uncle, Eudolph's father, had a
fine estate. Ciprani, like most of his country, ever had a
passionate love of mu.sic, and taking advantage of the lazy,
floating motion of the felucca, he gave a signal to the boat¬
men for a song. It was soon responded to, and their rich,
harmonious voices seemed to sink and swell to the gentle
heaving of the waves. After a hearty ' bravo ' from the
Signor, the strain was repeated at the request of Signora
Carlotta, and followed by several others. Concetta, now
fully roused from her dream, joined warmly in her thanks,
looking with considerable interest at the noble and almost
Herculean figure of the man who now came forward to make
some alteration in the sail near which she sat. She moved
a little out of the way of the rope, and in so doing
looked up and caught his eyes steadily and even fiercely
fixed on her. The colour left her cheek, and a thrill of
involuntary terror shot through her frame. She could not
account for this feeling of dread, for both the tone and
manner were civil enough as he said, ' Eestate, Signora,
restate,' and saying this his countenance lost all its stern¬
ness.
' Capitano Filippo,' said Ciprani, addressing the man, who
seemed above the rank of a common sailor, ' think you we
shall make the port of Lecco ere the evening tide begins to
ebb?'
At this question, the man addressed looked slowly round
the horizon, and fixing his eyes on Vesuvius, now bearing
62 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
away north-east, said, with rather a peculiar  tone in  his
voice:
' I care not to answer you, Signor, on the point, for, in
truth, I know not these seas so well as some others, and the
heavens, when they sometimes look fairest, can play us false
as other fair-seeming things. Ask Tomaso there; he has
known this bay for many a year, he can tell every ripple and
echo of its sea, and has listened to the moans of the mermaids
when the treacherous waves curled round the headlands.'
Ciprani laughed, and said, ' If Tomaso be as chary of his
seamanship as our capitano, we shall not learn much. For
myself,' he continued,' I care not if I spend the night on the
open deck, but the Signore are not accustomed to so rough
a bed, and Signorina Torcelli must be especially cared for.'
Concetta felt her heart beat quickly as she listened for the
man's reply, as she could not persuade herself that there was
not some hidden meaning in his peculiar voice and manner.
' Fear not for the safety of the Signorina Torcelli, Padrone;
1 will see tbat she is well cared for'—then, in a more natural
tone, said, ' Here, Tomaso, forward !'
At this call a slouching figure, with his fisherman's cap
drawn low over his eyes, came from the farthest end of the
boat. He wore one of the striped tight-fitting jackets
common to that class; a pair of dirty white drawers completed
his attire, for he had neither stockings nor shoes on his feet.
The sleeves of his shirt were rolled up his arms, one of
which was deeply scarred. He came forward apparently with
reluctance, and turned his face away from the party; but
when Signor Ciprani, pointing to some object on the horizon,
asked him if it were not a cluster of rocks which they ought
to pass before nightfall, he was obliged to face the speaker.
Concetta, who was struck by his hesitating manner, and
already rendered nervously sensitive by the strange expres¬
sion in the eye of Filippo, looked earnestly at Tomaso, and
was almost overcome with the surprise of recognising the
Beggar of Capo di Monte in the man before her. For one
instant the flash of his dark eyes, now hastily averted,
betrayed his consciousness of being discovered, but in a
moment he recovered himself; and when Concetta looked
again, to assure herself it was indeed Matteo, his face bore a
stolid, unmeaning expression, and steadily and unwaveringly
bore her searching glance. Without the slightest faltering
in his voice, which, however, bore not the slightest resem¬
blance to that of the beggar, he replied to Ciprani's question,
and shortly after was dismissed to his former place. There
was nothing of haste or impatience in his manner as he
TJie Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.   63
turned away, and Concetta asked herself, could it be possible
she had been so deceived ? Her nerves were in so excited a
state from the double mystery, that she scarcely knew how
to trust her own sight; but the more she considered the
expression and sudden change in the face of this man, the
more convinced she felt it was no other than Matteo. What
could it all mean ? and for what purpose had he so disguised
himself ? She longed to be alone with Carlotta, to ask her
opinion of the strange coincidence, and heartily repented
having joined the party, so fearful was she of some hidden
danger. Why had Matteo, who evinced such gratitude for
her kindness on the evening of their accident, now seemed so
anxious to escape being recognised ? Unable to solve the
mystery, she roused herself, and trying to shake oft' her
nervous apprehensions, entered again into conversation witli
her friend. Turning towards Siguor Ciprani, she said in one
of the pauses in their conversation :
' Did I not hear you call that sailor Tomaso ?'
' Yes, Signorina; but why do you ask ? You think, perhaps
you have seen him before, and it is very possible, for he
plies his trade briskly amongst the pleasure-seeking crowd
at Naples. Though not a very fine specimen of a Neapolitan
boatman, I believe Tomaso knows how to handle a sail, and
may be trusted in the management of his craft; but this is
his first venture with me. He was engaged by the Captain
Klippo for our little voyage, for my own men have been
bitten with the cry of liberty, and are gone to swell the
ranks of your Northerners.'
' His face reminded me,' said Concetta in a low voice, not
wishing to be heard by Filippo or his comrades, ' of a beggar,
who, under Providence, was the means of saving our lives a
few evenings ago.' She then related the particulars of the
accident, and how this man, bearing so strong a resem¬
blance to the sailor called Tomaso, had rendered them such
timely aid. She did not speak of her own share in the
transaction; but Matteo's parting words, that in any danger
befalling her he would not fail to help her, came back in all
their fulness to her remembrance.
' My dear Signorina,' said Ciprani, ' when you have lived
a little longer amongst us, you will continually find these
strange metamorphoses in our people. They have a wonderful
facility in assuming any character that suits their purpose,
and as to disguises, I verily believe they might deceive the
mother that bore them. In this instance, however, I think
you must be mistaken, as Tomaso is but just returned from
'; Amalfi, where he had taken some English travellers.'
64 The Ladies Edmburgh Magazine.
Concetta said no more, but the impression still remained
unaltered in her mind. As night drew on, Signor Ciprani
began to feel some anxiety for his fair charges, as there
seemed a probability of tlieir voyage being of longer duration
than he had anticipated. Filippo and his crew seemed
anxiously engaged in reconnoitring a vessel which appeared
to be steering in their direction. There was evidently some
doubt in the minds of the men, whose voices rose in the
earnestness of their conversation. Ciprani, perceiving this,
called to Filippo, and asked him what the craft was, for with
his glass he distinctly saw she meant to cross them in
their course.
' I like not her look. Padrone,' was Filippo's reply; ' and
should she intend mischief, we are quite at her mercy.'
Hearing this the ladies drew closer together, and shuddered
to think what might be their fate, should they fall into the
hands of those buccaneers, who, under pretext of fighting for
their deposed king, committed all kinds of enormities, and
extorted fabulous sums for the ransom of those known to be
of noble birth. Ciprani's troubled countenance told that he
himself was not wholly insensible to these fears, and, calling
to Filippo, he began to consult with him what they should
do in case of an attack. There was a small swivel gun
in the boat, but this would avail them little, for in all
probability the vessel approaching them was better armed.
Filippo now took the helm, and the little party watched in
silence, looking out eagerly for anything that might afford a
gleam of hope. AVhile Filippo spoke to Signor Ciprani,
Concetta could not help observing she was in some peculiar
manner the object of his scrutiny. Could it be possible that
this attack, if such it proved, had been preconcerted by
these men, Filippo and Tomaso ! Her heart almost ceased
to beat as these thoughts passed through her mind, and as
she vainly strove to discover some clue to Matteo's being
present under a disguise. There was one point that seemed
to acquit these men of any collusion with the supposed
enemy, and that was their own evident uneasiness at the
approach of the strange vessel. In the excitement of the
moment the mask had fallen from Tomaso; for his flashing
eyes and angry tones were no longer under control, and he
seemed to have forgotten there was any one on board who
might recognise the Beggar of Capo di Monte. Silently, but
swiftly, the suspicious-looking barque was gaining on them,
and Ciprani, for the first time, spoke his apprehensions to
his companions. Madame Ciprani was a courageous woman,
and held to the hope the vessel was a friendly one; but
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    65
Carlotta, contrary to the expectations of her companions,
who, from her vivacity, imagined her of a bold and fearless
spirit, gave way to a thousand fears, and loudly and bitterly
bewailed having yielded to the temptation offered of a visit
to the island.    Concetta, on whom the Signor looked with
most anxiety, knowing her delicate frame and her father's
fears, was perfectly calm, seeming to accept her situation as
her destiny.    She felt lierself powerless, and strove not to
increase the distress of her friends by any outward emotion.
The moon had now risen, and, spite of their distressing sus¬
pense, there was something in its glorious flood of light on
the crisp waves, that seemed to raise her thoughts above
this present scene, and to give her strength from above.
Whatever the strange barque might prove it would be soon
known, for scarcely a quarter of a league lay between them.
Filippo had given up the helm for a moment to Tomaso,
and taking the glass once more to reconnoitre the vessel so
swiftly approaching, he suddenly broke out into a joyful
shout, and turned to Ciprani with a look of triumph as he
cried out, ' Amici, Padrone, amici!' and the crew took up the
cry.    A voice as from a speaking trumpet in the strange
vessel came rolling over the waves :
' Filippo, Amico, avete I'acqua fresca ?'
The relief these words gave to the trembling party may
well be imagined, and they soon began to chide each other
for so easily giving way to their fears.    The hearty tone in
which Filippo shouted back ' Si, si,' at once dispelled their
doubts, and now they waited with no little curiosity the
explanation of the seemingly unintelligible alarm of Filippo
and his comrades.     In a few minutes the vessel lay side
by   side  with the  felucca,  and   friendly  greetings   were
exchanged.
' By the cross of St. Andrea, the ugly build of thy vessel
did frighten us, Bernardo ; how earnest thou in her, for she
is no true man's venture. We deemed she had run across
from Gaeta,' said Filippo in a menacing tone,' and expected
we should find ourselves in the dungeons of tlie prison ere
to-morrow's sun had sunk.'
' Thou wert not far wrong,' replied the man called Ber¬
nardo with a coarse laugh; ' and had the cowards been as
brave as thou, we had been there in thy stead.' Bernardo
now told of his comrades and himself having been surprised
on their return from Sicily, where they had conveyed
ammunition and stores for the so-called rebels. Concetta
remarked a peculiarly significant glance pass between
No. 50.—February 1870. E
66 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magasine.
Bernardo and Filippo as he spoke these words, but it seemed
to attract no other person's observation. They had fought
desperately, as men fight when life and liberty are at stake,
and succeeded in overpowering their adversaries.
' Seven ugly fellows,' said Bernardo with a savage grin,
' will never fight more in this world, whatever they may do
in the next amongst their mates below; the remaining four
lie in our hold, with their ankles tied to prevent their dancing
their cursed tarantella' At this witty speech of their
captain, there was a burst of laughter from the crew. ' How
came you to leave your own boat, Filippo ? Who should have
expected to have found you in a vessel of this kind ?'
' Nay, do not run down the barque in this fashion,' said
Filippo in a tone strangely unlike his former voice;' you
may be thankful to find yourself on her timbers some day yet.'
' Such a day you mean as when you were obliged to
leave the Santa Lucia, perhaps, Filippo,' and here Bernardo
laughed again \ though Concetta, whose attention was fixed
on Filippo, saw that he looked savagely at Bernardo. ' For
the love of heaven,' said Bernardo with a quick change of
manner,' give us some water, for none has passed our lips
since yesterday's forenoon, and the cursed rogues took care
to drink up all the wine before they gave us chase.' For¬
tunately the little felucca was well supplied with water and
fruit, which was now freely distributed amongst them. The
thirsty crew did not forget to give a hearty cheer for the
Padrone and the Signoras. The vessels proceeded in company
for some time, but when morning broke and land appeared,
the rakish-looking craft, which had caused them so much
uneasiness, shifted her helm and steered for Sicily. In a
few more hours, Ciprani and his party landed at Lecco; and
very thankful Concetta and her friend Carlotta were to find
themselves in the comfortable country-liouse belonging to
the hospitable host and hostess. Even Carlotta had at last
been struck with the brigand appearance of Filippo and his
comrades, for neither of them had the usual careless bearing
of the Neapolitan sailors. Before they disembarked, Con¬
cetta remarked that Tomaso was not amongst the crew.
She mentioned the circumstance to Signer Ciprani, who
said ' he supposed the fellow had found some acquaintance
in the other barque, and had made an exchange, one of
Bernardo's crew having taken his place. These fellows are
an independent race, and in these ticklish times it does not do
to quarrel with them for every slight cause. Filippo was an¬
swerable for the skill of the crew, and if he was satisfied, that
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.   6j
was all he looked for.' Concetta, in her secret heart, viewed
the departure of Tomaso in a different light; but she did
not impart her suspicions, and no further notice was taken.
In the course of conversation, Ciprani observed it was curi¬
ous, certainly, that the ladies had fixed on the present time
for visiting Ischia; and now acknowledged that all the
crew except Filippo were strangers to him, and his meeting
with Filippo also was accidental. As he had already men¬
tioned, his own boatmen had given him the slip; and
inquiring amongst the fishermen for men to supply their
place, Filippo, who happened to be lounging near seeking
employment, immediately off'ered his services, and engaged
to bring three others with him who knew the bay and its
islands under every aspect. Ciprani was evidently a man
who had little to fear from either party, or he would not
have been so careless at such a time in the choice of his
boat's crew.
CHAPTER IV.
Four or five days were spent most agreeably with the
kind friends, who vied with each other in showing attention
to their fair guests—taking them to all the most beautiful
parts of the island, and pointing out everything worthy of
notice. Concetta had almost forgotten the strange and
unaccountable appearance of Matteo the Beggar on board the
felucca, as well as her uneasy suspicions of Filippo. Carlotta
from the first had ridiculed the idea of Tomaso's being the
Beggar of Capo di Monte, whose cunning leer she should
never forget, and accused her friend of giving way to extra¬
vagant and absurd fancies.
' Nobody,' she said, ' could have been more obliging or
unobtrusive in his manner than the Captain Filippo, and
for her part she felt perfectly safe under the protection of so
stalwart a champion.' Signor Ciprani and his wife were
now anxious to embark on the return voyage; for some
persons with whom Ciprani had been conversing, and who
had just landed from Naples, spoke of slight shocks of
earthquake having been felt along the whole line of the coast
between Naples and Castellamare, more especially at Torre
del Greco. Filippo was at once summoned, to consult upon
the expediency of returning that same evening. He advised
their losing no time, for there was an unusual and even
unnatural calm in the air, a kind of treacherous lull that has
often been known to precede an eruption.    All was now
68 Tlic Ladies EdinbtirgJi Magazine.
bustle and confusion at the villa.    Madame Ciprani took a
hurried farewell of her parents, and the little felucca got
under weigh soon after noon.    There were now too many
real anxieties on their minds to allow of foolish imaginings,
and the friends sat together in silent apprehension of some
great  calamity,  as   Signor   Ciprani   evidently anticipated
something more than usual from the appearance of the sky.
The felucca made but little way, for there was not a breath of
wind to fill the sails ; and although the four boatmen rowed
with Herculean strength, a heavy ground swell seemed to
roll  them  back  after each boat's  length.    As  they came
slowly within sight of the Island of Procida, there was no
longer   any  doubt  that   something  fearful  had  occurred.
Boats  filled  with  anxious, terror-stricken   faces   quickly
succeeded each other, in their haste, it should seem, to escape
from  the  threatened  eruption.     At  length, rounding the
point  of the  island, Vesuvius burst upon their sight, no
longer calm as when they last gazed on it, but sending forth
lurid flames and volumes of inky smoke, while ever and
anon vast showers of cinders and stones were thrown up
with  great  force, then  falling in burning  masses  on  the
doomed  villages  beneath.     A  cry of despair  burst  from
Madame Ciprani as she heard Filippo, who had seized the
telescope, declare he could hear the torrent of burning lava
flowing down on Torre del Greco !    ' Mother of God !' said
the unhappy woman, ' have mercy on my children.'    This
was the only sentence she uttered.    Burying her face in her
hands, for she dared not take another glance, and flinging
herself on her knees, she remained in that position till her
husband, taking her gently into his arms, implored her to be
calm, for all might yet be well.    Concetta did not utter a
sound, but her eyes were fixed in the direction of Naples.
A deadly paleness overspread her face, and her hands were
clasped as if in prayer.    In an agony of suspense she was
quite  insensible  to  all  that was  passing  round her, and
scarcely heard Carlotta's attempts to console her with the
assurance that Naples would at least  be saved.    Ciprani
stood  watching  the  fearful   scene,  which  every  moment
assumed some new form, with compressed lips and anxious
brow, urging the crew, who were already making desperate
efforts  to  speed the felucca on her way, to make for the
nearest land.    He could not endure the horrible suspense
which the tardiness of the vessel caused them, longing to be
on shore to get some conveyance to take him at once to the
scene of the disaster.    His heart sickened as he thought of
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale oj Sixty-one.    69
the horrible fate which might have befallen his hapless
children. While all were watching with breathless anxiety
the tardy progress of their boat, there was a sound of paddle-
wheels almost close at hand, and looking back, Ciprani saw
the steamer from Leghorn making all speed for Naples. To
hail the vessel was the work of an instant, and in less than
ten minutes the ladies and Signor Ciprani were transferred
to the deck of the steamer, leaving the felucca and her crew
to follow as best they might. The passengers on board the
steamer were too much absorbed in gazing at the grand
though appalling sight, to pay any attention to the agitated
party who clung together in the forepart of the vessel.
Scarcely daring to lift their eyes, yet through the fascination
of terror, ever turning to the scene of what might prove the
wreck of their happiness, Ciprani, who had some slight
acquaintance with the captain of the steamer, entreated him
to make arrangements for their landing as quickly as possible
that they might haste at once to Torre del Greco. He was
anxious to leave Concetta and Carlotta at the Villa Torcelli,
supposing that the Count would have returned to his own
home; while he himself and his wife might be free to seek
their children, little dreaming of the desolation which
awaited them at their homes. Seizing on the first carriage
on the strand, he bade the coachman lose not a moment, and
urging the horses to their utmost speed, they soon gained
the summit of the Capo di Monte, and in another moment
found themselves at the Casa Torcelli. Concetta, who till this
moment had not spoken a word, leaned forward, calling
loudly for her father. She sank back, almost fainting witli
terror, when the startled domestic informed them the Count
had gone away early in the morning to Torre del Greco in
hopes of hearing something of the Signorina, and had not
yet returned. There was no time for hesitation, and after
the first burst of disappointment, Concetta implored Signor
Ciprani to take her with them, as the suspense she must
endure till her father's return would be worse than anything
that might befall her then. The Signora Carlotta added her
entreaties to those of her friend, and giving a few hasty
instructions to the servant in case of their missing the Count
Torcelli, the horses' heads were once more turned in the
direction of the bay, and they drove rapidly down the avenue
that had lately been the scene of their strange encounter
with the beggar Matteo.
All was forgotten in their present intense anxiety, now
rendered still more acute by the too visible cause of their
70 Tlie Ladies' Edinbm-gJi Magazine,
apprehensions. Vol umes of black smoke rolled down from the
crater of Vesuvius, obscuring everything below them except
when sudden flames broke out, revealing by their light the
lurid stream of burning lava hurrying madly forward in its
work of destruction. The ladies turned their heads away
with sickening dread, while Ciprani shouted to the horses in
wild tones, as if the poor creatures could understand the
magnitude of the danger which seemed impending over
thera. Ominous thunders were heard from the heaving
mountain, and tlie driver, becoming alarmed and superstitious,
refused to go any farther. He had evidently lost all command
over the excited steeds; but Ciprani could brook no delay,
and seizing the reins, impelled them forward at the risk of
overturning the carriage. On, on they went at the same
furious pace, till they reached Portici, intending at that
place to take the train to the station of Torre del Greco, but
there they again were foiled. The railroad between the two
places had been destroyed by the falling of earth which
followed the convulsive throes of the mountain, and all
communication by that means was cut off. Signer Ciprani,
almost maddened by the distress o-f his wife and anxiety for
his children, was incapable of remaining inactive, and the
8ignora Concetta scarcely knew what to propose. It was
impossible for them to proceed in the carriage, for the horses,
totally unused to such rapid and violent motion, would carry
them no farther. The wretched driver, too, who now added
to his other fears that of being swallowed up in the destruc¬
tion which threatened them, surlily refused to conduct them.
Every moment added to their perplexity, for the road was
filled with groups of people hurrying away in every kind of
conveyance from the scene of the catastrophe. Terror-
stricken, they took no heed of the little party in the carriage,
supposing them, like themselves, to be flying to some place
of safety. Wildly did Madame Ciprani implore her husband
to question some of the persons they recognised if they knew
aught of what had befallen the Villa Ciprani and its inmates.
At length two persons, one of whom was a priest, were seen
coming rapidly towards them in one of the high-wheeled
carts of the country. Ciprani leant forward to meet them,
and with earnest gestures entreated them to stop and give
them some account of the calamity.
'Alas, my son!' said the priest, who now recognised
Ciprani as an inhabitant of Torre del Greco,' dost thou not
know of the destruction which has fallen on the fair town ?'
Before he could explain further, the driver of the cart, who
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.    yi
was also familiar with the person of Ciprani, called out in a
voice of mingled pity and kindness:
' The saints be praised, Signor Ciprani, your little ones are
safe, but your pretty dwelling is destroyed !'
' Thanks be to God that my children are preserved,' said
Ciprani, raising his clasped hands and looking upwards; ' a
thousand blessings to you also for the assurance of their
safety,' said he, turning to the kind peasant; ' and for the
rest, I can bear my misfortune like a man.' Then taking his
wife in his arms, for in her eagerness to catch every word
spoken by the driver of the cart she had started to her feet,
lie said, ' Take heart, Lucia mia, and compose yourself while
I question these friends further.'
The Villa Ciprani was one of those that suffered most
from the shock of the earthquake which had preceded the
eruption. Providentially it had occurred in the afternoon,
and some friends of the Signer had rescued the children and
taken them with them to Castellamare, with many other
families who sought the same refuge. Poor Concetta listened
breathlessly to this account, hoping for some tidings of her
father ; but the stranger knew nothing of the Count Torcelli.
It was just possible he might have followed the children, and
Ciprani endeavoured to calm his young friend with this
suggestion. The good priest seemed unheeded in the
distressed party, and after exchanging a few words with his
conductor, he offered to retrace his steps and accompany
Ciprani and his wife to their ill-fated home. He endea¬
voured to persuade the ladies to return to Naples, for Torre
del Greco was no place for them in its present dangerous
state. Madame Ciprani would not be separated from her
husband, insisting on sharing his danger be it what it might.
Concetta also entreated to be allowed to accompany them;
but Ciprani convinced her she would only be a hindrance in
his efforts to find her father and his children, and at length
persuaded her to return with the Signora Caiiotta to the
Casa Torcelli. He assured her he would despatch a trusty
person as soon as possible to conduct the Count in safety to
liis house, or, if she still preferred it, to bring her and her
friend to their temporary home. It was a painful parting
between Concetta and Madame Ciprani, for their recent
anxieties had done more to cement a friendship than years
of common acquaintance would have effected. The good-
natured driver of the cart persuaded the coachman from
Naples to lend him a cushion for Madame Ciprani, and
seating her in the most commodious place, he set ofi once
72 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
more for the ill-fated Torre del Greco. There was silence for
some time after quitting their friends between Concetta and
Carlotta; the incidents of the last few days had followed
eacli other in such quick succession, that all would have
seemed like a dream had not their minds been filled with
anxious suspense as to the fate of the Count TorcelU.
Carlotta, who was the first to speak, urged their unwilling
conductor to make all speed back to Capo di Monte, assuring
liim of a reward for so doing. He scarcely needed such an
incentive, for the continual rumbling of the mountain, and
the oft-repeated showers of stones and cinders, falling within
a short distance, quickened his apprehensions, and muttering
an Axe,, and calling on his patron saint to save him, he once
more urged his tired horses to their utmost power; and ere
the gun on St. Elmo had boomed forth its nightly warning,
Concetta found herself once more at home, where, to her
great delight, her father was waiting to receive her. Their
mutual happiness may be imagined, and the hours passed
quickly in the relation of the events which had so unex¬
pectedly befallen them.
What a scene of ruin and desolation was that witnessed
by the Count at Torre del Greco! The pretty villa, where
they had so lately spent many happy days, was levelled with
the ground, the beautiful gardens buried beneath heaps of
cinders, while scarcely a vestige of the orange groves
remained to mark the spot which but a few hours before had
been so rich in beauty and fragrance. There had been
several slight shocks felt the day preceding the return of
Ciprani, sufficient to cause alarm through the little town,
and prepare its inhabitants for further danger.
The father of Ciprani, who lived at Castellamare, knowing
of the absence of his son and daughter-in-law, had come
early in the morning to seek his grandchildren, who thus
happily escaped the fearful catastrophe that buried their
home. The old man wept as he looked on the scene of
destruction, and thought of all his son's loss. Count Torcelli,
finding he could render no assistance, and ascertaining his
daughter had not yet returned from Ischia, gladly availed
himself of a fisherman's offer to take him in his boat to
Naples, which he reached only one short half-hour before
the welcome arrival of his daughter and her friend.
{To be continued^)
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 73
Countrg Subjects antj pursuits,
IL—rOX-HUXTING  FOR  LADIES.
Fox-nuxTiNG cannot be logically defended. It is better to
concede that at once, so as to turn the tlank of all arguments
against its uselessness, its wastefulness, its risks. ' Much
ado about nothing' might be the motto inscribed on its
stationery and decorations—the motto that would suit its
serious business, and the grave deliberations, hopes and
fears, and anxieties of its managers and employ^. But
while England and Ireland remain what they are; while
wealth abounds, and health drives our young men—and
young women too—to strong exercise; while winters are
dull and open, and meads are green, and horses can gallop,
there must be fox-hunting. I have expressly omitted Scot¬
land, because, much as the Scotch like it, they are also much
aware of the expense, and their canny thrift might train them
to do without it. The fact is, that civilization has, in Great
Britain, reached a point utterly destructive of the hunter's
life, which, like all thoroughly natural forms of honest
vigorous work, has a wonderful charm about it. Fox-hunting
is the greatest testimony to this charm, the greatest protest
now in existence against advanced civilization. Our modern
improvements and new appliances for luxury have to devote
themselves to reproduce by art a shadow of the simple,
natural occupation of man in the dawn of the race. We are
apt to pity those jolly fellows, our prehistoric ancestors, who
ran wild in primaeval forests, or followed the chase over
boundless deserts, winning food and clothing by hunting,
and fighting for life with beasts of prey. But we pay
them the compliment of imitation—an imitation with many
advantages, we suspect, over the original. Our modern fox¬
hunting is the most glorious make-believe going: it is absurd
to think of it as connected with roughness or slaughter; it
has no destructive element about it. As a pastoral poem
of genteel shepherds and shepherdesses, with rose-twined
crooks and a pet lamb or two, to the real, heavily-worked
shepherd out on the great moors among great flocks, so
is fox - hunting to the real hunter's toil: it has the
poetry, the dash, some of the danger, without the coarse¬
ness, the roughness, and the labour. Nobody is going
to kill bears, wolves, or tigers, or to take away any
life   save   the   one  possibly  forfeited   to  the  dogs.     The
74 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
])oor little fox! he can give us neither food nor clothing.
How weak and small and harmless he is compared to the
crowd of riders, to the pack of furious hounds arrayed against
him ! How pathetic is the contrast of the wits of one little
creature, smaller than the least of his hundred enemies,
against their united force and cunning! What a wonderful
and charming little beast he is! and with what joy we
(personally) hail liis escape when he contrives it: it is the
triumph of mind over brute force. We cannot help believing
he is clever enough to know it, and that he despises, as they
deserve, his army of foemen when he is dressing up his
draggled coat and trimming his brush safe in his earth with
the dainty vixen beside him. No doubt to some of us the
fox is the drawback to hunting, and a herring trail would
almost answer the same purpose. Only we should remember
that but for fox-hunting the fox would in this country soon
be an extinct animal; his whole life, with its many enjoy¬
ments, is earned by that flight across country, which, as it is
his natural resource in danger, is probably far less unpleasant
to him than we are apt to think.
But leaving the Vulpine for the Human point of view, we
find a great majority—the hounds, the eager horses, and the
gay riders—all full ©f enjoyment, and that of the most
healthy sort. The dull, soft weather, so common in our
open winters, is cheered and illumined by the stir, and the
fun, and the glancing of figures in scarlet across the dreary
landscape. No wonder our painters delight in portraying
the hunting-field; no wonder that it has almost a school of
painting all to itself. Leech's sketches alone are a most
graceful apology for fox-liunting ladies. Who could resist
those charming girls, so dashing and frank, yet so pretty and
modest and feminine, that used tO' appear in Punch ? Nowhere
can English beauty be seen to greater advantage tlian in the
hunting-field. The great critic Taine remarks that the three
most excellent things in England are the women, the horses,
and the trees; and that a girl on horseback, halting under a
tree, gives you in a coup d'tvil the one surpassing and
unrivalled beautiful spectacle of our country. Besides in¬
spiring the painter, hunting has inaugurated a literature of
its own, and a very pleasant and wholesome one it is. To
this subject we cannot allude at the present time without
an expression of regret for one, foremost in its ranks, so
lately lost to us by an accident incurred in his favourite
sport. So bold a rider, and out continually all his life long,
he owed his death at  last to the stumble of a horse in
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 75
galloping over a field, a casualty like that which befell the
Bishop of Winchester, and belonging rather to the risks of
mere ordinary riding than to those of hunting.
Still there is an element of danger beyond riding in the
sport, thougli a good deal of it, we must own, is due to reckless
riding. A well-mounted, careful, judicious rider may reduce
it to a minimum ; and we think ladies may well be careful,
and only hunt ' made' horses. Some people, doubtless,
think it wrong to run any unnecessary risk whatever; but
then, of course, not hunting only, but sea voyages, yachting,
Alpine climbing, shooting, rough travel,^—indeed, all travel
not absolutely necessary,—would, in like manner, have to be
abolished; and we do not think that human nature, at least
Teutonic human nature, would be improved by the change.
No; we cannot think it when we look round at the happy
faces at a Meet. How pleasant is the gathering of friends
at the covert side ! the greeting&of, perhaps the old M. F. H.,
the patriarch of the County ; still, after fifty years of hunting,
' Strong and merry,
And still the middle of liis cheek
Is blooming as a cherry.'
How delicious for the schoolboj' in the Christmas holidays,
is his first appearance in the Field, anxious to prove to ' papa'
and the rest that he has inherited the pluck of his race !
Then there are the country gentlemen, young and elderly,
and the young farmers; the doctor, who gets a chance of
improving his own health by a rattle across country; perhaps
even the parson, swept away ' by accident' on his sober
steed—like Charles Kingsley—and thus getting many a
brain cobweb s-wept away. The horse-couper, the breaker,
and sundry others, wdio may be a rougher lot, have their day's
pleasure too^ with the gentry, and a friendly, kindly feeling
is encouraged among all classes. It is rather a meeting of
friends and acquaintances for a splendid ride, than in any
way connected with slaughter; so do not let us miss the
ladies, so trim in their attire, so exquisitely mounted, so
good an element of polish and softness, diffusing gentleness
of speech and bearing round them. If they are gentle
themselves of course; ladies are sometimes the worst of
jealous riders against each other; let such be, they are not
of the sort to give a good tone to any society, and are not
worse in the hunting-field than elsewhere.
But most people are the better for hunting. We cannot,
indeed, say the end justifies the means, for the means are
everything, and there is next to no end at all: lejeu ne vaut
76 Tlie Ladies' Edinbnrgk Magazine.
pas la chandelle, certainly; but the collateral advantages—
the enjoyment, the wholesomeness, even the nerve-bracing
dash of danger—cannot be put down in any credit column,
or reckoned, however they may weigh against the expenses.
We need not count the trouble, which is usually undertaken
by people of leisure, who are much the better for the occupa¬
tion. It may be that other times are coming, that the
country is to develop more into a workshop, and our rulers,
becoming more and more politically-economically logical,
may cause fox-hunting to cease out of the land. What then
will happen ? Tlie rich will seek their sport in other
countries; the poorer sort will become more dull with more
work and less play, or worse play. ' Cakes and ale,' in some
form, are among the deep necessities of human nature; and
if those who have never tasted ours, and have, therefore,
hardly the means of judging of their merits, put them
harshly down, we may be sure other less wholesome sorts
will be handed round and accepted. We go on in the
words of a young lady who has plenty of experience in the
hunting-field:—
' I cannot help thinking that those ladies who voted against
field sports in the Debating Society, can never have enjoyed
the exhilarating pleasure of a gallop across country after the
liounds, or they would have been more lenient in their
decision. But, indeed, hunting for ladies has now become such
a recognised part of the amusements of a winter residence
in the country, that no apology for it is required. It is
curious how the feeling about such matters has changed in
the last thirty years. Then, I believe, in all England not
more than half-a-dozen ladies went out regularly with the
hounds, for it was considered fast and unusual; and if the
unfortunate lady had a fall, all the country rang with the
news. Probably the improvement in side saddles has had a
great deal to do with the present change in ladies' riding;
for in the old-fashioned cumbrous saddle, with two pummels,
the unlucky rider had little power of controlling a violent
horse, and would probably, on coming to a fence, have to
hold tight to the saddle with one hand, and might think
herself fortunate if even with that assistance she arrived safe
on the other side. With the saddles, the long sweeping
skirts of our grandmothers have also departed, giving place
to the neat hunting habit of the present day.
' I repeat, that it is only those who have really tried it that
can understand the pleasure of a fast spin across country.
First, the cheerful breakfast in the early morning, with all
Country Subjects and Pursuits. yj
the anticipations of the day's sport; those visits to the
thermometer,—for there has been a sharp touch of frost during
the night,—and in Scotland at least there is always a chance
of a hard frost setting in, when the curlers' hopes rise high
and the fox-hunters' fall to zero. Bat, no ! a plough, with
its horses steaming in the frosty air, can be seen busily at
work; the various carriages are off, and soon the wheels ring
less hard on the road, and specks of mud appear. Arrived
at the meet, no time is lost in mounting; and the Master,
who has given a few minutes' law for those who come from
a distance, moves on to the mount, as the first covert is
called. Then come some of the humours of the scene: u
father of a family trots by, followed by sons and daughters,
all laughing and talking and wishing good morning to their
friends; but nothing wiU tempt any of them to leave the
good horse their father is riding for more than five yards,
for they know well if they can only keep with him they
will see all there is to be seen. Then the breakers on the
young horses get jammed between elderly and nervous
gentlemen in a partnership which both desire to end. Then
the peculiar-tempered horse, whose disposition, I suppose,
answers to shyness amongst men, who will only follow his
stable companion, and has got separated in the crowd, begins
to neigh sorrowfully, varied with occasional progressions on
his hind legs, thereby clearing a way before him. But the
sound of a horn is heard from the far end of the covert;
and the
" Gay throng, which has gone laughing along,"
according to the words of the old hunting song, breaks up
in a moment into a long string of excited and galloping
riders, some determined to have their fun as long as they
can, getting to the front and leading gallantly for a hundred
yards, and then, not having confidence in their own judg¬
ment, waiting for one of the good riders, who are cantering
carefully along the side of the road. But a gate lets all the
cavalcade into one of the deep rides of the wood, through
which, with infinite labour, they struggle, to see the hounds
streaming up the opposite bank at a pace which proclaims
the scent to be good. Now send the good horse along, for
there is no fear of catching them, but a very great one of
your being left behind.
' I suppose, in one of the good hunting counties of England,
or, indeed, in the West of Scotland, every rider who is well
mounted may take a line of his own and find the fences
mostly manageable.    But certainly for ladies in the hunt I
7S TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
am writing of, such a course would be a very unwise one; for,
alas! wire, that bane of fox-hunting, is by no means un¬
known, and, indeed, part of the country has been compared
to a bird-cage, owing to the frequency of such fences. All
ladies who hunt should be prepared to open a gate occa¬
sionally, or hold the horse of their companion; but more than
this they should not, I tliink, be expected to do. Nothing
can be more annoying than to be pounded in a field witli
apparently a low stone wall all round, but surmounted, on
close inspection, with that hateful wire.
' There is no doubt that for ladies who enjoy good health,
hunting in moderation is a very pleasurable break in the
monotony of the winter; and surely the qualities it calls into
play,—courage, and quick decision, and good judgment,—
will not be bad additions to those characteristics of grace and
softness we so much value. Were hunting, indeed, carried to
excess, other duties would have to be sacrificed to it; but the
large price asked for horses now-a-days, and the expense of
keephig them, would always, except in a few occasional cases,
act as a check, for it is only the inexperienced who think
that one horse can go out every day. I have not touched
on the reverse of the picture,—the many weary days in bad
weather, rewarded with no sport, or the long rides home,
when the hounds have persistently gone exactly where you
did not wish them to go,—in short, on that uncertainty
which gives to all sport its charm, but to fox-hunting
pre-eminently. Any one who doubts the advantages of fox¬
hunting, should go straight from a non-hunting County to
another where hounds are kept. He will probably feel at
once in the latter the increased sociability and friendliness
pervading all classes. And that sisters and daughters should
feel an interest and take a personal sliare in the amusements
of their fathers and brothers, is in the present age not to be
wondered at, and acts very much to the advantage of both
ladies and gentlemen. ' C. 0.'
o^
While agreeing with our young correspondent as to the
increase of the number of ladies who hunt of late years, and
the reasons for it, we should wish to add tliat the chase
was very generally followed by ladies in earlier times, and
then, when sentimental weakness was rather the mode during
the earlier years of this century, it went out of fashion.
Probably, also, for a better reason: formerly there w-ere wide
spaces of waste land in many parts of the country, such as
can now only be found among the rough hills.    Fences were
Education in the A rctic Circle. 79
few, and it was when they hecame numerous and formidable
that ladies could hardly hunt in safety without the improved
saddles already mentioned. We believe that these fences,
which have made the graceful sport of hawking impossible,
have really much diminished the ease and pleasure of
hunting; for its ideal is to be found in the swift gallop of
a first-rate horse over free, open ground, rough perhaps, and
broken, but with natural obstacles only, not constantly inter¬
sected by rails and fences, stone walls and wires, and the
other impediments of high agriculture. But fox-hunting is
in its essence an assertion of freedom in the midst of barriers,
of triumph over impediments; and if it has helped to give
the prompt courage and energy that we believe to belong to
the national cliaracter, it has its uses and its reason, even
though, as we have already owned, it cannot be logically
defended. E. J. 0.
(!Hliucation in t!)e Slrctic Circle.
' The stern nature of the jSTorth drives man back within him¬
self, and what is withdrawn from the free development of the
senses must, in noble dispositions, be added to their earnest¬
ness of mind.' Nothing could better define the impression
made upon a traveller coming from a milder clime, by the
inhabitants of the towns lying north of the Arctic Circle,
than these words of Augustus Wilhelm Schlegel. The
gentleness of expression, tinged with melancholy, which
dwells on the features of the women, moving in the confined
circles of upper social life at Tromso, Xamsos, Alten,
Hammerfest, and other places, need not discourage any one
who might wish for a nearer acquaintance with them.
Though household luxuries be few, books, music, and flowers
are seldom absent; and during the long months of winter,
when the daylight only lasts from eleven to three, these girls
and women have plenty of leisure, and study with an ardour
unknown except to real devotees of learning among our¬
selves. It is interesting as well as instructive to consider
whether other nations are surpassing us, reaching to our
level, or resting content below it, in matters of education.
I confess to a feeling of surprise at finding in the social
centres enumerated above, an amount of refinement and
cultivation that I was not at all prepared to expect. An
invitation to afternoon coffee includes also a promise of
excellent music—not merely a few melancholy Norwegian
8o TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
airs strummed on the piano by an ill-taught school-girl, but
perhaps one of Beethoven's sonatas greets the ear, rendered
with an accurate appreciation of the composer's meaning,
which endows the fair girl who plays it with additional
charms. This is the more remarkable when the performer
bashfully confesses her only tuition has been obtained from
a governess, a country-woman of her own, born and living
ill the same town. To hear Chopin from a tradesman's
daughter in Hammerfest, and Wagner from the child of a
Lutheran minister, neither of whom has been further south
than Throndhjem, is to say the least astonishing, when one
considers the disadvantages under which such perfection has
been attained. The Norwegians have no doubt, as a general
rule, a good ear for music; but the real secret of tlieir
superiority lies in the fact that all their professors and
teachers of music study in the conservatories of Germauj%
and also that criticism withholds incapable amateurs from
performing either in public or private. The music of the
salon is not far behind that of the concert room. Although
by no means despising their national airs, rendering them
in a way which ensures respect if not enthusiasm from the
stranger, the Norwegians keep up a wide and discriminative
acquaintance with the music of other lands.
In various departments of educational progress they are
also not deficient in activity or zeal. Schools for girls in the
capital are excellent, and largely attended, and hither from
the far north come the daughters of the magistrates, and of
those merchants who have tlie necessary means at command.
Two of the best of these establishments have courses which last
half a year. By means of them, 3'oung ladies may be trained
for governesses, or for commercial situations. Teaching by
masters holding a university degree is very usual in female
schools. The grammar schools are intended for the better
class of children, while the Almnes-skoler, or common schools,
where the teachers are paid by the communities, aided by
tlie state, provide for the children of the poor, who are com¬
pelled to attend them. To supplement these, Amts-skoler
have been lately established in every Amt, or magisterial
jurisdiction, for grown-up boys and girls, in which the course
lasts from October to April for the boys, when their services
on the farms can be more easily dispensed with, and from
April to July for the girls. Whether the shorter allowance
of time for the latter points to their superior power of
acquiring knowledge, or to the fact that so much is not con¬
sidered necessary for them, is not stated.   At any rate, a lady
Education in the Arctic Circle. 81
who happened to be staying on one of the fjords at the close
of their course in one of these Amts-skoler, bears witness to
the great desire for knowledge manifested by these country
girls, and of the sacrifices they were willing to make in order
to attend the school.
Even before their establishment, the traveller must have
been struck by the general intelligence of the middle and
upper classes. Eeligion (I mean by this not so much
instruction in Scripture, as a general enforcement of moral
and social duties), history, geography, grammar, arithmetic,
and natural history, are the subjects taught. They are made
acquainted, likewise, with all the best northern writers and
their works ; and themes on various subjects are given them
to write. The thirst for information leads most young
Norwegian girls who are dwellers in the towns, to study
German, French, and English, and they attain, as a rule, not
a mere smattering, but a sound grammatical acquaintance
with the construction, history, and literature of one, if not
of all these languages. Ladies' classes for critical readings
of Shakespeare, given once a week by the first philologist in
Christiania, during the winter of 1873, were largely attended,
and the instruction to be gained, even by an Englishwoman,
was both interesting and valuable. A ladies' reading-room,
furnished with a good library, and provided with every
periodical of note, native and foreign, was set on foot the
same year, and aftbrded excellent opportunities for keeping
up and improving an acquaintance with foreign tongues.
Drawing classes are attached to every important school, and
though no Rosa Bonheur has yet arisen in Norway, there is
plenty of talent from which she may yet be evolved. A
member of our House of Commons, when conducting two
Norwegian ladies over the Palace of Westminster, found
both conversant with, but one especially well versed in the
lives, works, and political influence of every national hero
to whose statue he directed their attention. I have no
doubt there are many young ladies in Great Britain who
would be equal to a similar emergency should they find
themselves suddenly parading the parliament - houses of
Berlin and Versailles, under the guidance of a French
deputy or a German reichsrath; but it points the moral
that we have not begun our reforms in female education too
early, and that we cannot support them too heartily if we
mean to keep ahead of other European nations.
Catherine Eay.
No. 50.—Fkbkuaky 1879. w
82 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
W^t %\.tgt of Strasliurg.
TuE siege of Strasburg!—for in those dread days
Strasburg the Virgin stood before her foes
More helpless, hopeless, than Andromeda;
Chained to her pile, but with fair-fronting eyes.
And breast bare to the pitiless storm that smote.
And smote her bleeding but inviolate limbs;
While round and over her the iron hail
By day fell, and the red rain fell by night,—
And knew no succour coming nor to come;
And still endured, and made no sign, and said,
' The end is not yet come, and day by day
My agony shall stay their feet from France ;
Therefore I die by inches.'    And all knew
Her doom was on her ; and the world without
Sent never a message to her, nor farewell.
Nor any eye met hers but the ringed eyes
Of the grey cannon, round against her set.
That marked each shuddering and each streak of fire,
As the bombs struck her and she still endured.
But once for mercy spake aloud, as when
She sent her girls and children to the gates,
Having kissed them as who should not meet again,
And said, heart broken,' Let but these depart.'
And back the answer came to her, ' Too late !
Die all—or yield—together.'    So they stayed.
And as the fire waxed fierce around her heart.
Prayed yet once more in her extremity,
' Send us some draught of sleep, some fever balm
For those who lie with lips and limbs on fire
Within our hospitals !'    And yet once more
The answer was sent back to her,' Too late !
No more till the surrender!'    Then she ceased.
And prayed no more to man, nor yet to God ;
And all her thousands set themselves to death
Within her walls, and starved to skeletons.
Or sickened in the darkness underground.
And came forth but for burial of their dead.
And ever overhead the heaven was brass.
And through the empty streets the sheets of fire
From house to house by daylight scorched and leapt.
The Trellan Mystery. 83
While the continuous rocking roar was yet
O'ercrashed a moment as the roofs fell in.
And week by week the faces that remained
Grew greyer, ghastlier; and her soldiery
Dropped at their posts, and mangled limbs were strewn
On their own hearths, and, as the shells came through,
Her little children in their mothers' arms
Were torn to pieces, and her babes were born
Between the boomings as their fathers died.
W^t Crellan Jilssterg.
I WAS staying in the south of Cornwall some few years ago,
when I heard the following strange, and I was told authentic
tale, which may be of interest to some of our readers:—
In one of the wildest and most romantic parts of the
south coast of Cornwall, where the rocks are grandest and
most dangerous, may be seen a little weather-beaten church,
built close to the edge of a somewhat shelving cliff, and
forming the centre of a small inlet in the coast. So near is it
to the sea, that the rude walk of its graveyard is often
dashed by the breakers in a rough gale, and the building
itself looks as if battered by many storms. A rough stony
track leads up from the church to a small fishing village,
whose one street is composed of irregularly - built grey
houses, their homely faces here and there brightened by a
little whitewash. In the centre of the street is a small inn,
hardly more pretentious than its neighbours, and only to be
distinguished by its signboard, gay with the arms of the house
of Trellan.
There are no gardens in front of the cottages; the doors
open on to the road, giving the dusty traveller on a hot
August afternoon a sense of glare and heat, and a longing
for something green and shady, which, however, we must
not expect to find nearer than the woods of Trellan Hall,
which lie down in the hollow, a mile away from the village.
Fifty years have brought but few changes to this quiet
hamlet by the sea; and little imagination is required to
picture it as it was when my story opens on a cloudless
August day half a century ago. Groups of women are
standing in the street, bare-headed in spite of the hot mid¬
day sun, and here and there a knot of fishermen may be
seen, tempted from the alehouse parlour, or from their nets
84 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magasine.
and fishing-tackle on the beach far below, all attracted by
some unusual occurrence, which has disturbed the monotony
of their quiet existence. Children too, with open mouths
as well as ears, are hanging about, or dragging on to their
mothers' gowns, their play quite forgotten in the desire to
pick up all they can from the animated conversation of their
elders. The church bell is tolling slowly, and it is that
solemn sound which is causing such an unwonted stir in
quiet Trellan.
Half-an-hour ago, at the big house in the hollow, died Sir
Eichard Trellan. He was not an old man, he had not been
struck down by any fatal sickness: it was the blind excess
of many years that had at last undermined an iron constitu¬
tion, and brought him to a drunkard's end. Cursing and
raving, he passed away in the horrors of wild delirium.
That bell is tolling for the passing of an evil life, in which
seem to have been heaped all the sins and vices of unbridled
human nature. No living creature loved, no living creature
mourns him. Even these simple tenants of the soil of which
he was master, are breathing more freely now that they feel
they will suffer no more from his passions and excesses. He
had no kin to gather round his death-bed; his wide lands will
go to strangers. It would be a painful task to chronicle the
vices so thickly strewn over Sir Eichard Trellan's career. If
we listen to those talkers in the village street, we shall hear
from one of the young wife whose life faded away so swiftly
at the old Hall, under his cruelty and neglect, and of the
innocent babe who lies on her bosom in the cold vault
beneath the chancel. Another whispers the sad tale of the
poor lass, bright-eyed Philippa, once the flower of the village,
who one night left her humble home, and has never been
seen in Trellan since, though some declare a form and a face
like hers may be seen at dusk wandering down the hollow.
Many more siich tales are being gloomily recalled to-day by
all.    But we must pass on to another scene of my story.
A few days have gone by, and now a black train is slowly
winding down the village street, on its way to the little
church by the sea. As it passes the houses, women hurry
their children inside and shut their doors, that the dark
shadow may not fall on them. Men stand by, with no show
of reverence, as Sir Eichard Trellan is borne on to his last
resting-place. And now the solemn funeral service has
been read. What meaning can those beautiful words have
for that sinful soul whose lifeless form lies beneath the
velvet pall ?    The words ' our beloved brother' seem but a
The Trellaii Mystery. 85
mockery, and the clergyman shudders as he reads. They
close the vault, for the coffin has been lowered into it. It is
not full, but Sir Eichard is the last who will ever rest there,
for there is not one of his name left to be brought to the
little church by the sea. So they cement the heavy stone
firm and tight, for it need never be disturbed again. That
evening there is more talk in the village; and one old woman,
who is counted a sage among her neighbours, declares
ominously to an awe-stricken circle, that ' he'll ne'er rest in
his grave, he'll soon be a walking for his sins;' and as the
neighbours go home in the moonlight, some half expect to
see a tall white shrouded form gliding up the path from the
little church.
Six months have slipped away, and it is the New Year in
Trellan. The old hall is empty and deserted now ; no one
can be found to take up their abode there, for it is said to be
haunted. There are strange stories told of mysterious
sounds heard at night, locked doors banging, rustlings and
footsteps of invisible forms down the long passages and old
oak staircase. But, nevertheless, there is not the least
indication that Sir Eichard's ghost is troubling his old home,
or, indeed, that he has ever left his rest; folks say that if
ever seen, they are women's faces and forms that glide about
the gloomy hall. The old dame's prophecy has not yet been
fulfilled.
It is Sunday morning, a fearful storm has been raging at
Trellan all night. A tremendous gale has been blowing
right on to the rocks from the Atlantic, and fierce rain
driving up the village street. The rain stopped at daybreak,
but the wind is scarcely less violent. The waves are still
running mountains high, and the fishermen say that the
tide which is rising will be a very high one. However,
when the bell of the little church is faintly heard ringing
for morning prayers, the hardiest of the villagers prepare to
struggle down to the service. Some are encouraged to do
so by seeing their vicar pass, for thej' feel ashamed to think
that' parson,' who has twice as far to come from his house
on the hill, should find that bad weather has kept them from
their accustomed places. So a fair number gather for the
morning service. The winds whistling round the walls, and
the roar of the waves thundering on the rocks below, mingle
with the sound of prayer; but these fisher people are used to
nature's voices, and are not much disturbed by them. The
vicar has now ascended the pulpit and given out his text,
when suddenly, in a momentary lull of wind and wave, a
85 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
hollow tliud is heard proceeding from the great slab beneath
which sleep the knights of Trellan. All faces pale in a
moment, all eyes are fixed in awe upon the tomb within the
chancel arch. At that unearthly sound the clergyman
pauses and turns his face towards the spot, and again it
comes ' thud, thud, thud !' distinct and ominously clear.
Seized with a panic of fear, women and even men rush to
the door, while a suppressed scream of terror breaks from
more than one. The vicar, who had often smiled incredu¬
lously at the superstitious of his simple flock, now leaves the
pulpit with considerable speed, and follows his congregation
to the porch without crossing the chancel to the vestry.
The scared people do not pause till they are safe back in the
shelter of the village, where the tale of terror soon gathers
all to hear it. Old Dame Tripp looks wiser than ever as she
raps triumphantly with her stick and declares, * She knew it,
she knew it.'
The next morning the vicar, accompanied by the church¬
wardens and the sexton, with as many of the fishermen as
will volunteer help, proceeds once more to the little church
by the sea.
The storm is spent at last, and all seems very still both
within and without the little building. Not one of all those
strong men but feels an inward fear as they enter the
chancel. The first stroke of the sexton to break up the
cement somewhat reassures them, and when the great stone
is at last raised, all are courageous enough to look into the
vault. And what do they see ? The coffins are all there.
Sir Eichard's is not missing, and they soon find it is still
tenanted; but where is the order in which they left those
coffins, piled neatly one on another ? They are now lying in a
disordered heap at the bottom of the vault, Sir Eichard's at
the top. The vicar says they must be rearranged; the sexton
asks leave to put that new oak coffin at the bottom with
the heavy lead ones above it, ' to keep him quiet a bit' he
adds in an undertone of ghastly jocularity. The men
murmur to each other that ' for their parts they believe 'twas
Squire's doings after all, and old Dame was not so far wrong.'
The vicar's sober mind is fairly puzzled by the inexplicable
occurrence, he gives the desired permission, thinking it too
unimportant a matter to object to it. So the coffins are
replaced, and the vault reclosed. They leave the church as
they found it, quite quiet and still; it seems impossible that
anything supernatural should be there. Though unable to
explain  the  mystery, the vicar takes care to improve the
The Trellan Mystery. 87
occasion on the following Sunday, by preaching a long and
learned discourse on the danger and unorthodoxy of a belief
in spirits, and gets very eloquent on the subject of witch¬
craft and superstition. His words are heard, though I fear
not much heeded, by a large congregation ; for niany have
come from long distances, whither the ghost's fame has
spread, with the boldness of curiosity, expecting to hear more
unearthly sounds, and perhaps to see some more awful
sight. But they all go away disappointed, the stone gives
out no sound; and the villagers, who have begun to feel a
certain kind of pride in their church's notoriety, have now
some difficulty in getting their tale of terror believed in by
the dissatisfied pilgrims.
More than a year has passed since our last visit to Trellan.
It is boisterous March now—March the lion, not March tlie
lamb. Fiercely wind and storm are again raging round the
little church by the sea this dark Saturday night. The
villagers, as they shut fast their doors and shutters and
gather round their fires, say that there has not been such a
storm since that Sunday 'when the Squire rapped in the
vault.' Old Dame Tripp, it must be told, has now somewhat
lost the ear of Trellan, for that wonder has not been followed
by anything else, though it was only to be expected it should
be, so the old body now keeps her sayings to herself.
Sunday morning breaks unexpectedly into a fine day, the
storm seems quite past, a bright sun is shining over Trellan,
and the sky is so blue that several larks think it high time
to begin their spring carols, and the air seems full of their
joyous notes. The sea is still rolling in heavily on to the
rocks, as though loth to settle down after its night's wild
sport. When the villagers wend their way to church, they
find that part of the graveyard wall has been washed away.
Even the elder men say they cannot remember such a
thing in their time. It will soon be high tide again, and they
think pretty nearly as high, though not as rough, as in the
night. There will be some work to-morrow repairing the
wall and putting the graves in order. They now seem covered
with seaweed and rubbish, and some of the gravestones have
been washed out of place.
But the bell has stopped, and as nothing can be done
to-day the group of men turn into the church. There is a
good sprinkling of people there this morning ; they are good
church-goers in Trellan, and there is no chapel within some
miles to offer counter attractions.
The   Litany   is   over,   the   vicar   is   making   his   way
88 77/1? Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to the communion table, when hark! what awful sound
does he hear just beneath his feet! ' Thud, thud, thud !'
He starts back in fear and amazement, for it is that same
great stone which covers the Trellan vault from which the
sounds issue. With shrieks of ' The ghost! the ghost!' the
women rush out of the building, while the men stop at the
door, gathering close together for safety. The vicar, having
somewhat recovered his presence of mind, joins them, and
now he is assailed with eager questions as to whether they
may not open the vault at once; but to this the vicar will
not for a moment listen,—to disturb the dead and to profane
the Sabbath at the same time would be a double sin, and
could bring about no good result. The sexton, a somewhat
privileged individual who was often allowed to have his say,
remarked that' the corpses had begun it,' he thought; ' what
right had they to be a rapping out like that on the Sabbath,
disturbing decent folks at their prayers!' However, as the
vicar is not to be moved, they leave the church in possession
of the ghost for the day, for any more services are not to be
thought of.
The morrow's examination does not explain matters, and
only leaves a firmer and more awful impression that Sir
Ilichard's sinful, restless spirit it is that haunts the resting-
place of his ancestors; his coffin, notwithstanding the sexton's
care, is again at the top of the others, and all have apparently
been upset and disordered as before. ' He's in too tight to
get out, though he manages to knock at the door,' said the
old man ; ' let's put him at the bottom again, mates.' So the
houses of the dead are once more piled up neatly, and the
vault is secured. Many aud long are the cogitations of
the vicar over every possible cause of the repetition of the
mystery, but he can make nothing of it, and in time gives up
attempting to solve the problem.
The little church is nearly three years older when we see
it again. Winter storms are beating down on the coast, and
Trellan is coming in for its usual large share of wind and
water. It is Sunday morning once more, and the inhabitants,
who have not yet become afraid of bad weather, battle their
way down to their little church. The bell at last ceases to
raise its voice against the roar of the waves and the howling
of the wind, and the people settle themselves in their seats
for the morning service; the vicar enters the reading-desk
and opens his book, but there will be no service to-day; for
what sound is that which reaches the ears of all in spite of
the tempest without ?
The Trellaji Mystery. 89
'Thud, thud, thud!' Oh, that ghastly half - forgotten
sound ! A shiver runs through the congregation, but no one
moves—all seem petrified with fear and horror. This time it
is repeated, ' Thud, thud, thud!' Still all sit motionless with
pallid faces and fixed eyes; one girl has fainted, one or two
creep from their seats to go to her assistance, and now the
spell seems broken. The vicar breaks the awed silence. ' My
friends, I am now willing and desirous that we should put
an end to this trouble at once. May our labour on this
holy day be forgiven us; but this mystery must not rest
undiscovered a moment longer. I fear there is some
wickedness at work here.' And then, with somewhat faint
hearts, the strong men once more bend to raise that great
slab of stone; it is loose at last, and now they lift it; but
what is this so close beneath it, which seems to be rocking
to and fro ? It is Sir Richard's coffin, sure enough; but it is
floating, not in air, but in water, which reflects the light
they hold down to it in its black depths.
And so the mysterious, ghastly sounds are explained at last,
and the belief of Trellan in ghosts is shaken for ever. No ghost
was that which rapped beneath Sir Richard's vault-stone ; it
turned out to be only a very curious natural phenomenon.
The vault was afterwards thoroughly examined, and it was
found that a stream from the hills above had formed itself a
subterranean watercourse, no doubt the work of centuries,
which passed right under the church and the Trellan vault
in the chancel, and thence found its way through a fissure
in the rocks below down to the sea. A small natural crevice
was discovered in the floor of the vault, through which, at a
very high tide, the mountain torrent, forced back by the
unusual height of the waves, made its way with considerable
force, even rising to the top of the vault. This might never
have been discovered but for the circumstance that Sir
Richard Trellan's coffin, being of wood, was floated to the
surface and struck against the slab above each time some
giant wave forced the descending torrent back more effectually.
And thus the Trellan mystery was cleared up. Considerable
disappointment was occasioned by this very simple and
natural explanation of the much boasted Trellan ghost; but
there were not wanting those, among whom was the vicar,
who moralized on the retributive justice of the elements,
which would not suffer the bones of the sinful knight of
Trellan, even in their grave, to rest in peace.
E. M. S.
90 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
©tie to '' KvayKn-
TRANSLATION FROM EURIPIDES.
Sf/y^j eiva.yx.y\; oiiZs!/ laxvii 'jr'^ioi/.
The Chorus address Admetus, who is returning from the burial of
his wife Alcestis. They chant the following ode on the power of
Necessity (or Fate), and try to console him under his loss.—
Alcestis, 984.
While eagerly searching for knowledge,
I've roamed where the Muses sway;
To the airy regions above us
My thoughts have fled away.
I've argued in many discussions.
One truth still pervades my soul.
Necessity's power is dauntless,
And Fate beyond control.
No cures which melodious Orpheus
On Thracian stone engraved,
No drugs which far-darting Apollo
For ^sculapius saved;
No remedies gratefully healing
In mortal's suffering hour,
Can change Necessity's orders,
Nor take man from her power.
This Goddess alone owns no altar,
Where prostrate suppliants fall;
No struggles of victims can move her,
She never heeds their call.
Henceforward, dread mistress, forbid it,
To be my portion to bow
Beneath thy displeasure more lowly,
More grievously than now.
Great Jove, with his nod ever regal,
May sanction his decree;
Permission alone to fulfil it
Is granted him by thee.
By might thou canst shiver in pieces
Calybian iron and steel;
Thy hard, rugged bosom, no pity,
No tender thought can feel.
Our Library Table. 9^
O'er thee, by this Goddess now smitten,
Invincible bonds entwine;
Be patient, tears cannot avail thee,
Nor at thy grief repine.
E'en those from the Gods descended
Have faded away in death;
Great heroes, victorious in battle.
Are "one to the shades beneath.
So dear was the wife we are mourning
While with us she dwelt in love;
So dear is she now, while sleeping,
To us and to Gods above.
Thy sorrowing heart may find comfort
That this is all thy boast,
A Bride was ne'er welcomed more noble
Than her we have sadly lost.
Nor think of the tomb which contains her.
The mound with the fresh green sod.
As only death's cold, cheerless chamber,
But holding a gracious God.
And travellers passing will ponder.
While treading the pathway there.
And gaze on the spot with deep pity.
And breathe out a fervent prayer:
' See, here are the ashes reposing
Of one most worthy of praise.
Devoted and dying in honour.
To her all honour we raise.
Farewell, thou blest spirit, oh, grant me
The good thou hast to give !'
Let such be the words that may tell thee
Her fame all ages will live.
Mapyap/r;??.
"o^
©ur ILifirars Caftle.
PoGANUC People, their Loves and Lives.    H. B. Stowe.
Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington.
These worthies are of the same riigged New England stock as those
' Old Town Folks' with whom Mrs. Beecher Stowe made us acquainted
a few years ago.    These sketches are dashed off by a hand well able
to set both animate and inanimate nature vividly before us, and
92 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
though the book, as a story, is lacking in the interest given by a well-
constructed plot, there is much pleasure to be derived from the
bright, lively description of village life in Connecticut a generation
ago, and of the shrewd, grim, 'cute descendants of the Pilgrim
Fathers. Mrs. Stowe has the kindly power of seeing the good
wrapped up under a rough and unattractive exterior, and we think
our readers will find it a refreshing variety to turn from the ordinary
run of modern novels to the village politics of Poganuc, and make
acquaintance with its farmers and matrons, racy of speech and
homely in their mode of living, yet with saintliness, heroism, and true
poetry underlying their commonplace lives. Perhaps the best drawn
tigures are those of Zeph Higgins and his sweet-souled wife, but all
are good after their kind, from pretty little Dolly, the minister's
child, to Hiel Jones, described by the lady of his affections as ' saassy
enough to physic a hornbug,' and with a ' ready-made opinion of
everything and every subject that could possibly be started, from
stage-driving to apostolic succession.'
The House Suegeon ; or. The Doctor at Home.
Published by the Accident Insurance Company, 7 Bank Buildings,
London, B.C.
This little brochure professes to give instructions for the pi-ompt
treatment of accidents and other emergencies before the arrival of
medical aid, and comes from the pen of the late Alfred Smee, F. R.S.,
Surgeon to the Bank of England. We have seldom seen so useful a
little manual, now in its tenth edition, and yet not so universally
known in households as it might be. Many larger books on the
subject of domestic surgery are in circulation; this one only pro¬
fesses to give plain directions for the time, be it long or short, which
must intervene between an accident and the arrival of a doctor.
Often, in the first shock of terror and agony, precious moments are
wasted, because the most sensible and intelligent friends, perfectly
capable of doing all that would be necessary, hesitate from not being
quite sure of what is necessary ; what is the best way of stopping
blood, of restoring consciousness, the proper antidote to a poison, or
application to a burn or scald, etc. To such, this little book of
thirty pages will be an incalculable comfort, as enabling them at
least to relieve and soothe a sufferer, and to utilize time which, when
wasted in inaction, may possibly hinder a doctor's skill from being
efficacious when it does arrive. We recommend all who have not
already done so to possess themselves of this valuable sixpennyworth
of knowledge, and to familiarize themselves with its contents.
A Lost Battle.
Published by David Douglas, Edinburgh.
It is pleasant now and then to come on a story which is neither
sensational nor dull. Without going into very profound matters, or
introducing us to any'out-of-the-way characters,—'vagabond heroines,'
heroes who are irresistibly impelled to make love to the wrong
woman, and that sort of gentry,—the story has a freshness and quiet
originality about it, which combines with an easy flowing style to
make the book pleasant reading. The ' battle ' is the struggle of the
not very brilliant but very likeable young hero to succeed in doing
something in the world to make himself worthy of the artist heroine,
a young lady with a good many theories and notions as to what men
Our Library Table. 93
onght to be more especially, what lier husband is to be, before she
will condescend to fall in love.    Lisa might easily have been made
unpleasantly conceited,  but she escapes that danger, and has the
luck to find out where her pretty girlish theory had contained a
fallacy before it is too late to repair her mistakes.    As to how the
battle is lost and won, we leave the readers to discover this for them¬
selves.    There is a pretty contrast to Lisa, with her dignified ideas,
in the other heroine, poor Clementina, or Tiny Perrott, a naturally
delicate - natured   little  thing,   belonging   to  a  thoroughly  vulgar
family, and  always  coming  into  collision  with  her surroundings.
Poor Tiny, crushed by her smart gowns, sitting very upright on her
gilt chair, is a pathetic little figure, only wanting to be allowed to
devote herself to the awkward curate whom nobody else likes.    We
are very glad that the Fates release Tiny in due time from the brilliant
gowns and gold chair, for she is a loving little soul, and quite deserves
to be happy with her curate at last.    The peculiarities of the Perrotts
are lightly touched oflf, not too much dwelt on ; and the same remark
applies to the eccentricities of Julia Kenneth, a good-hearted sort of
girl, who spoils the attractiveness of her nature by slightly fast ways.
She is perfectly aghast, however, when her free and easy  manner
encourages the snobbish young man of the story to make love to her.
' " It is the devotion of a true heart that I venture to offer you, dear
Miss Kenneth."    "What!" said Julia.    There was an intonation in
her voice which made her eldest and favourite dog stop short, turn
round, walk up to Alfred and snifif at him suspiciously.'    Between
the dog and the lady the lover is crushed,  as he deserves.    We
cordially recommend this pretty and well-written story.
George Moore.    By S. Smiles, LL.D.    Rontledge & Sons.
It would appear that it is difficult to represent certain of the virtues
of humanity in an interesting light.    There is nothing in the nature
of  things which should prevent the story of this  man's  life  from
appealing to our sympathies, and yet we imagine the readers of the
bulky volume will mostly feel that there is a want somewhere.    In
itself, there is great interest in the idea of the sturdy Cumberland
boy beginning his struggle for life in the wilderness of London all
alone and friendless, by dint of sheer perseverance and determination
working up his way in the world, led on by the soft eyes of the girl
he had loved from her childhood; becoming successful and prosperous,
and remaining simple and unspoilt through it all.    Is it then his
biographer's fault that there is a sort of dryness through the book ? or
is it that the combination of qualities which carried George Moore to
success commands more respect than enthusiasm ?    We hope we are
not  so vulgar-minded  as  to  suppose  that  a  warehouseman  must
necessarily be unheroic, even if he happens to make a fortune ;  but
there must be something beyond even perseverance and energy before
we  can  feel enthusiasm  for a man's  character.    The  point  which
honourably distinguished George Moore from the ordinary successful
man was, of course, the almost boundless benevolence which led him
to expend not only money, but time and personal labour, in all sorts
of efforts for the good of his fellow-creatures.    We get quite puzzled
among the crowd of objects for which he laboured, and that not in
any superficial manner; and we think the account of all these things
might have been made more interesting, and less like formal reports.
There was no coldness or formality in the warm-hearted doer of these
94 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
good deeds himself, whose sympathies seem to have been ready for
all, from pauper children in his native Cumberland, and struggling
men and women in London, to the starving inhabitants of Paris,
among whom he toiled like a giant after the siege. Here and there
through the book come quaint little sayings which reveal the man.
'The day is always thirteen hours long if we wish to make it so.'
' I owe nothing to genius, but if I give double the time and labour I
can do as well as others.' 'The grand interpreter of the Word of
God is common sense.' But perhaps the best epitome of his life is
contained in the three lines always written in his pocket-book
' What I spent I had,
What I saved I lost,
What I gave I have.'
©uestion Scries.
II. Give the meaning and derivation of the word madrigal, and
mention the connection of the madrigal with the original oratorio :
show the difference between the old and new ideas of the oratorio,
giving an example of each.
Answers, not over fifty lines (twelve words to a line), to reach Qu.
C, care of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh,
not later than March 5th. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue ; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO DECEMBER SERIES.
In History: Heathek, best; B., M. B., Spider, May-Fly, very
good; Bretwalda, good; but she makes two men of Sir John
Oldcastle and Lord Cobham.
In Literature: Claribel, best ; Heather, very good, but her
dates are confused. R. Hooker's great work was not published till
1594; the mention of it was scarcely necessary, and the date given
was more than twenty years too soon.
I. The Lollards were a religious sect which first appeared in
Germany, and differed from the Church of Rome as regarded the
Mass, Extreme Unction, and Atonement. Some derive Lollard from
the Latin lolium, a tare, thus stigmatizing these reformers as tares
among wheat. According to others, they took their name from
Walter Lollhard, who was burnt alive for these doctrines in 1322.
But the real origin of the term is probably the German lallen, loUen,
liillen, to sing, with the termination 'hard,' so common in German.
The name signified one who continually praised God in sacred songs.
Subsequently it was applied to all heretics or fanatics; and in England
at the close of the 14th century it was given to the followers of
Wyclyfl'e, whose principles resembled those of the Puritans of the
17th century more than the system taught by Luther.
In 1401, the English Parliament passed an Act against heretics,
according to which William Sautre, a Lollard, who began his career
as rector of Lynn in Norfolk, was burnt alive. Henry Y. actively
persecuted the Lollards. Their chief leader. Sir John Oldcastle,
Lord Cobliam, a personal friend of Henry, was accused of heresy.
Su-ay Notes. 95
but escaping from the Tower, he raised the disaffected Lollards, and
marched to St. Giles' Fields. The Lollards were defeated, but Old-
castle escaped. In 1417, Henry being in Normandy, we find
Oldcastle conspiring with the Scotch who were invading England ;
but his plans were frustrated by their sudden retreat. He was
taken, and condemned by Parliament to die as a heretic and traitor.
Many other less noted victims suffered, but LoUardism lived on,
preparing the way for the Reformation. Heather.
II. Sir John Mandeville the traveller, called the father of English
prose. He was bom early in the 14th century, and after travelling
for thirty years, and penetrating to India and even China, he returned
to England about 1350; and his book, previously written in Latin and
in French, appeared in English in 1356. He meant it to be useful as
an itinerary to Jerusalem. It ia very readable to this day, and fairly
reliable as far as his own travels are concerned, though these are
mixed up with astounding fables collected from former writers and
from hearsay.
Sir Thomas Malory, knight, author of the prose epic called the
Morte Arthur, printed in 1485 by Caxton, who suggested the idea of
the work carried out by Malory. He has compiled a history of
Arthur, in which the materials drawn, some from Cymric, some from
Teutonic sources, and very unlike in spirit as well as matter, are
welded together in a harmonious connected story, written in beautiful
English, and giving us an embodiment of the chivalric ideal of the
Middle Ages.
Sir Thomas More, born 1478, died 1535. He wrote some histories
and controversial works, but his Utopia, which has given an adjective
to our language, is his chief book. It is the description of a fancied
island, with an ideal government, discovered by a companion of
Amerigo Vespucci's. Many of our modern improvements in laws and
manners are suggested by Utopia, a book of true genius, and from a
social and political point of view greatly in advance of its age.
Clakibel.
These being the last answers of the series, we have to announce
that the Prizes have been taken in History by B.; in Literature, by
Claribel. We may also mention as honourably distinguished.
Heather, who has been good in both departments; Spider and
May-fly, whose answers have always been creditable, and have
shown perseverance throughout. Bretwalda and Eromart are both
promising ; Rediviva, clever, but wanting in terseness. We hope
that the new series may again attract competitors, and that those
who may not feel equal to the first, will try to obtain the second or
third prize which will be offered at the close of the year.
Our Female Novelists.—The concluding article of this series, on
Julia Kavanagh, is unavoidably postponed till our next issue. We
are asked by the biographer of Mrs. Norton, to correct an inadvertence
as to Lady Mary Fox's parentage. She was a daughter of William
IV., not of Lord Melbourne.
Ladies' Club Room.—Some of our readers may not be aware that
a Ladies' Club Room has been opened at 6 Shandwick Place, Edin¬
burgh, during the past year.    It does not aspire to such magnificence
9^ TJie Ladies' Edmburgh Magazine.
as the Russell's Club or the Albemarle, but in comfort, neatness, and
convenience, it holds its own with its more ambitious London sisters.
This club does not provide dinners for its members, who, being
ladies, had better dine at home, but excellent luncheons, as well as
tea and coffee, are to be had at a moderate cost. The room is supplied
with the chief daily and weekly papers. In place of being obliged
to make business appointments uncomfortably at railway waiting-
rooms or the back premises of shops, this little club, with its well-
carpeted room, sofas, arm - chairs, writing - table, and good fire,
supplies every convenience for the transaction of ladies' business,
besides being a rendezvous where friends may meet by appointment
and parcels may bo left, no less than a place of refreshment. This
room supplies a want long felt by ladies living in the country eft-
distant suburbs of the town. We believe that the numbers are not
yet full, and that ladies may still be admitted on being proposed by
members to whom they are personally known.
Cutting-out and Sewing Classes.—The Executive Committee of
the Edinburgh School of Cookery have arranged for a course of
lessons in the school, on cutting out underclothing, dresses, etc.; also
on the system of teaching, sewing, mending, and other needlework,
as practised in German schools. These classes, which opened on
January 20th, are taught by Miss Braun, a certificated teacher of
needlework from Reutlingen. They will supply a want long felt in
Edinburgh, and we hope that they will be sufficiently well attended
to warrant the committee in repeating them annually.
Having solved Kitty Wren's difficulty three months ago, we are now
asked from the converse side by Alpha : ' Must I go to the Examina¬
tion if I attended the S. George's Hall Classes 1' [Again we reply,
There is no compulsion. No way has been discovered, save the rack
and thumbscrew, etc., for examinations without the consent of the
victim. All the processes and means employed in the present case
are purely voluntary; we do not even aim at' doing people good'
against their will.—Eds.]
 0 
Notices to Coritspouticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous coni-
nuinication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied bj'
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The series on ' Country Pursuits ' is nearly complete, but we shall
still be glad to receive a good paper on the Dairy, on Gardening, and
on Botanizing, with further suggestions as to suitable subjects.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society
will be held on Saturday, 1st February, at 4 Oxford Terrace. Debate,
' Is the influence of Browning advantageous to English Literature V
Our Female Novelists. 97
©ur jFemale j^ofadists.
XXV.
JULIA KAVANAGH.
' O'er her the myrtle showers
Its leaves, by soft winds fanned:
She faded 'midst Italian flowers ' .  .  .
//. 1824—</. 1877.
Julia. Kavanagh was the only daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
jNIorgan Kavanagh, of the County of Kildare. One of
Ireland's winsome daughters, she is described as being
extremely small, but possessing ' large, luminous brown
eyes, full of goodness and softness;' and a ' magnificently-
shaped head, surmounted by coil after coil of beautiful
hair.' Such is the pleasing description of the writer to
whose pen we owe such pretty, graceful tales as John
Dorrien and Nathalie. She was one of a circle of "whicli
few members now remain. A contemporary of Miss Bronte,
like her she gained admission into the literary portion of
society by the merit of writings which, though inferior in
genius and power, were yet possessed of great charms, and
deservedly brought her into notice, and gained for her the
acquaintance and society of such men as Thackeray and his
friends. Miss Kavanagh's life was uneventful, and gives
but little for her biographer to relate. Her knowledge of
foreign countries began early, as, when quite a child, her
parents j>assed some years in France, thus laying the
foundation for her subsequent perfect knowledge of the
French language.
Mr. and Mrs. Kavanagh spent many years in a chateau in
Normandy, and near a ' quaint little French town, half
town, half village, which lay hidden in a nook of the
Norman coast.' There Mr. Kavanagh shot, game being
plentiful; and perhaps it was there that he produced writ¬
ings, not entirely unknown to fame, upon Language, its
sources and formation. Doubtless it was Irom him, in some
measure, that his daughter inherited her literary talents.
So at Gravilles the small Julia read and dreamt the sunny
hours away. Passionately fond of fairy tales, she and her
brother John spent the long days in the old chateau in
unlimited study of fairy lore, the effect of which was
heightened by the picturesque surroundings of their child-
No. 51.—March 1879. ri
98 The Ladies Edinbiirgli Magazine.
hood's home. Thus the children lived in a delicious
' Dreamland,' Julia falling in love with the princes, John
Avith the princesses. Years after, Miss Kavanagh had out¬
lived her dreams. She had ' ceased to look forward,' and
took life ' as a sort of daily bread;' while to John never
came the awaking. While his ' dreamland was yet full upon
him,' as his sister sadly says, the young sailor and his ship
sank oft' the coast of Ireland. She was then seventeen, and
this blow made a change in her life. Her father never
recovered it, and her mother became a nervous and broken
woman;
' Her sun went down while it was yet day.'
At twenty our heroine's literary career commenced. She
came to London and published her first work, a tale for
children, entitled The. Three. Paths. This was in 1847. In
1848 appeared that really exquisite story of Madeleine: A
Tale of Auvergne. Wlio that in giiihood has read that most
pathetic tale, has not felt exalted while reading it, and
wondered if such self-sacrifice as Madeleine's were really
possible ?
It must have been about this time that Miss Kavanagh
met Charlotte Bronte one evening at Thackeray's house,
when the former describes the interview in the following
words:—' Charlotte Bronte, soon after she entered the room,
came up, and sitting down beside me on the sofa fixed her
eyes upon me for some time. Then she said slowly,—and they
were the first words I heard her speak,—" The intellectual
faculties largely developed, I have no doubt the moral also." '
In 1853 Miss Kavanagh went abroad again for some time ;
and most probably before she had returned the charmed
circle of authors had to mourn the loss of her greater rival.
' Life's fitful fever' closed to Charlotte Bronte in 1855. Miss
Kavanagh's pen was most prolific, and its labours were not
confined to novel-writing: she also put forth biographies
and travels. Composition was to our author a second
nature; as she herself said to an old friend, ' I was always
compelled to write. From a child I was always making up
tales. It came to me as naturally as sleep; and yet I never
satisfied myself in my plots. I am shackled also. Mamma
insists upon my ending every story happily. In vain I tell
her that it is not true to life. It is because of that very
fact, she replies,—because there is so much unhappiness in
real life,—that she will insist upon nothing but sunshine in
my tales. Writing after a time becomes as necessary as
one's daily food.'
Our Female Novelists. 99
The next work Miss Kavanagh gave to the world was
Women in France during tlie, Eighteenth Century. The result
of her long residence abroad, and lengthened travels in
France, Italy, and Switzerland, was seen in her Summer
and Winter in the two Sicilies, which was published in 1858.
In 1862 two volumes of French Women of Letters came out,
and were deservedly popular. Miss Kavanagh's knowledge
of French, the French people and country, rendering her
peculiarly fitted for the task. Its success encouraged her to
produce a similar work the following year, entitled English
Women of Letters. In her preface to the first-named work,
our author takes up the cudgels for women as novel-writers,
stoutly maintaining that tliey have in a great measure
formed that branch of literature, gained great eminence in
it, and, in several cases, undying fame; that their influence
as novel-writers, both in England and in France, can scarcely
be denied; they may be questionably great in other branches
of literature, but that in the wide field of Romance they are
truly so, and not only in ' pointing' to its ' brighter worlds,'
but in ' leading the way.'
The mother and daughter were congenial companions;
aud as Mrs. Kavanagh's sight failed, Julia read aloud to her,
or wiled away the hours pleasantly by relating her projected
tales, or planning out new plots and characters. They
travelled a good deal, and often resided altogether abroad
for long periods, at Paris, Nice, and other places. It was
thus that Miss Kavanagh was enabled to give us the very
pretty sketch of Paris aud French life contained in Joh-n
Dorrien:—
' Paris, the wonderful city, threw her spell upon him, and John
was too eager, too young, and too imaginative to resist the syren
when she came to him, clothed either in the dim glories of the past,
or in the gay splendour of the present. The weather, too, was
lovely, as it almost always is in early October. The sky was clear
and blue, the sun was genial, and the air was so light that it made
one glad to live. John rushed about from one end of Paris to the
other, finding strange contrasts without seeking them. One early
morning he lingered about the Temple gardens, where the Temple
tower of tragic memory once stood ; and whilst children laughed and
played around him his heart thrilled with pity at tlie vision of a sad-
eyed, stately Marie Antoinette looking down at him from behind
prison bars. An hour later, he was sauntering along the shaded
alleys of the Bois de Boulogne, watching a gay cavalcade. The
ladies were all young and lovely, or at least John thought them so,
just as their horses seemed to him the most beautiful in the world ;
and, as they rode swiftly past him, their fresh faces, flowing hair, and
fleet motion charmed the boy's poetic fancy. After modern loveli¬
ness came classic beauty.    The cool, green wood, with its lake and
lOO The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
its waterfall, was quickly forsaken for the Salles des Antiques in the
Louvre. Thei-e John fell helplessly, hopelessly in love ; firstly, with
that haughty Diana a la hiche, whose right hand draws an arrow from
her quiver, and whose left rests so firmly on the head of a captive
stag ; secondly, with Polyhymnia, all meditation and poetic grace ;
thirdly, with the two Roman empresses, stately as goddesses and
well-nigh as fair ; and fourthly and lastly, with the Venus of Milo.
How John loved the gracious majesty of her attitude, the sweetness
of her beautiful face, the waves of her hair parted back from her
classic brow 1 . . . Then the pictures the next day, the old Italian
masters so dark and so rich and holy ; the quaint Dutch painters, the
classic Poussins, the historic portraits, the drawings, and, indeed, the
everything.'
Corresponding descriptions of Trianon and Versailles give
the reader a longing to see scenes so graphically and freshly
described.
Small wonder that Miss Kavanagh, with her iesthetic
tastes, enjoyed life at Paris, and revelled in the gaiety,
the beauty, and the exhilarating air of the beautiful capital.
After reading such a description, who does not long, too, to
see the Venus ■ of .Milo, the Poussins, and all other works
of art in which Paris is so rich ? Nor is it wonderful that,
being so familiar witli this fair city, she should make it
the scene of one of her prettiest novels. How she must
have grieved over the rack and ruin wrought in it during
the recent siege, and mourned over the irreparable harm
then done!
She was, as we have said, acquainted with Normandy and
its coast, and during the late war between France and
Germany this acquaintance was strengthened, as Mrs.
Kavanaoh and her daughter left Paris and souoht in Eouen
and its neighbourhood a retreat from the horrors and alarms
of war. Italy, later on, became their favourite resort, and in
the neighbourhood of Nice they would reside a whole year,
spending the summer months at mountain villages, and
descending into Nice for the winter. Latterly Miss Kavanagh
did this with the hope that the mild air there would alleviate
the attacks of neuralgia to which she became an absolute
martyr, and which hnally undermined her strength and
constitution. Incessant pain wore her out; her death at the
last was sudden and unexpected. Her blind mother, on the
morning of Sunday the 28th October 18.77, was startled by
lieariTig a heavy fall in her daughter's room. Miss Kavanagh
was found stretched on the floor. She was lifted ivp, and
doctors were called in, but in vain; ere eight o'clock on tliat
Sunday morning the spirit of Julia Kavanagh had fled. She
' sleeps well' in the beautiful cemetery of Nice; above her
Our Female Novelists. roi
is a small marble cross, and on it an inscription, and the
words in French :
' She rests from her labours, and her works do follow her.'
She passed away in the fifty-fourth year of her age, leaving
a solitary and almost blind mother to mourn her loss, and
to finish in loneliness life's sad journey. Apart from her
other literary labours, Miss Kavanagh was a contributor to
some of the principal periodicals of the day. In Temple Bar
appeared her charming tale of ' Sylvie's Vow;' and to tlie
Argosy she also contributed regularly. At her death there
appeared in its pages a most interesting notice of our heroine,
entitled, ' In Memoriam,' and' written by one to whom she
was personally known, and whose pleasing description of
her only makes one regret that she lias been taken from
among us, and so is lost to us all hope of ever knowing the
author of Nathalie. We allude to this article on Julia
Kavanagh because of a curious coincidence' pointed out to us
therein by the writer.^ Side by side with this biographical
notice appears the^ last tale that Miss Kavanagh ever wrote.
Clement's Love is quite one of the prettiest and most graceful
stories that we have read. It is as a clear and vivid fresco,
where the figures, in their quaint peasant costumes, stand
out brightly from the background of sunlight, sparkling sea,
old-fashioned cottage, and grey village church; and the hand¬
some Norman maiden Anxjelique, in her picturesque dress,
seems quite a familiar sight to us. The curious conicidence
already referred to in connection with Clement's Love is told
us as follows :—
' This story is the only one o£ Miss Kavanagh's that has an unhappy
ending; perhaps the only one she ever so ended. It is as though a
presentiment haunted the writer of what was soon to be. " She
(Angelique) took up her bundle, and with one sad look around her,
she walked down the path that led to the sea ; . . . she shunned the
village, and entered the lane that lies at the back of the houses. The
sun had long left it. It was shadowy and dim, and in the dimness
and in the shadow the figure slowly vanished, and thus passed away
for ever from Manneville." These words might almost be applied to
their writer. They are probably the last she ever wrote in the way
of story. Julia Kavanagh has passed away for ever from the earth.
Like Angelique, she has walked down the path that leads to the sea,
the great Sea of Eternity.'
After her death a most charming work appeared, entitled
Forget - me - nots,  which   contained   a   collection  of   Miss
' Cha^^crw!' Wood.
I02 77/1? Ladies Edmbiirgh Magazine.
Kavanagli's shorter tales, in two volumes. She had designed
such volumes herself, and commenced the introduction when
her sudden death stayed the practised hand, and the work
was left to be completed by a literary friend, aided by the
Idind mother who remembered in substance the introduction
as her daughter had told it to her.
These volumes are rightly named, as they are like a bright
and pleasant bouquet of flowers. The scene of all these
tales is the same,—that is, Manneville, a little fishing village
on the coast of Normandy,—and Miss Kavanagh has quite
caught and infused into her pretty romances the brightness
and freshness of the Norman sunlight. On the other hand,
their only fault, if fault they have, is to us that of a too even
level of prettiness; one instinctively longs for a little more
variety, a little more power, a little more shadow. They
bring to our mind a story we once heard of a little girl who
was very fond of colouring pictures in her childish way, and
used anxiously to consult her friends as to what colours
were advisable, but ended by suggesting that she thought it
time for ' a plain piece of dark.' One quite longs for ' a plain
piece of dark' in Miss Kavanagh's tales—for the brush to
be occasionally dipped into sombre hues. An unmitigated
villain in one story even would be quite refreshing. The
perpetual glossing over of all evil, or disagreeables of life,
together with the undue preponderance given to its pleasant
things, with the invariably happy ending, combine to make
these tales slightly monotonous, and ' a plain piece of dark '
would be a decided relief.
The first of Miss Kavanagh's novels was Natlialie, pub¬
lished in 1850, which gained much well-merited notice. We
remember once reading of ' the harmless mine of Sir Walter
Scott's novels,' an expression scarcely applicable to such
powerful and beautiful works of fiction as the ' Waverley
Novels,' but which is exactly suited to Miss Kavanagh's
stories. Natural, graceful tales without trickery of style or
phraseology, they form thoroughly healthy reading for young
people. Her knowledge of France made her lay the scene
of her first novel in that country, which gives a decided
piquancy to the story, and to the characters in it. There
are passages of much pathos, and the characters are well
sustained and true to life. Many of us must have met with
a ' Eose'—one of those patient, uncomplaining w'omen who
may well be described thus:   ,
' Oft in life's stillest shade reclining,
In desolation unrepining.
Our Female Novelists. 103
Without a hope on earth to find
A mirror in an answering mind,
Meek aouls there are, who little dream
Their daily strife an angel's theme,
Or that the rod they take so calm
Shall prove in heaven a martyr's palm.'
In Miss Kavanagh's Eose, Keble's description of patient
endurance is pathetically embodied. The description in
Eose's own words of how she arrived at this really angelic
frame is deeply touching, and is like a low sad wail of music,
which once heard recurs perpetually to the mind:—
''' Others passed on before me, and engaged in the strife of existence.
I sat an exile at the door, passive, listless, and unheeded.
I grew sick at heart, and longed for death. I was not very devout
in those days, and thought not, as I think now, of the Christian's
immortality. Death then seemed a mournful and Lethe-like repose,
a divine and lovely mystery. I looked not beyond that untroubled
sleep Jh the cool bosom of the green earth beneath the blue sky. I
prayed to die with the same ardent prayers I had once put forth for
happiness and earthly love. I did not say to the Almighty, ' Take
my life,' but I yearned for repose; and every passionate wish,
whether embodied in words or not, is still the heart's truest, deepest
prayer." She paused. Nathalie, leaning back in her chair, with her
hands clasped upon her knees, was looking sad and amazed at all she
heard. " You would not have thought this of me," said Rose, with
a mournful smile. "Of me, your calm, apathetic sister. Nor am
I now what I was then. I speak of feelings that have long and
wholly vanished. Sorrow works its own cure. No human heart was
ever framed for ceaseless repining. Mine left me ; I remember the
day and the hour. I sat alone in this room, near this window; it
was evening, day faded fast, and a few pale stars shone from the
depths of the blue sky above the abbey. Sly heart was very full. I
knelt down and prayed in broken and inarticulate ejaculations.
' Why am I alone ? Why does nobody care for me ? Others are
loved ; why am not I ? Oh, God ! since I am useless in this world,
since woman's destiny is denied me, have mercy on me—let me die !'
My tears flowed fast, and I sought not to check them. I know not
what day it was—some saint's festival, I suppose, for. as I wept, the
old coloured church-window before me was lit up with the mellow
light of many lamps within, doubtless for some evening service ; and
the organ pealed forth with a solemn strain, and soft voices, blending
in religious harmony, rose sweet and clear in the silence of evening.
My rebellious heart melted within me. I remembered the text of a
sermon I had heard as a child on the text of ' Take up your cross
and follow me.' A dim revelation of the truth came into my pining
spirit; I saw and felt my sin ; I confessed it before God. It was not
my fate that was grievous, it was I who was weak and shrinking.
My destiny was that of thousands ; they suffered patiently, I asked
to die. I had erred greatly ; I had considered happiness the end of
life. It is not, nor is suffering ; those who say so blaspheme the
goodness of God, who has been prodigal of all joyful gifts. Yet
there is much of sorrow here below, and were all pure bliss, man would
104 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
still find vexation and trouble in his own unquiet heart. The end of
life is duty. "VVe all hear this, but we never know it until the truth
is reached through tears and sorrow. ... It is hard to submit %o
a quiet, obscure, and apparently useless life ; and yet this I had to
do. It had pleased Providence to give me to perform those homely
duties for which the world has no flattering voice, and of which no
records are kept. To stay near this harsh aunt who daily reproached
me for the bread I ate, and yet who wanted me, was my duty ; I
resolved that it should also be my sanctification and sacrifice.
Nathalie, is your religious faith spiritual, is it more than mere form ?
If it is, know that you can never be all unhappy; that there is no
destiny so miserable but faith can soothe and purify — none so
mean but it may raise and ennoble to the dignity of the noblest
martyrdom."'
This one quotation will suffice to show the simple interest
and pathos of Miss Kavanagh's style. It is the genuine cry
of a wearied but struggling soul, which bravely fights its
way through the mists and darkness of this world to the
truth and light of the better one.
Adele followed in 1858. It is much in the same style as
Nathalie. The scene is laid in Normandy, and the heroine
is Adele, a young girl, untutored, capricious, and wilful, but
withal really charming. She marries, in the second volume,
a man many years her senior. The first volume must please
any reader, and is very pretty, dealing with Adele's youthful
days at an old ruined chateau. The scenery is well described,
particularly in a narration of Adele's adventures in posting
secretly a letter entrusted to her by the hero of the novel,
William Osborne. The second volume is less attractive;
and in the third the reader is quite glad of a fire and a
typhus fever to relieve the somewhat monotonous misunder¬
standing of the lovers, and the little plots of the jealous
step-mother-in-law. Nevertheless, the denouement is very
pretty, and is—true to Mrs. Kavanagh's principles—a happy
one. It is a very pleasant novel, and Mademoiselle Janson
decidedly amusing with her oft-recurring and querulous
complaint that ' the world was going away,' and who is so
well portrayed as a person who possessed ' plenty of
peculiarities,—a habit of useless mysteries ranked among
them.' Do we not each know many Mesdemoiselles de
-Janson, who revel in an atmosphere of ' useless mysteries' ?
Queen Mat, which appeared in 1863, comes next. It is
strangely unlike its predecessors. The characters are coarser
and less pleasing, all except the heroine, who is charming
throughout — brave, true, and enduring. How Nemesis
gradually overtakes the children for their pai'ents' wrong¬
doing is well drawn; how the sins of the fathers are visited
Our Female Novelists. 105
upon the children is well shown, and keeps up to the last
the interest of the Look.
But of Miss Kavanagh's works, the palm should be given
to John Dorrien, from which we have already quoted. In
this there are wonderful little touches of character and
scenery that are worthy of a painter, they are so delicate and
true to nature. Such are the pictures she gives to us of the
sad and deserted Trianon; of the young girl, Antoinette,
reading on a low sunny wall in Italy, or with her tame
sparrow on her finger watching in the ' warm sunlight' the
old-fashioned Italian car rumble by up the hill, and vanish.
Good and true, also, is the description of the hour and the
place where Antoinette—the ignorant, ill-taughtAntoinette—
first believed; where first dawned upon her the truth,and with
it the knowledge came of ' that unknown God of whom the
Apostle told the Athenians, and whom she had found at last.'
With this book closes the list of Miss Kavanagh's prin¬
cipal works of fiction. Others she wrote (such as Bessie,
etc.), for, as we have said, her pen was a prolific one; but
xipon those we have noticed her fame chiefly rests. Of her
biographies we have already spoken: they are, like all her
stories, pleasantly written. But in them the lightness of
style, which is an ornament in a novel, is perhaps rather
misplaced, and makes these volumes too sketchy and lacking
in depth. The profound problems of life and thought are
but lightly touched upon. Still, if the style does not deepen
into tragedy in relating the struggles and sufferings, both
mental and physical, of the literary women whose lives she
relates and whose works she reviews, neither does it ever
degenerate into frivolity. The writing is even, calm, and
good throughout, and much useful information is to be culled
from her biographical volumes.
Miss Kavanagh seemed to feel most keenly that if women
can and do write, it should be done with a view to refine
the world and woman's companion—man ; not to lower or
render either more coarse. For that she condemns Aphra
Behn, the coarse female-novelist and writer of the reign of
Charles II., and commends warmly 'the noble examples of
Mademoiselle de Scud^ry and Madame de la Fayette;' and
she goes on to say:—
' The literature of France was not pure when French women began
to write. To their eternal honour,—and it is an honour which, if it
soar not as high, at least sinks deeper than that of genius,—the
women of that country, when they took up a pen, did their best to
ennoble women and compel men into delicacy.'
ro6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
We must now bring our notice of Julia Kavanagh to a
close; but ere doing so, we, in conjunction with all her
readers, must pay her a well-earned tribute of praise. Her
writings are, indeed, models of purity and grace; pretty and
talented romances she gave to the world, but not one line of
■ them could her readers wish unwritten, or could she, as the
Academy says, ' when dying wish to blot.' Her writings
speak of the source from whence they came. Julia Kavanagh
was a strict Roman Catholic, and a pious, good, and charitable
woman—a loving and dutiful daughter.
"When she was taken, she left a circle of sincere friends,
won as much by her goodness and unselfishness as by her
talents; indeed one of them says, ' She has left a name
behind her that all know, and those love most who knew
her best.' Among such friends she will long be remembered
and mourned. Whetlier her works will as long be held in
remembrance, we know not. Of them we can only say, in
her own words, that they must abide ' the test of all merit
—Time.' B. C. J. D.
{This paper concludes this Series for the present)
Sifgljattistan.
We think that at the present time, when the attention of the
whole country is directed to the events which are taking
place in Afghanistan, when the friends of those who are now
engaged in a campaign in one of the most difficult countries
of the world are anxiously waiting and watching for news,—
their hearts, no doubt, often saddened by the thoughts of
the hardships, even whilst they are thrilling with pride at
the brave doings of our soldiers,—at such a time as this it
seems to us that it would not be out of place to give the
readers of the Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine a very brief
account of the history of Afghanistan, with a clear recapitu¬
lation of the events which led to the first Afghan war,
and the well-known disasters of our retreat from Cabul.
That history repeats itself is, we think, a fact forced un¬
willingly upon our attention as we study the ancient records
of the invasions of our north-western frontier.
Afghanistan has been for the last eight hundred years
under Turkish rule. The Turks of Constantinople—the
Ottoman Turks, as they are called by way of distinction-
are but one small branch of this master race, whose early
home was  in Central Asia, but who have at one time or
Afghanistan. 107
anotlier succeeded in establishing their dominion over the
whole of the Asiatic continent, with the sole exception of
China. These rulers of the East have a way of puzzling the
unlearned, by appearing in history under the varying names
of Tatars, Usbegs, Moghuls, and Turcomans, but by whatever
name they may be called, they are all of one race—a race
which for many centuries gave despotic rulers to both India
and Afghanistan.
The first Turkish Sultan of both these countries was
Mahmoud Ghuzni; and since his time the rich and hapless
land of India has suffered from no less than six principal
invasions of Turks from Central Asia, who have swept down
from Cabul to devastate the fertile plains of Hindustan.
Until the days of British rule in India, whoever wore the
crown of Cabul held the crown of India, if not in his hand
at least within his grasp. One invasion, therefore, after
another followed in quick succession—the invaders being
all alike animated by a thirst for plunder, a deadly religious
hatred of the ancient Hindoo creed, and a tierce determi¬
nation to sack their villages and destroy their temples.
We give the dates of the six principal invasions to which
we have already referred:—
In 1002 A.D. The Turks under Mahmoud of Ghuzni.
1303 A.D. The Moghuls under Genghis Khan.
1398 A.D. The Turks under Tamerlane.
1525 A.D. The Turks under Sultan Baber.
1739 A.D. Nadir Shah's Invasion.
1761 A.D. Ahmed Shah's Invasion.
These are, no doubt, some of the most noted invasions of
India from Cabul, but in point of fact the highlanders of
Afghanistan looked upon the plains of Hindustan as the
Goths looked upon Italy, and their attacks were continual.
Mahmoud of Ghuzni alone, made no less than thirty forays
into India ; and these incessant wars never ceased until
the British Government acquired permanent possession of
Northern India.
Afghanistan itself has remained meanwhile beneath the
undisputed rule of its Asiatic conquerors; and there—as
formerly in India, as now in Europe—Turkish rule has caused
ceaseless rebellion and internecine war; it has ended in tlie
permanent oppression and grinding poverty of the people.
It is true that the Turks of Central Asia, like the Turks of
Europe, have the virtues of a military aristocracy, and are
generally  both  brave and  truthful; but their whole civil
io8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
administration is drawn from the Koran, and, therefore,
does not admit of improvement or change. Only one form
of government is recognised in the Koran, and that is a
military despotism—a strictly absolute and personal rule,
where the king is the despotic head of the army, the law, the
religion, and the people ; and Mahommedan lands can never
flourish under the bondage of a misgovernment which
recognises as one of the first principles of its creed, 'the
divine right of kings to govern wronar.'
The present rulers of Afghanistan are, strictly speaking,
only foreign military conquerors, who, even after the lapse
of centuries, find the aboriginal inhabitants very hard to
subdue. There are, indeed, no less than thirty-eight of these
aboriginal clans or tribes, who are generally at war both with
each other and the Amir of Cabul; secure amongst their
inaccessible mountain fastnesses, they retain their much-
cherished semi-independence even to the present day. These
Afghan clans claim a Jewish descent from Saul. They are
an interesting race in other ways, for there is a great ad¬
mixture of Greek blood amongst them, and they are believed
to be descendants of the soldiers of Alexander the Great's
army. We cannot refrain from quoting here the words of
an old Mahommedan, who gives a true and graphic picture
of these Afghan tribes :—
' These people, by reason of tire shelter of the mountains, which
are difficult of access, do not bend their heads to the king's commands;
rather they take some money also from the governor by way of
reward, and levy from travellers so much on each horse and camel as
toll; besides this, they also rob caravans, etc. of their goods and
chattels, and, having seized the poorer class of travellers, make slaves
of them. To be brief—among other nations there are a few thieves,
hut the Afghans are all of them thieves and robhers, and the result is
this, that the whole city of Cabul is subservient to them.'
The words remain true up to the present day; and though
our space does not allow of much quotation, the writer in
question is gifted with such a graphic power of description
that we are tempted to add a few lines in which he reviews
the physical features of the kingdom of Cabul:—
'To make the story short, tliere are mountain passes on all four
sides of Cabul, and, on this account, an enemy's army cannot come
there suddenly, or bring the country thoroughly into their power ;
and though this country does not yield much revenue, still wise men
consider it as the gate to India; and for this reason a large sum of
money used to be sent from the royal treasury to pay the soldiers, so
that each soldier or chief in Afghanistan might live at ease, and not
suffer annoyance of any kind, for on this account the armies of
Persia and Central Asia were not able to come into India.'
Afghanistan. 109
Such being the government, and such our neighbours on
the north-western frontier of India, we cannot wonder that
the English Government, having studied the history of the
past, should be keenly alive to the risk of leaving the ' gate
to India' in the hands of an enemy.    If there is to be any
feeling of security on our part, we ought to be able to rely
on the fidelity of our gate-keeper; and so it is that every
effort has been made by successive Viceroys to conciliate the
ruler of Afghanistan, and to endeavour to place the friendshijj
of the two countries on the lasting basis of mutual interests
and common foes.    Whether we should have succeeded in
this attempt if Shere Ali, the present Amir, had been left to
himself, must remain doubtful.    Another power has stepped
upon the  scene, and Shere Ali, with the love of intrigue
common  to  all  Eastern   diplomatists,  and   the   faithless
treachery peculiar  to the Afghan  race, has  forgotten  the
presents of money and arms, the substantial benefits which
he and his family have received for forty years from the
English, and has trusted to the delusive promises of Kussia,
throwing himself without  reserve into the hands of the
Czar.    It is a fact that many people refuse to believe, or
choose to shut their eyes to, but still w^e believe it to be a
fact, that  in  July last the Russian troops had absolutely
marched to the borders of Afghanistan, and Shere Ali had
promised them a free passage through his dominions in the
event of their contemplating an invasion of India.
This question of Eussian aggression is, as we are all aware,
no new one; it has agitated India for the last forty years,
and, although the people who have giv^en expression to their
anxieties have had to bear the penalty of being considered
alarmists, Eussophobists, and the like, the history of events
is repeatedly justifying their fears; and it is so curious in
the present to look back to the old alarms, the old victories,
and the old disasters of the first Afghan war, that we propose
to turn back for a few moments to that half-forgotten past,
in order that, by the light of former experience, we may gain
a clearer, juster view of present emergencies.
It is just forty years ago since the English took the city
of Cabul, and, after subduing the country, held Afghanistan
for three years peaceably and with great satisfaction to
themselves, and were tlien ignominiously expelled withoiit
even attempting to re-establish in it a permanent residency.
The reasons which led to our taking the country and then to
abandoning it, were as follows:—It is probable that it was
a young Scotchman of the middle class, Alexander Burnes,
HO The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
who first gave definiteness to the policy which resulted in
the temporary occupancy of Afghanistan. He was born and
educated at Montrose, and, at the age of sixteen, went to
India as an ensign in the Indian army. At an early age he
acquired the reputation of a man of mark and talent. Burnes
was but twenty-four years old when he was seized with
an irresistible desire to explore the then almost unknown
lands of Central Asia, and on this dangerous journey he set
forth in 1833. He started from the Punjab, at that time a
Sikh State, under Eunjeet Singh, and reached the city of
Cabul via the mountainous and dangerous route of the
Kyber Pass. Afghanistan was ruled at the time by Dost
Mahommed, and by this prince he was most hospitably
received and entertained for several months, the royal host
being charmed with his talented and accomplished guest.
Prom Cabul, Alexander Burnes made his way across
almost pathless ranges of mountains to Bokhara, which was
then ruled by a bloodthirsty Mahommedan bigot. Prom
thence he struggled on through the unsettled and dangerous
country of the Turcomans, in hourly peril of being taken
into slavery, until he reached Persia, and from that compara¬
tively civilized country arrived at length in England.
Burnes wrote a graphic and interesting account of the
countries he had seen, and of his adventurous journey. The
book was a great success, and the young author, ' Bokhara
Burnes,' as he was called, became the hero of the hour in
London society, and a man of note. There was not only
genuine admiration for his achievements, but the book made
a mark, appearing as it did when a panic existed regarding
Eussian advances, similar to the recent phase of uneasiness
through which we ourselves have passed. There were some
grounds at that time for the apprehension.
The Persians, under Eussian officers, were attacking
Herat, the frontier fortress of Afghanistan, with the^
intention of marching upon India. Eussia was massing
troops upon Khiva, and was suspected of sending agents
into Afghanistan. Cabul is the gate to India. England
could not view an enemy at its very gates without feelings
of disquietude and anxiety. When Alexander Burnes,
therefore, returned to India in 1836, Lord Auckland, the
Govei'nor-General, remembered his influence over Dost
Mahommed, and thought that he had at length found a
fitting person to send to the Court of Cabul. Burnes set
forth on his mission without delay, and was at first received
by the  Amir  with every consideration, but at  Cabul a
Afghanistan. 111
Eussian agent soon appeared upon the scene, and from that
moment the state of things was altered.
The struggle between the two emissaries was an unequal
one. Vilkovitch, a tall, fair young man, wearing the Cossack
uniform, dazzled Dost Mahommed by the most brilliant
promises; Burnes, on the contrary, had no authority from
Lord Auckland to promise the Amir of Cabul either men or
money. It is hardly to be wondered at, therefore, that after
the advent of the Eussian agent, Burnes' influence over Dost
Mahommed perceptibly declined, and that the Amir threw
himself completely into the hands of Eussia. Burnes felt
that he was losing rather than gaining ground, and returned
to India to announce himself the ill success of his mission.
Diplomacy having thus failed, the British Government
decided that, as Dost Mahommed had joined our enemies, the
only policy open to us was to follow his example, and ally
ourselves immediately with the Amir's own personal foes.
For the ruler of Cabul had no lack of enemies, and it so
happened that the man whom he had most reason to fear
had lived for the last thirty years as a refugee in British
territories. Dost Mahommed was only a usurper, the son of
the late Vizier of Cabul; and Shah Soujah, the king whom
he had dethroned, had fled for safety into India, from whence
he had, during his long exile, made five unsuccessful attempts
to regain his crown. It was decided that, by the aid of
British bayonets, Shah Soujah should be restored to his
dominions. This was the course strongly recommended to
Lord Auckland by Mr. William Macnaghten, a leading
Indian civilian ; although Alexander Burnes, who knew the
Afghans and their circumstances, remonstrated as warmly
against it, and told the Governor-General frankly that Shah
Soujah was thoroughly unpopular, that he had neither
ability nor courage, and that the Afghan nation would never
peaceably accept him for their ruler.
This warning was altogether unheeded. A large force of
British troops was assembled without loss of time on the
l)anks of the Indus for the invasion of Afghanistan. They
were commanded by General Keane, and marched from
Shikapore, in Scind, through the Bolan Pass to Quetta.
From that place they made their way to Candaliar, unopposed
by any Afghan force, but suffering greatly from famine and
other hardships. Then, by the help of treachery within the
walls, the English succeeded in storming the fortress of
Ghuzni, a place which the Afghans had until then considered
impregnable, and this loss sent a panic through the ranks of
112 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the enemy. Very soon after the fall of this fortress, Dost
Mahomnied fled into Turkestan; and in 1837 the English
marched triumphantly into the city of Cabul without having
had occasion to strike another blow. Shah Soujah, with
much pomp and ceremonial, was restored to the thi'one, and
returned with almost childish delight to the palace of his
forefathers, a strong mediaeval fortress which was called the
Balla Hissar.
The complete success of the Macnaghten and Auckland
policy was then proclaimed. Mr. Macnaghten was made a
baronet; General Keane, the commander-in-chief, became a
peer; and the members of the government flattered them¬
selves that the difficult Afghan question had at length been
satisfactorily solved. Still it was found impracticable to
withdraw the English forces from Afghanistan, and large
garrisons were stationed in the fortresses of Candahar, Quetta,
Ghuzni, Jellalabad, and even in the city of Cabul itself,
M'here they remained without open opposition of any kind
until the year 1841.
There was no open opposition. Yet Sir William
IMacnaghten, who had remained at Cabul as resident, ought
to liave been well aware of the ever-growing dissatisfaction
if he had not chosen to remain blind to the real facts of the
case. Strangely enough it was upon Alexander Burnes, who
had accompanied the English forces as an assistant to Sir
W. Macnaghten,—upon Burnes, who had remonstrated so
strongly against the whole Afghan Expedition, whose advice
since then had never been taken, and whose experience had
been steadily disregarded by his chief,—it was upon him
that the storm first burst which was afterwards to overwhelm
the whole English force in Cabul.
Perhaps, however, this was hardly to be wondered at.
The lawless Afghan clans looked upon the advent of Shah
Soujah and his ' infidel' allies with a deep disgust and
indignation, largely intermingled with fear. The popular
feeling vented itself unjustly upon Alexander Burnes.
' Sekunder Burnes,' as they called him, was ' a spy.' ' He
had come into their country alone,' they said, ' and they had
treated him as a friend, an honoured guest; he had returned
with an army to take away their country and their indepen¬
dence.' Vengeance was solemnly vowed against him, and
thirty Afghan chiefs banded themselves secretly together to
compass the death of Sekunder Burnes. He meanwhile
was warned in due time of the conspiracy by friendly
Afghans, but with strange infatuation he refused to take
Afghanistan. 113
any measures for his own safety. It was not long before he
had to pay the penalty of his rashness. At dawn on one
cold winter's morning in 1841, a mob collected under the
windows of his house in Cabul. Burues, who spoke the
Afghan language well, appeared upon the balcony, and tried,
by using his personal influence,'to persuade the multitude to
disperse. His eloquence was quite unavailing; the sight of
their enemy only maddened the Afghans; and the crowd
thickened, until the whole street was filled with a frantic,
yelling mob. It was not long before a rush was made
against the door, and a way forced into the house; the guard
made but a feeble resistance, and were easily overpowered;
and then Burnes, his brother, and a Captain Broadfoot, who
was staying in the house, were literally cut to pieces by the
daggers of the Afghans.
This was the beginning of the English troubles. Sir W.
Macnaghten had been warned that such an attack was
impending, but it did not suit him to think that there could
be danger from the Afghans, whom, by his wise policy, he
believed himself to have conciliated; and so we are quietly
told, that ' he disbelieved the information which had been
sent him,' and took no precautions either to save the life of
Alexander Burnes or to quiet the city. Shah Soujah took
a juster view of the importance of the situation. He knew
the frantic temper of the people if they were once allowed
to get the upper hand, and so from his citadel of the Balla
Hissar he sent out troops to overawe the excited citizens;
but his soldiers were driven back, and soon the whole city
was in an uproar. In an incredibly short time the Afghan
clans of the mountains, especially the Ghilzies of the Khoord
Kabul Pass, heard of the effort to upset the government, and
gladly joined in the rebellion. Instead of an insignificant
riot. Sir W. Macnaghten found himself face to face with a
national rising, for which he was totally unprepared.
The Afghans were headed by Akbar Khan, the son of
Dost Mahommed, and a brother of the present Amir, Shere
Ali. They attacked the English in their ' cantonments,'
which were open barracks, incapable of serious defence.
Worse than all, these buildings were not only unfortified,
but also at some distance from the small detached forts in
which the food and ammunition of the troops were stored.
We must not linger over the story of the English defence,
'iior is there space to relate here the numerous blunders and
mistakes which were undoubtedly made by their leaders.
They  refused  to accept Shah Soujall's earnest offer of a
No. 51.—March 1879. H
114 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
refuge within the Balla Hissar, on account of the danger to
the troops in marching through the town to the fortress, and
thus they threw away their only chance of escape. On the
fourth day after Alexander Burnes' murder, the forts, which
contained all tlie stores for the troops, fell into the hands of
Akbar Khan, and then the English were virtually at his
mercy. They were without food, without ammunition, and
surrounded by enemies; yet with the courage of despair they
held out gallantly in their barracks for six long weeks,—held
put against cold, famine, and the repeated attacks of the
Afghans, until at length Sir W. Macnaghten was driven to
negotiate with Akbar Khan about the terms of a surrender,
at the very commencement of which negotiation he was
treacherously murdered by the Afghan leader, who had
invited him to a friendly conference.
Those who were left behind must soon, with deep reason,
have learned to envy their leader, who, at this early period
of their troubles, found his rest; for now the horrors of their
disastrous retreat began.
The English force surrendered under promise of a safe
conduct to Jellalabad, fifty miles away across the moun¬
tains ; but they had no sooner left the sheltering walls of
the cantonments than the Afghans fell upon them. A
terrible massacre ensued. The regular troops were encum¬
bered by a vast number of camp followers, of terrified
women and children, most of whom perished in their first
onslaught, or were carried away into hopeless captivity in
Turkestan. Still a large proportion of the troops broke
through their enemies, and reached the Khoord Kabul Pass,
an altitude of some 8000 feet above the level of the sea.
Here, in the snows of those terrible mountain solitudes, the
wild tribes, principally Ghilzies, fell upon the unhappy
soldiers, harassing them day and night, cutting off all
stragglers, pillaging and mutilating the dead in the very
sight of the wretched survivors. Words are powerless to
describe the horrors of the way: cold and hunger did their
work as effectually as the sword; one by one our soldiers
fell, until at length, out of the four thousand fighting men
and twelve thousand camp - followers who had started on
the retreat, one man alone reached Jellalabad, and that was
Dr. Brydon.
One party, however, of the fugitives had a happier fate.
About twenty British officers, a few privates, eight officers'
wives, and several children, were taken prisoners in the
Khoord Kabul Pass.    Instead of being massacred on the
Afghanistan. 115
spot, they were well treated by Akbar Khan, who kept them
as hostages for his father. Dost Mahommed, and for his own
wife and children, who had, at an earlier period of onr
occupation of Afghanistan, fallen into our hands, and been
detained as prisoners in India. These English prisoners,
amongst whom were Lady Macnaghten and Lady Sale,
remained in the hands of the Afghans for nine months, and
were at length rescued by Sir Kobert Sale. The record of
their adventures and their escape is to be read in many
published narratives, notably in Lady Sale's Journal, which
supplies many interesting details to those who are already
acquainted with the main facts of the story.
It may well be imagined with wliat a thrill of horror the
tidings of this Afghan calamity wei'e received throughout
England and India. Nine months afterwards an avenging
army, under General Pollock, was sent into Afghanistan.
Cabul was re-taken, and a great part of the town burnt; but
the country, having been once more conquered, was imme¬
diately abandoned by the English, who retired somewhat
precipitately into India, without seeking to retain any
permanent fruits of their victory. The last act of the
English before leaving the country was to reinstate Dost
Mahommed upon the very throne from which it had been
the object of the first expedition to drive him. No other
course, indeed, was open to us; for Shah Soujah had been
killed in the national rising, and the English Government
had never any reason to regret their choice. Dost Mahom¬
med remained our loyal friend until his death, and at the
great crisis of the Mutiny, his staunch fidelity was of
inestimable service to us.
It is his son, Shere Ali, with whom we are at present at
war. The reigning Amir was considered at one time to be
a man of remarkable ability; but whether this be the case
or no, there is no doubt that the ruler of Afghanistan has it
always in his power to be an uncomfortable enemy, whilst,
on the other hand, he is seldom sufficiently secure in his
authority over the clans to make his friendship of any real
value to us. This want upon our frontier of a nation, which,
however weak in actual numbers, should be strong in the
bond of a common nationality, cherishing the same national
hopes, and influenced by tlie same national fears, is at once a
source of weakness and a defence to the English Govern¬
ment in India. It is our weakness, because it will probably
always prevent us from forming a permanent alliance
with the divided Afghan clans; it is, at the same time, our
116 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
defence, because whatever applies to ourselves in this way
would doubtless apply with at least equal force to Eussia.
Whether the difficulty will be met by leaving Cabul to
itself, a prey to confusion and internecine strife, whilst we
take  possession  of the important passes, and establish a
strong government in that part of the country which we
consider necessary for the rectification of our frontier, is a
question which must be left for wise politicians, or for Time,
the great solver of difficulties, to decide.    There can be no
doubt, however, that to the mind of natives in India the
disasters of the English in Cabul involved a great loss of
national prestige, which was by no means recovered by the
subsequently successful operations of our army of avenge-
ment.    ' You English are a great people, but you could not
keep Cabul,' are words which are in the mouths of even the
women in Upper India, where they still cherish a national
awe for the northern home of their Moghul conquerors.
There is a hereditary conviction that those who would retain
secure possession of the Indian  Empire  must  be strong
enougli to make themselves   masters  of those apparently
impregnable   fastnesses  with  which   Nature   herself   has
fortified her northern frontier.    At any rate, if we are to
judge of events by the light of past history, it is foolish to
deny the possibilities of an invasion from Central Asia.    It
is wiser to look the facts steadily in the face, and—whilst
we leave the question of how such dangers are to be met in
the hands of the statesmen who alone can deal with it—to
do our part, by endeavouring to inform our own minds upon
the former events of Central Asian history, and by abstaining
from silly criticism upon a  policy  which  may  have  its
foundations on a wider knowledge of the historical past, and
a juster comprehension of tlie exigencies of the present, than
any private individual can hope to possess. A.
Countrg Su&jfcts anti pursuits.
III.—MANNEES AND CUSTOMS IN THE
HEN-YAED.
Many years ago, a little girl was discovered sitting motion¬
less on a bundle of oats in the middle of a hen-yard. ' What
are you doing there, child ?' said the astonished onlooker.
' Just watching the chickens,' was the rej)ly, while the little
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 117
speaker remained perfectly still, to be sat upon and scrambled
over by her feathered friends in their eagerness for the feast.
' 'Deed an' its true,' said the old henwife; ' wee Miss is that
fond 0' the hens she'll sit there by the hour thegither, as
quait as a mouse, an' the beasts dinna mind her nae mair
than yin 0' themsels.'
The attraction—powerful enough to subdue into voluntary
quiescence a child naturally lively and restless—has con¬
tinued through life, and must be our apology for venturing
a few words on ' manners and customs in the hen-yard.'
AVe cannot pretend to any extensive acquaintance with the
management of poultry on a large scale, or a scientific know¬
ledge of the show points of the various fancy breeds. We
can, however, say a little as to the pleasure and profit to be
derived from the personal care even of a few fowls in a villa
garden. We say personal care advisedly, and hope to show
some of our country-women, not over-burdened with definite
occupation, an easy and pleasant method of obeying the first
great principle of political economy, which declares that the
individual who increases the productive power even of a
square foot of land thereby benefits the state. For many
years after our childish devotion to the chickens, we had
no opportunity of indulging our tastes in keeping fowls, till,
after leaving school, we settled down in a country home in the
south of England. We were then at that stage of existence
when worship of the ideal and the beautiful prevails, the
practical and remunerative being entirely lost sight of.
Accordingly a lovely snow-white hen first revived old asso¬
ciations, and especially one of a pretty little white chicken,
the chosen companion of a family of young rabbits. Nothing
would induce Tuftie, as he was called, to roost among his
own relatives; but every evening at bed-time he might be
seen pacing to and fro before the rabbit hatch till the door
was opened, when up he flew and snuggled down among the
little bunnies, to their mutual comfort and content. To
return to the fowls we admired so much: they were rose-
combed white Dorkings, which breed is generally supposed
to be the original stock of the famous coloured Dorking.
They are smaller and less valuable as market fowls than
their coloured relatives, but beauty was what we wished for,
and in that the white Dorking carries off the palm.
More from luck than good guidance, as the saying is, we
became the happy possessors, at a moderate price, of a fine
cockerel and two pullets of the coveted breed. In due time
the pullets brought out one twelve and the other eleven
118 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
chicks. With one exception, they all grew up to maturity.
Tortune again favoured us, as our cook was both interested
and skilful, and did the young broods full justice. Such
lovely little balls of creamy floss silk they were when newly
hatched, the downy fluff losing itself day by day in feathers
of the purest white,—not a coloured filament among them
all! We continued very fairly successful on the whole. We
made a calculation that each fowl killed for the table cost
us 2s., and each egg Id. These were the average market
prices for that part of England, so we made no actual profit.
We are inclined to think now that these calculations were
not quite so accurate as they might have been. We have
no clear remembrance of the fowls being fed on any approved
system, but suppose they got their share of the pony's oats
and the pigs' pollard and potatoes, with green food when
they were so happy as to find the hen-yard door left open
—not an unfrequent occurrence. The cockerel grew into a
very fine bird, but of so violent a temper as to lead him to
commit murder, for which dastardly act he was at once dis¬
missed, profit, as we remarked before, being at that time
entirely subservient to sentiment. The story of the murder
was as follows:—A spangled Hamburg hen was sent to us
in a present, but when introduced to the family, Snowflake,
the master of the house, showed such decided and uncom¬
promising disapproval of ladies who wore parti-coloured
garments, that the unwelcome stranger was removed and
allowed to wander about at will. Alas! one sad day the
hen-yard door was forgotten, the autocrat got out, pursued
his unfortunate victim into the coruer of an outhouse, where
he deliberately pecked her brains out!
After a time, our home in the south being broken up, we
returned to Scotland, and years passed before we found our¬
selves in circumstances favourable to fowl-keeping. Even
after becoming tenants of a villa and garden, the ruinous
state of the hen-yard made us hesitate about incurring
trouble and expense in putting it to rights. One day, how¬
ever, we saw a book lying on a friend's table. The title and
outward appearance were taking—The Illnstrated Book of
Poultry, by Lewis Wright. We opened, looked, read, pon¬
dered. Its arguments were irresistible, as a matter of
economj^, apart from the tempting fascination of becoming
the possessors of any creatures so beautiful as were depicted
in its splendid coloured engravings. And when our friend
at once offered to start us with half-a-dozen of her fine
young  chickens, who could have refused ?   We did  not.
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 119
But, having now arrived at the practical and prosaic epoch
of human life, profit not pleasure was to be the aim. The
experiment was to be tried for a year, Can hens be profitably
kept in a villa garden ? If not, they shall all die a violent
death at the end of their probation. Nine months of the year
have passed, and we have been so far successful as to be en¬
couraged to go on and, we hope, prosper. Circumstances have
been greatly against our poor hens,—their accommodations
makeshift and miserable. They have been ' flitted' in a
clothes-basket, a process harrowing to their feelings and
ours; they have had to live through the winter in a damp
house facing the north-east and fully exposed to the influence
of its breezes—breezes so biting as to make Edinburgh a
proverb and by-word from their continuance and intensity.
Nothing could be easier than to show why fowls do not
succeed in our suburban villas. The situation of the hen¬
house is generally in the coldest and dampest corner, the
yard about half the size it ought to be for the numVjer of
fowls kept. Another reason is that very few ladies, spite of
the outcry for something to do, are willing to give continuous
personal attention to their fowls. They imagine such work
is necessarily hard, dirty, menial, fitter for the cook or a
man. Were ladies to undertake ' poultry-farming' (of which
more anon), of course the heavy work would be done by
servants, under the personal superintendence of the lady.
But to ensure success, these servants would require to be
regularly trained to their special trade, not, as are the
generality of our cooks, town-bred women who have never
seen a hen in their lives, except limp and featherless ready
for cooking. It is no wonder, then, that even if willing to
undertake the extra trouble of managing the fowls, their
ignorance should prove anything but bliss to the poor
chuckies.
During the whole of last winter we fed and attended
entirely to our ' bunch' of eight fowls. Many ladies would
be surprised to find how fine the winter mornings are about
eight o'clock, and how ten minutes' exercise in the open air
sharpens the appetite for breakfast.
One day in September a hamper arrived, containing six
young fowls. We had requested the poultry-woman to tie
their legs before starting, but she had omitted to do so ;
consequently, when the lid was opened, out flew two or
three with loud outcries. A too-zealous helper ran to ' shoo'
them into the hen-house, the result being to ' shoo' them
over the wall into our neighbour's premises.    One was re-
I20 TJic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
covered next day. The other, in spite of many inquiries,
was never seen or heard of more—and ours was such a
' desirable locality !' Our stock consisted of a Houdan
cockerel and pullet, pure bred; a Brahma; and three cross¬
bred pullets, one of which we lost. We bought three
Houdan pullets a few days after, which made our number
eight. The Houdans are large, fine birds, fair layers, and
lose no time from a desire to sit. They are hardly to be
recommended as the most profitable of breeds, as they are
large eaters, and, as layers, were far outdone by one of the
cross-bred hens, Scotch gray and Brahma. A vulgar, randy,
red-faced wife is Jean; always pacing to and fro, girning
to herself, or standing aloof regarding her owners with a
suspicious eye, apparently suspecting them of sinister
designs upon her person. But she has done her duty.
Between November 15 and May 6 she has laid 115 eggs,
large and rich in flavour. She has paid her food three times
over. The Brahma pullet amused us all by depositing her
first egg on a mat just inside the outer front door. After
that for some weeks, be it rain, hail, or snow, she might be
seen, with the solemn stalk peculiar to her race, climbing
up the door steps on her daily errand. Her familiarity and
persistency were diverting, and child visitors loved to pick
up the warm, pink-brown egg from its soft bed; but the
liberty proved very inconvenient in the end. The time
came when Mrs. Helen sat still in her corner, and refused to
move. There were no eggs under her of course, nor did she
seem to wish for any; and after several attempts to induce
her to take to a setting we gave up the task, and shut the
front door in her face. She began to lay again soon, this
time in a small shed, and, after some fifteen eggs, brooded
again. We procured a setting of common hen's eggs, but
fresh and good. From want of proper accommodation, these
eggs underwent a series of mishaps. About four or five
days after the commencement of incubation, several of them
were broken in a tussle with a Tom-cat. The broken eggs
were removed, the others scrubbed in warm water and re¬
arranged for the hen, who this time proved the steadiest and
most patient of sitters in adverse circumstances. Again and
again did this wretched Tom force his way into the shed—
an old haunt—through an aperture apparently only large
enough to admit his paw, and, when we went in to feed
Helen, would start out of his lair, growling and spitting
furiously, while the poor hen, nearly frantic, flew out cackling
loudly, and we made futile dabs at the cat with a wooden
Comitry Subjects and Purstdts.
121
spoonful of mashed potatoes, our only weapon at command.
We felt very desponding of any success, when our hopes
were raised on the twentieth day by hearing ' peep, peep' in¬
side the shells. We felt happy, and went off on a necessary
errand into town, to find, on our return, that through
some unexplained and unexplainable mystery Helen had
been shut out of the shed and into the hen-yard for some
five hours. Eeleased, the poor would-be mother crept back
to her cold, cold eggs. Although we supposed all hopes of
success were now over, we had no energy at the time to
prevent her. Next morning, on lifting her off the nest to
return her to the yard, lo, two little living creatures! The
rest of the eggs, on examination, proved useless except one,
which was left under the hen. Some thirty-six hours after
a third chicken was hatched. All three having so bravely
struggled into existence, seemed quite prepared to continue
in it. They are now about two months old, and have
thriven to a wish from the first. Poor little things, they
have to undergo no small amount of snubbing from their
aunts in the hen-yard, and their mother will have nothing
to do with them! They seem none the worse for it, and,
cunning creatures, have discovered where and when to help
themselves. The corn chest is opened for the evening meal,
and in they hop and make the most of their time.
In feeding the young chicks, we followed the old Dorset¬
shire cook's system, and found it answer as well as formerly.
For the first meal boil an eojr hard, and bruise it down
among some stale bread crumbs moistened with milk. A
little food often (every hour for the first week), clean, varied,
should be the rule for the diet of chickens. Boiled rice,
potato crumbled, toast, bread and biscuit crumbs, oatmeal
scalded and rolled into a stiff ball of dough; a little Indian
meal mixed in with it is good for a change. Give the hen
plenty of grain for herself, but do not grumble if she eats
somewhat greedily at first of the daintier food prepared for
the chicks. She is only doing what every careful mother
ought—testing the wholesomeness of the fare provided for
her little ones. Broken rice and bruised Indian corn are
the best dry grains to begin with, but it is wonderful how
soon the little things can manage corn and barley. If they
are not on grass, green food must be given every day, at first
snipped with a pair of scissors. Clean fresh water is another
most necessary item for successful rearing. A very con¬
venient drinking dish can be easily made by inverting an
ordinary flower-pot in its saucer and filling the latter with
122 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
water. In this the chickens cannot drown themselves.
They will probably do their best to sit in the water and run
over their food as often as possible; but that is inevitable,
as also that the hen will choose what seems to you the most
uncomfortable corner to squat in with her brood. We are
supposing them cooped in the open air, with a small wire-
covered run in front. The latter is absolutely necessary in
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, owing to the legions of cats
which infest every suburban villa. If the weather be cold
and wet, they will do very w^ell for a week or so in a dry
outhouse, but the sooner they can be in tlie sunshine and on
grass the better. Make up your mind, however, that they
will ruin the look of a grass plot in no time.
■ A few words now on the practical results of our
experiment for six months—an experiment made under
most disadvantageous circumstances, so that we hope to do
better next season. Eight hens have laid 241 eggs, and the
cost of their food in the same time has been 218 pence.
Thus each egg has cost a fraction under a penny, while their
average market value in town, as guaranteed new-laid eggs,
is at least l^d. per egg. In reckoning cost of food, we have
not included the scraps from the plates, etc., all of which
are collected and boiled down daily, as previously to keeping
hens these same scraps went to fatten somebody's pig, or
were thrown out in the ash-bucket, an unnecessary act of
generosity to the town. These boiled scraps, mixed stiff
with bran, and a little Indian meal in cold weather, forms
their breakfast, and is always given hot about 8 a.m. Green
food is given during the day, and at 4.30 as much hard
grain as they seem eager for. The kind of grain is varied.
Indian corn in winter, because rich in heat-giving constituents;
oats and barley mixed in summer; dari and buckwheat
when it is to be obtained at a moderate price; and plenty of
clean drinking water, with occasionally a little iron mixture
in it as a tonic.
So much for the practical experience of the pleasure and
profit of poultry-keeping on a small scale. We can only
theorize on 'poultry-farming,' but are strongly of opinion
that it would prove a perfectly feasible mode in which
Avomen might earn a comfortable livelihood. Is it not piti¬
ful to read in the daily papers the scores of petitions from
poor ladies for homes—' companion, willing to make herself
generally iiseful; no salary expected,' and so on in the same
strain ? Whereas, in a poultry farm, you have the comfort
of an independent home.    No great amount of capital is
In the Chiircliyard—Cannes. 123
required to start a farm large enough to earn a fair, moderate
income for two or three ladies. For a man it is different; he
has generally others depending on him, and would not be
contented with what would be ample return, and more than
enough to support a woman. Of course the thing must be
gone about in thoroughly business style. Playing at keeping
poultry will not pay, any more than playing at any other
trade. To the woman who only plays at working, we would
say, ' Don't try poultry-farming or anything else.' But to
the other woman, who needs to Avork, wishes to work, and
is not only capable of working, but of going on doing it, by
all means start a poultry farm, and let the world know it
has succeeded, by publishing an account of it in the Ladies
Edinhurgh Magazine for 1880.
M. S. T.
In ti)e (CfjurcfjsarU—Cannes.
Blue, blue is the sea.
But bluer still were his eyes—
Grey, grey it must be
Wherever the Shadow lies.
Eed, red is the rose.
But ruddier far was his cheek—
Pale, pale are the snows
That drop on the mountain peak.
Straight, straight as a palm,
So straightly his course he ran—
Strange, strange is the Calm
That falleth on fallen man.
Cold, cold are earth's showers.
And colder is Death's dark wave;—
Yet fair, fair are the flowers,
That grow all over his grave !
H. A. Duff.
Cannes, February 15, 1878.
124 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Ef)c 23fggar of Capo rii iHonte: a Cale of Sixti)=onf.
By the Author of ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE  V.
Some twelve days passed without any fresh alarm from the
still smoking mountain, and the inhabitants of the little
town were beginning to take possession of such of the houses
as had escaped injury. The weather was still oppressively
hot, and Concetta, whose nerves had received so many shocks,
appeared to be sinking under an attack of low fever. The
Count had resumed his evening drives, which alone seemed
to give her life or energy. On their return one evening they
were startled at the sight of Matteo the beggar, who, imme¬
diately as the carriage appeared in sight, rolled down from
his accustomed place on the roadside, and accosted them in
his usual whining tone. Happily Count Torcelli no longer
appeared irritated by the wretched man's appeal, but, tossing
him a few small coins, bade him carry himself and his rags
to some other locality, or he should be obliged to imprison
him. Concetta could scarcely believe it was the man she
had seen on board the felucca, yet she knew she had not
been mistaken; for at the Count's mention of a prison there
was the same flashing eye and steady gaze when he thought
himself unobserved. The shattered arm, which he ostenta¬
tiously held up, was dexterously thrust forward to attract
their notice, and again he appealed to their sympathies for
the poor coral fisher.
The Signora Carlotta, now remembering Concetta's idea of
his having been one of the crew of the felucca, said, as he
continued to run by the side of the carriage, which was
slowly descending the steep hill, ' Surely Matteo has a
brother who could help him, if it were not himself on board
the felucca of Signer Ciprani a few days since.'
Matteo, who was too good an actor to betray himself if it
were he, assumed a look of artless inquiry as to her meaning,
then replied, ' Alas! good lady, Matteo has no brother, no
friend, and were it not for the bounty of such noble dames
as thyself and the Signorina, the poor beggar of Capo di
Monte might die in a ditch.' Then lifting his cap by way of
salutation, he hobbled back to his station on the bank.
Every evening they found him in the same place, apparently
waiting for them; and even when the horses' heads were
turned in another direction, Concetta perceived him lifting
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.  125
his cap or waving his hand in salutation.    The regularity of
his appearance soon ceased to call forth any remark, and
Concetta began to think she must have been mistaken in
thinking he had been one of the crew who accompanied them
to Ischia.   Her feeble health still continued to give her father
and friend much imeasiness, and the doctor who attended
her began to urge her removal to a fresher air, for the heated
city seemed to take away all her strength.    Perhaps new
scenes might also be beneficial to her spirits, which were
more drooping than ever, while she seemed utterly indifferent
to all around her.    As tlie doctor advised her being taken to
the mountains, La Cava was fixed on for their first few
weeks.    The very mention of such a change seemed to give
her new life ; her eyes sparkled and her cheeks glowed with
pleasure at the thought of the free, unrestrained existence
before her.    She accepted the proposal with delight, and
warmly thanked  her  father  for  acceding  to   her wishes.
Carlotta also, now that the fashionable world had deserted
Naples for their country residences, was equally pleased with
the proposed scheme, and assured the Count, who was pre¬
vented by his official duties from accompanying them, of her
watchful care over his daughter.    As little preparation was
necessary, in three days from the first proposal of the scheme
Concetta and her friend, attended by one female servant and
the coachman already mentioned, embarked in a small vessel
for Castellamare.    They spent one day with their friends
Signor and Madame Ciprani, who resided there until Torre
del Greco was considered free from further risk or alarm.
Coucetta looked with anxious scrutiny at the faces of the
boatmen who rowed them to Castellamare, fearing she might
again encounter the stern glance of Filippo, or the averted
face of Matteo; but the crew were all strangers to her, and
evidently only desirous of winning the handsome reward
promised them by her father on their safe arrival at Castella¬
mare, to which place the Count escorted his daughter and her
friend.
After a day of kind greeting from Ciprani and his
hospitable wife, and with a promise of their soon joining
them at La Cava,—a promise that reassured Concetta and her
father,—the Count returned to Naples. Concetta could not
see him depart unmoved, though she could assign no reason
for her secret misgivings, neither did she speak of them,
fearing to give her father pain or anxiety on her account. A
house had been engaged for them in the outskirts of the little
town.    The pure air and beauty of the situation soon pro-
126 The Ladies Edinbtirgh Magazine.
duced beneficial effects on the health as well as on the spirits
of the invalid. The Count had spared no expense in pro¬
viding for their comfort and pleasure, and ponies had been
procured for their daily rides in the mountains, with a young
peasant for their guide, and Pietro their coachman as an
escort. Carlotta was delighted with the novelty of the scene,
for her life had chiefly been spent in the plains of Lombardy,
and the excitement and wild freedom of these mountain excur¬
sions was a pleasure entirely new to her. She was never tired
of asking questions of the young guide, who walked by the side
of their horses, making him recount the wild legends of the
romantic region which lay at some distance from the boundary
of their daily rides, and which they were expressly bidden
by the Count never to enter, as the inhabitants had the
reputation of being wild and lawless.
Ercole, the guide, was a handsome youth of about twenty
years of age, and, encouraged by the rather familiar manner
of Carlotta in speaking to him, he laughed at their fears con¬
cerning the brigands, now so frequently the subject of their
conversation. ' La Cava,' he said, ' had too many people in
and around it for such men to venture near.'
' Nay,' said Carlotta, who was always the spokeswoman,
' the journals are filled with accounts of banditti in the
Abruzzi, and why should they not by degrees grow bolder
and invade this part ?'
As she spoke, Concetta's attention was attracted by an
expression which suddenly lit up the eyes of their young
guide. She could not quite understand whether it were a
glance of proud defiance, or whether it signified that they
would find a ready accomplice in him. There was a flush
on his cheek, and his figure seemed to acquire more strength
as the idea passed through his mind; this, coupled with a
look of bold admiration, made her call Pietro to her side,
while her heart beat with mingled fear and indignation as
she thought of the possibility of insult from the audacious
youth. Pietro, who followed on a miserable hack, was, as
she knew too well, a cowardly fellow—one able to render
little assistance in case of an attack. Concetta bade him
Jvcep up closely with the party, and gave Carlotta a hint to
be more guarded in her conversation before the young man.
The youth had quickly resumed his former manner, and
never suffered his eyes to express any interest at their
conversation.
As Concetta regained her strength she became less nervous,
and her confidence in Ercole was restored.    She had in the
TJu Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.  127
last few rides taken her drawing materials with her, and
while the horse rested had made some beautiful sketches,
while Carlotta, who was no artist, read aloud to her. Ercole
apparently had the feeling of a painter in his tastes, and
would often lead them to the most picturesque points of
view, and evidently had great delight in watching Concetta
as she drew, and was not a little proud when one day
Carlotta proposed that her friend should introduce him into
the sketch. His figure and attitude were highly picturesque,
and a few strokes of Concetta's pencil admirably delineated
his whole appearance, and by adding a little colour made the
resemblance complete. The young man's vanity was highly
gratified, and taking off his cap with a grace the Count
himself could not have exceeded, thanked the Signorina for
the honour she had done him.
The day following this little incident, Concetta received
the welcome intelligence that Madame Ciprani and her
husband proposed joining them in a few days. The Signora
Carlotta was enchanted, and spoke of the pleasure she
anticipated in having such companions in their excursions,
and inquired of Ercole if they could not vary their rides.
He told =them of a fine cascade in one of the gorges of the
mountains, scarcely a league from the point they had reached,
and which they ought to visit. Carlotta, with her usual
impetuosity, proposed their riding there at once, for the
evening was beautiful; and they might still return before
nightfall. Concetta objected to this sudden scheme, and
Ercole seemed to think it best to defer it till the following
day. He descanted so much on the beauty of the spot, and
of its being a favourite study for artists, to whom he had
frequently acted as guide, that Concetta became almost as
eager as her friend to see it. Carlotta begged they might not
wait for the arrival of the Cipranis, as the weather might
change and so disappoint them of their excursion altogether.
It was decided, therefore, that should the morrow prove fine
they were to go to the cascade, and Ercole was told to see
that the horses were in good condition. The morning proved
unusually bright and clear, and with Pietro mounted on a
sumpter mule laden with refreshments they left their home
at an earlier hour than usual. As it was a ride of some
hours, Ercole advised they should rest for an hour or more
under the shade of a spreading chestnut, and take their mid¬
day repast. The young man on these occasions usually
remained at some distance, but on consideration of the
length of the ride, Concetta bade him come near and share
128 Tlie Ladies' Edmburgh Magazine.
Pietro's dinner, a command which required no second bidding.
After drinking the ladies' health, Ercole' busied himself in
helping Pietro to pack up the remains of the lunch, and
replace the saddles on the horses.    In a short time they left
the route they had followed from La Cava, and soon found
themselves in an entirely different scene.    Instead of the
open views over mountain and valley, they entered a kind
of defile with high rocks on either side, and a turbulent
stream  foaming  beneath  them.     The  road   continued to
increase in wildness  and beauty at every hundred yards.
Sometimes  hanging  over the torrent, and then, suddenly
obstructed by some huge rock, the path turned abruptly into
a thick wood that skirted the edge of the ravine.    Carlotta
remarked, as their ponies cautiously picked their way through
the rocky uneven path, she was glad they had not lingered
longer under the chestnut tree, for she would not like to be
benighted in such a lonely spot; Concetta seemed absorbed
in admiration of the scene, and urged her steed forward at a
more rapid pace, so that her friend, who was not so good a
horsewoman, was left at some distance behind.    Ercole kept
up bravely at her side, though apparently panting with the
exertion, and continued to draw her attention to new objects,
thus preventing her from observing how much she was in
advance of her companion.   In truth, Concetta scarcely heard
what he said, for the wild scenery reminded her of that near
the Danube, and thoughts of a tender kind, associated with
her cousin Eudolph, so filled her mind as almost to exclude
all present objects.    Ercole had quickly perceived her abstrac¬
tion, but with the cunning of riper years continued speaking,
lest a sudden pause might recall her thoughts.
They had proceeded in this rapid manner for some time,
when a piercing shriek from Carlotta rang through the air.
Concetta stopped as if struck by a thunderbolt, and turning
to Ercole, bade him hurry back with all speed to discover
the cause of that fearful sound, while she retraced her steps
with as much haste as she could in such terror. Ercole
instantly bounded from her sight, but soon returned with
uplifted hands and seeming horror depicted on his counte¬
nance. The Signora Carlotta's saddle had turned, and, in
endeavouring to save herself from falling, her horse had
slipped its footing and rolled with her over the rocks.
' But Pietro,' cried Concetta, now awake to the full
danger of her friend's position,' could he do naught to save
her ?' and then, without waiting for a reply, she threw her¬
self from her horse, heedless of Ercole's entreaties to remain
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.  129
wl;ere she was, ran rapidly back through the tangled copse,
calling loudly to Carlotta, in terms of tenderest affection,
that she was hastening to her assistance. Her horse, finding
itself at liberty, rushed wildly by, upsetting her as it
passed, but was ([uickly caught by two men who sprang from
behind some thick bushes, and now stood before her on the
path. The blood seemed leaving Concetta's heart as she
thought she recognised in the foremost of the two the figure
of Filippo. There was no time for speculation, for they
stepped hastily forward, and, seizing her arm firmly, though
not roughly, bade her remount her steed, and then prepared
to lead it. In vain she entreated to be allowed to return
and ascertain the fate of her friend; her words were un-
lieeded. The men, followed by Ercole, spoke not, but
])ressed rapidly on in the direction of the mountains.
Before leaving the narrow gorge through which they had
passed, and entering upon a wild, uncultivated region, the
sound of the waterfall, which had been the object of their
excursion, broke loudly upon her ear, and its mournful
cadence seemed a presentiment of the danger now threatening
her, for she could no longer doubt their intention of carrying
her off. All the horror of her situation burst upon her, and
turning once more to the elder of the men, who she felt
convinced was Filippo, she entreated him with cries and
supplications to have pity, and offering a rich reward if they
would conduct her back to La Cava and her father.
' Peace, girl!' said the supposed Filippo, in a harsh, angry
tone; ' name not that dastardly coward if thou wouldst
hope for mercy. "When the vulture leaves untouched his
quarry on the plain, then may Torcelli's daughter hope for
favour.' He uttered tliese words with a grinding sound of
his teeth, as if he would gnaw the very heart of the detested
Count. Deep imprecations followed this outburst, leaving
poor Concetta more horror-struck than before. The man
now muttered something in an undertone to Ercole, who
immediately prepared to leave them; there was her last
hope of deliverance taken from her, for she had not yet
realized the fact that it was Ercole who had led her into
this snare. Concetta's eyes followed him with an ap¬
pealing glance as he turned to ask some question, and a
cry of despair burst from her lips when the youth was no
longer in sight. She had taken but little notice of the
second man, who dodged behind the horse as if fearing some
attempt at rescue, and gave herself up to harrowing thoughts,
called forth by the extraordinary language of the elder man.
No. 51.—March 1879. r
130 The Ladies Edinbtirg]i Magazine.
It now became suddenly dark, for the moon had not risen,
and there was no twilight. Terror rendered the poor girl
nervously sensitive to^ every sound, and the beating of her
heart was almost audible. They proceeded thus for some
time, going rapidly forward, but meeting no living creature,
save when some startled leveret darted across the path.
There were no signs of life in that deep solitude, and Concetta
seemed to have lived an age of suffering in the last hour, so
overwhelming were her fears. Trying, but in vain, to collect
her bewildered thoughts, she was not for some time aware
they had struck into a new path, and were approaching some
village. The sound of strange voices told her they had left
the mountains, and sounds of busy life were around them.
Tliis gave her courage to make one more effort and call for
assistance; but before she had time to utter a cry, she was
lifted suddenly from her horse, and a handkerchief was
tightly bound over her eyes and mouth, while another
imprisoned her hands, so that she was perfectly helpless, and
in this condition was laid in the bottom of one of the rough
carts of the country, and covered with some loose straw.
There was a halt for a short time, and she believed the horse
which she had ridden through the forest was now being
taken away, and another put in the cart; for she heard the
man whom she supposed to be Filippo address some words
in an undertone to the man who had accompanied them,
and then there was a sound of money jingling, and angry
words passed between the two. She could not, however,
distinguish the words; but she felt assured that some one
had taken the place of the man who appeared discontented
with his gains. She could just perceive that the moon had
risen,, and this she supposed liad been the reason of her eyes
being bandaged, that she might not be able to recognise the
route they were traversing.
Some four or five hours passed ere they made another halt,
and her wearied frame was bruised by the rough jolting of
the cart. Soon after they had left the village, one of the men
partially uncovered her mouth, and in imploring accents she
entreated him to give her some water, for she was faint from
thirst and exhaustion. The leader of the party called to the
man who was guiding the horse to take out a small keg of
wine and some coarse bread from a basket slung beneath the
cart; then, taking a drinking horn from his pocket, poured
some wine into it, and raising the poor fainting girl in his
arms, bade her drink some of it, for she would find it better
than   water.     Concetta,  whose  fears  had   conjured  up  a
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 131
thousand evils, imagined that perhaps the wine was drugged.
Turning her head away with evident distrust, she murmured
gently, fearing to offend the man by her refusal:
' I asked but for water to cool my parched lips—I cannot
drink the wine.'
'Canst thou not, pretty one?' said the man, 'tlien I will
drink it for thee;' and raising the horn to his lips, took a long,
deep draught, laughing coarsely when he had drained its
contents. His companion soon followed his example; but
seeing the poor girl sink back in utter exhaustion, he said, in
a compassionate tone, ' Nay, Padrone, it is but water she asks
for, and that we would not refuse to a dog. I have some at
hand for the beast; let her, in God's name, share it.'
'Ay, ay, Stefano,' said the elder and the first speaker, 'thou
wast ever soft-hearted towards the lasses, but this she must
have,'—mixing wine with the water,—' for it will be long ere
she gets a taste of anything more dainty, and the journey
is a long one.'
Stefano did not wait for a second bidding, and raising her
as gently as his rough manners understood, bade her take
heart and drink till her thirst was allayed, taking care, how¬
ever, to give her a good measure of wine in the water he now
held to her lips. Concetta, who had not been unobservant
of the hearty draughts taken by the men, concluding from
that circumstance that the liquid could not have been
tampered with, no longer hesitated, but drank eagerly from
the horn. She thanked him heartily, and it would seem
there was something in her plaintive voice tliat moved him
strangely, for he once more raised the horn to her lips, and
in doing so contrived to loosen in some degree the cover
from her eyes, unobserved by his surly companion. Could
he have seen the look of gratitude that filled her eyes as she
felt the pressure over her brow relax, he had been well
content. Fearing she might speak her thanks and so betray
him, he said in his usual blmit manner :
' Thou hast found it better than water, I am thinking, and
canst now eat some bread,—that's my fashion.'
Seeing her about to put it from her, he whispered hastily,
' Nay, keep it by thee, thou wilt require it ere it is offered thee
again.' Turning towards the leader, who had been apparently
reconnoitring the landmarks, he said briskly, ' Now forward.
Padrone, for the lass and the beast have had their sup, and
morning will soon break.' Once more the cart was in motion,
and Concetta, whose eyes were now partially uncovered,
perceived they were about to descend from the rocky heights
132 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magatiine.
they had traversed so long, and she could partly distinguish
through the occasional parting of the misty clouds that covered
tlie horizon that they were approaching the sea-coast. There
was a fresliness in the air that relieved the oppression of the
sultry night, and her weary frame seemed to recover under
its influence. Her spirit also lost something of gloom, and
she felt that anything was preferable to the horror of being
exposed to lawless outrage in that uninhabited region. The
trifling kindness shown her by Stefano had somewhat
reassured her, and hope once more sprung up in her heart.
She tried not to give way to despair, and endeavoured in this
one act of kindness from her captors to read a hope of future
deliverance.
{To he continued.)
E\^z 33anfe ©trectors' ^Trial.
AVe are often tempted to wonder what will be the effect
upon future history of the mass of ephemeral literature—
newspapers, chronicles, serials—of the present day. Will the
histories written, let us say a century or two hence, be the
better or the worse for the wonderful facility of access which
the M'riters will liave to the very spirit and temper, the
shades of opinion of all classes of society, upon passing
events, domestic and foreign ? We ourselves are inclined to
think that the philosophic calm of well-written history will
be the more difficult to preserve, from the aneroid-like
minuteness with which trifling variations of the mental and
moral atmosphere of the age are now registered. Distance
of time, it is true, like that of place, will have its own
softening power on the landscape, its own delicate medium,
as of atmospheric blue, subduing harsh features and crude
tones into general proportion and harmony in keeping with
the whole.
The winter of 1878-9 will afford more than one page of
deepest and saddest interest to the historian of the future.
Confining ourselves only to one event,—the crash of last
October and its disastrous consequences,—we cannot as yet
speak of it as of a thing past and done with, since of the misery
and ruin it involved we have probably not yet experienced
half the bitter fruits. Opinions run high as to the amount
of actual criminality which has led to such results ; systems
of banking, Scotch and English, are compared and com¬
mented  upon, till  we  must confess  that,  to  the  utterly
The Bank Directors  Trial. 133
uninitiated in"these matters,—as most of our own sex must
be,—the effect of trying to understand any part of what ig
said or written, is to excite our wonder that bankers can ever
understand their own business, and that every bank does not
break every five or six years.
But though the cause may be intricate, the effect is plain.
We read of one commercial failure after another; one appeal
for help and charity follows another; by one token after
another is seen the utter inadequacy of ordinary sources of
benevolence to provide for multitudes of the unemployed or
discharged; and sadder still, come histories, more or less
private, of ruined fortunes, descent from affluence to poverty,
of numbers of the tenderly-nurtured in the so-called well-
educated classes, unused to self-reliance, to labour either of
head or hand, now reduced to absolute destitution, to misery,
to madness! These are the things that have wrung our
liearts tlirough this unusually severe winter, and yet we
know that what we see and hear is but a part,—a small part,
a few outward indications of a deeper and wider suffering,
extending further than we can trace, further than can ever
be chronicled in any page to be written or read on earth,
lleplete, surely, with lessons the most impressive to all but
utterly selfish and callous spirits, must be the history of the
City of Glasgow Bank failure, and the disclosures it has
made.
One part, at least, of this story is now in the past, and
receding daily into further distance,—the trial of the seven
directors. It is, indeed, but one short month since our
northern capital became for eleven days the centre of interest
to the country at large, by the passing of this cause cil^hre
through its criminal courts. No trial, in our own recollec¬
tion, has stirred into excitement so large a portion of the
community, male and female. Eemarkable trials for murder
we have often had in Edinburgh, but their terrible con¬
comitants limit, to a certain extent, the public manifestation
of feeling; women of the upper classes can seldom attend or
openly discuss them. They seldom place before us more
than one criminal at a time; and though no personal
sympathy may be stirred for him, yet the horror of his
possible sentence will check, to a large extent, the clamorous
expression of public indignation. Here there was no fear of
a capital sentence ; and though in the abstract popular wrath
liad been fierce and strong, yet when seven men, all well up
in years, all occupying a position of high trust, apparently
in possession of affluence, and enjoying social consideration
134 Tlie Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
in a more than ordinary degree, were placed before the bar
of their country, bearing evident traces of suffering from
their recent imprisonment, and seeming fully impressed with
the shame of their situation, to answer for actions which had
wrought such woe, was it wonderful that a sense of strong
pity should arise, and should increase as the trial went on ?
We believe that it evidences to a right and healthy tone of
feeling in the community, and gives a hope that the lesson
may be the more lasting. We hold it as a piiblic misfortune
when sentimental pity is wasted on rogues and scoundrels of
any class ; but not the less are we glad to see the pow-er of
discrimination between degrees of guilt, of marking the line
where carelessness becomes crime, and refusal to •call even
guilt by a harder name than is due.
As in most trials of the kind, large portions of the indict¬
ment and evidence were unintelligible to ordinary readers
and hearers. That a jury could be expected to follow or
understand the indictment was a wonder to many of us. As
time passed, however, the intricacies seemed to be unra¬
velling, and when, on the third day, the more serious charges
were withdrawn, most persons could fairly understand why
this w^s necessary. Perhaps the burst of impatience, of
discontent^ with which the intelligence was received, was
occasioned by a fear that this was but to prepare the public
for the final escape of the accused; and it was rumoured
that in such a case popular feeling might do what the law
could not do, that among the ' traditions of old Edinburgh'
M^ere those of a certain Porteous mob, and that materials
might not be wanting for another.
But it was soon evident that if the fri-ends of the accused
had formed any such hopes, they were premature. Able and
excellent as was the special pleading in behalf of each,—
and the number to be thus defended formed an interesting
and unusual feature in this trial,—in our own case at least,
speaking as mere outsiders, the effect of each advocate's
eloquence was, not so much to improve the position of his
own client as to damage that of all the other six. A certain
amount of wrong had been done, all allowed; and the very
utmost that could be said for any one of them was, ' Some¬
body else was worse than him,—wrong had been done, but
he was incapable of it;' till, as the Prosecutor for the Crown
remarked, 'If nobody had been capable of doing wrong,
wrong had not been done; but then there was the wrong, so
somebody had been capable of it.' And then came the final
Charge from the Bench,—a masterpiece of fairness, of truth.
TJie Bank Directors  Trial. I35
of power,—beautiful in its unerring clearness, its righteous
discrimination, its true mercifulness, its judicial calm. No
forced display of eloquence, not one word spoken for effect;
but to us it seemed as if to the jury and court that charge
must have been as a lightning-flash, and to the accused a
marvellous self-revelation. It is impossible to believe that
this gigantic falsehood has been to most of them other than
a terrible self-deception; and if so, the Charge must surely
have been as the falling of scales from darkened eyes, show¬
ing them their conduct as it must ever be viewed by honest
men. True it was that there was a line to be drawn between
the more and less criminal; true it was that the heavier
charges were rightly withdrawn; true it was that even the.
most deeply implicated had this excuse, that they had come
into an inheritance of difficulty and trouble and wrong¬
doing, and therefore were not the originators of the
calamity; that they too had suffered for the sins of others ;
and that, using desperate remedies for desperate evils, they
had strained every nerve to prevent the ruin which has now
overtaken them and their victims. True also that their
struggles to preserve their credit must have been at the cost
of years of anxiety and suffering, of which indeed their own
correspondence gave sad evidence, and that even now their
own ruined fortunes showed that selfish motives of personal
profit had not been their incentives to fraud. Here, at last,
were these unhappy men shown that ' honesty woidd have
been the best policy;' and that their fall, in place of bring¬
ing them to a criminal trial, might have left them with
clean hands and unblemished reputation to begin the world
again like their fellow-sufferers, but in all honour, and with
the sympathy of their country instead of its execration.
Striving to avoid a ruinous failure, they departed further
and further from truth and honour by a path which
many have trodden before them ; their measures became
more and more unscrupulous, till not only ruined fortune
but blasted reputation stared them in the face, and they
must latterly have known that no turn of the tide could ever
reinstate them. Their lives have been those of desperate
gamblers, who, having nothing to stake, continue to play
because they dare not face the crash they cannot avert.
There can have been little doubt after the charge, that the
general verdict would be against the accused, though there
may have been some uncertainty as to whether it would
involve them all. This was set at rest a couple of hours
later, and certainly to most persons the distinction of the
136 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
greater from the lesser criminals was a relief We ourselves
could not have honestly wished the acquittal of one out of
the seven. To say that a man in a position of trust knew
nothing whatever of the safety of what was entrusted to him,
seemed to us to be not only no excuse, but a principle
capable of dangerous application. All we think must have
compassionated the accused on the evening of January 31.
To pass fourteen or fifteen hours that night, condemned but
iinsentenced, was in itself a part of their punishment so
painful that pity might be allowed its free course.
As to the sentence,—its justice,its magnitude, its degree,—it
was hardly to be supposed that criticisms would not abound.
Yet it is noteworthy, that of those who considered it too
lenient, the proportion of men to women seems to us to be
as one to three. How is this ? What has made our country¬
women hard-hearted on this occasion ? We have heard wishes
in no measured terms that a sentence of threefold weight
had fallen on these men. Perhaps on this head, in a serial
written and mostly read by women, we may be permitted a
very few words. Far from wishing to sentimentalize or
moralize, we feel that a crisis like the present brings
momentous lessons to all in this country of either sex and
every station.
As a nation we are losing our prestige for honesty and
truthfulness. We say this deliberately, and are prepared for
its being disputed. The effects of this declension are most
plainly visible, of course, in the commercial world, merely
because money transactions test the honesty of men and
communities in the most direct way. But a national sin
cannot be confined to one class, and we may even find its
beginnings and exciting causes in tlie class furthest removed
from its daily commission. The various forms of actual
thieving depend more on the social state, domestic habits,
and even climate of a country, than on the moral standard
of its people. Men will rob on the highway and live by
brigandage before railways intersect a country; but when
rich travellers are only to be found in first-class carriages,
the highwayman prefers stealing cash-boxes at the terminus,
and picking pockets in the train. But the national honesty
is much as it was before. Changed forms of crime are no
test one way or another; but when we look at the general
commercial character, we seem to feel tlie very pulse of
moral health. When we know that in these days the fair
trader has little or no chance; that honesty and strict truth
are almost laughed at by tradesmen; that many trades are
The Bank Directors  Trial. 137
carried on, so to speak, on gambling principles; that an
Englishman's word was once, biit is no longer, a guarantee of
good faith and honourable dealing; that, in haste to be rich,
men will build colossal fortunes on foundations which will
not bear close scmtiny,—that all this, and more of the same
kind, is on the increase in our country,—then indeed the
disclosures of the recent trial stir us to sad thoughts that,
as a nation, we need the humbling and purifying of worse
domestic calamities than this bank failure, before the moral
constitution of our country can be amended. How many
men who have execrated the names of the arraigned directors
have sinned in like manner, we do not inquire; but there is
every reason to think that ' cooking' accounts and uttering a
balance-sheet more favourable than facts would warrant, to
save a falling credit, is not an offence wholly unfamiliar
among our business men. If this be so, whether a man sins
with hundreds at the foot of his balance-sheet, or with tens of
millions, the evil principle is one and the same; and the
penal servitude which he would have assigned to his fellow-
citizens would be his own due. There are many Joseph
Surfaces, whose sole sense of a sin lies in the being found
out. But the Ladies,—they do not utter many balance-sheets,
and as a rule would fain escape keeping accounts altogether,
—they are impressed with the undue leniency of this sentence.
There is a certain tendency in our sex, perhaps never better
]3ut in words than by the immortal Mrs. Jarley's van-driver
George: ' If the cattle have got their proper load, a woman
always thinks they can bear something more.' We own to
this tendency, which leads us to judge without 'reference to
both sides of a question, and also to wish that a criminal
may be charged with all the consequences of his crime. This
is truly feminine justice, which we think might be corrected
by observing its utter contradiction of the Divine principle.
' These wicked directors ! how little they have got, only eight
months or eighteen; and think of the misery they have caused 1'
Yes! think of it, but you have no right to suppose that they
do not think of it too, and that the thought is not the worst
part of what they are enduring. Perhaps they might reply,
that their very wish to stave off this misery till matters could
be brought round first led them to commit the crime. Have
we, as well as they, no sad experience of the
' tangled web we weave
When first we practise to deceive ' ?
If SO, we can look with a more righteous vision, cleared
by charity, which covers a multitude of sins, which, while
138 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
interfering with no just sentence, never adds bitterness to
punishment.
As we have said, a national sin involves all classes ; women
cannot escape the responsibility or the obligation of atoning
for it. Yet it is startling to hear how calmly they assent to
the fact of this depraved sense of honesty, as if they could
not possibly be concerned in this national disgrace. There
is no principle we should like to see more firmly rooted in
our sex than this—that the standard of honour in a country
depends mainly on the value its women set upon first
principles of honesty and truth. In vain silly clamour tries
to separate the interests of the sexes : what is really good for
the woman is good for tlie man, and vice versa, even though
their spheres of duty are distinct. One duty is emphatically
the woman's, the earliest training of the next generation; and
of all habits that must be early instilled if they are to be of
use, those that train to truth and fairness are important
above all others. Now if women are the early educators,
and yet a great nation is declining in honesty, is there no
ground for an uncomfortable suspicion that in one branch of
her duty wonmn is failing to do her own work ? Put it as
we will, there is an uneasy feeling that the mother and home
should be the teacher and school of honour and truth, and
that if these fail, nothing can supply the want. When a
noble ship has sprung a leak, it is wisdom to find out which
plank has started.
And how can we do this? Not by mere conventionalisms
over other people's faults, but by honestly setting ourselves
to find out how we can fight against the great evil; whether
there is no one under our own immediate influence to whom
a higher standard might be shown. As regards actual
money matters, women can seldom sin on a commercially-
speaking large scale, as the men, the ostensible bread¬
winners and money-makers, can do. They speak slightingly
of our business powers; and we do not think the ladies will
ever take to banking, or that anybody would be wise in
trusting them if they did. What they can do, is to form
and train the child into the truth-speaking, honest boy, to be
in his turn the man who, as banker or tradesman, could no
more remain passive while a single dishonest trick was the
support of his house or his firm, than he could practise the
knavery with his own hand. But can women do this whose
lives are full of sliavis, of fashionable subterfuges, of the
' social lies that warp us from the living truth' ? If we have
ever had unworthy concealments, continued  in courses of
The Bank Directors  Trial. 139
deception, or condoned them in the case of others, for no
matter what fancied good purpose,—if we have failed in any
trust through indolence or carelessness in looking into
matters put under our charge, been wasteful, extravagant,
inaccurate in the most trifling expenditure,—we cannot speak
of ourselves as wholly blameless of the nation's sin. As to
money, the love of it, we are told on high authority, is the
root of all evil; and yet it is a stern necessity in all our
lives; and on right ways of getting it and just views in
spending it hang two-thirds of our duties on earth. To
gain, to have, and to spend money rightly, needs in man or
woman the exercise of all the four cardinal virtues, to say
nothing of many lesser ones besides. Only the woman who
will realize this firmly and act upon it faithfully, can form
the next generation to be true and just in all its dealing.
We think that the husbands, sons, and brothers of such
women would seldom be found among the gamblers and
spendthrifts of high life, the dishonest dealers of middle
class, the pickpockets and jail-birds of lower grade. The
woman whose whole time, thoughts, and money are con¬
sumed on self-gratification, who lives in a whirl that leaves
her no time for serious thought, for knowledge of home
details, who <;ould give no satisfactory account of her
stewardships be they great or small, who makes it her boast
how she can equal in silly expense and show those of greater
income than her own,—she may not lie consciously or steal
knowingly, but she cannot be of the smallest service in the
great work of her country and her God, the setting of a high
standard before those whom her example, if it does not
benefit, must harm. If any have a sense of an imperfectly
fulfilled trust, can they cast one stone, the flint-pebble of
one sarcastic remark, at those grey heads so lately bowed
down to meet their country's verdict in unutterable woe and
shame ?
To them, we must hope and believe, this last month has
been one of strange, unwonted calm. Speaking only of earth
and its tribunals, the worst is over, no further need of deceit
and guilty concealment; the unnatural strain of years is at
an end. Some of them may scarcely have been conscious of
the weight till its removal. As an English writer has beauti¬
fully said, we shall never know what the strain of Life has
been till it is removed by Death.^
The widespread misery they have caused is not at an end,—
far from it.     Attempts have been made to measure this
; 1 E. M. Sowell.
140 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
calamity with others of the same nature. To do this, it
seems to us that we must go back a century and a half to
the failure of the South Sea Scheme. It is undoubtedly
satisfactory to find our country improved in some respects.
Against the South Sea directors no such charge was made
as in the present case. The national disaster was owing to
the rage for gambling sjjeculation which, passing over from
Prance, possessed all classes like a kind of madness. Even
when our countryman, Law, escaped from the fury of the
Paris mob, the mania went on in England unabated,
cherished by Parliament, encouraged even on the steps of
the Throne.    Thus we read :—
" 'Change Alley became a new edition of the Rue Qnincampoix.
The crowds were so great within doors, that tables with clerks were
set in the streets. In this motley throng were blended all ranks, all
professions, all parties—Churchmen and Dissenters, Whigs and Tories,
country gentlemen and brokers. An eager strife of tongues prevailed
in this second Babel; new reports, new subscriptions, new transfers,
flew from mouth to mouth ; and the voice of ladies (for even many
ladies liad turned gamblers) rose loud and incessant above the general
din.'
There follows a list of the bubble companies on which
millions were wasted, and which to us seem almost in¬
credible ; such as, ' Wrecks to be fished up on the Irish
Coast,' ' Insurance of Losses by Servants' (this must have
needed a large capital!),' Trade in Human Hair,'' Importing
Jackasses from Spain' (superfluous then as now!), and
others more or less absurd, till the strangest of all: ' For an
tmdertaking which shall in due time be revealed.' We are
tempted to fancy ourselves back in the days of fairy tales,
when we read of the magnates of our land throwing away
thousands on absurdities like these! Yet when, at the final
crash in 1721, the five unhappy directors of the great central
Scheme petitioned to be heard by counsel in their own
defence, not only was this denied them, but every attempt
of the Government at the faintest show of justice was fiercely
denounced in the pamphlets of the day; Parliament was
besieged with petitions for the destruction of these ' cannibals
of 'Change Alley;' and when they were stripped of office,
disabled from public employment for life, and aU their
property confiscated, still popiilar indignation clamoured—
because, 'after all, nobody's blood would be shed.' One
pamphleteer writes:—
' Whatever they may have done and deserve, I would have no new
tortures invented, nor any new deaths devised; in this, I think, I
show moderation.    Let them only be hanged, and hangei speedily.'
Otir L ibrary Table. 141
Place this — the 'mercy tempering justice' of 1721
towards men whose fault was insane speculation—alongside
of the fair, open trial, the able counsel, the merciful re¬
missions, the careful protection from personal molestation,
the discriminating verdict, and the lenient sentence of the
guilty bank directors of 1878, and we humbly repeat, that
in some important respects our nation is improved.
These are a few of the thoughts that fill our minds as we
pass in review this event and its results. While we heartily
sympathize with the efforts of benevolence to assist so large
and defenceless a class of sufferers, we feel that a crisis like
the present has its bright side. It brings out qualities that
otherwise might never have seen the light. Courage,
readiness, unselfishness, come to the front at a time like this,
making beautiful and noble many a man and woman's life
which otherwise might have been one of indolent deteriora¬
tion. The life of a nation, like that of a man, consists not
in the abundance of things possessed, not in the unbroken
sunshine of prosperity, but in the spirit in which its children
can meet adversity. The full measure of the present distress
can never be known, so neither can tlie amount of good
wrought, of generous self-denial and large-hearted pity, ever
be revealed to us here. Let us take it on trust, knowing
that the things done in secret are written in a chronicle tc)
be laid open at the Great Assize; and that then we may
possibly come to know that this eleven days' trial was some¬
thing better than a nine days' wonder, reminding many of
us who needed the lesson, that we too are stewards with a
day of reckoning in the future, and that if by a human how
much more by a Divine code, ' it is required of stewards that
a man be found faithful.' L. D.
©ur ILtfjrarg ^M.t,
The Last of Her Line. Three Vols. By the Author of ' St. Olave's.'
Hurst & Blackett.
A pleasantly-written novel in the ordinary style of this writer.
She does not deal in tragic situations, heroic deeds, or desperate
villains ; her men and women are good sort of people, living hiim-
dnim lives as most of us do, and struggling after very commonplace
ambitions and ideals. But the characters are very life-like, the
dialogue easy and well-sustained, and exhibiting throughout con¬
siderable humour. Tiiere is little enough of plot ; the matrimonial
schemes of Mrs. Maleveron and the strenuous efforts of the Miss
Atcherleys, first to attain social standing and then good marriages,
are the chief incidents, and the loves of the principal pair do not
begin till the second volume is well advanced.    But the story is free
142 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
from the tediousness of some of the author's earlier books, and we
may beguile an hour or two very comfortably with it. The female
characters preponderate, and are better described than the men ; the
double-dealing, selfish Mrs. Maleveron, with her caressing speeches and
her mean aims, is really capitally drawn, and though we cannot say
that we appreciate as much as we are expected to do the charms of
the rather bread-and-butter heroine, consisting as they do in a sash
always untied, a cape always awry, an untidy chevelure, and generally
disordered appearance, we have no doubt that she was really a very
nice little girl, and that after her marriage she ceased to deserve or
to bear the name of 'Mopsie.'
(J^uestton Scries.
III. Sketch the chief character in Shakespeare's Coriolanus; con¬
trast shortly Volumnia and Virgilia; and show what were the
relations between patrician and plebeian which this drama alludes to
as existing at Rome.
Answers, not over fifty lines (twelve words to a line), to reach Qu.
C, care of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh,
not later than March 5th. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO JANUARY SERIES.
Best, Pellegrina ; second. Thorough ; third, Janbda. Next in
merit, Seglta (too long, or she would have been in Janeda's place);
Apis, A Chylde, very good ; then. Heather, Bretwalda, Eromart,
Nagol, May-Fly, Adelphe, good; Enia, Spider, very fair. Some
answers are too encyclopaedic, like articles in a dictionary.
Give a short account of the Venetian School of Painting: name
and characterize any three of its great painters, and describe any
picture as a type of the school.
We can best understand the characteristics of the Venetian School
of Painting, which flourished during the sixteenth century, by com¬
paring it with the pre-Rafaelite and the later Florentine schools.
The first aimed at Spiritualized Humanity, and its rigid lines, simple,
pure colour, and intensity of expression, show it to be the heir of
Byzantine art. The second gave us Ideal Humanity, and the influence
of ancient art is seen in the toga'd figures, the statuesque-like group¬
ing, and the exquisite drawing. But Venice was all Italian, its art
young ; the colouring both in city and mainland was especially rich
and glowing, the costume of the inhabitants was picturesque and
beautiful. So her painters drew from the models before them, and
gave us Glorified Humanity. They did not alter in idealizing, but
merely added a certain splendour to their ordinary surroundings.
Madonnas, saints, and angels, appear in the costume of the time,
only differing from ordinary mortals by the perfection of their grace,
strength, and beauty. Tlieir portraits, by Moroni, Titian, and others,
were life-like, yet wonderfully dignified ; and never was worldly
pomp so splendidly represented as in the historical pictures of
Veronese, Tintoret, and others, where the magnificence, unlike the
Dutch school, is yet tempered by an unerring taste.
Stray Notes. 143
Giorgio Barbarelli, called Giorgione, 1477-1511, was the first
painter who broke through earlier traditions into the free colour
handling of the Venetians. His sacred pictures have a peculiar
solemnity, almost austerity, about them, a kind of august magnificence
and luminous glow of colour all his own. They possess often an odd,
whimsical quality, especially in the juxtaposition of very difi'ereut
ideas and incongruous personages.
Tiziano Vecellio, or Titian, 1477-1576, in his long life, extending
over nearly a century, excelled in all departments of painting. Less
peculiar than Giorgione, his only rival as a colourist, he was softer
and far more bright and versatile. He never misses beauty, whether
in religious or historical pictures, or in his masterly portraits; and
his landscape backgrounds, founded on recollections of his native
Cadore, have led the way in pure landscape painting.
Bonifazio Veneziano, 1494-1563. His stj'le is so similar to that
of Titian and Giorgione, tliat many of his pictures have been taken
for works of these masters. With less originality, he had many of
their merits, and there is a peculiar, placid, contented dignity in his
best works. A picture by him, but long attributed to Giorgione, in
the Brera Gallery at Milan, called the 'Finding of Moses,' I shall
describe as typical of the Venetian school. Pharaoh's daughter is
seated under a tree, and the fair child is brought to her by the
anxious sister. The princess is the centre of a brilliant group of gay
cavaliers and dames in Venetian costume ; beautiful girls and hand¬
some youths recline on the grass; musicians, and dogs, and dwarfs,
and an ape, give stir and gaiety to the picture. Each figure, taken
by itself, appears to be a life-like contemporary portrait, and we
might ask what has it all to do with Moses. But, after all, the human
interest does not depend on dress; would not a mummy-like costume
arrest our thoughts at the costume, which very likely might not be
correct after all; while here for ever the high-born princess smiles
on the beautiful child, and the wistful sister longs yet fears to claim
it, and it is the princess and the sister themselves, not their dress,
that are impressed on the mind of the spectator. Pellegrina.
-0^
Glasgow Educational As.sociation—Lectures on Music.—In
January there was delivered for this Association a series of six
lectures on Practical Education in Music, by Herr Ernst Pauer ; the
.subjects being, Musical Talent and its Development, the Art of Teach¬
ing, the Art of Practising, the Choice of Pieces, the Musical Course,
and the Art of Reading at Sight and of Developing the Memory. At
the close of each lecture, seven or eight pianoforte pieces were played,
from works by the best authors of the Classical and Romantic schools.
The lectures and recitals were much enjoyed and well attended, the
audience numbering on the first day 450, and on the last over 700.
Herr Pauer has agreed to give a difi'erent course for the Association
next year, combining in the same way the lectures with pianoforte
recitals. The Association has also arranged for examinations botli in
the Theory and Practice of music, to be held in Glasgow this spring,
by the London Society of Arts. The names of candidates in both
branches are now being enrolled in large numbers at the rooms of
the Association.    The L. S. A. will give certificates to ladies who
144 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
pass successfully, and the Association offers to each of the four best
candidates a prize of £5. Ladies from Edinburgh or elsewhere, who
wish to avail themselves of the Practice Examinations, vocal or
instrumental, are requested to send their names at once to Miss
Galloway, 59 Bath Street, Glasgow.
Women's Union Swimming Club.—This club, for affording to
women instruction in and facilities for the practice of the useful art
of swimming, has now issued its rules, which, though few and simple,
may be of some interest and use to our readers. We therefore give
them verbatim :—
I. That the club be called the Women's Union Swimming Club.
II. That the object of the club be to promote a knowledge of
swimming among women.
III. That any woman favourable to the above object shall be
eligible to become a member.
IV. That the subscription shall be 6d. per month. Payment of
the subscription for six months shall entitle a member to six lessons.
Ignokama asks if any one can tell her whether there is in Edinburgh
a Woman's Halfpenny Bank ? She knows that there are already
various private arrangements made by kind ladies for receiving small
weekly payments from working women, and lodging such in the
Savings Bank, but she wishes to know if there is in Edinburgh
anything analogous to that now in full work in London, under the
care of Sirs. Paterson and Miss Williams ? This little Savings Bank
has succeeded so well as to encourage its promoters now to try a
further experiment, viz.—that of granting small loans at moderate
interest. Such a savings bank may thus become a successful rival
of the pawnbroker, and save from his avaricious clutches many
a household god.
A Wandeker asks : What is the Kyrle Society ? She has read in
an English paper that the VVestminster Hospital has been decorated
by the Kyrle Society. [We hope some one will inform us and A
Wanderer as to the objects of the Society. It probably takes its
name from the philanthropist, John Kyrle, immortalized by Pope :
'But all our praises why should lords engross?
Rise, honest Muse, and sing the Man of Ross. '
Epistle iii. Moral Essays.
We invite a Stray Note on the Kyrle Society.—Eds.]
Notices to (Coritsponticnts, tit.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies'" Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous
communications can be noticed, nor letters answered unless a stamp
is enclosed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, 1st March, at 4 Oxford Terrace, at 11 a.m.
Debate, ' Is Lady Macbeth really a " fiendish queen " ?'
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 145
Countrg Subjects anti pursuits,
IV.—FISHING FOR LADIES.
' And they dealt with mere and river, and all waters of their land,
And cast the glittering angle, and drew the net to the strand,
And searched the rattling shallows, and many a rock-walled well.
Where the silver-scaled seafarers and the crook-lipped bull-trout
dwell.' Morris.
' I WISH that you were married and had to live in the
country,' said the witty Duke of Buckingham to the dog
that bit him, by way of a polite anathema. No doubt some
may be found still who would take his view, and we are
obliged to allow that we country people are more thrown on
our own resources than the dwellers in cities. Perhaps we
have, therefore, more independent resources, perhaps we grow
more slow-witted; but however that may be, there is no
question that it is well for us to use the advantages of our
lot, and not throw away from a prejudice any of its innocent
pleasures.    Therefore let me say a good word for Fishing.
First, think of the reasonableness of it. Here, in river,
pond, lake, or sea, is a quantity of wholesome food, of valu¬
able property, only waiting for us to secure it by our skill
and dexterity; it is plainly our duty, and therefore becomes
our pleasure too, to gather the harvest of the waters. Fish,
in their relations to us, are evidently made only to be eaten,
and are more emphatically so than poultry, cattle, sheep, or
game, for which we sometimes contract most inconvenient
friendships. But fish are outside our circle altogether, and
we may have the further satisfaction of thinking, that though
they seem to live particularly careless, jolly lives, they all
end in being eaten either by us or by each other, unless
they meet with great ill-luck, such as chemical waste in
rivers, and are poisoned. Now, for every big fish we kill,
and it is these we aim at, a number of merry little fishes
have longer lives, so we anglers are really benevolent
institutions from a purely fishy point of view. Fish, too,
have no attachments to each other,—they are only rivals;
witness the fighting for bait in a shoal, witness the withered
old carp wrestling with each other in ancient Palace waters,
—therefore, in catching a fish, you make no home desolate,
you bereave no fond creature of a friend. Cool, calm, and
selfish, the fish goes on his glittering way like a regular man
of the world; he misses nobody out of his water home, and
when he ends his easy life by an easy death, nobody misses
him.
No. 52.—April 1879.       , -a
146 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Then let us observe the pleasantness of fishing as an
occupation; evidently it is generally felt, as is proved by
the many delightful books and poems about it, and yet it
seems hard to explain why it is so very enjoyable. Perhaps
it is because no~out-of-door pursuit lets the spirit of Nature
so imbue and saturate the mind as the gentle craft. Gar¬
dening, compared to it, is too active in,its continuous work;
sketching is a struggle ; the scene is changed too rapidly in
travel; a book, of course, brings its own thoughts, and doing
nothing brings a kind of rusty retribution ; but while linger¬
ing beside still or rushing waters, occupied but not absorbed,
the whole power of the scene and the season seems to sink
into our very heart. Thus, though the angler may enjoy
good sport, we find he or she is generally content to do
without it; the spaces when nothing happens are so pleasant,
that a rush of fish becomes sometimes even rather a trouble,
and were it continuous, would spoil the delicate flavour of
the sport. It is whispered that on some of the upper waters
of beautiful Highland salmon rivers, when a fish is killed
after many blank days, the bells are rung, and bonfires lit,
and the gillies are all treated. And if that is not exactly
true, something like it is, proving that the pleasures of the
higher and more skilful sort of fishing are independent of
' good sport.'
Let me recall the earliest memories of it, A little girl,
whose love for nature is fixed and guided by the sweet
' Story without an End,' stands blissful on a summer holiday
by the side of a clear pond, A wild, natural wood of Scotch
fir encloses the sheet of water, which reflects in its depths
the red branches of the nearest trees; delicate flecks of
sunlight fall through their shadows on the birch and rhodo¬
dendron covert about their trunks. All is so still, except
for the song of the birds and the coo of the wood-pigeons,
that the water-hen dares to lead her tiny brown fleet of
young ones out of the bulrushes right across to the island
in the middle. The dragon-flies hang suspended motionless,
like jewels on wings, or dart over the water. Everything is
so large to the child's eyes, that the water lanes among the
rushes and flags seem a great sphere of action crowded with
odd or beautiful creatures. Such were endowed by the
children with strongly-marked characters for good or evil,
and it was very nice to put a number of them on board the
cutter yacht Victoria, 5 lbs. burden, as she would carry both
those soi't of passengers and fish cargoes safely across the
water.    But though she answered her helm beautifully, and
Country Subjects and Pnrsnits. 147
could sail very near the wind, she could not tack midway,
of course, and sometimes, in consequence, had very long
voyages. Then, at least all the frog passengers would leap
overboard, till the children hit upon the expedient of putting
them in the hold, whence they might be seen springing with
futile leaps into the air and tumbling back again. But what
gave reason and climax to all the pleasant loitering, was, no
doubt, the fishing, when the cork float was deliciously
agitated, and now and again little perch were flicked by the
little rod out of the water, to be carried off, strung on rushes,
to make a splendid dish for the schoolroom tea. Very
great days, such as birthdays, were sometimes celebrated, if
the tide suited, by a certain delightful sea-fishing expedition.
First you rode to an old ruined tower, where the ponies
were tied up, and thence you scrambled over a long pro¬
montory of broken rocks out to a skerry only uncovered at
low neap tides; hence it abounded in mysterious attractions.
There were deep pools for sea-anemones and bright weeds,
whence you could fish up crabs, and, above all, sea-urchins,
large shell balls, like great jewels covered with glittering
prickles set in beautiful patterns. The smaller crabs served
to bait the line with which we fished for the blue codlings
off the outside ledges where the oar-weed swayed in the rise
of the wave. When the sea drove us away, we used to ride
home wet and tired, but laden with spoil.
But time carries us on to the higher school of fishing, the
trout stream. It brings us to a beautiful little river, a
tributary of the Earn, celebrated for the flavour of its trout.
How charmingly its amber waters slipped through the
meadows, or plashed and rippled in deep glens, through the
gTand old woods to whose lord it gives one of his titles ! There
occurred a grand epoch in life, especially life on the sunny
side of fourteen—the first good trout honestly hooked and
struck on the fly, properly played and safely landed. There
is another river, where for two happy seasons we fished, even
more beautiful as to scenery, but less good for fishing—the
Bran, near Dunkeld. Its lower waters used to abound in
parr; it is said now they are young salmon. If so, it is shock¬
ing to think what a quantity we used long ago to take out
of the water just where the Bran joins the Tay, on those
summer evenings when the old cathedral opposite and its
embowering woods, and the great craggy hills above, were
looking their loveliest. But it takes a dozen parr to make
one good trout, and the precocious little rascals were always
snatching the flies out of the mouths of the large, shy, rare
148 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
trout who hung suspended motionless in the brown shadows.
Also the Bran is too wooded for easy fishing,—the trees above
and the roots below are full of dangers for one's tackle. An
expedition of some miles above the falls and beyond the salmon-
run, was wont to reward us with a heavy basket, as there
were no parr there, which certainly looks as if the little things
were young salmon. As this can only be achieved by real
fishing, perhaps something should be said at this point about
the process; but it is very hard to give, by description, any
useful hints about it, though such have often been attempted.
The fingers and mind respond by experience to the jerks and
quivers of rod and tackle; by practice and by losing fish, you
find out when to strike and when to be passive. The art of
keeping the point of the rod well up, and of neither straining
the tackle nor losing the feeling of the fish comes also, like
a good bridle hand, chiefly by practice. As a rule, you
should, of course, try to guide the fish, so that he is scarcely
aware of it, either to a good landing-place or to the edge
of the boat; alertness, patience, and practice are the three
qualities most needed. We are of opinion that fishing from
the bank is much pleasanter than from a boat, though, of
course, a lady, as she does not wade, is more likely to take a
large fish from a boat. But there is a touch of monotony in
rowing to and fro over much the same sort of water, perhaps
getting chilled, and having little to do but look out for a rise;
while wandering by the river-side from pool to shallow, from
shallow to run, is most fascinating, even if it infers wet feet,
possible falls, and more trouble in securing the fish. But
why do I speak of fish, when so often it is rather
' The water-spirits are singing
Their melodies unto me '
while loitering on a sweet June day by one of those
beautiful streams, whose ripple flows through one's summer
dreams like delicate music ? Yes, believe me, you people
who glance with incredulous contempt at the literature of
the gentle craft, the sweetest fancies haunt the still or
running waters, the fairest imaginations people the solitude.
Let it be a solitude—angling is no social sport. You may
have a friend within call, probably you will forget whether
you have or not; but a friend beside you is likely to be a
disturbance—or a rival.
Quite otherwise is it with the social toil of sea-fishing.
As we have had the good luck to join it occasionally, not
with pampered amateur luxuries, but really going out with
the men to their work in the fishy, battered old boats, let
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 149
xis be allowed to say a few w^ords about its pleasures. For
hard as the fisherman's life is everywhere, you find them
on the whole a happy race—an honest, daring, God-fearing
set of men; daring, because they have constantly to defy the
dangers of the seas; religious, because when all is done they
must often feel their lives are only the playthings of the
great ocean, and their trust must be in Him who holds the
sea in the hollow of His hand. And yet, as a Normandy
fisherman once said to me: ' It is a saying among us that
there are as many old fishermen as old shepherds, and it is
the best of callings, because of the Lake of Galilee.'
In the grey dawn, drest in our worst, we slip down to the
graceful brown-sailed boat, and sail, if the wind be fair, or
otherwise row, to where the nets have been dropped over¬
night, possibly some miles away. Then shrinking up into
the smallest possible space, balanced on the gunwale, holding
on to a rope, we watch first the search for our own buoys,
and then the three men begin to draw ropes and nets gently
up from the sea, coiling and piling them aft. The tre-maille
used in Normandy is a long or rather three long nets fastened
together, and as it rises, now a great haddock, now a dark-
mailed lobster, or two locked in fight, are drawn up and
dropped into the well; now some red mullet lie tangled in
the meshes like gold in a purse, or, most valuable of all, a
flapping, foolish-looking turbot. There may be a huge
conger eel, or a hated dog-fish, all mouth and teeth, with a
thin, insatiable body like the mere tail of an honest whole¬
some fish, or some other sea oddity. The excitement is great,
and lasts long, till the wet nets are piled high in the little
boat, and we sail away, damp and merry, to drop it in some
other place.
Then it is also entertaining, on a breezy day, to run before
the wind, trolling for mackerel with many lines; it is pretty
to see them dart like flashes of silver out of the green rolling
sea, that follows so fast behind your active boat. Herring
fishing on a moonlight night is described as delightful, but
we speak only of our own experiences, and have never tried
it. The worst of sea-fishing is that it does not admit of bad
sport; want of success spoils it. You are probably out with
people to whom the catch is most important, and even if it
is not so, tossing about in a small boat on the sea becomes
dull, unless you feel you are working to some purpose. Then
it is most satisfactory, as we have seen certain good little fish,
called cuddies, in a sea-loch in Mull come to be killed as
fast as you can drop your bait into the water.    They are
150 TJie Ladies^ EdinbiirgJi. Magazine.
examples to all their kind, as good as those four fish in the
Arabian Nights who were always exhorted to' do their duty,'
and did it.
But before finishing, a word should be said of Norway,
land of streams, paradise of fishermen, though almost in scale
beyond the powers of fisherwomen. The rivers are so huge,
so turbulent, and roll down to the sea with such a rush of
water, bearing with them such enormous fish that they call
for heavy rods and tackle, and mighty men to wield them,
and deftly-managed boats to cross the heavy currents—that
is, as far as they are salmon rivers, for, owing to the steep¬
ness of the mountains, they average shorter than our Scottish
streams. Soon you come on most of them to a thundering
waterfall which no salmon can mount. In the upper waters
the ladies' sport may fairly begin; there trout abound and
many excellent fish. And trolling for sea-trout in the
inland reaches of one of the grand fjords is not to be despised.
Magnificent mountains enclose you where eternal snow rests
above, and the birch trees clothe the lower slopes, and seem
to have descended in a graceful fantastic dance down the
grey cliffs whose base is washed by the fresh sea water and
lapped in amber-coloured seaweed. It is very pleasant to fisli
there even from a leaky boat, with your feet on the thwarts,
and some one constantly baling—a not uncommon state of
affairs in Norway, where familiarity with the deep sea about
the doors has certainly induced some contempt of its dangers.
Norsemen will put off in any sort of boat, and get on any¬
how. Sometimes a birch tree may be seen mysteriously
gliding over a fjord, and on coming nearer it proves to be
serving as sail to a skiff. The fishing in these tjords is very
miscellaneous,—our hopes may range over such wide possi¬
bilities of fresh and salt water fish that they need never
flag,—indeed, we are pretty sure to catch something.
Before leaving Scandinavia, let me say a few words about
an ideal river, which yet is a river with a name—a name
known in legend and chronicle for many hundred years. It
runs through a fair, far lonely land, and falls into the sea no
matter where. At its mouth the salmon linger in shoals,
and the seals swim about with wistful, solemn eyes, as if
they were poets rather than the poachers they are, the rogues.
Some way up the river is a pretty little waterfall, where you
can watch the salmon mounting; they leap first to a back¬
water half-way up to rest, and thence either gain the top by
a desperate dart or fall back into the foaming pool below.
I have seen ten or fifteen leaping at once at this fall, and
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 151
often failing to get up. Many fish do surmount it, however,
and till a second higher fall a good many miles off there is
fine fishing along the solitary shore. No houses, no people,
no cultivation to be seen, only the glittering water, gliding
or rushing between grey rocky banks, clad with bog myrtle
and low birchwood. Only a great, blue mountain above,
with a greater snow one peering over its shoulder, till you
come to the ravine in the black basalt, where the river rushes
in a mass of foam from the upper falls which no salmon can
stem. I shall say no more, for as the simple grandeur of the
scenery almost spoils one for other landscapes, so does the
sport spoil one for other fishing, and the recollection for
other memories. For we who know where it is and how to
get there, even we can hardly hope to find the river we left—
the ideal is seldom twice attained; the weather will be less
fine, some one else may have found the place; at any rate,
we ourselves shall have grown older, perhaps lazier. All the
more do we treasure the memory of that river. And as it
may be said, that in speaking of fishing for ladies I have
spoken chiefly not of fishing but of its accessories, let me add
this last touch to the sketch of my ideal river, that we do
not loiter there for mere idle sport; we are probably very
hungry, and fishing anxiously for dinner. After all, none
can know what fishing really can be, except those who kill
for food, and will get less or worse food if they fail to kill.
Finally, those especially who advocate our 'Higher
Education' should remember the dangers of the heavv
mental strain of our brothers' work without their sweet
compensations, such as whole days spent in the open air,
resting nerves and brain in a pursuit sufficiently exciting but
not too absorbing. Besides, you enlightened pitiers of fish
in the water, and lovers of fish on the table, can you not
spare a little kindly feeling for us, the often disappointed
ministrants to your tastes! The minister reproaching a
small boy for fishing on a Sunday, was answered with the
natural irritation caused by total want of success, ' Wha's
catching fush ?' That is often our case, and then, even from
your own point of view, how harmless is our folly ! Listen
to the wise words of a recent traveller—' I prefer a human
being, even if only an angler, to the bravest pair of gills in
all the waters. I do not affect fishes unless cooked in sauce,
whereas an angler is an important piece of river scenery—
his quiet presence serves to accentuate the solitude and
stillness, and remind you of the glittering citizens below
your boat.' E. J. 0.
152 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Stutiies from Sfjafespcrc,
in.
MINOR CHAEACTEES IF EICHAED III.
When this play is under discussion, the remark is frequently
made that it is a play of one character, that everything is
sacrificed to the display of a single passion working with
terrific force, after the model of Marlowe's dramas. No doubt
there is much truth in this assertion. The main interest of
this play is undoubtedly centred on Eichard himself; and
this working of his ambition, his figure, is always foremost
in our impressions of the whole. This much we may grant
freely; but behind this one great character there are others,
the outlines of which are distinctly visible, though they are
carefully kept in the background and in shadow. Some of
these are only seen for a few instants, at some moment of
intense passion, or at some turning-point in Eichard's
fortunes, after Avhich they become insignificant. Such is
the effect produced by the appearance of Lady Anne in the
scene where she stands before us, struggling fiercely, madly,
against the deadly spell which Eichard throws over her, in
spite of her instinct and reason. So again, old Queen Margaret
rises suddenly among the creatures of Edward the Fourth's
court to blast their pride and terrify their bickerings into
silence by her tremendous curses. But scenes like these,
however impressive in themselves, hardly show the nature
of the persons represented, except as they would appear in
moments of extreme excitement. There are others, however,
whose individuality is made very clear as they move through
the story, and whose special points are well worth notice.
Amongst these is that erring but loveable being, Hastings;
and, considering how little he actually does, it is curious
how distinctly his character is marked, partly, I suppose,
from his continually-recurring contrast to Eichard. Not that
Hastings is a model character in the least. When we first
meet him, he has just been released from prison by stooping
to use Jane Shore's influence over the king; then he swears
fidelity to the queen and her friends, and breaks his
promise with much ease when Edward's death destroys
their power. He retains a bitter memory of the wrongs he
believes them to have done him, and triumphs, almost
savagely, when he hears of the execution of the three lords,
Elvers, Vaughan, and Grey. Yet, for all that, there is a
frankness, an exuberant confidence about him which is very
o
Studies from Shakspcre. 153
attractive. Unless he has to do with an open foe, it never
occurs to him to be suspicious; he believes everybody,
trusts everybody, in an innocent, boyish fashion, which
makes us wonder how he got on so long in the court w^orld.
His seems one of those minds which, partly from short¬
sightedness, partly from fearlessness, are incapable of
apprehending coming evils.
At the point in the play where Hastings becomes promi¬
nent (Act III. Scene 11.), things certainly look sufficiently
threatening to alarm anybody less light-hearted than he is.
The little king and his brother have no one in the world to
stand by them ; all their mother's relations are dead, or help¬
less ; the regal power has already passed into the hands of
the Protector Gloucester; and it is more than likely that he
will not be content without the crown, nor stick at trifles
to get it. But Hastings, who is too important, from his
position and influence, to be ignored, holds to this one fixed
point, that the natural succession to the throne shall not be
broken; he will never consent to set the little princes aside,
so that on this ground a collision between him and Eichard
is quite inevitable, though he never anticipates anything of
the sort.
We see him coming out of his house in the early morning
to talk with Stanley's messenger, as careless and confident
as if no danger existed. By the way, it is curious to notice
how closely Shakspere has copied all the slight details of
Hastings' last day from his historical authority, Sir Thomas
More's account of Edward V. embodied in HolinshecVs
Chronicle. There, as here, Lord Stanley, half superstitiously,
half shrewdly-apprehensive, sends to tell his friend of his
ill-omened dream of the White Boar, and urges him to fly,
but is unable to arouse any feeling of alarm in Hastings.
We must respect the gallant instinct which makes the latter
incline to face the danger rather than run away from it, even
though we feel provoked with the blindness which keeps him
in the belief that there really is no peril at all. He cannot
believe that Eichard means any harm to him; he cannot
doubt Catesby's honesty. This Catesby is painted blacker
in the Chronicle than he is in the play, for he appears there
as deliberately betraying Hastings, who had made his fortune,
while here he is nothing more than Eichard's tool, and even
ventures to give Hastings a faint hint of his danger. Catesby
is not much of a diplomatist. He asks Hastings pretty plainly
whether he will consent to give Eichard the crown; and
then how the impetuous loyalty of the chamberlain bursts
154 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
out! Prudence goes to the winds ; nothing remains before
his mind but the^wrong which is threatened to the true
heir of the kingdom :
' I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.'
It is all very well for the Protector to sweep away the
upstarts of the queen's faction,—Hastings is heartily glad to
hear of their death,—but to propose to him to turn against
the heir of his king, his 'master,' as he repeatedly and
affectionately calls the dead Edward, is intolerable. The
easy-going Hastings turns to steel at the notion, and repels
it with utter disregard of consequences:
' God knows I will not do it to the death.'
It is characteristic of this man that he expects to keep as
good friends as ever with Richard, after this energetic
refusal to help his cause. No shadow of foreboding comes
over Hastings; he looks to years of life and prosperity now
that his enemies have fallen. Instead of presentiments of
evil, there comes upon him that wild humour of exuberant
spirits which so many nations have held to be unlucky; he
is ' fey,' as the Scotch say, if ever man was. How lightly
his mocking laugh rings out when old Stanley comes with
his half-stilled fears, yielding his project of flight against his
better judgment, but still uneasy! It is all a joke to
Hastings, and, being so satisfied himself, he must needs
take the whole world into his confidence. To how many
people, I wonder, did he tell his triumph between his house
and the Tower! He would willingly see everybody as
pleased as himself, and his feelings exhale naturally in his
cheery invitation to the priest, and his good-humoured chat
with the pursuivant. Knowing, as we do, the terrible
sequel to all this, there is a sort of irony to us in the vivid
picture of the magnificent noble, elate and secure, flinging
his purse to the bowing pursuivant, and turning, with
smiling greeting, to the darkly-clad priest who comes to join
in the congratulations.
Then we fancy Hastings riding to the Tower, his mind so
full of bright visions that he heeds nothing of his horse's
stumbling, unlucky though such accidents were then held;
and so he disappears within the fatal walls. There, at the
council table, the same marvellous blindness is on him: he
is still perfectly easy and confldent, taking for granted that
his relations with Richard are quite undisturbed. On the
question of the coronation, he says coolly:
Studies from Shakspere. 155
' In tlie Duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.'
And a pretty presumption it is after the morning's work !
A few minutes later, Hastings shows us clearly how utterly
he misapprehends the formidable character with which he
has to deal in Eichard:
' I think there's never a man in Christendom
That can less hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.'
In fact, Hastings thinks the men around him are as trans¬
parent as himself. But one moment more, and the crash
comes which destroys all his illusions, and sets him, doomed
and helpless, face to face with death,—hopes, friends, and all
gone together. Then, in spite of his faults, a spark of real
nobleness and unselfish patriotism flashes out:
' Woe, woe, for England! not a whit for me.'
His fate might have been averted had he profited by his
warnings, instead of being absorbed in his vindictive triumph;
but who could save his poor country from the miseries the
bloody tyrant would bring upon her ? And so ends the
gallant Lord Hastings.
There is a little scene (Act ill. Scene vi.) in which the
scrivener, who has written out the indictment of Hastings,
comments on the absurdity of its having been written many
hours before the accused was even arrested. The incident is
put even more forcibly in the Chronicle. There, on a similar
remark being made, a bystander answers with bitter sarcasm,
' That the indictment was doubtless written by the spirit of
prophecy.'
Another character who repays study, though of a very
different stamp from Hastings, is Buckingham. Naturally
he must be prominent in the story of the royal family of the
time, from his wealth, his influence, his royal descent, and
his relationship to both the Houses of York and Lancaster.
Even Queen Margaret, in the midst of her fierce revilings,
recognises ' princely Buckingham' as holding quite a different
position from the other nobles; and certainly he is not the
sort of man to leave his advantages unused. His object
seems to be more that of influence than actual power, as, for
instance, he is delighted to assist Eichard to become supreme,
so long as he can believe himself to be directing his
movements. No loyal feelings stop him as they stop
Hastings. In the wild scramble after Edward's death,
Buckingham has the wit to see that Eichard is the most
likely man to succeed in the confusion, and instantly attaches
156 The Ladies' Edinburgh Maga'dne.
himself to the usurper, utterly disregarding his own solemn
oath, made to the dying king, that he would stand by the
queen and her friends. Buckingham is always restlessly
scheming and plotting, and when he falls into Eichard's
marvellously skilful hands, he is worked and used and
swayed, all the time fancying himself the guiding spirit of
the pair. Accordingly we find him foremost in the work of
breaking up the queen's party, and getting the young princes
entirely into Eichard's power; also he takes upon himself to
attempt to win over Hastings and Stanley, with scarcely a
reference to the real leader of the enterprise, who silently
frames his own plans all the while, but is too wise to inter¬
fere with his useful assistant. Certainly Buckingham is
only surpassed in craft by his master. How skilfully and
pitilessly he draws on Hastings, escorting him to the Tower,
feeding his delusions as to Eichard's sentiments towards him,
and then coolly assisting in his destruction !
We must not lose sight of that earldom of Hereford which
is dangled before Buckingham, and which seems to have
been the object of some, if not of all his schemes. In the
parts of the play where he is most conspicuous (Act in.
Scenes v.-vii.), he somehow gives one a feeling of thoroughly
enjoying his own duplicity, of being perfectly conscious and
very proud of his own cleverness. Look at him telling
Eichard about the Guildhall scene and his speech there
(which, by the way, had not produced the desired effect);
how he goes on describing his own oratory, quite unconscious
that Eichard is burning with impatience to get him to the
real point. Naturally, after having told Buckingham exactly
what to say beforehand, Richard's anxiety is to hear the
result of the speech,—not how it was made, as his short,
sharp questions show,—but the orator manages to keep him
waiting some time for a full explanation. Then it is amusing
to hear Buckingham telling his cousin what to do, and how
to feign and deceive, as if Eichard needed any teaching in
that line; and equally amusing is the endurance with which
the superfluous advice is received. Of course Buckingham
really has plenty of talent, or he never could carry out his
part as he does, or manage that wonderful piece of extempore
acting which imposes on the simple citizens when they come
to offer Eichard the crown (Act in. Scene vii.). There stands
Buckingham, pouring out his harangue to the still more
accomplished actor up in the gallery, who plays the harder
part of seeming' modesty and reluctance. It appears as if
Buckingham swells witli vanity as he sees the success of the
Studies from SJiakspere. 157
intrigue, and flatters himself that he has made Richard king.
But the vengeance for all this is not far off.
It is curious that this quick and clever Buckingham is
just as much deceived in his estimate of Eichard's feelings
towards himself, as the simpler Hastings had been; he does
not see that if he himself is not prepared to go all lengths, he
will be thrown over at once. He makes the fatal mistake of
imagining himself essential to the king, never guessing that
he is merely considered as a tool, to be used and flung away
when no longer wanted. Also Richard struggling for power
is a different person to Richard successful; and Buckingham
becomes suddenly (Act iv. Scene 11.) aware that his late ally
no longer wants him, does not greatly care for his opinion,
and has no intention of keeping his promises made in former
days. Buckingham being, as we have seen, a thoroughly
self-satisfied man, is all the more sensitive to the bitter sting
of Eichard's 'deep contempt' Nobody but Richard could
have flung him off in such a superbly unconscious fashion ;
and it comes with added force after Buckingham's pause for
reflection about the fate of the little princes. It would seem
as if he were preparing to bargain away their lives for that
Hereford earldom, when he finds that his chance is gone by,
he can no longer bargain, he must ask, and after all gets
told, he, the proud duke,—
' Thou keep'st the stroke
Between thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein to-day :
Thou troublest me.'
The curse which Buckingham imprecates on himself if he is
false to the queen and her friends (Act 11. Scene i.) certainly
falls on him in full force.    He finds most hate where he
expects most love, and the friend he most needs turns out
' Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile.'
Little more is seen of him, as his fall follows so quickly on
his weak attempt to undo his work; but we do get the one
redeeming touch of his solemn recognition of the justice of
his fate as he passes to his execution.
The general tone of the play is so decidedly hard and
fierce, that all the more noticeable is the pathetic grace of
the two tender little creatures who appear for a few moments
in the midst of the group of intriguing, struggling men. It
would have been quite pardonable if Shakspere had left
the little princes merely lay figures, like Clarence's children;
but, on the contrary, he has distinctly marked the character
of the two boys.
15 8' The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
First (Act II. Scene iv.) we have that sprite York chattering
away to his mother and grandmother, with the merry, fearless
ways of a family pet. He is as sharp as a needle, picking
lip things about other people, and threatening to repeat them
in a fashion as disconcerting to Queen Elizabeth as to any
modern mother. Considering all things, York would not be
at all a safe child to have about in those times, and we see
afterwards how his mother gets the credit of prompting his
sharp sayings, which really come from his native sauciness.
The idea of this tiny fellow setting his baby wit against
liichard, reminds one of nothing so much'as of the humming¬
bird plaguing the crocodile—
' By heaven, not half so bold,
The puny bird that dares, with teazing hum,
Within the crocodile's stretched jaws to conae.'
Evidently York is an irrepressible—a merry little scamp
whom everybody pets. Even the archbishop intercedes with
a ' Good madam, be not angry with the child,' when Elizabeth
is mildly trying to stop her little son's inconvenient remarks.
Then in the next scene we have the little king brought
before us, passing in his forlorn dignity to the fatal Tower.
He is no mere careless child like York; his circumstances
have developed the hereditary precocity of his family, and the
boy is beginning to know his own mind, and to hold to his
own opinions. His loving heart is not to be turned against
his mother's brothers by all the force of Eichard's representa¬
tions, to which he listens quietly, and then answers manfully,
'God keep me from false friends ! but they were none.'
Yet, in spite of his precocious wisdom, the poor child is
longing all the time for his mother and brother. Indeed, in
reading the chronicles of the time, a curious feeling comes
over one at the little allusions to 'the tender prince who
wearies for his brother,' occurring in all the discussions which
took place before York was brought from sanctuary. These
slight touches seem to bring the loving little fellows before
us ; they are real, human children, caring little or nothing for
the great interests which centre on them, but only wanting
to be together. To pass the time till York comes, Edward
goes off into his moralizing about Julius Caesar, natural
enough for an intelligent boy of his stamp; but the associa¬
tion of ideas stirs up the martial Plantagenet blood, and his
boyish ambition breaks out—
' An if I live until I be a man,
I'll win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.'
Studies from Shakspere. 159
The scene becomes delightful when York comes in, so saucy
and sharp, and just as mischievous as he can manage to be,
attacking his uncle like a little imp, and recalling his former
speeches to put him into a difficulty. Then notice, too, the
anxious efforts Edward makes to keep his brother in order
and prevent his doing mischief ' Uncle, your grace knows
how to bear with him,' says the poor little king; but York is
a great deal too much for him, and seems only instigated by
the attempt to check him, into uttering more outrageous
impertinences than before, while coolly putting it into
Edward's mouth :
* Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me ;
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks your grace should bear me on your shoulder.'
Here * little prating York' touches on a very sore point, not
only alluding to Eichard's deformity, but by the mention of
the ape connecting him with the strolling jugglers and
domestic jesters who usually carried such animals about
with them.
But in spite of his audacity, York is afraid of something.
The ghost-haunted rooms at the Tower are terrible to the
child's imagination, as well they might be, after the various
tragedies of which they had been the scene. To such terrors
the young king tries to rise superior; he ' fears no uncles
dead,' his mind being occupied with other presentiments
more reasonably alarming than York's ghosts. So the boys
disappear from bodily view, passing within the Tower; but
we hear their innocent voices again, joining that awful
chorus in Richard's last dream, and no other curse is more
terrific than theirs, just as none of the other victims are so
pure and harmless in life. Even that other Edward, the
gallant boy from Tewkesbury, does not affect us so much as
these two children.
The special points of several other characters might be
noticed,—Queen Elizabeth, with her curious mixture of
strength and weakness ; Stanley, who seems to cultivate the
art of keeping in with both sides to a remarkable degree;
bright, hopeful Eichmond, who comes to end the long
period of England's woes and divisions,—but all this would
extend the present paper too far, so we can only hope that
others will take the trouble to look at them for themselves,
as the general interest of the play is far better understood
when some study has been given to the subordinate parts.
Constance O'Brien.
i6o The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
In iHemoriam,
Lieut. Coghill, Killed 22d January 1879.
He was all but a boy in his years and his beauty—
A boy in his bearing so careless of life;
A man—as he trod on the high path of duty;
A hero—who died in the thick of the strife.
He laughed as at dawning he rose from his slumbers:
His dreams had been peopled by heroes of yore.
At evening himself was enrolled in their numbers,
And the colours he fought for were dyed in his gore.
Perchance, as he fell, flashed a picture before him—
A mother—a home—and a child's lisping prayer ;
But the battle's fierce din was the requiem o'er him,
And the tumult of war for a mother's fond care.
By the reeds on the river, young warrior, rest thee;
Though thy last pillow be but a blood-dabbled stone,
The annals of ages shall proudly invest thee
With a glory thy valour hath purchased alone !
M. Humphrey.
S^fje Beggar of Capo tii ilonte: a STale of Sixtg=one.
By the Author of 'Mabel's Ckoss,' etc.
CHAPTEE VI.
We must now return to the Signora Carlotta and her
wretched attendant Pietro. As Ercole said, the saddle of
Carlotta's horse had actually turned and she fell, but not
down the precipice. Ercole, for his own purposes, had
offered to assist Pietro in harnessing the horses, and had
thus contrived that the accident should occur; he had also
dexterously removed all the knives used at their luncheon
into his own keeping, so that when attacked by the men
who afterwards carried off Concetta, they were entirely
helpless, even had they possessed courage to use such means
of defence.
Ercole had very early in their acquaintance discovered
that Pietro was a coward, therefore he had no fears of his
plans being defeated by the poor wretch, and Madonna Car¬
lotta could be easily disposed of. Before the Signora had
recovered from the fright of her fall, the two men who after-
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. l6l
wards followed Concetta sprang from their ambush behind
the rocks, and seizing upon Carlotta and her esquire, tied
their hands behind them with strong cords, and then bound
each of them to a tree.    It was this outrage that called forth
the piercing shriek from Carlotta which so alarmed her
friend; but she could make no second cry, for the men gagged
her mouth, and served Pietro, who was too frightened to
utter a sound, in the same manner.    The horror of Carlotta
may be imagined as she concluded it was the intention of
these men to leave Pietro and herself to be starved to death
in that unfrequented spot.    In vain she attempted to unloose
the cords from her wrists ; the more she struggled the tighter
they became, till at length, worn out with her exertions, she
remained motionless.     Dreading yet hoping for the reap¬
pearance of the bandits, she listened intently for the least
rustle in the leaves, for she believed that when they had
secured Concetta they would return and carry off the whole
party.    With her eyes fixed on the path leading from the
rocks, scarcely daring to breathe lest she might lose the
sound of their approach, what was her despair when, after
more than an hour's suspense, she saw Ercole alone coming
hastily towards her!    Yet on second thoughts a gleam of
hope quickened the pulses of her heart as she descried him,
for he evidently was coming to release them.    With a well-
acted expression of horror at the sight of Carlotta bound to
the tree, he sprang forward, and taking his knife from his
belt, cut the cords, and removed the handkerchief from her
mouth, exclaiming at the same time,' St. Teodore be praised,
I am in time to save one of the ladies !'    Carlotta's fears for
herself were lessened by this unhoped-for deliverance; but
the thought that her friend was lost almost took away the
joy she felt at her own safety, and, turning to Ercole, she
asked an explanation of his words.
' Alas, Signora! I need not relate the violence of the
villains who so lately left thee to perish of starvation in this
lonely spot. They had, as they supposed, secured thyself,
gracious lady, and Pietro, whom I must now release from
his torture;' for the poor wretch, unable to utter a sound, had
been trying to attract his attention by kicking his feet vio¬
lently against the tree, beginning to fear they might forget
him in their eagerness to leave the wood.
' The bandits,' resumed Ercole, ' overtook the Signorina
and myself about half-way between the waterfall and this
place; for on hearing your shriek, the Signorina threw herself
from her horse, and was running to your assistance with all
No. 52.—April 1879. L
162 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
the speed she could command, thinking your horse, gracious
lady, had slipped with you over the rocky precipice.'
' Dear, generous Concetta,' interrupted Carlotta, her eyes
filling with tears; ' and it was I who brought thee into this
danger I Proceed, Ercole, for I am all impatience to know
her fate.'
' Alas, dear lady! accuse not thyself of bringing this mis¬
fortune on the Signorina Concetta. The bandits, for such I
feel convinced they are, were evidently watching for us; for
as we turned into the wood they sprang from the covert of
some high trees, and the tallest of them, seizing the Signorina
by the waist, lifted her forcibly on her horse, and, making a
signal to his companion, the man threw a rope round my
arms as I was endeavouring to rescue the lady from her
assailant, and pinioned me, at the same time showing me a
loaded pistol, which he threatened to discharge at my head
should I attempt to raise a cry of alarm. In vain I begged
them to release the Signorina, assuring them they would be
nobly rewarded if they brought her safely to La Cava,
swearing, at the same time, to reveal nothing that had
happened. They only scoffed at my words, and bade me, as I
valued my own life, be silent. When we had gone near half
an hour's journey towards the sea, gentle lady,—for when
we reached the cataract they crossed the river, and took a
new direction,—the elder of the bandits now whispered
something to his companion, who immediately took me by
the arm, and without a word turned back with me on the
way we came, and about a mile from hence undid the rope
from my arms, and bade me flee quickly from that neigh¬
bourhood if I wished to retain my liberty. Before he un¬
loosed the cords, Signora, he made me take an oath never to
divulge what I had seen, and then watching me till I had
turned the corner, strode rapidly back after his comrade.'
' And the Lady Concetta,' said Carlotta warmly; ' had she
no word for her lost friend, Ercole ?'
' Ah! Signora, I shall never forget her look of despair
when she saw the man leading me away.'
Here Carlotta's grief was unbounded, and for a time her
friend's misfortune absorbed all her feelings. At length
Ercole reminded her that night was fast approaching, and if
they did not begin their homeward way at once, who could
tell if tliose ruffians might not again overtake them ? Every¬
thing he said was so plausible and kind, that Carlotta had
not the least suspicion of his share in the transaction, and
looking upon him as their deliverer, promised to reward him
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 163
handsomely for his efforts to save them. Pietro appeared
completely stunned by his fright, and scarcely knew what
he was about; and had it not been for Ercole's quickness in
discovering the horses, they might have spent the night
amongst the rocks. Carlotta asked a thousand questions
about her friend from Ercole, as he walked by the side of
her horse, but she could elicit nothing further than what he
had at first related. He seemed afraid to hazard any reason
for their carrying off the Signorina Torcelli, and leaving the
others in the wood, lest, as he said, he might get into trouble,
' for everytliing is known to the bandits. Madonna.'
It was with a heavy heart Carlotta set out for their home ;
for what could she say to the domestics of the capture of
their lady ? or how could she apprise the Count Torcelli of
the dreadful disaster that had fallen upon him ? What steps
to take for the recovery of her friend she knew not, as they
were entire strangers at their present place of abode.
Happily she remembered that Signor Ciprani and his family
were to arrive to-morrow at La Cava, and she knew he
would exert every means in his power for the deliverance
of Concetta. She had little doubt in her mind that the
bandits were well aware of the position held by the father of
her friend, and that they knew they might expect a rich ransom
for his daughter. This idea rather comforted her, as it was
not likely they would ill-treat her with that hope in view.
It was clear also that they knew her own circumstances,—
that they were not likely to gain much by carrying her off;
their violence towards her was only to give them time to
make off with the more important prize. Night had closed
in before they reached La Cava and the villa taken by the
Count, for it was situated at some distance from the little
town. A few scattered lights were already gleaming in the
cottages, and there were tlie usual loungers round the black¬
smith's shop and the village caffi; but the sight of strangers
returning late from an excursion attracted no particular
notice, and the little group passed by without a word being
addressed to them. Ercole had drawn his cap a little lower
than usual over his eyes, and walked on the farthest side of
Carlotta's horse so as to avoid the light of the blacksmith's
forge. Carlotta remarked none of these things, for her heart
was too full of the sad intelligence she had to communicate
to the Count and their friends. She was thankful to hear,
on reaching the villa, that Signor Ciprani had been there to
inquire after the Signorina and herself. She had just
alighted from her horse, and was informing the attendant of
164 The Ladies'Edinburgh Magazine.
the misfortune which had befallen her young mistress, when
Ercole asked whether he should not go at once to the Signor's
and consult him as to what they had better do.    Carlotta
was extremely pleased at this suggestion, and after empty¬
ing the contents of her slender purse into his hand, she
begged him to lose no time in requesting the Signer to come
to her.    Ercole had his own motives for this seeming earnest¬
ness, as he well knew he should be suspected of having led
the party into this danger.    By this haste to recover the
Signorina Concetta he would remove all suspicion, and be
able, by his ready imagination, to give them a wrong impres¬
sion, and so prevent the possibility of her being retaken.
In as short a time as was possible. Signer Ciprani found
himself again at the villa, listening attentively to Carlotta's
agitated recital, and marking well its smallest particular.
As might be supposed, his first suspicions fell on Ercole,
whom he desired might be brought before him, and whom he
questioned minutely on every point, steadily fixing his gaze
on the youth's  face.     But  Ercole  had  learnt  his  lesson
thoroughly, and went through the examination without an
expression either of fear or of boldness.    Everything he said
seemed to confirm Carlotta's idea of the hope of a heavyransom
being the motive for the daring outrage ; and for the present
Signer Ciprani, though not entirely satisfied of the young
man's innocence, could advise nothing better than to wait
till the feUowing day, when they might perhaps gain some
information respecting these bandits  (for such they were
beyond all question) as might lead to their discovery.    One
thing he insisted en, and that was, that Ercole should remain
at his house that night that he might be sure he sent no
secret intelligence of their intended pursuit of these men.
Ercole evinced no surprise at this decision, and willingly
accompanied Signer Ciprani to his house, begging the Signora
Carletta to believe he would never give up the search for
the Signerina.    Ciprani reflected long and painfully on the
distressing and mysterious affair, and after writing a letter
to the Count Torcelli, and despatching it by a special mes¬
senger that same night, he inquired of his wife if Concetta
had not expressed some presentiment of danger from some
of the crew when she accompanied them in their recent
voyage to Ischia.    The events which succeeded their return
from the island were of so absorbing a nature as to have
entirely obliterated from the memory of Madame Ciprani
anything that might  have  passed  between Concetta  and
herself on that subject.     Ciprani then remembered it was
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Talc of Sixty-one.  165
to himself she expressed her belief that one of the crew
had assumed a disguise, and, passing by another name, was
no other than one of the many beggars infesting the suburbs
of Naples. Could this man have had any motive for assuming
that disguise, and was he indeed one of the miscreants who
had that evening succeeded in carrying off the gentle and
unoffending girl! He could not find any reasonable founda¬
tion for such a supposition, and yet it continued to haunt
his mind, and he half persuaded himself it would eventually
lead to the discovery of the rufiians.
Count Torcelli, as may be imagined, M'as thunderstruck at
the intelligence of his daughter's abduction. Not being
aware of having any personal enemies in the country, the
only conclusion he arrived at was that of Carlotta, who still
suggested the possibility of a large ransom being offered
for the recovery of Concetta as the motive for this daring
outrage. He set off at once for La Cava, leaving instructions
with the authorities to employ every means to discover the
villains and bring them to justice, at the same time offering
a large reward to any one who would give information re¬
specting his daughter. On his arrival at La Cava, he con¬
ferred with Signor Ciprani on the means to be employed in
their search, and himself examined Ercole, confronting him
with Pietro and the Signora Carlotta, endeavouring from
their account of his previous conduct to trace some connec¬
tion between him and the bandits; but nothing was elicited
that criminated the young man in the least. His statement
never varied, and there seemed nothing unreasonable in his
having pressed them to visit the waterfall, as it was a
favourite excursion of the lovers of picturesque scenery, sucli
as these ladies professed themselves to be. Carlotta's grief
was unbounded, and she reproached herself bitterly for not
having waited for the protection of Signor Ciprani. She
totally forgot, in her self-condemnation, that this haste had
been suggested by Ercole, on the plea of taking advantage
of the fine weather. Pietro, in his secret heart, perfectly
remembered how anxious Ercole had been that they should
embrace that opportunity, and also how eagerly he assisted
him in packing up the things and setting them forward in
their route ; but he was in too great fear of the consequences
he might bring on himself from these ruffians if he spoke of
these things, so he preserved his usual stolid, frightened
manner, and only corroborated the Signora's statement when
questioned by the Count. "Whether Ercole saw through his
fears  may be questioned, but he betrayed no uneasiness.
166 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
After a time Ercole was dismissed, but with strict injunctions
from the Count to be at hand in case they should succeed in
discovering the haunts of the bandits. Ciprani said but
little during this examination, but resolved to watch the
youth's conduct during his stay at La Cava. Descriptions of
Concetta were sent to all the towns and villages on the coast
as well as in the neighbourhood, and every inducement held
out to those who knew anything of the parties to come
forward with intelligence. The Count, being obliged to
return to his official duties at Naples, left the future conduct
of the affair to his friend Ciprani, trusting that his more
intimate knowledge of the country might enable him to
trace the captors. With a heavy heart he prepared to leave
La Cava, and was grateful to Carlotta for her earnest request
to be allowed to accompany him. Not only had she lost all
interest in the place, but she felt she should be acting as
her friend would desire in not allowing the broken-hearted
father to return home alone. Signer and Signora Ciprani
did not urge her to remain, and endeavoured to comfort her
with hopes of the speedy restoration of Concetta.
A month passed, and still no tidings reached the unhappy
father of his lost child. In vain were the offered rewards
increased, in vain were the haunts searched of those persons
in Naples who were known to be adverse to the new govern¬
ment,-—no clue had been discovered to the mystery that hung
over the affair. Ciprani had more than once written to
Count Torcelli that Ercole, whom he had for some time
suspected of taking part in the abduction, still continued his
calling as guide at La Cava, and was considered as trust¬
worthy as before this untoward event. Only one person
was missing from his usual place of resort, and that was
Matteo,the Beggar of Capo di Monte; but it so often happened
that these poor mendicants after a time sought some new
locality wlierein to excite the compassion of strangers, that
Carlotta did not attach any suspicions to his being absent at
this juncture; indeed, had she remembered him, it would
have been to regret he was not at hand to assist in the search
for her friend, so impressed was she with this man's devotion
to Concetta. Her days were passed in expectation of some
tidings of the lost one, and sad and gloomy was her now
unbroken solitude; for the Count devoted himself more
seriously than ever to the service of the State, seeming to find
his only relief in unceasing occupation, and secretly hoping
he might, through some of the links of political intrigues, find
a clue to the inexplicable misfortune that had befallen him.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 16j
CHAPTEE VII.
And poor Concetta! how had it fared with her this weary
month ? After several hours of fatiguing descent from the
mountains, through paths rarely traversed except by contra¬
bandists, the cart suddenly stopped in what appeared to be
the suburb of a fishing village. Bruised as she was by the
jolting of the rough vehicle, and faint with exhaustion from
her long fast, her spirits rose at the thought of being once
more in a village where she might, perhaps, by an offer of
money induce some person to rescue her from her horrible
situation. Only for a few brief moments did she retain this
hope, for in less time than we have taken to describe her
feelings, the man who seemed to be the leader of the ex¬
pedition called to Stefano to see that the bandage over the
girl's eyes was w^ell secured, and then take her from the cart
into the cottage at the side of the road. A tall, masculine-
looking woman now appeared at the door, attracted by the
sound of the cart-wheels. In vain Concetta resisted as the
cloth was being drawn tightly over her eyes, in vain she
supplicated to be freed from this irksome and painful con¬
finement; the woman laughed at her cries, and began to
joke coarsely with the elder of the men on the troublesome
bargain he had brought.
' iSTay, Ursula,' said the man in the same jesting tone, ' the
wench is well enough when she is alone, but, like the rest of
womankind, she thinks, when others are by, she must raise
her clapper. Here ! take her in and give her some breakfast,
for she has tasted little since noon yesterday. If thou hast
not eaten all the chocolate I brought thee a while agone,
give her some of that. Her mother came of gentle folk, and
the girl can't eat raw fish and chew garlic like thee wast
brought up on, old lass.'
Ursula's heavy brows knitted fiercely at this speech, and
she half lifted her closed fist at the poor girl who had called
it forth; but being too much in the man's power to disobey
him, she contented herself with taking Concetta roughly by
the hand, and, dragging her into a little kitchen, pushed her
rudely on a bench, bidding her sit there while she prepared
the chocolate. After a slight breakfast of chocolate and
cakes made of maize flour, she desired the captive to go into
an inner room and take otf her riding dress. Concetta pre¬
pared at once to obey, for the man who helped her out of
the cart had whispered the old Italian proverb, ' Ghi va
'piano,  va  sanol into  her  ear,  and  in  that  sentence  she
l68 The Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
detected the voice of Matteo. She understood the inference
he meant her to draw from that proverb, and now, assured
that it was indeed Matteo who had stood her friend in re¬
moving the bandage, she recovered a little of her former
confidence, and determined, if possible, not to provoke
further violence by useless remonstrance. Why he was
passing under another name, and how he was connected with
the persons who had carried her off, she knew not, but she
determined to abide her fate with as much calmness as she
could, trusting that the interest shown by the Beggar would
ultimately lead to her deliverance. Her mind was too
absorbed in dwelling upon the misery her abduction would
cause her father and Carlotta, to reason much on this strange
conduct of Matteo, and it was not till a later period that she
was able to connect this show of kindness w4th his previous
conduct. She lost no time in obeying Ursula's directions
as to changing her apparel, and, with her help, quickly put
on one of the ordinary dresses of the woman's daughter;
this, with the head-dress and linen band drawn over her
forehead, so entirely altered the character of her features,
that Ursula seemed much amused at the change wrought in
her appearance. She even took off the bandage from her
eyes, that she might see herself in a little broken mirror that
hung by the window. Concetta started when she saw how
completely the dress disguised her, for the woman had
wrapped an old shawl in many folds over her shoulders, thus
concealing her figure, and the white linen head-dress and
band over the forehead as effectually hid her beautiful brown
hair. She said nothing, however, remembering Matteo's
hint in the proverb. Ursula had the cunning to perceive
that Concetta's delicate hands would at once reveal she was
no common peasant-girl; so, without any scruple or hesitation,
she took a bottle of some brown liquid from the cupboard,
and, in spite of her remonstrances, smeared the hands and
arms of the poor girl. In doing this, the sparkling ruby on
Concetta's finger immediately caught the covetous eye of the
old woman, and, looking stealthily round, she was about to
take it off and secrete it, when, at that moment, the elder of
the men came in. She dropped Concetta's hand instantly,
but not before the quick eye of the man detected her
intention, and taking her roughly by the shoulder, he pushed
her back into the kitchen, saying, ' Thou beggarly old miser!
art thou not content with the wages thou get'st, and the
house and good living beside, that thou must rob the poor
wench of her only love-token mayhap ?'    Then turning to
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 169
Concetta with what seemed an involuntary burst of softened
feeling and admiration, he exclaimed, ' By St. Anthony, but
Catrina's old rags never became her as they do thee, girl!'
The colour mounted to her cheek at this speech, and in
spite of Matteo's caution, she was about to appeal once more
to his generosity; but he guessed her intention, and imme¬
diately resuming his former stern manner, bade her be quick,
for they must be leagues from thence ere the sunset. Again
the bandage was tied across her eyes, and she was forbidden
to utter a sound on pain of severer treatment. A cloak with
a hood was now thrown over her, and she was lifted into
the cart. She could not understand the last words that
passed between Ursula and the man as they left the cottage,
—for they spoke in a patois quite unknown to her,—but she
knew from the tone and manner of the woman that there
was no pity to be expected from her. She listened eagerly
for Matteo's voice, dreading lest he might be about to leave
them; for she was more than ever convinced that the man
who was the principal in this outrage was no other than
Filippo, and her only hope of escape was through the
assistance of Matteo. After an hour's rough jolting over a
shingly beach, Concetta's fears of being taken to another
country were fully confirmed; and her heart swelled almost
to bursting as slie listened to the waves breaking loudly
over the beach which seemed close to the cart. There was
no longer any doubt of their purpose—they were about to
take her to a foreign land, perhaps to sell her for a slave ! A
thousand horrible ideas suggested themselves, for she no
longer comforted herself with the thought that all had been
done with a view to extract a heavy ransom. Why should
they be leaving the country if this were the case ? Were
there not hiding-places in the mountains and caves of
the Abruzzi, where she might have been concealed, had they
not intended further violence ? In vain she racked her brain
to discover a reason for such atrocious villany. Had her
father any secret enemies who could find no other means of
wounding him.save in the person of his unoffending child ?
She had little time, however, for these overwhelming fears,
for once more Matteo took her out of the cart, and carried
her across the beach to a small boat that was tossing up and
down as it lay fastened by a chain to the side of a little pier.
She succeeded this time in uncovering her mouth, and in
piteous accents implored Matteo to tell her where they were
about to take her, and to remember his words on the Capo
di Monte.    She could not see his face, but she felt his arms
170 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
shake with a kind of tremor as she reminded him of his
promise ' to aid her even with his life if need be.' Without
halting one moment with his burden,—for he was evidently
afraid of exciting suspicion in the mind of his leader,—he
contrived to pull out of his vest the little silver cross she
had given him; and letting her hand touch it, he solemnly
whispered again those words of promise, and repeated the
proverb, ' Chi va piano, va sano' as he laid her in the boat.
He then began to occupy himself in placing the oars in the
rowlocks, and calling loudly to Filippo, for it was indeed no
other, that all was ready, signalled to the man on shore to
take away the cart and horse. Filippo, striding rapidly over
the beach now being fast covered by the waves, leaped into
the boat, and, letting the chain go, took the helm and pushed
off towards a vessel that was tacking about half a league
from the shore. He now gave some orders to Matteo in
the same patois he had used with Ursula, and pointing to
Concetta, bade him take off the handkerchief from her mouth,
which Matteo had carefully covered again, but let the one
over her eyes remain; and having cautioned her to remain
silent as before, rowed steadily towards the vessel that was
evidently waiting for them. The poor girl now gave herself
up for lost, for what hope of deliverance was there in a
strange land! She felt it was useless to appeal to the
generosity of her captor, and unless Matteo kept his promise
and stood her friend, she might never be restored to her
father. She could only pray to be supported under these
heavy trials, and leave the issue to a higher Power. As she
was hoisted up the side of the vessel the bandage over her
eyes became loose, and she saw that Filippo at once took the
command, which confirmed her in her opinion that he was
both brigand and smuggler; and the thought once more gave
her a ray of comfort, for she had wearied herself in vain
to discover any other motive than the hope of gain in the
daring act he had committed. She resolved once more to
make no attempt to excite compassion in those around till
she learned her fate more fully, and remained apparentlj''
passively resigned, though her heart was filled with anguish
and terror. She had no means of judging of time; but
about noon she perceived they were rapidly losing sight of
the coast, the landmarks of which, though strange to her
eyes, were dear to her from being on the same soil as the
home of her father, and tears filled her eyes as they faded
from her sight. She saw that the prow of the vessel was
directed south, and that every league was bearing her away
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixiy-one.  171
still farther from all she loved. She dared not trust herself
to think of the desolation of her father and Carlotta, much
less of her beloved Eudolph. Wlienever she looked up she
perceived that Filippo was stealthily watching her, as if to
read her thoughts. The men were not uncivil to her, and
Matteo, when he brought her some food, endeavoured by his
manner to show her that nothing of violence was intended.
As her eyes fell on the coarse food, she turned with loathing
away; but instantly remembering that perhaps her life
depended on her powers of endurance, she prepared to taste
it. Her movement of disgust did not escape Filippo, who, in
a half-mocking tone, exclaimed :
' Thy palate is too delicate for a seaman's mess, wench ; and
couldst thou toss an omelet, it might stand us all in good
stead, for in truth Niccolo is but a sorry cook. In rough
service, such as we sailors live by, it does not do to be too
fanciful, or we might starve. Here, iSTiccolo, bring the lass
some wine of Sicily, may be it may serve as a relish to thy
greasy pasty.'
Niccolo lost no time in obeying the command, for in
truth he had been wanting some excuse to have a nearer
look at the girl, who had greatly excited his curiosity. As
he handed her the wine, he dared to add some saucy words,
which made the blood rush in anger to her cheeks and brow.
The effect of this was only to call forth loud praises of her
beauty, for her eyes sparkled with indignation at the fellow's
boldness, thus rendering her more attractive in his youthful
estimation. Concetta felt herself degraded by his unbridled
admiration, and every pulse throbbed with anger at his
daring. Her spirit was completely roused, and for a time
she forgot her fears. Filippo, who was secretly watching
this by-play, now called Niccolo away, muttering something
to ]\ratteo of the girl's having no lack of spirit.
Though the season was advanced, the heat at noonday
was still almost insupportable, and Concetta felt overpowered
by the sun's rays as she sat on the open deck. Her previous
fatigue and anxiety, added to her loss of sleep, now produced
such complete prostration that she seemed fainting under
it. The deck was nearly covered with what seemed kegs of
spirits and large boxes, which evidently contained heavy
material. At length Filippo, remarking her sinking state,
bade Stefano, as he continued to address Matteo, to let down
the sail as a shelter, and place a mattress underneath for the
girl to lie down. As he rolled the boxes away to make
room for the mattress, she was attracted to the circumstance
1/2 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
by overhearing one of the crew remark in an undertone to
one of his comrades, he hoped the balls they contained
would soon scatter the hated Piedmontese. This, then, was
the real calling of Filippo, combined with that of smuggling.
Spite of the danger which an encounter with the Gari-
baldians might involve, her spirits rose at the thought, for
she now imagined she had gained a clue to Filippo's conduct,
and she might still hope for deliverance should he and his
crew be defeated. Thankful for the relief afforded her by
the shelter, and the mattress for her weary limbs, she was
unmindful of the anxiety which might now be observed in the
countenance of Matteo. Sleep soon overpowered her senses,
and for several hours she was insensible to everything
passing around her. The grating of the anchor chain being
let down was the first sound that awoke her, and starting
up from her reclining position, she perceived they were
within a few yards of the shore, and that they were
making preparations to quit the vessel. By the lights in the
little town which stretched aloncj the beach and terminated
in a small pier, she distinguished a group of men standing
mutHed in large cloaks, and evidently watching the arrival of
the vessel. Soon all doubt was removed, for directly the
anchor had fallen, several loud voices shouted, ' What, ho!
Filippo!' and a small boat rowed by one man left the pier,
and ran under their bows. This man quickly mounted the
side of the vessel, and by the light of a small lantern which
he carried, Concetta, now fully roused, saw that underneath
his cloak he wore a soldier's uniform. For some minutes
Filippo and this new-comer stood apart in close conversation,
and by the earnest and even vehement gestures of the
soldier, Concetta concluded their arrival had been anxiously
looked for. Another lantern was now hung against the
■mast, and all hands were rapidly employed in rolling the
heavy boxeS' and the supposed kegs of spirits over the ship's
side into a large barge which had noiselessly taken its
station imder her lee. Concetta watched eagerly for the
appearance of Matteo, but, alas ! he came not, and again her
fears assumed their former shape. So long as he had been
present she felt she had a friend, but now there seemed none
to whom she could look for sympathy. She could not
account for her confidence in the wild Beggar of Capo di
Monte, neither could she assign any motive for his taking
such interest in her; but he had so evidently stood her
friend in the painful scenes through which she had passed
for the last two or three days, that she confidently expected
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Talc of Sixty-one.  173
deliverance by his efforts. One by one the boxes were
lowered into the barge, and the men, all but Niccolo, seemed
preparing to follow; Concetta seeing tliis, imagined she was
to be left alone in the vessel through the night with the
bold youth. She could not endure the thought, and spring¬
ing up from the mattress, she caught the hand of Filippo as
he was stepping on to the ladder lowered into the boat, and
cried in a passionate, beseeching voice, ' Padrone, for the
sake of our Holy Mother, leave me not exposed to the insults
of that man. Perhaps thou hast a daughter, think what she
would feel under the same circumstances, and pity me as
thou wouldst pity her. Take me with thee wherever thou
goest; I ask no more.'
Filippo looked at the girl witb a strange blending of pity
and severity in his countenance, and even put one foot on
the ladder as if to descend; but this reference to his daughter
was not without its softening influence. He did not, how¬
ever, reply immediately, and Concetta renewed her entreaties,
even laying her hand upon his arm as she gasped in low
accents,' I will not speak or cry or make any attempt to
escape if thou wilt but trust me ;' then hastily taking her
crucifix from her bosom, and kissing it reverently, ' let this
assure thee of my truth. Padrone, for I swear by this holy
emblem to do thy bidding if thou wilt let me follow thee
this night.'
Filippo hesitated for one instant, then, looking fixedly at
her, said in a low voice, ' Thou knowest not what thou art
asking, girl; but if thou indeed fearest to pass the night on
board the vessel, thou mayest follow me, but I warn thee
thou wilt have rough companions where my lodgings be.
However, as thou hast chosen thy lot, so be it, and, remember,
if thou breakest thy oath by word or look, or shalt betray
what thou mayest hear and see this night, Filippo will cause
thee to repent it to the latest hour of thy life. Now, wrap
thy cloak well round thee and follow me into the boat, speak
not to any one unless I bid thee, and take what may be offered
thee in my presence.'
Concetta followed, trembling from head to foot as she went
down the ladder, fearing each moment she might fall into
the water, as the roll of the sea rocked the boat up and down.
Filippo then helped her forward into the boat, and said in an
undertone, ' Be not alarmed at anything thou seest to-night,
thou hast no part in it; be silent, and be patient.'
She raised her head for a momeiit to thank him, and the
light from the lantern showed him that her lips moved in
174 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
prayer, and her tearful eyes were lifted up to heaven as if
seeking protection, though no sound escaped her.
{To he continued.)
St l^ome anU SbroaO.
No. III.—A DUTCH SKETCH AND A DUTCH FAIR
I WAS SO cross at having to leave town in the middle of the
season, that it was less a question of where I should go than
of where I should not go; but a case of scarlet fever in the
house necessitated a general flight of the whole family, and
it was decided that I should accept a long-standing invitation
from my cousins at the Hague.
So on a bright May morning I started with my faithful
Abigail for the Dutch capital, via Harwich and Eotterdam.
Over that frightful crossing I will draw a veil. Suffice it to
say that Eotterdam, with its muddy river, narrow streets,
and dirty canals, seemed like Paradise. It was already late
when I reached the Hague, and I gladly retired to my well-
earned repose.
'To-morrow,' said my cousins sternly as they bade me
good-night, ' you shall be allowed the morning for pictures
and sicfht-seeincc, but the eveniiifr vou must devote to a studv
of Dutch life during the Kermisz,' and in my exhausted
condition I meekly assented.
Glorious sunshine awoke me on the following morning,
and I accepted with alacrity the proposition to drive to the
' Huis ten Bosch,' the queen's palace in the wood, of which I
had heard so much.^ The drive through the Bosch was
lovely,—the tender green of the young foliage against the
blue sky; the long shady alleys of beech trees, whose tops
kissed each other and formed a leafy arcade; and the pictur¬
esque piece of water, on which sailed some graceful swans,
formed a tout ensemble I have seldom seen surpassed,—in
fact few capitals, if any, can boast of so charming a resort
in their immediate neighbourhood as the Hague Bosch.
Twenty minutes' drive brought us to the palace, a modest-
looking abode with a cupola in the middle and two side
wings. The centre part of the building contains the re¬
ception rooms and the queen's own apartments, while the
wings are devoted to visitors and to servants' offices. AVe
were led through  a  long, narrow  corridor,  out  of which
' This article was written before the death of the queen, a national
calamity which occurred on the 3d of June 1877.
At Home and Abroad. I75
opened innumerable and rather shabby rooms, to the main
part of the palace. The famous Salle d'Orange is a beautiful
octagon-shaped hall, whose walls are decorated with mural
paintings by pupils of Eubens, and one angle of the room—
that in which the queen sits when she gives her charming
summer parties—is devoted to a sort of allegorical apotheosis
of the Stadtholder, Frederick Henry, whose widow, Princess
Amelia of Solms, built the Huis ten Bosch. This apotheosis,.
which was painted by Jordaens, is more remarkable for its
size than for its beauty. In fact, it was the general aspect
of the Salle d'Orange, its size, its proportions, its beautiful
parquet, rather than the paintings on its walls, which struck
me with admiration. The room used by the queen for her
smaller receptions contains some charming modern pictures,
such as Gallait's ' Jeanne la ToUe,' beautiful as to execution
but painful as to subject,—for what can be more terrible
than the idea of the wife, half-maddened by grief, clinging
to the senseless corpse of her husband,—one or two Israels
and Sadees in true Dutch style; and last, but not least,
Bisschop's portrait of Motley, the celebrated historian. He
was one of the queen's most attached friends, and this por¬
trait, which was painted at her request, is one of her most
valued possessions. No picture could do justice to the
beauty and intelligence of his countenance ; but in the hands
of Bisschop art has done all it could, and it is a speaking
likeness. We passed rapidly through the Japanese and
Chinese drawing-rooms, which are beautiful in their way;
but I felt far more interested in the queen's own private
study, a little room which looks like work, and which leads
through another tiny 'boudoir on to a westeria - covered
balcony. The view from this balcony is truly Dutch in its
restful monotony.
At our feet lies the carefully-kept garden, and stretching
away in the distance, as far as eye can reach, is the flat
expanse of green fields or 'polders,' on which hundreds of
sheeted cows graze phlegmatically. These meadows, inter¬
sected as they are by a network of canals, look like a green
chessboard. I reluctantly left this sunny little corner of the
Hague, and as I returned through the Bosch to the picture
gallery, called the Mauritz Huis, I was struck by the perfect
desertion and solitude that reigned in the lovely alleys,
which I was told was owing to the Kermisz, which forms a
centre of attraction to all good Dutch people. The Mauritz
Huis, like most Dutch galleries, is badly lit; but it is very
well  arranged by M. Victor de Stuers, and contains  the
1/6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
most valuable, but to my untutored eye the most uninterest¬
ing small collection of pictures I have ever seen.
' Every picture is a gem,' remarked an artist to me ; but
like black pearls or green diamonds, it requires a connoisseur
to appreciate them. To a farmer, Potter's bull must be a
delightfully refreshing spectacle,—for a more beautiful animal
it is difficult to see,—and I believe, in a surgical point of view,
the 'Lesson of Anatomy' is correct and deeply interesting;
and in truth, the wonderful expression and intelligence in
the faces of the professors round the corpse, especially that
of Professor Tulp, must strike with admiration even so
ignorant an observer as myself. But it requires a farmer, a
surgeon, or an artist to appreciate these two masterpieces.
In my humble opinion, far more beautiful is Eubens' portrait
of his Confessor, and Gerard Douw's Interior of a Cottage,
which for effect of light and perfection of drawing and finish,
almost rivals his famous ' Night School' in the Amsterdam
gallery. I had had enough of sight-seeing for one day, so
returned home to rest for the evening campaign.
At eight o'clock we mustered a party of twenty-three,—
we ought to have been equal numbers of men and women to
form what the Dutch people call a 'Bonterij,'—and the un¬
fortunate odd one was one of those stray Englishmen who
are constantly turning up, like solitary snipe, at unexpected
places. In truly correct Kermisz style, we all issued forth
arm in arm, through the silent street where my cousins
lived, and soon found ourselves in the ' Buitenhof,' a square
which you enter by an old archway. From the prison above
this arch the unfortunate Cornelius de Witt was dragged
by Iris murderers and literally torn in pieces. What a con¬
trast between then and now ! The whole square was blocked
with booths and stalls, around which thronged troops of men,
women, and children. We passed quickly through the crowded
Buitenhof and still more crowded Plaats, to the Voorhout, a
square whose centre, planted with trees, is now lined with
brilliantly-illuminated booths, and witli what is the great
attraction to the lower classes, the ' Poffetje' stalls. You
must be Dutch to pronounce the name, more Dutch to stand
the smell, and 'Dutchest' of all in order to be able even
to taste the horrible concoction. Behind a row of burnished
brass pots containing the batter in its raw condition, is
seated the presiding goddess of the stall, arrayed in all the
panoply of South Holland costume — cap, plates, and
necklace all complete. In front of her, over a bright wood
fire, is a sort of iron tray full of little round hollows, into
The Night after the Ball. 177
which, with much dignity and the dexterity of long habit,
she pours the hissing paste; a meek and subservient
husband, armed with a long-pronged fork, is ready to turn
the delicacy, which he immediately proffers to the passers-
by, seldom meeting with a refusal. ' Look out,' said my
pioneer, ' here comes une hande, joyeuse! I had been told
the Dutch were a phlegmatic nation, but certainly during
the Kermisz they are anything but calm.
Linked arm in arm, in rows of twelve or fifteen, the people
come singing along the streets, and woe betide any unfor¬
tunate individual who falls into their clutches! for with a
shout of'Hosse! Hosse!' the miserable object is whirled
round in their midst, and not released until they have per¬
formed a frantic dance ; and I had heard a tragic story of a
hapless woman, the wife of one of the secretaries of the
 Legation, to whom this happened, and who said that
for days after she felt like a humming-top. It would fill
pages were I to describe all the things we saw, all the
strange places we visited. We went to a capital circus, we
threw rings for knives amidst a cheering crowd, we paid
our respects to the dwarfs, but shrank from the presence of
the * Fat Woman.' Nothing escaped our inquiring minds.
' Que voulez-vous,' remarked my escort; ' k la Kermisz on
fait comme a la Kermisz.' It was a pretty sight to see the
peasants in the different costumes of all the provinces of
Holland,—Friesland, Zeeland, Gelderland, North and South
Holland,—each woman showing her district by her cap,
wandering about in large family parties, sometimes three
generations together, all come from far and wide to enjoy the
Hague Kermisz, their broad, ugly faces beaming with good
humour. A more good-tempered crowd I have seldom seen,
so that our evening was thoroughly enjoyable. The wind-up
was a cheery little supper, terminated by a dance. All were
present except the solitary snipe, who, evidently much
disgusted with the vulgarity of foreign society, retired early
to his nest. But for my part, I advise every one who wants
to spend a merry evening to make a ' Kermisz Partie' at
the Hague.
Cije i^iflljt after tfje Ball
' An owre true tale.'
In Christmas week 18 3-, I was staying with several cousins
at the house of our mutual grandmother, a beautiful old
No. 52.—Apeil 1879,     _ HI
178 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
lady of eighty, still fresh and vigorous in mind, and though
obliged to lean on an ebony stick, far from infirm. All her
family, down to a tiny great-grandchild, adored her, and
vied with each other in striving to sit near her and antici¬
pate her slightest wish.
One evening four or five of us, girls from sixteen to two
or three and twenty, were sitting round the fire with dear
' Granny ' in her high arm-chair, on one arm of which I had
perched myself, being the smallest though not the youngest
of the party, when the talk got upon ghosts and ghost stories.
Some of the latter had been told, and then a discussion
began as to the probability and possibility of them. In the
midst I turned to the old lady, who sat smiling beside me,
and said, ' Granny, what do you think ? Do you believe in
ghosts or not V
' Don't you know, Clara,' broke in the girl sitting at our
grandmother's feet,' that's a question Gran will never answer
—at least not what 1 call answer !'
Gran stroked the glossy head resting against her knee,
saying, ' Pray, Miss Pert, what do you mean ?'
' Why, you never say plainly " yes " or " no,"' replied my
cousin.
' I do not like to say positively I do believe in ghosts, and
yet I have reason for not quite (disbelieving in them. Shall I
tell you why I cannot say positively that I think such things
impossible ?'
We all joined in a chorus of assent, and Gran began :
' When I was seventeen, a long time ago, dears, I went
with my sister Anne, Clara's mother, to stay at a house
you've all heard of, though none of you have been there,
Aynhead Court, which then belonged to my great-uncle,
George Shadforth. I had been there twice before, in
summer; but this time it was in February, and we were
asked in order to attend a ball to be given in the neighbour¬
hood, for the coming of age of a friend's eldest son. Our
great-uncle and aunt were to fill their house, and had warned
Anne and me that we must put up with any room they
could give us. We did not have so many balls in those days
as you spoilt children have now, and I had only been to
one before, so we did not care much how we were housed
provided we got to the ball.
' We arrived after a long, cold journey of two days'"dura¬
tion, and were glad indeed to stretch our feet out before the
glowing fire of huge logs in the hall, where we found a large
party assembled.    It M'as a curious old hall, low but large,
The Night after the Ball. 179
panelled and ceiled with dark oak. On one side was the
wide hearth with handsome brass dogs, and finely-carved
chimney-piece, reaching nearly to the top of the room; on
the other ran up the wide staircase of shallow polished
oaken steps, with banisters of the same wood, the top of
which was more than a foot wide—a grand slide for the boys
of the family. At the foot of this staircase was a door lead¬
ing into a large room called the billiard-room, in virtue of
its containing a billiard-table, but used by the young folks
for whatever games or messes happened to be in vogue.
Over this room were two rather small bedrooms, seldom used,
as the rest of the sleeping-rooms were on the other side of
the house.
' When we had got tolerably warm, our great-aunt proposed
we should go and dress, it being past eight; for in those days
we had supper, as we called it, at nine, and as we followed
her upstairs, she said, " I hope you won't mind being in the
' Ebony room,' and sleeping together; you will have Dorothy
Winscombe " (a niece of her own) " next door to you." The
" Ebony " room, and its neighbour, called the " Sir Beilby "
room, from an ancestor's portrait which it contained, were
the rooms I have told you of over the billiard-room. We
both, of course, answered that we did not the least mind
where we were put, and liked being together,—sisters in my
day, girls ! always did,—but I know some of you prefer to be
separate. Well, we spent a day or two very happily, though,
I dare say, you would have thought our quiet amusements,
chiefly carried on indoors, very dull. Then came the day
of the ball, spent by most of us in preparations for the even¬
ing, and helping to powder each other's heads. The next
night we all went to bed almost immediately after supj^er,
being tired after dancing from nine o'clock at night till half-
past six the next morning. I had slept soundly for several
hours, when I was suddenly awakened by the sound of voices.
I listened, and was surprised at their seeming to come from
the room below. Anne was still asleep, and I did not like
to wake her. I sat up in bed, and straining my ears for
every sound, became convinced that I heard two men's voices
speaking in angry tones in the room beneath. Another sound
mingled every few seconds with the tones—a sort of rattle,
followed by a sharp thud, which I recognised as the noise of
throwing dice. The voices became louder and angrier, and at
last I woke Anne, who heard the same sounds distinctly.
After awhile, as we sat listening, came other noises, as of a
table being pushed aside and overturned, and breaking glass.
l8o The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
At this moment our door opened, and in walked Dorothy
Winscombe, with a scared face, asking who could be quarrel¬
ling in the billiard-room. As we all three huddled trembling
together, the clock in the hall struck three, telling us the
hour, as to which we had been wondering. About five
minutes later we heard a clashing sound, then a heavy fall
and a groan, steps moving in the room below, and the door
opening. Creeping out on to the landing, we peeped
cautiously over the balustrade, and in the fitful glimmer of
the embers of the hall fire, could just see the figure of a man
in the shadow near the billiard-room door. We watched,
and he seemed to open a cupboard in the wall, and push in
a large heavy bundle and something else which glittered.
Then he disappeared, but we could not tell whether he went
back into the billiard-room or not. None of us dared
venture beyond the landing, and Dorothy was too frightened
to go back to her own room; so, wrapping ourselves up
warmly, we made up our fire, which was not out, and sat
round it till morning, all being quiet in the billiard-room.
' At breakfast we looked anxiously at all the gentlemen, and
watched to see if any of them appeared on bad terms, but
could perceive nothing of the kind. I noticed that " Aunt
Dorothy," as we called Mrs. Shadforth, looked keenly at me
as well as at Anne and her own niece when saying " good-
morning," and asked rather pointedly how we had slept.
Later in the day, as we were talking over what had happened
in our own room with Dorothy Winscombe, Mrs. Shadforth
came in, and after some trivial questions, said, " Were you
disturbed by anytliing last night, as you said you had not
slept very well ?" Then we told her what we had heard and
seen, and after listening to our story, she bade us not tell
Uncle George, as he never liked such things repeated, and
that they had both hoped we might not be awakened or hear
the noises which always recurred on that night of the year,
the 28th of February. She then told us that our ancestor.
Sir Beilby Shadforth, whose portrait hung in Dorothy's
room, had been a wild, dissolute gambler of King Charles
the Second's court. He was rapidly approaching ruin, and
having displeased the Duke of Buckingham, had retired to
Ayuhead Court for a time, where he spent his days in riding
furiously over the country, and his nights in drinking and
playing cards or any game of chance with such neighbours
as he could induce to join him.
' One day—the 28th of February—a gentleman arrived on
horseback, by his dress and appearance evidently rich, and
The Night after the Ball. l8l
from the metropolis. Sir Beilby seemed moderately well-
pleased to see him, and desired that his horse (a splendid
black one) should be taken to the stables, as the gentleman,
whose name he did not mention, would remain over night.
Lady Shadforth, a meek, timid young thing, who was much
afraid of Sir Beilby, appeared at dinner; but the servants
remarked she seemed more than usually pale and frightened
on seeing the stranger, to whom she never opened her lips
during the meal, immediately after which she disappeared
and passed the evening in her nursery. Sir Beilby ordered
wine, cards, and dice into the dining-room, which since
then had been the billiard-room, and he and his friend
sat down to play. The servants going in to replenish the
fire, found them still playing at various hours during the
evening. About midnight the bell rang violently, and Sir
Beilby, on the butler's answering the summons, bade him
bring fresh cards, asserting with an oath, as he threw those
on the table in the fire, that the things were bewitched. He
also desired the man to bring more wine and brandy. The
butler, an old servant of his father's, seeing he was already
half-intoxicated, took in the cards and wine, hoping the
omission of the brandy might be overlooked. But Sir Beilby,
swearing fearfully, sent him again to the cellar for it. He
was then desired not to return, but with another servant
sat up a little longer, feeling uneasy at his master's proceed¬
ings. About two o'clock, however, he went to bed, his room
being behind the dining-room. He was just dropping asleep
when he was aroused by the same noises that had disturbed
us, but did not dare present himself before Sir Beilby, whose
temper was most violent.
' Next morning the stranger did not appear, and the room
prepared for him had not been slept in. On Lady Shadforth's
asking nervously where he was, her husband replied he had
gone away at daybreak and would not return, having walked
across country to catch a mail coach at a town some six
miles off, as he had made him a present of his black horse
" Sultan." Sir Beilby left Aynhead next day, and did not
return for some weeks. When he came back he took to
riding " Sultan," but with difficulty, as the horse, though
perfectly gentle with every one else, became almost un¬
manageable when mounted by his new master, whom he
would even try to bite and kick in the stable. At last, one
day about ten months after he became Sir Beilby's property,
the creature reared as he was mounting in the paved stable-
yard, and falling back, crushed him so severely that he never
182 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
spoke again, and died in a few hours. The horse, in
struggling to rise, so strained and injured himself, that he
had to be shot. To this Aunt Dorothy added, that on the
night of the next 28th of February, and every succeeding one,
the noise of quarrelling, dice, and clashing swords, such as I
have described, had been heard, and it was always supposed
Sir Beilby and his friend had fought and the stranger been
killed, though no one knew what he had done with the body.
We told Aunt Dorothy of our seeing the figure shove a large
bundle into a closet near the billiard-room door, but she
assured us no such closet existed, and taking us down made us
point out the place, where certainly there was no break to be
seen in the panelling, and no sign of any recess or cupboard.'
Granny stopped; and we all exclaimed,' Then, Gran, you
have seen a ghost, so you iniist believe in them !'
She smiled, and said,' I can't say whether what I saw was
a ghost or not, and I do not like to think it was; but I'll
tell you what occurred a year or two later when I was again
staying at Aynhead. A piece of carving had fallen from
the cornice near the billiard-room door, and the carpenter
was summoned to fix it up again. As he went up the steps,
his hammer slipped from his hand and struck the moulding
of the panel below; immediately the whole panel revolved,
displaying a deep cavity or closet in the very spot wdiere we
had seen the figure put in the bundle. A candle was
brought, and in the recess we found a skeleton, with some
shreds of what had apparently been velvet clinging to it,
and a broken sword sticking between the ribs, the other part
of the sword lying on the top as if thrown in.'
So ended my grandmother's story, which made us all feel
very ' eerie'; and I leave my readers to decide as they please
whether the sounds she heard and the figure she saw were
the product of her own brain, or produced from a less material
source. The skeleton certainly was not an illusion, nor the
broken sword, which I have myself seen since Granny told
me the tale of my gambling ancestor.
Aynhead Court no longer exists, having been burnt down
some fifteen years since. H. MacEwan.
' Cackle—to make a noise like a goose.'—Vide Todd's Johnson''s
Dictionary.
Bravo ! Dr. Johnson !    Never a truer word wrote you in all
your life : ' Cackle—to make a noise like a goose.'    That is
Cackle. 183
just as good a definition of the word, now, in this year of
grace 1879, as it was when you wrote it, well-nigh a century
and a half ago. Had you any personal experience of the
matter, I should like to know ? Did your Tetty cackle in
her house at Hanipstead ? or did poor old blind Mrs.
Williams entertain you with this music when she came to
live with you in Gough Square ? Could Mrs. Thrale's wel¬
comes to her villa at Streatham ever be likened to the
greetings of the geese on the common beyond ? As for
sprightly little Miss Ileynolds, we all know the reason of
her being banished from her brother's studio. To the great
Sir Joshua, no doubt, the Miss Cotterills cackled away
volubly, unless, indeed, a duchess or a countess happened
to be present, whereupon the Admiral's daughters would
forthwith forsake their former companion, and take to higher
nights. Perhaps, too, it was by her sweet, shrill cackle that
' dear Queeney Thrale, the musical girl,' persuaded her
father to live more abstemiously, and won thereby the
published admiration of her fatlier's famous guest. Or
perhaps the great lexicographer himself foresaw how his
future fame would be made; for it is not only the geese
who cackle. Far from it. The ganders have their turn too;
and Bozzy, and Beau, and Goldy, and Lanky, and Sherry,
and Mur, and the other members of the Literary Club, were
but the forefathers of the present frequenters of Pall Mall.
For human nature is pretty much the same in all ages.
Human nature, then, being the same, it has gone on
cackling, even through this last phase of the Nineteenth
Century. Does any one see a double meaning here ? So
much the better if it is unseen. All I meant to say was
that the highest subject, the deepest, the most sacred, the
most obscure, not one of these is safe from the cackler.
The higher the subject, indeed, the more, of course, can
be made out of it. Take the Church, for instance, or the
Royal Family and its doings. Are not these the alpha and
omega of the cackler's creed ? They could not exist with¬
out them. They are to be dragged in when all other subjects
fail. Who does not know how an attack on a pet parson
will arouse the sleeper ? And an apocryphal anecdote of the
last remnant of royalty, will it not serve as provender among
certain circles for weeks ? Welcome are the feet of those
that bring such grateful cackle!
But it is not into these subjects that I mean to enter here.
There are plenty of others.
Take marriage for one.    Thtrc is a prime topic for the
184 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
cacklers. All its pros and cons, all its after events. First
of all, the meeting, the acquaintance, the courtship, the
engagement, then the event itself; after which come the
honeymoon, the home, births, deaths, troubles, joys, sorrows
perhaps, alas ! Can you not see, on some such occasion, a
goose come sailing into a well-known drawing-room, followed,
perhaps, by a gosling or two, to whom it is expedient to read
a lesson ? Can you not see the goose at home receive her
guest, spread out her wings, and begin to flutter ? And then
the shrill cackle that ensues! ' Have you heard, Mrs.
Gansen, of Lord Eobinson's engagement to Lady Blanche
Jones ?' 'I have heard rumours of it,' replies Mrs. Gansen ;
' but is it true ?' ' It is announced in the Moiming Post of
to-day.' ' What will they have to live on ? She has not a
penny, I know, and he has just lost a big sum at Long-
champs.' ' Oh, the Jones have an uncle in the City! No
doubt he will come forward, now that he knows his niece is
really going to marry Lord Eobinson.' ' Yes, really at last;
it has been going on long enough, certainly. Why, fully two
years ago it was said Lady Blanche Jones was going to marry
Lord Eobinson.' ' Ah, yes; but in those days, you know,
she was occupied in a tremendous flirtation with Mr. Bertie
Green, the brewer's son.' ' You don't say so, Mrs. D'oie !'
exclaimed Mrs. Gansen. 'A flirtation with a man of that
sort! I should never allow m?/ daughter to do such a thing.'
This is said severely, and for the edification of the gosling.
Mrs. D'oie smiles acquiescently. Probably, ere long, she too
will have a gosling to the fore.
Or a little later. The marriage is now accomplished. It
is an early winter visit. ' Back so soon in town, Mrs. D'oie ?
T really hardly hoped to find you here !' ' Oh ! we have come
back rather earlier than usual this winter, because we mean
to spend the spring in the south of France. You know, of
course, that Lord and Lady Eobinson also intend wintering
at Cannes or Nice V * No; I had not heard it. What is the
reason of that ? Is Lady Eobinson very delicate ?' ' It is
to be hoped not. A consumptive race of Eobinsons would
not be a benefit to the world at large.' ' But what will they
do there—he especially ?' asks Mrs. Gansen. ' There is no
hunting, or shooting, or racing, or even fishing at Cannes,
I believe.' ' There is yachting, though. Only yesterday I
heard that Mr. Bertie Green means to have his new yacht
out in the Mediterranean this winter. I believe he starts at
once.' Both ladies smile significantly. There is no gosling
present this time.
Cackle. 185
IMeanwhile the ganders are not silent. On the steps of
the club you may see them standing on one leg aj)iece, and
with their mouths wide agape, cackling. But as I scarcely
think their cackle would be of interest to my readers, I do
not mean to repeat it here. Perhaps Lord Eobinson's fondest
'fal' looks glum, and expresses himself as 'limp' when
the news reach him. No more fun for him at Eobinson's
expense (literally). That he knows well. And perhaps
Eobinson's second brother feels rather disgusted. He had
never expected, somehow, that Eobinson would ever marry.
Perhaps he had traded upon this expectation,—^just a little.
Naturally, therefore, he ' feels rather down in the mouth,' as
he himself elegantly expresses it. These are but the common
instincts of kith and kin. But to more than this, to the rest
of the club gossip, we will turn a deaf ear, or at least depart
with dumb lips. Part of it, however, notwithstanding our
precautions, will probably be given to the world at large. A
certain number of ganders will most likely present it to a
select set of geese of their acquaintance. How they will
chuckle over it—all of them ! What mysterious communica¬
tions and half-muttered whispers it will necessitate ! What
sudden hushes and gaps in the conversation there will be
when a child, or a servant, or a pariah enters the room.
And yet, presently, from the drawing-room to the servants'
hall there will trickle the stream of cackle, together with
scraps of exaggeration, and odds and ends of untruth, it has
gathered on its course. For, indeed, the original authors of
the cackle would often be sorely puzzled to recognise their
own offspring if brought back to them, like the Prodigal
Son, from ' a great way off.' And if it is so with the cacklers,
how about the cackled ?
Well, I say this. As long as cackle does not consist of
malicious untruth, impossible exaggeration, or jealous hypo ■
thesis, the cackled—about have no cause for comjjlaint.
Indeed, for the time being, they are in an enviable position.
There they stand, raised above their fellows, placed on a
pinnacle, it may be, of their own uprearing. All the world
—all their own special world, that is—comes round to gaze
at them with affectionate admiration. Then there is an
outer circle still, to whom they are the heroes or heroines of
the moment. Scarcely could an emperor or empress eclipse
them. They are happier than Alexander! They have con¬
quered one world,—the kingdom of kindliness and friendship
around them,—but there still remain worlds beyond worlds
for them to make their own.    But the moment cackle over-
186 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
steps certain limits,—the limits of sympathy and sincere
interest, the limits of foolish curiosity, perhaps, or of a kindly
inquisitiveness into other people's concerns,—the moment it
gathers unto itself untruths, or unkindness, as I hinted above,
that moment it ceases to be cackle, and becomes wicked",
unchristian, snarling, lying, impertinent ' hatred and malice,'
such as we pray to be delivered from in our Litany, and such
as should certainly never find a place in these pages.
So here I wiU conclude, not without a certain conviction
that I, too, have been cackling away—not a little, and that
I am an undoubted goose for my pains. It never could be,
could it,—though Shakespeare assumes that it might,—that
a goose would go on cackling when nightingales might sing ?
Yet, lest any one should be suspected of doing so here, I will
haste to make silence for the singing bii'ds, and for other
many-voiced bipeds. ... A Goose.
©ur Efa IPartg,
humbly dedicated to the members of the edinburgh
ladies' literary society.
On a chill and dreary evening
In the early days of spring-time.
There was gathered in our class-room,
Near the western end of George Street,
jVIany a fair and blooming damsel—
When the treasurer, ascending,
Stood erect upon the platform ;
Called the students all to listen
While she read aloud a notice—
Eead aloud an invitation
From ' some members of the council'
To a friendly, social meeting.
Soon arrived the day appointed.
And we trooped along the highways—
Trooped along by tens and dozens
To our common destination.
Up the stairs we mounted gaily,
Eeached a room where genial faces
Waited ready to receive us—
Eeached a room with cups and saucers.
Water-cresses, cakes and coffee,
Eanged in hospitable plenty.
Our Library Table. 187
Seated there, we laughed and chatted,
Listened to some words of wisdom.
Gloried gladly in the triumph
Of our clever London sisters.
Then we wandered through the building,
Through the lobby and the club-room;
Eead the Magazine, a volume
Of the Ladies' own formation;
Peeped into the heavy columns
Of the Times and other papers;
Asked our friends for light respecting
Both certificates and classes.
Studies and examinations.
Then we talked of higher subjects—
Of the work a cultured woman
Finds to do, whate'er her sphere be ;
Of the help to man she renders ;
Of her right to education
Tor her own sake —as a being
Who will live throu"hout the ages.
Slowly then we all departed.
Grateful for the kindness shown us,
Glad to think our friends were doing
Such a work so well and truly,—
Striving not to make ' blue stockings,'
But a race of thoughtful women,
Cultured mind and soul and body.
A Member of the English Litekature Class.
l.s< March 1879.
Odd Minutes for our Soldiers.    By L. W. M.    Printed by
Waterston, Sons, & Stewart, Edinburgh.
Those who are interested in the moral welfare of our soldiers,
especially if resident in a garrison town, or otherwise brought into
frequent contact with them, will do well to procure for distribution
the very ijseful and prettily got-up series of tracts thus entitled.
The little s&ries, twelve in number, is so small as to be portable at all
times, and each single tract contains, in small compass, cheering
words of friendly, serious counsel, valuable indeed to those whose
lives are so full of temptation to thoughtless recklessness. The
packet may be had on application, post-paid, to L. W. M., 4 Melville
Crescent, Edinburgh.
188 The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine.
Records of a Giklhood.    By Frances Ann Kemble.
London : Richard Bentley & Son.
This is a book which is sure to earn a well-deserved popularity.
To the lovers of anecdote and gossip about times and people nearly
passed away it will be very welcome ; but were it no more than this,
we should hardly venture to give it the warm recommendation to our
readers in general which on other grounds we feel to be its due. It
is much more than a mere book of gossip. Among much of family
history and contemporary anecdote, the writer herself stands out an
interesting figure of a brilliant, warm-hearted, and good woman. We
use the word good in its full sense, meaning one who was not only
good-hearted, but high-principled and religious, feeling the responsi¬
bility of her gifts, and joining to a natural satisfaction in her celebrity
a sincere desire to be useful in her generation.
The writing of this history of a youth spent in labour, excitement,
and all the fascinations of polished society, has been the solace of the
authoress's old age. The sober reflections of her later life mingle
pleasantly with the vigorous and dashing comments on all things in
life which she indulged in in her early correspondence. Brought
up in a happy home, and her wits sharpened by constant home
discussion of artistic and literary subjects, she seems to have ripened
singularly early; but the book is a comforting proof that an early
ripened mind need not necessarily be soon overblown.
The chief value of these memoirs will be found, we think, in the
pleasant picture they give of artist life at its best. Those who do not
already believe it, may learn here that it is possible for those who
tread the boards to be not only thorough ladies and gentlemen, but
good Christians and excellent members of society; and if this were
more universally believed, <the higher sympathy thus attracted to the
theatre would tend in its turn still more to raise and refine it.
Strangely enough, the ' other side' of the question is argued, and we
think, too, unreservedly by the authoress herself. If she knew her¬
self, her tastes and predilections, even whilst she was a successful
actress, did not lie in the direction of the stage; and her views of tlie
danger to nerve and brain, and consequently to character, of the
excitements of artist life, are unsparingly expressed. Our readers will
remember how, when Mrs. Kemble's memoirs apj)eared in the Atlantic
Monthly under the title of ' Old Woman's Gossip,' these views of hers
as to her profession were controverted in the pages of this magazine
by one well qualified in every way to speak on the subject; and in par¬
ticular how the old age of Mrs. Siddons was rescued from the charge
her niece brings against it of ' vapid vacuity,' and shown to have been
one of happy and honoured rest in the midst of a loving family circle.
Our authoress falls into the common fault of biographers and auto-
biographers—prolixity, and probably her work has suffered from
having been published in the short instalments of a magazine. A
little more time and care would have been well spent on method
and arrangement, so that the writer might not have been detected
repeating herself in the compass sometimes of a few pages, nor the
reader's mind perplexed about the sequence of events and the identity
of personages.
English Composition.    By Professor Nichol, LL.D.    Literature
Primers, edited by J. R. Green.    London : Macmillan & Co.
This  latest addition to  Mr. Green's series of literature  primers
ought  to  be  gladly received by all  who are  anxious to  improve
Question Series. 189
themselves in expressing their ideas in English. It would be a good
thing, indeed, for the Ladies' Edinburgh, and for many other magazines,
if all their writers would expend the sum of one shilling on Professor
Nichol's little book, and would take the trouble of studying it atten¬
tively. Their writing might be less in quantity, but we may safely
say it would be better in quality, if they laid to heart Professor
Nichol's clear instruction, and took his advice on the much-neglected
art of using as few words as possible in expressing an idea. The
plan of the book is to indicate what should be the main objects of
composition, and the mistakes which are likely to be made by writers
unskilled in the art. Wherever a distinct rule is laid down, it is so
clearly framed that it is easily remembered, and the violations of the
rule are illustrated by well-chosen examples, often so comic as to be
unlikely to be forgotten. It is not pretended that this little primer
can exhaust the subject, or furnish rules for guidance in every
difficulty of composition, but it does supply general principles which
simplify the matter very much. Professor Nichol is unsparing in his
opposition to prolixity, ambiguity, or exaggerated language; and
really we are not aware how far we habitually fail in these respects
till some sharp test applied to our ordinary style shows us how faulty
it is. For instance, take a paragraph in this or any other periodical
and apply it to this simple rule : ' Every word in a sentence which
does not do good, does harm. On revision, strike out every word
which you cannot account for and defend.' The paragraph thus
treated would probably be much shorter. Even for those whose
composition does not go beyond letter-writing, the primer would be
a help. Who has not been annoyed by receiving a letter so confusedly
worded that the sense had to be guessed at in the end, only because
the writer was untrained in the expression of ideas ? It is true that
sometimes the ideas are wanting, and then even the primer will not
help us. But when the ideas are there, only all in confusion, the
attempt to get them into accurate, concise English is a great help to
the poor bewildered brain. Most of us surely must be conscious of
sufficient weakness in this direction, to be gratetul for the help this
book can give in correcting our failing.
(Question Series.
IV. Give your impression of Mr. Browning's heroine, 'Evelyn
Hope'—her appearance, character, and circumstances ; and her re¬
lations with the imaginary speaker. Show what support the poem
gives to your idea.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C, care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than May 5tl). The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue ; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO FEBRUARY SERIES.
The musical question has proved too severe for many of our friends.
Pellegkina, best; Heather, equally good in matter but stiff in
style, ranks second ; Thoeough, third ; Enia, very good ; also Apis,
J.A^'EDA, Stella, Nagul ; Adelphe, Ekomart, very fair.
190 The Ladies' EdinburgJi. Magasme.
Give the meaning and derivation of the word madrigal, and
mention the connection of the madrigal with the original oratorio ;
show the difference between the old and new ideas of the oratorio,
giving an example of each.
A madrigal is a composition for unequal voices, intended to be
sung without accompaniment, and distinguished from a motett by
the independence of the different voices, which may each appear to
follow its own idea without reference to the others with which it is
yet harmoniously blended. It is an unaccompanied chorus, or, at
most, it should be very slightly accompanied by organ or piano only.
Fugue, imitation, and other artistic forms may be used in it; the
music is generally bright and gay, the words pastoral or sentimental.
The derivation of the word has been disputed. The Spanish verb
madragar, meaning to rise early, has been suggested, associating
these songs with the idea of reveilles or aubades. But as madrigals
were certainly first composed in Italy, an Italian derivation from
the words madre and gala seems more probable. In Italy, the first
of May was wont to be celebrated by people meeting together with
songs and dances, in honour of what they call Allegro Maggio; and,
as in England, they used to crown some village maiden queen of the
May, or, as she was called in Italian, madre de gala, mother or queen
of the sports. In some histories of music a sacred origin has been
claimed for the madrigal, as choruses originally sung in honour of the
blessed Virgin ; but against this it may be said that, with the
exception of thirty Madrigali Spirituali by Palestrina, published in
1594, when the madrigal had long been a recognised form of chorus,
they had all secular words. Constanzo Festa, who died in 1545, is
considered the creator of the madrigal; and a very popular form of
composition it proved, for we find that by the year 1620 there were
already 894 English madrigals, and in Venice 1000 collections of them
were known.
The Church, ever prompt at utilizing worldly art for her own
higher purposes, had, we have seen, adopted the madrigal
through Palestrina, and now, from various sources, received the
oratorio. Carissimi, in circa 1585-1073, a Paduan who first studied
in Venice, is considered the earliest writer of oratorio. He lived
long in Rome, and became associated there with St. Filippo Neri's
disciples. He, we are told, was wont to allure young people to remain
after service at the church dei Padri dell' Oratorio, by causing sacred
songs, sometimes in the form of dialogues or madrigals, to be per¬
formed there, called after the name of the church, Oratorios. These
first oratorios were chiefly songs, duets, trios, or choruses on religious
subjects, but slightly linked together. Now they have developed
into sacred musical dramas, in which the chief personages are re¬
presented by especial singers, or at least voices ; and the chorus
sometimes occupies the position of the reflective chorus in a Greek
drama, and sometimes is directly representative of multitudes intro¬
duced into the action of the drama. As in the typical oratorio
of St. Paul, by Mendelssohn, the chorus. 'How lovely are the
messengers,' follows the Greek idea; while 'Oh be gracious, ye
immortals,' is more strictly dramatic, representing, musically, the
heathen multitude bent on sacrifice. Modern oratorio is an attempt
to give to some scriptural narrative all the emotional and intellectual
aid that can be afi'orded by the art of music. All the devices of
scientific and artistic music may be employed, and orchestra, organ.
Stray Notes. 191
soloist, and chorus, have each in their place to minister to the general
effect. Carissinii's oratorios, which contain the first sketch of the
modern oratorio, have met with the usual neglect which befalls old
music, except those choruses which Handel has adopted as his
own. Pellegeina.
Strag i^otcs.
[^Communicated.'] We are favoured with a prospectus of a political
club for women, which it is proposed to form in a central part of
London. Its object is to supply a place of meeting for the many-
women both in London and its neighbourhood, besides country
residents, who are interested in the social and political movements
of the day, and who may thus learn how they can best give help.
As yet we know too little of the scheme to speak of its probable good
results, but we may admit that some such organization may be needed
in the metropolis for employing the.scattered energies of such women
as take an interest in questions of national importance. The usual
rooms for reading, writing, and conversation are to be provided, as
also space for discussions and lectures. Newspapers and other
periodicals will be regularly supplied, and arrangements made for
serving tea and coffee in the club. Members are only to be asked to
subscribe five shillings annually; this will probably deter many
persons from joining their ranks. We think there is a healthy tone
about this low subscription, as proving that all classes are invited to
join a society not intended for luxurious loungers but for women of
earnest purpose, anxious to learn how each in her own sphere may
contribute to the national welfare. We shall gladly hear more of
this movement. [Especially we should like to hear what is usually
the first thing known of a political club—what are its politics ? Are
they those of the Carlton or the Reform ; or is the bond between
members to be merely interest in political questions, the interest
which pervades county or borough on the eve of an election, and
which is generally rather of a splitting-up than of a binding nature ?
The club will obviously have this advantage, that members must
apply their hitherto scattered energies to purely theoretical views
on politics, unhampered by the disturbing practical experience of
political work, at present only possessed by men. We feel we may
congratulate the future members on their complete immunity from
all temptation to luxurious lounging. Considering what London
rents and taxes are in central positions, and that it will take a
hundred members to raise £2.5, bare walls, backless benches in close
rows, and much hopeless waiting for newspapers, are the best they
can expect.    The tone may be healthy, but how about the air?]
Kyrle Societies.—As a humble member of a Kyrle Society, I
have much pleasure in supplying a note upon the subject. It is
perfectly right to suppose the name to be taken from Pope's eulogium
on the Man of Ross. As far as I know, there are but two of these
societies—the London one, and one in Liverpool, founded on the
London model, the object being to bring beauty home to the people.
I will now quote from the Liverpool Society's paper to show how it
is proposed to carry out this laudable project:—
'1. By decorating with mural paintings, pictures, etc., rooms for
192 Tlic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
social purposes, such as schoolrooms, workmen's clubs, mission and
coffee-rooms.
' 2. By organizing a series of concerts of good but popular music,
either free or at the smallest possible cost, to be given by volunteer
performers.
' 3. By encouraging the cultivation of plants not only in windows,
but in areas and yards, and the love of flowers, by gifts of the latter
and seeds or plants for the former.
' 4. By co-operating in any effort which may tend to the advance¬
ment of beauty, and the purification of those parts of our town especially
inhabited by the poor.'
Members are admitted to this society without the payment of any
subscription being necessary, personal help in the various work
undertaken being that which is most needed, though of course
donations in money are also wanted for the purchase of materials
and other necessary expenses. When first I joined this society, I
found the members busy decorating a refreshment-room connected
with a Girls' Friendly Society ; and I was soon after employed in
helping to beautify the bare walls of one of the waiting-rooms of a
great dispensary, hoping thus to beguile many a mauvais quart d^heure
that has to be spent there. Musical members of the society find
sufficient scope for their talents in helping in concerts, at recreation-
rooms, and workmen's clubs, etc. Thus with music and painting we
try to make a counter attraction to the public-house. Much help has
also been given to the Window Garden Association ; the society, I
believe, also interests itself in the improvement and protection of
open spaces in the town, and with other matters promoting health
and the love of beauty, thus carrying out their motto, ' Whatever
things are lovely, think on these things.'
Materfamilias asks: Can any of your readers inform me what
inducements are held out to boys who are candidates for the Edinburgh
Local Examination Certificates 1 May boys who are taught at home
enter for these Examinations 1
Naiad asks: How can I become a member of the Women's
Swimming Club ?    To whom must application be made for details ?
Notices to Corrcsponticnts, tit.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/mZZ postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication can be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, April 5, at 4 Oxford Terrace, at 11 a.m.
Debate, ' Should Art represent only " the beautiful" ]'
Browning's Influence on English Literature.       193
is ti)c infiuntce of Brobjnincj Sliijantagcous to
3£n2lisij ILiterature?
{Read at  the  Edinburgh Ladies'' Literary  Society,  and published by
request.)
B id the worn pilgrim lean upon his staff:
E, ough may it be, perchance, but wholesome too.
O ft will it guide him on his toilsome course,
W here hardly may he tell false steps from true.
N ow such a guide, so trusty and so stern,
I s ours to climb withal; and we may learn
N ew wondrous lessons from this master's store,
G rowing the while in wisdom more and more.
In discussing the question, Whether the influence of Mr.
Browning has been advantageous to English Literature ? I
propose to confine myself chiefly to his earlier and best
known poems—those which preceded the publication of The
liing and the Book. It is by these that he will principally
be remembefed, both because short poems most readily find
a home in the minds of men, and because it was mainly
through these earlier writings that it became apparent that
a new thinker and teacher had risen up among us. ' Eed-
Cotton Night-Cap Country,' ' Pacchiarotto, and How he
Worked in Distemper,' etc. etc., may have attracted attention
because Mr. Browning wrote them, but ' Pippa Passes,' or
' The Flight of the Duchess,' were read because they brought
to a world hlas^ with excess of culture, the delightful
experience of a new sensation, the conviction that a new
voice was speaking in its midst.
Matthew Arnold says that Poetry interprets in two ways,—
by having natural magic in it, and by having moral pro¬
fundity,—by expressing with entire conviction the ideas and
laws of the inward world of man's moral and spiritual
nature. The second of these faculties seems to express the
peculiar character of Mr. Browning's genius. He is endowed
with an intellect at once subtle and profound. He might
be described as a philosopher who has chosen poetry for his
medium of utterance; indeed, it sometimes seems as if verse
with him was a mere accident of expression. He is not
insensible to natural beauty; on the contrary, when he can
pause to dwell on the outer world, he describes it with rare
felicity; but he is especially attracted by human nature, and
the laws which govern it through all its strange windings
and inconsistencies, and by those deeper problems of our
No. 53.—May 1879. N
194 ^■^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
being which have perplexed mankind ever since the days of
Job. Arnold goes on to mention Keats as having possessed
in perfection the gift of naturalistic interpretation. Shelley
was endowed with the same magic touch. They were fain to
clothe Poesy with every gorgeous ornament which wealth of
fancy could suggest, until, overburthened with colour and
detail, her form and outline were well-nigh lost. The earlier
poems of the Laureate show something of the same
tendency; and there was a real danger lest English poetry
should languish in an atmosphere of sensuous beauty, while
her votaries, lacking resolution to attack the actual evils
they saw around them, consoled themselves by creating a
visionary world where no unpleasant facts should intrude.
The influence of Mr. Browning broke in upon this dreamy
Paradise, like a healthy sea-breeze which creates a free circu¬
lation of air, effectually dissipating the mists and vapours
which clung about the enchanted ground. To him it is a
real delight to breast the Hill Difficulty. He is intensely in
earnest; the realities of things, the
' rage
Of knowing, seeing, feeling the absolute truth of things
For Truth's sake,'
have taken such hold on him that he -cannot pause to
consider their outward form. He has no time to indulge in
graces of expression. So vast are the thoughts that occupy
him, that he finds it by no means easy to shape them into
words. He wrestles with his subject; hammers it, as it were,
on the anvil, until, by repeated blows, his meaning, or some
approximation of it, becomes framed into speech. This
struggle for utterance in itself supplies an attraction to a
certain class of minds. Grappling with the sense of Mr.
Browning's rough - hewn sentences constitiites a mental
exercise which is wholesome and bracing, like breathing a
mountain atmosphere, to those who can bear it. Of course
I do not mean that there is any merit in obscurity fcr se.
Thought may be so transparently clear that we scarcely
realize what profound depths have been sounded in order to
present it to us. Still, if a man undertakes to guide us
throTigh a perplexing labyrinth, we must not quarrel with
him because the paths are rough. There are many passages
in Mr. Browning's poems which, if written out in the plainest
prose, with all inversions straiglitened, every nominative in
its place, and all the missing articles and conjunctions
supplied, would still tax our powers of comprehension to the
utmost, from the really  abstruse  nature  of the  subjects
Brownings Influence on English Literature.      195
discussed. In a luxurious and easy-going age, there is a
positive merit in overcoming difficulty; and where the
thought is worth the labour, it will be of infinitely more
value to us if we make it our own by some exertion of
intellect and will, than if we had picked it up, as it were,
ready-cut and polished for our use. On the other hand,
there are certain modern poets who seek to veil their
paucity of ideas under a guise of startling and far-fetched
expression. It would be matter for real regret if a writer of
Mr. Browning's eminence could be quoted in defence of this
school. But there is no affectation of mysticism in him; if
his meaning is hard to seize, it is because his language is
over-weighted with substance. Every writer of originality
runs the risk of having his peculiarities copied and exagge¬
rated ; and the influence of Mr. Browning will be found to
lie mainly in his rugged earnestness of purpose, the deep
convictions which he seeks to share with us. He certainly
lends no countenance to a weak straining after effect.
He is great as a satirist. With indignant scorn he holds
up to our reprobation all injustice, hypocrisy, and double-
dealing. Like Carlyle, he has an utter intolerance of sliams.
Mr. Browning, indeed, is attracted even by what he despises;
these by-ways, these twists and turnings of human nature,
have a fascination for him. He is gifted with a strong
dramatic faculty, which, though it does not prompt him to
represent his men and women in action, gives him a singular
power of analyzing motives and dissecting characters. With
a marvellous intuition, he throws himself into the position
of the half-worldly, half-rationalistic Bishop Blougram; or
represents the practical paganism of the Eenaissance in the
bishop who orders his tomb in St. Praxted's Church; or
depicts the reckless mockery of mirth of the Jews in Eome,
compelled to listen to a Christian sermon. In all these it
is some form of religious tyranny or imposture which he
exhibits in its full depravity. For him such subjects have a
painful interest. He seeks, by laying bare the sore places
of our nature, to discover the causes of the evil, and so effect
a cure, even as a physician is attracted by the symptoms of
disease rather than by a frame in rude health.
But more pleasing themes are not wanting. With what
almost divine insight has he imagined the soul of a musician,
a great composer, in ' Abt Vogler;' how full of point is the
humour in ' Fra Lippo Lippi;' how brimming with sly
amusement the representation of an Italian person of quality
in ' Up at a Villa—Down in the City'!
196 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Ere opening your eyes in the city, the blessed church-bells begin;
No sooner the bells leave off, than the diligence rattles in ;
You get the pick of the news, and it costs you never a pin.
By and by there's the travelling doctor gives j^ills,  lets blood,
draws teeth,
Or the Pulcinello trumpet breaks up the market beneath.'
It is matter for congratulation when any writer whose
teaching commends itself to the feeling of the day, ranges
himself on the side of Christianity, and lends the weight of
his intellect and arguments to uphold its immortal truths.
This Mr. Browning has done; and this alone would make
his influence of priceless value. Through all his involved
speculations—metaphysical subtleties of which it is difficult
to discover whence they start and whither they tend, por¬
traits wicked, self-deceiving, tainted with earthly passion—
we find the assured standpoint of one who, as he says of
himself, ' at least believed in Soul, was very sure of God !'
His weapons are frequently not those of old-fashioned ortho¬
doxy : they look strangely to our eyes, like a Moorish
scimitar beside a cross-handled sword, but he has shown
that with them he can do good service in the cause of Belief;
and, accepting as he does so entirely the tone, learning, and
science of his time, his accents seem peculiarly fitted to
arrest the attention of such inquirers as are still capable of
being convinced. Those poems which deal with theological
problems are among his most remarkable. Let us take
three, which seem to comprehend that whole vast interval
between the first awakening from the merest materialism,
and the profound conviction of a triumphant faith.
In ' Caliban upon Setebos,' we have a strange, even repul¬
sive subject, but a masterpiece of terse reasoning, expressed
in language the most direct and simple. Is this indeed
Natural Theology ? Is this terrible conception of Force
without Love such a ruler of the universe as man's unaided
reason would have evolved for itself ?
' He is strong and Lord.
Am strong myself compared to yonder crabs
That march now from the mountain to the sea ;
Let twenty pass, and stone the twenty-first.
Loving not, hating not, just choosing so.'
True, Caliban is a creature lower in tl)e scale of being than
an average savage, yet not lower than the origin which many
a learned man would now assign to our race. He is ' a little
higher than the apes;' just so; but wdien all that such a
theory involves is fairly set before us, must not any one who
Brownings Infltience on English Literature.       197
is really in search of Truth, pause before he accepts this as
his conclusion ?
Our next poem, the 'Epistle of Karshish,' appeals to a
different phase of thought. It is one of the most striking
utterances in the whole range of literature,—almost the only
attempt to fill up the outlines of persons and events men¬
tioned in Holy Writ which seems to add force and reality
to our ideas of them. How wonderful, and how entirely in
harmony with what we should expect to find, is the portrait
of Lazarus during the remainder of his life !
' Heaven opened to a soul while yet on earth;
Earth forced on a soul's use while seeing heaven.'
Then the physician, with his scientific scepticism:
' 'Tis but a case of mania, subinduced
By epilepsy, at the turning-point
Of trance prolonged unduly some three days.'
And yet—and yet — the case has fascinated him; half-
ashamed of the interest it excites in him, he yet cannot
turn away from it. And at the last, with what a noble and
pathetic burst of feeling does he lay hold on the great truth
after which he had been dimly groping!
' The very God !    Think, Abib ;  dost thou think ?
So the All-Great were the All-Loving too ;
So through the thunder comes a human voice,
Saying, '' 0 heart I made, a heart beats here !
Face, ray hands fashioned, see it in Myself." '
Verily, we may laugh to scorn, we may stamp out, this
deepest craving of humanity; but even as we think it
crushed, it springs up anew, and asserts its undying force !
The same thought—the central truth of the universe—
meets us again in ' Saul.' This poem is set in a higher key
than either of the other two; there is in it less of abstract
reasoning, more beauty of imagery and expression. Imagi¬
nation, discarding the supports of argument and logical
proof, soars upwards on the wings of a heaven-born inspira¬
tion, and feels herself expand and breathe more freely in the
atmosphere of Faith, which is in truth the most akin to her
nature.
A striking picture might be made from the opening de¬
scription,—the dark form of the king, leaning against the
tent-prop, dimly visible through the intense blackness—a
stray sunbeam revealing the figure of David as he enters,
with the dew on his ' gracious gold hair, and the lilies, yet
living and blue,' that are twined round his harp-strings,—
such a picture as Eembrandt would have loved to interpret.
ipS The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Beginning with the simple, plaintive tune, ' all our sheep
know,' — ranging onwards through the world of nature,
through all the joys and sorrows that make up the sum of
human life,—the shepherd-poet sings to charm away the evil
spirit, until, as his eyes are opened to behold more and
more of the mysteries which encompass us, he bursts into a
strain of prophetic rapture not unworthy of the sweet
Psalmist of Israel. Not Nature—not social or family happi¬
ness—not Fame—can appease the yearning of man's heart
after that perfection which he finds not here below;
nothing—save belief in the Divine love, as manifested in
the God-Man, and the hope of an immortal life, where
man shall' awake'
' From the dream, the probation, the prelude, to find himself set
Clear and safe in new light and new life.'
The necessity for another sphere of existence, where the
anomalies of the present may be equalized, forms the subject
of Browning's last poem,' La Saisiaz.' The volume contains
two poems, of which the first is in his best manner, and well
deserves to be studied ; while the second. The Two Poets of
Croisic, can only be described as rhymed prose. The cir¬
cumstances under which 'La Saisiaz' was written had stimu¬
lated the emotional side of his nature, and the language
employed is beautiful and appropriate. A lady friend with
whom he had visited Switzerland, was snatched from his
side by an awfully sudden death, and was laid in the little
churchyard among the vines. Alone he makes the moun¬
tain ascent which they had planned in concert:—
* Every side my glance was bent
O'er the grandeur and the beauty lavished through the whole
ascent.
Ledge by ledge out broke new marvels, now minute and now
immense ;
Earth's most exquisite disclosure, heaven's own God in evidence !
As I climbed or paused from climbing, now o'er-branched by
shrub or tree,
Now built round by rock and boulder, now at just a turn set free,
Stationed face to face with—Nature ? rather with Infinitude.'
And then he muses. Only five days before, they might
have stood there together! Five days,—scarcely long enough
to entice ' this pink perfection of the cyclamen' from the
crevice in the slab,—
* Yet of might to place between us—oh, the barrier !
. . . Therefore,—dared and done to-day
^ Climbing,—here I stand ; but you—where?"
Browning's Influence on English Literature.       199
The  answer to this question is given in a train of close
reasoning; link by link the chain is forged which shall bind
us to the hope of the future.     The argument is in parts
difficult to follow, but it is full of striking thoughts and
images;    and altogether the poem well deserves  careful
reading.
I might dwell on Mr. Browning's claims as an interpreter
of art.    His descriptions of pictures, his power of realizing
an artist's feelings, show a sensitive and highly cultivated
eesthetic taste, which peculiarly fits him to be our guide in
matters of which, it must be confessed, most of us   are
painfully ignorant.    This is more particularly the case with
regard to music.    Not only is he keenly susceptible to its
influence, but his knowledge of the science of music is such
that he is able to analyze, and express in fitting words, the
magic charm which it exerts over us;  thereby solving, in
one department, the question whether Science and Poetry are
antagonistic, by proving that, where the poetic imagination
already exists, technical or scientific knowledge does but
increase the poet's power of finding adequate expression for
the  aspirations which  he  possesses  in  common with   all
mankind, but for which he alone can find fitting utterance.
It is a curious thing that Browning, who listens with such
11-1 *
delight to 'those thirds so plaintive—those commiserating
sevenths—the Dominant's persistence till it must be listened
to'—in  musical harmony, should apparently be  so  little
awake to the harmony of words.    I do not mean only in his
more obscure moods, when his ideas come so rapidly that he
has not time  to unravel them, when  his   sentences  are
' congested with parentheses, and packed with subordinate
clauses.'   But there must surely be some flaw in ear, or taste,
or brain, which leads him to spoil so many of his finest
passages with some halting line, some awkward or uncouth
expression.    We cannot forgive him for the liberties he has
taken  with  the   English   language,  making  it  'dance in
fetters' to metres which are utterly foreign to its nature.
Such rhymes as,' instinct, quince-tinct,—eye-holes, viols,—
burlesque you, rescue,—-^thiop, wreathy-hop,' would be all
very well in the pages of Bon Gaultier or the Ingoldsby
Legends,  but when we meet with them in poetry which
does not profess to be comic, we are soon ready to cry.
Hold, enough I
Still, it seems not so much that Mr. Browning cannot
express himself in melodious language, as that he deliberately
excludes Beauty from the means he employs, and sets him-
200 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
self to arrest our attention rather by a certain determined
energy and quaintness of style. Some of his short poems are
absolutely perfect; such are 'Evelyn Hope/ 'Two in the
Campagna,' 'The Guardian Angel,' and the delicious little
breath of Spring, beginning,
' Oh to be ill England now that April's here !'
He gives us a finished picture in a line :
' Rescue my castle before the hot day
Brightens to blue from its silvery grey.'
' What I love best in all the world
Is a castle, precipice-encvrled,
In a gash of the wind-grieved Apennine.'
Would a page of description tell one more than that last
line?
' The grey sea and the long, black land,
And the yellow half-moon, large and low,
And the startled little waves that leap
In fiery ringlets, from their sleep,
As I gain the cove with pushing prow.
And quench its speed in the slushy sand.'
* The champaign with its endless fleece
Of feathery grasses everywhere!
Silence and passion, joy and peace,
An everlasting wash of air.'
The first of these is a suggestion of Tennyson; the second
reminds us of Wordsworth.
Throughout Mr. Browning's writings there runs a vein of
warm patriotic feeling. Italy, indeed, is the love of his
heart.
* Open my heart, and you will see
Graved inside of it, Italy,'
he says in one place; yet—perhaps for the very reason that
he views his mother-land from a distance, so that all the
harsh lines of party politics are softened and blended—he
is able to fuse all lesser feelings in an overflowing conviction
of the high mission which England has hitherto fulfilled,
and (we trust) will still continue to fulfil. There are few
finer things in the language than the lines on the battle of
Trafalgar, ' Home Thoughts from the Sea,' with their burst
of generous sentiment:
'Here and here did England help me ; how can I help England ?'
So again ' The Lost Leader.'    How grandly the passionate
lines ring out!
' We that had loved him so, followed him, honoured him,
Lived in his mild and magnificent eye,
Learned his great language, caught his clear accents,
Made him our pattern to live and to die.'
Browning's Influence on English Literature.       201
One longs to know of whom these verses were spoken.
Perhaps some day, when the full history of the nineteenth
century is written, for whoever lives to see it, this will be
explained.
With the excej)tion of occasional poems, such as we have
now been quoting, Mr. Browning will never be a popular
poet; he has not himself sought for popularity. It has been
shrewdly remarked that ' in the career of every successful
artist there seems to be a period reached at which the
temptation to indulge in puzzling eccentricities is almost
irresistible.' He has undoubtedly laid himself open to this
charge, and the tendency must detract seriously from the
permanent value of his writings. Probably we shall not be
far wrong in attributing much of the peculiarity of his later
manner to the loss of his wife's influence. All his wildest
speculations and most questionable moralities have appeared
since the death of that true poetess and sympathiser in all
noble aims; and we are therefore led to imagine that her
presence was needed to keep the balance of his nature, to
knit all his finer faculties together, and to prevent them from
thus flying off at a tangent
But we must ever look upon him as having been a prin¬
cipal means of forming the minds of those who, in their turn,
will act as the guides and teachers of lesser men. He will
take his place among the great thinkers of all ages; and we
may emphatically claim his influence as morally beneficial.
There are natures which cannot rest without working out
every problem for themselves, and ascertaining their posi¬
tion step by step. For all such his writings will be a rich
mine of hope and encouragement, as showing how others
have trodden the same path, have stumbled over the same
obstacles, and have emerged conquerors. ' What is Truth?' is
liis motto; and in the pursuit of Truth he is entirely honest
and fearless. Nor is he blinded by any specious or plausible
theories,' oppositions of science, falsely so called.' He has
a firm grasp of the great verities which lie at the root of all
wisdom. He looks round on this scene of failure and dis¬
appointment, and he gathers from it material for rejoicing.
The more imperfection he sees around him, the firmer is his
trust in the ultimate destiny of man:—
' On the earth the broken arcs; in the heaven a perfect round.'
He who has learned that' Man succeeds in that he seems
to fail,' can look patiently on much that would seem sad and
incomprehensible but for this clue ; and his fellow-men will
202 The Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
crowd to his feet, to hear the lesson proclaimed again and
again. If such are the results which flow from the study
of Mr. Browning's writings, we may confidently expect that
when Time, who tries all, shall have permitted his more
perplexed and harsher utterances to fall into oblivion, the
pure flame of his genius will remain, no baleful meteor, but
a clear and stedfast light. A. G.
^ i3aUati of i\t Crical.
' Thou art like those mortals who have picked up in the woods and
carried to their lips some pieces of the reed-pipe thrown away by the
god Pan. Then they enter into the wilderness, follow the course of
the streams, bury themselves in the heart of the mountains, restless
and haunted by an unknown purpose.'—Maurice de Giierin.
' Why do you wander, fair Karin,
So far upon the hill,
Where waste lands high meet empty sky,
Where winds have their will ?
' Why do you bide there, fair Karin ?
'Tis not to tend the sheep;
They love not to go where the shrinking snow
Gleams in the crannies deep.
' 'Tis not to watch the herds, Karin;
They never care to stray
Where the ice clings still to the.heart of the hill.
All through the summer day.
' 'Tis not for the horses' sake, Karin;
They glance and gallop back.
Where hills ablaze in former days,
Have burnt the lands black.
' 'Tis not for the riders' sake, Karin;
They shun the shore of the lake,
Wliere the sad wind moans o'er standing stones.
And the dead men wake,
' Who wandered far in their lives, Karin,
Yet missed the way and the light—
The way they seek, with wailing shriek, ,
Night after night.
I
A Ballad of the Ideal. 203
'Leave them the haunted lake, Karin,
The phantom summer snow,
And the icy spires, and the ancient fires.
All they have now.
' Come to the warm green vale, Karin,
Come to the merry throng,
Where the burr of the wheel and the dancer's heel
Beat time to song.'
' Ah, leave me lone on the hill, maidens!
No sorrow has marred nvy fate;
Yet by those waves, near the place of graves.
Long I must wait.
' The winds slept high on the crags, maidens.
The dead slept low in the ground.
When I was aware that all the air
Broke into glorious sound.
' And was it an angel from heaven above ?
Or one of the eliin race ?
Did a long lost friend for a moment bend
From some blissful place ?
' I know not yet; but this I know,
That most I love to be
Where the sunbeams glow on the mountain snow.
Where all came to me.
' There is little joy in the vale, maidens.
And little rest by the hearth.
When loveliness our life can bless
Not of the earth.
' But when I come to the lower land,
I shall have learned a song;
The vale shall hear, and the end shall be near—
I need not linger long.
' And when I come to the world again,
I shall a secret know.
So sweet to tell that it ends all well
To whisper it and go.'
E. J. 0.
204 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Country ,Sii6jccts ant pursuits^
v.—BOTANY.
Amoxg the country pursuits suitable alike for the strong and
the weakly, we may reckon the study of Botany.
Like all other studies, it is better when carried on earnestly
and thorouglily; but even when only taken up in a compara¬
tively desultory manner, it serves to render interesting many
a lonely walk which otherwise might be found somewhat
dreary. To those whose fingers can wield pencil and paint¬
brush it affords an endless variety of lovely subjects; and we
have known more than one invalid whose days spent on a
couch have sped away gladly and happily in filling an album
with sketches of the wild-flowers brought in by others, and
arranged in their botanical order. We ourselves well re¬
member the intense pleasure of our first sight of the lovely
little fei'n, aspleniwn viridc, which we had long been seeking
without success. It was a hot summer's day, and we had
taken refuge from the broiling sun in the shade of a high,
overhanging rock, beside a lovely mountain stream, whose
tinkling sound, as it passed between large grey boulders, had
a cool, refreshing effect on our senses ; while the drip, drip,
of a spring behind, as it oozed through the crevices of the
rock and fell from a soft, velvety cushion of sphagnum moss,
aided in doing away with the oppressive feeling of heat from
which we were suffering. The repose would have been
perfect, and the dolce far niente in that shady spot most
enjoyable, but for those ever-active little demons, the midges,
which in about five minutes came swarming around us, and
our peace was at an end. An uneasy, impatient wriggle
under the torture of their worrying little stings caused us
to turn, when, lo! our eyes fell on a fairy-like tuft of slender,
bright-green fronds, between some broad patches of mar-
chantia. Heat, fatigue, midges, all were forgotten, and in an
instant we were, regardless of the damp surface, climbing
the rock to investigate that tuft, which, to our delight, proved
to be, as we suspected, asplenium viride. Two or three more
plants were discovered at no great distance; so we carefully
dug up root and all, and for more than a year that lovely
fern gladdened our eyes under a glass shade in our sitting-
room. There is one form of botanizing which we would
strongly deprecate, i.e. that which leads its followers to
ruthlessly grub up and carry away all the specimens they
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 205
can find of any rare plants, in some cases leading to its
extinction. We would also warn zealous botanists against
being led by their eagerness to trespass into private grounds
or woods even when unfenced and unprotected by lodges,
as we have known much annoyance given to the owners of
such plantations or copses on finding some favourite fern
or flowering plant, whose natural progress they had been
watching, either mutilated or carried away.
The study of Botany is one which must raise its votaries'
thoughts in tone, for no one can pursue it without being more
and more impressed with the wonderful perfection of the
minutest of God's works, both as to symmetry and suitability
to the peculiar functions of each individual part; it is, indeed,
a study which leads the mind ' from Nature up to Nature's
God.' We scarcely believe in the existence of the oft-quoted
individual to whom
* The primrose on the river's brim
A yellow primrose is to him,
And it is nothing more ;'
for, without being either a poet or a botanist, there can
hardly be any one to whom primroses and other spring
flowers have no associations. We think one of the best
modes of studying Botany is to take some one family of
plants, and devote whatever time we intend setting apart for
this pursuit to the collection of specimens of that family,
making ourselves thoroughly acquainted with their habits
of growth, varieties, localities, etc.; and we would not
recommend the choice of a genus which is rare or difficult
of access, except in the case, perhaps, of exceptionally good
walkers. For young girls Botany is an especially well-
adapted study, as it induces them often to take a good
healthy walk, when otherwise they might only dawdle
about listlessly without aim or object. And to how many
lovely spots will they penetrate, in search of some wished-for
specimen, with which they would otherwise have remained
unacquainted! To a botanist no weed is insignificant or
ugly; and we know of one lady, who, living near a pond,
took to the study of duckweeds, and in those apparently
uninteresting little plants found most unsuspected beauties,
and became so enthusiastic on the subject of their loveliness
as to cause much merriment among her friends. Another
merit of botanical study is that it requires no expensive
apparatus,—an ordinary trowel, a penknife, and a magnifying
glass being quite sufficient,—not but what a good microscope,
when it can be afforded, is an invaluable aid and acquisition.
2o6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Then, too, it is an occupation for each and every season.
In spring we can watch the different forms of buds and their
various modes of unfolding, as well as the special mode in
which one or other kind of plant pierces the ground and puts
forth its first tender leaves. In summer tliere are the perfect
Howers to be studied, their infinitude of colours; and one
most interesting subject of notice is their tendency to
abnormal development, or, as gardeners term it, ' sporting,'
either in form or tint. In autumn we have an endless
occupation in studying the various forms of 'fruit,' the
botanical term for all seed-vessels, and their many varieties
of dehiscence and indehiscence; while in winter we can
arrange the notes, sketches, and dried plants collected during
the three foregoing seasons, or turn our attention to the
lichens which flourish on the old walls, rocks, and tree poles
and branches within our reach. The Linnrean system is now
nearly obsolete, but we would venture to suggest that, for
children and beginners, it is the easiest, and even for more
advanced botanists may be used with advantage in combina¬
tion with the natural arrangement.
In a short article of this description it is scarcely fitting
to enter into details, or to recommend any books on the
subject, but we would mention to our readers the small one-
volume edition of Sowerby's English Botany as a convenient
reference, and not cumbersome when travelling. One merit
of the science of Botany is that it is open to all, rich and
poor alike, and is one of the simple and natural occupations
which health accompanies, as it leads its votaries into the
fresh air, and conduces to exercise. The botanist can indeed
say:
'For us kind Nature wakes her genial power,
Suckles each herb, and spreads out every flower!'
and the pursuit affords one of the purest, if not the purest of
liuman pleasures,—one that can be shared with others, or
equally enjoyed by the solitary. What more delightful than,
on a calm spring morning, when the delicate smell of the
bursting birch catkins pervades the air, to wander alone in
some natural wood or copse, and there to seek and find the
lirst fairy-like green fronds of the oak fern, or the rarer and
only slightly less lovely beech fern, and, sitting down beneath
the tassels of the weeping birch—the ' lady of the woods,'
then and there to study the marvellous manner in which
each tiny pinnule is rolled and packed into the smallest
possible space; or in autumn, with some sympathizing friend,
to wander up some Highland glen, crushing, as we pass, the
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 207
hay-scented fern, and causing it to give out its peculiar
fragrance, while we seek for the gemmed fringes of the sun¬
dew where a spring moistens the grass and stones, cropping
out in a space between gloriously purple tufts of heather,
over which hover numerous varieties of bees,—the handsome
Emperor moth, and other insects too numerous to mention,—
while the whirr of the grouse's wing, and the wild, weird
voice of the curlew far overhead sound pleasantly in our
ears! Alas! that the lovely little sundew, when found,
should betray its carnivorous nature by the remains of its
unfortunate insect victims here and there among its diamond¬
like edging of hairs. Some of these disjecta memhra are so
small as only to be visible beneath the magnifying-glass,
and we hope, somewhat revengefully, they may be the relics
of our enemies the midges.
An objection we have heard raised more than once against
Botany is, that there ' are so many long Latin words and hard
names.' This, we think, is easily overcome, and applies no
more to our subject than to any other science, and many of
the terms used have English synonyms equally efficient.
Then, too, complaints are often made as to the difference of
various authors respecting the number of species contained
in the Flora of Great Britain. There is no doubt this is
somewhat puzzling to a tyro, and that while some authorities
are inclined to multiply the species ad infinitum, others-,
again, we should say, with their dislike to what they con¬
temptuously term ' species-making,' are over-slow in admit¬
ting a group or form of plant to that title. A very little
study, however, will soon overcome these difficulties, and
we feel sure any of our readers who may be induced by our
advocacy of Botany to turn their attention to it, will find
themselves richly rewarded by the increased pleasure the
merest half-hour's saunter will afford.
Combined with our subject we would suggest the study of
Entomology, which, though less suitable, perhaps, for ladies,
is most interesting, and can to a certain extent be most
easily pursued; but to enlarge on this theme would be beyond
the limits of our present paper.
We now bid our readers farewell, trusting that during the
coming spring and summer some of them may learn the
delights of finding a hitherto unknown plant or blossom,
which perhaps would otherwise, for them, have been doomed
' to blush unseen,' and so have left them in ignorance of one
more of the wonderful works of Him who created ' herbs for
the use of man,' not the least portion of that use being to
2o8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
clothe the earth with beauty, and, by our admiration for that
beauty, to lead our hearts to adoration of its Maker.
L. H. EOGERSON.
K\}t Bcgpr of Capo tii iHonte: a Sale of Sixty^one.
By the Author op ' Mabel's Ckoss,' etc.
CHAPTEE VIII.
Before Filippo lauded, the crew of the vessel had gone on
shore, and all, with the exception of the soldier who had
come on board, had disappeared with the men who had been
waiting for them.    Filippo helped Concetta up the broken
steps of the pier, and bade her heed her footing over the
slippery, slimy weed that hung about the large stones, and
keep close to him.    A few words in the unknown i^tois
passed between the soldier and Filippo; then, turning sud¬
denly into a long narrow lane, lighted by one miserable lamp,
they began to ascend several flights of steps, which led appa¬
rently to the Campo Santo.    Concetta, almost breathless
from the hurried ascent, shuddered as she saw the place they
were approaching, for she found the men had all assembled
at the gate of the cemetery, evidently awaiting the appearance
of their leader.    A bell hung over the gate, which Filippo,
as soon as he reached the entrance, rang loudly.    In a few
minutes a faint light could be seen approaching through the
arches of a long cloister which ran round the graveyard.   Not
a word was spoken by any one; all seemed intent on the
purpose of their strange meeting, though Concetta thought
she could perceive something like fear on the countenances
of some of the men, as the light fell on the various symbols
of death and the hideous representations of the Crucifixion
which met their gaze on all sides.    In her intense anxiety not
to be separated from Filippo, she almost forgot her fatigue,
and scarcely heeded the astonished look of the friar who was
unlocking the heavy gate, when he saw a woman amongst
the party.     Filippo saw and understood the glance, and,
whispering something into the father's ear, he bade Concetta
enter and follow him.    Silently, one by one, they walked
through the cold, dank cloister, preceded by the friar, who
knelt for a minute to murmur a short prayer before a shrine
lighted by a small lamp, showing a figure of the blessed
Virgin within, and most of the party did the same.    Con-
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 209
cetta's prayer was full and deep, as she too knelt before the
shrine; and Filippo's eyes, as they rested on the figure of
the kneeling girl, seemed to wear a softer expression than
they had done hitherto. She would have lingered there,
pouring out her heart's sorrows, had not Filippo touched her
arm, lifted her up, and bade her hasten onwards. She
thought his touch and his voice were more gentle than she
had known them before, and felt thankful for the change.
There was something strangely solemn in the echoes that
followed their footsteps as they passed through the rows of
tombs on either side of the cloister. A gate at the opposite
end of the Campo Santo admitted them into a rough kind
of shrubbery, at the end of which were some vineyards, and
beyond them rose a mass of heavy buildings. Concetta
could not distinguish their form, for the night was gloomy,
and there were no stars out. She concluded it was a
monastery, and soon that idea was confirmed by the opening
of a small door into a larger entrance, which was now un¬
locked by the monk who acted as porter. The friar entered,
and they remained for a few minutes in the outer yard, till
a side door was opened from the interior, at which the party
were admitted. A flight of narrow steps led up to a spacious
but barely-furnished room, with a stone floor, above the kind
of cellar they had just entered. A large, rough table, with
similar benches of unplaned wood, seemed the only pieces
of furniture in the room. At the upper end of the table
sat two friars, who immediately rose up at the entrance of
Filippo, and greeted him heartily. Apparently they took no
notice of Concetta, but Filippo desired her to seat herself on
a bench near him, and a little separated from the others. It
was a welcome command, for the poor girl, unaccustomed
to fatigue of any kind, felt she could not have gone many
steps further. Some earnest conversation now passed be-
twea^ the friars and the men who seemed the leaders of the
party, and Concetta thought she distinguished the names of
Mazzini and Garibaldi in their eager discussion. Some
more friars now came into the apartment, bringing with
them a quantity of arms, such as swords and pistols, and one
of them bearing a large painting of the young king, Francis
II. Concetta now felt assured she was in the power of her
father's enemies, and waited with a trembling heart the issue
of this secret meeting. The friar who seemed the head of
the brotherhood now desired each man, as he received a
weapon, to swear on the picture of the king never to relax
their efforts to restore their liege lord to his throne so long
No. 53.—Mat 1879. n
210 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
as they lived, and never to betray the cause in which they
were now engaged. The oaths were freely taken, and each
man took his seat on the benches round the table. Concetta
did not dare look up, lest her face might betray the emotions
passing in her breast, but every nerve in her body quivered
with apprehension as she heard the words repeated which
might, perhaps, be the signal of her father's destruction.
Some serving friars now came in, bearing a quantity of
plain food and wine, of which the men eagerly partook,
rilippo handing a portion of both to Concetta. While fear¬
ing to refuse it, she felt, in drinking their wine, as if she
was in some measure an accomplice in their schemes of
vengeance, so solemnly sworn over their cups by her com¬
panions. Their carousals extended far into the night, and
the poor girl was obliged to listen, not only to the coarsest
ribaldry, but to the horrible cruelties proposed in case of
their capturing these hated Garibaldians. How much longer
these orgies might have continued she knew not, had not the
bell of the convent sounded for early matins; but at that
sound the friars rose from the table, and the one who seemed
the Superior said a short prayer, commending them to all
the saints, with a promise of everlasting happiness to those
who should succeed in crushing the hated leaders of the
rebellion which had deposed their lawful and beloved king.
Concetta trembled as she listened to this blasphemous
mockery, and felt thankful that the time was come for their
quitting the convent. The monks, before they broke up the
meeting, did not fail to inculcate the necessity of immediate
action, as every day lost was rendering their cause more
desperate. Filippo now turned to Concetta, and signed to
her to follow him; but as she attempted to rise from her seat,
her trembling limbs refused to support her, and she sank
back utterly powerless. Eilippo saw it was no feint, but
hesitated for a moment how to act. One of the friars, who
had been furtively watching the sad and changing counte¬
nance of the girl, came forward and suggested they might
take her in the litter kept in the convent for carrying the
sick. She looked up gratefully at him for this considera¬
tion, though a feeling of dread thrilled through her frame,
as her fancy suggested the probable loathsome disease of the
poor sufferer in whose service the litter was last employed.
She was allowed no choice in the matter, and Filippo pro¬
ceeded once more to bandage her eyes, lest, as he said, she
might be frightened at the steep declivity leading from the
convent, but in reality to prevent her carrying away any
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 211
recollection of the features of the locality. She did not
attempt to demur, but, remembering her oath, submissively
resigned herself to the irksome restraint. The events of the
night had shown her most clearly the intentions of Filippo
in his present character of reactionist, but his conduct towards
herself was as inscrutable as ever. Her mind was calmer
than it had been during the first days of her capture, for she
was sensible of a change in the manner of Filippo, though
she could not account for it; nor could she reconcile his
present scheme with the intense hatred toward the dynasty
of the Bourbons which he had avowed on board Signor
Ciprani's vessel, in their little voyage to Ischia. Coufd it
be that he had then been acting a part to acquire a more
intimate knowledge of her habits and whereabouts, and that
the pretended encounter with the other vessel had been
pre-arranged to prevent suspicion falling upon him when his
plot for her capture had succeeded ? While these thoughts
filled her mind, she was for a time insensible to the difficulties
of the descent; but the oaths and exclamations of the men
who carried the litter made her tremble lest, wearied with
their burden and the dangerous nature of the rocky path,
they might refuse to carry her further. Every now and
then they halted and muttered something about leaving her
behind, and probably would have done so had they not
feared the anger of Filippo, for they made fresh efforts
whenever his voice was heard calling them not to tarry with
their burden.
And now the sound of the waves rolling over the rocky
beach told her the dangerous descent was ended, and Filippo's
voice was again heard shouting to the men to hasten on board
and raise the anchor, as the wind was favourable for their
sailing, Alas, then it was too true ! they were about to take
lier from her adopted country, and bitter were the tears she
shed at this enforced separation. She was soon taken from
the litter, hoisted up the side of the vessel, and laid on the
mattress where she had slept on the previous day. The
handkerchief had not yet been taken from her eyes, but she
had become familiar with the sounds on board, and soon
discovered they had left the little port. The breeze was
fresh, and the little vessel seemed to fly before it; and when
at length her eyes were uncovered, she perceived they were
fast losing sight of the land. Filippo walked backwards
and forwards on the deck, evidently in some anxiety, for he
constantly raised the telescope he carried in his hand and
examined the bearings of the compass.    Concetta observed
212 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
with surprise the change that had taken place on board
during the niglit. Instead of the heavy chests formerly
stowed aft in the vessel, it now was covered with bales of
merchandise ranged in order on each side, and empty wine-
casks filled the hold. The appearance of Filippo, and the
men who joined him at the convent, was as completely
changed as that of their little bark. Instead of the rough
sailors and soldiers who had stood together on the pier
the previous night, these men now assumed the dress and
manners of negociants engaged in commerce, carrying their
merchandise from the mainland to be disposed of in the
islands, and conveying back the empty casks which had
contained the wines of Sicily. So complete was their trans¬
formation, that she would have doubted the evidence of her
senses, had it not been that from time to time Filippo
stopped in his walk as he passed the mattress where she
lay, and directed a somewhat troubled glance towards
her. It was a beautiful morning, and had not her mind
been filled with sorrow and anxiety, she would have been
enchanted with the glorious colouring which heralded the
bright luminary, now just rising above the eastern horizon,
and sending rays of rosy light far up into the heavens. The
curling waves, following each other as if in sport, caught the
reflection, and gave out a succession of sparkling effects.
The world outside seemed full of joyful life, for flights of
birds flew over and around the ship, now dipping their light
wings in the blue water, now soaring in wild circles almost
beyond the eyes' ken. But Concetta was insensible to aught
that spoke of happiness, and brooded over what seemed the
chain of her destiny, link by link into the far-off, unknown
future. Vainly had she tried to solve the meaning of
Matteo's disappearance, when and where he had quitted the
vessel. Filippo, who had taken no notice of her since they
had left the convent, now addressed her, and she started
from her reverie at the sound of his voice:
' 'Twere pity, girl, thou wert not one of us, for then thou
hadst not been so easily cast down.'
She looked at him timidly, as if to understand the mean¬
ing of his words, but he passed on, merely bidding her
receive the good offices of Niccolo in the way of breakfast in
a better spirit than she had done the previous day. As he
spoke, the young man appeared from below, bringing her
some good chocolate and wheaten bread. She took them in
silence from his hands, on which the youth, putting on a
look j)artly saucy and partly reproachfully, said :
TJie Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 213
' Thy night's rest hath done thee little good, wench, if it
hath not taught tliee a word of thanks for the dainty meal
I've brought thee. I could not break the morning's fast
myself till thou wast served, at the least thou mightst have
given me a smile for my reward !'
Apparently Concetta's resentment had passed away, or
sadder thoughts had banished the recollection of his previous
boldness, for she said gently :
' My heart is too full for smiles, good youth, but I thank
thee, nevertheless, for thy willing service; it is all I have to
give.'
The youth's countenance softened at the reply, and he no
longer offended her with his rude glances. Filippo was now
eagerly examining the different weapons they had received
at the convent, in which scrutiny he was joined by several
of the men, all of them appearing much excited, and using
much gesticulation as they continued to pace the deck.
They evidently anticipated a speedy use for them, and
Concetta caught the sound of Garibaldi's name in connection
with Messina and other Sicilian towns. A light was thrown
by these words on the destination of the vessel, and she no
longer doubted that Filippo and his friends Avould soon be
found in arras against Garibaldi and his followers; but what
would be her fate ? they did not war with women ! As the
men passed and re-passed before her on the deck, she en¬
deavoured to find some reference to herself in their broken
sentences. In vain she listened, for her name never crossed
their lips; they scarcely appeared to remember her presence,
so intently were they occupied with their proposed outbreak.
Wearied with her sad thoughts, she endeavoured for a time
to forget her sorrow, and profit by the seeming indifference
of Filippo by availing herself of his permission to seek
repose in the little cabin below. She knew not how long
she had lain there, when a wild exclamation of joy burst on
her ear, and shouts of ' Etna and Catania' rang through the
air. She raised herself from the mattress, and, looking
through the window, saw what she concluded must be the
island of Sicily, for there was the majestic cone towering in
gloomy grandeur above the surrounding country. All was
now hurry and' confusion on board the vessel, which was
rapidly approaching a small fortified town rising high above
the rocky beach, and in about half an hour they anchored
close under the rocks, and men in boats came crowding
■ round, all eagerly shouting to Filippo and his companions in
hearty greetings and offers of conveying the goods on shore.
214 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Concetta, now completely roused, looked eagerly from the
cabin window, and tried to form some conjectures as to her
future destination, hoping also to discover Matteo amongst
the expectant crowd.
{To he, continued.)
When the birds are homeward flying
O'er the hill,
When the shadows low are lying
Dark and still;
While the sun is slowly sinking
In the sea,
Then, as I of thee am thinking.
Think of me !
When our earthly cares are ended
For the day.
And the lights are softly blended
Tar away;
When past hopes with future linking.
Follow free;
Then, as I of thee am thinking,
Think of me!
C. M. Williams.
©ur llusical Season*
' Music is a higher revelation than science or philosophy.'
—Beethoven.
At the close of our present musical season it appears, on look¬
ing back, that we can find at least one cause for congratula¬
tion. While the amount of good music offered to us has been
much the same as during the last four or five winters, we
think that the number of appreciative hearers has increased,
and tliat musical intelligence is decidedly growing in this
coimtry. Though few have reached that climax of intensity
in music which leads them to quarrel about the various
musical schools, one saying, ' I am of the Italian,' another,
' I am of the German school,' yet there is a growing belief
in music as a reality. In the dawnings of the understanding
of it, it is looked on as a luxury, and in its steady growth
Our Musical Season. 215
it becomes at last as much a necessity as a man's daily
bread.     What religion is to Scotland, we may almost say
that music is to Germany.    ]\Ien only quarrel about what is
dearest to them.    Thus the Scotch have quarrelled about
church affairs, until tliey have  split themselves  up into
almost as many sects as they have buildings to worship in ;
and the Germans have quarrelled about music until they have
almost as many schools as they have composers.    That is the
way to attach a man devotedly to any object—let him fight
for it.   It was this that made the men of the feudal ages better
lovers than those of the nineteenth century; each man had
to win his lady by the sword.    And this is one of the causes
at least that make the Germans better musicians than the
English or Scotch; they have often to fight their way against
fearful odds.    At first, even in Germany, it might have been
said to any school. Go in and win ; there was a monopoly
first by one and then by another; but as soon as competition
set in, enthusiasm waxed high, and music was idealized.
The competition between the various schools is now more
general with us than it was ; and with its increase we shall
see music grow out of a mere luxury into a necessity, some¬
thing that we cannot do without.    There is no Art which
is not necessary to us, if we only knew it.    It is our failing
to understand this that  sinks  us  in  the  scale of being.
After we have got under way in the affair of music, how¬
ever, there   are   various  hindrances,  arising   from various
causes, which may  cross  our path and impede our  pro¬
gress.    One of these arises from the want of ideality pre¬
vailing in the present day.    This want has militated against
Christianity, and it is militating against music.    That love
of science which leads man everywhere to trace all things
from scientific  causes  to their due  results, has  led  some
musical critics to fix on inspiration as the cause of music; to
dissect this cause, to label its parts, and, if possible, to frame
from them a recipe for the speedy and effective manufacture
of musical compositions of aU kinds.    The profane finger of
science has intruded within the curtain even of this holy of
holies; and should its so-called discoveries wear a plausible
aspect, there is cause for fear that the belief in music as an
Art may in some cases be undermined.    That is an advanced
and  complicated occurrence, however, and one which can
never happen to any who are imbued with true notions on the
subject of the art of music.   For as the advance in science is
like the noting down of fresh peculiarities which we may have
discovered on the surface of a country, the advance in Art,
2i6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
on the other hand, is like soaring up into a limitless vault, or
plunging into an ocean unsounded by the plummet. Art is
addressed to sentiment, science to reason. Art is myriad-
tongued and measureless, for its language to each is different.
Sometimes it produces but a faint result, at other times
its eff'ect is so overpowering as almost to burst the human
vessel into which its works are poured. Thus the belief
in music can never be qualified or undermined in the case of
those who are in reality its votaries.    But who are these ?
The species of concert-goers with whom we have at pre¬
sent to do, has at least this one pervading feature, that all who
belong to it consider themselves, to a certain extent, to be
in love with music, and also to have some knowledge of it.
To show how very varied are the qualifications of the species
for understanding musical performances, it may suit our
purpose to divide them into four kinds. These are—first,
the music - mad, whether professional or amateur. The
former of the two may well be devoted to his art, for the
sake of which he has suffered poverty and hardship ere he
became proficient enough to win the smiles of fortune. The
amateur is generally characterized by a more unreasoning
madness, a devotion to that which he knows to be delightful,
yet cannot tell why. The second class of concert-goers con¬
sists of those who hear, practise, or even compose music only
in a desultory way; who often suffer long intervals to elapse
without any musical thoughts or intentions; to whom,
in fact, music is nothing but an amusement. The third
class answers to the character of the hypocrite in religion;
they profess to be perfect connoisseurs of all the phases
and developments of an art of which, in reality, they know
next to nothing. The fourth know so little as to be able to
enjoy only what is self-evidently enjoyable. But they wear
no semblance of this absent knowledge. Their faces have
always the same expression, except when roused by some
sprightly melody, when they open their eyes a little wider
than usual, and on leaving the concert-room are heard to
remark, ' I thought that popular air the best of the whole.'
Leaving out of account the first class, to which compara¬
tively few belong, we think that by far the greater number
of musically educated ladies may be reckoned among the
second class just mentioned. They are the audience, tlie
musical public in fact, possessed of some power of apprecia¬
tion and of criticism. They help, often w'ithout knowing it,
to form the general taste ; for it is their expressed opinion
which is usually taken for the true one, and repeated by
Our Musical Season. 217
others.    Can we express too strongly, therefore, how desirable
it is that they should listen with heart, mind, and soul, so
that their opinion may be a true and conscientious one ?   In
order to be a good listener at a concert, many qualifications
are necessary.    A chief one among these is memory.    It has
been remarked that the great element of success in painting
is memory, not only of form and colour, as beheld in nature
or in the artist's model, but also memory of the combinations
of colours required to produce certain effects.    It might also
be remarked, that for musicians and authors memory is
an essential in the execution of their work.    Mozart, like
Goethe, had his works in their completed state present to
his mind before he wrote down any part of them.    Th^
entire score was vividly before him, and the greater part
of his work was done before he began to commit it to paper.
The ideal hearer would naturally go to the concert-room
with a mind familiar with the scores of all the productions
about to be heard.    But such can be the case of few, and in
lieu of this, a good knowledge of the pianoforte renderings,
where they exist, will go a long way towards familiarizing
the mind with the music, and rendering attention more easy.
Where even this has not been attainable beforehand, the
analytical programmes assist greatly.    Of these we had nine
last winter, one being provided for each of the Orchestral
Concerts given in the earlier part of the season, and one for
the Eeid Concert in February.    The earlier concerts were
more scantily attended this winter than we have before seen
them.     Undoubtedly  commercial  depression  is  partly to
blame for this.    The lives of many have suffered restriction
to the necessities of life, among which music is not included.
To how many among us is the sentiment of beauty still a
luxury, to be parted with long before the silk dress and the
elegant chambermaid!    In Germany, we cannot but think,
ladies would have discarded all finery, and taken to coffee
without sugar, and almost without coffee in it, rather than
lose an opportunity of hearing a symphony, to them always
the piece de rdsistance of the whole performance.    But we
must  not be  hard  on  our  countrywomen;   concerts  are
cheaper in  Germany than  here, and  the  time has been
troublous indeed.    A financial revolution is as soul-disturb¬
ing to those concerned in it as a civil one is to the whole
community.    Let us rejoice that some of us have been free
enough from painful distractions to welcome the recreating
power of music.
We will now go back in spirit to the music we have heard,
2l8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and dwell for a little on some of the strains that pleased
us most. The Jupiter Symphony, performed on the 25th
November last, may, we think, have been so called because,
before composing it, Mozart, at the summit of his fame, shook
himself free from all trammelling influences, and, like Jove,
began to make his own weather. We listen to this symphony,
and seem to follow a mighty genius in its career, from the
beginning to the close of the work. The somewhat scanty
number of strings in proportion to tlie winds, might hinder
the effect of the performance of this and other symphonies
from being so colossal as it should have been; yet, under
the guidance of a thoroughly competent musician, the
orchestra, however unused to play together, proved, indi¬
vidually and collectively, to be not unworthy interpreters of
this great work. Mozart is not only musician, but thinker;
the variety of the appearances of earth, its sights and sounds,
the spirit of beauty, the mysterious connection between soul
and body, subtle and profound as that between sound and
instrument,—all these have flitted across his brain. He has
even marked that underlying note of sadness that brings a
discord here and there into all the sweetest harmonies of
earth, a discord that not even the best musician can resolve.
Mozart is a thinker, but he is an optimist. Morbid brooding
on absent, impending, or even present cares, is foreign to his
disposition; his manly imagination has enough to do witii
his art. He sees beauty, life, light, gaiety, light-heartedness,
and these fill his heart and become his own while he trans¬
lates them into music. The wonderful interweaving of
melodies in various combinations with their accompaniments,
is extremely conspicuous in the Allegro which forms the
finale of this symphony, and is a miracle for its brightness,
variety of themes, and effects of counterpoint and modulation.
Under the bright and magical eifect of this wonderful work
of genius, we are inclined to call Mozart tlie Shakespeare of
music.
It has sometimes been remarked that we seldom find a
musician who is also a man of general culture. But though
it may be true in a certain sense that a thorough musician
cannot find either time or interest sufficient to enter deeply
into other subjects, yet he masters them, as it were, through
the instinct of his art, which forms a peg on which to hang
other knowledge. An instance of a highly-cultured man
who is above all a virtuoso and a composer, we have, how¬
ever, in the Abbd Liszt. We heard, at the concert of the
9th December, a Poeme Symphoniq^ue, composed for orchestra
Our Musical Season. 219
by Liszt. That nobility of style which is conspicuous in all
his compositions, both literary and musical, is eminently
observable in this composition. It belongs, to some extent,
to the class of programme-music, as the subject of meditation
is suggested beforehand; the hearer is not slavishly kept to
the text of a running interpretation, however, as in the over¬
ture by Goldmark, performed at the same concert. Liszt is
eminently revolutionary in his attitude towards all musical
systems; but as his works are chiefly composed for the piano¬
forte, and of great difficulty, they are limited to a certain
class, and do not arrogate to themselves the proud title of
Music of the Future. With regard to the suitability of pro¬
gramme-music for answering the highest ends of the art, we
do not presume to give an opinion. The greatest composers
have indulged in it to some extent; Beethoven, for instance,
in the composition of his quartett in F, was inspired by the
words, ' Must it be ? It must be,' which had been the sub¬
stance of a dialogue between himself and his landlady, who
demanded payment of his lodgings. But this humble theme
was no doubt altered and idealized a hundredfold in the
mind of Beethoven during the composition of his quartett;
the landlady would become the personification of worldly
cares, which do not fail to assert their power over even the
greatest genius. Tlie mind of Liszt, enlightened by the
highest culture, imbued with noble generosity even in the
uses of his art, inspired to discover and to fulfil the mission
of art to the spirit of man, cannot dwell patiently even on
a true artistic creation which lacks ideality, and is wanting
in applicability to the whole human race. Thus, in hearing
Gluck's Orpheus, the hero becomes idealized in his mind.
The marble statue which he had seen in the Louvre, fixed
for all time in the attitude of striking the lyre, becomes in
his fancy an immortal genius, exhorting through the lyre,
teaching to the men of all periods and nations the true uses
of art. He is to draw men into that serener sphere which
glorifies human life, and mirrors forth things inexplicable
by words. In this symphonic poem of Orpheus, the poet-
musician begins by rejoicing in his art, and then bewails
his Eurydice, the lost ideal to which his inspirations were
addressed, but which a cruel destiny has alienated from him.
A solemn hymn, a melody full of anguish, the wailings of
disappointment, succeed, and then the strains gradually die
away, and are finally hushed. Orpheus has departed to seek
his Eurydice, after calling on all around to help him.
Space will not permit of our dwelling longer on the earlier
220 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
part of our winter programme, which contained many other
masterpieces admirably performed, such as Schumann's
Eourth, and Beethoven's Seventh Symphony. Besides the
five Orchestral Concerts, three Oratorios were given. "We
were present at only one of these,—viz. Israel in Egypt,—and
thought that, as far as the choir was concerned, the rendering
gave a faithful account of the condition of Israel in Egypt,
for it left much to be desired. Israel did not stay so long in
Egypt on that occasion as Handel had intended, for, after
numerous sins of omission, the orchestra and choir set us
free at ten o'clock, and we departed without great regret.
The Choral Union of Edinburgh gave, at several of the con¬
certs, selections of glees, which, under their able conductor,
showed a nearer approach than on former occasions to true
artistic attainment.
Our bill of musical fare for the winter, always with
admirable prudence, leaves the best items to the last. The
Eeid Festival is to us invariably what Eurydice was to
Orpheus,—like an angel's visit, short and sweet, which leaves
us sadder and yet gladder, and perhaps wiser than before.
For some portions of the Eeid Concert we were prepared by
the beautiful rendering on the organ given previously by the
Professor of Music. The morccaxix were all of high rank,—
notably Beethoven's Emperor Concerto, and Mozart's Sym¬
phony in E flat,—and it was fitting that they should be so,
when to be performed by an orchestra which 'realizes in the
domain of music the ideal of the Peace Compress.' We
welcome the ' Emperor' to such an august assemblage, feeling
assvired that winds and strings will alike do him justice. And
all did indeed conspire to make the hearing of that concerto
a thing to be remembered, the pianist interpreting his part
from memory in the most enthusiastic and perfect style,
while the orchestra knew that lie knew what they were
doing; they played as one man, and gave a noble rendering
of the work. The Adagio is in Beethoven's grandest style,
and the light, playful, and effective finale, with its marked,
peculiar rhythm, is as gracefully happy as anything he ever
wrote. We hope that when it was written he had passed
that stage of existence when justice (?) required him to
throw rotten eggs at his cook, and to quit his lodgings,
taking with him a half-written score. "We cannot but think
that he would have been gratified by this performance, even
as far as the number of the orchestra went, for it is well
known that he disliked giant orchestras. Mozart's Sym¬
phony in E flat, plunging, as it does, through a volcanic
I
Our Musical Season. 221
eruption into a flow of happiness and gaiety, seemed to us
more varied in theme—a greater triumph of minute knowledge
of the art, than Spohr's somewhat affected Duo conccrtante,
which preceded it. The ever-welcome music to the Mid¬
summer Night's Dream, which concluded this concert, formed
a fitting appeal to the fairies who wait upon St. Valentine
upon the eve of his day. Among the vocal numbers of the
Eeid Concert, we had the well-known air from Gluck's
Orpheus, in which the musician cannot tell what to do
without Eurydice. It was beautifully rendered by the
round, full contralto voice, with its perfect cultivation, while
the singer preserved that native simplicity so often found in
German artistes. How tellingly did this voice contrast with
the clear, bird-like (we had almost said swallow-like) tones
of Miss Thursby's soprano, so eminently suited to that
beautiful setting of ' The Swallow,' which seemed to us far
more worthy of Tennyson's words than the other somewhat
hackneyed air to which we have often heard them sung!
We have already alluded to the dark side, which, alas!
underlies music as it does all other things.    The intensity
of genius is too akin to despair, for it sees where other men
are blind, and feels where their sympathy cannot reach.    In
associating these  moods with  Beethoven, we  cannot  but
think he must have been more than ordinarily sad when he
composed his Choral Symphony, which we heard at the
Saturday Concert, the last of the Reid Festival.   Beethoven,
in spite of public opinion, believed in the power possessed
by  the  English to   appreciate  music.    He even took the
trouble to study the character of the nation, and to approach
in thought their mental atmosphere.    That spirit of deter¬
mined progress, that hopeless repining against fate, the one
of Saxon, the other of Celtic origin, find their expression
throughout the purely instrumental part of this magnificent
symphony.    The   minor key, in which the first movement
begins, with the piano passage in the key of the dominant,
hints at the design of the composer rather to retire from the
hum of men and their ordinary intercourse, and to cherish
the woes of the idealist who questions cruel fate, and cannot
anticipate anything but gloom.    Even when he tries to be
gay, this minor undertone is at hand, ever ready to step in
and sadden all.    His star-gazing, however, has been profit¬
able after all, for at length he sees cheerful rays piercing the
clouds; he discerns the true origin of joy, and the whole
composition bursts forth into a sublime hymn of rejoicing.
This we did not hear with its full effect, as the choral part
222 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
was wanting. But the close was grand enough to make us
feel that this was the work of a great mind at its highest
stage; we strain our powers to meet and to appreciate it;
and at the close feel that we could hear it a hundred times,
yet ever iind something new. And this was composed by
Beethoven when he ' had persuaded himself that nowhere
should his stupendous genius, which anticipated the progress
of many centuries, meet with adequate recognition except
in Great Britain.'
Perfect as all the performances were at the Saturday
Concert, yet we cannot but feel that one performer merits
more than an ordinary share of applause and admiration,
namely, the fair violinist. The task of the performer
is to create anew that which has been created by the
composer. He must analyze it, enter into it with heart and
soul—be one with it, in fact. Earely is even this achieved,
but still more rarely do we find a performer who has so
completely made the music her own that she is, as it were,
pervaded by it, and is nothing less than an embodiment of
the gi'ace and sentiment which it expresses. By due artistic
progi'ession she has risen to this height, and there is not
much reason to doubt that she has found the key to the
emotions of her hearers. Most fitting, therefore, to her, as
well as to the others who shared in it, was the tribute paid
at the close of the last concert of the Festival. We could
not but think, when the shouts of applause followed the
giving and acknowledging of the wreaths, that we were
not in cold Scotland any more, but back again in enthu¬
siastic Germany. The difference between the Eeid Concert
of to-day and the original Eeid Concert of from thirty to
forty years ago, may well call forth shouts of applause and
expressions of gratitude to those who have achieved this
result. And when we see the prime mover in this musical
revolution modestly lay his votive wreath upon the bust of
Beethoven, we think that Beethoven, too, saw through the
chill exterior of the English nation, and, far from thinking
them unmusical, wrote his best works for them, and looked
to them alone for ' an adequate recognition of his stupendous
Work as your Saviour worked when here,
Breathing a blessing everywhere,
Doing the best within your reach,
Each for all, and all for each.
TJie Working Ladies' Guild. 223
Tread where your blessed Master trod,
Feet in His footprints tend to God ;—
Go not alone, but with you lead
The feet that fail, the hands that bleed.
Join hands and hearts, until at length
The Guild shall prove that ' Union's Strength;'
So shall ascend about the Throne
Ten thousand songs—not yours alone !
The Working Ladies' Guild is a society of ladies and gentle¬
men, formed for the purpose of giving practical aid and
sympathy to gentlewomen needing assistance. It came into
existence in the year 1877, and for the first few months its
office was in a private house. In April 1877, however, two
furnished rooips were engaged, and a secretary appointed.
The present office is at 113 Gloucester Eoad, London, S.W.
So the work was started. But for some time previously—
for mamj years, indeed—it had been in the heart of one of
our earnest women, ' that a sort of Christian freemasonry for
benevolence was needed, and might become a powerful aid
to the many solitary workers in this wide field of labour.'
Other duties, however, prevented her from setting her wish
into word or deed, but often was it tlunujht over; and when
at length the other duties dropped away, one by one, and
time and opportunity came, health was too uncertain to make
it seem right to attempt it. Still the haunting wish was not
to be stifled, and presently an attempt vjas made. And then,
as so often happens when God means to bless a seed which
is sown for Him, it is found to have taken root in soil pre¬
pared for it in other hearts. So it was with the Working
Ladies' Guild. Before its seed was really sown, it seemed to
grow up and bear fruit, and now it may already be said to
be a spreading tree, under the branches of which, many an
aching heart, weary and worn with the ceaseless battle of
life, may find rest, and shelter, and help.
For this society, thus formed and started, the name of the
Working Ladies' Guild was presently chosen, as indicating
a iraternity engaged in united work, and anxious to afford
mutual help. It is connected with several other societies
having kindred objects; it is confined to no special locality;
and its organism is sufficiently elastic to suit different forms
of assistance, but each having the same purpose. That pur¬
pose is chiefly (by finding suitable employment) to maintain
or restore independence to those assisted, the great difficulty
of this part of the work being to find employment for un¬
trained women, who are naturally the chief sufferers in any
224 T^i-^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
reverse of fortune. There is also a large class of ladies who
no longer come up to the present standard required for
teachers, and who are too old to attain to it. These two
classes the Guild ought to be able to assist better than any
other society, as each associate is requested to mention to the
secretary every possible opening for employment, no matter
how trivial it may appear. Such occupation will often fill
a vacant gap in life whilst waiting for something better.
The rules of the Working Ladies' Guild are few, and grow
according to their need. The following are those at present
used:—
I. No person can apply to this Society except through an
associate.
II. The names of persons assisted shall not be published.
III. Persons of all creeds are assisted.
IV. Those applying for assistance must be personally
known to the associate recommending them, who must fill
up a form of recommendation, which form can be obtained
from the secretary.
V. This form must be sent in to the secretary by the
nominee, at least one day before personal application. Asso¬
ciates are themselves expected to assist in the course deter¬
mined xipon ; for the Guild is not a relief society, but acts on
the principle of co-operative help.
VI. No case requiring assistance is retained on the books
longer than twelve months, without special permission.
VII. Ladies having accepted employment cannot apply
again to the Guild without a re-introduction.
VIII. No married lady can be assisted with money, if her
hvisband is in health, and able to support her.
The subject of loans is under consideration. Meantime,
it has been decided that no loans be granted, except by
authority of the General or of the Case Committee.
The organization of the Guild is not yet complete, but it
has not deviated in any essential point from the original
intention of its Foundress.
It has its ' Council of Eeference,' composed of gentlemen,
who can be occasionally and individually consulted by the
Committee, of which they are ex officio members.
The General Committee meets every month, to receive
reports of work done, to frame rules, to elect associates, and
to determine all questions of finance. It includes the heads
of departments, local heads of branches, heads of associated
societies, and others specially chosen by the President, and
approved of by the Committee.
The Working Ladies' Gtiild. 225
The Case Committee meets every month (and oftener if
required), and is composed of ladies specially chosen for this
purpose. Members of both the ' Council of Eeference' and
the General Committee may be invited to join.
The associates introducing cases shoiild, if possible, be
present, and other associates are frequently invited by the
president to consult and co-operate. An associate is selected
who can be entrusted with the care and working out of each
case, and through whom all aid is passed. This is done
chiefly in order to adhere as strictly as possible to the
fundamental rule of the Guild, not to divulge names and
circumstances of those assisted more than absolutely neces¬
sary. The power of this committee to vote money is limited
by the General Committee.
The Guild has also its ' Corresponding Members,' who may
be empowered by the president to hold monthly meetings
of ' groups.' These groups differ from ' branches' of the
Guild by having no power to elect associates. They take
part in the general work of the Case Committee, and are in
direct relation with the central office, from whence cases are
sent to them for deliberation and assistance.
There are ' special departments' for plain work, for art
needlework, and for drawing in connection with the Guild.
iSTor are any of these departments intended to supersede
existing societies. London is fuU of forlorn women, who
cannot obtain employment through the existing channels ;
it is for their sake that the Guild is anxious to throw open
other doors, and to utilize whatever is offered in the way
of aid for those on its books.
The Guild has also its own registry at its own office. It
is, however, in connection with the registries of other asso¬
ciated societies. No lady's name can be placed on this
registry, except through an associate.
A depot has been opened at No. 78 Buckingham Palace
Eoad, where specimens of the various works executed in the
different departments may be seen.
For further information concerning the plain work, address
a letter to Mrs. Locker, 80 Eaton Square, S.W. Eegai'ding
paintings, drawings, etc., address to the Lady E. liundas,
34 Onslow Square, S.W.; for the art needlework, to Lady
Eden, at the Depot, 78 Buckingham Palace Road; for the
knitting department, apply to Miss Louise Barron, 47 Glo'ster
Place, Portman Square, who will send boxes of knitted goods
to any ladies willing to aid in disposing of them.
The societies associated with the Guild are—The Ladies'
No. 53.—May 1879.        ^ p
226 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Dressmaking and Embroidery Association, 42 Somerset
Street, Portman Square ; The Society for the Employment of
Women, 22 Berners Street; and The Association for German
Governesses, 12 Wyndham Place. Each of these societies
has its own registry.
The Guild is also in connection with the Industrial Society,
11 Porchester Street.
The Wo7nan's Gazette is always willing to diffuse informa¬
tion about the Guild, and regularly reports progress. It can
be obtained from Messrs. Hatchard's, Piccadilly.
The associates of the Guild are divided into two classes.
They are termed ' honorary associates' and ' full associates.'
The former are those whose yearly subscription is less
than a guinea, and who, furthermore, do not offer any special
help or aid to the Guild. These associates may introduce
other associates, but they cannot recommend cases for
assistance.
The full associates are those who pay at least one guinea
subscription, or who give some regular and definite aid to
the Guild. These associates may not only introduce other
associates, but they can recommend cases personally known
to them. They must, of course, be able to vouch for the
worthiness of their case, as well as to co-operate with the
Guild in the assistance determined upon.
Each fresh associate must be introduced for election by an
existing associate, or by the consent of the president.
No associate has power ex officio to ask for money or aid
upon any plea whatever, unless by authority of the president
or committee.
All are expected to inform the secretary of change of
address, and of any vacant situations or employment that
come under their notice.
Donors who do not wish to become associates, but who
give £10 and upwards, are entitled to recommend one case
annually for each £10 given. The list of associates and
donors to the Working Ladies' Guild can only be had at the
office, and is not transferable. Eeports, with rules, can he
had at Hatchard's, 187 Piccadilly.
Subscriptions should be paid to the secretary at the date
of the associate's election. The following years they become
due either at Christmas or at Midsummer.
Letters addressed to the secretary, and requiring an
answer, should always contain a stamped envelope. The
office closes from the middle of August to the end of
September, also for a fortnight at Easter and a fortnight at
The Working Ladies' Guild. 227
Christmas, during which periods no fresh applications can
be received, and the office only receives letters.
Besides this London work, there are various 'groups'
and ' branches' established both in England and in France in
connection with the head office of the Guild. Each of them
is under an appointed chief and an organized staff.
The ' groups' are in or near London, and work with the
head office. There is at present a valuable ' group' working
at East Mowbray.   Also there is one in Wimpole Street.
The ' branches' are established in more distant districts.
They have not yet quite settled down into working order.
One, however, has already been set going at St. Leonard's, and
another at Scarborough. There are also working associates
at Southsea, at Brighton, and at Torquay.
Of the foreign ' branches,' the earliest was that started at
Cannes during the winter of 1877-8. It was placed under
the charge of a well-known authoress, who has made that
corner of France familiar to English readers by one of the
most picturesque of stories.
Another ' branch' has since been started at Nice, and it
is said that the Bishop of Gibraltar is anxious that other
brandies should be formed in the various places of his
diocese.
On Tuesday, March 18, 1879, the first general annual
meeting of the "Working Ladies' Guild took place. This
event may be regarded as a sort of epoch in the history of
the Guild. The Vicar of Kensington lent his parish-room
for the purpose. The meeting consisted of associates of the
Guild, unknown to each other's faces perhaps, but known
well enough by the interchange of kindly words, and thoughts,
and deeds.
The president read a paper, in which the following infor¬
mation was embodied:—
'Though it is scarcely more than two years since the Work¬
ing Ladies' Guild began its existence, the number of associates
is now not far short of a thousand. It counts among them
men and women of influence and position. Some help more
than others, but all are ready according to their capabilities.
When an associate happens to be in the place for needed
help, she wiU then be called upon to give the definite aid,
which is registered against her name in the books.
'Tlie Guild has its own doctors, lawyers, men in Govern¬
ment offices, literary men and women who write, work,
teach, visit, and receive guests sent at their own request and
invitation by the committee for change of air, etc.    Others
228 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine,
provide tickets for convalescent houses and hospitals. Others,
again, give tickets for concerts or entertainments for the
weary and hard-worked. One lady will give occasional
drives to invalids. Another will seek for lodgings by the
sea-side, and will lend books and comforts to strangers while
there. In fact, there is no sort of aid offered by associates
which does not prove acceptable to the Guild.
' It would, of course, have been easy to increase the number
of associates had it been desirable to do so, but the tendency
of such an elastic society is always to grow faster than it can
be organized. Hitherto both solicitation and publicity have
been avoided.
' The list of cases relieved, and of employment given,
might also be doubled, and yet the real benefit be less; for
if the work be of the right sort, the effects unseen are at
least equal to those seen. And in all cases the quality of the
work given is of more value than the quantity accomplished.
' Like most other things, the Guild consists of two parts
—its body, and its soul.
'Its body is represented by its machinery of organized
aid; its soul is shown by the way in which that machinery
is worked, and that aid bestowed.
' This it is which makes it somewhat difficult to form a
branch. The Guild can easily be reproduced as an appliance ;
but to be of real use it must take spontaneous root, and
grow into a living tree in a kindred soul, through sympa¬
thetic hearts.
' By the personal trouble and kindness of associates, the
Guild should be made a many-sided, many-handed friend to
those who seek its aid. Money is given in the name of
unknown friends, and not the proudest, most sensitive
nature can refuse to accept help offered in such a manner.
At the same time, it is important that the Guild should be
guarded against weakness and imposture, and this is why so
firm a stand is made on the personal responsibility of the
introducing associates. The cases that have passed the
searching ordeal of the Charity Organization Society are
always dealt with at once. Here, at least, is safe ground for
a fresh start in life.'
The Working Ladies' Guild has now two objects in view.
The first is to set going a Loan Fund for training young
English girls to some definite profession. The contrast
between English girls and their French and German sisters
is pitiable to see. The latter marry earlier than the former
do,  it   is  true;   but  at   seventeen   or   eighteen,  or   even
The Working Ladies Guild. 229
younger, they carry with them into their husband's houses a
fund of housekeeping knowledge, a genius for the graces of
the menage, a whole dowry of adaptation, of skill, of savoir-
faire. They laugh while the sun shines, but they do not
deem it necessary to go about draggletail when the rain falls.
On the contrary, they strip off the tinsel, but they still retain
the flowers of life. Let it rain ever so, their homes are not
destitute, their children are not poverty-stricken. Early
training has supplied resources even for dark days, and
brave hearts know when, and where, to use them. There is
always ' something' in reserve in a French menage, be it only
the multifarious coins in the old housewife's brown jug, or
the few francs already put aside for Bebee's dot, or Angele's
skill at confectionery, whereby she supplies Sirandin with
honhons, and the home table with hiftecks in the most comme
il favi manner, or Jules' talent on the violin, whereby he is
enabled to support his family till the storm be overpast;
these talents, indeed, having been especially nurtured and
fostered with such view if need should be.
With English girls it is different. They lead a merry life
in their father's comfortable house'; they do pretty much as
they please; they learn what they choose, which is usually
nothing at all. Sometimes a serious study is taken up as a
pastime, and, of course, it ends in nothing. These English
girls are rosy and strong, well-made and well-bred. They
know the right things to do, and they do them generally.
Tliey do not marry, perhaps, but what does that matter ?
They are happy, healthy, and wealthy. The days go by only
too swiftly for them,—too swiftly, alas! Sickness, and
sorrow, and death are at hand; the money-bags are found to
be less full than was anticipated ; the daughter's portions are
small; there are other claims and many changes; the old
place knows them no more; they go forth into the cold,
bleak, unkindly world.
But is there nothing they can do to help themselves ?
They can ride, they can row, they can swim, they can skate;
but these accomplishments can hardly be considered as
money-making ones. Oh ! the hours they wasted in strum¬
ming on the piano, without the slightest feeling for music.
Oh! the days they spent in idleness and frivolity, when
they might have been learning to fend for themselves, or, at
least, to teach others to do so. The German Frau, at this
moment, would be tossing an omelette for her husband's
supper; the Frenchwoman would be putting dainty finish¬
ing touches to her still elegant though somewhat narrowed
230 The Ladies' Edmburgh Magazine.
appartement. Why should not the Englishwoman find similar
employment under similar circumstances ? Because she knows
not how\ Because her early training has not supplied her
with those simple, homely arts, such as might render her and
those around her independent of Fortune's smiles and frowns.
Yet in her early girlhood it was otherwise. In those long-
vanished days she too, no doubt, may have had leanings
towards definite work, towards some serious study or occupa¬
tion which should bear fruit by and by. But these tenden¬
cies were nipped in the bud. Such things as learning in
order to teach, as supplementing pocket-money by small
earnings in literature, in art, in needlework, cookery, what¬
not, are not comprised in the scheme of an English girl's
education. But the world has grown wiser at last. If girls
could be trained to some profession, to some self-supporting
way of life, as boys are, there would be fewer women for
men to laugh at by and by; fewer of the ' shrieking sister¬
hood,' claiming all things except the one best thing; fewer
of those poor, pitiful, helpless beings who not only sink
themselves into the Slough of Despond, but draw those
about them down too. This, then, would be the object of
the Guild's Loan—to train young girls to some definite and
remunerative walk in life.
Another Eund that the Guild is anxious to establish is
one to assist chronic cases of illness. Tickets to the various
hospitals are often difficult to get, or impossible ; and it some¬
times happens, too, that after months of weary waiting, when
the order for admission comes at last, the case is pronounced
ineligible. Then, hopeless and disappointed, the poor sufferer
sinks back in his miserable home, feeling that the hardly-
won earnings of those around him scarcely suffice to procure
his scanty comforts, while he is but a tie and a charge to
those nearest and dearest to him.
Miss Emily Orr, Cheriton Eectory, Alresford, has under¬
taken to collect subscriptions from 2s. 6d. and upwards for
this purpose.
Subscriptions for the Guest Chambers in Campden House
are gladly received at the office. These Guest Chambers
are devoted to the use of ladies, chosen by the president or
committee, and to whom even a small rent is sometimes for
a time impossible.
Lastly, a floor of apartments in No. 1 Campden Houses,
Campden Hill, has been furnished by the Guild. They are
rented by ladies whom it wishes to benefit. Each has a
separate room, use of plate and linen, cleaning included, for
Notes on the Royal Scottish Academy Exhibition.   231
the moderate sum of 4s. per week. The Guest Chambers
are on this floor. The rest of the building is let at slightly
higher rates to families or ladies with high references.
There are sets of two or three rooms, distinct from each
other, furnished or unfurnished. The way in which these
rooms have been eagerly sought is a proof of the great need
there is of 'Chambers for Ladies,' free from the inconveniences
of ordinary lodging-houses. It must be distinctly understood
that only one floor is in connection with the Guild—the rest
of the building is not a charity.
And so the little seed, sown in faith, albeit with something
of fear and trembling, has grown, like the ' grain of mustard-
seed,' into a far-stretching tree,' so that the birds of the air
come and lodge in the branches thereof.' Nay, further, slips
have been taken from it and transplanted here and there,
and they, too, are growing into lofty trees. ... As I lift my
eyes from my paper I see stretched out before me a strange,
cold, grey world; the bare, black arms of the trees swing
themselves to and fro helplessly; a fine, white dust is flying;
the roads look as if strewn with pounded chalk; the horses'
hoofs eeho along them; the windows creak and crack as if
the whole house were in the midst of a tempest; a few
shuddering green leaves peep out, then shiver and shrivel
up with the cold; and yet the spring is at hand. 'The
winter is past. . . . The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs,
and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell.' So
may it be with the seed sown, with the tree grown, of the
Working Ladies' Guild. H. A. Duff.
^otcs on tl)c iclogal Scotttsl) Scatientg (f^xlji&ition.
It is with no idea of influencing in any way the verdict
already given on our Eoyal Academy Exhibition, that these
few remarks are submitted to our readers. All who, living
in or near Edinburgh, have cared to do so, have visited it
more or less frequently; everybody has given their opinion,
agreeing with or differing from their friends to a greater or
less extent. As usual, the Exhibition has been a convenient
sauntering-place in inclement weather, and a purveyor of
small-talk. To artists, we are told, there is the further
substantial satisfaction of a sale of pictures almost unprece¬
dented, and certainly unexpected in a season of commercial
distress and depression like the present.
As to the contents of the Gallery, they are in no way
above or below the averages of past years.   There are some
232 TJie Ladies' Edinbuj'gh Magazine.
pretty pictures, and some we are glad to have seen, with
many others which stir no feeling whatever, and leave no
after-thoughts behind them. One feature of the Exhibition
is the melancholy interest afforded us by the number of
pictures by painters whose names we shall never again read
in our annual catalogue as linked with fresh efforts of
genius. Such are ' Meditation' (62), begun by G. P.
Chalmers and finished by another hand; ' A Brittany
Peasant' (256), by the same; and even finer, 'The Legend'
(308), the interior of a Highland hut, where the old grand¬
mother tells some weird and ghastly tale to the troop of
children who crowd half-terrified around her. The treatment
of this subject is masterly.
In the 'Parallel Roads of Glenroy' (28), and one or two
other landscapes, we have specimens of K. M'Leay's very
pleasing powers; and of Sam Bough are several beautiful
memorials, such as the ' Eden near Corby Castle' (240) ;
' St. Monance after a Storm' (323); ' Burns' Cottage' (357);
' Edinburgh' (462), the view from Port Hopetoun slightly
idealized; ' Fishermen drying Nets ' (803); ' Yanwath Hall'
(818);' Bannockburn' (886).'' All these are full of the artist's
intense feeling and sense of the poetic spirit in Nature,
which draws us irresistibly even to his most faulty pictures.
In 406 we have an excellent portrait of himself by Sir
Daniel Macnee, one among many good portraits. The land¬
scapes, on the whole, are much on a par with those of former
years. If 'views' can get tired of sitting for their pictures,
we think Glen Sannox and the Trosachs, and even Glen
Tilt, may fairly be so. Some little bits of less well-known
scenery are very good, such as 'The Dhulochan' (223), W. H.
Paton. Having a strong love of the Thames scenery, we
hung enamoured over 387, ' A Sultry Morning on the
Thames,' liobert Meyerheim. The soft silvery haze, the
steamy atmosphere, the delicately feathering woods, are a
treat to look upon; and the figures of the ladies and children,
standing waist-deep in the flowery grass, almost give one
hay-fever, but have a charming look of out-door summer
pastime and fresh air. Then there are the usual cliff and
coast scenes, calm days and stormy days, fisher-folk and
their craft, nothing very distinctive, though many are pretty.
Then there are also the ordinary attempts to make a pretty
picture out of gorse in full blossom. But we liave often noted
with amusement how completely there is ' a fashion' in paint¬
ings quite as much as in crewels and fancy-work. This year
our artists have all been smitten by the charms of ragweed;
Notes on the Royal Scottish Academy Exhibition. 233
one foreground after another blazes upon us with its strong
yellow hues. We delight in the real article, and can
summon up numberless mental visions of landscapes where
the dreary and monotonous levels were only redeemed by
the glory of golden radiance shed upon them by this weird-
looking plant in its full bloom; nevertheless we think the
uncompromising ' vegetable' is better left out of pictures,
it will not sit or stand for its portrait in any picturesque or
graceful fashion, and no paint can produce its peculiar yellow.
There are this year an unusual number of beautiful flower-
studies, perfect portraits of floral friends. Our own favourites
were 'Marguerites' (86) by G. Reid, and 'Marsh Marigolds'
(217) by the same; 'Chrysanthemums' (527), J. Cowie;
'Apple-blossoms' (895), and Tansies' (842), by Grace H.
Hastie. There is also a delicious little picture,' A Brown
Study' (877), by Fanny C. Jolly—a charming collection of
brown leaves and beech-mast, enough to make a squirrel
dance for joy.
Besides ragweed, there is a decided penchant for camels.
The number of these sagacious but unamiable-looking beasts
compared to other animals is as ten to one. ' Eebekah at the
Well' (268) is a pretty picture, and inspired us with fresh
respect for the maiden's kindness, from the way the beasts
are jostling and quarrelling, and the quantity they seem
inclined to drink. 'Along the Sands at Tangier' (213) is
beautiful, camels and their drivers dark against the afterglow
of the sunset sky. There are a few good dog-portraits ; in
' Leo' (173) Gourlay Steell has given us a noble likeness
of a dear canine friend.
The compositions, historical or fanciful, have some of
them considerable merit. ' The Raid of Ruthven' (154), W.
B. Collier Fyfe, we have heard much admired; but to us,
though the young king's frightened expression is good, the
whole has more the air of a taUcau acted by amateur per¬
formers than of the historical fact. The silk and velvet of the
dresses is painfully new and fresh. Mr. Orchardson avoids
this error in his ' Queen of Swords' (251). The groups are
admirable, and the faded finery of the old ladies who look
on at the dance is well given. We like still better ' Left by
the Tide' (40); the colouring may be a little fade, but it
suits the old-world look of the composition. All the acces¬
sories are good, and the figures most graceful. ' School Re¬
visited ' (124), G. D. Leslie, is always surrounded by a host
of admirers, and was well known before its exhibition in
Edinburgh ; it is a graceful picture; the pretty girl-faces are
234 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
attractive. ' Alnaschar' (498), AV. E. Lockhart, is very clever,
so much so that had it been painted for us, we should have
preferred it being a minute later in the story, with the various
articles lying broken on the ground, instead of being in the act
of falling ; one feels frantically inclined to rush and save them.
' The Lily-Harvest' (49 J) sounds lovely, but one is sorry to
know that lochs, lilies, and lily-gatherers can ever look so
ugly. 'The Mudlark' (518), Th. Graham, is a beautiful
little creature. It may be a true criticism that she is too
clean and pretty, but there is a world of sad child-history in
her eyes, in a handwriting most touching, but bad to read
on so young a face. As to 'The Buried Past' (535), we
can only wish it had been buried so deep that nobody had
thought of digging it up again. Sir Xoel Paton gives us
nothing but a study from which he promises a larger picture,
' The Adversary' (242); it is perhaps unfair to criticize it,
viewed without its intended relation to the whole.
Yearly we leave the gallery with the unspoken question,
Is this all ? Where are our great historical or religious
pictures ? Can it be that so many ways of expressing
thought and faith are now open to men, that the painter
gives us only a part of himself on the canvas where he was
once compelled to pour forth the whole ? Or have mechanical
contrivance and invention chilled the fire of genius in our
Art-interpreters ? This we know, that among all these
sublime and lovely effects of inanimate Nature, these pretty
landscapes and quaint stories, we seek in vain for such
pictures as once seen become a part of ourselves, returning
again and again to
Flash upon that inward eye,
Which is the bliss of solitude.
©ur Hiftrarg Eablc.
The School Cookery Book.    Edited by C. E. Guthrie Wright.
This little volume comes as an addition to an already very large
list of similar publications ; but it fills a gap which has not yet been
supplied. Perhaps the editor's own words will best explain its
mission : ' Food replaces the materials used up by the movement
of our bodies, keeps up warmth, and gives power of movement, or, as
it is more correctly called, force. Food cannot, however, accom¬
plish these objects in its normal state.' The editor then proceeds
to give a number of both excellent and simple recipes for good but
economical cookery. They deal with the elements of all that is most
necessary in the wholesome preparation of food ; and many young
and inexperienced housekeepers will find their difficulties smoothed
by attention to its simple directions. One word must be said of
warm praise for that part of it which treats of the preparation of
Our Library Table. 235
foods for invalids. Of all cookery that of the sick-room demands the
most delicate care, and in the chapter set apart for it in this little
volume both hints and recipes are given which must be of the
greatest possible service to those who are called to sick-nursing. We
hope that this useful little work may have the circulation which it so
well deserves.
WiTHix Sound of the Sea. By the Author of Vera, Blue Roses, etc.
London : C. Kegan Paul & Co., 1 Paternoster Square.
The ' sound of the sea' on the East Coast of Scotland is apt to be
somewhat mournful and dreary, and it does but show how true the
local colouring is, to say that something of the same effect is produced
on us by the book before us. In spite of its dainty exterior and
most readable type, there is a want of sunshine about it.
' I do not love a lay that tells
A long unvaried tale of grief.'
The lives of the different personages in this story are brightened by
few gleams of happiness. The mother, ignorant of her son's fate,
and waiting day by day for news of him that never comes ; the
minister's poor sister, Clementina, whose brain is crazed from the
blight that had fallen on her early love ; even the auburn-haired
cousin, 'Katie Ruadh,' dying of decline in Assynt, are all conceived
in one sombre line of grey. There is not much incident in these
sober lives, and the characters themselves are somewhat slightly
sketched in. We cannot feel any great interest in Hugh Ford, who
runs away to sea, though the adventures on board the whaling-ship
are well described ; and there is an almost humorous touch of nature
in bringing him back married to an American wife—a sensible man,
as the world counts sense, who thinks it his duty to lecture his sister
on her love-affairs. But Mr. Esslemont is a grand study. There is
a sort of monumental calm about him, a strength as of the rugged
cliffs of that storm-beaten coast, as he bears in silence and patience
a burden which would have broken down a lesser nature. Such men
as he have been the backbone of Scotland for generations : upright,
God-fearing, full of simple dignity, their whole language and tone of
thought elevated and refined through familiar converse with the
Hebrew Scriptures. Marion, too, is very sweetly drawn ; and these two
characters would be sufficient to redeem a less attractive book than
the present. The style is always agreeable, sometimes beautiful. A
pleasant episode is introduced in Marion's visit to Sutherlandshire,
the glimpse of Highland lochs and mountains contrasting well with
the level fields of Lumgair. The old doctor and his wife are excel¬
lent ; the servants, too, are drawn with much knowledge of Lowland
character. Their broad Scotch is rather indicated than worked out ;
but some of their sayings are full of homely pith. Witness Robbie
Tosh's views about pigs : ' Thae pigs will make graund hams if they
are spared!'   This is surely worthy of the Emerald Isle.
The Life and Letters of Frances, Baroness Bdnsen. By Augustus
J. C. Hare.    London:  Daldy, Isbister, & Co.
There is both good and evil in the present fashion of publishing
the private letters of celebrated people, or of those intimately con¬
nected with these celebrities. It is good, because it makes us
acquainted with the characters of many people beyond our own circle,
so enlarging our sympathies; and it is evil, because it so often does
violence to that feeling of delicacy which holds the expression of deep
236 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
emotion as too sacred a thing to be lightly given to the world. The
life of Madame, afterwards Baroness, Bunsen, well illustrates both
these propositions. It is a book well worth reading from the
beautiful character of which it treats, but a considerable number of
letters might have been left out without doing any harm. We cannot
help feeling surprised that those to whom they were written could
have permitted them to be published, and certainly Mr. Hare might
have shown a wise discretion in making use of them. This is a matter
on which people are likely to differ, however, as it is a question of
feeling. Others may also object that there is something too much of
the mere detail of Madame Bunsen's domestic life, which, though
interesting to her friends and relations, is of less moment to the
public than the many important public events by which her life was
influenced. In spite of these drawbacks, the book is a very pleasant
one. Madame Bunsen herself was so charming, so fresh and vigorous,
that we are disposed to overlook errors of judgment in her biographer.
He has wisely let her tell the story of her life in her own letters, with
merely such connecting links as were necessary. The outline of her
history is a simple one. After a quiet girlhood, mostly spent in
Wales, she met Bunsen in Rome, married him there, and followed
his varying fortunes to Switzerland, to England, finally to the quiet
retreat in Germany where he closed his active and laborious life.
She survived him several years, long enough to write his life, and be
the loving guardian through childhood of five of her grandchildren,
early left motherless. The special charm of her nature was her great
power of sympathy and of sustaining her interest in people from
whom she was far parted for long years. Over and above the husband
and children to whom she was devoted, she found room in her heart
for troops of friends, and hers was real, warm friendship, which could
stand the test of long separation. She had an active mind as well as
an energetic body, and both were well used before her peaceful death
at Carlsruhe. Her account, for instance, of a morning's work at
Rome, is a good example of how much could be compressed into a few
hours. But there are limits to the greatest activity, and London
life bafiled even Madame Bunsen, so that she was glad to be released
from the task of trying to do double and treble as much as she ought
to have done. If we were to select the most characteristic of her
letters, we should take those to her young friend Abeten, as showing
the most clearly her strong sense, her bright wits, and her intensely
loving heart.
The World She Awoke in. In Three Vols. By Lizzie Aldridge.
London : Smith, Elder, & Co.
Out of a very bad fever and much family distress, and yet, strange
to say, in possession of a remarkably fine head of hair, to which
frequent allusion is made. This is a singular book, and we are
tumbled so suddenly among such very queer people, and have to pick
up as best we can the connecting links of their very odd ideas and
puzzling mutual relations to each other, that the reader may be
pardoned who feels even up to the last page bewildered and astray in
the world lie has awakened in. Everything has a moral, says the
dogmatic Duchess in Wonderland, and in spite of our perplexity, we
think we have gathered some of the meaning of our author, who
certainly does not write in mere idleness, but as holding strong
opinions and desiring to express them. She evidently thinks that
there is grievous need for the exercise of the highest trained skill and
Question Series. 237
womanly tenderness among the homes of the poor, both in sickness
and in health, and that if people find themselves blessed with youth,
health, a competence, and freedom from absorbing claims, they had
better go and train at St. Thomas' Hospital, and then join the
Association for Nursing the Poor in their own homes. They will, in
living for others and in bearing their burdens, find happiness far
surpassing that which is to be found in the indulgence of artistic
tastes, the enjoyment of refinement and luxury, and the resolute
turning away from all that is tiresome, hard, or commonplace in life.
Margaret Hope is a very pleasant heroine, and her terrible experi¬
ences as a lady nurse among the wretched denizens of London slums
will be read with painful interest, written as they are with the power
of one who knows what she is speaking about. Miss Aldridge anti¬
cipates thus the utilitarian, selfish question, as old as the days of
Judas, ' To what purpose is this waste ?' ' Did she do any real
good? What do you call "real good"? Is giving a cup of cold
water to a thirsty child "real good"? Is keeping a sick woman
clean doing " real good " ? Is helping the prostrate breadwinner back
to health again doing "real good"? Because, if so, then Margaret
did "real good." But perhaps you mean, did she permanently
elevate some of her patients ? And here you and I might both ask our¬
selves whether we ourselves were so permanently elevated by our last
illness, that we think no one can be ill without being the better for
it. . . . But if no gratitude was earned among the Hereditary Grand
Paupers, there was unbounded thankfulness among the real working
class — thankfulness and a courtesy that resulted in a permanent
friendliness that was intensely delightful to Margaret. For some of
these people, nobly struggling through all but overwhelming disasters,
she felt a respect so deep that it quite humbled her—her own life
appeared so easy in comparison to theirs.' The group of relations
whose ease and cultivated selfishness are contrasted with Margaret's
noble aspirations, are as odd a set of people as we have ever met with—
caricatures rather than portraits perhaps, yet with such an impress
of reality about them, with their art jargon and their house, the
perfection of advanced taste, that we feel certain they must be studied
from the life. Altogether the book is anything but commonplace, and
will repay perusal.
 0 
Question %zx\z%,
V. Show how a beautiful object may be made repulsive, and a
repulsive one beautiful, in painting.    Give examples of both.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C., care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than June 5th. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are off'ered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO FEBRUARY SERIES.
Apis would have been first, but for exceeding her limits. Thorough
takes, therefore, the first place; Eeomart the second; Nagol the
third. Apis' answer is excellent in all other respects ; Stella very
good ; May-fly and Spider good.
Sketch  the  chief  character  in  Shakspere's   Coriolanus;  contrast
238 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
shortly Yolumnia and Virgilia; and show what were the relations
between patrician and plebeian, which this drama alludes to as
existing at Rome.
Coriolanus has been fitly called the ' impersonation of aristocratic
principle.' He does not believe any great or good qualities can
exist in 'the common file,' as Shakspere makes him call the people,
and hence his unbounded contempt for them, wliich he does not
scruple to show in all he says and does. He has many great qualities,
but all are marred by his intense pride. He prides himself on his
birth, wealth, and honours won in war, and on mere civil distinctions.
In the citizen he entirely forgets the man. At the same time he is a
most dutiful and loving son and husband, a good patriot, and the
bravest of soldiers. He is too modest to listen to his own praises,
and begs the life of a poor prisoner at Corioli, because of the
hospitality shown him on some former occasion. These very
qualities may be said to have caused his ruin. In order to save his
country from the degrading rule of the hated plebeians—from his
point of view—he leads her foes against Rome, and so seeks to work
the downfall of those who banished him. However, on the inter¬
cession of his mother, wife, and child, he is overcome by natural
feelings, and sacrifices himself knowingly for the good of his country.
Voluninia's character is that of a typical Roman matron. She glories
in the brave deeds of her son, and herself says, ' Had I a dozen sons
... I had rather had eleven die nobly for their country, than one
voluptuously surfeit out of action.' Virgilia, on the other hand, is
so constituted that she shrinks at the mere mention of wounds and
blood, more especially in connection with him she loves not less
dearly than Volumnia. She would have been satisfied had Coriolanus
been a meaner man, though she is capable of pride in his deeds when
she knows him safe. Volumnia glories not only in his great deeds,
but all the more because of the wounds gained in achieving them.
She covets both martial and civil honours for her son, and would
even have him go somewhat aside from the strict rule of honour and
truth to attain these honours. She argues most persuasively with
him, when they have gone to beg him to make peace with Rome,
while Virgilia only can employ the persuasion of tears. The
plebeians had long been much oppressed by the patricians at Rome.
They were obliged to fight in all the wars, while their property was
uncared for at home: and if they could not pay their debts on
returning, all they had was confiscated by their creditors, and they
could even be sold as slaves. At last they rebelled, and after many
vain attempts succeeded in gaining some redress for their wrongs.
They were allowed tribunes, who were elected from among the
plebeians, and although not allowed to join in the deliberations of
tlie senate, might listen to the debates, and ' veto' any law they did
not approve of, which veto was final. There was, however, many
patricians who hated the plebeians, and among those Coriolanus was
chief ; and he only waited for an opportunity of depriving them of
their hard-won privileges. There was, therefore, some foundation
for the report, with which the drama opens, that during the famine
of 489 Coriolanus prevailed on the senate to withhold corn from the
people, or only to sell it thein at exorbitant prices. The consuls
were chosen from among the patricians by the people, hence the
ceremony which Coriolanus had to submit to, and which ended so
disastrously for him. Thorough.
Stray Notes. 239
Strag l^otes.
M. W. thus answers Materfamilias in our last issue. — The
inducements offered to boys who are candidates for the Edinburgh
University Local Examinations, over and above the advantage which
is derived from the systematic course of study, which ought to
precede the test afforded by such examinations, are :—1st. Candidates
who hold Honour Certificates, or who have taken the ordinary certifi¬
cate with honours in Latin, Greek, and Mathematics, are qualified
to attend the higher classes in these subjects at the University, and
are thus enabled to enter at once for the curriculum of three sessions
in Arts. 2d. Honour Certificates granted at these examinations
secure exemption from such subjects as are mentioned in the certificate
from the Medical Preliminary Examinations in any university or
medical school in the United Kingdom. 3d. Several bursaries and
prizes are offered to successful candidates. To these may be added
the advantage to a youth who may be unable to pursue his studies
at a university, to have the guarantee which such a certificate affords
of good secondary instruction when he applies, say, for any situation.
Boys who are taught at home may not only enter for these examina¬
tions, but will find in them the definite aim which home tuition so
often lacks, as well as a fixed standard by which progress may be
tested. To such home-students we would recommend as a useful
guide the system of instruction by correspondence pursued in connec¬
tion with the S. George's Hall Classes, to the students of which
special attractions in the way of prizes and bursaries are offered.
Thalatta asked in our magazine of August 1878, the source of the
following quotation:—
.  . .  'The tree
Seeks kindlier nurture from a soil enriched
By its own falling leaves,' etc.
She will find it in H. Taylor's short poem Ernesto, well worth closer
acquaintance. The hero is brought into contact with one known and
loved long before:
' But time had been between and woven a veil
Of seven years' separation, and the past
Was seen with softened outlines, like the face
Of nature through a mist.'
The love is not dead or cold, but exalted and purified, he knows
death is near, and
. . .  ' hopes that needs must knit with self
Their object, were iirevocably gone.'
Poultry Farming.—We have received the following note:—To
the Editor of the Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.—In No. 3 of 'Country
Subjects and Pursuits,' on 'Manners and Customs of the Hen-Yard'
(see March No.), theauthor recommends ' Poultry Farming' as a feas¬
ible means of earning a comfortable livelihood. On paper, a poultry
farm sounds a most easy and pleasant way of making money. So
little capital is necessary, etc. But how is it that one sees so many
' poultry farms to be let or sold, with every modern improvement and
appliance'? Alas! it is because of the want of success that has almost
invariably attended efforts to make such farms pay. Wherever large
numbers of fowls are collected together in one spot, disease breaks out
among them, a sort of low fever sets in, and the birds die rapidly.    I
240 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
should recommend any one thinking of starting a ' Poultry Farm'
tirst to read a little article in the Fkld of March 29th, 1879, on the
subject.
The Kyrle Society.—Another interesting reply to the question
asked in March by A Wanderek, we insert for our readers' benefit:—
The Kyrle Society is of an unusual character, and its object is to
bring the cheering influences of natural and artistic beauty into the
homes and neighbourhoods of the poor in large towns. The members
of the society have found such a variety of ways for compassing this
object, that they would take too much space if it all were described
here, but among them are paintings, either on zinc or plaster, for
the walls of hospitals, school-rooms, and mission-halls, executed by
members. The new decorations at Westminster Hospital belong to
this branch of their work. The Society also endeavours to encourage
the cultivation of plants in the homes of the poor, and the laying
out of waste bits of ground, etc. It gives free concerts in poor parts,
and in one or two London churches a member plays the organ once
or twice a week for any one who cares to come in. The Society is
named after Pope's hero, as was suggested in last month's magazine,
and the treasurer is Miss Octavia Hill, after whose name it is hardly
necessary to say more to recommend the Society. Further accounts
of the work can be obtained from the Hon. Sec, 14 Nottingham
Place, London, W., as quarterly reports are printed saying what has
been done, and what form of assistance is most needed. We hope
some friends of artistic sympathies may feel disposed to give a helping
hand to the Kyrle Society.
A Perplexed Citizen hears her country friends talking knowingly
of Hydro-incubators and Artificial Mothers, and does not like to
betray her ignorance by asking what is the function of each. Will
M. S. T., or some other contributor to your valuable pages, enlighten
her?
ixfottccs to Corrcspontrcnts, rtc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Ed'mhurgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/i(W postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
tlie Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Pajjers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The Editors will be happy to receive contributions for the Series
on ' Country Subjects and Pursuits.' A paper on Yachting would be
acceptable, also one on keeping Bees, and further suggestions are
invited.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, May 3, at 14 Melville Street, at 11 a.m. Debate,
'Does Aurora Leigh merit Mr. Ruskin's encomium that it is the
greatest poem produced in this century']'
On the Injiiience of Brownings Poetry. 241
©n t!jc Infiucnrc of Brotontng's ilortr^.
II.
Were we to be asked for an unfailing guide to the formation
of judgments upon literary works, we should say it was to be
found in certain qualities of mind—qualities not to be acquired
without much patient and solitary study. How, for instance,
can we hope to reach a pure literary taste without a frequent
perusal of the best classic authors ? how can we attain to any
power of discrimination without comprehensive readings in
all branches of literature \ But reading is not enough with¬
out a constant habit of forming judgments; and this, too, is
not enough without recording to ourselves these judgments,
and carrying them forward to be compared with those next
formed. After some perseverance in such a course, we may
have formed an idea of what are our own tastes and capaci¬
ties; what subjects, what scenes, what modes of thought, work
most effectively upon our own mind; and then with this,
the only standard which we can honestly call our own, we
may compare the productions of the writer we wish to study,
and of whose writings we wish to form an estimate. Such
a method, were it frequently pursued, would give rise to a
very varied and also a very original series of criticisms.
Instead of admiring a poet because some one else admires
him, we should then be in a position to ascertain whether
he in any measure fulfils the demands which we have our¬
selves considered fit should be made from poetry.
In the growing intellectuality which characterizes our
literature, all authors, whether poets, historians, novelists, or
essayists, seem to have come to the conclusion that reason
or intellect is to be to their work what the flour is to the
loaf, i.e. the principal ingredient. The poetry of Eobert
Browning, of which we are now going to express a small
part of our opinion, in no way counteracts this tendency ; it
rather sails with the stream. ■ He has OTeat and vast thoughts
embedded in his poetry, but they have generally to be dug
out, as the oyster from the shell, or the ore from the mine;
and when the digging is accomplished, we have the feeling of a
task performed by us, and a sermon preached by him, never to
be forgotten perhaps, yet to be treasured in our memory rather
among the didactic lessons we have received than the beautiful
passages of poetry which came with a charm which they left
around us.   Early in life, it is true, he became deeply attached,
No. 54.—June 1879.        . q
242 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and was even wedded, to the Muse of Poetry. His respect for
personal endowment being, however, not transferable to her, it
would appear as if he had come to his wedding in a brilliant
morning robe, a smoking cap, and a pair of remarkably easy
slippers, in which he could trip about in a ponderous fashion,
without emulating the measured movements of the Muse her¬
self. Can we wonder that the Muse of Poetry was shy of being
wedded to such a personage ? Once or twice, indeed, at her
suggestion, he may have regulated his attire and deportment,
but this only on rare occasions.
Hutton calls Browning a dramatic thinker,—an intellectual
apologist for the dramatic part of life,—his creative powers
being controlled by speculative interests, and never hurrying
on his imagination deep into the play of those practical forces
which constitute the life of a great drama. Browning has
been compared to the French poet Theophile Gautier, who,
though vastly inferior to him in power of thought, notwith¬
standing resembles him in his love of quantity, of lists,
enumerations, and catalogues; and who, in his records of
travel, never takes his seat in a railway carriage without
making a neat little speech on the marvels of steam and
the diffusion of civilisation. In a volume of essays lately
published, called The Renaissance, the writer, in an article on
AVinckelmann, discusses the nature of true artistic talent:
'The base of all artistic genius,' he says, 'is the power of
conceiving humanity in a new, striking, rejoicing way ; of putting
a happy world of its own creation in place of the meaner world
of common days ; of generating around itself an atmosphere with a
novel power of refraction; selecting, transforming, re-combining the
images it transmits, according to the choice of the imaginative intellect.
The artist has to employ the most cunning detail, to complicate and
refine upon thought and passion a thousandfold.' 'The poems of
Robert Browning,' says our author, 'supply brilliant examples of
this. His poetry is pre-eminently the poetry of situations. The
characters themselves are always of secondary importance ; often they
are characters in themselves of little interest; they seem to come to
him by strange accidents from the ends of the world. His gift is
shown by the way in which he accepts such a character, and throws
it into some situation, or apprehends it in some delicate pause of life,
in which, for a moment, it becomes ideal.'
All these remarks, however, only show us that Browning
is a dramatist by fits and starts. He does not paint often
from outward nature, nor, indeed, from the more exalted
passages of human life ; he does not fulfil that function of the
poet which carries us into another world altogether distinct
from this; in short, his writings are rather to be called realistic
than ideal.    With regard to the subject of poetry, we wish
On the Influence of Broivnings Poetry. 243
it to be ideal; with regard to its form, we wish it to be
regular, harmonious, stately. But Browning's verse is as
wanting in these qualities as his treatment of his subjects is in
ideality. Often, when he wishes to be most sublime, we fiJid
his metre giving a sort of hobble to the verse, which reminds
us of a plough-boy riding over a newly ploughed field. It
has a strained and laboured effect, and suggests the author
to us throughout his works in a peculiar and unwelcome
manner. We have, perhaps, a line in heroic metre to begin
with, succeeded by one of half its length, with the last
syllable short. This uncouth metre is employed throughout
the poem entitled Die, Grammanan's Funeral, and its effect
is even enhanced by the oddity of the rhymes.    Thus—
' Did he not magnify the mind, show clear
Just what it all meant ?
He would not discount life, as fools do here,
Paid by instalment!
He ventured neck-or-nothing—heav'n's success
Found, or earth's failure :
Wilt thou trust death or not ?    He answered " yes ! "
Hence with life's pale lure 1'
In this passage, the rhymes ' all meant' and ' instalment,'
'failure' and 'pale lure,' are most edifying. They are
exactly such as we often find in humorous poetry, meant to
increase the ludicrous effect; but when we meet with them
in a poem on a funeral, we immediately fancy that some Don
Quixote has ridden on his Eosinante to the grave, and is
performing awkward capers before the assembled mourners.
If the secular poems of a writer form a clear index to
his character, those poems in which he treats of religion
form an index ten times clearer. So if we take Browning's
poem of Christmas Eve as an example of his works, we shall
ascertain much about its author. In the first place, take
the metre—it is irregular; rhymes and words alike un¬
scrupulously clutch at each other as something for use
rather than for ornament; as when we find ' interloper' put
as a rhyme to ' improper,' and ' priestliness' to ' beastliness.'
The metre is irregular in the extreme, the style is diffuse
and prolix ; and yet we might have thought that one so fond
of stringing words together might have succeeded in con¬
densing them more. The two- and three-syllabled rhymes
continue throughout the poem, which, after giving a minute
description of a service in a small chapel, describes the author
as leaving it hastily. He afterwards witnesses a magnificent
service  in  a basilica in Eome, and lastly  hears  a  most
244 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
sceptical sermon for Christmas Eve, preached in rationalistic
Germany. It is not the place here to enter into the religious
meaning of the poem, which is a deep and striking one.
We have only to remark how both the form and the matter of
this production equally throw light on the poetical instinct
and capacity of the author himself. This is one of the most
popular of his poems, for the simple reason that its meaning
appears at once, without any need for digging on our part.
Therefore it suits the lazily disposed. Also it is one of his
earlier poems, written, probably, before the period when even
his lyrics had changed into dramatic fragments sketched
from a carefully prepared situation which the author had
elaborated beforehand in his own mind.
When, on this Christmas Eve in question, he wanders
away, disgusted with the service in the little chapel, and
accompanied everywhere by a glorious spiritual presence,
he first enters the Basilica at Eome. Here the altar, the
incense, the music, the tapers, the multitude, for a moment
overpower his soul with something like frenzy ; but soon
recovering himself, he does not fail to perceive the weakness
of Eome, and the inability of her head to guide the pulses of
her throbbing heart. The intellect of Browning is too in¬
dependent to bend for a moment before the blandishments
of the Eomish Church; it stands sturdily apart, divines at
once the weak point in that worship, and impresses upon the
style and form of this poem something of its own isolated
and rugged peculiarity. It was something of this indepen¬
dent spirit which made him say when he left the chapel, by
way of protest in favour of a more artistic form of worship,—
^ I thought it best that Thou, the Spirit,
Be worshipped in spirit and in truth,
And in beauty, as even we require it—
Not in the forms burlesque, uncouth,
I left but now, as scarcely fitted for Thee.'
He then sees at Eome what an error the little chapel
has committed in stripping off all outward embellishment,
and reducing the service to what appears to be a mere
parody of what it has grown out of Yet here we cannot
but note the intense and all-pervading sincerity of Browning's
genius. He invariably regards ideality and ornament with
a suspicious eye, as things to be avoided until the real has
been made perfectly safe, after which they may be sparingly
made use of. He is the prophet of Truth and Liberty, far
more than of Imagination and Art. Had he allowed himself
0  be carried away in the smallest degree by the pageantry of
On the Infliieiue of Browning s Poetry. 245
Eome, there is no doubt that his verse would have borne the
impress of it, in greater smoothness and regularity, in flow¬
ing iiumbers more like the impassioned strains of Byron,
where beauty is all in all, and the austere is forgotten.
Yet, though strong in intellect, he is not cold-hearted
enough to agree with the sceptic of Giittingen, who throws
doubt over all the essential doctrines of Christianity. He
answers him,
' For one found able
To sift the truth of it (the gospel) from fable,
Millions believe it to the letter.'
To neither himself nor the sceptic does he accord a monopoly
of critical penetration; he has some respect for the million,
both as regards their intellect and their faith. Had he been
more exclusively a man of thought, the poem would no
doubt have assumed a colder tone, and might probably have
subsided into stately blank verse like Milton's, Pope's, or
Wordsworth's. But Browning is a more universally de¬
veloped human being than any of these, though perhaps he
may fall behind them in one thing, namely, the love of
uniformity. Had he been a watchmaker, we cannot but
venture to suppose that his watches would invariably have
ticked irregularly ; had he been a railway official, most likely
the trains would never have been up to time; and when
reproved for this, he would have said, ' Let other men keep
time; this is my way'' First, then, he had been disgusted
with the chapel, its stupid preacher, its common sights and
sounds; satiated afterwards with the pomp and ceremony
and the meaningless devotion of Rome, he had fled to the
intellectual worship of rationalistic Germany. But here,
that thing called love, of which he had already declared
there could never be too much, was frozen out; men's creed
was in their own hard heads and harder hearts. Discouraged
and dismayed, he retraces his steps; he opens his eyes, and
finds himself again in the little chapel, where he much doubts
whether he has not been dreaming all the time. He now
resolves rather to endure the worship which has its basis
both in truth and love, than to fly to others which have lost
either one or both of these.
Throughout this poem, we have sought less to read the
poem than the man. Browning's poetry is, in many parts
of it, to us just what the little chapel was to him before
and after the vision. Before the vision, he very soon had
enoiigh of it. The priest was stupid, the people dull and
vulgar.    So at first we find his meaning obscure, his rhymes
246 The Ladies Edinburgh Magasitie.
forced and absurd. If we persevere, however, in trying to
understand him, he may at last, in some cases, appear to
us as the little chapel appeared to himself after the vision.
He says:—■
' Meantime, in the still recurring fear
Lest myself, at unawares be found,
"While attacking the choice of my neighbours round,
With none of my own made—I choose here'—
And then:—
' May truth shine out, stand ever before iis !'
The last line may be taken for the motto of Browning's
poetry: truth at all costs, cast off what else we may. And
in the face of this, when we seek to estimate the influence
of Browning over the literature of the present day, we may
answer:—as a philosopher, a lover of truth, his influence is
good for those who will take the trouble to understand him;
as a poet, both in respect of poetic quality and form, he is
a bad model, because he himself obeys no rules, and any
poet imitating Browning, only resembles one masterless steed
running after another.
To conclude: Browning may, in some respects, be com¬
pared with Wagner. Take Wagner away from music and
Browning from poetry, and place them side bj' side; what
is the result ? We find they are both dramatists; the one
has made his poetry merely a medium for the expression of
human action, while the poetry itself is nothing to him but
a tool. The other has made his music merely a medium for
the expression of human action, while the music itself is
nothing to him but a tool. Is this what we expect of a true
poet or a true musician ? with such, surely, art always holds
the highest place. If the drama of the future is to hold all
the arts in abeyance, and make them subservient to her own
advantage, we yet want the perfect dramatist who shall so
picture human life in words, as if he pictured it in music,
and vice vnsd; for thus only can these arts cease to be
slaves, and become fellow-workers in that hardly, we might
almost say never, to be realized consummation.
J. Menzies.
Countrg Subjects anli pursuits.
VI.—THE DAIEY.
A Highland proprietor, discussing with a friend the difficulty
of getting this department well managed, jocularly remarked.
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 247
' The truth is, to get a good supply of butter and cream, one
would need to marry the dairy-maid.' This was surely a
quiet though unintentional hit at those ladies who should,
but do not, superintend the dairy as much as any part of
their household. If ladies would have their daughters
taught how all domestic duties ought to be performed, so
that they could teach their servants when ignorant, or
detect them when remiss, it would save much of the
grumbling we hear against the class, besides making the
duties of a young housekeeper more pleasing and more
profitably performed.
The dairy, to one who knows its helongings, is a delightful
part of the house. The remembrance of one I knew brings
a charm,—its clean stone shelves with rows of basins of
milk, coated with rich cream ; empty basins ranged behind
ready for the next milking; the jar for cream with its white
muslin cover in the corner; the window a little open, admit¬
ting the cool air; and the harmonious rustle of the wind
playing its gentlest pranks amongst the trees—all seem to
come back with a sweet home feeling as I sit by my fire this
winter's evening, far from the charmed scene.
Half a century ago, three ladies of gentle birth, when
deprived of the shelter of their father's roof, were brave
enough to rent a small farm and establish a dairy. Accus¬
tomed during their father's lifetime to see the most made
of a small estate, and all its resources turned to good account,
they were well educated for the life they afterwards led,
and conducted their dairy operations with such skill and
success as to accumulate a comfortable independence. jSTo
laggard servant-man or woman would liave ventured to offer
service to them, their activity and knowledge suffering
no imposition; yet they filled their position so wisely
as to gain the respect and esteem of their neighbourhood
with an influence that tells even now. As I remember
them, they were a link to a past generation, these heroic old
ladies.
' Be sure your cows are fed long enough before milking to
have a good rest, for rest is as necessary as food,' was one of
the lessons I had from those friends. * And if a cow does
not yield eight or ten pints a day, get quit of her. She is
not worth her food.'
I found a very good cow gave eleven pints of milk in a
day; from the cream eleven lbs. of butter was made in a
week, and from the skimmed milk a fair quantity of cheese.
This I considered an extra good cow, so it was no small
248 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
disappointment when pleura came ravaging and left her stall
empty.
The time of plentiful milking varies greatly, some cows
giving freely for only a few months after calving, others for
the whole season.
Then the feeding greatly influences the supply. Of course,
we think of only one kind of feeding for the summer months,
plenty of good grass and a supply of running water; but in
winter it can be varied as circumstances require. When
oil-cake and turnips are given, and the latter gets dry and
sapless as the season advances, I have seen cows drink freely
of water from the pail. But, undoubtedly, boiled food gives
the best return in quantity of milk. As the best of cows, if
carelessly milked, will soon shorten their supply, it is of the
first importance that the milker be strong and active enough
to make the xaS\k froth into the pail, and patient enough to
drip clean.
Thorough cleanliness is most essential in the dairy. In
order to keep milk well and to have good butter, every
vessel used must be scalded and scrubbed, then exposed to
the air and sunlight. The stone shelves are best to be
scoured with a flat stone, and a flannel cloth kept con¬
veniently ready to wipe up drops of cream or spilt milk.
The milk should be set aside as warm as possible, and the
cream gathered when quite thrown up, but before souring
in the least. This is difficult to manage in hot weather. A
good, cool dairy with an outlook to the north is such an
advantage for summer work; but when this cannot be had,
a little cold spring water may be poured into each bason to
quicken the separation of the cream from the milk. The
more suitable the dairy is for the heat of summer, the
less will it be for winter's cold; then the basons may be
rinsed in hot water, or a little hot water put in the milk.
Cream for churning must be of summer heat, so in winter
requires to be set near the fire for a little; if made too warm,
the butter will be short and spoiled.
The finest butter for salting is made in autumn, and if for
winter's keeping, may have nearly an ounce of salt to the
pound, half being worked in one day and the other half the
next. After being well kneaded with the wooden spoons or
a pair of cool hands to take out the water, it must be packed
in its receptacle and beaten down with a wooden mallet till
quite firm, adding from every churning what can be spared
for salting, and always covering carefully to exclude the air.
The choice of cows is naturally highly important to the
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 249
well-doing of the dairy. In the Perthshire Highlands in
bygone days, there flourished a race of small hardy cows,
mostly black, but devoid of the picturesque shaggy coats
and wide-spreading horns of the "West Highlanders. Ped
upon the short, sweet grass on the braes, their milk was
exceedingly rich, and the housewives were wont to regale
thirsty visitors with a jugful of the morning's milk, topped
with the rising cream; but the younger generations of these
cows having merged into crosses, only a passing tribute to
their ancestral virtues is now admissible. Shorthorns are
excellent milkers, but are apt to involve their owners in great
expense, and such is the value of the breed that their milk
is generally required to rear their own calves. The black
Angus Doddy, or polled breed, is said to be very profitable,
because the cows are not only fairly good milkers, but the
elder matrons are easily fattened for a different sphere of
usefulness, when discarded from the dairy byre, and the
calves are also valuable for feeding purposes. It may be
observed, as a matter of practical experience, that dairy
fanning is not likely to pay unless both these points are
kept in view. The successful milk purveyors are those who,
living near large towns, are able to sell large quantities of
new milk, and divesting themselves of all sentiment and
personal regard, sell off at once to the butcher such cows as
may be dry, without speedy prospects of resuming their
milking duties.
The race which in Scotland, however, seems best suited
for dairy purposes, and proves itself a general favourite
whenever it is introduced into England, or even America, is
the Ayrshire. This cow, fulfilling the usual conditions of
the bovine race as to the body forming a parallelogram,
tapers a little toward the shoulder, and should have a long,
slender neck, and small, well-formed head. There is a fashion
in horns as in other head-gear, — a few years ago the
'crumpled horn,' familiar in nursery rhymes, was the
favourite; now symmetrical horns, well set up, are preferred.
The colour varies, usually red and white spotted, occasionally
all red or brown, but neither colour nor style of horns are
thought essentials in an Ayrshire, as the merit lies especially
in those shapes which indicate a good milker, i.e. a finely
developed milk vein, and capacious, elastic, well-placed
udder. Twenty-four pints imperial or three gallons is the
minimum yield for twelve weeks after calving, from any
mature Ayrshire worth keeping. In her prime {i.e. after the
third or fourth calf), a good milker should give thirty-two
250 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
pints imperial, or four gallons a day, for that period, and an
average of about six hundred gallons annually. The best
cow we have known or heard of, gave six and a half gallons,
or fifty-two pints imperial, for twelve consecutive weeks, but
she was a grand exception. After three months, the quantity
always diminishes, but usually improves in quality, so that
the cream is richer, and a very good milker has generally
thinner milk than one less free; hence it is important to
consider, whether the owner's object be to obtain much milk
or much butter. As the froth of new milk interferes with
correct measurement, where accurate statistics are required,
it is desirable to calculate by weight, as one gallon of milk
equals one lb. weight avoirdupois. It will generally be found
a sufficiently satisfactory result, if one and a quarter quarts
cream produces one lb. of butter. Butter and cream seldom
reach remunerative prices, but where there is not sufficient
demand for new milk, they serve to utilize what remains
over. The Jersey, Guernsey, and Alderney breed (the cows
of each of these islands differ in size but not in general
characteristics) give very rich milk, and a proportion of it,
say one Guernsey to seven Ayrshires, will generally improve
the flavour and look of the butter.
In many pastures at certain seasons, the grasses and
flowers give a rank taste to the butter, and prevent it from
keeping well: the unpleasant flavour of turnips is readily
detected, but it can be partially prevented by care in feed¬
ing the cows at stated hours. Perhaps a more frequent
cause for bad butter, is want of care in pressing out or
washing out the butter milk, which consequently turns sour.
In winter, whilst the dry cows will thrive on hay, turnips,
and chaff (which will go further if boiled or stewed together),
the newly calved ones will deserve extra fare, when cotton-
cake and barley-meal can advantageously be added to their
warm mash.
The cow-fancier, travelling in foreign lands, meets many
congenial attractions. "We have visited the fairs of Brittany,
Avhere several hundred little cows, of the size of an Ayrshire
yearling, are exposed for sale, and where the owners and
would-be purchasers vociferate, haggle, separate, return to
the charge, and finally strike the bargain, by clasping each
other's right hands with a violent slap.
We have observed the pale, cream-coloured cows of
Hungary, with wide, black-tipped horns ; the red cows of
Upper Austria, with a white saddle on shoulder; and the
lovely Swiss cows, with dun or fawn coats, black muzzles, and
The Sea Chimes. 251
gentle ways, climbing like goats over the steepest hills,
friendly to all comers, snuffing at the traveller's sketch-bag
or cloak with hospitable interest, and playing a concert of
sweetest music (at least sweet to partial ears) with their
tinkling bells of varied notes. Amid such pleasant memories
let tlie present notice close.
On the coast of Sussex, near St. Leonards, the waves at times, as
they break on the beach, make a sound like bells, which is called by
the country people, ' The Bexhill Chimes,' and is said to be the fore¬
runner of a storm, and is supposed to toll the knell of those who
will fall victims to its fury.
I SAT on the beach and listened
To the wavelets' ceaseless song.
As breaking in tiny ripples
They chased each other along.
'Twas a calm, bright morn in summer.
And blue were both sky and sea.
While the air was full of music—
All telling of Nature's glee.
O"
As I sat there idly musing,
I marked not how time flew past;
Till a change in the billows' voices
Dispelled my fair dreams at last.
Methought noto their singing sounded
Like chiming and tolling bells,
While the breeze that was quickly rising
Seemed whispering sad farewells.
And on the far-off horizon
Could I a dark cloud descry,
That was slowly creeping upward
To spread its veil o'er the sky.
Then sudden I thought of the saying,
I had heard long time ago.
That the waves ne'er chimed but in token
Ere long a tempest would blow.
1^2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magasine.
And then I also remembered,
The tolling was said to be
A sign that some hapless mortals
Would sink in the surging sea.
Alas, too true was the legend!
For a stately ship that night
Went down, and with it hopes vanished
That had been my life's dear light.
The morning-beam returning
Saw me again on the shore;
But my dreams, and my youth together,
Were gone, to return no more.
'Neath a leaden sky knelt I, weeping
Beside a damp, lifeless corse,
Wliile the ocean was lashed to fury
By the wild wind screaming hoarse.
Ah ! woe on the billows chiming!
And woe on the ruthless sea,
That destroyed all the hope and brightness
This earth had held forth to ijie
1
Helama.
This was how she came to be called so. I was sauntering
along the parade, wishing my doctor had selected any other
place than Northsea for my long and tedious convalescence,
when I was hailed by llobinson.
' Come along, old fellow, here's a chance for you! I am
going to meet a beautiful girl, and a great heiress. She is a
friend of my aunt's, who wishes us to pay her every atten¬
tion, and make her stay here agreeable, and all the rest of it.
Hear what she says to my mother,' taking out a letter; ' she
only got this a quarter of an hour ago, but I think it better
to seize the first opportunity of meeting her, and being
useful. I say, old fellow, we shall be regular duffers, if two
such swells as you and I let such a prize slip through our
fingers.'
He  opened  and  read:  ' My dear young  friend, Isabel
Robinsoris Heiress. 253
Evelyn wishes] to go somewhere for a complete rest after
the London season, so I have ventured to recommend North-
sea. She is a charming creature, very talented and accom¬
plished, besides being pretty and amiable, and her fortune
of a hundred thousand pounds makes her a very desirable
acquaintance for young men like my nephew.'
' Here's the important P.S., " Isabel has just come in to
tell me she means to start to-morrow, and has written for
the rooms I recommended. She very kindly has a cousin
living with her, a ' portionless damsel.' " '
' Beware of that cousin, Howard; being penniless, she is
sure to be bewitching. It is not such a very large fortune
after all, but I flatter myself there is a great deal of quiet
enjoyment to be got out of a hundred thousand pounds.'
And I cordially agreed with him.
Eobinson and I were more the friends of circumstances
than of choice. His free and easy manners, and comfortable
self-assurance, often grated on, what I considered, my finer
sensibilities; but he was a good fellow at heart. He was
the eldest son of the banker of the place, who had made a
good connection as well as a comfortable fortune, and in¬
habited a pretty little country-place a mile out of Northsea.
Although much better connected than Robinson, I was
socially on a par with him, being only a briefless barrister,
whom ill-health, brought on by over-study, had stranded for
a time at dull little Northsea.
My cousin had run through the family property, and the
dear old place I heard would soon be in the market; so you
see, I would not have objected to a charming girl with a
hundred thousand pounds myself
For want of better, Eobinson and I represented the gilded
youth of Northsea; for we scarcely considered Dueling, the
son of a retired merchant, within the pale, although he
possessed a fine place and lived in grand style.
We and the train reached the platform simultaneously,
and from a first-class carriage stepped immediately a richly
dressed young lady, very tall and handsome, and apparently
not utterly unconscious of the latter fact; she was followed
by a slighter and more childish figure, in a quieter and less
striking costume. This was, of course, the cousin, and to
make assurance doubly sure, when Eobinson advanced, hat
in hand, to introduce himself, and deliver his mother's
message of invitation, the tall lady turned to the other,
' What do you say to this, dear ?' she said.
And the little one answered distinctly, ' How very, very
254 'rhe Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
kind of Mrs. Robinson, Bella; but do whatever you think,
best;
' Then I gladly accept Mrs. Robinson's kind invitation,'
said she, with a frankness that charmed Robinson. For
myself, I thought that even without the fortune she would
have been a fascinating girl. Robinson confided to me
privately next day, that his own taste lay more in the direc¬
tion of the sweet little cousin with the tender blue eyes,
and soft pink cheeks, but perhaps that was only because
he wished to enhance the value of the charms he was mean¬
ing to relegate to me. I perceived at once his little game,
and resolved to defeat it. So when, after introducing me to
the young ladies, he asked me to accompany the party to
Finorie, and stay dinner, I declined the invitation, and
offered instead to find the maid and the luggage, and see
that they were all right, and knew where they were
going.
Both Robinson and his heiress looked astonished at my
self-denial, but a pair of soft blue eyes met mine, and the
owner repeated again, ' How very kind !'
There was a very unusual earnestness in the tone in which
little Miss Evelyn said those commonplace words, as if she
actually felt the kindness, and was not merely employing a
conventional phrase meaning nothing.
The Robinsons and Evelyns became the greatest friends,
and were always to be seen together; but I kept as much
out of their way as possible, and only accepted particular
invitations to Finorie. I had long made up my mind that
Robinson's heiress would not suit me at all for a wife, an
opinion Miss Bella seemed to share, for she showed no
inclination to become IMrs. Howard, and a very strong
penchant to be eventually mistress of Finorie. One day
Robinson arrived in a distracted state, to beg me to help him
in getting up a picnic for the Misses Evelyn's benefit.
' They are the most provoking girls I ever met in regard
to their possessions, neither will own to anything, each says
" our" about everything; one would think they were in a
plot to perplex us; it is always " our ponies, and our home,
and our servants," etc. etc. One would really imagine
they were co-heiresses to hear them talk,' said poor Robinson.
I rather enjoyed his discomfort, and remarked,' Perhaps
they are.'
' But my aunt says distinctly that one is an heiress, and
the other penniless.'
' But your aunt may liave been misinformed.'
Robinson^s Heiress, 255
' Then the fortune may be a myth altogether,' cried
Robinson, aghast.
' Possibly,' I said serenely.
' But, my dear fellow, consider, much as I admire Miss
Evelyn, if she is not an heiress I could not marry her for
years to come. You know there are such a lot of us, and
my father is comparatively a young man; I could not ask
him to retire immediately in my favour,' said Robinson
eagerly.
I felt inclined to retort, 'What is that to me, my dear
fellow 1' but said instead, ' Why should you doubt your
good fortune ?    Did not you hear her called Bella ?'
' Yes,' he replied ruefully,' but I fear the other is called
Bella too, or at least something very like it. Of course, my
Miss Evelyn comes first into a room, wears better dresses
and far more jewellery than her cousin, always drives the
pony carriage, and speaks of her father's hounds and the
horses she rode at home, so I never doubted she was the
heiress till yesterday.'
' Well ?' I said interrogatively.
'A business letter came to the little one, and she said,
quite naturally, " What a plague money is, to be sure!"
The other one gave her a warning look, and said laughing,
" / never found it so." And then the little one became
scarlet, and looked exactly as if she had let the cat out of
the bag. It is very mysterious, I have not enjoyed a
moment's peace since it happened. Girls really should be
more explicit.    It's not fair, I declare,' continued he.
'Perhaps they believe, what I have no doubt they are
often told, that it is not their money but their sweet selves
that is the principal attraction, so they do not see the
necessity of proclaiming which of them has it,' I said
sarcastically.
' You might help a fellow,' said Robinson dolefully.
' Shall I call for the young ladies, and ask them which
has the fortune ?'
' No; but you might devote yourself to the cousin, and
find out her name, and where she has lived, and all about
her. I am sure she will be much easier to pump than the
heiress,' said the incorrigible Robinson.
But I would not commit myself further than to promise
to attend the picnic.
I do not know that it was a very successful picnic, in spite
of unexceptionable weather; picnics in this country seldom
are ; they are either on a giganti'C and wearisome scale both
256 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
as to food and amusement, or there is nothing definite to do,
although always plenty to eat. On the present occasion, the
servants seemed to take several hours to lay the luncheon,
and we to take as many more to eat it, and then some more
zealous than discreet person at once proposed dancing.
Hitherto I had been attending to various matrons of my
acquaintance, but now Eobinson dashed at me, saying,' Do
dance with the little cousin.'
We danced our regulation dance, and wandered away.
Some chance remark of mine struck a spark of sympathy in
my companion's mind, and instantly leaving the regions of
small talk, we plunged into conversation.
I was amazed to find in this simple-minded child an
intelligence surpassing that of ordinary women. She had
had the advantage, too, of a thorough and comprehensive
education, and even in her most critical remarks she dis¬
played as much the sweetness of her temper as the soundness
of her head. Hours might have slipped past unheeded, in
the unwonted enjoyment of a congenial spirit in the person
of the sweetest, prettiest, dearest little girl in the world,
had she not, with womanly thoughtfulness, suggested that my
watch should be consulted. Her own, she acknowledged
naively, she had forgotten to wind up. Thanks to her
precaution, we reached the settlement in time to prevent
remarks being made on our absence. Miss Evelyn at once
joined Mrs. Eobinson, and began to assist her with the tea.
I went in search of Eobinson, whom I found in a suppressed
fury, his heiress having disappeared with Dueling, who had
only been asked on account of the convenience of his drag.
My good news consoled him rather, for I had proved indubit¬
ably to myself, that my Miss Evelyn was not the heiress;
the name her cousin called her was EUa, and she mentioned
casually a poor, dear sister in India. Now, great heiresses
are not generally blessed with sisters, while poor cousins
always have a stock of relations on hand in unfortunate
positions.
Oh, Eobinson, cruel was thy revenge! Soon all my
schemes for recovering the dear old place faded before the
vision of a slight little figure with soft pink cheeks, bright
blue eyes, and a winning smile. I felt that home would not
be home if she, were absent, and that the tiniest cottage in
England would be paradise if enlivened by her presence. I
no longer required pressing invitations to meet Miss Ella
Evelyn; I was eager to snatch at any pretext for doing
so.
Robinsons Heiress. 257
This might have continued for years if that impudent
Dueling had not had the insolence to pay Ella some atten¬
tions. It was Eobinson, as usual, who enlightened me.
' Better look sharp, old boy,' he said confidentially, ' or
Dueling will have transported the little cousin to adorn his
staring new brick mansion ; tone it down a little, eh !' witli
his insufferable chuckle. 'Not such a bad thing for a
penniless girl after all to come into all those vineries and
pineries, and horses and carriages, and the house in town
that Dueling is always talking about. Dare say she'll jump
at it like a shot.'
I could have strangled the fellow as he stood there
chuckling inanely; but I only said with dignity, ' Miss Ella
Evelyn is not a person likely to be tempted by such baits.'
' Well, you know best; but don't say you were not warned.
Bye-bye,' and out he went, still chuckling. I did not believe
for a moment that my Ella would sell herself for gold; but
the suggestion made me very uncomfortable. If she were
really dependent on her cousin, and supposed I was only
trifling with her (and I had no confidence in Eobinson's
representations of my motives), she might be induced to
accept Dueling, who reaUy was a gentlemanly enough
fellow, although his father had kept a shop.
Affairs were brought to a climax at a dance the Misses
Evelyn gave to the neighbourhood in return for hospitality
received. When I sought Ella's hand for the opening
dance, she acknowledged blushing that she had been engaged
for it to Mr. Dueling for some days. Dueling's grapes
graced the supper-table, his evergreens adorned the walls,
and, more odious still, in Ella's hand was a bouquet of his
hot-house flowers. I, too, had sent a bouquet of pure white
blossoms that I had procured from Covent Garden; but no
doubt she preferred the richer giver and gift.
Something of my disappointment must have been evident
to her shrewd eyes, for she continued shyly, with a look of
suppressed fun, ' Mr. Dueling, being accustomed to town
hours, may be late, and then I shall be at liberty to dance
it with you, if you will have me on those terms.'
' I have no wish to interfere with any prior claims. Miss
Evelyn; and no doubt Mr. Dueling puts a very high value
on this particular dance, as he secured it so long beforehand,'
I said stiffly.
' I cannot flatter myself he does,' she answered, laughing.
' In fact, I know he would prefer one of the Miss Eobinsons
as a partner, for they are all much better dancers than I am ;
No. 54.—June 1879. r
258: TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
however, I have not engaged myself for the second dance,
so you may have that if you care for it.'
' I care for anything you choose to give me,' I said
earnestly.
' Except Mr. Dueling's dances,' she answered, with twink¬
ling eyes.
' Even them I accept gladly, if you bestow them on me
ungrudgingly,' I said, charmed out of my ill-humour.
I was rewarded with both dances, for Dueling could not
believe it possible that we actually intended to commence
dancing at eight o'clock. Ella led the way into the tea-room,
wdiere I saw my flowers in a vase on the table. She took
them out and put those she carried in their place, saying,
' Now I may have my favourite bouquet; I have done my
duty by the one I got first. This one came anonymously
this evening; is it not lovely ?'
I perceived my modest initials had been overlooked, so I
said nothing, but took the flowers from her hand and pointed
to the letters.
' Then it was you !' she cried, in a tone of genuine delight,
turning crimson as she perceived what she had revealed so
unconsciously.
' You suspected me ?' I asked.
' I thought it like you,—I mean what you would do,—
and I remember you speaking to me of those flowers, and—
telling me what they meant; but as you said nothing about
it when you arrived, I concluded I must be mistaken,' she
replied, still blushing. . . .
But I do not think I need tell the rest of the conversation,
as it was very long—one subject, and a very hackneyed one
too, being the sole theme. The result was that Ella promised
to be my wife, and offered cheerfully to wait for me as long
as I liked. I did not understand the roguish smile with
which she listened to my sad accounts of my unlucky
prospects, and how it might be years before I could set up
even the tiniest home for her, till we exchanged rings, and
on the one she gave me I saw the initials I. E.
' Is not your name, Ella ?' I asked.
' That is my cousin's pet name for me ; my real one, that
every one else calls me, is Isabel,' she answered demurely.
' And your cousin's name ?' I asked breathlessly.
' Is Anabella,' she said, without raising her eyes.
' Then she is not E ' (I had almost said Eobinson's
heiress, but stopped myself in time); ' she has no fortune, I
mean?'
Robinson s Heiress. 259
' No, it is very sad for poor Bella. The entail was a male
one, so it passed over us all, and the property went to a
distant cousin; so as my dear sister married and w-ent to
India about the same time I took Bella to live with me.
Papa was the youngest brother, but he made a great deal of
money as an indigo planter; we had no idea he had so
much, and I do not think he knew it himself. My sister
was engaged before we knew how rich we were, and I have
always envied her for that.'
' So you made up this pretty little scheme in your wise
little head to deceive us all as  to which was E.  the
heiress ?'
The vivid blush spread over her whole face at my question.
' Oh, no,' she said earnestly; ' but we were always being
reminded, in a manner unpleasant to us both, of our different
fortunes, so we resolved to be mum on the subject for the
future,—not to tell any fibs, you know, but simply to say
nothing. My cousin is really Miss Evelyn, for she is the
eldest; so we did not change any of our habits, but only held
our tongues and warned our maid to do the same. I hope
our innocent deception has not done any harm,' she added
anxiously, seeing I still looked grave. I was thinking of
Eobinson's frightful disappointment; and she seemed to
divine my thoughts.
' Your friend, Mr. Eobinson, knows; at least I told Bella
to tell him. It was principally on my account we made our
identity a mystery, I hated so the fuss vulgar people made
about me, or rather my money. And I confess,' concluded
the lady a little haughtily, ' I do not see why our affairs
required to be made public property; it was nobody's
business how much or how little we had.'
' No, certainly not, dearest; only you see had you had the
little instead of the much, we could not have married for a
long time; and some men might have thought it unfair to
ask such a sacrifice from a girl, however much he loved her.'
' Yes, I understand that; so I told Bella to acquaint Mr.
Robinson with the true facts of the case. I do hope he loves
her for herself, although she will not be entirely portionless ;
for she has a little of her own, and I have settled some of my
surplus cash on her to make it up to five thousand pounds.'
I thought this was very nice of my darling, and made her
happy by telling her so ; but I feared that llobinson would
think the enjoyment very quiet indeed to be derived from
five thousand pounds, especially after anticipating twenty
times that sum.    As for myself, I only rejoiced in the money
26o The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
because it would enable me to dispense with any delay in
securing my happiness.
That night Kobinson walked home with me in order to
obtain my congratulations on his engagement to Bella
Evelyn—although not the heiress. I found the honest
fellow was thoroughly in love with her, although he imagined
it was all the other way, and that it was her devotion to him
that caused his rapture.
' Lucky fellow you are !' he said regretfully, after I had
imparted to him my news in return for his,' to secure the
girl of your choice, and an heiress by mistake.'
' Sly dog you are, to keep us all in the dark; I might have
missed my heiress altogether if I had been a very prudent
man !' I retorted.
He looked his surprise.
' You have known who was who for long, have you not ?'
' On my honour, no !    I only knew it this evening.'
A sudden inspiration struck me: ' Before or after you
engaged yourself to Miss Bella ?' I said carelessly.
' Before, of course. It was her telling me slie feared I
misapprehended her position that brought it about. I am
sure she is very fond of me, and I am sure I am a lucky
man to gain such a fine girl, even without a large fortune.
I could not have done anything else than propose to her,
could I, after such charming frankness ?'
' Certainly not,' I replied decidedly. ' No gentleman could
have done otherwise, after the attentions you have paid her.'
Eobinson appeared relieved.
' But I say, old boy, you must not mention this to a
living soul; for Bella has such a delicate mind she could not
bear the fuss that would be made over it, and then the
conspicuous position in which she would be placed as an
engaged young lady she would not like at all. It is not as
if we could be married directly, you know,' he said.
I promised to be as silent as the grave.
'Your engagement, when announced, will pave the way
for nune,' he went on; ' for we cannot both be expected to
marry the heiress. Bella is afraid my people will be dis¬
appointed when they find out the mistake we have all made.
She is so sensitive, and has been accustomed to so much
admiration all her life. Her father lived in good style,
quite different from the little cousin's father, who sent his
daughters to England to be educated, but toiled on at money-
making till the last moment.
I tried to say something of my sweet Ella, but he over-
Robinsons Heiress. 261
whelmed me with his extravagant praises of superficial,
flighty Miss Bella, who was not fit to hold a candle to her
lovely little cousin. I soon tired of hearing his ridiculous
raptures, but it required my utmost ingenuity to get rid of
him. My engagement was announced, and also who was the
true heiress. The Misses Eobinson, with snigularly bad
taste, at once ceased their ardent court of Bella; but their
brother continued his courtship with increasing fervour. It
struck me, however, that the ex-heiress did not take so much
interest in Eobiuson's conversations now, wlien his bright
visions of their future life, founded on her supposed fortune,
faded into dull reality of small means and few pleasures.
But Eobinson was as much fascinated by the myth of his
own creation, as he had been originally by the myth of her
fortune. I had a grudge against Bella, who insisted on
carrying my Ella back to town much sooner than she wished
or I desired.
I was not very much surprised when Eobinson came to
me some weeks later to consult me about what he called a
most extraordinary letter from his lady-love. The whole
matter was as clear as day, but Eobinson was blind where
Bella was concerned. That astute young person saw her
position at a glance, and now wrote to say how sorry she
was to have to write on so very painful a subject, but he
must be aware that his sisters no longer cared for her, and
that his parents had never forgiven her for not being the
heiress they supposed, and that even in himself she had
perceived a subtle difference, in spite of his efforts to conceal
it, since the disclosure of her want of fortune; so she saw it
was her duty to break an engagement that would only
become a source of misery to both. Of her own feelings she
would not speak, etc. Eobinson was sure this precious
epistle was only caused by the writer's extreme delicacy of
mind, and wished to start for town without delay.
But I counselled caution, and offered to find out, through
Ella, if any one had been ruffling that transparent delicacy,
or if her cousin had seemed depi'essed or unhappy of late.
The answer came by return of post, that although dear Bella
had been dull and unlike herself since they left Northsea,
yet now she was very happy, very happy indeed, as every
one would say who saw her, for she was just engaged to Mr.
Dueling.
Eobinson was first incredulous, and then gave vent to
Byronic despair, but ended in natural, healthful anger and
indignation.    He is now able to hum—
262 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' If she be not fair for me,
What care I how fair she be 1'
but means to start immediately to travel in Asia Minor.
Thus Eobinson's heiress, if she has any real existence, is
still to be found. NoNO.
IV.—FOUE SUNNY WEEKS AT BLANKENBEEGHE.
We crossed from Dover to Ostend on the 20th July, thence
by rail, via Bruges, to Blankenberghe. The weather was
clear and bright, and we saw as in a dream the contents of
our childhood's toy-boxes poured out on each side of the
railway, and the delightful pictures of Goldsmith's geography
become realities. Little farm-houses, shining white with
red roofs; neat little trees, made to pattern, surrounding
them; little patches of different crops, iu the tidy but ap¬
parently not very productive fields; lust-haiiser on the
banks, water-lilies on the surface of the tranquil canals.
All this was as it should be ; but neither Goldsmith nor the
toy-boxes had prepared us for the splendid trees, forming
magnificent avenues on the ramparts of Bruges, or for the
stately old gateway, with its feet among the water-lilies, as
we passed out of the town.
Blankenberghe is a Flemish fishing village, situated some¬
what below the level of the sea, thus solving one sanitary
difficulty by making it impossible to pollute the health-
giving waves by the drainage of the houses. Plights of
steps leading up from the town bring you on the great digue
or embankment that protects the town from the sea. It is
a magnificent esplanade, bordered on the land side by a
long, very long, line of first-class hotels, cafes, cursaals, villas,
and maisons-garnics; ou the other side stretch the sands and
the sea. The sea, the sky, the sands,—that is Blanken¬
berghe,—no green thing, not a blade of grass or a straggling
bit of samphire to be seen for miles. The sands are covered
by a city of gay-looking bathing-machines, with outlying
hamlets of tents, where sensible invalids pass the day, for
up to the digue and down to the sands is a journey not to
be undertaken lightly. The bathing, I am told, is excep¬
tionally good; the slight landw^ard slope of the sands makes
it safe at all times of tlie tide; and a paternal government,
in consideration of a few sous, provides all that is necessary
At Home and Abroad. 263
for the comfort and safety of the bather. Indeed, the last
point is provided for with perhaps a shade too much energy,
if it be true, as was currently stated, that the armed watchers
on the beach have orders to fire on any adventurer, who, after
due warning, persists in passing the allotted boundaries and
getting into danger. The idea is good, but it is one of those
which scarcely admit of being put into practice. On the
sands we watched the bathers ; avoided the holes dug by the
infantile representatives of every country in Europe, not to
mention America; and gave bon-bons to the little Flemish
children playing round the paternal or maternal bathing-
machines. A calm, somewhat stolid, but by no means
stupid race were those Lilliputian fisher folk; and wlien
they looked up smiling, and saying, ' Danke, Madame,' there
was a sweet, unaffected expression of childish gratitude
passed over their homely features and almost made them
beautiful. The mothers turned smiling from their toils,
and even the fathers managed by some shy but courteous
gesture to show that they appreciated such slight but kindly
notice of their children.     On the digue there  was often
music and gay promenaders; but Mrs. H's  favourite
resort, as well as mine, was a kiosqu£ used as a book-stall.
Having been slightly overreached by the shop-boy whom
I had always found in sole charge of the houticiue, I went
one day to remonstrate, and found the Jciosqtie, with the
exception of one corner where the boy was stowed away,
filled by one of the grandest gentlemen I ever saw—grand
in physique, grand in dress and bijouterie, grand in manner,
and, as I shortly learned, grand also in didactic morality.
He looked down on me benignantly and invited me to enter.
Thinking of Charles II. and the fish at the Eoyal Society, I
concluded that he knew the kiosqiie w^as not quite full, and
obeyed. Having placed me carefully in one corner, the boy
being pancaked in another, he continued to tower in the centre.
I attacked the boy in some of those striking terms of reproach
w^hich my experience of a French school half a century ago,
has still left verdant in my memory, but it would appear
not nimble on my tongue, for the gamin pretended not to
understand me. But this modern Quixote reproved him
with much sternness and dignity, giving him some valuable
precepts as to honesty towards strangers, and finally made
him give me back twopence, with which I was quite satisfied,
though I had claimed half a franc. For such lofty morality
and such fine courtesy are not to be picked up for nothing,
like cockle-shells on the shore.    I was less impressed, how-
264 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
ever, when I found this was no chivalrous stranger, but the
master of the houtique. Still I never failed to admire him
as I. saw him day after day towering aloft, and managing to
stow away, not one only, but four or five pratiques in the
corners of the kiosquc, whence they emerged, not much
flattened, bearing Tauchnitz editions and French novels.
We lived, not on the digiie, but in the village, in the house
of Dr. Verhaaghe, the principal medico of the place. There
"we could see, in its most striking aspect, that which gives a
distinctive character to Blankenberghe, namely, the manners
of a fashionable watering-place, with its cursaals, grand
hotels, cosmopolitan waiters, and French chefs, brought into
sharp contact with the ways and habits of a kindly, homely
race of fishermen and small bourgeois, still standing in the
old paths, neither the parasites, nor the imitators, nor the
despoilers of their glittering butterfly visitors. The same
contrast has been seen elsewhere,—in the Highlands for
example, and at Biarritz,—but now at those places modern
civilization has done its work on the independence of the
native character as sweepingly as it has done in New
Zealand on the existence of the native races. Dr.
Verhaaghe's house is known as possessing the most liberal
criisine in the town, and it combines many of the comforts
and conveniences of a modern hotel with the kindly hospi¬
tality of an old-fashioned hostelry. The doctor presided
at liis tahle dlwte and kept the accounts, but did not other¬
wise appear to take au active part in the management of
the house. The door of his natty, well-ordered surgery was
close to the entrance of the house, and as it generally stood
invitingly open, I trust it was no impertinent curiosity that
i'requently led me to sit down on the opposite bench and
see the cordial Flemish greetings that passed between him
and his 'morning patients,' who enjoy the benefit of his
skill at the rate of 7-|d. per visit. He is said to have no
great faith in medicine, and to prescribe it sparingly; but I
once saw him spread a large blister with so liberal a hand,
that I presume his researches have given him confidence in
the abnormal thickness of the Flemish epidermis. He does
not seem to make a regular round of visits, but is sent for
in any emergency; for example, when a lamp fell on the
head of a countess during a public concert, or when one
trooper's horse kicked its neighbour whilst their owners
were bathing cL la militaire under the supervision of their
officers. To show how sensible and liberal his treatment
was, 1 may mention that once when I was more ailing than
A t Home and A broad. 265
usual, my sister went to the kitchen to try if she could
explain to the cook how to make extract of beef. The second
cook, a ' brave Beige,' in white cap and apron, said he knew
aU about it, as M. le dodeur often made it for his patients ;
and sure enough in due time, there was sent into my room
more than a pint of first-rate meat extract, made of beef,
chicken, and veal, so strong that a spoonful diluted was
enough for a meal. And mark this, ye hotelkeepers of
England, who charge extra for a basin of watery beef-tea,
this never appeared in the hill ! On returning from my even¬
ing walk on the digue, I used often to find one corner of
the surgery illuminated by a brilliant lamp, whilst the rest
of the room remained in deep shadow. The light that
flickered on the phials and gallipots arranged on neat shelves
above the table, and on a glass case of weird-looking
surgical bandages, fell in a broad stream on the doctor's
sturdy shoulders and honest old head, as he bent over his
bills and prescriptions. What a picture ! A Teniers in its
homely strength and quaint background, with something
Ptembrandt-like in the deep contrast of its light and shadow !
Mademoiselle, the doctor's daughter, arranged all house¬
hold matters, inspiring the whole staff of foreign waiters
and Belgian women with her own spirit of activity,
common sense, and kind thoughtfulness. Mr. Trollope met
with something like that in the Tyrol, but Mademoiselle has
none of Madame Trolimanns' masterful spirit,—in fact, so
far as it is in her power, she not only wishes to see her
guests happy, but that they should be so in their own
way. The chef is the doctor's son, a handsome, intelligent
young fellow, who, at the end of what I hope proved a very
successful season, was to proceed to Anvers to study art. I
shall not easily forget the picture he himself made in his
beautiful kitchen, turning with ready politeness from the
interesting occupation of saut^ing potatoes, to give me
important information about 'cuivres repousses,' and the
address of his friend, an antiquary at Bruges, where I saw
an exquisite specimen of this art as now revived. There is
something noble in this ascent to the temple of art through
the paths of honest labour and independent exertion. Such
a man does not need condescending patrons or professional
critics to bring him into notice. No; sufficient for him is
' the cunning of his own right hand,' sustained by the
buoyant hopefulness that comes of lofty aspiration, wedded
to lowly duty. Let us wish success to the painter-cook of
Blankenberghe and to all such as he !
266 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
In our evening strolls we sometimes went into the Kirke,
which at that time we found filled with devout worshippers,
cliiefly of the lower orders. Tlie church recalls an English
village church (with a difference), for over the porch is an
effigy of St. Antoine with his pig. The churchyard, with its
long grass, and the monotonous character of its stern-looking
grey stones, recalls a Scotch kirkyard of thirty years ago.
The interior of the church is whitewashed; but the decora¬
tions, with a few exceptions, are rich and in singularly good
taste. The ritual was stately and imposing, and the music
pleasing. Mrs. H. and I went one evening to hear a charity
sermon by a Jesuit father. At the close of a short musical
service, more ornate than usual; there issued from the vestry
a middle-aged man in a spotless cassock and gold-coloured
scarf. There was a comfortable look about him, which did
not at all answer our expectations as to the outward man of
a Jesuit. He spoke French with a marked Gascon accent,
and between this and my deafness I at first could not
understand him. When I began to follow, he was describing
the miserable state of man—suffering in intellect from
doubts, difficulties, impassable boundaries—suffering in the
heart from griefs, disappointments, hopes betrayed—suffer¬
ing in the body from toil, disease, and death. It was not
thus that God made man. No; He made liim in His own
image. But man sinned, 'et a I'instant, la mort, jus qu'alors
retenue fut lachee sur sa proie ;' the deadly poison entered
into our minds, hearts, and bodies. And to ' soulager toutes
ces miseres' is the divine task of Catholic charity. From
generals he came to particulars, and gave a very interesting
account of ' la charite contemporaine Belgique.' But wound
up by contrasting their great and successful works among
the heathen with the ' rien accompli' by the rich Anglican
Church—a church, he said, so rich that its income was greater
than that of all the Eoman Catholic churches in the world.
As he spoke, he turned mildly expostulatory glances on Mrs.
H. and me, and we felt that for once we were not the riglit
women in the right place. Query, would he have made
those statements before a congregation where the facts were
known ? He finished, and an old woman and an old man
came round, as usual, to collect sous for the chairs, grasping
the coppers securely in one hand, and giving change honestly
with the other to any one who tendered more than the
petit-sous lawfully due. Then came an elegant lady to
' faire la quete,' All this time the low-browed, ill-shaven
verger, in his rusty gown, strayed about as usual with a look
At Home and Abroad. 267
of mingled suspicion and anxiety, looking sadder and
'umbler than usual; for there stalked up and down the
church a grand personage in a magnificent uniform, carrying
a formidable pike and surmounted by a cocked hat, worn
transversely on his brow. Across his martial bosom he wore
a crimson scarf, on which, embroidered in golden letters, were
the words ' Kirkes Polizei.' For what was this ' Appareil
guerrier' required in so peaceful an assemblage ? Was it to
protect the son of Loyola from the daughters of Knox ?
Passing up and down to the digue, I often remarked this
inscription in front of a house: ' Misjes School,' ' Ecole
communale des filles.' One day I craved admission, and found
two well-sized, well-ventilated rooms, under the charge of a
calm, still, unaffected-looking woman, who, with one assistant,
seemed to keep a large party of girls in excellent discipline
and efficient working order. They all learn Frencli as well
as Flemish. To this the elder girls add German and English,
pronouncing the three languages comprehensibly, and so far
as I heard with no glaring fault. They read in French an
account of the horse, its usefulness and its noble qualities.
In my childhood such an essay in our ' Collection' would
probably have wound up with Job's description of a horse,
—Job xxxix., 'Hast Thou given the horse strength? hast
Thou clothed his neck with thunder ?'—for in those remote
times it was thought good to cultivate the taste and imagina¬
tion of a child, as well as to pack his brain with words and
desiccated facts. But the hearts of those little maidens
were not made to bound within them at the thought of the
magnificent animal ' saying among the trumpets, Ha! ha!
smelling the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and
the shouting.' No ; the anti-climax is so great that I scruple
to write it. But—truth will out—the lesson wound up by
saying that an ignorant prejudice had long existed against
the flesh of this noble animal; but the writer was glad to
state that it was now overcome, that horse flesh was now
frequently sold in Belgium, and that it was excellent. I had
often thought the ' filet de boeuf rather tough ; after this
visit to the ' Misjes School' I ceased to partake of it.
I must now record a little adventure we had, in which the
Belgian lion, by the very peaceableness of his demeanour,
quite got the better of his more fiery British brother. We
had long talked of making an excursion to Heyst, whose
hotels are dearer, whose digue is smaller, whose resources
are fewer than those of Blankenberghe. Heyst was to be
visited.    We talked about it till some of us believed they
268 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
had been there; others, feeling that they knew all about
it, might have been tempted on their return to Britain
to say they had been there. But no form of mendacity,
however insidious, was possible to any one of them ; for the
fates decreed that to Heyst we should go, and added, by a
kind of perversity to which they, in common with other
ladies, old and young, are addicted, that Heyst we should
never see.
It happened tluis : Mrs. H. and C. were going to Brussels.
A Mrs. B. and I went to the station to see them off. A
bustle arose,—train to Heyst on the near rails prevented
access to Brussels train on the other. A friendly official
advised Mrs. H. and suite to pass through the Heyst train
to their own. She did so successfully, but no sooner had
she set her foot on the platform, than off' went the Heyst
train, carrying with it the whole suite. General consterna¬
tion ! Poor C. in great distress. All much vexed and
anxious. However, we wandered through the train, till, find¬
ing an empty and luxurious carriage, we seated ourselves
and bemoaned our fate. Enter to us a fiery-looking guard,
and demanded our tickets. C. showed him hers. Then he
demanded ours, whereupon we burst forth into complaints of
the treacherous official who had lured us to our fate. ' Je
ne demande pas cela, je demande vos billets.' ' Ou allez
vous ?' ' Nul part,' we replied with much truth ; but our
friend did not see it. He stamped with rage and perplexity,
and at last left the carriage, utterly baffled by the unusual
situation. It was not in the code. Left alone, we again
anticipated all sorts of absurd and tyrannical conduct, and
sketched out our line of defence. The Consul at Ostend,
possibly the Foreign Office, was to be applied to. No one
spoke of writing to the Times; that was too obvious a step
to be mentioned. One thing we decided, that we should
not leave the carriage, knowing it could go no further, but
remain there in motionless dignity till we were carried
back to Blankenberghe. But our friend came sternly to the
door and desired us to descend. We calmly sat still. ' Mais
il n'y a pas a dire, il faut absolument descendre.' Obstinacy
on our part—emotion on his. ' Mesdames ! il faut descendre;
il faut venir au chef de la gare.' At this foreshadowing of
active persecution we arose, like bold Britons, and descended.
Following him with stately steps and defiant hearts to the
huremi, where we found the chef, a good-humoured-looking
youth, by no means bristling with authority. He heard tlie
guard's story, heard  ours,  looked  at  the two  tickets for
o
AI Home atid Abroad. 269
Brussels, and then said, ' Eh bien, vous etes venues de
Blankenberghe, vous n'avez qu' a y retourner, il y aura une
trenne k quatre heures.' Here was a letting down of our
heroically strung expectations ! It was too much ! it was
humiliating ! it was more, it (almost) made us ridiculous. I
was determined to be heard; to make liim understand that
the case was serious. So in the best French that fatigue of
body and a succession of ill-detined and apparently needless
emotions had left me, I drew a lively and pathetic picture
of Mrs. H. left ticketless, daughterless, and friendless on the
platform at Blankenberghe ! My eloquence was in vain.
' Qu'est ce que lui arrivera ?' said my friend. In desperation
I replied,' Elle aura peur !' ' Peur !' said my friend with a
slightly satirical accent. ' Est ce qu'on la mangera ?' I
succumbed, and we at last sat down outside the hureau till four
P.M., when we were escorted to our carriage by the chef and the
belligerent guard. Ten minutes afterwards we arrived at
Blankenberghe, and had the pleasure of seeing Mrs. H. smiling
on the platform amidst a group of friends. So that is how
we went to Heyst at the expense of the Belgian Government,
And as the train stops a long way out of the town, the fates
carried out their intention, for Heyst we never saw. "When
the time came for us finally to leave Blankenberghe, we
found ourselves escorted by a procession,—first a band, which,
on the whole, favoured us with great flashes of silence ; then
all the boys from the ecoh communale, walking steadily and
seriously, but not sadly ; then all the girls in similar fashion ;
then our great boxes on a truck ; then a miscellaneous crowd
of women, sailors, fishwomen, and nondescripts, all alike,
steady and serious ; then ourselves, escorted by a group of
English friends. Though we knew that the procession was
not got up in our honour, yet we did feel that it added to the
dignity, if not to the comfort of our departure. So in common
gratitude we tried to look as if we belonged to it, copying as
well as we could that impressive Belgian demeanour, which
gives to pleasure itself the meritorious cachet of iminteresting
duty. At the station we found ourselves in the midst of a
crowd, not an eager crowd, nor an expectant crowd, but only
a crowd stolidly crowding.
It was no longer possible for minds undisciplined as ours
to copy their composure; for it was impossible to see how
we and our boxes were to reach the train. We did reach it
somehow, without disturbing the steady aspect of our Belgian
friends, who now began to gaze after the procession, which
was soberly following a road parallel to  the  railway, the
2/0 The Ladies^ Edhiburgh Magazine.
place of our truck and boxes being occupied by an ancient
and shabby post-chaise, the sight of which evidently stirred
slightly the hearts of the crowd, so much so, indeed, that we
instinctively felt that we were gazing on a triumphal chariot.
As we gazed, the train proceeded with a slow and lingering
motion, as if loath to lose so imposing a sight; and as we
approached a little wayside station, we saw that the pro¬
cession had halted outside of it, and a sturdily built, middle-
aged man passed with an important and official air through
the gates. A gentle wave of something like eagerness passed
over the faces of our Belgian fellow-passengers. ' Le voila !'
said one; ' Le voil^ qui monte,' said another, as he clambered
into the post-chaise. The whole procession, fishwives,
children, military band, and htdssiers closed around him and
hid him from view. But no matter; we had seen the new
Burgomaster arrive from Ghent. ■ For it appears, possibly to
typify that justice is a thing very far removed from every¬
day life, that a new Burgomaster must always come from a
distance ; so this one, who had been born and passed his
life in Blankenberghe, left it in the morning, and in the
afternoon he arrived from Ghent.
Our four sunny weeks were over. The mists of autumn
lay around us, and winter stood with frozen aspect in the
immediate background; but neither the mists of autumn nor
the frosts of winter can blot out the memory of those bright
skies, that pure air, those mighty waves, fresh from the
mysteries of the silent Pole, nor that of the dear old friends
whose presence tinged the barren sands of Blankenberghe
with an 'after-glow' from the happy fields of 'Auld lang
syne.' H. L. E.
2rf)c Beggar of Capo tii JHontc: a Eale of Stxtg^one.
By the Author of ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE IX.
It was evident that the arrival of Filippo and his cargo
w^as well received, and there were the usual noisy demonstra¬
tions of this excited people. A full hour passed before any
one on board seemed to remember the existence of Concetta,
and she saw with melancholy presentiment that night was
fast drawing on. She had almost made up her mind to go
upon deck, when her attention was attracted to a covered
vehicle, drawn by two bullocks, which slowly made its way
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 271
to  the  nearest point  opposite  the  vessel.    At   first   she
supposed it might be for the transport of the merchandise
into the country; but no one seemed in a hurry to load the
cart, if such were its purpose, and the young man who drove
the bullocks seemed in no haste to set off again.    He joked
and laughed with the people around, and appeared to find
friends amongst the crew, for they were   soon  engaged in
conversation.    It was getting almost too dark to distinguish
objects, yet she fancied she saw Niccolo amongst those who
had been most hearty in their greetings.    Presently she was
able to see his face more distinctly, and she saw him turn
round and point to the cabin window in which she stood.
The light of a lantern which was now hoisted in front of the
vehicle fell on their faces, and she plainly saw the stranger's
look turned towards the place pointed out by Niccolo.    The
darkness of the little cabin made her invisible, and she con¬
tinued to watch the two men.    The stranger seemed eagerly
listening  to  Niccolo's  narration, whatever  it referred  to.
There was  something in  the  young  man's  features  that
seemed familiar to her, but she did not like the expression
of his countenance—it was hard and stern, and she felt an
instinctive  dread of being placed under his guardianship.
He was older tlian Niccolo, and though he affected a certain
jollity and carelessness in his manner towards the crew, his
compressed brow and lips told of a nature the reverse of any¬
thing open and candid.    He could not have been more than
five  and  twenty, yet he  bore  evident traces of a life of
determined action and wild adventure.    Concetta was not
left many minutes in doubt as to the purpose of the vehicle
she had been looking at, for Filippo's voice was heard calling
loudly for Niccolo.   The youth sprang into the boat, climbed
the ship's side, and almost before she had missed him from
Ms place by the bullock-driver, he was in the cabin desiring
her to come upon deck, where the padrone waited for her.
Heartsick with apprehension of new and untried dangers,
she   slowly mounted the steps  to  the  deck, where  stood
Filippo, looking almost as stern as on that eventful day when
she first met his glance on board Ciprani's vessel.
' Thou wilt have time enough and to spare, girl, for resting,
if last night's rough ascent to the convent tried thy thin-
shod feet. Come, follow me on shore. Thou mayest say
farewell to the sea for a season, mayhap that will comfort
thee; for I mind me thou wast in sore haste to leave it when
the burning mountain cast its lurid glare on the waters of
the bay.'
272 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
This was the first time Filippo had referred to their
having previously met, and the allusion to that scene of
anxiety and terror brought back her grief for her father and
her friend, which fears for her own safety during the last
few days had in a measure banished from her mind. For
the moment forgetting herself and the danger of provoking
her captor to further violence, she exclaimed, in a bitter
tone :
' Hast thou no feeling for those whose hearts are rent with
anguish, for the fate of the helpless girl thou hast treacher¬
ously torn from her home ? To my thinking, thou wouldst
have shown greater proof of thy manliness in striving with
those who could have coped with thee, Padrone; the cause is
weak indeed which seeks to injure defenceless women.'
As she pronounced these words her eyes flashed with the
spirit of a hero, and her figure looked commanding and
defiant, while her lip curled with scorn as she waited his
further bidding. Filippo, instead of the wrath which she
expected to follow her bold speech, looked at her with
involuntary admiration, as he said :
' By St. Anthony, albeit of the weaker sex, it would appear,
girl, in spirit we are not unequally matched. Had thy
craven-hearted father shown but half thy courage, thou
mightst even now have been with thy betrothed, holding
sweet converse on the banks of the Danube. Nay, start not,
girl,'—for at these unexpected words Concetta betrayed
unwonted emotion and astonishment,—' the story of thy life
is no mystery to Filippo, and again I repeat thy father's
dastardly conduct' . . . .
He was not allowed to finish the sentence, for the poor
girl had conquered the emotion she had betrayed at the
mention of her lover Eudolph, and now said, in an indignant
voice:
' Dare not to brand the name of my honoured father with
such epithets. What can such as thou, brigand, contra¬
bandist, the disloyal betrayer of woman,—what canst thou
know of one as far above thee as the heaven that now looks
down on him ! Is it not enough for thee to break the heart of
one whom thou knowest to be powerless in thy hands, without
loading the head of him thou hast robbed of his child with
dishonour ?    Shame on thy manhood for such cruelty!'
Astonishment had hitherto kept Filippo silent, and
perhaps a lingering feeling of sorrow at the thought of the
trials to which she was about to be exposed; but the last
words of the agitated girl struck a chord in his breast which
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 273
jarred every nerve, and, taking her roughly by the wrist, he
said in a voice of thunder that made Niccolo, who stood at a
little distance, tremble for the captive's life,' Barest tliou to
beard me with such words as these, thou bold girl—I who
with the uplifting of a finger could immure thee where thy
cries would never reach the ear of a friend ?'
Here he paused for a moment, and Niccolo expected to
hear him command that the girl should be bound hand and
foot, and carried from the deck. It would seem, however,
that Concetta's dauntless bearing had stood her in good stead,
for the countenance of Filippo relaxed, and he let go her arm,
muttering to himself in an undertone:
' She has done her part bravely, and in sooth it ill becomes
Filippo to quarrel with the wench for using her only weapon.'
Poor Concetta's heart beat wildly with terror and emotion;
for now the excitement had passed, she felt all her fears
return, and stood trembling like an aspen before him.
Filippo saw the change in her countenance, but forbore to
remark on it, though a half smile on his lips showed he was
well pleased it should be so.    He merely said :
' Thou hadst better keep thy taunts till I have more
leisure to answer thee, for the night calls me and thee away.
We have wasted too much time already;' then, seeing she
was about to turn away, he added:
' Stay ! how wouldst thou have me call thee ? for with thy
peasant's dress thou shouldst bear a peasant's name. Thou
must forget thy lineage and thy name, jiroud girl, if thou
wouldst know peace where thou art going.'
Concetta made no reply, her head was bent down to
conceal the tears she could no longer restrain. Filippo
looked at her for a moment or two in silence,—her youthful,
drooping figure and utter dejectedness seemed an appeal for
mercy,—and laying aside the harsh, stern manner which he
had worn but an instant before, he turned to Niccolo, who
had stood wondering at the strange scene, and said, half
jestingly:
' Here, boy, thou shalt name the wench, though, in sooth,
thou owest her little grace for her scorn of thy services.'
The colour mounted to the brow of the youth at this
unexpected command, and he looked humbly towards
Concetta to see how she received it. The intended degrada¬
tion fell but lightly on the poor girl, for her sorrow was too
deep to be stirred by anything so trivial. Niccolo evidently
felt for her situation, and in a tone Filippo rarely heard from
one of his calling, he replied kindly:
No. 54.—June 1879. g
2/4 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
' I would call her Maria, Padrone; and may our Holy
Mother, whose name she beareth, watch over her.'
What a revulsion of feeling now passed through the heart
of Concetta! It seemed as though this invocation of that
blessed name had raised new life in her, and that she would
be from henceforth more especially the object of her watch¬
ful protection. Her countenance expressed her feelings, and
her look of gratitude rewarded the youth for all his previous
mortifications. She no longer hesitated, but prepared at once
to follow Filippo down the ladder, with the assistance of
Niccolo, who seemed anxious to prove to her that he would
take no part in whatever might ensue after her leaving the
vessel, rilippo led the way to the covered cart, and the
young buUock-driver helped her into it. She shrunk from
his bold, searching glance, and thought what an aggravation
of her sorrows would be the forced companionship of such a
man. She did not hear Filippo address him by name, but
apparently he was well acquainted with their route, and
needed no directions. One thing she observed, namely, that
Filippo did not seem to take this new-comer into his confi¬
dence respecting the men who had accompanied him from the
mainland, at least she could detect no reference to their
proposed schemes. "When he spoke, it seemed of domestic
matters, and occasionally she caught the sound of women's
names in their conversation; but the road was so rough she
could not often connect a sentence. It was midnight when
they halted to rest the bullocks and refresh themselves.
The moon was now high in the heavens, and Concetta was
able to see that the little cabaret at which they stopped stood
alone in the midst of what appeared, and was in fact, a
volcanic district, for the road they had travelled was formed
of scoriiie and lava, the accumulation of ages. The rocks
seemed broken in strange and fantastic forms; and though
she could not distinguish in which quarter lay the ocean, the
sound of waves rolling up through their cavernous masses
told her they were at no great distance from the sea. The
lonely, desolate look of tlie cottage, standing as it did without
shelter of any kind, cast a chilling influence over her spirits,
for she concluded it was Filippo's intention to leave her in
this solitude, and there was indeed little hope of her ever
meeting with help in this unknown region. She was thank¬
ful, however, that the hateful bandage had been taken from
her eyes, thus allowing her to see the place to which they
had brought her. Filippo got down and went into the cottage,
where, it would seem, they were expected, for a man came
The Beggar of Capo di Alonte: a Talc of Sixty-one.   275
out with a light, and began to help the driver to unyoke the
bullocks. Concetta supposed she was to remain in the cart,
for Filippo had not desired her to get down; and she was
indulging in the luxury of giving way unobserved to her
grief, when she was startled by his loudly calling her by her
new name. For an instant she did not recognise the sound,
so absorbed was she in her own sorrow, but on the bullock-
driver's calling out ' Maria,' and pointing to the cottage, she
understood she was to follow Filippo into the little inn. He
took no notice of the traces of weeping on her cheek, but
pointed to a seat opposite to him at a small table, and bade
her take some of the supper which was spread before them.
She sat down, and glancing timidly round her, felt much
relieved at seeing a young, respectable-looking woman, with
a baby in her arms, seated near the fire. The woman rose
and came forward, offering her some soup and bread. The
poor girl gladly accepted the refreshment, for nothing had
passed her lips since the chocolate brought her by Niccolo in
the early morning. The woman looked kindly at her, and
seemed much struck both with the fairness of her skin and
the blue eyes, so uncommon in those parts. She also saw
that the young girl had been weeping, aud knowing some¬
thing of the troubles which followed the revolt in the Island,
she thought that perhaps the poor young creature was
mourning the loss of a parent, or more likely in the present
case, of her lover. As she brought her some meat and wine,
she bent down, and laying her hand kindly on Concetta's
shoulder, bade her take heart, for she was too young and too
fair to be left long without a protector. At this moment the
bullock-driver came into the kitchen, and making room for
him at the table, the young wife busied herself in serving the
new-comer; and with admiring glances, and some hurried
words in the patois of the district, she evidently directed his
attention to the fair stranger. Concetta saw his lip curl scorn¬
fully as he turned away and gave his attention to the viands
before him, and again she was struck with the familiarity
of his features. While she was trying to recall any period'
of her life when she might have seen the youth, her eyes rested
unconsciously on his face. He was too much engrossed with
the substantial meal before him to waste any thoughts on
Concetta, yet by that mysterious influence which so often
makes us feel the eyes of another are upon us, he looked up and
met her wondering gaze. Without shrinking from her earnest
look, he showed no sympathetic feeling, no curiosity to divine
her meaning, as would have been natural in any ordinary case.
276 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
His nature was evidently a hard one, and he had possibly
never known the amenities of life. It was strange, but in
that very want of interest Concetta found a resemblance to
her father, though she shrank from avowing it even to her
own heart. Yet there was something in the bearing as well
as in the features of this man, that recalled a picture of her
father taken in early life.
Filippo, busily engaged   in conversation  with  the  host,
had not been observant of what passed at the supper table.
The young wife seemed much interested in the beautiful girl
whose dejection was so apparent, and desirous of changing
the current of her thoughts, she laid her baby on Concetta's
lap, thinking, in her maternal pride, that its smiles and merry
crow must lighten any sorrow.    The little creature, swathed
and bound in the manner so universal in all parts of Italy,
seemed not unwilling to receive the caresses of Concetta, as
she bent over it and kissed its velvet cheek.    The infant,
though conscious that a stranger held it, was yet attracted
by the soft blue eyes so full of tenderness, and the happy
mother  looked  on   with  fond love  and pride.    It was a
moment of peace to the heart-stricken girl, and her cheek
paled as Filippo called to her to give the child to its mother,
and mount into the cart without further delay.    The simple,
frank kindness of the peasant woman had for a time enabled
her to shake off the dread that filled her heart.    The woman
now embraced her warmly, as she rose to bid her farewell,
and in the fulness of her heart towards the young stranger,
she prayed the Virgin would bless her, and ere long make
her as happy a mother as herself—she could ask no better
fate for her.     As Concetta took her seat in the cart, she
wondered  how  long  it  would  be   ere  they reached their
destination, and whether she was to continue this wandering
life.    Filippo never addressed her, and she was in too much
awe of him to question him about their whereabouts.    What¬
ever was the present subject of his thoughts, it appeared to
irritate and stir up angry passions, for his lowering brow and
compressed  lips   expressed  too  plainly  the   tempest that
agitated his breast.
The road, if such it could be called, became more difficult
at every league, and Concetta observed that they had now
turned in the direction of the mountains. Like the evils of
her own sad fate, these fastnesses seemed pressing closer and
closer upon her, for the cold light of the early dawn revealed
more fully the wild and savage region they had now entered.
In vain she looked for traces of human habitations; and ere
A Letter from Sandwell. 277
long a new fear took possession of her mind, for she thought
their purpose might be to murder her in this scene of desola¬
tion. The increased gloom of Filippo seemed to favour the
idea.
This suspense was horrible, and she hailed with gladness
the loud barking of a dog, which was followed by the appear¬
ance of a man from behind what looked like a cavern in the
rock. The bullock-driver at once threw down his guiding-
staff, and left the new-comer to unyoke the animals, while
he disappeared behind the rocks. Concetta felt they had
now reached the place of her imprisonment, and pressing her
little crucifix to her bosom, inwardly prayed to be supported
in the coming trial, whatever it might prove to be.
She needed no second bidding to dismount from the cart,
and was meekly following Filippo in the direction take*n by
the young man, when a sudden movement of the bullocks
made her look round. She could hardly restrain an exclama¬
tion when she saw it was Matteo who was occupied with
them. He had purposely caused the animals to make this
restless movement in order to attract her attention, then
covertly raising his finger to his lip to imply caution, and at
the same time assure her of his continued watchfulness, he
resumed his employment, and took no further notice of her.
She obeyed this silent warning by showing no sign of recog¬
nition ; but her heart was lightened by this proof that she
was not forgotten, and had still a friend in this remote
and desolate solitude.
{To he, continued')
% iLetter from SantiiriclL
The following letter will, we are assured, be read with the greatest
interest by all who seek to further women's education.
It is with great pleasure I comply with your request, and
write an account of my new home, Sandwell. I will endea¬
vour not to give coulevr-de-rose to any of our surroundings ;
but if the description seems sunny to others, I can only say
the place is sunny to myself. There are passing clouds, but
these are not to be named in comparison with the bright¬
ness. Sandwell is to almost all its inmates a happy home.
A drive of five miles from Birmingham, through the healthy
suburb of Handsworth, and lanes shaded with trees, until
we forget we are on the very edge of the Black Country,
brings you to one of the  lodges, and then a short way
2/8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
further through the park and you reach our spacious house.
It belongs to Lord Dartmouth; the present Earl was born
and resided here till about the year 1853. After his re¬
moval to Patshull, he nobly gave up this house to various
works of charity, under the superiutendence of Miss Selwyn,
the late Bishop of Lichfield's sister, who continued her
efforts with unabated interest till age and the loss of sight
obliged her to withdraw. Now the work is purely educa¬
tional. It embraces three distinct objects, which, though
diverse, are capable not only of harmonizing but of mutually
aiding each other. These are—first, the Industrial Home
for the training of servants; second, the Girls' School for
giving a first-class education to gentlemen's daughters; and
third, the College, where the further education of women is
to b» combined with a free, healthy country life.
To begin with the Industrial Department. One of the
difficulties usually felt in training establishments, is to give
the same sort of work as will afterwards be required in
domestic service. But this is obviated; the rooms are
spacious; carved woodwork and pretty things must be
dusted; and the young girls, under a careful housemaid, are
accustomed to this and all kinds of housework. The kitchen
girls, again, take it in turn to learn cooking, to do scullery
and dairy work, and to clean their bedrooms, the refectory,
and tlie other apartments in use on the ground floor. These
are under the superintendence of a lady-cook, an Associate
of South Kensington. A school of cookery is also opened
for the young ladies of the upper department, and others
from the neighbourhood. Cooking is a popular lesson, and
a charming variety from mathematics, languages, analysis,
etc. The table-maids learn to clean plate, glass, etc., under
a good servant, and wait at table with alacrity and evident
pleasure. Then there are laundry and wash-hoiise fitted up
with every convenience, with a hot room for drying, etc.,
and here laundry work can be most successfully taught.
There are boys as well as girls. These are under careful
supervision, and work in the garden, farm, stables, or in
carrying the coals, chopping the wood, etc., for the large
establishment. The children are frequently the orphans of
very respectable parents, sent either by their own relations
or by some kind, disinterested friend. Some of the yoimger
ones go to a national school in the neighbourhood, whilst all,
three times a week, attend the night school in which some
of the ladies teach, and on the other evenings there is a
sewing school, a singing or a confirmation class.    The whole
A Letter from Sandivell. 279
household assemble twice a day in the chapel within the
house for morning and evening prayer, when a portion of
our English service is read, and I give a short catechetical
explanation of one of the lessons for the day.
II. The Girls' School.—This, in its large and lofty rooms,
riding school, and abundance of playground, has many
special advantages. Every effort is made for healthy learn¬
ing, no undue pressure is used, but steady, earnest work
encouraged. Excepting music, the teaching is entirely by
ladies. The whole school endeavours in its measure to reach
the standard proposed for the Oxford Local Examinations.
Before Easter there is a rehearsal examination, when every
child takes part, and from which I decide who shall be the
candidates. This distinction is greatly desired. We intend,
when the University Examination Papers are brought' back
by the candidates, to give them to those left at home, and
thus the whole school will receive the benefit. One-third of
our number are this year going in, and we hope that next
May, Sandwell will itself be a centre for the examination.
But lessons are not the only thought; there are poultry to
be fed, gardens to be tended, lawn tennis to be enjoyed, roots
to be found for the ferneries; and in the winter, such skating!
for a beautiful little lake, a mile in circumference, belongs
to the house. Once a week I invite the children to the
drawing-room, and music or games, or work for the poor or
for missions, gives a pleasant evening, when formality is
altogether thrown aside. The dining-room is a magnificent,
lofty apartment, forty feet by thirty feet, and, like the others,
has a beautiful oak floor.
The expense averages that of a good boarding-school; but
in order to help the daughters of gentlemen whose means
are limited, there are ten exhibitions of thirty-six guineas
per annum; and to encourage study, there are five open
annual scholarships of from £10 to £50 in value. Three of
the latter are to be given away this summer, and I should be
glad to hear of candidates.
III. The College.—This, it is hoped, will be eventually the
most important department of all. My wish is, that the
resident teachers should be ladies who, having themselves
known the dehght of higher education, would form tutorial
classes for the inmates. These may either be ladies who
have fortunes, who will find every accommodation for walk¬
ing, riding, boating, archery, and other pursuits calculated to
promote health in the midst of study, or they may be those
whose  means, otherwise  insufficient, are  enabled  to  gain
28o The Ladies' Edhihirgh Magasuie.
similar advantages by teaching some subject that they
thoroughly understand, and learning, in return, others they
wish to acquire. For these also there are scholarships and
exhibitions.
The test of study is to be the Oxford Women's Exami¬
nations.
There will be lectures on some subjects, tutorial classes
on others; and when these cannot be formed, instruction by
correspondence, and an occasional visit from the correspond¬
ing instructor, will be arranged.
I both hope and believe that the difficulties occasioned by
distance from a university town will be overcome. The
failure at Hitchin was from totally different circumstances.
There was no home staff of competent teachers; for ladies
who could teach classics, mathematics, and philosophy
were then almost unknown. Here we are not far from
Birmingham, and not so distant from Oxford but that an
occasional lecturer might sometimes run down. Then we
are free from all the distractions that are inseparable from a
xiniversity town. "We have the freedom of a wide park, the
house is built on good soil, we have an abundant supply of
fine water; and as proofs of its healthiness, during the
twenty-two years of Miss Selwyn's residence the school has
never broken up on account of infectious diseases,—indeed,
such are hardly known,—and during the half-year that has
passed since I came, we have not once required medical help
for either pupils or industrials. I feel sure that, when once
Sandwell is known, it will be a favoiirite residence for those
who wish for quiet study. I trust its students will neither
in scholarship nor future usefulness be behind their sister
collegians of Girton, Newnham, or of the newly rising halls
in Oxford.
It will give me much pleasure to furnish further informa¬
tion should I receive any inquiries, addressed, ' Sandwell,
Birmingham.' Thanking you for the warm interest you have
expressed in our institution,—I am, yours very truly,
J. A. WiNSCOM.
[We shall hope to hear further details from time to time of the
success and progress of the work of Sandwell. It seems to us tQ
combine so many of the elements necessary to women's success in the
prosecution of their studies, and to avoid so many of the incou-
■veniences and discomforts which seem inseparable from residence
in a large town while pursuing such studies, that it only needs to he
more widely known in order to have its advantages eagerly sought
after by young lady-students of all grades.]
Maxims and ApJwrisins. 281
Jlaxims attli ^pfjorisms.
FKOM THE WRITINGS OF GOETHK.
[These, translated into English for the first time, we shall hope
occasionally to give our readers, with parallel thoughts from other
sources whenever this is possible.]
^ As in water face answereth to face—so tJie heart of man to man.'
Everything worth thinking has been already thought,
one must only try to think it out again.
' There is one sure way of giving freshness and importance to the
most commonplace maxims — that of reflecting on them in direct
reference to our own state and conduct, to our own past and future
being.'—Coleridge, Aids to Reflection.
'To restore a commonplace truth to its first uncommon lustre,
you need only translate it into action. But to do this, you must
have reflected on its truth.'—Coleeidge, Aids to Reflection.
' True wit is nature to advantage dress'd ;
What oft was thought, but ne'er so well express'd.'
Pope, Essay on Criticism.
'Exprimer ce que nul n'avait encore exprime et ce que nul autre
que nous ne pourrait rendre, c'est la, selon moi, I'objet et la fin de
tout ecrivain original.'—Sainte Beuve, Causeries de Lundi.
How can one learn to know oneself? Never by intro¬
spection, but by action. Try to do your duty, and yoti will
at once know what you are.
' Rely upon it, the spiritual life is not knowing, nor hearing, but
doing. We only know so far as we can do ; we learn to do by doing,
and we learn to know by doing.'—Life of F. W. Robertson.
* If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine.'—
St. John vii. 17.
But what is your duty ?   The day's claim.
The rational world may be looked upon as a great undying
individual who unceasingly acts upon the inevitable, and
thus learns to master even what is accidental.
i82 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
SToo Hate,
It has come when my hands are too weary,
To pick up their coveted right,
It has come when my heart is too dreary,
To care for its long-deferred light;
When my eyes are too dim to perceive it,
When lonely and sad is my fate,
When my life is too poor to receive it;
Oh, why has it come so late ?
Time has brought me the honour and gladness,
All the love, recognition, and praise.
All I yearned for in sadness, or madness.
All I prayed for in other days;
And friends—tender loves —gather round me;
It is now—it is I—cannot wait—
For Death with his fetters has bound me.
And beyond—I may yet be too late!
H. A. Duff.
©ur ILi&rarg Eaile.
Paul Faber, Surgeon.   Dr. George Macdonald.   Hurst & Blackett.
Those who have been used to open a new book by Dr. Macdonald
with the feeling that they were not only going to sit at the feet of a
teacher, but also to listen to a charming story-teller, must iind, we
think, in Paul Faher some disappointment mingled with their
l)leasure. There is, indeed, much of the old, lofty, pure, unworldly
teaching ; there is, as ever, much spiritual insight; there is the
chivalrous kindness towards women which we expect of him, and for
which we thank him ; and there is an uncompromising advocacy of
the claims of animals on human respect and tenderness for which we
bless him, and wish him God speed. In spite of all this we must,
with the greatest reluctance, confess to disappointment. It seems
almost as if there were a law of Nature overruling authors, and
perhaps most of all novelists, by which their style, both of thought
and expression, tends to become an exaggeration of itself. We see it
in Dickens, in George Eliot, and in many others, and we see it here
in Paul Faher, as compared, say, with Alec Forhes.
Possibly in the book before us, as in many other cases, the extreme
seriousness of the topics treated makes them unsuitable for the novel
form ; but however this may be, the incidents in this book strike us
as too exceptional, some of them as too repulsive, for artistic pur¬
poses. We would rather not have had the surgical treatment in the
sick-room, nor the painful scene between husband and wife in Faber's
dressing-room, nor the dog escaping from the surgery door (here we
turned the page and could not face the description).
Such is our quarrel with the substance; but we have also a little
grudge against the style.    It has become charged,  not only with
Our Library Table. 283
words which we do not know,—obligated, conduction, kokangel,
etc.,—but also with sentences too fine or too quaint for everyday
use—as this of the bleeding of the heroine : ' But a slight trembling
of the hand he held acknowledged the intruding sharpness, and then
the red parabola rose from the golden bowl; ' or this, of the old
minister's establishment, ' for all quadrupedal mania he had but a
nondescript canine and a contemptuous {sic) feline foundling.'
And now, having spent our blame, let us turn to the pleasanter
task of giving a screed or two of doctrine from our old friend and
teacher, in which we breathe the pure air of the heights with him
once more.
He is speaking, "Vol. I. 217, of the heroine's narrow religious
bringing up. ' But the more familiar one becomes with any religious
system while yet the conscience and will are unawakened, and obedi¬
ence has not begun, the harder is it to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Such familiarity is a soul-killing experience, and great will
be the excuse for some of those sons of religious parents who have
gone further towards hell than many born and bred thieves and
sinners.' What better commentary could there be on one of our
Lord's sayings than this, or on another of His sayings than the
following, I. 291 :—' The only way to be absolutely certain of God is
to see Him as He is ; and for that we must first become absolutely
pure in heart. For this He is working in us, and perfection and
vision will flash together.'
How will this also come home to many who have felt their spiritual
life rather cramped than developed by their teachers ? An extempore
prayer has just been made, the words ' seemed rather to freeze than
revive her faith, making her feel as if she never could believe in the
God of her fathers. She was too unhappy to reason well, or she
might have seen that she was not bound to measure God by the way
lier father talked to Him, that the form of the prayer had to do with
her father, not immediately with God.'    Vol. II. 61.
Here, again, is a fair picture of a candid and holy soul. He ' was
alive all through ; the life eternal pervaded every atom of his life,
every thought, every action. Door nor window of his being had a
lock to it. All of them were always on the swing to the wind
that bloweth where it listeth.'    Vol. II. 67.
And these are but taken at random out of many passages of wisdom
and beauty.
Catherine or Siena.    A Biography.    By Josephine E. Butler.
Dyer Brothers.    1878.
Catherine of Siena, though we see her under the disadvantages
of Romish canonization and the growth of legends round her story,
must have been a true saint. Mrs. Butler tells us there have been
more than forty lives of her written, and does not set forth at the
beginning of her work why she adds to the number; but as we pro¬
ceed in the story, we see that the motive power has been the
interest that an earnest and true woman has for an earnest and true
woman, and the desire to uphold a shining example.
In our short space it is impossible to enter into all the subjects of
interest suggested in the book. The problems raised by the life of a
mediaeval saint would require a volume for discussion, and remain
unsolved at last. We find in Catherine the usual features,—the
ascetic life, the early struggle with sensual and worldly temptations,
284 The Ladies Editiburgh Magazine.
the supposed interviews with our Lord in person, the apparently
miraculous answers to prayer in the healing of the sick, even the
reception, though in this case invisibly, of the stigmata. All this
we must leave aside, as does our authoress. The real lessons of
Catherine's life lie outside of these mysteries. To us she is a singular
instance of what native force of character, combined with absolute
singleness of purpose, can enable a single individual to effect. The
power of these qualities in combination is equally seen, whether the
single aim be one of selfish ambition, as in Napoleon, or of heroic
enterprise, as in Joan of Arc and Catherine. In the one case, the
will is entirely untrammelled bj' scruples of conscience ; in the other,
entirely unfettered by any selfish objects ; in both it has the strength
and freedom of unity. These are the persons who, for good or evil,
move the world, bearing down before them the feebler and more
divided wills, even of those who in mental gifts may be otherwise far
their superiors. Not to quote other instances of Catherine's singular
power over men, it is enough to point to her influence over the
amiable but irresolute Gregory XI. in proof of what is here said.
(We have spoken of Catherine as an example, because though it is
not possible to acquire her force of character, which, like poetic
inspiration, is a gift to the few, her singleness of aim is to a certain
extent within the reach of self-discipline.)
We speak of her, of course, as she appears in these pages. Whether
it is the true Catherine of Siena as she walked the earth we cannot
fully judge ; but as her achievements are matters of history, we
should infer that the truth has not been overstepped. Again, from
the extracts Mrs. Butler gives from her heroine's own writings, her
voluminous correspondence, and her ' dialogues,' we learn that she
has not done more than justice to the purity of her creed, and the
single-heartedness of her love to God and man. The picture is at
least consistent and life-like. Of the difiiculty of her task, owing to
tlie unreality of the early biographers, the authoress speaks feelingly,
p. 332, and adds—
' To describe human enthusiasm in high and passionate action
requires a gift which few writers have possessed. Instead of the
high and beautiful humanity, the old biographers of the saints give
us only a super-humanity, which leaves us with an unsatisfied longing
to possess the real portrait instead.' This is very true, and one sees
the reason of it. The noble humanity is a reproach to the lower
mind ; the super-humanity is not. Contented lukewarmness likes to
shelter itself by making a broad distinction between the ' saints ' and
ordinary Christians. It is comparatively easy to look up, but hard to
climb up, hardest of all, perhaps, to lay to heart that our Master said
to all, 'Be ye perfect.'
Bel. Marjory.     A Tale.     By L.  T. Meade, author of Great St.
Benedict's, A Knight of To-day, etc.    London : John F. Shaw & Co.
In Bel. Marjory, Miss Meade has greatly exceeded her former
efforts. The tale is intensely interesting throughout, and its characters
drawn with care and ability. Bel. Marjory, a child left to educate
and develop herself, blossoms into a devoted and earnest woman,
one who is only too apt to forget what is due to herself in her
eagerness to do good to others. Peter, spoiled and rendered selfish,
is saved by her devotion, and before the end he triumphs over his
weaker and lower nature.    The author continues to show her interest
Question Series. 285
in the East End, and the work carried on there. All who like a
healthy tale ought to read Bel. Marjory, and we cannot help desiring
for the author many and continued successes.
Buttons : the Narrative of the Trials and Travels of a Young Gentle¬
man. By Ascott R. Hope. London : Griffith & Farran.
In the story of Buttons, Mr. Hope has bestowed upon us another
valuable addition to literature for boys. The genuine Buttons is not
the hero of the tale ; that position is reserved for his young master,
Geoffrey Shaw. At the commencement we detest this young gentle¬
man, but his humiliations win our pity, as his adventures do our
interest, and when he takes leave of us, he has become, through the
' uses of adversity,' a much more hopeful specimen of human nature.
The interest of the tale is well sustained, and we cordially recommend
Buttons to all lovers of stories.
(Question 5»eries.
VI. Explain two different senses of the term ' development' as
applied to musical compositions, and give instances of its most
perfect types.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C, care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than July 5th. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue ; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO APRIL SERIES.
The arrangement of these has been a matter of difficulty. Pelle-
GRINA is beautiful; we regret the excess of eleven words, which
excludes her. Lucciola is second : we give her answer ; but as she
declines to compete, we also give Peasant, as she will be first for the
prize. Apis will be second ; she sometimes mars her good writing by
using odd words. Stella will be third for the prize. In another
group we place Heather, Nagol, and Thoeough. Heather is
well expressed, but fails, we think, in catching the meaning and
spirit of the poem ; Nagol is good ; Thorough fair.
Give your impression of Mr. Browning's Evelyn Hope—her appear¬
ance, character, and circumstances ; and her relations with the
imaginary speaker. Show what support the poem gives to your
idea.
We see a maiden of sixteen, slender and ethereal-looking, golden-
haired, hazel-eyed, frank and gay, but underneath deeply thoughtful,
with a nature of fire, and calm passion. The only child of wealthy
parents, she has opportunities for active kindnesses which she fulfils
(now astir) for study and thought, which she enjoys,—her pretty
room, her favourite book-shelf, her garden, ' duties enough and little
cares.' She had not come to ' her time to love ;' but she had ' hopes
and aims ' beyond the present, ' pure and true' like her own spirit.
Of a sudden mortal sickness strikes her ; she wandered on the sunny
tnrf, plucked her red geranium, came to her chamber, lay down on
her bed, and before the scarlet petals dropped from the glass, ' God's
hand beckoned her unawares '—she lay dead.
285 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
She had been followed and watched in that last walk. The lover
is past middle-age, and her equal in birth and rank. Otherwise, so
self-conscious a spirit would have shown his feelings about the
inequality, even by boasting like the lover in Maud. Evelyn has,
perhaps, 'scarcely heard his name,' that is, as a possible suitor. An
old friend of her father, he comes and goes freely. He has artistic
and literary tastes, and full scope for their worthy gratification ; he
has ' ransacked the ages' in books, ' spoiled the climes' in art-
treasures—but missed—Life's completion. He feels that a love was
wanting, a woman was wanting, the woman he now knows—Evelyn,
the love, hers. People thought his heart ' full as it could hold ' of
travels and pursuits and ambitions. Yes ; but there was space and
to spare for the creature who lies dead in the sunlight! What is the
issue ? He thinks that the meaning of her beauty and of his love,
of their two incomplete lives, is—each is being kept for the other.
Her incompleteness is only that of the half-opened rose, she wasted
notliiiHj. With a girl's narrowed sphere, she did what she could. He
knows he has misused his man's powers and opportunities ; so he has
yet lee-way to make up on Life's voyage, 'much to learn,' and, alas !
' much to forget,' before he can take her. When, his probation past,
he rises to a purified life, in the great Awakening, he will find her.
' God creates love to reward love.' He gazes on her in her shroud ;
all he can see is the ' sweet, white brow,' the 'sweet, cold hand ;' he
says to his own wrung heart, ' Hush!' and places her last-plucked
geraniuin-leaf in her grasj). It is their 'secret,' and when she
awakes she will recall her brief summer day on earth, her flowers,
her last walk, the dogging footsteps, the haunting eyes, she will
' remember ' what unspoken secret was folded into her slender fingers
with her geranium-leaf, and ' understand ' his love, and in responding
to it find her own pure spirit's completeness. Lucciola.
She was young and beautiful, full of life and spirits. Her golden
curls clustered round her happy face, and her rosy lips were often
parted in a sunny smile, or from her eyes would drop the ready tear
of sympathy. She was not idle, she had much with which to occupy
her time, ' duties enough and little cares.' She was of a quick, loving,
impulsive nature, and 'now was quiet, now astir,' always ready with
a kind word or look for those around her ; fond of flowers and
reading, or, perhaps, roaming in the forest, reading from the Book
of Nature. She was of high birth, but she had something to impart
to all, giving out to them (if with nothing else) a portion of the
sunshine with which she seemed so greatly blessed. Tims she lived
on from day to day, hajDpy and free as a bird, until ' God's hand
beckoned her.' 'Unawares' it was to those around, no doubt,—no
untimely call to her sweet, pure, untainted soul.
There was one, a man of middle age, to whom she was his Uqht and
life; but he was beneath her in station, and their paths in life were
widely diverged. She, perhaps, had never seen him ; nor, if she had,
would she have shown to him more marked love than she did to all
others around her. But he—he loved her and watched her in silence,
she was his bright star, a light ever shining on his daily way. He
did not speak to her. He never, in his generous and noble nature,
told her of his love for her ; but he knew there was an aching void
in his heart which none but she could fill. Now she is dead. . . .
He lias been admitted into the room in which she was alive not long
Stray Notes. 287
ago ; but now she is dead, and her, ' sweet, cold hands ' are crossed
upon the quiet breast. Beautiful in death as in life she lies there,
while two rays of sunlight from the darkened shutter fall upon her
pale face, and on the ' sweet brow' lies a mark of peace, which,
indeed, is 'all of her,' for it pervades her whole expression, and
indeed the very room, with its sweet, awful stillness. Near her, in a
glass, there droops a blossom she lately plucked, dying, as she herself
has died, withering and passing away as all earthly beauty ever does.
But what is he musing over as he sits there 1 He is thinking
of a time (far off it may be to him) when he shall meet her
alive once more, and ready to return his constant love—when
(according to his idea) he shall have passed through other lives
and worlds, still clinging (as it were) to his first love, and that, when
all things shall be perfected, he and she shall meet with a perfect
understanding between them, and be joined together in true and
endless harmony. See, he places a leaf in her hand, carefully closing
the cold fingers over it. It was a myrtle leaf perhaps, the sweet
emblem of immortality, of the immortality of his love, and of their
two living souls—a sign between him and her that she would some
day ' wake and understand'—some day, when all things shall be made
new, and death and decay be passed away for ever. Peasant.
[iV.fi.—One correspondent omitted to put Qu. C. on her cover.
The mistake was observed and remedied, but any answer not properly
marked is liable to be excluded from competition. We cannot
return Answers, in any case ; a copy must be kept by the writer.]
Strag |iotcs*
M. S. T. kindly answers A Perplexed Citizen in our last month's
issue.—An ' Artificial Mother' is a shelter for little chickens deprived
of their natural mother. One of the simplest ways of making one,
is to mount a board on two sides and a back, line the board with
sheepskin wool downwards, and hang a piece of flannel in front to
keep the wind out. The board should be about a foot square, and
bored with a few gimlet holes for ventilation, the side pieces two
inches from the ground behind, and four in front. The sheepskin is
only tacked round the edges, so that the centre bulges a little.
Hydro-incubators are artificial hatching-machines, all of them too
complicated in their construction to describe here. In the Scotsman
of to-day, April 30th, there is a notice of a new and successful
' Hydro-incubator ' by Messrs. Christie & Co., which gained the silver
medal of the Ayrshire Agricultural Association.
Poultry Farming.—The following information is kindly com¬
municated by M. S. T., in reply to the note in our magazine for May
from the Manager of a large Poultry Farm:—'I have kept large
quantities of fowls for many years, and have succeeded hitherto in
preventing anything more than ordinary disease. The largest
number of fowls I have had at one time was 1035 head, and they
were kept without any disease breaking out amongst them ; but if
such a number, or a tenth part of them, are overcrowded, and the
ground becomes tainted, then they will most probably die one after
the other, and those that live longest will not yield any profit.'
Overcrowding and neglect is the true cause of fowls becoming diseased,
and can be prevented by care. Of course, both labour and skill are
required in this, as in all other occupations; and no one, man or
288 The Ladies Edinburgh Magaziiic.
■woman, should attempt to keep a large number of fowls for profit,
■without previous training and experience.
Mimosa and Aspen, in view of the coming Local Examinations,
ask, ' If the reading aloud is a very trying ordeal %' There is a pre¬
valent idea that this ' reading' is performed by each student in
presence of the assembled Senatus, armed with all academic terrors ;
and that some extraordinary display of elocution is called for. Let
us re-assure our nervous correspondents. The candidates are
admitted singly into a small side-room, to read about twenty lines of
simple English, the auditor being either the professor, or one of
the lady-assistants, the former being generally considered the least
severe in criticism. We heard one of the lady-examiners remark,
after passing some fifty candidates, that she had never known before
in how many ways it was possible to read badly. Let Mimosa and
Aspen read in a natural, unaflected tone of voice, and they will find
that the ' ordeal' is less formidable than a shower-bath or a dentist's
chair!
Kindergarten   wishes   to   know   in   what  book   the  following
Children's Rhymes are to be found.    One beginning—
' The owl and the pussy-cat sailed one day
In a beautiful pea-green boat;
They took some money and plenty of honey,
Wrapped up in a five-pound note.'
And another—
' Said the table to the chair,
You can hardly be aware
How I suffer from the heat,
And from chilblains in the feet.
Come, let us take the air.
Said the table to the chair ;
So they toddled round and round,
With a cheerful, bumpy sound.'
Notices to Corrcspontrmts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless fidl postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The Editors will be happy to receive contributions for the Series
on ' Country Subjects and Pursuits.' A i^aper on Yachting would be
acceptable, also one on keej)ing Bees, and further suggestions are
invited.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, June 7, at 14 Melville Street, at 11 a.m. Debate,
' Is the miser a more despicable character than the spendthrift 2'
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 289
Countrs Su&jects anU pursuits,
VII.—BOTAXY.
II.
Botany has already been treated of as a country pursuit,
but perhaps a few pages more may be allowed to one who
has loved it and studied it more or less for more than forty
years, and to whom it has brought much delight and enjoy¬
ment. I have seen it one of the most lasting pleasures of life.
In fact, I treasure still a note from a gentleman past ninety
upon the right name of a piece of sea lavender which had
been sent to him from Athens. There are times, likewise, of
overstrain from grief, anxiety, or exertion, when nothing is
so refreshing as the beauty of a flower, enhanced by knowing
something of its wonders, and tracing the mystery of its
structure. We aU know how Mungo Park's heart was
cheered by the tuft of moss, and how Bishop Stanley's
attention was diverted from the abyss beneath by the lovely
gentian on the rock ; nor do the sweet calls of flowers ever
fail to those who have eyes to see them:
' In childliood's sports companions gay ;
In sorrow on life's downward way-
How cheering; of our last decay
Memorials prompt and true.'
There is something in the pleasure of acquisition which
makes collecting almost a necessary adjunct to any study;
and thus the drying of specimens gives zest and likewise
accuracy to the science of botany, though outsiders may
laugh at our herbarium, and remind us of the soldiers quar¬
tered in the house of a savant, who found plenty of good
hay for their horses, and only wondered that it was divided
by sheets of white paper !
It is quite worth while to try to make a good and com¬
plete collection. Probably it is the damp of our climate
which makes it almost, if not quite impossible, to preserve
the colours of any plants but the Banunculacea;, though in
both Norway and Switzerland they can be much better kept.
All that it is possible to do is to lay out the plant as much
as may be possible in its natural form, so as to show its
character of growth, as Eobert Dick is said to have done.
People have different opinions about blotting-paper and sand,
but I have dried plants between newspapers or the leaves of
a Bradshaw quite as successfully as with the most elaborate
No. .55.—July 1879. T
290 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
apparatus. All that is really necessary is careful laying out,
so that no leaves are doubled, and in the case of the more
succulent plants to change the papers so as not to let them
lie in their own damp. When dry, fasten them with strips
from the edges of postage-stamps to half sheets of paper, on
which write the name, Latin and English, the locality, and
the date. It might be well to add the family and Linnaean
class; and a pleasant interest w^ould be given by choosing
some poetical motto or description when possible, such as
Herrick's or Wordsworth's Daffodils, Shakspeare's Cowslips,
or Burns' ' Pleasures are like poppies fled.' The half sheets
may be kept between the leaves of a larger book. Folio
size is best for this book, as the smaller plants can be placed
in pairs in one page, and the larger can have a whole one to
themselves. If you fasten the half sheets in, it should be
very slightly, until a whole genus is filled up, or else leave
gaps for the lacking species.
Few enjoyments are greater at the moment than the spying
a rare plant, perhaps the one kind wanting to make the set
complete. It gives a fresh charm to every journey into a
new neighbourhood to look out for some new discovery, such
as the rare motherwort, the quaint spider ophrys, or the
lovely flowering rush. Let me here note that these rare
plants ought to be carefully and unselfishly handled. Unless
there are very large quantities, they should not be dug up by
the roots, nor so much of the blossom gathered as to prevent
seeding. High farming destroys many precious hedgerow
and marsh flowers; a pig-sty has obliterated the only
habitat of Lconurus Cardiaca that I ever knew; drainage has
demolished my favourite ' yellow mead of asphodel;' but I
grieve more for an Osmunda Begalis that was dug up and
transplanted in a fernery. However, collecting and naming
plants is not botany. That is a much more thorough thing,
and means understanding them, as far as we are capable of
comprehending these exquisite works of the Divine Hand.
It is for this reason that the Natural system is preferable
to the Linnaian. The Swede was a giant, but dwarfs on his
shoulders had to complete his work. His classification
served a purpose like the alphabet to a dictionary, and, in
the earlier classes, threw together plants without affinity to
one another. Even the later classes, though coinciding with
Natural orders, only do so by accident, and are wholly de¬
pendent on the stamens. Learn to count them and their
pistils, and you have the key to Linnaeus without any further
real knowledge.
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 291
But the moment you have mastered the great distinction
between the asparagus head and the double seed-leaf of the
lupin, and know that the one grows inwards and the other
outwards, that the one has ribbed leaves, the other netted
ones, that the one follows the rule of three in all its parts,
the other the rule of four or of five, you have learnt a real
principle, and made a step in science. Each name gives an
idea. For instance, if you were told that a plant belonged
to Linnteus' Trianclria, you would have nothing to show
you whether it was a grass, or a crocus, or an iris ; but to tell
you that it was one of the Crrammcc, would at once show you
the chaffy blossom, jointed stalk, and linear leaves of a
grass. In reading books of travels, the understanding these
terms enables us to draw a far more accurate picture of the
vegetation in our minds. And if ever you become an ex¬
plorer in some new region, a knowledge of the Natural system
will bring you very near to determining the properties of
any newly found plant.
Manuals of botany swarm. Perhaps Mrs. Kitchiner's is
as good as any we can recommend to a beginner, and the
Kev. A. Johns' for assistance in discovering the names of
British wild plants. Hooker's is, however, the most scientific;
but after all I have said, I own to enjoying the humble
device of having recourse to' pictures' like those of Sowerby,
or Miss Pratt's beautiful Grasses and Ferns. They are a
great help to the lazy, and do often give a certainty even to
the most diligent that nothing else can.
Lindley or Hooker ought to be read for the sake of under¬
standing the great outlines of the vegetable kingdom viewed
in connection with the rest of creation. The cellular tissue,
the medullary rays, the method of growth and development,
are as marvellous as the courses of the stars, and as unsearch¬
able. ' The mystery is only gone farther,' as Mrs. Gatty
says. Nor are these merely things to read about. A
microscope will enable us to verify many statements, and to
others we have only to open our eyes. For instance, why do
carpenters always use wood cut lengthwise, and find it lasts
better than what is cut across the grain ? Again, why is
sea-kale and celery blanched ? Why are early spring flowers
pale in colour ? All these things have answers, and the
pleasure of working them out is wonderful.
So, too, are matters of colour and distribution of plants.
The scale of tints is most curious. Sky-blue flowers have
gradations of purple, pink, and white in their varieties, never
of yellow; and in the same way the reds that have yellow
292 The Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
varieties have never been made blue by nature or art. The
causes of these facts are still occupying botanists, and give
interest even to the experiments of gardeners.
The distribution of plants is another most remarkable part
of the study, and can be followed up on our journeys. How
they tell of the connection between lands dissevered long
ago, may be seen in Kingsley's Frosc Idyls, and Hugh
Macmillan's Holidays in the Higlilands. This is the real
interest of rarer ones, not the mere selfish triumph of finding
something that other people do not possess. Some have
curious associations. There is the tradition that Scotland
was indebted to the Duke of Cumberland for the mischievous
ragweed, called after him Stinking William; and the fact
that fifteen new plants have been introduced into France by
the forage of the German army, seems to confirm the notion.
There are weeds that follow civilization, the groundsel, the
poppy, the crow-foot, the bramble, as if to fulfil the curse of
Adam, and these often overwhelm the more delicate aborigines.
This is an experience in many colonies. Shall I enter on the
further wonders of protection exercised by vegetation—the
pines, that, by their peculiar gifts of evergreen needle-leaves,
scaly fruit, roof-like branches, and tapering growth, form into
bulwarks against the mountain snows — the purifying
Eucalyjjtus—the forests that secure a rainfall ? These are
but mere hints of that great field of marvels on which we
enter the first time we count the golden anthers in a white
lily. And to go from the greatest to the least, we cannot
dissect a periwinkle, squeeze a cranesbill petal between two
bits of glass, or place the starred leaf of a Deustsea Scabra in
a microscope,—nay, or examine ' the meanest flowret of the
vale,'—without feeling that indeed Solomon in all his glory
was not arrayed like one of these.
Can we touch on the higher symbolism of plants, and
the wonderful analogies to high truths that have been
traced in them ? The shamrock, the passion - flower, the
Uspiritu Santo or dove plant, are strange instances. There¬
with we may mention the Calvary clover {Medicago Uncinata),
a native of Palestine, with its blood-dropped leaves, and the
thorny crown of its pod; and even the arum was the old English
passion-flower, giving the column and the scourge, and the
nimbus of glory. ' Our Lord and our Lady' was its ancient
name, and in Devon it is still called a ' Lamb in a pulpit.'
Those who can should learn local names of plants, as they
sometimes explain old English poetry, and often are curious.
' Love an idles,' as Hampshire children call heart's-ease, is a
The Thirteenth Guest. 293
remnant of the times when the ' little western flower' was
called by maidens, ' Love in idleness.'
And lastly, an author should be, at least, an observer.
Scott made notes of the flora of Eokeby, saying that a writer
would repeat himself and lose reality if he trusted such
details to his fancy. Kingsley, when his globe flower must
needs come rather late in the season, accounts for it by the
cool, shady spot in the spray of the waterfall, and what
pleasure his clear accuracy gives ! We would not have a
lover, as in one novel we have read, present his lady with
a Habenaria Bifolia as a token of love; but oh! let him
beware of impossible bouquets of primrose, forget-me-not,
and heather, and of walking in lanes embowered in honey¬
suckle and wild rose, where nightingales sing in September,
full moons shine the whole month through, and Venus
appears in the meridian ! C. M. Yonge.
Site STljirtecntfj (guest
A LEGEND OF S. GREGORY.'
In a chamber hospitable.
Plain and bare as hermit's cell,
. See around a good man's table
Pilgrims twelve are feasting well.
Yearly Christians love to ponder
How their Master and their Head
Made that Feast,—surpassing wonder,—
Blessed and gave the Cup and Bread.
' Therefore,' saith the good St. Gregory,
' Spread the board and pour the wine ;
Yearly, to that hallowed memory,
Twelve poor men with me shall dine.'
All assembled—portions meted,
Spoke the ' Benedicite,'
' Are our numbers now completed ?
Brother Fabian, count and see.'
' In the gallery at Bologna is a picture by Vasari, known as the
' Banquet of S. Gregory.' It represents the legend given above, at
the moment when the Divine Guest's presence is first perceived by
the company, who are awe-struck as He vanishes from their sight.
The head of S. Gregory is said to be a genuine portrait of Pope
Clement VII.
294 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
But the monk, his visage altering,
Stricken as with sudden awe—
' What means this ?' in accents faltering—
' Lo! a thirteenth guest I saw.'
' Surely hast misreckoned. Brother;'
' Nay, I marked the stranger well,—
Pilgrim seemed, like to another
With his staff and scallop-shell.
' All alone, he entered singly,
In poor raiment like the rest.
Yet—methought with aspect kingly—
Koyal seemed that thirteenth guest.
' Koyal, said I ? heavenly rather,
He is gone! and by the rood
Kays of light behold, my father,
Streaming where he late hath stood !'
All is o'er—the feast is ended;
Gregory, pacing through his hall.
Thoughts of joy and sadness blended.
As around night's shadows fall.
Hoping, fearing, hesitating,
Strange the thoughts that fill his breast;
Lone in silence meditating.
What might mean this vision blest ?
Far beyond earth's fitful story,
Him, whom countless worlds obey.
Thou shalt see, and in His glory
Know thy ' Thirteenth Guest' to-day.
Ay, and all who here have cherished
Sufferers with kind deed or word,
Saving lives that else had perished,—
Knowing not ' it was the Lord,'—
They shall hear the revelation.
Spoken by the Eternal One,
To the sons of consolation
On the right hand of the Throne :
* Ye who loved my poor to gather.
While on earth, to share your store.
Come, ye blessed of my Father,
Be My guests for evermore.'
L. D.
At Home and Abroad. 295
at 1l?omf anti ^broaU.
v.—IN  THE  PYEENEES.
One of the pleasantest attributes of memory has always
seemed to me to be the readiness with which it recalls bright
and happy days, and the singular facility it has of consign¬
ing to oblivion all the hundred petty worries and annoyances
which served at the time to rob the passing hour of one-
third at least of its due share of enjoyment. It is true, I
suppose, in the case of despairing lovers, remorseful criminals,
or morbid analysers of mind, that
A ' sorrow's crown of sorrows is remembering happier things ;'
but I hold more to the same poet's words, that events fondly
looked at through a lapse of years
' Orb into the perfect star we saw not when we moved therein.'
I know that this excursion of which I am going to speak,
was not the unmixed pleasure that I like to think it now;
that I was then too young and heedless to read nature's
lovely, changeful face as I see it in fading colours as the
recollection of it waxes more faint; that heat, and dust, and
fatigue, and little misunderstandings with my travelling
companions, provided me with the ' crumpled rose-leaf' of
daily discontent. But these are forgotten, while the one
grand fact remains, that from the usual dull, grey tenor of
an existence commonplace enough, some glad, sunny, red-
letter, never-to-be-forgotten days stand out bright and clear.
'Tis well to have had them; 'tis better to cherish their
memory and live them over again at will.
No two persons are agreed as to the best mode of tra¬
velling, whether by railway or steamboat, carriage or horse¬
back, so as to derive the most enjoyment and obtain the
best idea of the country visited. Of course, if time and
distance are main objects, there can be little choice as to
modes of locomotion, the fastest bearing oft' the palm; but if
leisure and pleasure only are consulted,—health and good
spirits understood,—no mode of progression combines in itself
more varied and pleasurable sensations than a riding expedi¬
tion well organized and well carried out. The proof of the
success of some in which I have taken part, lies in the
delightful memories which linger round them still, and which
296 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
often form the topic of conversation amongst the few
survivors of those happy days.
Given the rare beauty of a real, genuine summer day,
with heaven's blue sky over you, with undefined, subtle
scents in the air, and the myriad harmonious voices of nature
making music in the trees around, with the low wash of the
moaning sea, or the ripple of the blue wave on the pebbly
shore of some inland loch sounding at your feet; with some
dun Highland cow or dark-eyed collie to give a touch of
beautiful life to the stillness of the scene; with your own
heart beating high as if in unison with earth's enjoyment;
with a good-going horse, and perhaps a pleasant companion
or two thrown in;—what more does one want for complete
happiness, if only you have the eyes to see and the heart
to understand ?
To-day nature is offering her loving, gratuitous service to
you. As your horse's hoofs fall on the turfy woodland path
into which you have turned aside, the scents of crushed wild
thyme and sorrel rise sweeter than clouds of incense round
you. Flowers, beautiful sentient creatures, their rosy faces
upturned, and assuming a still deeper blush under the sun's
ardent gaze, smile on you from every hedge; they too are
rejoicing in their abundant life, in their glorious service of
love, and use, and beauty; and as they sway and bend with
every breath of the passing wind, seem to be proudly conscious
of the part they act in this world, and of the germ of resur¬
rection life within them. The birds are ' singing of summer
with full-throated ease;' rainbow-winged, gauzy things, dart
in the sunlight; beauty without flaw, fresh from the Creator's
liand, is all around; care, tliat black shadow, is cast for the
moment behind you, and all the cobwebs swept for one glad
day from your brain.
Eiding is undeniably the best method of seeing the country
properly; the view lies all around you, and if you wish to see
what is behind or on either side, you have merely to toucli
your rein and your obedient animal turns as yoii desire. The
fresh air meets you with a kindling touch, instead of the
draughts inseparable from the side motion of a wagonette;
and the delicious exhilarating movement of riding is im¬
measurably superior to that of being drawn backwards in a
dogcart, when the endeavour to see the road before you
infallibly gives you a crick in your neck.
We had spent the winter at Pan, in the Basses Pyrenees,
and when the early spring had come, covering the fields and
lanes with a glowing scarlet mantle of anemones; when the
At Home and A broad. 297
country had burst into sudden, exuberant beauty; when bare
walls were hidden by the drooping tresses of westeria and
other graceful creeping plants; when the undulating coteaux
on the further side the Gave were quivering waves of living
green; when far-off silver streams trickled down the mighty
snow-clad mountains of the high Pyrenean range ; wlien all
was life and motion, we too woke up, and a party of seven or
eight of us, varying from the ages of thirteen to two or three
and twenty, used constantly to meet in the wide square of
the Place G-rammont, and set off early in tlie morning for a
long ride into the neighbouring country. To the now famous
Lourdes, which tlun was only renowned for its old Chateau
and the room where Lord Elgin was so long confined
(grotesque sketches of which, with outlines of the walls, each
stone faithfully portrayed, done in the blackest of B.B.B.
pencils are in our possession to this day), through the vine-
covered lanes of Jurangon to the villages of Louvie and
Gans on the high road to Tarbes, along which you can see
seven open miles of road without a single bend, sentinelled
all the way by tall poplar trees,—to all those and many other
places we rode. We lingered at Lestelle or Betharam, as it
is as often called, and led for weeks a lazy, dreamy life,
such as one fancies lotus-eaters love. We basked in the
sunshine in wooden balconies hidden in trellised green ; we
tried languidly to learn a few words oipatois from the chatty,
cheery, dark-eyed peasant men and women, who knitted and
span as they walked; we rode on donkeys, or strolled along
lanes briary with a tangled maze of flowering weeds; we
sauntered into the chapel evening after evening as the quick
twilight fell, and heard the Angelus sung by the sweet boy
voices of the lads who were in training for the priesthood at the
neighbouring college; we toilingly made the ascent (but not
on our knees as we saw some others doing) of the hill called
' Calvary' with all the ' stations' on the way; where, go when
we might, morning or evening, some poor soul was there with
either secret sin or sorrow, hoping that as the little scented
beads fell from the fingers, and the ' Aves' from the lips,
so might the care and sorrow fall from the heart. We
leaned over the ivy-covered, gracefully mantled bridge, or
sat below, watching with ever new delight its arched reflec¬
tion, mirrored in exquisite repose in the water; by sunset or
by moonlight we could not say which picture was the fairer.
One day we had driven to some distance, when on a
sudden the air grew cold and dark, and up from the horizon
swept  a  sand-storm, swift, dense, mysterious.     The  very
298 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
horses stopped, planted their feet firmly, and stood quivering
with terror as in the presence of some unknown power; we
ourselves cowered down in the carriage, covering our heads
and eyes with shawls as the blinding dust came rushing on
and over us; the trees creaking and moaning, all bent to the
ground in one direction. The shutters, which had been
hurriedly overlooked by the owners of the various houses in
their general rush at the first sign of the storm to close and
fasten all the ' persiennes,' flapped dismally against the walls,
and the fairy scene of a few moments before was wrapt in
the clinging darkness of this mysterious visitant from Spain.
We got very good serviceable horses, always hiring, when
possible, from the same owner, so that we might, partially
at least, become acquainted with the temper and disposition
of our steeds, persuading the horse-hirer to mend and smarten
up the harness a little, and give the animals an extra feed
when we took them out for the whole day, a very necessary
injunction. Hiring was much cheaper then than now, as
Pau, though very well frequented in those days, was not the
expensive and fashionable resort it has since become, espe¬
cially to Americans. Five or six francs was what we gene¬
rally paid for a tolerably good horse ; of course, if we engaged
it for an excursion to last over several days, we paid extra for
a groom to accompany us and take care of the animals, and
also we provided them witli fodder, and paid for stable-room
at the different halting-places; but even under those con¬
ditions the terms were amazingly low, especially considering
the amount of enjoyment afforded.
They were not, perhaps, exactly such horses as one would
have chosen on which to mount and run the gauntlet of
critical eyes in Eotten Eow or at Brighton, but they had a
fair amount of ' go' in them, rather too much so for a some¬
what careless and inexperienced rider like myself, who,
thinking of something quite irrelevant, was at one time
pitched over the nose of my steed, and on another occasion,
allowing the rein to dangle negligently on its neck, my
charger, startled by the noise of another party of riders on
a cross road, turned suddenly round and dashed at a hard
gallop after them, ending by fairly running off, the rider
clinging madly and inelegantly to the pommel, her hat
hanging down her back, and her hair flying anyhow. These
were, however, slight discords in the harmony of enjoyment,
provocative of much discomfiture and some blushes at the
time, and of considerable mirth afterwards.
The longest and pleasantest of our expeditions was one
Ai Home and Abroad. 299
we undertook for a week at a time, six or seven of us younger
ones going on horseback, and two carriages full of fathers,
mothers, and other friends indisposed for such violent
exercise, following the same route, and generally arriving at
the day's destination before us. A satisfactory arrangement
in every way, as the carriages took the luggage of the
equestrians. Our rooms were ready on our arrival, and fresh,
cool muslins shaken out, for which to exchange our rather
hot and heavy riding-gear. Glad indeed we were to avail
ourselves of the change of toilette as quickly as possible, for
the heat of a Pyrenean summer is almost tropical in its
intensity. We secured as good horses as we could in Pau,
and started before the sun was high in the heavens. Pug¬
garees we voted frightful appendages, and to keep our heads
cool we either put a cabbage-leaf or a sheet of white paper
inside our hats, and the difference it made to our comfort
was really wonderful. We rode the first day to Eaux Bonnes,
a distance of twenty-six miles, resting at a village half-way,
seeing that our steeds were ungirthed, their feet and nostrils
bathed, and themselves provided with food and drink before
our own appetites were appeased. We did the same when
we arrived at our halting-place for the evening before taking
off our habits, as much, perhaps, for our own sakes as those
of the poor, tired beasts, as, had they not been properly
attended to, our excursion would have been at an end or
disagreeably retarded. Foreign ostlers are not distinguished
for honesty, and are constantly guilty of stealing the com
from before the poor animal's nose. One of our party
detected the man on one occasion in the act of theft, as he
arrived on the scene at the very moment when the hungry
and enraged animal had turned round and inflicted a severe
bite on the robber's hand, and we could not, under the cir¬
cumstances, summon up sufficient Christian feeling to be
sorry for the man.
It was a long, hot, dusty ride on hard roads to Eaux
Bonnes, but the matchless beauty of the exquisite evening,
the sound of the waterfall behind the hotel, the dark majesty
of the mountains towering above, and almost meeting over
the little valley, the delicious saunters in the wooded garden,
the welcome rest after the exhilarating motion of the ride,
were surely worth a little sun-burning and fatigue. From
Eaux Bonnes we went to Luz and Cauterets, to Argelez, to
Bagneres de Bigorre and Luchon, from Oleron up the Val
d'Aspe to the gloomy romantic Fort d'Urdos, hewn out of the
solid rock.    Turning aside or resting a day or two at several
300 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of the places, we made various mountain excursions, one to
the Lac Bleu perched high up on one of the chains, the
waters of which are of a marvellously translucent azure,
rivalling the sky above; and in descending from which we
were suddenly wrapped and folded in a dense white mist,
rendering it most dangerous for us to pursue our precipitous
path, and filling me with such fears for my life as I never
experienced before or since. Some of the stronger of the
party pursued the excursion into Spain, across the zig-zag
path over the Port de Venasque, while the others, determined
at least to stand on Spanish ground, took the easier road,
and went as far as the picturesque village of St. Beat on the
Spanish frontier. The sultry heat of that August day was
something not to be forgotten, and never was shelter more
grateful than when we entered and sat down in the cool,
delicious shade of the church, and thought how wisely the
architects of other days acted in placing the windows high
up in the walls, where no blazing rays of a fierce sun could
assail the worshippers below.
How merry we were! ^Vhat songs were sung to old
cracked spinnets, in old, out-of-the-way inns, where the
inhabitants stared at us and thought we were mad! How
we danced in our riding-habits in the baronial halls of
ancient ruins, to airs whistled hideously out of tune; how
we flirted and quarrelled and made friends, and pitted
our horses against each other, and ran races, and tried mild
jumps across wayside brooks, and thought what poor fun it
was to be a dowager and be condemned to go in the carriage !
The perfect freedom, the joyous abandon, the escape from
school-room restraints and drawing-room conventionalities,
how delightful they all were!
How lovely the mornings, when the air was crisp with
the snowy breeze from the Pic du Midi, when a rosy flush
died off the pine-covered tops of range after range of im-
dulating mountains; how glorious the evenings, when the
rocks stood out bold and densely black against an orange
and opal sky, and ere we could drink in our fill of that
most bewitching scene, lo!
' At one stride comes the dark !'
We quoted poetry largely, and I have no doubt wrote it, or
something we thought deserving the name; but young or
old, romantic or prosaic, we all felt the beauty we were
passing through, when
At Home and Abroad. 301
' The warm ocean of a summer wind
Breaks softly on the ridges of the hills, ,
And floods the valleys with delicious lakes
Of air, that wash and wind about the woods,
Till every leaflet floats on balmy tides.'
These are the things which linger in one's memory, and are
only the fairer as they fade; but in the course of nature we
had our little accidents and misadventures.    My horse, for
instance, had a most horrid trick of lying down with a view
to enjoying a roll over whenever it entered a field; and one
day, when we were taking a short cut, without any warning
whatever, down it went with me on its back and began to
roll over.    Fortunately, close by some men were threshing
out Indian corn on a tarpaulin, and laying their fiails across
my pony's legs, they dragged me from beneath, but not before
my habit, a thin cloth one, had suffered considerable damage,
being torn in several places.    I was more fortunate, however,
than a young lady riding the same animal a few days after.
Seeing a wide though shallow pond at the  roadside, she
stopped to allow  the  horse to drink  and   lave  its feet.
Advancing into the middle she lazily loosened the reins on
its neck, when down it dropped into the pool, and as she
wore a white pique habit, her appearance the rest of the
ride, a brown and muddy object, was miserable indeed.    One
of our party who would not attend to the directions of the
municipal authorities,  printed at the   entrance  to   every
village, desiring riders to go slowly along the streets, charg¬
ing at a swift canter through the village of Gan, ran over
two ducks and a child.    The former were killed, the latter
mercifully escaped with only a fright.    On another occasion,
a lady and gentleman of our company had a race almost for
their lives from one of those ferocious sheep-dogs, whose
nature, once roused, resembles that of a wolf more than
anything else, and who, had he once fixed his fangs in the
lady's habit, would have torn her from her seat.    Lashing
their frightened horses to fury, they urged them on faster
and faster, the dog gaining on them at every stride with
foaming mouth and kindling eye.
' For God's sake, Laura, faster!' cried the man, hoarse
from anxiety for her as he saw signs of her giving way
in the blanched cheek and swaying figure, ' while I try
and keep him at bay.'
So he wheeled his horse round and lunged at the fierce
brute with the loaded end of his riding-switch, and then as
suddenly turned, and spurring his horse fled after his
companion, and at length got beyond the danger.
302 Tlie Ladies^ Edinbtwgh Magazine.
The turning of saddles was a sort of daily, cela va sans
dire occurrence, as the horses there have a most cunning
habit of puffing out their sides while the grooms are girthing
thein, and in a short time the difficulty of retaining one's
balance becomes great; and if one is not ignominiously
landed on the ground before applying for assistance, one
very soon has to dismount and have the saddle girths
tightened.
On the whole, I think I preferred the daily excursions to
those occupying a few days; it was pleasanter to get com¬
fortably back to one's own house, where we often wound up
the day with a little impromptu dance. Ah, me I how few
of that merry party live now, and of those few how different
are their several lives !
Some have died a soldier's death; some who met first at
those gay cavalcades have continued life's journey hand in
hand, and cheerily help one another over the rough places
which break up the flowery path in real life often enough;
one, the most dandified in dress, the first in amusement and
ilirtation, is a hard-worked clergyman, and a sworn celibate;
India, America, Australia, hold the scattered homes of others.;
and two or three of that party have lads and lasses of their
own more than half the age they themselves were then.
I could have said much of the beauty of Bagneres de
Lucbpn, but I have already described our adventurous
journey there in these pages years ago.
Up over the winding road of the Col d'Aspin we went to
that beautiful valley, with torrents rushing madly over rock
and scarp, and the fiery evening sun dashing with blood-red
the grey lichened stems of the pine forests through which
the road wound and climbed; we stopped to peep over wild
narrow gorges, where some fallen giant of the woods formed
a natural and most picturesque bridge; we shut our eyes to
call up the vision of how the glory of a winter must crown
the everlasting verdure of the pine-clad hills; we threw
stones down mighty fissures in the rocks to hear them crash
and bound and reverberate in the deeps below; and with a
sigh of the fullest content, we carried away, photographed
on our mind's vision for ever, that matchless scene of forest,
stream, and rock, with the billowy background of endless
mountain ranges, gloriously topped by the far-off snowy
head of the Maladetta, or, as it is called on the French side,
' les Monts Maudits.'
By this time we were all tired of horseback exercise, for
the weather had been very close and hot, and some of our
At Home and Abroad. 303
day's expeditions long and fatiguing; so, parting from some
of our friends, and sending our riding-ponies on before, we
returned late one sultry evening to Bagneres de Bigorre.
We turned aside to pay a passing visit to the quaint old
town of St. Bertrand de Comminges, which stands boldly
up on a solitary rock in the widespread plain. Some old
wood-carvings and stained glass and rude paintings of the
fourteenth and sixteenth centuries deserve notice from their
quaintness of design and execution ; and among other relics
of the saint is carefully preserved the skin of a huge
crocodile which is said to have once been the plague of the
neighbourhood. We looked on it with awe, but I am not
sure that we quite believed the story. In these days one is
called on to believe so much that is extraordinary, and to
disbelieve so much that formerly appeared simple enough,
that one gets lost between the two.
Leaving the old cathedral town behind us, we experienced
one of the most frightful nights of thunder and lightning I
ever remember. I often think of the weird picture the scene
must have presented. A murky gloom more depressing
in its influence than natural darkness brooded over the
horizon; huge round-topped clouds pressed on each other
far over the vault of sky; sheet lightning played broadly
and beautifully on the far-off hills; while near us overhead,
flashes of the most vivid forked lightning I ever saw seemed
to cleave the darkness with their fiery, jagged edges. We
were all driving in a large brake with three horses abreast,
and they began to get rather restive as flash after flash
played, and peal after peal reverberated round them; and
the young driver—whether with the intention of reassuring
them I know not, but I do know that he had imbibed rather
too freely of the wine of the country before starting—every
now and then leapt with a demoniac shout from the box-
seat to the back of the centre steed, and wildly waving the
reins, yelled and swore at the frightened horses. In vain
we begged him to desist; a patronising and decisive soycz
tranqvMk was all the answer vouchsafed; but it was like
a scene in a demon-haunted story to see, in the lurid light,
the black, lithe, gesticulating figure, balancing itself on its
precarious footing with waving arms and shrieking voice,
and each moment to expect that either the horses would run
away or some horrible accident occur, and thankful indeed
we were to arrive safely once more at Bagneres de Bigorre.
M. HUMPHEEY.
304 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
^tutiies from ^fiaftspere.
IV.
SHAKSPEEE'S   WITCHES.
Creative imagination finds its material in experience. It
finds there the simple, it creates the complex. What was the
material from which Shakspere created the supernatural
beings which the stage-directions call ' witches,' but which
he leaves, like their deeds, without a name, unless the ' weird
sisters' may be called one ?
There are two points, hitherto unnoticed, I should like to
mention regarding them.
I. There must have been a reading of ' The Edda' for
part of the material of Shakspere's imagination.
'I dreamt last night of the tlirce, weird sisters' (Act ll.
Scene i.). The Northern Fates were beautiful, adorned
with the respect that early Teutonic races paid to women,
and chiefly to ' wise women.' These were not, because of
other elements in the conception, but they were superior to
any ordinary idea of ' witch'—dignified, powerful, sharing a
somewhat spiritual nature:
' And what seemed corporal melted
As breath into the wind.'—Act i. Scene iii.
In one phase, they were the three veiled maidens Odin
saw in his descent to Hela, to learn the fate of Balder the
Beautiful; by recognising whom he betrayed his divinity,
Urda, Verdandi, Skulda, the Fast, Present, and Future. For
years I had tried to understand why the third witch was the
prophet of the group. The Edda gave the answer.
1st {Urda)—' When shall we three meet again V
2d (Verdaiidi) decides the time : ' When the battle's lost
and won.'
3d (Skulda) the Future prophesies, ' That will be ere set
of sun.'
The 1st asks,' Where ?'
2d. The  Present, most  powerful,  chooses  the  place  of
meeting, ' The Heath.'
3d. The Future prophesies,' There to meet with Macbeth.'
In Scene Third it is the third witch wdio, hearing the
drum, foretells that Macbeth is about to come.
But the clearest relation is in the famous ' Hails.'
1st.  Urda (Past)—' Hail, Thane of Glaniis !'
Macbeth—' By Sinel's death, I know, I am Thane of Glamis.'
2d.   Verdandi (Present)—' Hail to thee. Thane of Cawdor ''
Studies from Shakspere, 305
Macbeth—' But how of Cawdor ? The Thane of Cawdor
lives, a prosperous gentleman.'
Macbeth was not yet aware that this traitor was just
being discovered and degraded.
3d. Shdda (Future)—' All hail, Macbeth! that .slialt be
king hereafter.'
Macbeth—' And to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief.'
The same order takes place in their conference with Banquo,
and this is all the more striking because Shakspere therein
reverses the order given by Holinshed.
1st. Urda—' Lesser than Macbeth, but greater.'
2d.  Verdandi—' Not so happy, yet much happier.'
3d. Skulda—' Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.'
It is just to acknowledge that in the later scenes this is
less clearly continued. Shakspere has got more under the
influence of a second element of the material of his imagina¬
tion. Yet in Act iv. Scene l. there is something like the
order in 1st. ' Speak.' 2d. ' Demand.' 3d. ' We'll answer.'
But here the answers are not from the witches' mouths, but
from their masters. We are brought more nearly to the
magic glasses of the necromancers of the middle ages—magic
—a show—a disappearance.
It is the first witch, the Past, that most bitterly jibes and
taunts Macbeth, and yet they all unite to
' Show his eyes and grieve his heart.'
In Shakspere's evolution of these weird sisters of Scandi¬
navian mythology, he mingled other elements.
II. The whole play of Macbeth was intended as a delicate
compliment to the new King of England, James VI. of
Scotland. Its scene is in Scotland, its subject among his
ancestors, its prophecies to his glory:
' And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass.
Which shows me many more, and some 1 see
That twofold balls and treble sceptres carry.'—Act iv. Scene i.
This has been noticed by all commentators. But there is
more to notice. King James had published in Edinburgh, in
1597, a book on Dajmonology, and a reprint had been made
in England in 1603. A book written by a king was not so
common a thing in those days that it should pass unnoticed,
especially by Shakspere the Wise, when preparing a
drama in his honour. Fresh from re-creating Hamlet, with
its objective ghost, Shakspere would read the royal book
all  the   more   eagerly.     Whether  he   took   the   place   of
No. 55.—Jolt 1879. U
3o6 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Philomath or not, like his own Harry Hotspur, the royal
reasoner was able to prove clearly to him,' quoting Scripture
for his text,' that there were necromancers, witches, spirits,
and devils. He would accept them all.; they would fit into
his conception of the superstitious nature of the times and
place he was dealing with. He had been reading Holinshed,
and had been told there that King Duffe's life was wasting
away as his waxen image before the fire melted, in a manner
King James lucidly explains. This was discovered, he reco¬
vered, he destroyed the witches and all other leagued traitors,
and rested in the Castle of Donewald, who murdered him, as
Shakspere makes Macbeth murder Duncan. But the witch-
part in the history was too tame and leisurely an actiou
for the fiery heat of Macbeth, and is omitted. The only sign
that the story had passed through his head is the allusion,
'I will drain him dry as hay.'—Act i. Scene iii.
His supernatural was to add to the energy of the natural
here. King James had said that such evil practices as
dealing with Satan were generally begun for curiosity,
revenge, or greed of gear. Had these' witches' been tempted
by curiosity ? Eevenge appears in a malignant form in
'A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,' etc.—Act i. Scene iii.
They have no hope of reward with Macbeth ; do they pursue
him from some hidden revenge ? or were they but Satan's
agents sent to tempt him to destruction ?
The king divides such people into two classes—into, first,
necromancers or magicians, tempted by curiosity of knowing,
who had more power, being able to command Satan; and,
second, witches of inferior power and desires, who served him.
The ' witches' of Macbeth are a generalized idea of both,
along with the first element. They are powerful, they are
fearless, but they have ' masters.' They are women. King
James said there were twenty women for one man who
followed these ways, because the judgments of women were
weaker. ' And the devil, ever since he tempted Eve, has
been homelier with them.' They were ugly and old women.
King James is known to have shared the popular opinion
that witches were so, and Shakspere made them unlike
their northern prototypes to suit the southern taste:
' So withered and so wild in their attire.'—Act i. Scene iii.
' Her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips ; you should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.'
' Filthy Hags !' etc.
Studies from Shakspere. 307
The introduction of Hecate among northern superstitions
has only been accounted for by the romantic nature of
Shakspere's genius. But in this same Dajmonology, King
James says there are various kinds of spirits : those sent in
dead bodies by Satan to haunt a man, or to haunt a house.
' The fourth kind are Phairie, commonly called by Gentiles
Diana.' Here, then, we come upon the associated idea.
Diana Triformis, in her character of Hecate, a spirit, is able
to mingle congruously with those who call up spirits.
Whether the Scene Fifth in Act Third is authentic or not
(and we cannot feel it to be so), her appearance in Act iv.
Scene l. is authentic, and fits well with such a suggestion:
' Like elves and fairies in a ring.'
That the word ' witch,' applied to these three sisters, was
even in stage-directions only used because of the poverty of
the language in suitable phrases, is shown by the note,
' Enter, Hecate, to the other three witches.' Neither king-
lore nor folk-lore would have called her a ' witch.'
Dr. Simon Forman, 1610, in describing the play of
Macbeth, says: ' There stood before them three women,
fairies, or nymphs.' He does not call them witches, though
even in the play they are given some of the attributes of
witches. King James had also taken cognisance of the
spirits sent in dead bodies by the devil. ' They could right
easily pass through closed doors.' May not the dead
Banquo, shaking his gory locks, be one of these real fleshly
demons sent by the devil to cause despair in Macbeth ? The
king might well think so if he liked, looking at the spectacle,
and remembering what he had himself written. What does
Shakspere think ? It is grand to see how lordly he sits,
free from any encumbering belief on the subject. The
universal poet must speak of all things in heaven and in
earth; but it is as a dramatist and a psychologist, and not a
believer, that Shakspere now speaks of the supernatural.
The objective ghost of Hamlet has become a very subjective
one. Only the imaginative characters see the witches,
Macbeth and Banquo, not their followers, not Lenox.
Only the most imaginative character, in its highest state of
excitement, hears voices and sees visions. Macbeth, with
nerves overstrained to the murder of Duncan, sees the
dagger, and immediately after, struck with remorse, hears
the voice. His conscience was hardened in crime before he
made up his mind to murder Banquo ; there are no hesita¬
tions, no dagger-visions seen before; but conscience awoke
3o8 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
in remorse, when he said, ' Would he were here!' The
friend he had deceived, murdered, and maligned — his
phantasm appears to the kindled imagination. None else
see it.    The murderer had told him—
' Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
The least a death to nature.'
And Macbeth sees him with ' gory locks,' and ' twenty mortal
murders on his crown.'
The nature of the temptation is well brought out by
Gervinus and Ulrici; it is only his own thoughts projected.
He starts at the name of king, it was an old thought of his.
He ' yields to that suggestion whose horrid image doth unfix
his hair,' but it came not through the ' supernatural solicit¬
ing ;' and the natural soliciting of the ambition and fevidal
revenge of his wife, aids his desire and makes it action.
C. Caemichael.
STo JHg ©in Piano.
Sweet friend that spake in accents rich and clear,
Sweet voice that uttered all I bid thee tell—
Now silent, must thou share the doom austere
That to all earthly pleasures brings farewell ?
Yet not for sounds of new and buried fire
Can 1 forget thy sympathetic tone,
Whose mellow beauty did my heart inspire,
Until I deemed thy magic was my own.
Sleep soft, old friend! may kindly echoes still
Float round thee of forgotten melodies ;
Though mute thy voice, somewhere the sacred thrill
Of Music wakes again, and never dies.
Alma Glen.
V(^t 33ego[ar of Capo tii jHonte: a STale of Sixtg^onr.
By the Author of 'Mabel's Ckoss,' etc.
CHAPTEK X.
On turning the angle of the huge rock which concealed, as
Concetta supposed, the entrance to the cavern and haunt
of these brigands, a sight met her eyes for which she was
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 309
wholly iinprepared. In the midst of rocks, of lava, and
debris of the mountain, which formed a kind of natural
barrier, appeared a small open space, watered by one of the
few springs in that region. Three or four low, irregular
buildings stood on one side of the strip of land, which afforded
scanty pasturage to a cow and a couple of goats, hemmed in on
both sides by the same rocky barrier. There seemed no egress
but the stone pass through which they entered; for at the
distance of a few hundred yards the cliffs rose like an
amphitheatre, shutting in the little glen from the outward
world. At a little distance stood wdiat seemed a bath of
some kind, from which issued sulphureous vapour, and
Concetta perceived a young girl sitting on the ground, almost
in the steam that rose in white wreaths from the open bath.
She had no time for conjecture as to the meaning of this
strange scene, for her attention was now fixed on a woman
who came out of the first of the buildings on hearing the voice
of Filippo. There was something fearful in her appearance.
Her figure was of great height, her long black hair streamed
over her shoulders, and her eyes rolled wildly with a fierce
expression as she gazed on the young stranger. Her features,
convulsed as they seemed with passion and suffering, bore
traces of former beauty, while her commanding figure still
showed a certain air of dignity. She wore a circlet of coral,
placed low on her forehead, and her dress was a strange
mixture of rich and coarse materials, hanging fantastically
about her without form or order. Concetta instinctively
shrank from her gaze, feeling this weird-looking creature
was in some manner linked with her destiny. She stood
tremblingly before her as the poor mad woman, seizing her
bj'- the arm, inquired who it was that dared to come there
to mock her ?
Filippo here interfered, and removing her hand from the
girl's arm said, in a gentler voice than she thought it possible
he could have used :
' Nay, dear Livia, thou hast forgotten the promise that I
made thee the last time we parted.'
The poor creature looked blankly at him for a moment or
two, then lifting her hands to her head, and covering her eyes,
appeared to be trying to recall the promise alluded to. Filippo
saw Concetta's look of alarm mingled with awe, and turning
to her said, in his sternest voice:
' Look at her well, girl; this is thy father's doing ! Said I
not truly the dishonoured would be avenged in Avounding
her the betrayer most delighted in ?    Canst thou now defend
310 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the man who made shipwreck of that woman's happiness,
that woman's virtue ?'
Concetta appeared stunned by what she heard, and her
senses refused to take in the meaning of these terrible words.
She could not speak, and Filippo continued:
' Look at that wreck before you. When she first met your
father she was one of the most beautiful as well as joyous of
God's creatures,—you see what she is now, a poor, demented,
heart-broken slave, cast aside as a worthless toy, and left to
hide her sorrow and her shame where best she may. Curses
on the villain who brought her to this state.'
Concetta could bear this no longer, and clasping her hands
said, in a supplicating voice : ' Oh ! speak no more of those
cruel words. I know not to what thou alludest. My father
has ever borne an honourable name, and could never have
caused such misery as that.'
' Listen, girl,' said Rlippo in a hoarse voice, and speaking
rapidly, as if he feared to trust himself entering on this
subject. ' Some three and twenty years ago thy father and
myself were quartered in the same town.' Seeing lier astonish¬
ment, he proceeded: ' Thou canst not believe, perhaps, that the
rough sailor, brigand, or whatever else thou calledst me, held
equal rank with the proud Torcelli, and there thou thinkest
right; in military rank I was beneath him, but as pure blood
runs in my veins as ever beat in the heart of a Hungarian.'
Concetta started violently at hearing this, then hung her
head in trembling suspense, for she knew not what to expect.
' The Count saw my sister, and sought her love; it was
given him with all the fulness of a girl's first affection. His
promises were fair and open, and I trusted to his honour.
Military duty now called me to the frontier. T left Olivia
in the guardianship of her mother. Alas! for all truth or
trust in man's honour. When I returned my sister had fled,
and her betrayer was the Count Torcelli!' He uttered the
last words in a voice of thunder, and the poor, mad creature
seemed to feel them in every nerve,
' Who called the Count Torcelli ?' she cried in a trembling
voice. 'Tell him not that Olivia is here, or he will not
answer thee.' Then, covering her face with her mantle, she
rocked her body to and fro as if in utter despair.
The sight of the broken-hearted creature in her misery
roused the fierce passions of Filippo, and he continued his
torrent of words with increasing violence.
' I sought to discover their retreat, but all in vain; soon,
too soon, the story of her love became the world's talk, and the
392 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
accustomed to eat with our dinner in our laps, whilst the
others have theirs up to their mouths.
Often shortly after a storm you may experience a totally
different sensation—the wind drops altogether, and a dead
calm ensues, or you may have all the remains of a storm, a
heavy, rolling swell, the motion of which is often far more
irksome than that of a fresh breeze, every spar on board
creaks dismally, and rolls with a despairing groan, first on
one side then on the other, as the vessel lurches heavily;
you turn in within sight of some island or headland, your
sides are battered by knocking against the sides of your
berth all night, and the same scenery catches your eye the
first thing when you go on deck in the morning. Pieces of
paper and bottles are thrown overboard to try and mark
any progress, but they float alongside till we weary of their
sight.
o
' Ships in the calm seem anchored ; for they glide
On the still sea, urged solely by the tide.'
We examine the patent log which floats behind us, but it
only marks half a knot per hour, and thus we continue till
a welcome breeze springs up, and carries us swiftly on our
course.
Can one who has experienced it, ever forget the pleasure-
able sensation of sighting land when in quest of some place
of shelter ? The distant grey coast becomes gradually more
distinct as we approach it, the hazy outlines develop them¬
selves into rugged points, we draw near enough to distinguish
caves and clefts ; we coast along in search of an inlet, startling
the sea-birds into short fliglits, when with plaintive cries
they settle within a stone's throw; perchance we spy an
opening beneath a massive rock, which we feel certain we
could explore. ' The gig's away,' calls the mate; in we get,
and pull for our discovery. A narrow entrance causes us to
duck our heads, and two strokes of the oars carry us into a
lofty cave, which re-echoes every sound. We shout to hear
the effect, startling from their hiding-place hundreds of
rock-pigeons, which whirl round our heads, some of them in
their alarm almost striking us with their winqs in their
efforts to escape by the low entrance. Leaving the startled
inhabitants of the cave to recover the intrusion, we proceed
on our voyage, and shortly espy what looks like the mouth
of a small river. We venture slowly up it after consulting
the chart, almost touching the high banks on each side with
our bowsprit, so short are the tacks the wind necessitates our
312 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Where is Claudia, Maddalena ? has not the fever left thy
mother that she comes not to greet her husband ? Here,
take this girl with thee, and give her some breakfast; it is
long since she has tasted food.'
Maddalena, thus bidden, looked towards Concetta to follow
her, and led the way into a little low kitchen, wondering
what made the girl look so sad, for she had not understood
the rapid utterance of her father. The wretched Livia had
taken no further notice of Concetta, and remained where
they had first seen her, wringing her hands and muttering to
herself. Filippo entered the dwelling by another door, for
which Concetta felt grateful, as she was spared for a short
time the expression of his wrath. Maddalena was not above
sixteen, though her marked features and full, tall figure gave
her the appearance of being older. Her step was quick and
light, and her manner wild as a young fawn, and as she
pointed to the stranger to take a seat, she leaned her arms on a
little table opposite, and proceeded to examine her appearance
from head to feet.    After some minutes' survey, she said:
' Do the young women of Eeggio dress in that fashion ?'
Concetta looked up in surprise, and said gently,' I come
not from Eeggio.'
' Nay,' said the girl sharply, ' there thoii dost not speak
truth, for my father brought thee in his vessel from thence.
I heard Paolo but yesterday talking of thee to Stefano, and
he said thou earnest from Eeggio.'
' Tliy father's vessel might have been at Eeggio,' answered
Concetta,' but I knew it not. The Padrone landed in the
night, and left it before daybreak the next morning,' thus
trying to account for her ignorance of the place.
This speech gi'eatly excited the curiosity of Maddalena,
and she was about to question the girl further when Matteo
entered the room. At sight of him Concetta gave a little
start, but happily it was unobserved by Maddalena, who had
turned her head hastily to see who it was that came in.
Matteo looked at the empty table, and said sternly:
' Is this the way thou obeyest thy father, Maddalena ? Did
he not tell thee to give the young girl some breakfast ?
Hadst thou come as far as she has, thou hadst been ready
enough to complain at not being served.'
' Nay, Stefano,' she replied apologetically, ' I did but ask
the girl if the women of Eeggio dressed in that coarse garb,
and she denied that she had been there. It was but yester¬
day thou spakest of her to Paolo as coming with Filippo from
Eeggio.'
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty'One. 313
A curious expression passed over the countenance of
Matteo on hearing this, but instead of replying to the im¬
plied question, he said abruptly :
' Well, Maddalena, a hungry wench looks for something
better than girl's chatter; give her some breakfast first, and
then ask her what thou wilt.'
He then busied himself in bringing in various things
which had come in the cart, but took no further notice of
Concetta. Maddalena's attention being thus diverted for a
time, she spread a clean though coarse cloth on the table,
and putting some sausage and maize bread, with a jug of
goat's milk, before Concetta, bade her help herself. Matteo
loitered about to see whether the poor girl, so delicately
nurtured, could eat such homely fare. He saw her look of
distaste, and fancied she could not eat it, so he said, in a
half-jesting tone:
' Maddalena, common hospitality bids thee offer of thy
best to the stranger; hast thou no chocolate to give her with
the milk ?'
Maddalena opened her large brown eyes with astonishment,
and saucily replied :
' Didst ever hear of a serving wench too delicate to eat
sausage and drink goat's milk. Methinks thou art bewitched,
Stefano, to talk in that manner. If she eats not what is
placed before her, she is likely to get nothing better here.'
Concetta's indifference to the things before her did not
arise from distaste to the food provided,—the terrible history
she had just heard had taken away all desire to eat. Fearing,
however, the young girl might misinterpret her unwillingness
to take the food, she said at once :
' It is not that I dislike what thou hast brought me, but
I am very w^eary and not hungry. If thou wouldst kindly
let me rest awhile, it would refresh me more than the
breakfast.'
Maddalena was struck by her gentle tones, and seeing her
eyes filled with tears, imagined she had just parted from her
parents, and this made her feel more kindly toM'ards the
girl, whose fair skin and slight figure gave her so youthful
an appearance, that she supposed her to be little older than
herself She then brought Concetta a cup of chocolate,
which she said she had made for her sick mother. Concetta
took the chocolate, and when she had drunk it, Maddalena
took her into a little bedroom with two small beds in it, and
pointing to one of them bade her lie down and rest herself;
then hearing her father calling her, left the stranger to the
314 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
repose she so much needed. Concetta looked round for a
moment to assure herself she was alone, then sank on her
knees, and burying her face in her hands gave free course to
the grief which swelled her young heart almost to bursting.
Her ideas were scarcely connected enough to understand the
full meaning of her position,—she only knew she was sepa¬
rated, probably for ever, from all she loved on earth, without a
hope of being restored to them. She tried to pray, but bitter
remembrances forced themselves into her very petitions for
help. Fatigue at length mercifully overpowered her throbbing
pulses, and throwing herself on the little bed of maize leaves,
for awhile she forgot her sorrows in a deep slumber.
It was late in the afternoon when she was awoke by hear¬
ing Filippo calling ' Maria.' She started up, and sitting a
moment to collect her scattered senses, so strange was every¬
thing around her, she rose and opened the door leading to
the kitchen, and stood before him. She scarcely dared to
look at him, and dreaded to hear him speak, fearing he might
recur to the subject so torturing to her feelings. His voice
and manner, however, were less stern than in the first burst
of his anger, as if, the dreadful secret being revealed, and he
having succeeded in getting her into his power, his oath had
in some degree been fulfilled as to its purpose of vengeance
on the Count Torcelli, so that he perhaps saw no necessity
for further harshness towards the unoffending girl. Concetta
even fancied a look of compassion, and almost remorse,
passed over his face as he remembered his late violence.
Her appearance was indeed calculated to awake pity in the
hardest nature ; for distress and fatigue had left unmistakeable
traces of suffering and weakness on her delicate frame, and
as she now stood trembling before him, she looked like a
drooping lily. Filippo now desired Maddalena to take the
girl into her mother's apartment, where she would be told
the duties she had to perform in their household. Madda¬
lena gladly obeyed him, for in truth she was delighted to
have such a companion to relieve the dulness of her secluded
life.
Claudia, the wife of Filippo, was reclining on a kind of
low divan that ran round three sides of the small room.
She had been in her youth extremely handsome, and even
now, faded and worn by continual ill health and anxiety,
appeared to possess a delicacy and beauty which contrasted
strangely with all around her. Her dress was simple and
unadorned, made after the fashion of the country; her dark
braided hair, folded round her classically formed head, gave
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 315
an elegance to her appearance and harmonized well with her
dignified carriage and figure, which all betokened a higher
station than the one in which she was now placed. Her
voice was low and musical, and in its tones reminded Con-
cetta of her mother, and she felt insensibly drawn to her by
this chain of sympathy. Claudia looked at her for some
moments as if wishing to read her thoughts, and then gently
told her what was expected of her. The poor girl received
her instructions with a willing mind, assured of being under¬
stood and compassionated by such a mistress. While she
was yet speaking the wretched Livia came into the room,
and once more began to wring her hands and cry and moan
piteously. Claudia remarked the young girl's colour change
as she listened to this wailing, and soon found a pretext for
sending her away.
In a few days Concetta was surprised at finding a change
of clothes placed on her bed, and Maddalena informed her
she was no longer to wear the hideous dress she had worn
on her arrival. Concetta, it may be supposed, was very
grateful for this consideration, which, as she rightly guessed,
she owed to the kindness of Claudia. She expressed her
thanks to Maddalena, who laughing said:
' Thou owest me no thanks, girl, for I am sorry thou
shouldst have dropped thy rags before Ercole saw thee in
them,' she was proceeding, when Concetta started at the
mention of this name, said hurriedly and with a look of
eager inquiry:
' Ercole didst thou say, Maddalena ? dost thou know aught
of Ercole of La Cava ?'
Maddalena's cheek and brow flushed, and her eyes sparkled
fiercely as she said:
' I know not of whom thou art speaking, or what La Cava
has to do with Ercole, my father's vine-grower in Catania.
I did but wish the youth had seen thee in thy old robe and
shawl, that I might have rallied him on the dress of his
lovely women, for he comes from Keggio.'
Seeing Concetta still looked confused, she continued:
' Didst thou know this youth at Eeggio ? for by thy change
of colour there has something passed thou wouldst not I
should know.'
' I know nothing of Eeggio, as I have already told thee,
ISIaddalena, and the Ercole I spoke of was a guide to the
mountains round La Cava.'
The girl's curiosity was much excited, and she questioned
Concetta of the appearance of the youth, and how she came
3i6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to know of such a place as La Cava, of which she had never
heard. Concetta hesitated a little before she answered,
fearing, if she told the circumstance that happened at La
Cava, she might incur the displeasure of Filippo, who evi¬
dently had not entrusted his daughter with his secret.
Maddalena remarked her hesitation, and her jealousy drew a
false conclusion from it; for she imagined that Ercole, who
had always professed great admiration and love for herself,
had been trifling with this stranger. She resolved to watch
their meeting closely. Seeing Maddalena still waited for an
answer, Concetta said:
' If the Ercole thou speakest of be of Eeggio, it cannot be
the same. The name is not uncommon on the mainland,
and the youth I knew was not a vine-dresser.'
The girl did not appear quite satisfied, and looked very
earnestly into the face of Concetta, which still wore an air
of confusion. Long after Maddalena had fallen asleep did
Concetta weary herself in endeavours to unravel the chain
that linked together Filippo, Matteo, and Ercole, for she no
longer doubted that the youth Maddalena described as a
vine-dresser in Catania was the man employed by Filippo
to betray her into his power. She felt assured the occupa¬
tion of vine-dressing was not his real calling, that the three
men were connected in contraband traftic, and perhaps at
this particular period were lending their services to those
who were hoping to restore the young king to his throne.
She could not understand Matteo's interest in her; for in
spite of his apparent indifference and studied avoidance of
anything like recognition, she felt assured she owed much
of her present comfort to his friendly offices. Often, when
she looked up suddenly, she found his eyes fixed on her
with an expression of pity, though he instantly turned away
if she detected his slance.
o
CHAPTER XL
Filippo did not remain many days with his family after
bringing Concetta to this wild abode. She rejoiced when
she saw him depart, for the dreadful history of Livia's wrongs
seemed ever to recur in his presence, nor did she ever dare
to meet his eye, while her heart almost acknowledged the
justice of his retribution. She felt impelled by every means
in her power to soothe and lighten the grief of the unfor¬
tunate woman, who, after a time, ceased to exhibit those
feelings of anger and distrust which Concetta's first appear-
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 317
ance had caused. There was something in the girl's tone
and manner that seemed to draw Livia from her sorrow, and
she would sit for hours supporting her head with her hand
as she leaned against the low table, watching the light and
graceful movements of the maiden in her household work.
Claudia's health seemed to decline from week to week,
and she rarely left the low couch on which Concetta had
first seen her. Although reserved in her manner, there was
yet a kindness in her tone when she addressed Concetta, and
she evidently sought to make Maddalena less exacting in
her demands on the services of the new-comer. She did not
look happy, and Concetta fancied that she felt the hardships
and restraint of her present life very bitterly, though she
made no complaint. Matteo still remained at the dwelling,
but he seldom addressed her, and when he did it was always
as a stranger. Strange as this conduct was, she took heart
from it, as it proved that whatever scheme Matteo might
have formed with regard to her future fate, he had some
motive for concealing his interest in her from those by whom
she was surrounded. She could not decide in her own mind
whether Paolo was or was not aware of the connection
between herself and him, and shuddered to think what the
consequences of such a discovery might bring upon her in
the absence of Filippo, who kept him in strict subjection.
Though often engaged in Filippo's daring exploits, he had
not been trusted with the motive of Concetta's capture. He
was stern and gloomy by nature, and it was only in the wild
excesses of some bacchanalian carousal that he was ever
seen to relax.
Filippo had taken Paolo away with him, and they had
been absent nearly a month, during which time nothing had
occurred to break the monotony of their lonely life. Concetta
fulfilled her appointed tasks apparently to the satisfaction
of Claudia, and she was beginning to accept with somewhat
of calmness what seemed to be her destiny. Matteo some¬
times absented himself for two or three days, and Concetta
remarked that Claudia always appeared more dejected after
his return. They usually held long conferences together,
and Concetta fancied that she was in some manner the
subject under discussion. AVhatever it might be, it was
plain that Maddalena was not taken into their confidence,
and the young girl showed her displeasure by thwarting
Matteo in all his wishes. She was capricious in her be¬
haviour towards Concetta, and jealously watched every word
or look he addressed to the poor girl.    She was even irritated
3l8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
by Livia's unconscious interest in the captive, and mis¬
chievously endeavoured to excite her anger by alluding to
her former misery. On this point, however, she dared not
persevere too far, for Matteo, in whose charge the poor
creature had been left, sternly forbade any trifling with her
feelings. There was much that was incomprehensible in
this man's conduct both as regarded Livia and Concetta,
the latter of whom vainly sought to penetrate the mystery
of the connection between Filippo and Matteo. In the
presence of Filippo he seemed to hold a subordinate position,
but in her husband's absence Claudia deferred everything to
Matteo. The rest and comparative freedom from pressing
anxieties began to exercise a good effect on the health of the
poor captive, and she acknowledged with thankfulness a
return of strength and activity to which she had long been
a stranger. Every week seemed to develop some new charm
in her figure and countenance, though the latter still retained
its pensive sadness. The resentful feeling which the first
shock of her capture had called forth was passing away, and
one might have thought from her subdued and patient
manner, even when the young Maddalena tried her gentle
spirit almost beyond endurance, that she bore her sorrows
as a kind of penance for the crimes of her father. Neither
by word or gesture did she resent the rude attacks of the
wilful girl, who, finding she could rouse no retaliating spirit,
began to tire of her own waywardness. Claudia had not
been unobservant of her patient submission, and was daily
learning to regard her with more favour. Sometimes she
seemed disposed to forget their relative positions, and throw
aside the authority of a mistress by treating her as an equal,
but a cautionary glance from Matteo recalled the strict
injunction of Filippo, and she resumed her usual reserved
manner.
Things had remained in this state for some time, when
again Matteo left them in charge of the peasant who looked
after the animals, and brought them their daily supply of
provisions. He had been gone some three or four days,
when Concetta thought she observed in Maddalena a great
anxiety about her personal appearance. She was not aware
of its being a fete, day, but the young girl seemed to take
more than usual pains in plaiting and ornamenting her hair,
and putting on her favourite dress, and was restless, and
evidently awaiting the arrival of some one in whom she was
greatly interested. Her manner towards Concetta was more
than usually pettish, and she seemed to wish to find occupa-
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.  319
tion for the girl at a distance from the dwelling. Concetta
was quick in detecting the wish, though she could not so
readily account for its object, unless it might be she expected
her father to return, who always brought his daughter some
pretty bauble from the towns he visited.
Amongst her other occupations Concetta had learned to
spin flax, and having completed her household duties for the
day, she took her distaff in her hand, and almost without
thought followed the windings of the little stream to the
strip of green pasture bounded by the rocks that shut in the
narrow ravine. She seated herself on a block of lava, and
while her fingers mechanically drew the flax from the
distaff", her thoughts reverted to her father, her home, and
still further, to that dream of her young life, the happy years
spent in the company of her beloved Eudolph. She knew
not how long she had been seated there, nor heeded the
tokens of the coming night, so absorbed was her mind in the
recollection of past scenes, when the sound of rapid footsteps
approaching over the broken scoriaj which strewed the
ground behind the rocks, startled her from her reverie. The
sun had sunk, and the grey twilight was already rendering
every object indistinct, as she rose to retrace her steps, her
heart beating almost audibly in the fear of being surprised
in that lonely spot. She had not proceeded many yards,
when a young man came bounding from the covert of the
rocks, and calling her loudly by her name, desired her to
stop. The blood for a moment seemed to leave her heart as
she recognised the voice of Ercole, for what could be his
motive in seeking her in that secluded spot ? Swift as an
arrow the young man was at her side, and seizing her hands,
attempted to draw her towards him. With a force she
knew not she possessed, she tore her hands away, and in the
haughty tone of a superior, commanded him to leave her.
Ercole for an instant was surprised into obedience, but soon
recovering his audacity, approached nearer, and said, in a
mocking tone:
' The Signorina Concetta perhaps imagines she is within
reach of the Casa Torcelli, and can summon with a breath
her insolent lacqueys, but she will soon find it is not her
interest to treat Ercole with scorn.'
Concetta did not condescend to answer him,—indeed, she
could not have spoken a word had it been to save her life,
so intense were her fears. She struggled, however, to conceal
her feelings, and walked as rapidly towards the dwellings as
her beating heart permitted.    She felt that every step gained
320 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
was in her favour, and trusted to Maddalena's quick ears to
recognise the young man's voice, and bring her out to meet
him, for the cause of the girl's restlessness was now explained.
Ercole, nothing daunted by the rebuff of Concetta, con¬
tinued his mocking strain, unconsciously raising his voice in
anger at her obstinate silence, till, as she hoped, the sound
of loud talking brought out the inquisitive and jealous
Maddalena. It was too dark to distinguish tlie countenances
of either, but Maddalena, with ill-suppressed suspicion in her
voice, said, as she ran forward to meet them:
' Ercole, how earnest thou to meet the girl, and what wert
thou saying to her in so loud a tone ?'
Ercole altered his manner and voice even while she spoke,
and playfully seizing her by the waist, he drew her head
back, and bending over her, silenced her with a kiss. Affect¬
ing to be angry with him, she pouted her pretty lips, and
bade him release her, at the same time tenderly reproaching
him for not having come earlier in the day.
'Have I not watched for thee, Ercole, since early dawn,
and gathered thy favourite flower for my hair; where didst
thou lag, truant, and how cam'st thou to be toying with the
serving-wench ?'
Concetta, who had recovered herself at the siglit of Madda¬
lena, and had walked silently by her side, felt her cheeks
glow with indignation at this insult, which she dared not
resent. Luckily, it was too dark for them to observe what was
passing in her mind; and having reached the dwelling, she
passed rapidly forward and shut herself into her room, while
Maddalena continued to interrogate Ercole of his meeting
with Maria, for Maddalena knew not Concetta's real name.
Ercole, aware of her jealous disposition, and having reasons
of his own for wishing to conceal his previous knowledge of
Concetta, cleverly availed himself of tliis change in her name
to declare he had never known her, that his meeting with •
her was purely accidental, and that he had chosen that path
in hopes of surprising his bella Maddalena; that his dis¬
appointment on discovering a stranger where he hoped to
find his beloved made him angry, and he could not help
showing it to the young woman, who had not given him
very satisfactory answers concerning Maddalena. He then
turned the conversation towards herself, and flattering her
vanity with loud praises of her increased beauty, soothed
the maiden into forgetfulness of her previous suspicions.
It was evident to Concetta that Ercole's visit to the rocks
was not merely to play the lover to Maddalena.    After a
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Talc of Sixty-one. 321
short time given to making his peace with lier, Claudia sent
to desire he might come into her room, as she wished to
speak with him alone.   Maddalena could not preventhis going,
though she was annoyed at her mother's breaking up their
interview so soon;   and calling petulantly to Concetta to
hasten her preparations for their supper, she once  more
began to question the girl of tlie meeting between Ercole
and herself.    She could not quite satisfy herself with his
explanation, for it hardly seemed to account for the evident
anger visible in Concetta's countenance and manner when
obliged to resume her duties before him.    Her brow and
cheeks still flushed with indignation at the recollection of
his audacity, and being compelled to act the part of a menial
in his presence was perhaps a bitter drop in her cup of
sorrow.    Even while appearing to listen with attention to
the outpourings  of Maddalena's  girlish  heart, the  youth
found opportunity to follow the movements of Concetta's
graceful figure with his eyes, and when he could do so un¬
observed, dared again to insult her modesty with his bold
glances of unbridled admiration.    In truth, Ercole was struck
with the change and improvement her rustic life had wrought
in the appearance of Concetta.    Her form had regained its
roundness, and grace and dignity shone through her simplest
action, while the feelings that now agitated her bosom con¬
tributed to heighten her beauty by giving fire to her eyes
and colour to her cheek.    No wonder Maddalena's charms
paled by comparison with this noble creature, and Ercole
from that moment vowed secretly to obtain her for his bride.
Accustomed to a life  of adventure, he had  no  fears  or
scruples as to the means lie should employ to secure his
prize.    Had Maddalena been less impressed with the power
of her own charms, or less inexperienced, she might even in
thatfirst interview have detected her lover's wandering glances
and somewhat indifferent manner.    She became impatient
of Ercole's return, and rose from the table where supper was
spread to break up his conference with her mother.    Ercole
was leaving the apartment at that moment, and Concetta
distinctly heard Claudia, in a broken, sobbing cry, utter the
names of Garibaldi and Ciprani, in reply to the youth's con¬
cluding words.    A thrill of joy shot through her frame at
the sound of these names uttered in conjunction, for might
it not be possible her kind  and  generous friend, Signor
Ciprani, had gained some clue to her capture, and was now
meditating a scheme to counteract the lawless daring of
Filippo.    Instinctively she turned her face away as Madda-
No. .^i.").—July 1879. X
322 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
lena and the youth entered the kitchen, lest they might read
the hope that now animated her heart and suspect something.
The words she had overheard acted as a spell, an cegis which
turned aside as unseen, and uncared for, the bold glances of
Ercole, and his attempts to engage her in conversation.    She
heeded him not, but busied herself in attending to the wants
of poor Livia, who had long ceased to expect such attentions
from the hand of Maddalena.    Ercole could not fail to re¬
mark the interest betrayed by Livia in Concetta, and was
already devising how he could make the poor, half-witted
woman an instrument in his designs upon the girl.    Madda¬
lena at length perceiving that her lover's attentions were
distracted from herself, felt her jealous suspicions return, and
quickly found some excuse for sending Concetta from the
room, a command she was only too thankful to obey, for she
was longing to be alone to meditate on the new hope which
made her pulses beat with happy expectation of a not far
distant deliverance.    Claudia, to whom Concetta was now
sent, seemed in deep affliction, caused apparently by the
recent intelligence brought by Ercole.   Her eyes were swollen
with weeping, and the supper which had been sent to her lay
untouched before her.    She started at the entrance of the
girl, and seemed to examine her countenance with searching
glances.    Concetta was unconscious of any change in her
manner and appearance, but the newly revived hope was
not only beaming in her eyes, but her step was firmer, her
whole bearing more erect, and no longer showing that patient
submission which had been so marked in her every move¬
ment since the relation of Olivia's wrongs had been made to
her.    Though she stood before Claudia, as usual, waiting her
bidding, it was no longer as one dependent on her bounty or
subjected to her authority.    Claudia remarked every change
in her ingenuous countenance, and for the moment forgot
her own sorrow in her interest in the young creature whose
destiny seemed now a part of her own.    While she made
]ier comments on the changed expression in the countenance
and manner of Concetta, the girl seemed suddenly to undergo
some revulsion of feeling.    She remarked the restrained grief
and the melancholy which shaded the brow of Claudia, and
a generous sympathy for one who had been uniformly kind
and gentle towards herself filled her heart, and her soft eyes
suffused with tears as she thought of the sufferings her own
deliverance might bring on her hostess.    Not a word was
spoken between them, and yet each felt that a chain of
sj'^mpathy now linked their hearts, which succeeding circum-
Life and Letters of James Hinton. 323
stances could not sever. Claudia now gently bade her remove
the untasted meal, and bidding her good night, sank back on
her couch, and once more recurred to the harassing and dis¬
tressing communications of Ercole.
{To he contimied^
Hilt ant( iLctters of 3amc&' l^mton.
Edited by Ellice Hopkins.
This biography of an earnest and original thinker will find
many sympathizing readers in an age when religious belief
can no longer be lightly inherited from our fathers, but
when it must be a matter of personal seeking and holding.
It is interesting to study the mental struggles of such a
vigorous nature; for the life of James Hinton was not
outwardly remarkable; it is the inner life which fascinates
us, as we trace its development in the letters to his future
wife and to his friends. After passing through a period of
doubt and uncertainty as to where truth was to be found,
he came out of it grasping the truth of Christianity with
an earnestness which made him dare to face the problem
of the evil in the world, and the sufferings permitted in it.
These sufferings, he said, are felt as pain, because of the
weakness of our present nature; if we were perfect, pain
would not be felt as pain, but only as a difficulty which it
would be a pleasure to overcome. This subject is worked
out more fully in his little book. The Mystery of Pain, which
deserves to be widely read.
The old antagonism of the Law and the Gospel was, he
felt, still going on in the world, the Law saying. Thou shall
not, and putting restraint in all directions which were
utterly insufficient to reach the root of evil. He saw that
the gospel of love, and willing self-sacrifice for the good
of others, was the only sufficient power to overcome evil.
The lesson is an old one, but it needs constantly to be
re-stated in the language of the day, and to be lived out in
action as it was in Hinton's life. He dared to protest
against the worldly standard of success, a life of ease and
comfort, and to say. You learn what you are by what you
can endure.    To quote his own words:
'Now this enjoyment in endurance is just according to the inten
sity of the life; the more physical vigour  and balance, the more
324 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
endurance can be made an element of satisfaction. A sick man can't
stand it. The life of enjoyable suffering is not a fixed one ; it
fluctuates with the perfectness of the life. Now, don't you see the
perfectness of the step I took ? Is it not a perfect revelation ? That
our pains are, as they are, unendurable, means not that they are too
iireat, but that we are sick. We haven't got our proper life. Only
think of this being our nature, our proven destiny, a life so intense
and so large that it shall make all human pains the condition of its
exuberance I'
He tliought that our moral faculties were less developed
than our intellectual, and that we need a fresh basis of
morals,—to start from altruism, and not from self. ' The
word " altruistic,"' he says, ' I borrow from Comte. Is it
not a capital word ? I am resolved to naturalize it.'
Yet he does not approve of asceticism as such; there is
self-seeking lurking even in that. Altruism, he says, is the
key which would solve our social problems, living to serve
others, not grasping anything for ourselves; in his own
words:
' Never fear to let go, it is the only means of getting better things
—self-sacrifice. Let go, let go ; we are sure to get back again. How
science teaches the lesson of morals, which is ever, Give up, give
up, deny yourself—not this everlasting getting; deny yourself and
give, and infinitely more shall be yours ; but give—not bargaining ;
give from love, because you must. And if the question will intrude,
" What shall I have if I give up this ?"—relegate that question to
faith, and answer, "I shall have God. In my giving, in my love,
God, who is Love, gives Himself to me."'
It is sad to think that the over-active brain of the thinker
wore him out prematurely. He died iu 1875, at the age of
fifty-three, at St. jNIichael in the Azores. He was eminent
in his profession as an aurist, and found that the practical
life he was forced to enter, was of service to him in the
world of thouglit. It is impossible in this short notice to
call attention to all the suggestive matter contained in this
biography.
 0 
^our passer le CTcmps.
Around the great cathedral tower
The startled air is ringing;
The chimes are telling out tlie liour,
Their wonted message brinuin":
' Time is passing, time is past,
Hours are flitting, ooiu" fast;
Seize them, use them, wliile you can.
Hear our warning voice to man !'
Pour Passer le Tevips. 325*
But not alike to all mankind
Is the message from the tower;
In some an echoing strain they find,
Their words come home with power:
' Time is yours, though only lent,
Think how best it may be spent;
Hark! an hour has passed away.
Work while it is called to-day.'
To some, again, their warning note
Chimes in far other strain;
To dull, unwilling ears they float,
Their lessons are in vain:
' Half of the day is gone at last,
How shall the other half be passed ?
What will you do to hill the time.
Until we ring our midnight chime ?'
Another idler starts in haste
To find an hour is gone;
Stroke after stroke records the waste,
And calls in solemn tone ;
' Xo time is left thee to delay.
Beware lest thou, too, " lose a day;"
Still art thou slothful, ever late,
Though " time and tide can never wait."'
The miser counts his glittering store,
And reckons up his gold ;
The chimes break on his dreams of ' more,'
His thoughts of ' Ijought and sold :'
' Time is passing, time is flying.
Time for selling and for buying;
^loney save, and money get,
Time for greater fortune yet!'
The sick man tosses to and fro.
And counts up every chime;
He thinks the night will never go,
He cannot ' pass the time:'
' Tear not, another hour is gone,
The sky is rosy with the dawn;
Thy night of sorrow wears away,
There dawns a yet more glorious day.'
526 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
"When we, too, hear the pealing bell,
What message does it bear ?
Our consciences alone can tell
What form of words we hear:
' Time is passing, time is going,
Drop by drop the river flowing;
Dost thou " pass " it, " kill" it, " lose " it,
" Waste" it, "save" it, " spend" or "use" it ?'
H. M. L.
iEije (JFUinliursI) Association for tlje ^nibrrsttg
CHiucation of SBlomcn.
As the present year marks an important epoch in the
history of this Association, we consider the present a good
opportunity of drawing attention to a few facts connected
with its development and progress. We do this in the hope
of attracting the interest and sympathy of our readers and their
friends to a work which, carried on as it has been in our
midst for twelve years, has still much to do before its good
effects can be extended as far as they ought to be among
Scottish women of the upper and middle classes.
We may hail with satisfaction the appearance of its new
Calendar (David Douglas, 9 S. Castle Street, Edinburgh). It
bears for the first time on its title-page the altered desig¬
nation of the Association, which, as the Preface states, ' was
recently adopted by a resolution of the General Committee,
as expressing the constitution and aims of the Association
more accurately than that by which it had hitherto been
known.' Many will agree with us that there is much in ' a
name,' and that, in giving a designation to any corporate
body, it is as well that the ultimate aim and purpose of the
society at least should as far as possible be made known by
the title. A Ladies' Educational Association (our title in
time past) might point merely at their improvement in read¬
ing and spelling; but an Association for their University
Education can stop nowhere short of the highest education
possible under existing circumstances.
But with this change of name, our Association retains its
purpose and character as before. Having stated that we
should like to see it made more widely beneficial to the
community at large, our first piece of advice to all who are
interested in the subject of female education, either on their
own or their friends' account, is to possess themselves at
University Education of Women. 327 _
once of a copy of the Calendar. The questions frequently
put to us, not merely by strangers or country visitors whose
ignorance is only natural, but by residents in Edinburgh,
testify to the need of information on the simplest points,
which might easily be obtained from the Calendar.
In this country and in our own day, we need hardly enter
npon a defence of, or an apology for, any scheme for the im¬
proved education of any class. The cause itself is won, and
the differences of opinion which exist upon the subject have
reference only to the mode and manner in which improve¬
ments should be carried out. On this matter people will
differ to the end of time, all who think seriously on the
subject deciding for themselves what to adopt and what to
reject for themselves and their children.
Educational Associations like ours are becoming common
throughout our empire. Our own in Edinburgh has the honour
of having inaugurated the good work in Scotland. Speaking
with the right of membership, we have not space at present
to enter into its history or details, but we should certainly
like to draw in the co-operation and support of many who
as yet have shown little or no interest in our work. As
members or as students, either or both, we should be glad
to welcome them in much greater numbers to our ranks.
And among the many errors prevalent, we may notice the
most frequent, the notion that members and students are
synonymous. One glance at the list of members (page 83
of the Calendar) ought to dispel the fancy; members may be
of either sex and any degree; students, of course, are ladies
only. Outsiders may, and do frequently, make the mistake
of thinking that if they cannot be students they can be of
little use as members. This mistake we should like to rectify.
We do not believe that any very large class of well-educated
persons, either men or women, would own to being wholly
indifferent to the progress of women's education and its
general improvement throughout the country. It is not
unreasonable, therefore, to hope that more information as to
the aims and efforts of this Association will lead many whose
ideas have hitherto been imperfect and confused, to place
themselves on our list as members, perhaps as Life-members,
as annual subscribers to the funds, with the fixed intention
of giving assistance in various ways which membership would
render practicable. Eesidence in Edinburgh is not necessary;
there are many ways in which our members can help us,
even at a distance.
Then, again, as regards students, should they all become
328 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Alagazinc.
members ? We say unhesitatingly, yes. Students always
owe a debt of gratitude to their Alma Mater, and in the pre¬
sent instance it cannot be better discharged than by enrolling
themselves as members. Students in classes like ours,
will always be of two distinct kinds, the thorough and the
desultory. The latter term need convey no reproach; we
merely use it to distinguish those whose actual education is
over, who have no need of certificates or diplomas, but who,
with literary or scientific tastes, wisely employ some of their
leisure time in keeping up old pursuits and acquiring fresh
knowledge. We cordially welcome any number of such
students to our ranks, believing that their influence and
example in their various circles is excellent, and that their
presence in our lecture-rooms as well-bred and sensible
women, is certain to be advantageous to us as well as pleasant
and useful to themselves. But we should like those ladies
to become members as well as students, and to keep up their
own interest in the progress and success of the work, even
when they cease to study themselves.
As to the other class, the thorough students, we desire to
see them regard membership as absolutely indispensable for
themselves. Whether in entering upon the complete curri¬
culum they intend to make professional use of their learning
as teachers of any grade, or whether they merely love know¬
ledge and seek it for its own sake, they cannot but feel the
immense privileges obtained by means of such an Association
as ours. It places within easy reach pleasures and advan¬
tages perhaps inaccessible to them by any other means ; and
the more benefit they have derived from these, the more surely
will they wish to lend their support to an institution which
has done so much for them. In becoming members, they
would learn to appreciate the energy and thoughtfulness,
the quiet perseverance in spite of difficulties, which have
for years distinguished the Executive ; they would see how
their wants as students have been anticipated, their welfare
and success kindly cared and provided for at all hazards; and
they would feel glad to lighten a burden necessarily heavy
by their influence, their subscriptions, their practical assist¬
ance wherever it could be of use. It is from members like
these that our council should be recruited. The need of
' fresh blood,' of new ideas, is often felt, and can best be
secured, not by constant re-elections, but by fresh additions
from the ranks of ordinary members; therefore, the larger
these ranks the greater the choice. Even members not
permanently resident in Edinburgh, may make their ideas
University Education of Women. 329
known to the council by the medium of friends; practical
common sense is always welcome when brought to bear
upon the practical difficulties that must arise from time to
time. ' Become members yourselves, and induce as many of
your friends as you can to do the same,' would be our invari¬
able counsel to students, and we hope that in time they will
all do so, from no incentive save the desire to extend the
usefulness and work of the Association.
In the Calendar preface, allusion is made to our new
i:)remises, 14 Shandwick Place. We wish to draw attention
to this change, and the very great improvements it involves.
Students can hardly be sufficiently grateful to the zeal and
energy of the Executive Committee, headed by the Hon.
Secretary and Treasurer, which have been so strenuously
exerted in order to secure such comforts and advantages for
them. In our old quarters, 117 George Street, many incon¬
veniences had been cheerfully and patiently submitted
to, which are now wholly obviated. Instead of being forced
to crowd all the Lectures into one room, often greatly pressed
for time, one class hurried out to make way for the next,
we now have two excellent lecture-rooms, a larger and a
smaller; so that two Professors can give their lectures at
once, independently, all arrangements for time, provision
for smaller or greater numbers at examinations, and above
all, for thorough ventilation of the rooms between each
lecture, being greatly facilitated. We have now, too, com¬
fortable waiting-rooms for the students and professors, good
accommodation for the hall-keeper, and last, but by no means
least, the Library. Until now we have had to stow away a
somewhat inadequate supply of books as best we could, only
three of the classes having a tolerably fair number at their
command. In our present cheerful and pretty room, the
books will, we hope, not only be attainable, but can be read
in thorough comfort. We heartily concur in the wisdom
that has made the charge of 5s. per. annum incumbent upon
every student. For this small sum they are free of the
room, a great convenience, whether they read the books or
not; while, without extra charge, they may borrow and use
the books of every class without restriction. When it is
remembered that no matriculation-fee is exacted from our
students, we feel sure that this moderate payment for the
free access to this pretty reading-room and its contents will
not alarm or surprise them.
We urge upon members and friends the importance of
every effort to increase the efficiency of the Library.    This
330 T]ie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
may be done by subscriptions, by gifts of books, and also
by the loan of any for which the owners have no immediate
use. The greatest care will be taken of them, and we believe
that among former students many kindly agree to help us in
this way. Any questions can be answered, and information
given, on applying to the Librarian, Miss Schwabe, 2 Glen-
orchy Terrace, Newington, Edinburgh.
Lastly, we refer readers of the Calendar to the statements
about our Bursaries, p. 77. These we would gladly see in¬
creased, knowing how verj^ helpful they are in encouraging
the poorer students to persevere. Many a promising scholar
may be deterred from carrying on her already successful
course of study, by the fear that even her moderate educa¬
tional expenses may be diminishing the slender resources and
scanty comforts of those she loves, and may sacrifice all
hopes of future professional advantages for herself rather than
add to the cares that press heavily on her parents, when the
winning of a bursary would clear the way to her success;
therefore we may hope that those in happier circumstances
will appreciate the pleasure of raising funds, which, by in¬
creasing these fortunate chances, may so greatly benefit their
poorer sisters. The number of years the Association has now
held its ground, must have added to the numbers of those
we may call 'our old students ;' to them we primarily turn,
believing that they will not fail us at this important crisis,
when new improvements are entailing on us new and hea^y
expenses. There never was a greater claim upon our friends'
interest and help than at the present moment. We therefore
ask all of them, as knowing the goodness of the cause, to
bring all their own energy and influence over their friends
to bear upon the Edinburgh Association for the University
Education of Women. One of the Council.
(Dur ILibrarg Calile.
The Great Frozen Sea. By Captain Markham, R.N.
London : Daldy, Isbister, & Co. 1878.
The records of Arctic travel possess an attraction of their own, the
same feeling in kind, if not in degree, as that which seems to seize on
the actual voyagers to those frozen regions. Through all their
hardships, there is a sort of fascination in the hand-to-hand struggle
with the elements, in the study of natural phenomena in such an
unwonted guise, even in the uncertainty of the results to be obtained,
which strongly impresses all the active spirits, worthy descendants of
the mariners of old, to whom adventure is life. Man, among his
other distinguishing qualities, may be described as an investigating
animal.   Whether it be the sources of the Nile, or the interior of the
Our Library Table, 331
great continent of Australia, or the configuration of the lands round
tlie North Pole, he cannot rest until he have discovered all that is to
be known.
The Expedition under Sir George Nares departed amid sanguine
hopes that now at length the great problem (if problem it be) might
be set at rest; and when first the message, ' Pole impracticable,' was
flashed along the telegraph wires on their return, no doubt a certain
measure of disappointment was felt. But on second thoughts, it
seems evident that our expectations were somewhat unreasonable,
and therefore there is no need to be surprised at their non-fulfilment.
Our explorers are now working in a region very much to the north¬
ward of that north-west passage which was the former object of our
researches; and with every additional mile of northing, the
difficulties to be overcome grow more formidable. The work per¬
formed by the expedition must be looked upon as thoroughly
satisfactory, when we think of the conditions under which every step
of the way was accomplished ; and the results—the extent of coast¬
line laid down, and the high latitude attained—ought to be considered
a triumph of courage and discipline. The myth of an open polar
sea—that mysterious ocean whose waves greet us in the frontispiece
to Dr. Kane's Arctic voyages—is now finally disposed of ; and has
resolved itself into the tremendous icy billows of the Palseocrystic
sea. The experiences of the Alert herself make it easy to understand
how the belief should have arisen. Such is the changing character of
ice navigation, that those on board of that vessel repeatedly found
themselves in 'an apparently open sea, with no ice in sight,' only to
be brought up a few hours afterwards, surrounded, and well-nigh
crushed, by the mighty floe-bergs. No future party will ever
attempt to reach the Pole by way of Smith's Sound. That other
expeditions will be sent out, if not by Government, at least by private
persons, is, we think, pretty certain. Captain Markham mentions
regretfully in his preface, that while the flags of Holland, Sweden,
and America floated last year in the Arctic regions, ours was
unrepresented. Whether any real gain to science will be the result,
seems very questionable. To reach the Pole in order to say we liave
been there, is indeed a barren honour; the tide of scientific discovery
seems to have set in a new direction ; and it is probable that the
voyage of the Challenger has contributed far more towards the solu¬
tion of important scientific questions than the late Arctic expedition.
Every one must have enjoyed the lively and interesting account
of the life on board the Alert given in Captain Markham's pages; nor
are they without their undertone of tragedy. It can scarcely be
doubted that the terrible outbreak of scurvy to which the crew so
nearly succumbed, could not have been averted through any amount of
lime-juice. The circumstances were such—the long-continued dark¬
ness, the intense cold, such as had never before been recorded, the
severe and unaccustomed labour—as too well account for the failure of
vital energy which must have predisposed them to this dread disease,
and we can only rejoice that its ravages were not even more fatal.
Robin Adair.    By Honourable Mrs. Fetherstonhaugh.
London: Bentley.    1879.
' Story ! Lord bless you, I have none to tell, sir.'
In the work whose title we have given there is so little of novelty
in the incidents or characters, so little of what one may call motive
332 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
power, running through the whole, as to give the impression that the
authoress had not so much a story to tell as that she was determined
at all hazards to tell a story. This being premised, we may say that
the book, though of the very slightest texture, considered as a work
of art, is graceful and refined ; sufficiently interesting and suiBciently
amusing to give an hour or two of refreshing pleasure to the weary or
the invalid.
The title, Robin Adair, is rather misleading, for the personage who
figures under this sobriquet, though he must be called the hero of
the tale for want of another, is by no means its chief character. He
is slightly, not to say flimsily, drawn; the writer has apparently no
very definite conception of him in her own mind, therefore, naturally,
he is uninteresting. We must credit him with some external charms
to account for the part he plays in the destiny of others, but all we
see of him is the shallow-hearted man of the world, who, having at
one time resolved to give up the commonplace heiress whom he does
not care for, and to devote himself to the girl whom he loves and who
loves him, subsequently, without reason given, reverses this decision,
throws over his real love, and marries her rival. We learn the change,
or the forsaken girl learns it, by his letter announcing it to
her ; but his motives and his mental struggles in the interim are not
revealed. So poor, however, is our opinion of him, that we have the
comfort of thinking we have not missed much. His real raison
iletre is to be a peg whereon to hang the fortunes of a nobler creature
than himself. The heroine, Eleanor Hamilton, with her devotion,
her endurance, and her forgiveness, is the one character in the story
that approaches completeness of development, and the only one into
which the authoress has put her heart. High-minded as Eleanor is,
we must take leave to protest against the extreme facility of her
forgiveness. We believe in forgiveness, but not in such forgiveness
of a wanton and unrepented injury as would permit the victim, six
months after, to enter into easy conversation with the wrong-doer
upon sentimental topics.
Besides Eleanor, there is a second little heroine, of a type for which
Mrs. Fetherstonhaugh has a predilection, in Clare O'Neill, the wild
Irish girl, a fresh young creature bred up in solitude, who tumbles
into love with perfect innocence and scorn of the conventional; and
who, with her boy-lover, comes and goes through the story in easy
and unexpected ways, though without much influence upon the main
business.
The subject into which our authoress decidedly puts her whole
strength is—sport. We are here quite unable to criticize her; we
can only say that fishing, cub-hunting, fox-hunting, and steeple-
chasing are described with a zest and a gusto that impress the
uninitiated mind with a great sense of reality. We make the
acquaintance of many horses in the course of the story, and on the
whole we think that they have more character in them than the men
have, and that Goliath, Sanspareil, Cobby, and their fellows are better
discriminated than Charlie Anstruther and Stephen Adair. The
writing is not without an occasional touch of humour,—as when the
Irish girl, seeing that her new acquaintance throws his line in a style
more suggestive of ' double-thonging a wheeler' than of high art in
fly-fishing, quietly observes, 'Ye drive well, don't ye?'
In conclusion, if the writer has not a deep insight into human life,
she at least looks at it with kindly and sympathetic eyes.    She has
Question Series. 333
touches of fellow-feeling for the poor and suffering, and for the hard-
worked clergy who suiier with them ; and she honestly loves the
things that are 'pure and of good report.' On the whole, we may
say that as, in the present constitution of things, there must be novels
and novel-readers, it is well that cultivated women should write
tender and graceful tales like the present, which can give innocent
pleasure to many and suggest harm to none.
(Question Scries.
VII. Give from Shakspere, three instances of intense passion
veiled by a calm exterior, with any comments of your own upon each
of them.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C, care
f)f Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than August 5th. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO MAY SERIES.
Best, Stell.v, though her concluding examples are somewhat
vague. Second, Eromakt ; an interesting answer, though somewhat
careless in style. Third, Thorough ; a well-studied answer, but the
style marred by constant use of the word ' repulsive.' Nagol, very
good ; Aeachne, fair.
Show how a beautiful object may be made repulsive, and a
repulsive one beautiful, in painting.    Give examples of both.
Painting is designed not only to delight the eye bvit to refine and
elevate the mind. It must therefore be suggestive; it must exercise
the powers of the imagination ; the mind of the painter must, as it
were, be visible in his picture,—he must Kptak through his art. And
to accomplish this in sucli a manner as that his work, whatever maj'
be the subject, shall convey pleasurable sensations to the spectator,
has always been the aim of a good artist. To this end he will study
nature in her various forms, conscious that all our ideas of beauty
are derived from her. But he soon discovers that, to make his
pictures agreeable to the eye, it is not enough that they should be
exact representations of nature mapped out in literal truth. To
prevent their being realistic, and so failing to give pleasure, much
experience will be required in deciding on what objects are to be
heightened, what thrown into the shade, what only hinted at, and
what left out altogether. This difficulty of composition will be
considerably increased if his subject, as will often be the case, be not
in itself beautiful. He may have selected it with a view to some
moral teaching, or as a means of conveying useful information, or,
perhaps, even for the pleasure of exercising his skill in rendering an
unpleasing subject interesting and attractive. We have an example
of success in such a work in Rembrandt's celebrated ' School of
Anatomy,' exhibited in the Picture Gallery at the Hague, where
the painter has so admirably arranged the composition of his picture
as to make a subject naturally repulsive actually attractive to the
334 '^^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
crowd of admiring spectators •who surround it daily. He has so
skilfully contrived to direct the attention to the living, as that the
corpse, though occupying the centre of the canvas and with a full
light thrown on it, is almost unnoticed; and this he has accomplished
in defiance of Sir Joshua Reynolds' rule, that to render an unpleasing
subject pleasing, the strongest light should be cast on the most
beautiful object in the picture, and what is disagreeable or repulsive
should be thrown into the shade or background. Rubens' two
famous pictures in Antwerp Cathedral, 'The Descent from the Cross'
and ' The Elevation of the Cross ; ' Guido's ' Dead Christ' in the
Pinacoteca at Bologna; Titian's 'Entombment of Christ,'—all furnish
instances of the power, in the hands of genius, of correct drawing,
harmony of colour, judicious management of light and shade, and
good composition in investing painful subjects with a sublime beauty
that fills the spectator with emotions of the purest pleasure. It is,
on the other hand, by the utter disregard of these necessary technical
qualities, and still more by the total absence of soul breathing through
the work, that a beautiful subject is so often rendered repulsive, and
we turn away disgusted from a picture that should only have
awakened feelings of delight. Unfortunately, we have not far to
seek for examples of such. There are but too many of them to be
seen in our modern picture galleries. They are, for the most part,
the productions either of ignorant and inexperienced artists, who,
impatient of labour and disdainful of the necessary rules of art, trust
to their own genius to become good painters ; or of those who,
destitute of any genuine taste or intuitive perception of the beautiful,
cultivate the art simply for fashion's sake, and hope to excel without
knowing what true excellence is. Stella.
Strag i^otcs.
Edinburgh University Local Examinations.—These Examina¬
tions took place on the 17th, 18th, and 19th of June, the number
of candidates reaching in all 889—a very considerable increase on
last year. Of these numbers, about 140, we are glad to say, were
taught in the S. George's Hall Classes, either orally or by correspond¬
ence. It is very gratifying to see how many new centres are formed
throughout the country, their number being now forty-five, although
Glasgow is now in the field, and Aberdeen intends to be so next
year.
Conversazione at the Ladies' Club.—Some of our readers may
remember the account of a pleasant entertainment in our August No.
last year, given by the members of the S. George's Hall Committee
to their lady-students and the tutors, on the occasion of the Edin¬
burgh Local Examination. Again this year a similar invitation was
given, and a similar meeting took place. A casual observer might
have been puzzled to know why some of the ladies were decorated
with a small bow of green ribbon,—was it a sign of special merit,
an honour gained at the University ? No, these little badges were
worn by corresponding students at the request of the committee, in
order tliat in the crowd and bustle of a large meeting no stranger
from a distance should be overlooked. No sooner was a ' green bow '
discovered than its wearer was greeted kindly, asked whence she
Stray Notes. 335
came, in which class she had corresponded, these queries being
always followed by an introduction to the tutor. It was pleasant to
notice the genial interest shown by teachers and taught, when
suddenly, after long correspondence, the personal identity of each
was made known to the other. After tea and coffee had been served,
the guests moved freely through the rooms of the club, while they
discussed over their ices the events of the first examination-day, and
made, doubtless, many forecasts as to the work of the morrow, and
the final results of the whole, for the hearing of which much patience
must be exercised, as some weeks must elapse before this exciting
news can be received, of how each student has prospered. Here
and there might be noted a student of an anxious countenance, but on
the whole good spirits prevailed, such as must have inspired the tutors
with the hope that their candidates were to bring them some reward
of distinction in return for the kind and persevering care bestowed
on them throughout the session. As six o'clock approached, the
rooms began visibly to thin, as some students had once more to be
at their desks in the University, while many other first-year students
doubtless purposed a few hours' quiet study in preparation for the
dreaded arithmetic which would commence the following day's
work. As a pleasant way of bringing our students and teachers
together, the committee have reason to congratulate themselves on
the success of this reunion.
Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of Women.—
The annual general meeting of this Association was held on 2d
April—the Very Rev. Principal Caird in the chair. Among the
speakers were Professors Veitch, Ramsay, and Cowan ; Dr. J. A.
Campbell of Stracathro (one of the assessors of the University) ;
James Campbell, Esq. of Tillichewan ; the Rev. Dr. Jamieson, and
the Rev. Marcus Dods. The Hon. Secretary, Mr. Grahame of Auld-
house, read the annual report, giving an account of the classes held
during the past year, and a sketch of the work proposed for session
1879-80. Courses of lectures were delivered as follows:—Philo¬
sophy of Religion, the Very Rev. Principal Caird ; Mental Philo¬
sophy, Prof. Veitch; Physiology, Prof. M'Kendrick; Natural
Pliilosophy, Prof. George Forbes (of Anderson's College); German
Literature, Mr. Mungo W. M'Callum, (Luke Fellow); Practical
Education in Music (with pianoforte illustrations), Herr Pauer. Tu¬
torial classes were also held in the rooms of the Association, New
Public Halls, for Latin, Mathematics, English Language and Litera¬
ture, Theory of Music, and Domestic Economy. The attendance at
the lectures and classes was good, the number of working students
being larger than that of last year, and the work better done. The
number of students in the Correspondence classes (for preparation
for the Glasgow University Local Examinations, or for assistance in
private study) increased greatly, and classes were formed for ladies
in Ireland in connection with the Irish Intermediate Education
Examinations; these classes will be continued, with an additional
number of subjects, next session. Twenty-two Bursaries were offered
by the Association for competition at the Glasgow University Local
Examinations, besides prizes for the Society of Arts Examinations in
tlie theory and practice of music. A library of nearly 400 books
of reference on the subjects taught in the lectures and classes of the
Association has been formed, and a reading-room for ladies established.
The  lectures   proposed   for   session  1879-80  are — Logic, Prof.
33^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Veitch ; Moral Philosophy, Prof. Edward Caird ; Greek Literature,
Prof. Jebb ; English Literature, Prof. Nichol; Fiench Literature,
M. Monnier ; Physical Geography, Prof. Young ; History, Rev. Prof.
Lindsay (F. C. College); Chemistry, Dr. Ramsay, Assistant Professor
in the University ; Perspective, Prof. James Thomson; and ' Cha¬
racteristic Sketches of Great Musicians,' Herr Pauer. The tutorial
classes will be Latin, Mathematics, and Theory of Music. Classes
for instruction by coiTespoiidence will be held for the subjects pre¬
scribed in the Glasgow University Local Examinations for the
common subjects and the Junior and Senior Certificates, also for the
Higher Examinations for Women.
A scheme is in course of preparation by the Glasgow University
Local Examinations Board for Higher Examinations for Women
similar to those of Oxford and Cambridge, and open to all Scotland.
The first Examination will be held in May 1880, and preparatoiy
instruction for these Examinations will be included in the work of
the Association Classes, whether taught orally or by correspondence.
Examinations were held at the end of April in connection with the
Association by the London Society of Arts in the Theory, and on the
15th May and following daj'S in the Practice, of Music, both of which
were well attended. The examiner in the practice of music, vocal
and instrumental, was Mr. W. A. Barrett, Mus. Bac. Oxon., and
Vicar Choral of St. Paul's. These Examinations will take place also
next year, and it is probable that, in addition to those for the first
and second class certificates, higher examinations will be added for
iin honours certificate, and also special examinations for a teacher',s
diploma.
On the 21st, 22d, and 23d May, the Local Examinations were held
in Glasgow University, the number of candidates being nearly 400,
and of centres 11.
The next session of the Association will begin on 3d November.
Notices to CoriTSpontimts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editoks, Ladies' EdinhurgU Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/h/Z postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Societj- will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The Editors will be happy to receive further contributions or
suggestions for the Series on ' Country Subjects and Pursuits.'
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, July o, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m. As is our
custom in July, the usual Debate will give place to a discussion, of
which the subject will be—' Where shall we go ?'
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 337
(ITountra Subjects anli pursuits.
VIII.—GAEDENING.
Having formerly written upon Botany as affording a pleasur¬
able study and pursuit for those of our sex living in the
country, we now take up our parable in favour of its kindred
occupation, Gardening, the enjoyment of which we cannot
but think is greatly enhanced by a knowledge, however
slight, of our former subject. As we remarked in reference
to Botany, so we may say of Gardening, that it affords one
of the purest of human delights; for the study of nature
taust interest, whether Me contemplate her in her wildest
aspect, or when compelled by man to assume somewhat
artificial conditions. The mind is enlarged, surprised, and
charmed in turns by considering her display of beauties, and,
to q^uote the words of our grand blind poet—
* In contemplation of created things,
By steps we may ascend to God.'
The cultivation of even a small garden gives a vast field of
observation,—it creates an unceasing object of interest, and
renders home more and more pleasing,—for in our own
garden we ever find some novelty in bud or flower, and
a never-ending exercise for our taste in planning new
arrangements and combinations.
The love of gardening, we believe, first arose in England
in the reign of Edward III.; and most of our readers are
probably acquainted with the description of ' a garden faire '
given by King James I. of Scotland in his volume of poems
entitled' The King's Quhair' (or King's Little Book), penned
during his imprisonment in Windsor Castle. Henry VIII.
formed the famous gardens at Nonsuch early in his reign,
and from that time forward, under the auspices of succeed¬
ing sovereigns, flower-gardening progressed with rapid strides
—assuming different styles at different periods, tiU in the
present day it has almost reached perfection in its deft
combination of the natural and artificial.
Floriculture now-a-days has become one of the greatest
occupations of British ladies, and may be said to form one
of their accomplishments, at least of those who are content
to keep within the proper sphere of women—home, and
from those who cannot find pleasure in a garden we turn
with pity tinged with contempt.
Many ladies object to gardening on the score of their
No. 56.—August 1879. Y
338 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
inability to bear the fatigue of stooping, but we would
remark that, in our advocacy of this amusement, we do not
insist on the necessity of our friends performing every part
of a gardener's duty with their own hands ; intelligent and
tasteful superintendence will render a garden quite as much
the owner's work as if she placed each root and scattered
each seed with her own fingers; and those plants which
it may be wished to personally tend, may be raised to a
convenient level by placing them in wooden baskets, etc.,
ornamented with bark or cones. These can be formed with
old barrels or boxes, and are easily renewed at small expense ;
to our taste, they are more appropriate to a damp climate
such as ours, than marble or terra-cotta vases, which soon
acquire unsightly stains, and patches of green or black
mould.
A lady should have light tools for her own use in garden¬
ing, of which no great number are required. A spade and
fork, or better still, one of the American tools, spade and
fork combined, a small and a moderately large trowel, a
pruning knife, light syringe, and a watering-pot with long
spout, also a small hoe and a rake, will be quite sufficient.
In laying out a garden, regard must of course be had to
the style of house to which it belongs, and also to whether
it is to contain a greenhouse or not; as on this latter fact
will depend whether the flower-borders are to be arranged
for ' bedding out,' or merely for annuals and perennials.
We would strongly deprecate the creation of any sort of
summer-house, having always found such buildings, if
buildings they can be called, mere harbours for insects of
every description, troublesome to keep up and seldom used,
except, perhaps, as a sort of lumber-room. Seats disposed
in spots of various aspect, so that sun or shade, a breeze or
shelter therefrom at different hours and seasons, can be
obtained as desired, are, however, most advisable.
For a lady's gardening, the beds should be rather small,
so that she can easily reach the centre of each, in order to
pull out intrusive weeds, tliin the annuals, and prune the
roses,—we ourselves are of opinion that such beds always
have the most pleasing effect when cut out of a turfy lawn,—
but when set in gravel with tiny box-edgings, there is the
advantage, on a damp or wet day, of being able to attend
to them with less detriment to skirts, and no fear of cold
from damp feet, though, when engaged in gardening, boots
should be worn of sufficient thickness to reduce this fear to
a minimum.
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 339
We do not propose to recommend any particular style of
garden to our readers ; but we strongly advise them to have
roses and carnations in abundance, these flowers being
especially suited to the personal care of members of our
sex—a care they will richly and amply repay, as the more
carefully and judiciously they are pruned, watered, and
tended, the more liberally will they offer their beautiful
and perfumed blossoms; nor will we give names of any,
however great favourites they may be of our own, inasmuch
as the particular variety or plant which prospers and
flourishes best in one soil or aspect, may prove a failure or at
best but an indifferent bloomer in another.
Here we would also srive a word of advice as to the selection
O
of plants; in order to have fine and satisfactory results, always
cultivate those that seem to take the most kindly to your
locality. We have seen much disappointment ensue on the
endeavour to rear some tender specimen, which, after all, only
produced perhaps one or two really good flowers. Many
amateur gardeners, for instance, strive in Scotland to rear the
' Marshal Niel' rose to grow and blossom out of doors,
simply because they know it is difficult to do so. In perhaps
one instance out of three or four they succeed, but scarcely
ever obtain a handsome show of blooms ; and if a tolerably
large number adorn the plant one summer, the next year pro¬
bably produces none, and at last comes a severe winter such
as the past season, which destroys the bush entirely, whereas,
had its owner turned her attention instead to the ' Gloire de
Dijon,' which grows luxuriantly and will flower abundantly
almost anywhere, much time and trouble would have been
saved, and ' a thing of beauty ' be still possessed as ' a joy for
ever,' instead of a melancholy bundle of shrivelled leaves
and dead branches, which is hastily thrust out of sight.
We would therefore impress on our readers always to select
such varieties of whatever plants they ' go in for,' to use a
slang phrase, as show a liking for the particular locality
with which they have to do; it is far better to have one
fine specimen of some common flower, than half-a-dozen
sickly or merely moderately good individuals of a rarer or
less hardy description.
Some may argue that floriculture per se is a compara¬
tively useless occupation, but we deny this. We are told
that ' he who makes one blade of grass grow where none
grew before, is a benefactor to the human race and to the
world ;' how much more, then, he or she who causes a spot
that has been a wild tangle of weeds to become a miniature
340 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Eden ? It is true, the blade of grass may multiply and
become food in the shape of hay, while the roses or
carnations, however numerous, can never yield a like return,
except that the bees may gather honey from them, which
in its turn may be eaten by man; but beauty has its uses
in softening hearts and raising thoughts to heaven. Pure
utilitarianism would render this world a cold and dreary
region, with little of the rejoicing that leads to thankfulness
among its denizens.
We know of scarcely any pleasure so pure as that of
finding on a spring morning the first violet nestling beneath
its leaves ; and how delightful it is on going forth, amid the
twittering of birds and soft rustling of the leaves, to enter
our garden and spy a delicate gleam of colour showing over
the spot where in autumn we hid some new bulb beneath
the rich brown mould! how charming to plunge our hands
amid the densely crowded leaves of the lily of the valley,
and discover the first fragrant spike of pearly bells! In
summer, too, how cheering at the close of a hot day, on
approaching our pet rosebush, to behold the bud we have
been anxiously watching for weeks,—and carefully brushing,
to guard against its enemies the ' aphides ' or green-tlies,—
no longer a bud but a glowing crimson globe, into which it
is delicious to plunge our heated faces and revel in the attar-
perfume !
Late autumn and winter are dreary seasons in the garden,
but much may be done in preparation for spring; and the
empty parterres may be rendered less desolate-looking by
planting them with coloured kale, seedling rhododendrons,
or tiny shrubs, between which may be placed the bulbs
which are to make them a glowing map of rainbow lines
early in the year.
We do not intend here to say much on the subject of
indoor or window gardening, that being more a town than
a country amusement, but any one who possesses the true
spirit of a gardener, will most likely turn her attention to
those plants which can be grown in her drawing-room or
boudoir, when there is no longer occupation out of doors for
her floricultural propensities. We have written these lines
more especially for those whose garden establishment is
small; for such ladies as have greenhouses and gardeners
' galore,' the pleasures we have described are much dimin¬
ished, for there is no such tyrant as the 'head gardener,'
who objects to his domain being invaded by ' the ladies,'
who, he complains, ' are sure to pick the very flowers he
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 341
wants to keep for the show.' But, even under the iron rule
of such an important individual, the mistress can generally
extract much amusement and pleasure from a garden of
which she usually contrives to appropriate some nook for
her own especial delectation, and where she, as well as her less
richly dowered sister, will find that in truth
' There is a lesson in each flower,
A story in each stream and bower ;
On every herb on which you tread
Are written words which, rightly read,
Will lead you from earth's fragrant sod
To hope, and holiness, and God.'
L. H. EOGERSON.
IX.—GARDEN GAMES IN GENERAL, AND LAWN
TENNIS IN PARTICULAR.
If you lived in our neighbourhood, gentle reader, you
would not be surprised at receiving a post-card with only
the name of a house written on it, and below the mystic
words, ' Tea and tennis at such a day and hour,' legibly
inscribed, for such are our simple habits. Of course we con¬
sider those informal gatherings highly superior to the immense
garden parties got up at great trouble and expense, with
tents for dancing and impromptu concerts, and with every
sort of game put up new for the occasion, and which seem
to me inventions of the Evil One to show how much money
may be spent in trying to amuse people without attaining
that laudable object.
People run into sets, and nobody cares to do anything
but wander listlessly about the grounds criticizing the
arrangements. Those who do condescend to play, do so
more to please their hostess than from any hope of enjoyment
accruing to themselves. We can understand how this bad
state of things may exist, even in a county that is not
exceptionally ill-natured. The presence alone of some
hundreds of spectators, to whom every one is known at least
by sight, is sufficient to make some people shy. One feels
that ordinary skill is not sufficient for an occasion of this kind,
and that it would be presumption on one's own part to play
knowing that another, who can do it so much better, has
already refused. With this may be mixed the less worthy
feeling of not desiring to add to the existing spectacles, and
become oneself a butt for the exercise of the wits of one's
so-called friends.    To be content knowingly to amuse one's
342 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
neighbours in that way, requires uncommon strength of
mind, or excessive good nature; to do so unconsciously is,
alas ! the fate of all of us, more or less.
When entertaining one's friends degenerates into the
mere display of one's wealth, or taste, or superiority in any
way, true hospitality vanishes, and it all ends in vanity and
vexation of spirit. Our proffer of ' tea and tennis ' has the
advantage of showing what to expect, and what is expected
of one in return; and whoever objects to tea, and does not
care for tennis, need not attend. I must say the announce¬
ment generally has the effect of drawing together all the
muscular Christians, male and female, of the neighbourhood.
When I see the enthusiasm of the rising generation over
this game, I cannot help dropping a tear of regret to the
memory of my old friend croquet, once so popular. Archery
was fast dying out; although a very graceful and interesting
pursuit, it required more space and time for practice than
was at the disposal of many people, so croquet was regarded
as a veritable godsend. How well I remember our joy and
congratulation over its importation, not twenty years ago,
and how we wondered to each other how the monotony of a
country existence had been endured in the days when
croquet was not. To prophesy then that its reign would
not last undisputed for ten years, would have been to draw
down on our devoted heads the scorn and derision of all who
could hold a mallet. *Si'c transit gloria mundi. Another
ten years and we too may be considered old-fashioned and
out of date by the young generation treading on our heels,
who in this fast age of ours will not allow us time to grow
old gracefully.
Passionate liking seems a sure prelude to weariness and
speedy forgetfulness ; for bowls, which never has been a craze,
has never been completely out of fashion, and is an admir¬
able game for the elderly and sedate to whom tennis is an
impossibility. I see even old croquet-players preferring it
to their ancient idol, and with a sigh over the fickleness of
mankind, I turn toward the tennis ground.
But ' away with melancholy,' my regrets for the loss of
old friends has fortunately never interfered with my enjoy¬
ment of new ; and I do like lawn tennis, although I am sure
I do not know why, for it has none of the advantages of its
predecessor in popular favour. In the first place, it is
essentially a selfish game, for it can only be enjoyed by the
young and strong; in the second, it only occupies four
persons at a time; in the third, the heat is an objection to
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 343
it as a summer game, and in winter it cannot be played at
all outside, unless on gravel courts; in the fourth, it requires
too great an amount of energy to be graceful; in the fifth, it
depends for success altogether on physical prowess, for no
powers of finesse can counteract an unsure eye or unsteady
hand.
Yet there is something very fascinating about it in spite
of these drawbacks. For one thin", it is almost as amusing
to watch as to play, and a game is over so quickly that the
interest never flags. Ladies find it a great saving in mental
wear and tear, not to mention money; for they have not to
consider what to put on, and I do not think even the most
extravagant of girls indulges in half-a-dozen tennis dresses.
The dress itself requires to be short, and looks best in
inexpensive materials; flowing silks and velvets only entail
on their wearer perpetual annoyance. The beautifully
embroidered aprons now worn are a legitimate field for the
display of feminine taste and industry. Some of them are
quite artistic with their groups of real-looking flowers or
autumn leaves wreathed round. I am afraid if any of my
readers expected a learned dissertation on the rules and
aim of the game, with a short account of its origin, and
hoped to have all the knotty points gone thoroughly into,
the reasons for and against put in order, and finally the law
laid down incontrovertibly, they will be disappointed. A
recapitulation of the rules to those who know tennis well
would be simply a bore, and to those who know it not at all
would be unintelligible; besides, there have been so many
new rules added lately, that there is now almost as great a
diversity of opinion on what the rules are, as there used to
be in croquet, with the same result that each ground holds
its own. Consequently every rule I laid down as absolute,
invariable and unalterable as the laws of the Medes and
Persians, would provoke a discussion or a denial from some
quarter or another, so for my own sake I refrain. To those
who really desire information on the subject irrespective of
a wish to argue, I refer to The Lavjs of Lawn Tennis as
adopted hi/ the Marylebone Cricket Club, and the All England.
Croqv,et and Lawn Tennis Club, which is considered to be the
best manual yet published.
With the general aspect of the game most people are
familiar; the courts chalked out on the green grass, the net
suspended between the gaily painted poles, and the four
players with their rackets in their hands, who dive, and
plunge, and run, and jump after an India-rubber ball, and
344 1^^'-^ Ladies' Ediiibtirgh Magazine.
count in a manner incomprehensible to the ignorant on¬
lookers, the same movement never apparently leading to the
same result.
To the cynical, it is always a pleasing sight to see people
making fools of themselves, and to those who do not play
lawn tennis the delight in it certainly seems an infatuation.
As a rule, men play much better than ladies, but there are
exceptions to every rule. The different styles of play are
very amusing to watch; among ladies the style helpless is
not uncommon. The performer on this occasion ought to be
young and pretty, and is generally embarrassed with a long
train, which is always falling down and requiring to be
pinned up again, with the assistance of her partner and any
volunteers within hearing. She aims feebly at every ball,
whether it rises within one foot of her or ten, and is equally
astonished at missing both, and at once appeals to her
partner to know the reason why. Long explanations require
to be given on the spot, in spite of the manifest impatience
of the opposite players, and she succeeds in making herself
as much the centre of attraction and interest as the fate of
the game, and is happy in the knowledge of being so. As
may be imagined, she never thoroughly grasps the full
meaning of the rules, or the best manner of catching the
balls; but she deprecates her stupidity so prettily she never
lacks willing instructors.
In strong contrast to her is the obtrusively masculine
young lady player, who apparently despises feminine charms,
and aims only at manly graces. No shrieks of triumph or
dismay are allowed to escape from her lips, no voluble
appeals for sympathy, no eager attempts to explain failures;
nor are her feet allowed to stray into skips of joy over good
shots like her companion's. With stoical indifference she
takes her shots, or misses them, as the case may be, and it is
only when the fates are pax'ticularly hard that an expletive,
generally confined to the stronger sex, sullies her red lips,
and makes the amazed spectators smile, or sigh, or stare,
according to their several dispositions.
A much more dangerous adversary, however, is the dark
player, who smilingly admits that she plays tennis and likes
it, in very much the same manner as Lady Helpless on alike
occasion. She is accoutred more like Avork, b\it that is no
criterion of merit; a tennis dress is more easily made than
a tennis player. In choosing sides, she leads people astray
by asking to be placed on the stronger one. Her first serve,
however, reveals her true character to the experienced; like
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 345
a cannon ball it comes over.the net, strikes the ground just
within the court, and rises far above the unfortunate
recipient's head. The enemy grow pale at the sight, but it
may be an accident, and breathlessly they wait for another.
This one comes lower, but with still greater force, skims the
top of the net, but lauds in the right court, and runs along
the ground defying any one but an equally expert player to
pick it up. Great horror is on two faces, and suppressed
amusement on the opposing ones, while the balls roll steadily
on; if caught at all, being either knocked down or sent out
of court by the tremendous effort required in their capture.
This player would go on triumphantly to the end of the
game if she was not very apt to send her ball into the net,
instead of over it, and thus commit suicide to the immense
relief of her opponents. Fortunately for the unlucky beings
who hold this position, such play is extremely rare.
I have observed a curious fact, that these last two styles
are not so much appreciated by the other sex as by our own,
—indeed they generally seem to prefer the helpless, or the
ordinary, good-natured style. The latter is the common type
of lady player, more eager than efficient, very willing to
learn and ready to lead the laugh against herself at her own
mistakes; but never able to judge where the ball given her
ought to fall, or the one she sends is going to land. She
never attempts science, and leaves all difficult shots to her
partner, so she seldom improves; her sole ambition is to
serve correctly, and to catch any easy ball that comes to her
hand. Her zeal and her good temper always make her a
pleasant partner, and her want of skill is no disadvantage;
for a victory sheds the more lustre on the other player,
while a defeat she at once attributes to her own bad
play.
The efforts of beginners are very amusing, and tennis
appears difficult to learn, for there is always a novice at
every party. She approaches confidently, it looks so delight¬
fully easy, and she has played at battledore and shuttlecock
successfully when a child; but when she finds the balls
have a knack of rising exactly where you least expect them,
sometimes over your head, sometimes straight in your face,
sometimes a mile away, she becomes anxious and bewildered.
The applause when at last she touches a ball but without
sending it over the net, sounds ironical, she fears she is
making herself ridiculous, and could almost swear that last
ball passed through her racket. But fortunately one is not
always a beginner,  although, like the Irishman of happy
34^ Tlie Ladies' EdinbitrgJi. Magazine.
memory, it would be an advantage, we think, to skip the first
twelve lessons of many a pursuit.
Men players may be classed under two great heads—the
capable and the incapable, and thus dismissed.
NONO.
Vi^t Storg of l^oumama.
By C. L. Johnstone.
On June 15, 1389, the Plain of Kossovo (the Ousel's Plain)
was the scene of one of the decisive battles of the world, in
which the Servians, Bosnians, Croatians, Albanians, and
Eoumanians were defeated by Sultan Bajazet, whose father,
Amurath the Conqueror, had been assassinated in the grey
of the morning before the battle began; and in 1391, the
Eoumanian Prince Mirza was finally reduced under Turkish
vassalage. At this very time the Tartar Emperor Timur of
Samarcand, commonly called Tamerlane, had extended his
power over Eussia and a great part of Asia, and was
meditating an expedition to India, which he subsequently
accomplished. He was a fanatic Mussulman, and his Arab
biographer records, with the greatest pride, the wholesale
massacres and torture of the Christian inhabitants of Eussia,
Georgia, and Armenia, evidently believing that these acts
alone would obtain for his master an exalted place in a
future world. When he heard of the victories of young
Bajazet in the Greek Empire and among its allies, he formed
a plan of union with the Ottoman Turks for the subjugation
of all Christian Europe, to render the Mahometan creed
compulsory throughout the world; but his letter proposing
this scheme was too haughty to please the conqueror, who
had just defeated the united armies of Erance, Hungary,
Bavaria, and Constantinople at Nicopolis, particularly as it
contained a claim to Syria, which Bajazet was preparing to
annex, so it was answered by a declaration of war. The
Ottomans were defeated at Angora, and Bajazet was carried
about in a cage by the victors, till, as one account goes, he
beat his brains out against the bars, while another says that
he died of apoplexy; but at any rate Western Europe was
saved from invasion, and the result of this battle probably
delayed the fall of Constantinople for fifty years.
Erom this time till the end of the last century, IMoldavia
and Wallachia, ruled by Turkish pashas who bought their
The Story of Roumania. 347
post, were as ill-governed and as much robbed by the
Turkish garrisons and officials, as the outlying provinces
of the Turkish Empire have usually been down to the
present time. During eighty years, from the middle of the
last to the beginning of the present century, sixty of these
pashas or hospodars were deposed, and twenty-five suffered
death by order of the Porte; but at the peace of Jassy
between Eussia and Turkey in 1791, the Empress Catherine
inserted an article giving her the protection of the Christian
inhabitants of those provinces, and in which the Sultan
engaged not to depose a hospodar without the consent of
Eussia.
The Moldavians and Wallachians became exactly what
grievous oppression will always make a slave; for if tyranny
produced, as a rule, fine characters in its subjects, there would
be a great deal to be said on the side of the tyrant. The
children of Israel who reproached Moses in the wilderness
for bringing them away from the flesh-pots of Egypt, and
who rebelled so frequently in the Promised Land, are a
common type of the degradation produced by servitude.
' By treaty,' wrote an English officer in 1827,' these provinces
are only tributary to the Porte, in effect they have been
abjectly enslaved and ruinously plundered. Thus the popu¬
lation has dwindled to 900,000, while under any tolerable
government they might be 15,000,000.' And the following
is the character which in 1858 Nassau Senior's Polish friend
Chrzanovski gave of the inhabitants, though it is possibly a
little coloured by the ordinary national dislike of a near
neighbour: ' Nothing can do much good to the principalities,
the peasants are mere brutes. The boyars are more corrupt
than any society that ever existed in Europe. There is no
virtue or honour in any man or in any woman. . . . Four
millions of servile peasants or shopkeepers debased by
centuries of oppression and intrigues.'
In 1805, the exertions of Pitt had brought Eussia into an
alliance with Austria to check the advance of Napoleon's
conquests. Prussia had promised to join them, but hung
back till they were defeated at Austerlitz, from jealousy of
her German rival, and then offered her friendship to France ;
but her fickle ingratitude only made Napoleon mistrust her,
and he ended by signing a peace with Austria, while he
began preparations for a march on Berlin. As Eussia was
connected by royal marriages and many years of amicable
intercourse with Prussia, he considered it essential to
embarrass her with another war to prevent her from aiding
348 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
his enemy, and for this purpose induced Sultan Selim III.
to break the treaty with Eussia, by deposing and beheading
the Hospodar of Moldavia and Wallachia, a Greek of eighty-
five years of age ; and at the same time to seize upon all
Eussian merchant vessels trading in Turkish ports. Selim
followed this up by sending a Turkish army to lay waste
Eoumania, whereupon Eussia declared war. It was a most
inopportune moment; for Great Britain was at that very
time pressing the young Emperor Alexander I. to come to
Prussia's aid, and being of an impulsive and generous nature,
he at once obeyed the demand. But Turkey was then a
powerful empire, and the division of his armies, rendered
necessary by two wars in different quarters, spoiled both
campaigns. The Servians, under a brave peasant leader,
Czerny George, however, assisted the Eussians, and the
Turks were at length compelled to raise the sieges of
Bucharest and Belgrade, and were driven across the Drina
and the Danube. The grateful citizens of Jassy presented
the Eussian general with a gold-hilted sabre for having saved
their town from a Turkish assault by his speedy advance.
Napoleon drew back from all his promises to the Sultan,
although the diversion caused by the Turkish war led
mainly to the exhaustion of the Eussian armies in Germany,
and induced the Czar to listen favourably to a proposal for
peace with France, which was ratified in the Treaty of Tilsit
in 1807. But as England was bent on continuing the war,
the British Cabinet sent General Wilson to try and separate
Eussia from her new compact. 'England,'said this envoy
to the Prime Minister of Eussia, 'is desirous of the military
power of Eussia being augmented to the highest degree of
which it is capable, whereas France is anxious to reduce its
present strength. It was understood that Moldavia and
Wallachia were provinces added to Eussia in the event of
France obtaining important stations in Greece, which acquisi¬
tion would for ever destroy Eussia's influence there. . . .
England never would propose the partition of Turkey, but
nevertheless, if any arrangements could be made between
Austria and Eussia on the basis of occupying and exchang¬
ing those provinces, which arrangement would secure the
sincere alliance of both countries, England never would
make that a cause of quarrel which proved the bond of a
union she desired so much to establish. The same principle
of a liberal and friendly policy would induce England to
protect the interests of Eussia on the side of Greece, of which
her  present  engagements obliged the  abandonment,' etc.,
TJie Story of Rotimania. 349
Russia having made over the Ionian Isles, which she had
possessed for several years, to France. But the negotiations
failed, as Alexander I. would not break faith with his new
ally. In 1811, when Eussia had occupied Eoumania for two
years, she proposed a peace with Turkey, who rejected it on
the score that Servia was a rebel, not a belligerent, as the
Eussians insisted; and Napoleon made fresh overtures to
the Sultan to assist him in carrying on the war into the
heart of Eussia, in which case Turkey was to be recompensed
with the Eussian provinces on the Black Sea. Mahmoud
took offence because Napoleon proposed to him to lead the
Turkish army in person, being ignorant that for several
generations it had been contrary to Turkish etiquette for the
Sultan to appear in the battle-field. This gave Eussia
another chance of making peace, which was essential to
her, as Napoleon was on the point of crossing her frontier
with 600,000 men; and the British Government again
sent General Wilson to Eussia, but this time by way
of Constantinople and to avert the dismemberment of
Turkey.
Wilson arrived at the Grand Vizier's camp at Shumla at
the beginning of August 1812, and found to his chagrin that
a treaty had already been signed between Eussia and Turkey,
providing for the independence of Servia, which for the
present was to be garrisoned by Eussian not Turkish troops,
to prevent its occupation by the French who were in
Dalmatia. Eussia was to keep the portion of Bessarabia at
the mouth of the Danube, but to restore Eoumania nominally
to Turkey, although no Turkish troops were to be stationed
there, and she was only to pay a small tribute. But Wilson,
armed with the authority of the British Government, strongly
protested against the occupation of Servia, and tried hard,
though in vain, to induce the Eussian plenipotentiary to
give up the mouth of the Danube, assuring him that it would
gain him ' the affection of a prince (the savage Mahmoud)
endowed with splendid qualities;' while the inhabitants of
Bessarabia, being Christians, and also including many refugees
from Wallachia, implored the Eussians not to abandon them.
As it was, directly Tchichagof had withdrawn his forces front
Servia, Turkey broke the article of the treaty with regard to
her, and which secured to her people a universal amnesty and
self-government, and that no Turk should enter any part of
the principality except as garrisons in the fortresses. The
Sultan sent an army to lay waste the country,—men, women,
and children were impaled and burned alive; and the Servian
350 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
leader killed his own father to prevent him from falling into
the hands of the Turks.
Eussia was engaged in a death struggle with France, and
no other Power was willing to come to their aid; so, to save
their lives and properties, the upper class in Western Servia
or Bosnia, as it is now called, adopted Mahometanism, and
their grandchildren are at present the fiercest opponents of
Christianity.
When a Servian deputation arrived at the British Embassy
in Vienna during the Congress in 1814, and showed how the
Treaty of Bucharest had been disregarded by the Turks, it
was told to apply for redress to Eussia; and when the
Emperor Alexander I. asked the British minister to join him
in urging the Porte to act with more moderation to the
Servians, the British minister said that the Powers must
first agree to guarantee the dominions of the Porte. No
Slavonic committees then existed to bear the blame of
insurrections in Turkey, which were nevertheless rife from
1814 to 1820, when the execution of the Servian leader,
Czerny George, with circumstances of great cruelty by the
Turks, roused up Moldavia and AVallachia; and their patiiot
chief Ipsilanti was extremely disappointed when the Czar
refused his offer to annex Eoumania to Eussia, and disowned
the proceedings altogether. The Greeks in the Morea rose at
the same time, and the Turks called on Eussia to deny a
refuge to those who were pouring into her territories, but was
answered that, so long as the Turkish Empire lasted, the
Czar would grant an asylum to any Christian who demanded
it, on which an embargo was placed on Eussian goods passing
the Bosphorus.
Seven years were passed in diplomatic negotiations,
Austria striving hard to keep Turkey intact, and to induce
the British Cabinet to permit no aid to be offered to the
insurgents. In the meanwhile the Emperor Alexander I.
died, wearied out and distracted between the efforts of his
subjects to induce him to assist the Greeks with arms, and
of Europe to prevent him from moving in the affair at all;
and he was succeeded by his brother the late Emperor Nicolas,
who within two years was engaged in a war witli Turkey.
Tlie Eussians advanced as far as Adrianople, but faithful to a
promise not to eater Constantinople, they concluded peace
within a few days' march of it. The Duke of Wellington,
though opposed to the war throughout, lest assisting
insurgents should lead other discontented nations to follow
their example, particularly our subjects (as they were then)
The Story of Routnania. 351
in the Ionian Isles, still owned that he wished the Eussians
had broken their promise and taken Constantinople, in which
case there would have been an end of the Eastern Question
and the Ottoman Empire. 'We must construct a Greek
Empire, and give it Prince Frederick of Orange, or Prince
Charles of Prussia, and no Power of Europe ouglit to take
anything for himself excepting the Emperor of Russia a sum
for his expenses,' he wrote in anticipation of this event. The
treaty of peace made Wallachia and Moldavia independent of
Turkey, except by the payment of an annual tribute.
In 1839 Napoleon III. wrote in his Idecs: ' At the
present day I see only two governments fulfil their
providential mission, the two Colossi at the extremities of
the Old World and the New. It is from Eussia alone that
the East can receive the ameliorations that await it.'
In 1853, Napoleon III., having seized upon the French
throne, found it necessary to support his power by a foreign
war. He first made overtures for an alliance with Eussia,
telling her chargd d'affaires that he had always held the
Emperor Nicolas in much respect, and considered him a
relation, as his daughter was married to a Beauharnais, his
first cousin; but on the Czar rejecting it rather haughtily,
saying he preferred an English alliance, and referring to the
Treaty of Vienna, which bound the European Powers never
to acknowledge a Bonaparte on the throne of France,
Napoleon III. made the same offer to England, and it was
accepted at once. From this moment he endeavoured to
draw Turkey into difficulties with Eussia, and then sent the
French fleet into the Dardanelles ' to protect French interests,'
which were not threatened unless at the holy places in
Jerusalem, whereupon Nicolas sent his army to occupy
Eoumania as a counter-move, fearing that a renewal of the
policy of Napoleon I. in 1806 was the new French Emperor's
true object. This led to the Crimean war. On the eve
of its declaration by England and France, Alexander II.,
who was then heir to the Eussian throne, signed a document
at the top of a long list of noble names, entreating his
father, for the sake of peace, to withdraw his forces from
Eoumania, as Austria, who had undertaken the office of a
mediator between the Powers, had laid this down as the act
required to preserve it, and after some hesitation, when the
allies had already entered Turkey, the Czar consented, and
fully imagined that it would avert any further hostile
measures. But the battle of Sinope, which it was the fashion
to call ' a massacre,' by which  the Eussians destroyed the
352 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Turkish fleet, and prevented it from reinforcing the army of
irregulars who had begun to ravage Eussian Armenia before
the declaration of war, had caused gj'eat excitement in
England and France, coming as it did directly after a pro¬
clamation that no Eussian war-vessel must leave its harbour,
even to feed or protect its own troops ; and the abandonment
of Eoumania, which was at once occupied by the Austrians
as the allies of England and France, enabled us to land our
armies in the Crimea without fear of our communications
being intercepted by the Eussians. Eussia, indeed, has never
forgiven Austria that rather treacherous act, and declared
she did her more harm by lier secret alliance with England
than if she had been an open and more active foe to the
Czar.
The Austrians treated Eoumania like a conquered country,
lived at free quarters, and were the original source of the
great national debt which at present weighs down its
prosperity. ' Austria has succeeded in making even Eussia
regretted,' said a Franco-Pole to Senior in 1855. ' I have
correspondents in Jassy and Bucharest. They tell me that
nothing has so prepared the people for incorporation with
Eussia as their experience of Austrian rule. The pressure
of Eussia is heavy but gradual, the Austrians are brutal and
impatient.' ' Austria,' wrote Bismarck, ' hoped to lame
Eussia in 1855, and secure the best half of Turkey, though
she had been saved by Eussia in 1848.' Six months after
the signature of peace in 1856, she stiU clung to Eoumania,
and it required the strong remonstrance of the allies to make
her quit it, and they had already, at her request, inserted a
clause in the treaty, that the two provinces shoidd never be
united; but this clause was broken by Napoleon III., one of
the parties to it, from dislike to Austria, in 1858. A few
years afterwards. Prince Charles of HohenzoUern, a Eomanist
scion of the royal house of Prussia, offered himself for elec¬
tion during a revolutionary crisis, and was chosen as the
Hospodar of the two provinces by the cabinet, under the
belief that it would secure for them the goodwill of Prussia.
Eoumania, like many young states, overrates her own im¬
portance, and because the banks of the Danube were used
as a penal settlement by the ancient Eomans, prides herself
on her Latin origin, making her very superior to her
Slavonian neighbours. She showed no sympathy for Servia
or Bulgaria in 1876, and secretly offered her alliance to
Great Britain and to Austria, if they declared war against
Eussia,  on  condition   that  they would  acknowledge   her
The Story of Roiimania. 353
independence of Turkey. When Eussia finally declared Avar
against Turkey, she did not treat Eoumania as what she
was legally, part of the enemy's country, but tried to induce
her not to mobilize her army, which she was aware might, in
case of complications with Austria, be used most disastrously
against herself, for her sole communication with Bulgaria
was by the one line of railway through Moldavia, which
might have been cut any day. Prince Charles, anxious to
display military talent, insisted on mobilizing his army, and
then the Czar, who had lent him cannon and other war
material, and afterwards gave him the two first ships
captured by the Eussians from the Turks, entreated him to
cross into Bulgaria and assist at Plevna, from the fear of
some treachery, which was not unfounded; for Eoumanian
spies swarmed through the Eussian camp, and gave every
information to the Turks, and their signals were always
ready at Giurgevo to acquaint the Turkish garrison at
Eustchuk with meditated manoeuvres or attacks, while a
telegraph conveyed any information of that nature direct
to Shumla and Varna. But the Eoumanians fought with
courage at Plevna, for which they fondly hoped that Eussia
would make over to them a useful piece of her own territory,
instead of claiming back, as she had already stated that she
should, the slip of land on the Danube which she had
yielded in 1856. That slip of land had, in fact, been
garrisoned by the Turks, and a part of it had never been
handed over to Eoumania, whose officials surveyed the
Dobrudscha six months before the Treaty of San Stefano,
and came to the conclusion that it would be a very good
exchange; and the subsequent difficulties that have arisen
about it, seem to have been put forward in the hope of
obtaining both. Poor Eoumania forgot that in the eyes of
all Europe, except Eussia, she was a province of Turkey, till
the Treaty of San Stefano set her free, and she was
grievously offended at the arrangement being made between
Eussia and Turkey, instead of having a direct voice in the
negotiation as a belligerent herself. Turkey would never,
however, have consented to this, as her bitterest pill was the
success of her rebellious vassal; and an eye-witness observed
that at the taking of Plevna, the wounded commander,
Osnian Pasha, looked highly pleased when complimented
by the Czar and the Eussian officers, but showed mingled
indignation and contempt when the handsome Prince
Charles came forward to offer his hand.
The large sums of money which the Eussians have expended
No. 56.—August 1879. , 2
354 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
in Roumania had quite enriched the principality, where there
are now current 100,000,000 silver rubles; but she was
foolish enough to keep her army on an expensive war-footing
till after the Treaty of Berlin, hoping that her services might
be humbly asked by a great Western Power, and her indig¬
nation knew no bounds when her independence was only
granted by the Congress on condition that she altered a
domestic law, and when Lord Beaconsfield even suggested
that she should undergo the humiliation of paying a capita¬
lized tribute to Turkey. However, in this matter Russia
stood her friend; and if she will now turn her sword into a
ploughshare, and give up all idea of increasing her territory
at Austria's expense (for she once owned Transylvania), she
may yet become a prosperous and respected state, and no
power will then grudge her independence. ' The attempt,'
said Guizot in 1860, ' to preserve the integrity of the rotten
Turkish Empire, is an attempt to resist nature. The longer
it lasts, the greater will be the waste of men, and money,
and diplomacy, but it must eventually fall.' But the story
of Roumania shows that national gratitude hardly lasts
through a generation, so it will be our own fault if the heirs
of Turkey, whether Greeks or Slavonians, are ever made the
mere tools of Russian ambition or aggression as opposed to
our interests.
S^raitslatcti from Wxx^t*
The Lotus flower is shrinking
Away from the burning sun.
With drooping head and slumb'rous,
Waiting till day is done.
Her paramour, the moonbeam,
Awakens her with his light.
And her sinless flower features
Are unveiled before his sight.
She blows, and glows, and gazes
Through the perfumed air on high;
Pain-thrilled she weeps and trembles,
Lost in loving ecstasy.
DuM^.
fc)
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 355
V^z Beggar of Capo tii fHonte: a STale of Sixt2=one.
By the Author or ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTER XII.
CONCETTA, once more at liberty, retired to the poor little
apartment assigned to her, and spent the greatest part of the
night in revolving every possible and impossible connection
of the names of Ciprani and Garibaldi which could have
reference to the evident grief of Claudia. She resolved to
watch narrowly every word that fell from the lips of Ercole,
and endeavoured to steel herself to bear with calmness any
fresh insult offered by him, and also to avoid, if possible,
giving him an opportunity of meeting her away from the
dwellings. In reviewing the events of the last month, she
thought she could discover, in the frequent absences of
Matteo, and his long conferences with Claudia on each
return, a clue to the circumstance of Ercole's having come
to this desert. That Filippo had experienced some reverse,
she no longer doubted, and it seemed probable tliat, in con¬
sequence of Matteo's being unable to leave him, Eilippo had
despatched Ercole to apprise Claudia of his failure.
Ever since the strange scene she had witnessed in the
convent at Reggio, Concetta was convinced that her surmise
had been correct with regard to the double calling of Filippo ;
that he was both contrabandist and political conspirator,
in which latter capacity it was not improbable he was known
to Garibaldi. She also thought it likely that Ciprani had
suggested to her father, that the man who had been the
principal agent in carrying off his daughter might be connected
with, if not the actual leader of, the reactionary party, who
had so long defied Garibaldi's search, though he was known
to be concealed somewhere on the Sicilian coast. It seemed
also to explain much that she had never been able to com¬
prehend in the conduct of Matteo. That he had assumed
the character of the Beggar of Capo di Monte, to gain an
insight into her daily life, and so to further the plan of
carrying her off, she had long been persuaded, but what were
his relations with Filippo she could not yet understand.
That there must be some heavy obligation to Filippo which
bound him to his destinies, she believed, if not, as she some¬
times fancied, a tie of relationship with Claudia. Whatever
it was, it was clear they were involved in the same perils,
35^ T^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and had the same interests at stake. Matteo's behaviour to
herself led her to believe he had been an unwilling actor in
her capture, and that some strong fear, or perhaps stronger
vow, alone prevented his favouring her escape. This un¬
acknowledged sympathy towards her had been one great
element in saving her from the despair that might have other¬
wise arisen from the seeming hopelessness of her condition.
When tempted to lose all hope of deliverance, she recalled
Matteo's voluntary promise of saving her at the expense of his
life, if such must needs be. It was strange that she placed
such confidence in a man who evidently had no scruples in
employing deceit and falsehood in his intercourse with others,
yet so it was, and this promise, under Providence, was the
anchor of her hopes, and gave her power to wait with patience
the fulfilment of his word. This, too, was the secret of her
renewed health and spirits, which had otherwise failed her.
With the sanguine nature of youth, she looked forward to
some sudden event which should restore her to her beloved
father and Carlotta; and now that her hope seemed about
to be realized, her buoyant spirit gave colour to her cheek,
and elasticity to her step. Ercole regarded her with mingled
astonishment and admiration. Could this be the languid,
drooping girl he had seen at La Cava ? He determined to
watch her narrowly, and had Paolo or Matteo been present,
he might have suspected that her beauty had won on their
stern natures, and they had betrayed their trust.
Concetta was soon aware that she was undergoing a
searching scrutiny from Ercole, and tried to subdue all out¬
ward signs of the new feeling that animated her bosom.
Maddalena, who was too young to conceal her feelings of
disappointment, made Concetta aware of Ercole's intention
of quitting the rocks that afternoon, to return, as he said, to
Eeggio. She Avas very unhappy at the thought of losing her
lover so soon, though she confessed that he had not been so
tender towards her as at other times. Could it be that he
admired someone more than herself? She looked keenly
at Concetta as she asked this indirect question, but the
implied suspicion fell harmlessly on the latter, who showed
no signs of confusion, and Maddalena was forced to find
some other reason for Ercole's indifference. If it was not
admiration, what was it that made him ask so many ques¬
tions about their new domestic, for on the first opportunity
he had had of being alone with Maddalena, he had artfully
turned the conversation on the girl. With the cunning of an
older head, he had drawn forth every particular respecting
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 357
Concetta since her first coming to the rocks, but in all her
relation he could find no reason for suspecting either Paolo
or Matteo of having broken faith to Filippo. He determined
on speaking to her alone, even if obliged to return to the
rocks without the knowledge of Claudia. He had conceived
a passion for the girl, which every obstacle seemed but to
increase, and he secretly vowed to sacrifice all his hopes of
plunder, and even his allegiance to Filippo and his cause,
rather than relinquish his pursuit.
We have said that Filippo, accompanied by Paolo, had
been absent more than a month, and yet no mention was
made of their return. If Claudia had any expectation of
this, she carefully concealed it. Maddalena was always
more irritable when her father was away, for there was a
monotony in their life during his absence that wearied her
young spirit. She would willingly have risked much of her
comfort to share in the excitement of his journeys by land
and sea, for the love of adventure seemed inherent in her
nature. Her whole conversation with Concetta was com¬
posed of the stirring incidents of their lives before they had
sought refuge in that deserted region. Concetta, to her
.surprise, gathered from Maddalena's history that Italy was
not their native country, that her father had fallen into some
great trouble when a young man, and was obliged to leave his
country, and that her Aunt Livia had gone with him to share
his exile. Her parents had had two children besides herself,
but they died young, and before she could remember; and
Claudio and jMatteo, she added, did not join Filippo and Livia
immediately, but when her father came back from his tem¬
porary home, her mother and Matteo followed him to Sicily,
where they had lived ever since.
On hearing this, Concetta had with some difficulty
refrained from betraying too great interest in this recital,
for she was eagerly watching for some word that might give
her a clue to Matleo's connection with Filippo. At length
she asked, in as careless a manner as she could assume, if
Matteo was a brother of Claudia's ? Maddalena seemed
surprised at the question, never having doubted but that
Concetta knew of the relationship between them.
' Only a lialf-brother,' she said. His father was a soldier,
and was killed fighting for his liberty; and Matt€o's mother
had afterwards married the father of Claudia, who lived at
Prague.
Concetta listened with intense interest, for she now
believed she had found at least one link of the mysterious
358 TJie Ladies' Edinbiirgh Magazine.
chain of circumstances connected with her capture. This
also probably explained Filippo's knowledge of her attach¬
ment to Kudolph, as her uncle's estates lay within a short
distance of Prague, and the family were known to be staunch
adherents of the cause of Hungarian independence. Still
jVIatteo's interest in her fate was as inexplicable as ever, and
slie racked her brain to recall any incidents of her early life
that might throw some light on his conduct. She could now
understand Pilippo's having left Claudia and his family in
charge of Matteo, and Claudia's sympathy with him, but
she felt there was some stronger reason for Matteo's evident
dread of offending him. From this period she encouraged
]\Iaddalena in her confidences, but she prudently forbore to
question her more at that time. That there was some
learful secret between Filippo and Matteo, she no longer
doubted, and she trusted to be able to discover it before the
latter should return to the rocks.
Claudia daily became more gloomy and reserved, and poor
Livia was relapsing into something of her former wildness,
I'rom the continued absence of her son. She often refused
to take her food, and would wander up and down the ravine,
calling loudly on Paolo, and occasionally mingling the name
of Torcelli with her cries. Concetta trembled as she listened
to her imprecations of vengeance on Torcelli, and dreaded lest
some gleam of returning reason should unite her name in
these denunciations, and perhaps in the mad woman's frenzy
subject her to bodily harm.
A w^eek had passed in this manner, things daily assuming
a more unhappy aspect, when one day about noon Ercole
suddenly appeared before them. Maddalena gave a joyful
scream at his ajjpearance, and did not remark his searching
glance at Concetta, who was seated near the low window at
her work. Concetta saw the look, and shuddered to think
wdiat fresh villany it might import. She did not lift her
ej'es, however, and felt relieved when he asked to be admitted
to a conference with Claudia. There was much apparent
hurry and earnest purpose in his manner, and the poor girl
felt a presentiment of some crisis being near at hand, either
as regarded Filippo and his family or herself, she could not
determine which. She awaited with a beating heart the
return of Maddalena, who, although not usually present at
these interviews, was on this occasion admitted to the
confidence of her mother, and half an hour elapsed before she
returned to the kitchen. Concetta looked earnestly in the
girl's face, for it bore a mixed expression, though joy seemed
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 359
tlie most powerful. Her step and voice were light as usual,
but her eyes bore traces of weeping. Concetta was not kept
long in suspense as to the meaning of her agitation, for
Maddalena bade her throw down her work, and prepare
immediately to help her mother and herself in their arrange¬
ments for leaving the dwelling in the course of that evening.
Concetta scarcely believed she had heard correctly, and the
pulses of her heart beat wildly to think the time of her
deliverance might be so near. When she looked, rather than
asked, if it were indeed true that they were about to leave
the place, Maddalena in her turn, struck by the emotion
visible in the girl's countenance, said, ' Did she suppose they
were going to live at the rocks for ever, that she looked so
incredulous ?' Then, without giving her time to answer,
Maddalena burst into a passion of tears, and told her in
broken sentences that her father and Paolo had had an
encounter with the troops of Garibaldi, that Paolo had been
made prisoner by them, and that her father, though severely
wounded, had escaped, and was now lying concealed with
some other comrades in one of the caverns on the coast.
At this unexpected intelligence, Concetta, forgetting all
her caution, uttered an exclamation, and breathlessly inquired
whether Matteo also had been taken prisoner, or whether
he was with the Padrone.
' Nay, wench, but thou art strangely curious about Matteo,'
said Ercole, who unperceived had followed Maddalena into
the little apartment. ' "What is it to thee whether he has
fallen in the strife ? It cannot affect thee: no one can
discover thy retreat, be assured.'
As he uttered these words, his face bore an expression of
triumph and cunning, which struck terror to the heart of the
poor girl.
' Up, girl,' continued he in a voice of authority, 'and help thy
mistress. Thou wilt have time enough to bewail thy friend,
if such he be, when we are gone, for do not suppose Pilippo
wants such as thee in his present habitation.'
Concetta became deadly pale as she listened, for now the
truth broke upon her that she was to be left alone with the
poor maniac, who might at any moment turn upon her when
there were none near to help her.
Claudia now called for Maddalena, and for the moment
she was left alone with Ercole, who gazed upon her with a
savage delight, knowing how completely she would be in his
power when left alone with Livia. She entreated him to
petition Claudia to take her with them, giving her sacred
35o The Ladies' Edinbitrgh Magazine.
promise neither to attempt to escape, or speak one word that
could reveal who she was, but all in vain. Ercole's passion,
brutal as it was, gained strength even as she spoke, and, with
a dreadful meaning in his eyes, he declared she had nothing
to fear from Livia, she would not long be left alone with her.
An indefinable terror now took possession of her mind, and
again she implored him to entreat for her. His only reply
was, ' I have not forgotten thy scornful glance, proud girl,
when in the woods at La Cava, and I swore then to be
revenged on thee. It is my day of triumph now, and neither
Signor Ciprani nor the emissaries of Torcelli shall defeat my
purpose.'
Concetta clasped her hands in supplication as he uttered
these names, and cried once more, ' For pity's sake, withhold
not from me what thou knowest of my father.'
' What wouldst thou give me to know, pretty one ? for by
my faith thy sorrow doth become thee, and thou mightest even
now find favour with me by one kiss. But why do I ask
for what I have the power to take ?' and saying this he
advanced towards her, and, seizing her hands, drew her forward
to embrace her, and might have succeeded spite of her indig¬
nant repulse, had not Maddalena at that moment reappeared.
She had listened to the supplicating tone of Concetta un¬
observed, and hearing the loud reply of Ercole, who in the
wildness of his passion had forgotten his usual caution, and
had been witness to his endeavours to embrace Concetta.
Surprise and anger kept her silent for a moment, then, burst¬
ing into passionate weeping, she reproached him for so
treacherously deceiving her; then, turning to Concetta, she
accused her of wickedly enticing her lover from her.
Concetta heard not her reproaches, for as Ercole at the sight
of Maddalena let go her hands, indignation and terror over¬
powered her senses, and she sank unconscious on the floor.
Ercole on seeing this turned fiercely to Maddalena, who
stood trembling with passion, and in a voice hoarse with
rage desired her to fetch water and try to restore the fainting
girl, whom she had frightened to death in her jealous fury.
He then lifted Concetta from the ground, and, resting her
head against his shoulder, commenced chafing her beautiful
hands, which even the menial work of the last two months
had not been able to spoil. She no longer wore the ring
Avhich had formerly excited his cupidity, and, suspecting
Maddalena of having taken it, he desired her to give it back.
He seemed to have thrown off all disguise of his feelings
towards her, and, trying to recall her to life by every gentle
The Beggar of Capo di ]\Ionte: a Tale of Sixty-one.   361
means, assured her of his love and of his entire obedience to
her wishes.
The sound of Maddalena's sobbing voice, for she could no
longer restrain her feelings, drew Claudia from her apartment.
Pale and drooping as the poor girl before her, she inquired
the meaning of this strange scene, at the same time advanc¬
ing towards Concetta, who still lay unconscious. Before
Maddalena could speak, Concetta, after a deep sigh, opened
her languid eyes, but, finding herself supported in the arms
of the hated Ercole, she gave a violent shriek and broke
from his grasp, and, falling on the ground, once more relapsed
into insensibility.
Her scream brought Livia into the room, in her usual
excited manner calling wildly for ' Filippo and Paolo!'
Claudia, quickly divining something of the truth, in a voice
of authority desired Ercole to remove Livia from the room,
while Maddalena and herself attended to the terror-stricken
girl. Maddalena dared not disobey her mother, but she lent
a very unwilling arm to help to carry Concetta to her
chamber, where in a short time she recovered her conscious¬
ness. Claudia remarked her look of terror round the little
apartment, and, bending over her, said soothingly she had
nothing to fear, for no one was present but herself and her
daughter, and Ercole would have left the rocks in another
hour. He was to conduct them to Filippo, and would re¬
main with them. Concetta now confessed it was Ercole
alone she feared, and pleaded so earnestly she might not
be left with Livia, that had Claudia dared to disobey the
commands of her husband, she would have taken her witli
them. She would even then have left Maddalena with
them, but the irritated girl refused to stay, and in her
present suspicious mood Claudia thought Concetta would
be happier without her. She also assured her of the
protection of the peasant, who was to remain with them
in their absence, which she hoped would be a brief one,
and before they started she gave him instructions to that
effect.
Ercole took no further notice of either Concetta or
Maddalena, and stood apart in gloomy silence, revolving in
his mind what his next course should be. Claudia took
Livia into her apartment, and with kind solicitude endea¬
voured to impress on her poor weak mind how much her
comfort depended on being friends with Concetta, and recall¬
ing her constant attention to her wishes. Poor Livia seemed
but half to understand her meaning; however, she showed no
362 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
displeasure towards the girl, and Claudia hoped the paroxysm
had passed over.
In another hour everything was ready for their departure,
and Concetta followed them to the waggon, which was the
same that had brought herself to these rocks some ten weeks
before. Claudia spoke kindly to her, and bade her take
heart, saying in the hearing of Ercole, if she found her husband
was unable to be moved for some weeks, in all probability
he would send for Livia and herself. Concetta looked grate¬
fully at Claudia for holding out this hope, and would have
received comfort from the expectation, had she not caught
the expression of Ercole's face, which again wore that look
of triumph which had already caused her so much uneasiness.
She trembled to think what it might portend. Long after
the sound of the heavy wheels moving slowly over the broken
cinders had died away, did the poor girl stand looking after
the retreating party. When and where might be their next
meeting, and what perils might be in store for her in that
solitude, she dared not ask herself, left with Livia, the
vrretched victim of her father's cruelty, for her sole companion!
This last thought, however, stood her in good stead, for it
made her resolve to be kind and patient with the poor
maniac, and try to win her affection and confidence. How
far she succeeded will be known in a future chapter.
CHAPTEE XIII.
We must now return for a time to the Count Torcelli, and
the events which crowded thickly around him after the
abduction of his daughter. After a fruitless search of many
weeks, during which every known haunt of the banditti in
and near Naples had been searched, Torcelli began to give
up all hopes of recovering Concetta. His temper, always
gloomy, had become irritable, and the Signora Caiiotta, who
still remained his companion, sought in vain to calm him.
None of his political schemes succeeded,—in short, the whole
world seemed against him. He was not qualified by nature
for the situation he held, and a growing discontent was
observable in those around him. The truth was, he was no
Liberal in heart, and the Neapolitans soon found this out.
His appointment under Victor Emmanuel obliged him to
further the cause of liberty, but he did so with an unwilling
spirit, and would, if he dared, have countenanced the attempts
of the Bourbons to regain their ascendancy.    He sometimes
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.   363
fancied his secret was discovered, and that the daring act
of carrying off his daughter had been done out of a party-
revenge. For some weeks he hoped, through the efforts of
bribes which he employed, that his search for his daughter
might have been successful, but more than two months had
passed, and still no tidings reached him of Concetta.
Never till he had lost her had Count Torcelli known how
necessary his daughter was to his happiness. His spirits
and health were fast giving way, and Carlotta looked forward
with gloomy forebodings to the issue of this intolerable
suspense. For a considerable time she could not induce
him to make the circumstance known to Concetta's relatives
in Hungary, and probably he might never have consented to
any application for help on their part, had not the young
Count Eudolph Bathyani read in a public journal, some
weeks after the occurrence, a reward offered for the discovery
of Count Torcelli's daughter, who had been forcibly carried
off from La Cava in the month of September. Eudolph had
been forbidden to hold any intercourse with his cousin, and
was alike ignorant of her delicate state of health and all the
other particulars of her life at Naples. He was, however,
aware that the Signora Carlotta had been her companion
ever since they had left Turin, and he determined to address
a letter of inquiry to her, fearing his uncle might not even
choose him to be acquainted with the facts if he applied to
him for information. Like his relative the patriot Bathyani,
lie tliirsted for an opportunity of fighting for the independ¬
ence of his country; but that being denied under the existing
state of things, he resolved on following the fortunes of the
Liberator of Italy, and drawing his sword in what he con¬
sidered an equally sacred cause.
Paidolph's father, who was an old man, idolized his son,
and could not bear the idea of his going. Although he was
as ardent a lover of liberty as the young Eudolph, the old
Count had hitherto refused his consent, fearing to lose his
son, till, hearing of the misfortune which had befallen
Concetta, the daughter of his only sister, and as dear to
him as his own child, he no longer hesitated, and speedily
provided him with every requisite for the expedition, and
the search which he proposed making for his betrothed,
bidding him God-speed and success to his arms. Fearing
some treachery if he wrote to Carlotta from Prague, Eudolph
determined not to write until he was actually in Naples,
and had there gathered all the particulars of Concetta's
abduction.    Though  the  interest  in  her fate  had  passed
364 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
away, like any other nine days' wonder, he was not long in
collecting the history of the principal facts, and then he at
once addressed a letter to Carlotta, apprising her of his being
in Naples.
This letter was indeed a joyful surprise to Carlotta, who
had almost despaired of hearing of her friend, or that the
persons employed by the Count and Signor Ciprani would
ever be successful. Her principal hope had been in Ciprani,
whose clear, shrewd intellect had been unremittingly at
work to discover the real motive for the capture of Concetta,
for he had long since abandoned the idea of its being
instigated by the hope of securing a heavy ransom. The
large sums offered by the Count must long ere this have
been claimed by her captors had gain been tlieir object.
Ciprani was unacquainted with the history of the Count's
previous life, but he could not help thinking this outrage
was connected with some real or supposed injury inflicted
by TorceUi. He had frequently expressed this idea to
Carlotta, and said how much he wished he had the means
of verifying it, for he no longer doubted that vengeance was
the motive that had prompted the act. Carlotta was startled
at first by the suggestion, and refused to admit the possibility
of wrong or injustice on the part of the Count, whom she
had only known as respected and honoured by all men.
Ciprani, however, as a man of the world and a keen reader
of character, was accustomed to search deeply into the
motives of men. He had remarked many traits in Torcelli's
character which might have escaped a mere superficial
observer, and he had more than once suspected that the
gloomy moroseness of the Count's temper derived its origin
from some error of his youth which still burdened his
conscience. Ciprani greatly desired an opportunity of
inquiring into the circumstances of Torcelli's early life, and
felt that his wish was about to be gratified as he read a
hurried, agitated note from Carlotta, informing him of the
arrival of the young Count Eathyani, and desiring to know
how she should act with regard to his introduction to Count
Torcelli, for she took no step without consulting Signor
Ciprani. Ciprani at once decided on an interview with the
young Hungarian before mentioning his arrival to Torcelli,
hoping he might elicit something respecting the Count's
residence in Hungary which might justify his idea of
personal vengeance having been the motive for Concetta's
capture. He introduced himself to Count Eudolph as an
intimate friend of tlie Torcelli family, and deeply interested in
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 365
the fate of the lovely girl who had so cruelly been torn from
her home. He did not, of course, avow his knowledge of the
young man's particular interest in the Signorina Concetta,
but chose to attribute his eagerness for her restoration to
the ties of kindred, and a chivalrous desire to rescue his
young cousin from her forced captivity. With infinite
delicacy and refined tact he imparted his own suspicions
to the Count, and inquired whether he could recall any
event in which Torcelli could have made himself enemies
during his long sojourn in Hungary. Eudolph started at the
unexpected question, for he knew not yet how far Signor
Ciprani was acquainted with the relations between Count
Torcelli and himself, nor whethei: Concetta had confided to
this friend their peculiar interest in all that concerned each
other. Ciprani observed his hesitation, and explained his
motive for asking what might appear an impertinent ques¬
tion from a stranger, and then with a peculiar smile he added :
' The Signorina and my wife conceived a strong attachment
for each other, and our young friend often spoke of the happy
years spent in Hungary, and of the pain this long separation
from her beloved relatives had given her. This confidence
Madame Ciprani naturally extended to me, for we were both
interested in all that concerned the Signorina Concetta.'
There was a truth and sincerity in Ciprani's avowal that
instantly won upon the young Count, and the reserve which
had hitherto kept him silent gave way to a frankness equal
to Signor Ciprani's, and he ingenuously acknowledged the
tie that bound them to each other, and his firm determination
to recover her or die in the attempt. Being now assured of
the friendship between the families, he did not hesitate to
recount to Ciprani the circumstances of the sad history of
Livia's wrongs, the details of which he had heard from his
father. That the brother of Livia was a brave, bold man,
and had challenged the Count after the betrayal of his sister,
but that Torcelli had refused to meet him on the plea of
inferiority of rank, the man holding a subordinate position
in the regiment. Count Eudolph added that the circum¬
stance had cast a cloud over the Count's reputation, and was
in fact the reason of his giving up the army and leaving the
country. A tinge of shame was perceptible on the young
Count's brow as he gave these particulars, for, notwithstand¬
ing this slur on Torcelli's character, his father's sister had
become Torcelli's wife. Ciprani listened with deep attention
to the young man's history, and asked many questions
respecting the personal appearance of Livia's brother, feeling
366 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
convinced that Filippo, the captain of the crew he had
engaged to take his vessel to Ischia, and the bandit who had
carried off Concetta, were one and the same person, and that
the poor girl was the victim of the vengeance intended for
her father. Eudolph could give no particulars beyond the
mere facts, as it had been too painful a subject to be ever
alluded to in his mother's lifetime. The more Ciprani
considered the subject, the stronger were his convictions
that at last he had found the key not only to the cause of
Torcelli's gloomy sternness, but also to the motive of the
outrage on Concetta. He spoke freely on the subject to
Count Eudolph, and inspired the youth with the same
sanguine hope, for, having this clue, they might, through
the numerous agents of Garibaldi in Sicily and along tlie
southern coast of Italy, discover the haunt of the bold
outlaw, for such Eudolph described him to be.
After a long conversation on the measures to be pursued,
Signer Ciprani invited the young Count to his house until
he could ascertain the wishes of Torcelli. Eudolph
ingenuously confessed that his principal object was to
regain his cousin, but at the same time he felt impelled
by sympathy with the Italians to give his arm, and if need
be his life, in the cause of liberty.
After offering the rites of hospitality to his new friend,
Ciprani lost no time in repairing to the Casa Torcelli and
seeking an interview with Signora Carlotta. He did not
think it necessary to make her acquainted with the history
he had just heard, but bespoke her influence with Count
Torcelli to induce him to accept a visit from his nephew,
giving her instructions how to introduce the subject. He
bore particularly on the part the young Count was prepared
to take in the struggle for Italian independence, which every
day seemed nearer its accomplishment, and left it to a
future interview between himself and Torcelli to suggest
the service the young man, with such opportunities, might
render him in the recovery of his daughter. From Carlotta
he learned that the Count Avas every day becoming less
hopeful about the fate of Concetta, and this induced him to
think he might regard with less unwillingness the proposal of
Count Eudolpli to lead the search further than had been yet
attempted. Ciprani proposed that Eudolph should call on
the Count Torcelli the following morning, when he would
accompany him, and pave the way for his introduction.
Count Torcelli was occupied with political duties the whole
of that day, which rendered it easier for Carlotta to absent her-
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 367
self; so,leaving a little note to inform the Count she had availed
herself of his engagement to pay a long-promised visit to
Madame Ciprani, she ordered the carriage, and, accompanied
by Signor Ciprani, drove rapidly to his new residence on the
road to Pausilippo, looking forward with great eagerness to her
introduction to Count Eudolph,of whomshehad heard so much
from her best friend. Ciprani did not disturb the aerial castles
her romantic and sanguine temperament had reared. His mind
was too fully occupied with the details of the crime which had
brought such fearful consequences in its train. Well did he
weigh every particular, and he could now connect this
almost forgotten history with Filippo's conduct towards the
young lady, and his significant words to her when she was
on board the vessel. He could not discover as yet what
part Matteo, the Beggar of Capo di Monte, had taken in
the abduction, but he resolved to leave no means untried
to discover the connection between these men. He had
long suspected the guide Ercole to have been a principal
agent in the capture, and for many weeks had kept his
eye upon him and his movements at La Cava; but when
the winter set in, and he and his family had returned to
Naples, he had lost sight of the youth. So completely had
these thoughts engrossed Ciprani, he had not observed they
had already reached the villa, where his wife and the young
Count stood waiting to receive them. Madame Ciprani
seemed delighted to welcome Carlotta to her new home, and,
after a warm embrace, turned with much grace to Count
Eudolph, and introduced him to her friend. Carlotta was
much struck with his noble mien and commanding height;
the shade also of pensive melancholy over his fine features
made him appear still more interesting. Concetta had
described him as being extremely handsome, but there
was more than mere beauty of feature in his intellectual
countenance, and she did not feel surprised at the impression
such a face and figure had made on the heart of her young
friend. His eyes were dark and thoughtful, and spoke of
earnest purpose, but there was a sweetness of expression round
the mouth, which tempered what might otherwise have been
somewhat stern, if not severe. Carlotta seemed unable to
withdraw her eyes from his countenance, and her face so
ingenuously expressed what was passing in her mind, that
the young Count became confused under her prolonged
gaze ; this, and the consciousness of her being aware of his
peculiar interest in his cousin, crimsoned his brow, and he
was evidently seeking for some excuse to address his host,
368 TJie Ladies' EdinbnrgJi Magazine.
and tlius turn the attention of the lady. Madame Ciprani was
an amused spectator of Carlotta's unrestrained admiration,
but, perceiving the young man's confusion, with feminine
quickness she turned the current of the Signora's thoughts
by some question relating to the Count Torcelli. Carlotta,
recollecting herself, at once resumed her usual ease of
manner, expressing with real sympathy her uneasiness at
the failing health of the Count. After an hour or two of
friendly conversation, of which the fruitless efforts to dis¬
cover Concetta formed a principal part, Carlotta took leave
of her friends and returned home. The Count was more
than ever depressed that evening, for one of his emissaries,
from whom he had expected more success, had returned with¬
out obtaining any tidings of his daughter. He began to give up
all hope of her being ever restored to him, and lamented
over his age and infirmities, which prevented his actively
seeking her himself This seemed a favourable opportunity
for Carlotta to introduce the subject of Count Eudoljjh's
being in Naples at that moment, of his having enrolled
himself under the banner of Garibaldi, and of his waiting
the permission of Count Torcelli to avail himself of the
opportunities which his present position afforded to engage
in a personal search for his cousin Concetta. Carlotta, aware
of the delicacy of her mission, for the Count was suspicious
of any interference, was rather nervous at mentioning Count
Eudolph's name, and her changing countenance betrayed
her fears. Torcelli was evidently greatly surprised at
hearing of Eudolph's being in Naples. He looked search-
ingly at Carlotta, half suspecting some deep-laid scheme
with regard to his daughter was about to be unfolded to
him. Her evident confusion only added to his suspicions,
and he said sternly :
' I hope the Lady Carlotta has not so far abused my con¬
fidence as to lend herself to any rash proposal of Count
Eudolph's, for I conclude she is aware of my having for¬
bidden my daughter to hold any communication with this
relative. It seems extraordinary that he should choose this
particular period to present himself before me, and I confess
I am not free from doubt as to his real motive.'
Carlotta eagerly assured him of her entire ignorance of his
plans or intentions, and then told him of Signer Ciprani's
liaving authorized her to mention Count Eudolph's arrival
in Naples, and to express his hope that Count Torcelli
would delegate to his nephew the authority to use such
exertions for the recovery of his daughter as he was unable
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixtj-one. 369
from his position and failing health to undertake in his own
person. The Count's features relaxed on hearing Cipraui
advocated Rudolph's cause, and, resuming his usual courteous
manner, he apologized to Carlotta for his unworthy suspicion,
but did not encourage her to prolong the conversation. He
sank back in his chair, and remained for a considerable time
lost in tliought. Carlotta took courage from this, and
considered it a hopeful sign, for she remembered the time
when tlie mere mention of Rudolph's name would have
been sufficient to have broken up their friendly relations.
Trouble, and a growing consciousness of weakness, had
done its work on the old man, and softer feelings were by
degrees taking the place of pride and an unyielding temper.
He had felt his daughter's loss more deeply than he allowed,
and was yearning for the solace of her companionship and
hlial love. Should he rashly throw away what appeared
his best if not only chance of regaining Concetta ? for he
well knew the ardent attachment Count Rudolph felt for
his cousin, and that he would never relax in his search for
her. To the young Count himself he bore no enmity, but
his proud nature rebelled against the coolness displayed by
the father of Rudolph, who not only looked upon his
conduct towards Filippo and his sister as unpardonable,
but suspected him of taking part against the Hungarian
cause. The ill-will engendered between them ended, as
we have already heard, in Torcelli's leaving the country,
and forbidding all future intercourse between Concetta and
Rudolph. Concetta's extreme youth at the time led him
to hope that change of scene and an introduction to the
gaietj' of a court would soon efface every remembrance of
her cousin; but it proved otherwise, and their plighted
troth remained unbroken.
Before the evening closed, Torcelli deputed Carlotta to
write to Count Rudolph and appoint a meeting for the
following day, and also to request that Signor Ciprani would
accompany him. It was a painful moment for both parties,
and Rudolph was shocked to see the ravages trouble and
care had wrought on the old man. We will not dwell upon
the interview; suffice it to say, Torcelli received his young
relative with courtesy, if not with kindness, and, after
discussing the various means which had been already used
for the recovery of Concetta, he gave Rudolph letters to
Garibaldi and other friends of the cause, to ensure him a
welcome into their ranks, and authority also to call upon
his aid in whatever manner he should deem necessary for his
No. 56.—August 1879. 2 A
370 The Ladies Editibiirgh Magazine.
success. He shook hands with him at parting, and assured
him of a welcome at his house while it suited him to remain
in Naples. Count Eudolph then proceeded to the apartments
occupied by Carlotta, who received him with eager interest,
and made up for her late gauclierie by leading the conver¬
sation to the subject most interesting to him, readily falling
into his wish of hearing from her the smallest details re¬
specting his beloved cousin, of whom he now spoke freely.
Ciprani had taken his leave when the interview with
Count Torcelli ended, and the young man felt relieved
that he had no otlier witness than the warm-hearted
Carlotta to his heightened colour and eager attention, as
he listened with a beating heart to the glowing description
of his betrothed, and her never-failing interest in himself.
Before quitting Naples, he and Ciprani, armed with the
authority of Torcelli, v'isited every prison in the locality,
hoping to discover, amongst the numerous persons who had
lately been incarcerated there, some one who might give
information of Filippo, or his comrades Matteo and Ercole.
They gained nothing by their seai'ch, though bribes and
piiomises of pardon were held out to those who knew
anything of the haunts of these men. Full descriptions of
their persons were left in every prison, which might even¬
tually lead to their detection. With this hope, Rudolph
parted from his kind friend Ciprani, and proceeded to join
Garibaldi in Catania, where for the present we shall leave
him, and return to the unhappy Coucetta.
(^To be continued.)
Ox the farther banks of the River
Stands the figure of my Love;
The rising waters swell more and more,
How can I cross to the other shore ?—
I tremble, I fear!    O'er the waters' rush,
O'er the raging storm, I hear His voice—Hush
And the waters sink
Into rest complete.
With a gentle murmur
Tliey now kiss His feet.
He takes my hand across the River,
His arm encircles me for ever.
And He welcomes me above.
M. E. F. T.
The Archbishop's Visit. 371
There is a little village hidden in a valley of the Apennines,
of which no ordinary traveller has probably ever heard, so
that it is useless for me even to mention its name,—indeed,
it is scarcely a village at all. A church, with its parsonage-
house attached, stands in an open space beside a mountain
stream, and two or three hamlets, scattered through the
adjoining chestnut woods, form the remainder of the parish.
It is true that several houses more pretentious than the
ordinary peasants' cottages are now to be seen in that quiet
valley, but some years ago the district could only boast of
one such residence, and the peasants consequently called it
' the palace.' It stood among the chestnut woods on a hill
above the church, and was inhabited in the summer by an
English family. I love to think that those ' English' are
still remembered and affectionately spoken of by the people
of the valley where I spent my childhood.
From the parsonage at the back of the church, a short
cut led across the stream and through tlie woods to the
'palace' of the Englisli. So it happened that the old Prevosto,
or rector, often strolled up that way, and soon found a place,
not only in the family circle, but also in the heart of each
member of it. He used to hold long arguments with our
mother, whom he considered the most cultivated woman in
the world; and often, thinking to please her, would make
English quotations from ponderous theological works, with
which she, I am afraid, had not even a bowing acquaintance.
He read English with great intelligence, though his conver¬
sation in that language was limited to a few words, which
he pronounced with many contortions. But in his native
dialect, with which we were familiar, his talk on parish
matters grew fast and fluent, and was often very entertaining.
It was from the Prevosto, then, that we heard, as he strolled
in our garden one fine summer evening, of the coming of
the Archbishop. That was the most important event that
occurred during our sojourn in the country! You must
understand that the Archbishop of Genoa had not passed
through this district for five-and-twenty years, although, at
intervals, bands of candidates for confirmation had been sent
over the hills to other districts he was visiting. Now, how¬
ever, he was coming to this very parish—coming from the
grand palace at Genoa, to stay in that small parsonage whose
roof could be seen peeping through the trees yonder.
372 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Alagazine.
Of course, the church would have to be cleaned and newly
decked for the occasion,—indeed, the I'revosto had already
bought a fine set of hangings and a grand picture for the
high altar. ' Would not the Signora Laura'—this was his
name for our mother—' come down and see the picture—
she, who had so much education ?'
All this the old man poured forth iu deep and sonorous
tones, his bony face aglow with excitement, his old straw hat
thrust to the back of his head. (For the Prevosto on
working days wore the shabbiest and most unclerical of
garments, and dug in the garden in his shirt-sleeves.) The
Signora Laura gladly promised to give an opinion on the
picture. Accordingly, the very next morning she set off
down the hill with her children. The entrance to the
parsonage was primitive, especially when viewed in the liglit
of the approaching archiepiscopal visit Passing through a
dark archway under the belfry tower, you came upon a flight
of broken and uneven stone steps. These landed you on a
small piazza, covered with a thick trellis of vines, and having
in one corner the most picturesque of fountains — so
picturesque that you forgave it for being broken down and
letting a stream of water inundate the ground before the
house. The chief feature of this fountain to my childish
mind, however, was a flat stone on its brink, peculiarly well
adapted for the washing of dolls' clothes. The front door
opened off this piazza straight into a large kitchen, ill-paved,
and furnished with blackened ovens, a cooking-range that
would have puzzled any northern housekeeper, and a hen¬
coop. Xow the door of this coop was not kept closely
fastened, so, even if you escaped stumbling into one of the
numerous holes in the brick floor, you were pretty sure to
trip over a wandering hen or chicken before you were halt-
way across. Yet this was the door by which the Archbishop
was to make his triumphal entry.
'Here is the picture, Signora,' cried the Prevosto, when we
reached the dingy little hall beyond the kitchen.
As he spoke, Bianca, the dear, scraggy, hot-tempered
housekeeper, who always had pocketsful of fruit for us
children, held up to the light that famous canvas. I do
not well remember what the picture was like, or what
our mother said about it. I know it was dark, very dark,
with a dinginess not born of dirt alone, since Bianca assured
us slie had scrubbed it for half an hour. I know, too, that
the Signora Laura said something which gratified our host,
for he was iu high good humour and allowed us to go with
Tlie ArcJibishop's Visit. 373
him into the church by the back way, a flight of steps
leading out of his private study. There was something
delightfully exciting about this dark and privileged entrance.
We felt like conspirators. First there was the vestry, and
then the ante-chamber where all the vestments and the
choir-boys' little tunics were kept, and, piled togetlier in a
corner, the crosses and banners we were accustomed to see
fluttering and shining in the sun, in all the pomp of some
festive procession. Then we came by a side-door into the
church—the dear old church, with its faulty architecture, its
tawdry altars, now brightened by bouquets of roses and
seringa; with its countrified air, and its refreshing stillness
and peace. We did not take much notice of all that then,
for the Prevosto began to explain his plans for new decora¬
tions, and we presently went out into the large piazza in
front of the church.
Here a surprise awaited us. On the uneven paving-stones,
a little platform and pulpit, draped in red, had been erected,
and from this elevation a stranger, a priest we had never
before seen, was delivering an oration. Several groups of
peasants returning from work had stopped to listen, and
were sitting on the low stone wall which encircled the
piazza.    We happened to catch a fragment of tlie discourse.
' Dear sisters,' the preacher was saying to the women who
formed the chief part of his audience,' I would give a word
of advice to those of you who bear the cross of having a
drunken husband' (a rare case, by the way, in those parts).
' To such I would say—my sister, never abstract money from
your husband to supply yourself with vanities or luxuries ;
but if your children are in want, then we give you full
authority to steal from the man's pocket, as he lies in a
drunken sleep, all that you may require for the good of your
little ones.'
I remember seeing our mother smile. ' Who is the new
preacher?' she inquired as we passed on, for a new face
was rarely seen in the parish.
' Ah !' replied the Prevosto, shrugging his shoulders,' these
are the missionaries. I do not love them myself; they talk
much nonsense to the people. But we must have patience
with them ; they are always sent out from Genoa some weeks
before the Archbishop comes, to prepare the people for his
visit. For me, I think I could prepare them as well—I,
who have known them and all their joys and sorrows ever
since they were born !'
The missionaries, however, continued their sermons from
374 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the pulpit on the piazza every evening for several weeks,
until the time when their lesser light was obscured by the
arrival of the Archbishop himself.
The evening before that great day, we noticed a little knot
of peasant-girls collected round our garden-gate, and when
we ran down to see what they wanted, one of them stepped
out from the rest to speak to us. This was Vittoria, a
special friend of ours, and the model beauty of the village.
She used always to be chosen to carry the big cross at the
head of the processions, and the self-possession she had
acquired on these occasions had earned for her the post of
spokeswoman among her companions.
' Signorine,' she began, a little shyly, ' we have come to
ask for two Howers, only two roses,' looking up at the tiower-
laden bushes by our gate, ' for our procession to-morrow.
"We are all going to the top of yonder hill to meet the
Archbishop on the borders of the parish. We must have
some flowers, fine nosegays to hold in our hands and to tie
round the cross. Yours are the only flowers of quality in
all the country. Ah ! you will certainly give us two ?' she
pleaded.
Knowing that the word ' two,' in the native dialect, meant
at least twenty times that number, we hesitated, and looked
inquiringly towards our mother, who had just joined us.
We repeated the request to her eagerly. Surely for his
Grace she would be generous. And she did not disappoint
us.
' I will give you a basketful of flowers, Vittoria,' she replied,
' for this time we must do our best!'
The girls did not wait for the basket, but stretclied out
their aprons for the precious blossoms.
' Ah !' said one admiringly, as she took vip a heavy red
carnation, ' how beautiful they are, almost one might think
they were artificial ones !' which was the highest praise she
knew how to bestow.
This was by no means the only contribution the Signora
Laura made towards the reception of his Grace. In the early
morning we went down to inspect the room reserved for him
at the parsonage. Under the pergola we passed into the
kitchen, which was pervaded by a strong smell of baking and
cooking, and where a brood of newly-hatched chickens were
running about more recklessly than usual, and on into the
stuffy little parlour. Here our mother tried to remonstrate
mildly with Bianca on this state of things, but she could not
understand what there was in it to inconvenience an arch-
The ArchhisJwf s Visit. 375
bishop or any one else. ' The chickens! why, had they not
always made themselves at home in the kitchen, and nobody
had objected ? The windows! who ever wanted those open ?
they were never opened!' Even the fresh green vine-
branches that climbed the outer wall seemed to bar the
panes by way of protest; and, indeed, it made little differ¬
ence either waj', for the windows were not much larger tlian
those of a modern doll's house. So our mother carried iier
notions of reform upstairs, where she found a yet wider field
for them. The bedroom prepared for his Grace was opposite
to that of the Prevosto, and next door to the store-room,
which, being filled with apples, was a delightful resort for us
children, but hardly a pleasant adjunct to the bedrooms
close by. Well, this could not be helped; but how about
the fittings of the room itself ? The uneven brick tioor had
been scrubbed very clean, to be sure, but not an inch of
carpet was to be seen; and all the furniture of this long, low
room consisted of a bedstead and a chair. On the broad
window-seat stood a red earthenware bowl filled with water,
and beside it lay a coarse towel. The only feature of the
room which seemed appropriate to the expected visitor was
an oval window on a level with the floor, and looking straight
down into the church, which joined the house at this point,
so that the occupant of the apartment could, if he wished,
hear a service at six o'clock every morning without getting
up.
' But for the rest, it won't do at all,' said our mother;' I
must send down some things, Bianca.'
The housekeeper stood with her hands on her hips. ' Eh !
I understand nothing more,' she sighed. ' There is his bed;
here he can wash his face. What else, then, Signora, can
he want ?'
Bianca found, however, that according to the ' Inglesi,' he
wanted many other things, for soon a cart-load of goods
came down from tlie house on the hill—rugs, a wash-.stand,
chairs, tables, plate, table-linen, and what not.
Bianca was grateful enough for any additions to her table,
for all her energies were concentrated on a grand dinner
which was to be given to the Archbishop, his attendant
clergy, and the neighbouring parish priests, numbering in all
perhaps twelve. It was reported that she sacrificed forty-
two chickens to this entertainment. Chickens, you see,
were her strong point; but the repast possibly suffered from
a certain sameness.
The Archbishop was not to arrive till late in the evening;
37^ The Ladies' Edinbitrgh Magazine.
but in the early afternoon, as we children, hot and inky,
were toiling through a weary page of pot-hooks, we were
interrupted, to our glee, by the arrival of Teresa. Teresa
was the village tailor and sempstress. She made and
patched everybody's clothes, and many a pair of trousers or
cotton gown of the neighbourliood had had two or three
years of extra life put into them by her loving care. She
was also mistress of the ceremonies when any took place,
and had been selected on the present occasion to superintend
tlie arrangements for the reception of tlie Archbishop on the
clmrch piazza. All this she explained to mother, Avhile
every line of her bunchy little figure expressed her sense
of importance, and her scanty grey hairs bristled with
excitement.
'Ecco, tlie Prevosto, he comes and says to me, "Teresa,"
he says, " go and get two of the cleanest children in the
place to scatter flowers in the Archbishop's path when he
reaches the church door." So I think within myself, surely
no children are so clean as tliose of the Inglesi,' with a side¬
long bow, as thougli conscious of paying us a compliment,
' and I thought I would take three steps and ask the Signora
if she would lend us her two little girls—yes V
How eagerly we watched our mother's lips as she replied
to this request, and how gladly, when we heard her consent,
did we throw away otir inky penholders and rush to tell the
household of the lionour conferred on us! Then we were
washed, combed, and attired in crisp frocks, till we looked
more English than ever; and Teresa, putting into our hands
little baskets filled with rosemary and yellow gorse-blossoms,
took us down the piazza to await the great moment.
A procession of village youths and maidens, carrying
crosses and nosegays, and clianting as they went, had gone
to meet the Archbishop on the borders of the parish he was
leaving. This was at the top of a steep hill, which was
reached by a rocky and precipitous road. The Archbisho])
was carried down this road in an open sedan-chair, by two
men ; but as his porters came at a good round trot, I fear that
the old man's journey was not an easy one, and that the
attendant priests, who travelled on foot, fared better.
Tlie shadows were lengthening as the little procession
came in sight through the woods behind the church,—the
girls in tlieir gay holiday dresses and white muslin veils;
the young men carrying dangerous-looking old guns to fire
a salute with; and in the midst the venerable Archbishop,
wearin" his robes and mitre.
Hymn for Travellers. 377
Some one lifted me up on to the low stone wall. I saw
the group distinctly, and remember that the old man's
benevolent face and dignified bearing, even while descending
from a sedan-chair, made a deep impression on my mind. I
tightened my grasp of mother's hand as all the old guns
were fired off into the walnut-trees above. None of them
burst, but it was a terrible moment. Then Teresa whispered
to us, ' Throw your flowers!' and straightway a shower of
blossoms, strewn by awkward and trembling little hands, fell
over the path and the chui'ch steps. Some of them lodged
among his Grace's apparel, I am sure, but he turned with a
pleasant smile and gesture of acknowledgment. Our sense of
importance reached its climax when he asked some one who
those hionde bamhine were ? We were all too much excited,
I think, fully to appreciate the affectionate little address
which he delivered from the threshold of the church,
thanking the people for their kindly welcome.
The groups of peasants did not disperse from the little
piazza until long alter he had retired ; and as they strolled
home through field and wood, discussing the details of the
great event, the moon stood high over the mountains.
Most people have assisted at a confirmation service in the
Romish Church, and one is very like another ; little peasant
girls in cotton frocks and white veils, too, look much the
same all over Italy. So the scene which took place in the
church next morning, and which we witnessed from the
organ-loft, needs no further description.
The Archbishop stayed long enough to do justice to Bianca's
grand dinner, but the day after he was carried away over the
hills to another district, and we saw him no more. The good
old man was laid to sleep long ago in the great cathedral at
Genoa, but the people of the valley still remember him ; and
when they are enumerating the great events that have come
to pass in tlieir day, they speak of the time when the
Archbishop came over the mountains to see them.
A. G. Y. S.
^mn for STrafarllcrs.
We are but homeless wanderers
When far, 0 Lord, from Thee ;
But home in every country
May be where two or three
3/8 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Meet, conscious of Thy presence,
Attentive to Thy word,
Believing that Thy Spirit
AVithin each heart has stirred
The germ of noble effort,
The higher, purer deed.
The life of Christian struggle
That would from sin be freed.
If we must still be wanderers.
Yet we may look above,
And see one sun is shining.
And know that all we love
Beneath Thy holy guidance
Are living, though afar ;
That sea or Alps dividing
Nor love nor prayer can bar;
That thought with Godlike power
Can leap o'er time and space.—
Thus in Thy presence kneeling
We shall seem face to face.
B. L. T.
©ur ILtijrarg ^able.
An Inland Voyage. By Robert L. Stevenson. London :
Kegan Paul.
A tale of travel depends much on the telling. Some folk go far
afield to the rich East, to the heroic North, to the unknown South,
and come back and write two big volumes as prosy as their talk and
as barren as their ideas. Their books may serve the purpose of
deterring the restless from travel. But here is a little book that
might lure the most inert to go out in search of adventures. It is the
voyage of two canoe-ists on the Sambre and Oise and some connecting
canals, in about 200 pages, all worth reading, many sparkling with
good things, and full of quaint observation, little social hits and
descriptions given in a few touches, like a delicate etching or a
vignette by Bewick. They mot with bad weather and bad accommo¬
dation, and came to inhospitable inns which sent them farther,
taking them for pedlars ; but it is all pleasant to read about, even
when their good genius, the river, which runs so brightly through the
book, serves the writer a bad turn and nearly drowns him ; when, as
he says, ' the devouring element in the universe had leapt out against
nie, in this green valley, quickened by a running stream. The bells
were all very pi-etty in their way, but I had heard some of the hollow
notes of Pan's music. Would the wicked river drag me down by the
heels indeed, and look so beautiful all the time ] Nature's good-
humour was only skin-deep after all.'
Our Library Table. 379
No Telegraph ; or, A Trip to ocr Uncokxected Colonies. By
Rose Pender. Printed by Gilbert and Rivington, St. John's
Square, Clerkenwell.
This little volume, which is very prettily got up, does not pretend
to be anything but every-day jottings from the pen of a lady, con¬
taining her impressions of the places she saw and the people she met
while on an eight months' voyage with her hiisband on a mission for
Government. It is easily and pleasantly written ; the enjoyments
and drawbacks of travel, disastrous and happy days, agreeable and
disagreeable people, are all mentioned in an equally impartial manner,
as she voyages to the Cape, and thence to Natal, to Mozambique and
Zanzibar, to Aden and Mauritius, then back to Aden and home by
Suez, Cairo, and Alexandria. To one unacquainted with the oceans
she traverses, or the ground at which she touches, enough is said in
her slight sketches to give a general impression of the various scenes
she witnesses; while to those who have gone over the same ground,
the book may serve vividly to recall similar experiences of miseries
endured and difficulties overcome. The volume was printed for
private circulation, but copies are to be sold for the benefit of the
families of soldiers fallen in the Zulu war.
Essays in Romance. Bv John Skelton. Edinburgh and London :
William'Blackwood & Sons.    1878.
We are almost inclined to think, judging from the literature which
now-a-days passes current, that there exists but a diminished circle
of those to whom it is a pleasure, alone and for itself, to read what
is written in pure, incisive, vigorous, graceful, correct English. To
all such, however, we may promise, in this respect alone, much
gratification from the perusal of the book before us. Nor does its
subject-matter yield in a somewhat indefinable charm and interest to
that of any series of Essay.i we remember. We may place first the
descriptions of scenery, which plainly come from the lips of an out-and-
out devotee of nature in all her aspects, albeit possessing a mind of
scholarly and artistic bent. Some of the very best of these are to be
found in the ' Prelude : A Word for Winter,' in which we have a quiet
but determined advocacy of rural charms and attractions at a time
when to many they are unknown ; and in the ' Epilogue: Among
the High Alps,' where, early in the season, the traveller enjoys almost
unchallenged possession, as it were, of perhaps the most enchanting
locality of Europe.
We would not omit our word of admiration for the series of
thirteen short poems, ' from the sketch-books of Philip Evergreen,
Painter,' woven in sequence into a little story of love, sweet and
charming, and fresh with the freshness of Arcadia. Some of the
lines possess our memory as a Doric refrain.
We have heard it said that no writer of note can escape something
in the shape of theological effort. It is so here ; and though the
author thus inevitably lays himself open to opposing criticism, those
even who differ most will find much with which they will agree and
sympathize.
Work in Brighton.    W^ork among the Lost.    By Ellice Hopkins.
London : Hatchards.
The first of these books has a short preface by Florence Nightingale,
bearing testimony to the good work which is being done in Brighton,
and entreating ' the women of England to read tlie little book, and
380 TJic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
then judge, each for lierself, how best to use that influence, never to
be forgotten, lost, or set aside, of every pure woman in the cause.'
Fuller details of the work, as carried on by Mrs. Vicars in tlie
Albion Home, are to be found in the second of these books. The
work has been going on for eighteen years with much success,
spreading its gO(jd influence far beyond Brighton, inmates being
received from all parts of the kingdom, who, after going through the
discipline and training of the Home, are sent into suitable situa¬
tions. If any of our readers are inclined to help personally in this
work of reclaiming those who have gone astray, tliey cannot do
better than study those little books, which are full of practical advice,
and show how much can be done by a wise and kind treatment of
these poor women.
Visitors to Brighton can see for themselves, as we have done, the
working of this excellent institution, which, we are sorry to hear, is
in want of funds, as many of its original supporters have died. The
work is one which can never be entirely self-supporting, though
the profits of the laundry and needlework go some way towards
the expenses.
Meiioik of Bishop Selwyn. By Rev. H. W. Tucker.
Gardner. 1879.
This book raises again in our minds an old question as to Iww
biography should be written ; for there are obviously as many ways
of writing it as there are points of view from which you may look at
an object. Should it be the aim of a writer to let us see his subject
all round ?—or to get into the heart of it \—or, thirdly, to show us
all the circumstances among which the subject lived and moved, and
leave us to make the best of it ] The last plan would seem to be
that on which Mr. Tucker's book is constructed. We feel that we
liave ' heard great argument, about it and about,' but we do not feel
that we have been much in the actual company of Bishop Selvvyn.
Here is a most noble subject—a true hero—a grand life ; and yet a
great part of the two volumes is as dull as a bine-book. The instinct
of a biographer seems to be wanting to the painstaking author, and
so likewise does the historical instinct; for both these imply not only
careful chronicling of facts, but also a certain imaginative grasp of
the whole. As an instance of the second-named want, we may take
the historj' of the Maori ■war, one of the most eventful periods of
l?ishop Selw}'n's episcopate, and how very faint and colourless is our
notion of it after getting through all Mr. Tucker has to tell us of it.
The difficulty of understanding it, as well as the vague impression
left upon us by many other parts of the book, is much increased by
the want of a good map of New Zealand, which we should have
thought a very obvious means of help to the reader, and one which
would have been of much more use to him than the ' Conspectus of
Creeds ' which forms a bulky insertion in the second volume. It may
be a strange objection to make to the biography of a bishop, but we
think that in these volumes there is a great deal too much of church
matters. Those who want to study the subject of synods, cathedral
reform, etc., may do so by consulting reports of convocation,
pamphlets, and blue-books; but in the life of our great missionary, we
want chiefly that which will enkindle others to take up his work and
act in his spirit. This we fear the book will not do ; it will not breed
missionaries, though any young man who has his mind fully made
up to the work may doubtless find here  much iiifoniiation about the
Stray Notes. 381
life which lies bef I ire him, with its special difficulties and its special
rewards. For this and other reasons we hope the book will be read—
we recouimend a system of judicious skimming—but we hope it will
be extensively read. Bishop Selwyn is not easy to find in it, but
still he /,•)■ to be found by those who diligently seek.
It is impossible in the shoit space at our command either to tell
the story of Selwyn's life, or even to quote passages which would
worthily illustrate his opinions and characteristics, though there are
points on which we feel much tempted to dwell. It is needless to
say that the lessons of his life are many, and that they are not only
for the missionary, but for all. Those whose lives are built on wholly
different lines may yet measure themselves by this man and learn
some home-truths. True, he was of an unusual mould both in body
and mind : we have perhaps no right to wish to be like him any more
than to wish to add a cubit to our stature ; yet let us look well at
him and not grudge our admiration. It is common to saj', ' Oh, a
man with such strength as his could do anything, and he is no
measure for other people.' Very well; but let us look at him as a
work of God's hand, and a specimen of what human nature may lie
even now, and from his use of his many talents take courage about
the management of our one.
0urstton Srrirs.
VIII. Give and comment upon three allusions to blindness, from
three poets, exclusive of Milton.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu, C., care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than 5th September. The best answer will be inserted, and tiie
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO JUNE SERIES.
The question seems to have been too hard for our correspondents.
Stella sends the only answer which is good, though too full in the
historical part, and too meagre in the part relating to the develop¬
ment of the features of a movement by the ingenuity of the composer.
The answer is slightly over the limits.
Explain two different senses of the term ' development' as applied
to musical compositions, and give instances of its most perfect types.
The primary meaning of the word ' development' is the act of
gradually unfolding a plan or subject; advancing it, by successive
changes, from an imperfect to a more perfect or finished state. We
see the process going on every day in nature : the seed developing
into the flower and fruit, the child into the man. It is the same
with every art, science, and invention : before attaining any degree
of perfection, it must have undergone careful elaboration. The history
of music, vocal and instrumental, forms no exception to this rule.
The ancients, as we gather from history, sacred and profane,
cultivated it both as an art and a science, but our sources of informa¬
tion are so slight and scanty that we cannot tell to what degree of
perfection they brought it.    The first attempts must have been rude
382 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and imperfect. We cannot imagine Jubal's organ to have resembled,
in the slightest degree, the glorious instrument of our own day. It
was, probably, the simplest of all wind instruments,—possibly a
species of 'Syrinx ' or ' Pan's pipe,'—originally made with one reed,
the number of which was, after a time, increased to twenty-three.
We read in sacred history of troops of men-singers and women-
singers, and various instruments of music being employed by the
Jews in their temple services. The study of music in Egypt was at
first, as we learn from Plato, confined to the priests, and only used
by them on religious occasions. The Greeks, who derived their
knowledge of the elements of art from that country, introduced it
into their games, and used it to animate their soldiers as they
inarched to battle. It seems to have been first cultivated as an
amusement by the luxurious Romans in the time of the emperors.
But not only has music, as an art, been thus developed from the
earliest times, but every class of musical composition is, more or
less, capable of development; and that in two senses. First, the
class itself may be developed into another, higher and grander ; and
secondly, the theme of each individual composition may be elaborated
and developed according to the rules of art. As an example of
the first, we may instance the gradual process by which—through
successive changes, and in the course of several centuries—the simple
tunes of the Troubadours or Provencal bards were develoj^ed into
our modern oratorio and opera. Musicians have found pleasure in
discovering in many of these songs the germs of the future melodies
of France and Italy. Their development may, in a great degree, be
attributed to the enthusiasm of the Crusaders, and the efforts of the
clergy during the dark ages to teach the people through ' miracle
plays ;' which, again, by the process of refining away Scripture
personages into mere moral abstractions, were known in the 15th
century by the name of ' moral plaj's ' or ' moralities.' But, secondly,
there is an internal development, of which each separate musical
composition—whether it be the concerto, symphony, fantasia, polo¬
naise, or any other class—is capable. The sonata, however, being so
diversified that each movement can be detached and elaborated in
such a manner as to be made a distinct work in itself, though forming
part of a consistent whole, affords the composer the largest scope for
his i^owers of development. This class of music was brought to its
present perfection by Beethoven, the varied beauties of whose ' 12th
Sonata,' 'Moonlight Sonata,' and 'Sonata Pathetique' have never
been surpassed; and these may be regarded as the most perfect
types of highly-developed musical composition. Stella.
Strag i^otcs.
Viator asks if the public may be allowed to profit by Pellegkina's
answer to the April question regarding Evelyn Hope, which was said
to be so beautiful? Might it appear as a stray note? (So many
requests of the kind have reached us, we have decided to give
Pellegrina's answer, though only as an exceptional case.)
Evelyn Hope was only sixteen, and her fair life was still in the
bud ; she was wholly unconscious of the love of the worn man of the
world, in whose heart she reigned. Perhaps he was hardly aware
himself of her empire till he heard of the death of the fair creature,
Stray Notes. 383
what seems to mortal eyes tlie utter destruction, the lapse into black
desolation of all that grace and promise. He may Jiave been a hard-
worked politician ; we think, at any rate, he was a man of action,
capable of one intense ideal motive and sentiment, which remained
untouched by the circumstances of common life. AVe can suppose
she was a girl he had often seen, but knew very slightly; the
daughter probably of an old friend and contemporary with whom he
still kept up some intercourse. And he had never spoken to disturb
the rest of her heart; he had felt that she was too young. Now that
she is gone, there is no link between them ; he is no more to her than
a fellow-mortaL Had he but spoken, there might have been a tender
hope of a future meeting shared by both. Now it was too late. But
was it so ? Was all that loveliness and all his intense interest in her
made but to jierish, to be swept away as nothingness, as the snows of
yesterday—a wave of sensation that rose and sank again amid the
changing waters of existence ? Would there be in all the endless
future never more the Evelyn he knew, never more himself as he
then was, because never more the same combinations of circumstances
and moods \ No! From the intensity of his own thoughts, will,
feelings,—from a spiritual oneness, a personality that resists the
dissolving touch of physical death,—he dares to look to worlds beyond
this one, where the ' uses of labour are surely done.' Love, Browning
calls elsewhere 'a sparkle from God's life at strife with death;' so 'it
is sure of range above the limits here ; ' and again, ' Wilt thou trust
death or not \' The Master answered, ' Yes, man has for ever.' Brave
words of confidence in the good apprehended by faith alone founded
on the good seen and recognised here—faith that God is great to
grant even as we see He is mighty to make, and 'creates the love,'
not to deceive or torment, but ' to reward the love.' The good and
the beautiful will accomplish the purpose for which they were granted ;
the deep reason will be known of even the passing physical beauty,
tlie amber hair, the mouth's young red, fleeting indeed, but passing
only into a higher type in the new life to come. The last verse,
showing the craving of the imagination to rest on some connecting
link with the dead, is very natural and beautiful. A leaf, a little
token from him of hope and spring, was to be buried with her.
' A thought lay like a flower upon my heart,'
says Mrs. Browning, and, like the leaf, he hopes the thought some
day may be permitted to touch the dead girl's personality. It is also
a pledge of his own fidelity to the chosen lady of his att'ections. The
hour that he watches by the side of the dead Evelyn is all that he
will have of love fulfilled on earth; he knows that he is hers, and
that he will love her always; he feels that she is his, because ' all we
have willed or hoped or dreamed of good shall exist,' 'on the earth,
the broken arcs; in the lieaven, a perfect round.'—Pellegrina.
Hennie thus further answers A Perplexed Citizen :—As I have
been using an incubator through the coldest part of the winter, I
shall be glad to explain its use and construction. First I had
better say an incubator is used only for hatching eggs instead of a
sitting hen, whilst an artificial mother serves instead of a hen to brood
the chickens after they are hatched. There are various sorts of
incubators, heated by hot water, gas, or oil lamps. There have been
various public trials of incubators both in England and Scotland, and
the result has been that the incubator made by Messrs. Christy, of
384 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Fenclmrch Street, London, and heated by hot water, has been decided
to be the most successful and easiest managed. I used this winter
one made by an amateur, and as every fertile egg in it was hatched,
the result was far better than it would have been under a hen. It
consisted of a wooden box enclosing a small zinc tank, with an inlet
for the water at the top, and an outlet for it at the bottom. In the
middle of the tank was a small box or well with a glass top, in which
the eggs were placed. The process of attending to it consisted of
filling it with hot water to begin with, till it reached a temperature
of 105° Fahrenheit, and then night and morning replenishing it with
about two quarts of boiling water, to raise the temperature to the
same lieat. All makers of incubators impress upon one that the heat
must not be allowed to vary more than two or three degrees, or fail¬
ure will result. I am certaiii that this is a mistake. I allowed mine
to vary from 92° to 108°, and the chickens were remarkably strong.
A great deal depends on plenty of moisture being kept in the egg
compartment. An artificial mother usually consists of a frame
supporting a tank filled with warm water, with a sheepskin or some¬
thing woollen nailed to it, in which the chickens may nestle at
pleasure.
AiGLE writes :—'I have just seen Miss Yonge's article on Botany
in your magazine, in which she mentions the difficulty of preserving
the colour of wild flowers in pressing them. I have been advised
lately, by one who has had experience, to try placing a thin layer of
wadding above and below the flower while it is being pressed. My
friend invariably does this, and has found it successful.'
Nottrrs to Corrrsponticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies^ Edluhurgh Magudue, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless _/«/Z postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not bo returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Oflice-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The Editors will be happy to receive further contributions or
suggestions for the Series on 'Country Subjects and Pursuits.'
No meetings of the Ladies' Edinburgli Literary Society will be
held in August and September. In order to suit the convenience of
members, tlie meeting in October is postponed till Saturdaj' the 11th,
when it will be held at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m. The usual
Debate will give place to a discussion on the comparative advantages
to be derived from the seven professorial classes [English Literature,
Logic and Mental Philosoi:)li}', Education, Exiserimental Physics,
Mathematics, Greek, Latin], to be held next session in the Edinburgli
Association for the University Education of Women.
Cottniry Subjects and Pw'suits. 385
(Countrg Subjects anlf pursuits.
X.—AFLOAT.
' She walks the water like a thing of life,
Daring the very elements to strife.'
To a real lover of the sea, her wonders and her beauties, there
can be no enjoyment equal to yachting.
No doubt many will exclaim, ' Oh, but I am such a
wretched sailor, I should always be miserable !' Never mind
if you are, no one wants you to put to sea in a gale of wind,
or to take such a long voyage as is described in Mrs.
Brassey's delightful book. The Cruise of the Sunbeam.
Besides, I daresay your experience of a sea voyage may have
been restricted to a nasty passage between Dover and
Calais in a crowded steamer, with a short cross swell running
down the Channel, or perhaps to a pull in a heavy rowing
boat off some favourite watering-place. Half the pleasure
of yachting to my mind consists of living on board the neat,
trim vessel, equally spotless and clean be she five tons or
500. I have seen and lived on various yachts both at
home and abroad, sometimes not having slept ashore for six
months at a time, so will try to explain the chief facts about
them.
The English headquarters of yachting is considered to be
at Cowes, in the Isle of Wight. Here about August, especially
during the regatta week, may be seen the finest amateur
fleet in the world, of every variety of rig and of size, from
the diminutive vessel of a few tons, manned and navigated
by its owner with the help of a man or boy, up to steamers
and schooners of several hundred tons, requiring a crew of
30 men. Cowes lies on both sides of the river Medina, with
large yacht-building yards, on whose ' slips' may often be
seen the lines of a new vessel, or a well-known racer under¬
going alterations to make her yet more swift. In a picturesque
building on the edge of the sea the lioyal Yacht Squadron
have their club-rooins, with a private landing-place for their
members, whose yachts are easily distinguished by their
floating the white ensign, the same as that carried by the
ships of the Eoyal Navy, a distinction awarded to no other
club. During the regatta, Cowes is crowded with visitors,
and very exciting are some of the races, though to my mind
a great deal of pleasure is withheld by the race being rarely
won by the vessel coming in first, a certain number of
minutes being  allowed  to  compensate  for extra tonnage
No. 57.—Septkmber 1879. 2 B
S86 T/ie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
carried by a competitor. liyde, Southsea, Southampton,
Dover, Devonport, and all the chief seaports of the south,
possess yachting clubs and hold regattas. In the Thames,
off Gravesend and Erith, a considerable fleet of yachts is
generally anchored; whilst on the east coast, Hull and
Harwich offer all the inducements in their power to yachts¬
men. Both Scotland and Ireland are annually visited by
numbers of vessels, Kingstown, near Dublin, being a very
favourite resort. The towns on the Clyde in Scotland have
monopolized a large share of the yacht-building trade;
particularly for steam yachts are they noted.
I think I had better give a short account of a cruise, in
order that my readers may realise in detail the peculiarities
of a yacht and her belongings. The first thing to be done is
naturally to obtain a yacht, which may be either bouglit
outright or else hired at so much per ton per month, either
to include or not, as may be previously arranged, the pay of
the crew. There are in all ports well-known yacht agents
who always have a targe selection on their books. I once
had to choose a yacht for a family to winter in and cruise
about the Mediterranean; and as several ladies were to be of
the party, I naturally looked more to their personal comfort
than to the fast-sailing qualities of the vessel. I chose one
of 132 tons for a party of six. She was broad in the beam,
which, for the uninitiated, I had better explain means broad
in proportion to her lengtli; for if you buy a racer, or even a
very swift sailer, she is generally very narrow, and con¬
sequently would have bad sleeping accommodation, and also
give you a terrible tossing in rough weather. Of course
there are many other details to be looked to, such as
sufficient ballast to keep her steady in the water, and to
observe that she be not over-masted; that her decks are
sound and well-caulked, or the wet will come through below;
that her sails and boats be in good condition, etc. etc. The
after or ladies' cabin is the one nearest the stern of the vessel,
and holds two ' berths' placed rather high up, with large
drawers underneath, and lockers or chests hid in every
available corner; in fact, in one cruise the wine cellar was
under my berth. In the way of furniture, a yaclit's cabin
contains little beyond a washing-stand, table, and swinging
lamp, with sometimes a bath underneath the floor. The
saloon or general living room,—for it is only very large yachts
that contain two sitting rooms,—has a swinging table with
sofas all round, and though the table is fixed in harbour,
with any wind it must be loosened.    A schooner yacht has
Country Subjects and Piirsuits. 387
two masts, mainmast and foremast. Nearly all the large
yachts are of this description, and may either be rigged ' lore
and aft' or else ' square-rigged.' A cutter having but one
mast, the size of the principal sail is greater in proportion,
and this is why she requires more men than a schooner of
the same tonnage. A yawl is rigged like a cutter, with the
addition of a small sail right aft, and her mainsail not being
so large as that of a cutter, she is considered a very comfort¬
able boat to cruise in.
Now-a-days a great many steam yachts are built, very
expensive luxuries, and not to my mind to be compared to
their sailing rivals; and besides the extra outlay in building,
engineers and coals are wanted for the engines, which often
take up the best part of the vessel.
A steam launch is a great addition to a large sailing
yacht, useful either in towing into a crowded harbour or in
lending help when becalmed within sight of land, and
charming for making excursions in and about a coast; but
they are heavy boats to carry, and in bad weather have to
be taken on deck, instead of being slung on ' davits' as are
the other boats, of which a yacht generally carries three,—a
' gig,' manned by four or six oars, kept for the use of the
owner and family ; a ' cutter,' used for every sort of purpose,
carrying provisions, fetching water, etc.; and a ' dingy,' a
small boat rowed by one man and slung over the stern when
at sea.
Crews of yachts are very fine men in appearance, smart
and tidy in their dress, which consists of blue or white
jerseys and trousers, with the name or badge worked on the
breast. Four of them are told off as the gig's crew, one
being chosen as coxswain ; and delightful it is to be swiftly
rowed in a light boat, and with a little practice one can
easily learn to steer, though to bring a boat neatly alongside
of a vessel swinging with the tide requires a certain amount
of dexterity.
As I am writing for ladies, a few words as to suitable
attire may not be out of place. Tor ordinary wear, looks,
and comfort, there is nothing better or so good as the orthodox
blue serge, with a tarpaulin or str;aw hat, the ribbon showing
the name of the yacht. Clothes are very apt to get spoilt at
sea from the damp, therefore for smart shore-going, a white
serge looks excessively neat and pretty, and washes well.
For very hot weather, a blue and white striped Galatea is
cool and neat; but even in the hottest weather, one feels a
certain amount of air on the water, which makes one glad of
388 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
warmer clothes than are required on shore. A thick ulster
or mackintosh is indispensable, and no nails must be allowed
in the shoes, which are best soled with india-rubber, for fear
of damaging the deck, the pride of a captain's heart.
Now a comfortable vessel having been chosen,—and I lay
stress on the word comfortable, for, oh the misery of a vessel
which seems to delight in shipping heavy seas over her
bulwarks, to flood everything !—she next has to be fitted out;
that is to say, all her sails have to be ' bent' and put in
repair, her spars adjusted, and her rigging erected; for except
the masts themselves, and what is called ' standing rigging,'
everything is taken out of a vessel when she is laid up.
This process in a large vessel will take about three weeks,
during which time the captain will have chosen a competent
crew. The pay of ordinary seamen is from £1, Is. per week,
whilst a mate receives £1, 10s. and a captain from £2, 10s.,
and their food; the steward and cook receive something above
a seaman's pay, and the ship's boy something less. All
captains are now compelled to hold a certificate of naviga¬
tion, and are usually well-educated, respectable men. Before
sailing, the crew sign articles, and often enter into an
arrangement with the owner that a certain proportion of
their wages may be paid weekly to their families during
their absence abroad.
Let us now consider that we have put to sea, and are
awakened early in the morning by what seems to our un¬
accustomed ears to be a dreadful disturbance on deck,
accompanied by a loud pattering of feet; this, on inquiry, we
find to be the matutinal washing of the deck, to wdiich it owes
its spotless appearance. Doubtless it will be a few days
before yachtsmen, or rather yachtswomen, find their sea-legs,
and dire may be their moans that they ever left land, but in
a short time the worst will have passed by; and then how great
the delights of sitting on deck, skimming through the bine
water, watching the ocean birds hovering round, swooping
down as if at times they meant to pick things off the deck
itself; at night, if in southern climes, wondering at the
brilliant phosphorescent light, when everything one touches
seems to emit a blue flame, and the vessel cuts through
waves of fire,
' And leaves behind a rippling wave of light'!
We anchor in some lovely harbour, teeming with nautical
life; we watch boats flitting to and from the shore, manned
by natives of distant countries, clad in some distinctive
costume, their swarthy faces relieved by the bright colouring
Country Stibjeds and Pursuits. 389
of their dress, and chanting as they pull some native song.
Probably we are near a man-of-war,—for yachts out of
courtesy are generally given the best moorings in a strange
harbour,—and we can see and hear all that goes on on board
the monster vessel, if perchance it be an ironclad. Or we can
fish off the side of our own home. In the Mediterranean the
sea is often so transparent that the fish can be seen coming
to the bait. Nearer home, particularly near the Eddystone
Lighthouse, we can go trawling with large nets, and immense
is the result of a good day's deep-sea fishing. Perhaps we
have anchored in some little retired creek or bay in Greece
or Albania, far out of the beaten track of steamers; we amuse
ourselves in landing to explore what is to us an unknown
country, and to make acquaintance with the wonder-struck
natives, who have never seen any other females than their
own submissive, hard-worked kindred. The gentlemen of
the party take their guns, and there being no guarded
preserves, will succeed in bringing home some trophy to
vary the monotony of yacht fare.
Though there is much of the dolce far nientc existence
about a yachting life, it does not naturally follow that the
days need be idly or unprofitably spent. To any one fond of
sketching, how numerous are the opportunities of obtaining
bits of sea-coast, fishing villages and their picturesque in¬
habitants, shepherds and their flocks, lovely sunsets, grand
headlands, and many views which, only visible from the
water, never fall to the lot of those who stick to the ordinary
tours. Those who cannot draw, may photograph; dry plates
may be exposed by perfectly inexperienced persons, and
brought back untouched to England to be developed.
Botany is also rendered extremely interesting, opportunities
being att'orded of obtaining many plants which only grow
on sea-coasts, and hitherto only known to us by hearsay.
What an opportunity for studying languages is offered when
we take a voyage of some days, or in the evenings ; and I may
remark to those meditating a southern voyage, that by far
the most useful language to know in Greece, Malta, Egypt,
etc., is Italian; rarely is any one of the lower classes met
with who understands French. I advise all ladies to learn
to row and swim whenever an opportunity arises; many
instances have occurred w^hen life would have been lost if
some member of the party had not possessed these accom¬
plishments. Learning to steer the yacht is not an uncommon
accomplishment for some ladies, and I have seen the owner's
wife on board a cutter skilfully steering in and out of a
390 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
crowded harbour. A little knowledge of cooking is also a
great boon to the party, such as being able to make cakes,
rolls, puddings, jellies, salads, etc., the ship cook's talents
being generally confined to the most primitive forms of
roasting and boiling, and the ordinary fare becoming often
monotonous, and in case of illness distasteful. Near the
home ports there is no fear of running short of provisions;
but for longer voyages it is best to lay in a good store of
first-class tinned provisions, such as soups, marmalade, and
biscuit.?, for by dire experience I can tell how unpalatable
salted meat becomes when one does not feel inclined to
touch food from sea-sickness. In many parts of the Mediter¬
ranean it is most difficult to procure any fresh meat beyond
kid and lamb of such diminutive size that a whole animal is
placed on the dish at once. A plentiful supply of books
should be taken, and, if possible, some containing the history
and description of the places it is proposed to visit, as it
certainly adds greatly to the interest of scenery to be able to
recall feats of former days in the same spot. Good standard
English works should also be provided, for there will be plenty
of time to enjoy them. As for music, a small piano is usually
carried in the main cabin ; and if the party can muster
sufficient voices for a chorus, a fine evening on deck is the
very time for it, voices floating over the water always having
an enchanting effect. Sailors are very fond of playing
various instruments, and on any holiday indulge in a variety
of nautical songs of a most pathetic description.
Hardly any one can have been fortunate enough to have
cruised for any time or to any distance without having
encountered at intervals some ' dirty' weather,—indeed, the
generality of yachtswomen often imagine it to be blowing
hard when the captain will declare it is only a ' puff of air.'
More particularly in the IVIediterranean is one liable to be
overtaken by sudden and violent squalls ; sitting on deck,
all sail set, apparently wind enough only to fill the top-sails
and to send the vessel briskly along, one imagines that all
will continue thus, and one has already calculated how soon,
at such a rate, the next port wdll be reached. But at sunset
the captain looks anxiously to windward, where dark and
lowering clouds are gathering:
' Tlie evening sun sunk down ; huge piles of clouds,
Crimson and sable, rose upon his disc,
And quenched him ere his setting, like some champion
In his last conflict, losing all his glory.
Sure signals those of storm.'
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 39 ^
Down with the top-sails, double reef the main and foresail,
an extra hand to the helm, and we are ready to meet our
approaching foe, whom we can now see sweeping down upon
us as if we and we only were the object of his wrath.
Choice is given to the ladies either to be lashed to the side
in their chairs, witli the certainty of getting soused by the
angry waves fast lashing themselves into foam, or to go
below, and liave the hatchway closed down over the com¬
panion-ladder. Wrapped in rugs and mackintoshes, they
prefer to stop and brave the weather, rather than lose a
sight of surpassing grandeur, even though it awakens awe.
The pelting rain descends in torrents, till one pities the
helmsman, unable to shelter himself, as do the rest of the
crew, under the lee side of the deck. We dash along, now
leaping the mountains of water, now plunging downwards,
dipping our bowsprit right through the waves that roll across
our track; the deck is covered with water one moment and
as quickly relieved by the escape of its unwelcome visitor
through the ' scuppers.' In vain we hope to reach our dis¬
tant port, the wind is nearly dead against us, and we have to
tack and tack again; and with the prospect of beating about
all night, anxious voices are heard imploring the captain to
put them ashore, wlio, at heart no doubt despising his un-
seamanlike passengers, decides to go about, and to run back
to the harbour which we left only in the morning in all the
enjoyment of a lovely, bright day, with the prospect of a fair
and speedy voyage before us.
When we venture below, great is the confusion that greets
some of us in our cabins, where, having neglected the pre¬
caution of turning down the fastenings with which all
drawers and lockers are provided, we find a happy medley
on the floor of clothes, books, boots, and bottles whose corks
have also taken the opportunity of escaping, and the
contents of which are dispersed over their companions in
misfortune; the sudden motion of the vessel has induced
everything to jump out of its place and to join in a whirling,
sliding dance, greatly to the detriment of all breakables.
As we gather up the remnants, a thought strikes us as to
what will have become of the china and glass, but the
steward has seen that every article is fitted into the little
frame belonging to it, or hung on to a hook from which it
cannot jump off. We even find our dinner laid; in our
ignorance we exclaim in horror that the table is all on one
side, and that everything must slip off, but no, it is a swing-
■ ing table, everything stops on, only some of us must get
392 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
accustomed to eat with our dinner in our laps, whilst the
others have theirs up to their mouths.
Often shortly after a storm you may experience a totally
different sensation—the wind drops altogether, and a dead
calm ensues, or you may have all the remains of a storm, a
heavy, rolling swell, the motion of which is often far more
irksome than that of a fresh breeze, every spar on board
creaks dismally, and rolls with a despairing groan, first on
one side then on the other, as the vessel lurches heavily;
you turn in within sight of some island or headland, your
sides are battered by knocking against the sides of your
berth all night, and the same scenery catches your eye the
first thing when you go on deck in the morning. Pieces of
paper and bottles are thrown overboard to try and mark
any progress, but they float alongside till we weary of their
sight.
o
' Ships in the calm seem anchored ; for they glide
On the still sea, urged solely by the tide.'
We examine the patent log which floats behind us, but it
only marks half a knot per hour, and thus we continue till
a welcome breeze springs up, and carries us swiftly on our
course.
Can one who has experienced it, ever forget the pleasure-
able sensation of sighting land when in quest of some place
of shelter ? The distant grey coast becomes gradually more
distinct as we approach it, the hazy outlines develop them¬
selves into rugged points, we draw near enough to distinguish
caves and clefts ; we coast along in search of an inlet, startling
the sea-birds into short fliglits, when with plaintive cries
they settle within a stone's throw; perchance we spy an
opening beneath a massive rock, which we feel certain we
could explore. ' The gig's away,' calls the mate; in we get,
and pull for our discovery. A narrow entrance causes us to
duck our heads, and two strokes of the oars carry us into a
lofty cave, which re-echoes every sound. We shout to hear
the effect, startling from their hiding-place hundreds of
rock-pigeons, which whirl round our heads, some of them in
their alarm almost striking us with their winqs in their
efforts to escape by the low entrance. Leaving the startled
inhabitants of the cave to recover the intrusion, we proceed
on our voyage, and shortly espy what looks like the mouth
of a small river. We venture slowly up it after consulting
the chart, almost touching the high banks on each side with
our bowsprit, so short are the tacks the wind necessitates our
Country Subjects and Pursnits. 393
making. "We proceed thus a few hundred yards, when in
rounding a point we find ourselves in a large salt-water lake,
a perfectly land-locked harbour, where ships might lie snug,
and no one passing along the coast would suspect their
proximity. Hardly do we allow time for the anchor to be
dropped, ere we are paddling off in the dingy to explore this
new land, and soon discover a shepherd, who has been
watching us from behind a rock, wondering what can be the
object of strangers in disturbing his solitude, but quite ready
to fraternize over a present of tobacco. Expeditions follow
of course. A distant hill is spied, from the summit of which
an extensive view must be obtained; an early start on the
morrow is decided upon,—for distance in a strange land and
ascending ground are very deceptive. Accordingly we are
called at eight bells (4 a.m.), and are ready even before the
sun is risen, and are thus in time to watch the gradual
breaking of the gloom, tlie first warm colouring developing
till the whole sky is bathed in pink, and night is over:
' And more magnificent art thou, bright sun !
Uprising from the ocean's billowy bed ;
Who, that has seen thee thus, as I have done,
Can e'er forget the effulgent splendours spread
From thy emerging radiance ?'
Our breakfast hurried over, we enlist two sailors to escort us
and carry all requisites, and are put ashore where we find
mules and guides awaiting us. With much trouble and
amusement we perch ourselves on the wooden saddles
provided, and start in single file. Hardly have we gone a
few yards when first one and then another of our party are
seen to quit their saddles with far more haste than is com¬
patible with either elegance or comfort; but experience soon
teaches the necessary amount of balance required, and one
is able to give all one's attention to the enjoyment of the
ever-changing scene before us. One hour we keep a track
through orange and olive groves, laden with fruit and
jealously watched by the owners, whose whole subsistence
depends on their crops. The next we climb a narrow stony
track on the very edge of a hill, en route, to the village
perched on its summit, the inhabitants of which flock to look
at the rare sight of strangers. From the chattering and
laughter amongst them, we give occasion apparently to many
amusing comments. Down the hill we proceed, crossing a
narrow brook trickling down a wide bed to the sea, finally gain¬
ing our destined point, from whence we watch the sun setting
394 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
far away over the sea, clothing each island and hill with a
deep tint of purple, and even when sunk totally out of sight,
its reflected rays soften every outline of nature :
'Crimson disappears, but o'er the hills
A flush of orange hovers, softening up
Into harmonious union with the blue.'
We remain absorbed in admiration till the rapid twilight
drives us homewards, pondering over a day of enjoyment
such as seldom falls to the lot of those who keep but to
beaten tracks, and travel by railroad or steamer. I hope I
have said enough to show how immense and how varied are
the pleasures and experiences of yachting. Any one fagged
and weary of town life, requiring a thorough change of scene
and freedom from ordinary daily life, I strongly advise to
try it. It need not be a costly amusement; there are no
travelling expenses, no hotel bills, no packing necessary on
the eve of a removal; you carry your home with you, which
may vary in size and form, as do a cottage and a castle, but
the pleasure will be as great, the benefit derived as satis¬
factory, choose what size you will. You may turn into your
berth in one harbour, and with no personal exertion wake in
another.
To every one tired of the well-known watering-places, but
still longing for sea breezes and amusements, I repeat
again and again, ' Try yachting.' Y. 0.
SEritten in ©ejection ijg t!)e Sea«
The skerry away in the fjord,
So deep in the sea's unrest,
In quiet endures for ever
The foam that beats on its breast.
Mean is the man who is weaker
Than senseless rock in the strife.
And yields to the clash of the billows
The countering currents of life.
E. J. 0.
—From the Icelandic of Bjarna Tlwrarensen.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 395
V^z Beggar of Capo tii fHontc: a ^ale of Sixtg^one.
By the Author of 'Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTER XIV.
Claudia and Maddalena had not left the rocks more than
three days when Livia became seriously ill, and refused to
take any food. Her paroxysms of anger had left her, and
the poor creature sank into a state of utter wretchedness,
moaning and calling continually for her son Paolo. Concetta
tried by every means in her power to soothe her and induce
her to eat, but she feared to press her too much lest she
might bring back the former violence. With great difficulty
she succeeded in making her take a little nourishment, but
on the fifth day Livia became so much worse that Concetta
feared slie was dying. Slie entreated Giuseppe, the peasant
in whose charge they were left, to hasten in search of some
assistance; but he, fearing to incur tlie displeasure of Mlippo,
should it be known that he had absented himself, at first
refused to go. He thought perhaps that Filippo would be
annoyed if a stranger were brought into his place of conceal¬
ment. He was a poor ignorant man, and knew little of the
country beyond the limits of the rocks. This, no doubt,
had been the chief reason of his being trusted by Filippo in
his absence. Concetta, becoming every hour more alarmed,
at length persuaded him to go to the little roadside inn,
where they had stopped on her first coming to the rocks.
Slie remembered the kind manner of the hostess, and bade
him implore her to return with him with all speed, as,
knowing Filippo and his family, this woman was not likely
to betray their haunts.
This last suggestion prevailed, and the man set off to do
her bidding. Concetta returned to the chamber of Livia, to
watch by her until he should return with the woman. The
poor creature's mind was more wandering than ever, and
from time to time she would fix her eyes earnestly on the
pale face of the girl, as if trying to recall some incident
connected with her history. She evidently mistook her for
some person she had known in former days, and after a long
silence, during which she had never taken her eyes off
Concetta, she beckoned her from the foot of the bed where
she was sitting. Concetta, supposing she wished to take
something, rose at once, and, bending kindly over her, asked
A\hat she should bring her.    Livia took her hand in hers as
396 Tlie Ladies' EdiiibiirgJi Magazine.
gently as if she had been her mother, and drawing lier closely
to her, said in a whisper:
' Teresa, dearest, where has Matteo kept thee all these
years, and how camest thou to leave the convent and break
thy vow, leaving the good sisters who loved thee so
tenderly ?'
Concetta started from her bending attitude on hearing
these words, and half drew her hand away in the sudden
excitement, for conjecture was instantly busy with her as to
the meaning of what she had heard; however, quick as
thought she recovered herself, and leaning gently towards
the sick woman, said hesitatingly:
' Livia doth mistake me for some other: they call me
Maria; and Matteo, though I know little of him, hath ever
been my friend.'
' Nay, girl,' replied Livia in an angry tone ; ' think not to
deceive me as thou didst deceive thy sister nuns. That thou
art not happy, I read in tliy pale face; and w^ert thou not so
like thy mother, whom I loved as my own sister, I would
even now denounce thee, girl.'
Then, with a piteous cry, she flung her arms up in the wild
manner customary to her when much excited, and seemed to
implore mercy from heaven.
' I said thou wert not happy, girl,' she continued after a
pause; ' who ever knew happiness that committed sin ?
Thou seest what a wretch I am, that am but the victim of
another's crime ; think, then, what thou deservedst who hast
broke thy vows to God and left thy holy calling.'
Concetta was speechless from astonishment, for she doubted
not this was a true history, and that Matteo had run away
with a nun. This, then, explained his recklessness, and
perhaps in some way bound his fate with that of Filippo.
A thousand conjectures flashed through her mind, but how
to convince the poor creature, now tossing herself from side
to side in restless moaning, that Teresa and herself were
separate persons, she knew not. Could there be any resem¬
blance between this nun and herself which might have
interested Matteo in her fate ? She longed to lead Livia to
speak more fully on the subject, hoping to elicit something
more definite of this strange history, but already the shadowy
memory had given way to present sorrow, and the wretched
woman resumed her heart-broken cry for her son. Some
hoiirs had passed since the man had left the rocks in search
of assistance, and Concetta was sitting watching anxiously
for his return, for Livia was growing more excited, when the
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 397
sound of wheels struck her ears, and she hastened towards
the entrance of the enclosure, hoping to find the kind-
hearted woman had come to her assistance. What was her
horror on turning the angle of the great rock, to see Ercole
unfastening a horse from a light-covered cart! Her breath
forsook her at this sight, and she leaned for a moment against
the rock to recover herself, trusting to regain the house
before he perceived her; but his quick ear had caught the
sound of her footsteps light as they were, and throwing down
the reins he sprang forward, and endeavoured to take her
hand, as he said:
' This is kind, wench, to come and welcome me. Thou
knewest I should come to give thee liberty, and see I have
fulfilled my promise, so now give me my reward.'
Concetta's heart beat fast as she struggled to free herself
from his grasp, for he had seized her in his arms, when Livia,
with her long black hair all unbound, and uttering a piercing
scream, appeared in sight, waving her arms high in the air
and calling loudly on Filippo. The suddenness of this
apparition made the young man let go his hold of Concetta,
who seized the opportunity to fly back to the shelter of the
house. She listened tremblingly to the angry menaces of
Ercole, mingled with Livia's loud cries, who seemed to be
struggling with him, as he tried to force her back to the
dwelling and stop her screams for help. He was evidently
aware of their being alone at the rocks, or he would not have
exposed himself to the chance of any interference from the
j)easant, who would have resisted his attempts. He at last
succeeded in bringing Livia back to the house, and deeming
it wiser policy to deal quietly with Concetta, affected to take
her repulse in a jesting manner, merely remarking he
expected to find more gratitude from the girl he had done so
much to please. Concetta, who had now recovered from her
first alarm, made no reply, but busied herself in soothing
Livia into calmness, earnestly praying that Giuseppe would
have arrived with the women before he could offer her any
further indignities. Ercole desired her to prepare to leave
the rocks in an hour, and bade her provide some food for
herself and him, as they might not reach any village through
the night. She looked at him as if she did not understand
liis meaning, for she dared not trust herself to speak.
' Didst thou not hear me, pretty one ?' said he, with a
laugh that made her shudder. ' I promised thee liberty, and
now that I am about to open the door of thy cage, thou dost
not care to leave it.'
398 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
In a low voice, she asked if Claudia had sent for her and
Livia.
' That Claudia has sent for thee is sufficient, girl. She does
not need a poor maniac to add to her cares. Come, get thee
up and prepare thyself, else night will surely o'ertake us in
tliis devil's glen, and we must be many leagues away ere
morning breaks.'
Concetta's voice trembled, but her exterior was calm and
her manner firm as she said:
' I cannot leave this poor creature alone to die, perhaps
without help; thou must therefore return alone to Claudia if
thou canst not take her also.'
Ercole hesitated for an instant in his reply, which gave
Livia the opportunity of speaking, and she began very
piteously, imploring Concetta not to leave her, clinging to
her as if fearing they might be parted by violence. This
gave Concetta courage, and fixing her eyes steadily on the
young man, she said :
' If thou meanest to act truly by me, thou wilt take her
with us; I "will not go one step without her if I should
never leave the rocks again.'
He saw she was determined, and dreading, perhaps, the
vengeance of Tilippo should he leave the wretched woman
to die alone in that deep solitude, he said, after a moment's
consideration :
' As my desire is but to please thee, ungrateful girl, I will
consent to take her, but on thee must be the blame if harm
happens to the poor mad creature. Thou will repent thee
of thy kindness ere thy journey is half accomplished; but be
it as thou wilt, I have promised and will not break my word.
Let her be ready in the hour, for I will not wait longer for
her.'
He then went to attend to his horse's wants, and also to
satisfy his own hunger. Concetta knew not what to think
might be the issue of this sudden journey, for she greatly
mistrusted Ercole, yet she was so completely in his power
that she dared not refuse to obey him. She resolved,
come what might, not to lose sight of the poor suffering
Livia at any cost, for she not only felt pity for her situa¬
tion, but she looked on her companionship as a kind of
protection from the insults of Ercole. Concetta, however,
had great difficulty in persuading her it was best to comply
with Ercole's wishes in regard to leaving the rocks, and
nothing but the hope of finding Paolo where they were
going   made  her at last   consent.     Ercole   became  very
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 399
impatient, and repeatedly came to the door of their chamber
to hurry them, threatening to leave them on the road if they
delayed any longer. Concetta, had she dared, M-ould pur¬
posely have lingered in hopes Giuseppe and the woman she
had sent for would be there before they started ; but Ercole
grew so angry that she feared to delay any longer, and
hastily filling a basket with some bread and a bottle of wine,
and throwing an old mantle over Livia, she took the poor
creature by the hand, and, supporting her by her arm, led the
way to the cart which was already standing at the entrance.
She fastened over her own shoulders the old shawl which
Ursula had wrapped round her when Filippo first carried
her off, and with that sole protection from the cold, took her
seat by the side of Livia, whom Ercole, with some unwilling¬
ness, helped up into the cart. Could any one have remarked
tlie two women as they left the rocks, they would have been
struck with the strange contrast of their appearance. The
gaunt figure of Livia, who, with her black hair floating
wildly over her shoulders and looking hurriedly round like
some frightened animal, leaned heavily on the young girl,
and Concetta's sweet face, beaming with compassion for the
sufferings of the poor maniac she more than half supported,
would have formed a study for a painter ! The large folds
of the shawl shrouded while they could not conceal the
grace of her figure, and Ercole looked at her with increasing
admiration. He came forward to assist her into the cart,
but she evaded his touch by passing rapidly to the other
side. As they were now about to move, Concetta tremblingly
asked whether Ercole did not mean to leave some token by
which Giuseppe might know what course they had taken.
He laughed loudly at this, but made no direct answer, being
evidently anxious to get away before the return of the man.
Seizing the reins and jumping into the driving seat, he urged
the steed, which was a strong pack-horse, to its utmost
speed as soon as they had cleared the broken lava that was
strewn about in every direction.
The excitement and suddenness of their departure had for
a time given Livia strength to bear up, but now that they
had left the rocks where she had lived for so long a period,
her weakness and her fears returned, and she lay stretched
out on the litter in the bottom of the cart, moaning and
apparently suffering much from the jolting of the vehicle
over the rough way. Concetta tried to support her head as
she sat by her side, but the poor creature restlessly turned
from side to side, calling upon Paolo to come and save her,
400 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and seeming to take no heed of her companion. Concetta
endeavoured to see tlie direction in which Ercole was taking
them, but the short day had nearly closed in, and there was
nu twilight. She could only hope they might meet Giuseppe
on his return from the inn, as she would in that case feel
assured she was on the same route as that previously
traversed with Filippo. There were no means of judging of
the time, but through the openings of the canvas she saw
the stars shining. It seemed to her that Ercole was not
very familiar with the road, for every now and then he
stopped and dismounted as if to examine the landmarks.
He appeared also to be listening attentively at those times,
as if he either expected or feared some interruption. Poor
Concetta's heart sank with apprehension at these baitings,
for it now became evident he had purposely taken a different
path, or they must have met Giuseppe. Exhausted by
weakness and sorrow, poor Livia had ceased to moan, and
now lay so motionless that Concetta feared she had fainted,
and might die in that state if some means were not used to
restore her. This thought gave her courage to address Ercole,
and she begged he would stop the cart while she gave a
draught of wine to the poor exhausted woman; but he would
not, and roughly bade her not to trouble him with such
requests. ' If she did die, so much the better for them all.'
He had not time to be waiting on an old mad woman, and
it would be time enough to think of her when they came to
their journey's end, adding, in an undertone, he had never
bargained for such a companion.
Goncetta was not, however, to be driven from her purpose,
so she contrived to lift poor Livia from her reclining posture
and put the flask to her lips, but could not tell whether she
drank from it, for she sank back in the cart and did not speak.
-Another hour passed, and once more they stopped, and
Concetta distinctly heard the sound of waves falling in
regular succession on a rocky coast at no great distance. A
strange hope now filled her breast. Had Ercole indeed brought
tliem to this retreat to favour her escape ?—for now it was
plain they had left the main road and were nearing the
coast. Could it be that he had used Claudia's name as a
pretext for leaving the rocks, and thus giving her a chance
of escaping ? Before she could collect her thoughts and
determine what her course should be if the means of leaving
the island were offered her, Ercole had again dismounted,
and taking the horse out of the cart was soon out of sight,
for she could distinguish nothing but a huge chaos of rocks
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 401
blocking up the road they had travelled. Livia started up
as the cart stopped, and feeling for Concetta, whom she could
not see, so obscure was the night, demanded where they
were. Alas! Concetta could give her no reply, for she
dared not impart her hopes to one whose clouded intellect
unfitted her for understanding any plan which required
tliought. She also feared to call forth any new emotion in
Livia, so prostrated had she become in mind and body.
They were not left long in doubt, for Ercole now appeared
with a lantern, which he set down, and then came forward
to assist Concetta from the cart, saying they had reached
their destination for the night. She did not dare refuse his
help, fearing to irritate him, and so add to the fears and
agitation of Livia, but she involuntarily shrank from the
pressure of his encircling arms as he lifted her down. He
then laid hold of Livia, and drew her tall figure with some
roughness from the cart amidst cries and reproaches. He
paid no attention to lier remonstrances, but taking up the
lantern, bade them follow him, and be careful of their footing.
Livia cluug as before to Concetta, though, to the surprise of
the latter, she did not appear so frightened as might have
been expected. When Ercole led the way down some rude
steps cut in the rocks, forming one side of what seemed a
large cavern, and ending in a winding passage, a nervous
dread kept Concetta silent, though a thought crossed her
mind that the cavern might after all be the hiding-place of
Filippo and his wife and daughter.
Livia seemed to have no dread of entering the cavern, and
even roused herself to some exertion ; so Concetta concluded
they had sought refuge in this place in other troublous
times. Still she could not divest herself of fear, and her
heart beat almost audibly as she descended the rough
uneven steps after Ercole, who did not speak, tliough he held
the lantern carefully before her at each turning. After a
time the passage became narrower, and scarcely high enough
to admit them without stooping. Livia followed them
closely, supporting herself against the sides of the rock.
She now began to question Ercole when they should find
Paolo and Eilippo. He made her no answer, but went
cautiously forward in a bending posture, till suddenly he
stopped, and putting his finger to his lips he made signs for
her to cease speaking. After listening attentively for a
minute or two, he went forward again, and forcing himself
through a narrow aperture, beckoned to Concetta to follow
him.    What was her astonishment at finding herself in a
No. 57.—Septembeb 1879. 2 C
402 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
large, high cavern hung with magnificent stalactites. On
the ground were some remains of food, such as the rind of
cheese, and broken bits of coarse bread, and two rush beds
which bore evident traces of having been occupied but
recently. Livia, on seeing the large, empty cave, renewed
her cries and moanings for her son, and Concetta's heart sank
as she perceived neither Claudia nor Maddalena. She turned
to question Ercole, who, having now set down the lantern,
appeared to be making arrangements for the night. In
trembling accents she inquired whether this was the place
Filippo had appointed for their meeting. His only reply
was to point to the rush beds, and desire them to rest them¬
selves as best they could and ask no questions. Turning to
Concetta, he said:
' Thou shouldst have learned ere this how idle it is to
contend against the wishes and commands of Filippo.' Thus
artfully did he hope to turn suspicion from himself. ' I have
sworn to do his bidding, and if it leads not to the liberty
thou dreamest of, on him let thy displeasure fall. Here thou
art safe from harm, and I promise thee to-morrow, girl, thou
shalt leave thy prison.'
After this he took Livia by the arm less rudely than
before, and desired them both to take some of the bread they
had brought, and also to drink some wine. Too weary and
ill to resist any further, Livia, after attempting to eat, lay
down on the rush bed, and made a sign to Concetta to do
the same, but she determined to sit by her side and watch
the movements of Ercole, for she could not divest herself of
the dread of some design of tlie young man in thus bringing
her to this gloomy cavern, where no help could be found,
and where it was impossible her cries could reach the ears
of the passers-by. Ercole helped himself to some of the
wine, and after trimming a fresh wick in the lantern, leaned
his back against the narrow entrance, and soon appeared to
be sleeping heavily. Concetta looked furtively at him from
time to time, feeling persuaded he only affected to sleep, for
more than once she caught him looking stealthily at her, and
at such times there M-as an expression in his eyes that made
her shudder. She remembered how he had sworn to be
revenged of her repulse of his advances in the little glen,
and trembled to think how completely she was in his power.
She instinctively drew nearer to poor Livia as these thoughts
passed through her mind, as if she could protect her from
insult. At length fatigue and anxiety overpowered her
senses, and she found it impossible to bear up against the
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 403
oppressive heaviness which now stole over her. She must
have slept some time, when she awoke, startled by liearing
a long, low whistle, which seemed to come from a voice
immediately over their heads. Ercole had heard the whistle
also, and that it proceeded from no friendly voice, for he
instantly seized the lantern and extinguished the light.
Either the whistle or tlie sudden darkness roused Livia
from her uneasy slumbers, and she screamed out in her
loudest tones the names of Paolo and Filippo. Ercole threw
himself forward, and, dark as it was, seized her by the
throat, and threatened to strangle her if she uttered another
cry. Tlie gurgling, choking sound which the poor creature
made in attempting to scream, made Concetta fear he might
even then have fulfilled his threat; in her fear she laid her
hand on Livia's arm, and implored her for all their sakes to
be still. The hard breathing of the unliappy victim was all
that assured her he had relaxed his grasp. A silence so
deep succeeded that she could hear the beating of her own
heart. After a time she was able to perceive by a ray of
light that penetrated the roof of the cavern that Ercole had
crept to his former position and was listening intently.
Again the low whistle was repeated, and fearing Livia
might cry out a second time, she gently laid one hand upon
her mouth, while caressingly placing the other on her
shoulder, as if to satisfy her of her presence. A few minutes
elapsed after the second whistle, and voices were heard in
earnest whispers close above their heads, where the light
penetrated, and then the tread of feet was heard endeavour¬
ing to find a footing on the slippery rocks which lay piled
in masses on all sides. Apparently it was a difficult thing
to accomplish, and an oath startled the listening women.
Concetta inwardly prayed they might succeed in finding the
entrance to the cavern, for in that lay her only hope of
deliverance. Ercole scarcely breathed in his intensity of
listening, and never took his eyes off the aperture in the
roof of the cavern, which now admitted more light, or else
Concetta, having become accustomed to the darkness, could
better distinguish objects. She still kept her eyes steadily
fixed on Ercole, though she never relaxed her hold on Livia.
After what appeared an age of suspense, Ercole crept noise¬
lessly towards Concetta, and in a voice scarcely above a
whisper, desired her not to attempt to call out or move from
her place until his return, for the men whose voices they
heard were brigands, and might do her bodily harm, even if
they did not murder her and Livia, should they discover their
404 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
hiding-place. He would make his way out and watch their
movements, and endeavour to discover the object of their
search, and what had brought them to the cavern.
It was with mixed feelings she saw him wind himself
through the narrow passage; for she was now convinced of
his ulterior design, and trembled to think how awful might
be the fate of Livia and herself should Ercole not return to
bring them food or release them from that gloomy prison.
Ercole groped his way out in the dark, not venturing to light
the lamp, for, as he supposed, it was the light and thin thread
of smoke rising through the aperture in the roof of the
cavern that first drew the attention of the men to their
hiding-place.     He had spoken falsely, however, when he
called them brigands.     His quick ear had detected their
foreign accent, and he made no doubt they were some of
Garibaldi's men sent in search of Filippo and his gang, who
were known to have sought refuge on the coast.    Ercole
trusted to his knowledge of the caves to elude their search,
and could he but reach the steps leading from the cavern
before the soldiers had made their way over the sharp rocks,
he might conceal the opening, and so prevent their entering
and discovering Concetta and her companion.    As soon as
he could be assured of their having given up the search, he
determined to return and carry her off to the nearest port,
and if possible find some vessel sailing to the mainland, that
would take them back to Eeggio, for he swore that nothing
should divert him from his purpose of making Concetta his
wife.    Now that he had given up all allegiance to the out¬
lawed Eilippo, he had no scruples, and inwardly vowed that
nothing but force should separate them.    He had taken the
precaution before entering the cavern to turn the horse loose
into the scanty pastures that skirted the ravine, and the
little cart he had thrust into a recess of the cave, which was
of great size.    On quitting the open cavern where he left
Concetta and Livia, he never stopped till he reached the
entrance; then rolling a fragment of the rock across the
narrow opening, he leaped from rock to rock till he had left
the cavern some hundred yards behind him, and hoped he
liad escaped unseen.    He soon found he was mistaken, for a
bullet rang through the air within half a yard of his head,
followed by a sharp report from a gun.   A loud shout from
the men, who now caught sight of him as he bounded over
the broken scoria', told him his only chance was in flight, but
the nature of the ground was against him, and obliged him
to discover himself as he passed rapidly from one point to
The Beggar of Capo di Monte; a Tale of Sixty-one.  405
another. He felt his case was desperate, and the thought
passed his mind whether he should give himself up, for the
men were evidently gaining on him, and secure his own
liberty by revealing the place where Filippo and Matteo
were concealed. Before he could put his treacherous thought
in execution, another bullet whirred through the air, and this
time shot him in the side, so that he fell groaning to the
ground.
The men seeing him fall, came more leisurely over the
rocks, looking cautiously round lest in their turn they might
be surprised by the gang of rebels whom they supposed to
be concealed in the cavern. When they came up to Ercole,
they found he had fainted from loss of blood, so after a
short consultation they tied a handkerchief over the wound
to stanch the blood, and determined on carrying him off at
once to the nearest village, fearing, if they attempted to
explore the cavern, they might be overpowered by numbers,
for they supposed Ercole to have been a scout sent out to
reconnoitre after their whistle had alarmed those in the cave.
They lost no time, therefore, in securing him, and finding
the horse, which Ercole had turned loose, at no great dis¬
tance, they flung his still insensible body across the animal,
and led it away as rapidly as the nature of the ground would
permit, dreading every moment to be pursued by the banditti.
Concetta, hearing distinctly the reports of the gun, which
followed so quickly after the departure of Ercole from the
cavern, divined something of the truth, and eagerly groped
her way to where the lantern stood. Almost beyond her
hopes, she found some of the matches Ercole used still left
in the lantern, and after a little trouble she succeeded in
striking a light and then re-lit the lamp. Livia was aroused
by the sudden glare, and began to ask where they were and
when she should meet her son. Concetta, bending over her,
tried to make her understand their situation, but the poor
creature seemed not to comprehend, and continued her low
moaning cries for Paolo. The temporary strength which
excitement and the hope of meeting her son had given her
had all fled, and the reaction that followed brought its usual
results. Her bodily weakness recalled her former delusion
respecting Teresa, and she began to accuse Concetta of
bringing this dreadful calamity on them by her sinful con¬
duct. The poor girl could scarcely bear up under this fresh
trial, but as she knew her only hope lay in preserving her
own mind calm and in keeping up her strength, she did not
attempt to undeceive the suffering woman, but tried every
4o6 TJi.e Ladies^ EdinburgJi. Magazine.
means in her power to soothe her. After a time she suc¬
ceeded in persuading her to take some of the wine and
bread, though she abstained from them herself, not knowing
when they might be able to get a fresh supply. Long and
anxiously did she watch for the return of Ercole or his
pursuers, but the night wore on and none appeared to rescue
the unhappy women from their prison.
{To be co7itinued.)
Stutiies from S|)altgj)cre.
V.
IS LADY MACBETH 'A FIEND-LIKE QUEEN'?
(^Originally read at the Ladies' Literary Society.)
' His fiend - like queen.' The accusation comes from a
prejudiced quarter—from tlie lips of the son who has just
avenged in blood the murder of his father, well-nigh at her
hands, alid his own enforced flight; the slaughter, by hired
ruffians, of Banquo, and of the defenceless family of Macduff.
Is it merely the harsh judgment of one who has suffered
intolerable wrong ? or is it a judgment in which unbiassed
minds can agree ? I think that there is enough truth in it
to remove it from the charge of being due to blind unreason¬
ing prejudice, and that Prince Malcolm may expect to find
it echoed by many who have not his bitter cause for undying
enmity against her who so narrowly escaped his personal
vengeance.
Let us consider a little closely some of the principal
characters in Shakspere's great tragedy. Of course we
know that modern historical inquiry has set before us a
very different conception of the existing state of Scotland
and of its king and people to that which the poet had in his
mind. He was not concerned with such petty considerations
as minute accuracy of historical, geographical, or scientific
detail; so the fair blossom Perdita is abandoned on the sea¬
shore of Bohemia, and the sucked and hungry lioness ranges
the forest of Arden—if these occurrences are not reconcileable
with the facts that Bohemia is land-girdled, and that Eelis
Leo has been unknown in Europe, at least since the sous of
Japhet peopled it—why, tant pis pour les faits. No doubt
if Duncan and Macbeth existed at all (which I believe some
profound historians do not admit), they and their followers
were little removed from a state of savagery, in which wrong
and spoliation were the order of the day, a violent end the
Studies from Shakspere. 407
natural  termination  of   any  life  whose   possessions  were
coveted—a state which presented nothing of that condition
of settled rule, sacredness of the king's person and loyalty to
a gracious master, which were the natural mould of thought
in Shakspere's time.    So he has drawn such a King Duncan
as might have been contemporary with his own Virgin Queen,
or witli the gallant Plantagenets who won honour for England
on the stricken fields of France; very unlike the reality, and
the more's the pity for Scotland.    The old king has led a
long and honoured life—a stormy one indeed, but he has
struggled bravely, and has had the gift so indispensable to
the leaders of men, of attaching his followers to himself as
well as to his cause, with that fervent, passionate union of
love and reverence towards a person which makes up the
sentiment which we call loyalty.    And the king deserves the
faithful devotion of his servants, for he is generous to reward
true service, and has no .haughtiness to those about him,
bearing  his  honours  meekly,  and  being  full of gracious
conditions.    This is he, beloved, revered, and in whom old
age, rank, and personal worth unite to command his subjects'
hearts.    He comes to dwell for a night under the roof of the
one of all his nobles who owes most to his sovereign's favour,
on whom rewards have been showered, and whose special
place in Duncan's regard is marked by this act of graceful
condescension.    But in the heart of Macbeth and his wife
ambition has found reception—ambition long cherished and
suffered to hold undisputed sway till it has undermined all
principle, eaten up like a canker all better qualities, whose
fair outward show is swept away in a moment at the opening
of the  flood-gate opportunity which  suddenly  brings  the
attainment of his evil desire within the limits of possibility.
Not that he yields to temptation without a struggle; and how
does Lady Macbeth influence him at the critical moment ?
Does she act as a drag upon the evil passion which hurries
him along the downward path ?   Does she stand like a shield
between him and the temptation ?   Does she strive with him,
and lend her voice to strengthen the urgings of his own con¬
science and the pleas of honour, gratitude, loyalty, a subject's
duty, and the sacred claim of a guest ?    Alas ! no.    Fiend-
like indeed is the temper, fiend-like in their subtlety and
irresistible force are the arguments by which she spurs him
on to that deed of midnight treachery, steeling him against
all gentler thoughts, and hardening herself against womanly
or even human ruth.    There are some who have done such
deeds or incited others  to them, prompted  thereto  by a
4o8 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Mamzine.
&>'" -"-'"i>'^
natural affection seeking indulgence in unlawful ways.
I'arents have been known to commit crimes for their
children's sake, which they would have shrunk from for
their own, but this poor excuse cannot avail here. Lady
Macbeth and her husband grasped at the sceptre ' with an
unlineal hand,' and sinned for their own a"Q;randisement—
not to raise and ennoble their offspring. Nor was it with
her as it has been with some women whose nature seems to
have suffered poisoning at the very fountaiuhead and springs
of action, by the denial of those holy relationships of wife-
hood and motherhood, a deprivation which seems to have left
the chamber of their hearts empty, swept and garnished, for
evil passions to take possession of. Lady Macbeth did not miss
tliese great factors in the fiill development of womanhood.
She was a wife, leaned on, trusted, passionately loved by her
husband, and there were noble elements in her strong
character which might well have led him upon a worthier
course. And she herself tells that, though childless when
we meet with her, the deep bliss which only mothers know
has been hers—bliss which, though enjoyed perhaps but for
a few days or hours, is enough to make a woman remember
no more her anguish in the joy which blots it out, which
stamps her memory with an indelible impress, and which
ought surely to open her heart for evermore to considerations
of tenderness, and to the claims of weakness and helpless
innocence. Yet she herself owns, that such is her relentless-
ness she could have been capable of that which Holy Scrip¬
ture brings forward as the type of the well-nigh impossible—
inhuman callousness towards her sucking child. Truly
Malcolm's epithet is not too strong.
Besides the outrage on natural affection, the duty of a
subject, and the restraints of ordinary human feeling. Lady
Macbeth, no less than her husband, violated, in Duncan's
murder, a safeguard whose sacred nature was perhaps more
realized in wild and lawless times than in our own. Hospi¬
tality has been called one of the few virtues of savage races,
and we know with what horror any failure in its obligations
was regarded by our forefathers, even when an enemy claimed
its protection. Shakspere lived near enough to those days
to realize the double dye of Macbeth's crime in the slaughter
of the royal guest who had trusted himself with perfect con¬
fidence to the shelter of his friend's roof. And here again we
find her who might have been his better angel, playing the
devil's part, and stifling with taunt and bitter scorn the con¬
science he was almost disposed to listen to.
A Sketch of the Quakers. 409
These considerations, then, may he held to justify the
prince's opinion of what Lady Macbeth became by the indul¬
gence of unrestrained ambition. ' By that sin fell the angels,'
says Shakspere in another drama, and he has shown with
wondrous power in this great tragedy how by the same passion
two human creatures meant for better things, lost the eternal
jewel of their souls, and made shipwreck of their happiness.
They are our fellow-creatures still though, and command even
to the last something of our regretful pity. The great drama¬
tist has never, I think, except in the instances of lago, of
Eegan, and Goneril, depicted complete and utterly unredeemed
villany; and there is something in tlie originally grand quali¬
ties of these two guilty souls, and in their clinging love for one
another, alone on their awful pinnacle of crime, that enables
us to compassionate them even while we shudder. It is a
rare triumph of genius to call forth this feeling, and it is only
matched by the mighty master Dante, in that touching passage
of the Inferno where he describes tiie doom of that other
pair, Francesca and her Paolo, swept away to utter ruin by
the strength of their lawless desires, and condemned ever¬
more to be borne in restless misery upon the wings of the
whirlwind. Even while we agree with Malcolm, such is the
pity we feel for the lives that might have been so noble, that
we would say like Dante in another place, not in scorn, but
in reverent condemnation, ' Non ragionam di lor, ma guarda
e passa.' A. D.
 0 
a Sftetcb of tte ©uaj^crs.
By a Quaker.
In most large towns in England there is to be found, usually
in a back street, a plain, unpretending building, over the
doorway of which is inscribed, 'Friends' Meeting House.'
It is probably entirely destitute of any pretension to archi¬
tectural beauty, but with every accommodation for the com¬
fort of the congregation which meets under its roof, and
most likely there is on one side of it a small green grave¬
yard, with rows of stones bearing the names and ages of
those who lie beneath. On Sundays the back street becomes
alive with people, whose appearance is quite out of keeping
with it, some in well-appointed carriages, others on foot,
nearly all apparently belonging to the middle and upper
middle classes, well but quietly dressed, and in their
demeanour rather grave and serious.    This house and these
410 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
people belong to the body known to the outside world as
the ' Quakers,' but among themselves as the ' Society of
Friends,' a name suggestive of all that is peaceful and
harmonious.
Let us enter with them, and sit awhile in their company
on the benches of the old-world-looking meeting-house. We
find ourselves in a large square room with galleries on three
sides of it. There are at one end two or three rows of seats
raised a little from the floor, and facing these are benches
which cover the whole area. The women enter by one door
and the men by another, and sit down on opposite sides of
the room, the men usually not removing their hats until
they are seated. A dead silence then succeeds, each one
appearing to be absorbed in his or her own thoughts. There
is no sort of regular service, all that being left, according to
the principles to be explained presently, to develop itself.
After a time, probably some one, either man or woman,
delivers an extempore sermon, or kneels to offer prayer, the
rest of the congregation standing. As there are no regularly
ordained ministers, any one may officiate in this way, and
sometimes there will be a succession of sermons or prayers
occupying most of the time of the service. At the end of
about an hour and a half, two of the Friends sitting in the
uppermost row of the raised seats before mentioned, shake
hands, which is the signal that the service is over, and the
congregation disperses.
There are now but a comparativelj' small number of
Quakers in England, not more than about 14,000, though in
the United States they form a much larger body.
Let us glance back to the early days of the Society, which
is in this country a small, and on the whole, decreasing sect,
but which was once so numerous, and try to discover for
what cause they arose and separated themselves from the
rest of the Church. Quakerism, in these days, is apt in the
minds of most people to be associated with a peculiar style
of dress, the use of ' thee and thou,' and an abstinence in
general from the pomps and vanities of this wicked world.
But these are merely its accidents, not its essence—the
shadow, not the substance. It arose, in the first instance, as
a protest against the existing state of things, as a witness
for the truth of spiritual religion. The England of the 17th
century was torn asunder by dissensions on religious matters,
each party claiming the monopoly of truth, and each becom¬
ing dominant in turn and seeking to impose its formulas on
all, and after a time producing a violent reaction.   Besides the
A Sketch of the Qiiakej's. 411
different religious parties, there was what we may call the
party of no religion, during the predominance of whicli,
under Charles II., licentiousness and wickedness were
rampant. It seemed as though in the midst of these conten¬
tions true religion was almost dead. But it was not dead, it
only slumbered.
It was at this critical period that George Fox, the son of
a weaver, and himself a shoemaker, became much troubled
about his soul's welfare. He relates in his Journal how
he went to one priest after another to see if they could
minister to his condition, and how one told him to smoke
and to sing psalms, and how another wished to give him
physic and to let him blood, ' but,' he says, ' 1 saw they
were all miserable comforters.' Help came to him at length.
' When all my hopes in them p.nd in all men were gone, so
that I had nothing outwardly to help me, nor could I tell
what to do, then, 0 then, I heard a voice, which said,
" There is one, even Christ Jesus, that can speak to thy con¬
dition !" and when I heard it, my heart did leap for joy.'
From this time forth, untroubled by further doubts or fears,
he saw it to be his mission to proclaim the spirituality of
religion, to spread abroad the doctrine that God speaks to
every man individually, that there is no need of human
mediators, or of forms, or of rites and ceremonies. He
travelled far and wide in the promulgation of his views ; but
the corner-stone of his teaching was always that the Spirit
of God was in every man, and that by its means all were
able to draw near to Him, and to cast off the works of
darkness. This is what was meant by the doctrine of the
Inward Light. It came like a revelation to numbers of men
and women wearied and oppressed with the strife around
them; and although George Fox was an unlettered man, such
was the fervour of his preaching, and the power of this great
truth which he was endeavouring to inculcate, that large
numbers were attracted to him, including many from among
even the educated and well-born. He and his earlier fol¬
lowers undoubtedly believed that they were inspired by the
Spirit of God in the same manner as were the prophets of
old. Such a notion would be likely to lead to extravagance
and fanaticism on the part of those whose hearts were
stronger than their heads, and accordingly we find that some
did mistake the impulses of their excited emotions for the
inspiration of the Indwelling Spirit, and so discredited their
master's teaching. But in spite of all such drawbacks, the
believers in the new doctrine multiplied exceedingly, and
412 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
bore emphatic testimony to the direct communion of the
soul of man with God.
As the number of his followers increased, George Fox
established meetings all over the country, and devised an
elaborate organization for the worship and discipline of the
new sect, which has lasted with but little alteration until
the present time. He cast aside all the ordinary means of
grace, taking the words of Christ, ' They that worship God
must worship Him in Spirit and in truth,' for his guiding
principle. A ' man-made ministry' was to be discarded, as
coming between the soul and God, and men and women in
their assemblies were to speak only as they believed they
were moved by the Holy Ghost. Baptism and the Lord's
Supper were to be understood and partaken of spiritually, not
actually, and no dependence was to be placed on any outward
rite, even on such a simple one as the public reading of the
Scriptures. They were to protest also against the worldly
customs of insincere speech, and flattery and adulation of men,
and they carried this into such small matters as the making of
bows or wearing their hats. God only was worthy of reverence
in the eyes of the early Friends, so they declined to show any
by bowing or the removal of their hats in the presence of
men, no matter what their position in life. Many amusing
anecdotes of the trouble that some of them brought upon
themselves by their persistence in this practice are to be
found in the annals of the Society. It is said that William
Penn, who was intimate with both Charles II. and James
II., once went into the presence of the former without un¬
covering. The king instantly removed his own hat, and
on being asked why he did so, replied, with his customary
urbanity, ' That it was the custom of that place for only one
to be covered.' They endeavoured to carry out the same
principles with regard to language, and therefore declined to
address any one by any title whatever, but called every one
alike by the name of ' Friend.' Till within the last twenty or
thirty years, it was the custom for men in business to address
their correspondents as ' Respected' or ' Esteemed Friend,'
and the practice has not yet altogether gone out between
members of the Society, who usually address each other in
writing, even when unacquainted, as ' Dear Friend.' The
early Friends considered also the ordinary way of using the
plural number in speaking to a single person as wanting in
truthfulness; they therefore preferred to make use of the
second person singular, and addressed every one as ' thou,'
thereby exciting the  utmost derision in their  opponents.
3
A Sketch of the Quakers. 413
George Fox, during one of his sojourns in prison, wrote a book
called the ' Battledore,'
' Which was written to show that in all languages Thou and Thee
is the proper and usual form of speech to a single person, and You
to more than one. This was set forth in examples or instances taken
from the Scriptures, and books of teaching in about thirty languages.
When it was finished, copies were presented to the king and his
council, to the bishops of Canterbury and London, and to the two
universities one each ; and many purchased them. The king said it
was the proper language of all nations ; and the Bishop of Canterbury,
being asked what he thought of it, was at a stand, and could not tell
what to say to it. For it did so inform people, that few afterwards
were so rugged toward us for saying Thou and Thee to a single person,
for which before they were exceeding fierce against us. Thou and
Thee was a sore cut to proud flesh, and them that sought self-honour,
who, though they would say it to God and Christ, could not endure
to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and
abused, and sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words
to some proud men, who would say, "What, you ill-bred clown, do
you Thou me ! " as though Christian breeding consisted in saying
You to one, which is contrary to all their grammars and teaching
books by which they instructed their youth.''
It is a great mistake to suppose that the founders of the
Society wore a peculiar garb; they wore the usual dress of
the time, but divested of much of its ornament. Their
descendants wore the same dress without much alteration,
and consequently preserved the fashions of a former genera¬
tion long after it had passed away. The peculiar costume
has in this country nearly disappeared, only a few old ladies
and gentlemen still continuing to wear it.
The new sect, as was likely, suffered many things from
persecution, for toleration found no place among the
principles of either of the parties struggling for supremacy.
George Fox himself spent more time in prison than out of it,
and his followers seem to have formed the larger portion of
the population of every gaol. The record of their sufferings
is a sad and humiliating thing for us now to look back
upon; for we must remember that it was long before the days
of Howard, and the prisons were, without exception, in the
most abominable condition. Men and women were often
incarcerated for years, and sometimes were only relieved from
their sufferings by death; but they bore all with patience
and constancy, believing that they were obeying the voice
of the Lord. George Fox gives an account in his Jmirnal of
his various imprisonments; sometimes he was sent to gaol
for refusing to swear, sometimes for persisting in holding
meetings, sometimes for no offence at all. The commonest
' George Fox's Journal, vol. i. p. 393.^
414 T^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
cause of imprisonment among his followers was the refusal
to pay tithes, but i\\ many cases the reputation of being a
Quaker, or attendance at their meetings, was enough. They
came into constant collision with the magistrates on
account of their testimony with regard to ' hat worship' and
oaths, and often held arguments with them on those subjects,
in which the Justices by no means always got the best of it,
for those old Quakers were men of a ready wit. On one
occasion, George Fox and some others were brought up for
trial at the Launceston Assizes.
' When we were brought into the court, we stood some time with
our hats on, and all was quiet; and I was moved to say, "Peace be
amongst you ! " Judge Glynne, a Welshman, then Chief Justice of
England, said to the jailor, " What be these you have brought here
into the court i" "Prisoners, my lord," said he. "Why do you not put
off your hats?" said the judge to us. We said nothing. "Put off
your hats," said the judge again. Still we said nothing. Then said
the judge, "The court commands you to put off your hats." Then
I spoke, and said, " Where did ever any magistrate, king, or judge,
from Moses to Daniel, command any to put off their hats when they
come before them in their courts, either amongst the Jews, the people
of God, or amongst the heathen ? and if the law of England doth
command any such thing, show me that law either written or
printed." Then the judge grew very angry, and said, "I do not
carry my law books on my back." "But," said I, "tell me where
it is printed in any statute book, that I may read it." Then said the
judge, " Take him away, prevaricator ! VWferk him." So they took
us away, and put us among the thieves. Presently after he calls to
the jailor, " Bring them up again." " Come," said he, "where had
they hats from Moses to Daniel 1 Come, answer me ; I have you fast
now," said he. I replied, " Thou mayest read in the third of Daniel,
that the three children were cast into the fiery furnace by Nebuchad¬
nezzar's command, with their coats, their hosen, and their hats on."
This plain instance stopped him ; so that not having anything else to
say to the point, he cried again, " Take them away, jailor." ' '
Persecution, as usual, had the effect of causing the Society
to grow and multiply exceedingly, not only in England, but
in Ireland and America, though it is somewhat curious that
it never seems to have spread to any extent in Scotland.
George Fox went on preaching tours through England,
Wales, Ireland, even to Holland and France, and once to
America, and many thousands were ' convinced of the truth ;'
but although he visited Scotland once, but little results seem
to have followed.
Naturally, in consequence of the persistent persecution
which followed them in England and Ireland, many Quakers
turned their eyes to that new countiy across the sea, where
numbers of fellow-sufferers had already found rest from their
1 George Fox's Journal, p. 229.
A Sketch of the Quakers. 415
enemies. William Penn, the most eminent of George Tox's
early converts, was the principal agent of their settlement
in America. The province of Pennsylvania was granted
to him by Charles II. in discharge of an unpaid debt, and
he determined to found there a colony, which should be
governed according to the most just and enlightened
principles, and where freedom should tind a congenial home.
He remained faithful to his principles of peace even in his
dealings with the uncivilized inhabitants of the land, and
refused to seize upon their territories, but paid for them
fairly, and so earned their gratitude and friendship. He
was himself the first governor of the new State, and under
his fostering care it rapidly became a flourishing and pros¬
perous community, to which large numbers of Friends were
attracted by the prospect of entire liberty of conscience
there, so that for a time it was known as the 'Quaker State;'
for although the New England colonies were founded mainly
by those who were forced to emigrate in search of freedom,
yet they would not extend to others wliat they so earnestly
desired for themselves, and from the first the Quakers were
persecuted with a hot zeal which far exceeded anything
which they had experienced in their own country. In
England the worst they had to fear was imprisonment, bad
as that was, but in New England delicate women were
cruelly whipped at the cart's tail, and driven on foot in
bitter weather from town to town, and in some cases they
were even put to death. This bitter persecution of the
Quakers is a terrible blot on the early history of New
England; but in spite of it, from that time until this they
have been a numerous and important body in the United
States, and their numbers, although diminishing in this
country, continue to increase there. They have naturally
diverged somewhat from the doctrine and practice of their
brethren in the old country, but a great deal of friendly
feeling and intercourse is kept up, frequent visits being
interchanged by the more prominent members of the body
on both sides of the Atlantic.
The organization established by George Fox for the
government of the Society has lasted, with but little altera¬
tion, to the present day, and it is well worthy a little
attention, as it is one of the best examples of a pure
democracy anywhere to be met with. Most religious bodies
which are apparently democratic, are not really so, there
being almost always some class within them to which the
governing power is pretty much confined, such as ministers,
4i6 77^1? Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
or elders, or other officials; but there is absolutely no
governing class among the Quakers, for as there are no
ministers in the ordinary sense of the word,—that is, there
is nothing equivalent to the rite of ordination,—those who
preach have no more power than the poorest and meanest of
the community. There is no system of representation even,
but every one who chooses can take part in the regulation of
the affairs of the body. There are, indeed, so-called ' re¬
presentatives ' sent to the meetings for legislation or
' discipline,' but that is only done to secure that a certain
number shall be present. Any member of the Society has a
right to attend the ' Yearly Meeting,' which is held in London
every May, and to take his part in influencing its decisions.
Another point in which the Society of Friends differs from
other bodies, is that it allows its women to take their part in
the management of its affairs, and this fact has not been
without considerable influence on the female portion of the
community.
A meeting is held once a month by every large congrega¬
tion, or by three or four smaller ones collectively, for tlie
transaction  of business.     This   is   called   the   ' Monthly
Meeting,' and  before it come all the affairs  belonging  to
that congregation, such as the registration of births  and
deaths, the arrangements for marriages, the care of the poor,
the admission of new members, the disbursement of chari¬
table trusts, and any other matters which may arise.    The
women take their part as well as the men, and business
which concerns them both is transacted jointly, but a good
deal is done   separately, the women sitting in a separate
room with their own ' clerk' and ' assistant clerk,' who act
the  part  of   chairman  and  secretary.     Several  of   these
monthly meetings, situated in the same district or county,
unite once in three months in a ' Quarterly  Meeting,'  to
which ' representatives' are sent by the various constituent
monthly meetings, but all members in the district can attend
who wish to do so.    These quarterly meetings have jurisdic¬
tion over the monthly meetings, and there is a right of
appeal to the former from any decision of the latter.    The
women have their quarterly meetings   also, although any
matter which concerns them as well as the men is transacted
in a 'joint conference.'    Much business is done by sub¬
committees appointed by these various meetings, which often
consist of both men and women, and the latter usually take
an  active  part  in  the  proceedings.     All   the   quarterly
meetings in England unite to form the 'Yearly Meeting,'
A Sketch of the Quakers. 417
held every May in London, vi^hich legislates for the Society
at large, and is the final court of appeal.    The women also
have their own yearly meeting held at the same time, but in
another room, which presents a curious and unique appear¬
ance during this particular week in May.    It holds perhaps
600 or 700 people, and is usually well attended.    At one end
there is a table raised two or three feet above the floor, at
which sit three or four ladies who act as secretaries or clerks,
one or more of them being generally chosen for their ability
to read well and to make tliemselves heard in so large a
room; the principal clerk does most of the writing required,
such   as making minutes, etc.    Seated on benches on the
floor and round the sides, or in large galleries   above, are
ladies of all ages and all styles of dress, from the most correct
Quaker costume to the last new fashion.   But, on the wliole,
the effect is one of extreme soberness and quietness, the
colouring being very subdued, and mostly inclining to shades
of grey and brown.    When any communication is necessary
between the men's and women's meetings, it is   done   by
Avritten messages carried by ladies and gentlemen appointed to
perform that and other small services.   The decisions of these
various legi.slative assemblies are arrived at in a manner quite
peculiar to the Quakers.    On no question whatever is a vote
taken; but it is the business of the clerk to take what is
called the ' sense of the meeting,' which consists in finding.
out, apparently   by   a   sixth   sense,   probably   evolved   by
many generations of practice, what the majority of those
present think upon a given proposition.    He sits quietly at
his desk after having laid the matter before the meeting, and
listens while a number of Friends give their views on it, there
being often nearly as many opinions as speakers.    Presently
he is seen writing, and then lie rises and reads a minute he
has just drawn up, saying, ' I should be glad to know if
Friends think this expresses their views,' whereupon, if any
dissent, they are   expected to state  their  objections.     It
seems sometimes almost impossible to decide among con¬
flicting opinions, but the clerk is undoubtedly helped much
by his personal knowledge of many of those present; know¬
ing, for instance, that the opinion of such a man is worth
those of half a dozen others, and so forth.    Strange to say,
tlie decisions arrived at in this manner are rarely cliallenged,
uncertain as the process may seem to be.    How curious it
would be if the House of Commons were to adopt this
system!    Its  decisions would  in  not a few cases be re¬
versed, but probably they would not be received with the
No. 57.—September 1S79. 2 D
418 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
same calm acquiescence as are the decisions of the ' Yearly
Meeting.'
The association of women in the affairs of the body has
been from the first one of the most striking features of the
Society, and was insisted upon by "George Fox himself,
sometimes in the face of considerable op^^osition. He says
in one place—
' That faithful women, who were called to the belief of the truth,
being made partakers of the same precious faith, and heirs of the
same everlasting gospel of life and salvation that men are, might in
like manner come into the possession and practice of the gospel order,
and therein be meet-helps unto men in the restoration, in the
service of truth, in the affairs of the Church, as tliey are outwardly in
civil or temiJoral things ;—that so all the family of God, women as
well as men, might know, possess, perform, and discharge their
offices and services in the house of God, whereby the poor might be
better taken care of, the younger instructed, informed, and taught in
the way of God; the loose and disorderly reproved and admonished
in the fear of the Lord ; the clearness of persons proposing marriage
more closely inquired into in the wisdom of God ; and all the
members of the spiritual bodj', the Church, might watch over and be
helpful to each other in love.'
This would satisfy the most ardent advocate of women's
riglits, and, as was natural, this liberality has reacted strongly
upon the women of the Society themselves. It might be,
perhaps, supposed by some that they would thus have been
turned into masculine, strong-minded women, full of self-asser¬
tion and other unfeminine qualities. But the contrary has
been the case. There are no more thoroughly feminine women
to be met with anywhere than among the Quakers, quiet and
gentle in manner in a high degree. 'Every Quakeress,' says
Charles Lamb, ' is a lily ; and when they come up in bands
to their Whitsun conferences, whitening the easterly streets
of the metropolis, from all parts of the United Kingdom,
they show like troops of the Shining Ones.' But with all
their gentleness, a capacity for business and for entering
into and transacting affairs outside the ordinary narrow
circle of a woman's life is more widely diffused among them
than amou" others destitute of their advantages. Now that
so much is being done to open up new fields for the energies
of women, and that there is so much controversy on the
subject, it is doubly interesting to watch the result of an
experiment of this sort which has been tried for so long a
time. The Quakeresses have always freely availed them¬
selves of the liberty to take part in the ministry, and there
have been many eminent ministers among them. These
female preachers generally act under the strongest sense of
A Sketch of the Quakers. 419
duty in appearing in this public capacity, and are often
among the most shrinking and retiring of their sex. Their
'meetings for discipline' are conducted with the utmost
regularity and propriety, and the training in the conduct of
business received in this manner is most valuable in other
ways, a Quaker lady being a most desirable accession to any
committee, her familiarity with all such proceedings enabling
her to get through them with much greater ease and rapidity
than is to be usually found in such assemblages, Until
quite recently the education of young Quakeresses was of a
much more solid and useful nature than that given to women
generally; not being allowed to learii music, dancing, or
other accomplishments which were considered 'worldly/
they had more time than the average Englishwoman for
solid studies. For the most part they did not mix much
with the outside world, though of late this state of things
has altered somewhat. The result of these various influences
was the development of a certain kind of serious earnestness,
an elevation above the petty thoughts and feelings that so
often occupy the minds of women. But at the same time
there is no neglect of home duties ; on tlie contrary, they
have shown most conclusively how to combine the fullest
attention to these with care and thought for others in the
world outside the family circle. They are also, perhaps, a
little less afraid of coming forward and taking a prominent
position than are others less accustomed to mix in public
affairs, and so are often to be found in the forefront of
philanthropic and other movements, leading the way and
encouraging others to follow.
There is one other thing worthy of remark with regard to
the women's meetings. It is a popular notion that the
peculiar and cherished prerogative of women is to talk,
and that, therefore, if they were allowed to take part in
any deliberative assembly, even in a mixed committee,
nothing could be done for the floods of conversation. As far
as the Quakers are concerned, there could not be a greater
mistake. Although the women have full liberty to talk as
much as they please, as a matter of fact most of the talking
is done by the men. They rarely preach at great length,
and in ' meetings for discipline' say but little, and that
strictly to the point. In a conference of both sexes on any
important subject, they often remain silent, until, perhaps,
the clerk rises and says: ' I should be glad to know what
our women Friends think on this matter,' whereupon a few
will rise and briefly give their opinions.    In a word, the
420 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Quaker ladies are rarely great talkers, either in or out of
meeting.
How long this peculiar organization will last, as far as
regards the women, it is not easy to predict, but there are at
present some signs of its decay. There is a tendency to give
up the women's meetings, and the younger women prefer to
devote their energies to Sunday-school teaching and other
like occupations to attending monthly and quarterly meet¬
ings. But it is hardly possible to view without regret the
passing away of a system which certainly produced several
generations of women, gentle, kind, most womanly, yet
strong and self-reliant, such women as could not but elevate
and refine all who came within the sphere of their influence.
There is one branch of the ' discipline' which ought not
to be overlooked, although of late years it has nearly fallen
into disuse, for it affords evidence of the great desire on the
part of the founders of the Society that their practice should
be in accordance with their profession. Soon after its
establishment, the yearly meeting issued a series of questions
or ' queries,' as to the conduct of all Friends within its
borders, which were to be answered first by the monthly and
then by the quarterly meetings, and finally the answers were
sent to the yearly meeting. By this means a rigid super¬
vision as to conduct was kept up, and those who trans¬
gressed the code of the Society in any material point were,
if they persisted, ' disowned,' or separated from the body.
These ' queries' referred to such matters as the attendance at
meetings, the due discharge of obligations, such as the pay¬
ment of tithes, the upholding of the ' testimony' as regards
war and oaths, the frequenting of places of amusement, the
simplicity and plainness of dress, etc. In the early days of
the Society there was very gi-eat strictness on all these
points, and any defaulter came under the disciplinary action
of his monthly meeting. The non-payment of tithes was
vigorously insisted upon by George Fox, and many Friends
were imprisoned for this offence. Until cliurch-rates were
finally abolished, this ' testimony' was maintained by the
Society, and Quakers in most cases allowed their goods to
be seized upon rather than pay them. Much care also is
taken that peace and harmony should reign, as indeed they
ought in a body where all call themselves ' Friends.' One of
the queries ran to this effect: ' Are Friends preserved in love
one towards another ?' and if any quarrel or feud was known
to exist, the answer to it would run thus: ' We believe
Friends are preserved in love one towards another, with one
A Sketch of the Quakers. 421
exception, which is under care.' The last clause meant that
the monthly meeting was endeavouring to arrange matters
amicably, sometimes, no doubt, with success, though occa¬
sionally the answer given above would be returned by some
particular meeting for many successive years, indicating that
the parties concerned had never succeeded in making it up.
Sometimes, when there is a serious dispute, arbitrators are
appointed, who hear what both sides have to say, and give a
decision in accordance with the merits of the case, and
consequently disputes between Quakers rarely come before
the law courts, a settlement usually having been arrived at
before that point is reached. This inquisition into conduct
may seem to many an undue interference with the liberty of
the subject, but it has not been without some beneficial
effect on the body generally. In the case of quarrels, for
instance, people would be ashamed of appearing again and
again as defaulters before the monthly meeting, and would
take some pains to become reconciled. There is, or rather
was, a query to this effect: ' Is care taken to avoid and dis¬
courage tale-bearing and detraction ?' This continually
recurring question has undoubtedly done something towards
cliecking tattling and gossip among the Friends, as, for
instance, when the conversation tends to become censorious,
and the doings and characters of others are discussed with
more freedom than is necessary, some one will suddenly say,
'Oh, I am afraid this is tale-bearing and detraction,' where¬
upon all feel rebuked, and thus a feeling has gradually
grown up that such conversation is wrong, and ought to be
checked. The system of inquisition into conduct was much
more severe formerly,—in fact, of late years it was little but
a form, and quite recently it has been for the most part
abolished. In the minutes quoted below of Hardsliaw
Monthly Meeting, at the end of the 17th century, we may
see the strictness of the early Friends even with regard to
very small matters, as, for instance, dress:—
(IG88.) ' It is ordered that the Friends appointed in every meeting
shall give notice in their meetings that the cross pockets, or long
pockets before, in men's coats (which is the world's fashion), side
cuffs, broad hems on cravats, and over-full skirted coats, are fashions
inconsistent with the truth, and are to be left by Friends.'
(1703.) ' Inquiry is to be made in all the meetings if there be any
in the use of periwigs, extravagantly or unnecessarily, and that account
be brought to our next meeting.'
' Upon a discourse concerning Friends wearing periwigs, each
meeting is to consider whether such Friends as may have occasion for
a wig should not first have the consent of the Preparative Meeting
before they use any.'
42 2 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine,
(1705.) 'It is the advice of this meeting that Friends forbear leaving
their coats and waistcoats unbuttoned from their necks downwards.'
The following refer to the much controverted questions,
drinking and smoking:—
(1685.) 'It is the sense of this meeting that no Friend ought to go
into houses that keep ale at fairs, unless they take some Elder with
them.'
(1691.) 'It being discovered that the common excess of smoking
tobacco is inconsistent with our holy profession, this meeting adviseth
that such as have occasion to make use of it, do take it privately,
neither in their labour, nor employment, nor by the highways, nor in
alehouses, nor elsewhere too publicly.'
One of the matters respecting which the Society was
formerly very rigorous, was marriage. It was considered
wrong for a Friend to marry any one belonging to another
denomination; he or she who desired to do so was first
remonstrated with, and then, if they could not be induced
to give up their intention, disowned, or separated from
membership. This practice of disownment in such cases
has, without doubt, been exceedingly detrimental to the
Society, as it has lost many thereby who, if more gently
dealt with, would have proved most useful members. During
the last fifteen or twenty years this restriction on marriage
has been done away with, with much benefit. Some curious
minutes on this subject are to be met with in some of the
old books which record the transactions of monthly meetings
in former times. Here are one or two from a women's
meeting in London:—
(1757.) ' The Friends appointed to visit Mary Albright, report that
she still persists in her resolution to many away from Friends. This
meeting refers the affair to the men Friends.'
'Catherine Duck reports that she, in company with Mary Funston,
had visited William Smith's servant; that the young woman seemed
very tender, and not quite determined about marrying ; took their
visit kindly, and would be glad of another. This meeting, therefore,
requests the same Friends to continue their care over her.'
They seem to have been successful in their efforts, for a
little later appears the entry:
' The Friends desired to continue their care over William Smith's
servant, report that they visited her again, which she received well,
and told them she would endeavour to break off acquaintance with
the man she had kept company with.'
(1785.) 'This meeting being informed that Sarah Deane, now Impey,
is lately married by a priest to a person not in membership with us,
Ann Gunn and Elizabeth Allen are desired to visit her upon it and
make report. It did not come to our knowledge as a meeting before
it was accomplished, so as to make an appointment to visit her, but
we have the satisfaction to find that she had been privately laboured
with by some Friends.'
A Sketch of the Quakers. 423
* Ann Gunnand Elizabeth Allen report that they have visited Sarah
Tmpey, who acknowledges her being married by a priest; says she
knows she has broke through the rules of our discipline, and expects
to be disowned.    Her case is referred to our meu Friends.'
Some mention of the peculiar views held by the Friends
on the subjects of swearing and war must not be omitted.
George Fox held that the precepts of Christ regarding swear¬
ing and the resistance of evil were to be taken literally; there¬
fore he ordained that his followers were to take no oaths
of any sort, not even in a court of justice. In conse¬
quence of their steady refusal to sioear, justice sometimes
miscarried, and an enactment was passed in the early
part of this oentury, which made legal the simple ' aftirnia-
tion' of any one declaring himself to be a Quaker, a privilege
of which most members of the Society avail themselves
when occasion arises.
It ha,s teen a leading doctrine of the sect from its foun¬
dation until now, that all war is contrary to the precepts of
the Christian religion, and therefore wrong. The Quakers
have consequently always refused military service, and some
liave been known to carry the principle so far as to decline
to serve the army or navy with stores when they have had
large contracts offered them by the Government. They
never allow any opportunity to slip without endeavouring
to press upon others their view of the wickedness of war, and
a society has been founded, mainly by their exertions, for
the promotion of peace principles among the people. When
a great war is going on, such as the Franco-Prussian war
in 1870, they will not, as a body, do anything to assist the
combatants, even by sending out stores for the wounded.
On that occasion they raised a large sum of money and
appUed it to the relief of tlie non-combatant victims of the
war, the poor farmers and peasants whose crops were de¬
stroyed. Commissioners were sent to that part of France
which suffered most, who took out agricultural implements
and seed-corn, to endeavour to hasten the return of prosperity
to the desolated region; and very grateful were the poor
people for the timely assistance.
In conclusion, has the Society of Friends yet a place in
the world, a mission to fulfil ? It is a question that has
often been asked, but which is not very easy to answer, for
the times are changed, and old institutions do not ahvays
change with them. The Society arose at a time of trouble
and darkness, as a witness for spiritual religion, which
witness it bore with boldness and constancy.    And it was
424 Tlie Ladies EdiiibiirgJi ATagaziuc.
not mere doctrine and dogma tliat it fought for, but it
endeavoured—has, we may say, always endeavoured—to
bring religion into dailj^ life, to cause it to influence men's
conduct in all their relations to those with whom they came
into contact. It taught the world also that the Spirit of
God was not far off, only to be approached with ditticulty,
but was in every man, pleading with him against sin and
temptation, if he would but listen to its voice. The dangers
that now threaten religion are wholly different; and whether
Quakerism will ever be able to adapt itself to the needs of
the age, time alone can show. However that may be, from
its past history we may learn many a lesson for which we
shall be the better—of constancy and firmness in suffering, of
sincerity and uprightness in our dealings with our fellow-
men, and of faithfulness and boldness in proclaiming and
following what we believe to be the truth. E. S.
©n ©riginalito.
Goethe says, 'that everything worth thinking has been
already thought.' How, then, are we to avoid constant
plagiarism ? He gives us the answer in the same sentence :
' It remains for us to think it over again.' It is this
employment of our minds, to think out afresh the wisdom of
the past, which gives new worth to what is old and thread¬
bare. An active mind will naturally enjoy exercising its
faculties, and will not be satisfied with adopting the thoughts
and opinions of others; this exercise of the individual
intellect and judgment produces what we call originality.
There may be originality without great mental powers, but
not without either a certain vigour and activity of mind, or
a lively fancy and imagination. In the former case, the
person reasons for himself, and draws his own conclusions ;
in the latter, he sees the world with his own eyes, and
reproduces it as one who sketches from nature, and does not
merely copy. Originality has, for this reason, a charm for
those whose minds are jaded with listening to the repetition
of commonplaces which, like paper money, have become
soiled by passing through many hands. Originality gives us
coins fresh from the mint, bright and shining, though not
necessarily of great value.
There seems to be some connection between sincerity and
originality, in so far as sincerity means that the word spoken
expresses the genuine feeling of the speaker.    Some people
On Originality. 425
habitually express what others have felt in like circum¬
stances, because they think that such words and feelings are
expected from them. We sometimes, from indolence, allow
ourselves to use other people's thoughts, because it would
be more trouble to think out a matter for ourselves; and
thus a good verbal memory and a certain fluency of
expression often hinder originality, by the facility witli
which words, not thoughts, suggest themselves to the mind.
Some persons think in images, which bear the same relation
to abstract thought as the Egyptian hieroglyphs bear to the
modern alphabet. They see, with their mind's eye, visions
which they find it hard to put into words, so as to bring the
same picture, with all its cloud-capped heights and dewy
jjastures, before the eyes of others; and yet they may
occasionally, with a few well-chosen words, reveal that
which they have seen, and the world will then acknowledge
that the artist drew from nature, and that what he paints is
but a small part of what he has seen.
It is a mistake to think that, in order to be original, we
must reject the aid of others. No wise man does this.
Kather, like a skilful workman, he gathers his materials
from all quarters. The silkworm furnishes her web, the
shell-fish yields its rich dye, while the earth gives gold and
silver; and from all this he will weave a tissue, which shall
be his own handiwork, and in which he may honestly rejoice,
for he has brought together in harmony that which was
scattered, and made the clothing of the worm fit for kings'
use. Is the poet not original when he takes the common
sights around him which all men see, and traces subtle
analogies between them and higher things, so that his mind
is like the pool reflecting the moon and stars above, and
making them visible to the downcast eyes of men, who,
bowed with toil and sorrow, would not look upwards to
heaven itself ?
The mere accumulation of the thoughts of others will
hinder originality only if they lie like stones heaped up in
our minds; but if they are like seeds cast on fruitful soil,
they will germinate and produce other seeds. Goethe dis¬
tinguishes between two German words—Begriff and Idee ;
the former he says is the sum, the latter the product of
experience. We may say that, in the former case, it is as
if the gases, oxygen and hydrogen, existed side by side;
while in the latter case they have united and taken the new
form of water. A new idea may thus spring from old ideas,
if the vital force of mind acts upon them.
4^6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
There are some authors who think that they show origin¬
ality by writing in a strained style, with a constant effort to
say something new, or to say it in a new way. But this is
no sign of originality, which is rather simple and vigorous in
style, and not affected; because it does not aim at saying
things differently to others, but only at putting down what it
has seen with its own eyes, and which must, for tliis reason,
be from a fresh point of sight. It is this fresh sight which
is real originality, and which we often observe in the remarks
of children and of the poor, who are not afraid to say just
what they think. This is also the reason that there is
sometimes more originality to be found among country folk
than among townspeople, who are constantly hearing what
is said by their neighbours. The peasant will probably have
fewer thoughts than the artisan, and have greater difficulty
in expressing them; but he will probably preserve more
individuality, and, unless stupified by excess of bodily labour,
possess a native shrewdness which more than replaces the
shallow sharpness of the townsman. How admirably George
Eliot has pictured such a character in Mrs. Poyser! who
uses her own faculties to observe, and her own racy imagery
to express her thoughts.
Where there is little or no originality, there will be a
poverty and narrowness in the life, or a patchwork combina¬
tion of the tastes and opinions of others; it is so easy to
imitate, so difficult to bring these imitations into harmony
with each other, because they do not spring from the same
root, and are the result, not of natural growth, but of
artificial cohesion. If our talents, however few, are laid by
without use, we cannot expect that they will yield the
interest they would otherwise have done. The danger has
often been hinted at, that our numerous examinations, and
the system of cramming encouraged by them, may stifle that
slow and steady growth of the powers of the mind which is
alone likely to produce original thought of any value. The
multiplication of books which are written down to the level
of the reader, is also another danger. Who will now grapple
with a difficult passage, and turn it over in his mind, till the
meaning reveals itself to him ? We accumulate knowledge,
we sharpen our tools of logic and rhetoric; but neither stores
of facts nor well-arranged sentences will replace the action
of the individual mind, which must have time and leisure
to reflect, and ' inwardly digest,' as the Prayer-Book wisely
says.
As our bodies differ in endless variety notwithstanding
Our Library Table, 427
resemblances, so do our minds differ ; we have only to use
them, each for himself, and originality would then cease to
have the restricted meaning which it now bears. Coleridge
says, that in order to restore a commonplace truth to its
original freshness, we have only to put it in action ; this is
because no two men ever act exactly alike, and thus the old
truth is revealed anew. But neither do two men ever think
exactly alike, if they think at all; it is quiet acquiescence
in not thinking which produces uniformity. Where thought
is aroused, as we see it now in religious matters, endless
diversity of opinion arises, and some are scandalized, and
think that truth has vanished from among us. But it is not
so. This diversity is a sign of life and growth, and is far
preferable to the lifeless uniformity of careless times. Mr.
James Martineau says, in his Endeavours after the Christian
Life: 'Assuredly only that knowledge which a man wins
for himself by the spontaneous efforts of his own mind, has
the proper and purifying effect of tridh on him, and renders
his nature clearer than it was before.' This is saying in
other words what we have already quoted from Goethe, and
which is the pith of the matter; 'We must think it over
again.'    Not till then is the truth our own.
Beatrix L. Tollemache.
©ur ILilirarg ^able.
THEorGH Wrong and Rcth. By M. Humphrey, Author of ' Madeline
Heathcote,'etc. Edinburgh: R. Grant & Son. London: Simjjkin,
Marshall, & Co.
In the motto of this prettily 'written story is to be found the key¬
note to the character of the heroine;
' Bear through sorrow, wrong, and ruth,
In thy heart the dew of youth,
On thy lips the smile of truth.'
Through much sorrow and wrong, surrounded by deceit and guilt,
dating from her very birth, ' Venezia Austyn ' grows up to as sweet
and true a specimen of womanhood as one might wish to see. Her
gentle nature has a force that carries her unscathed through circum¬
stances that might well-nigh have broken down the rectitude of a
weaker character. For the short time when prosperity shines upon
her, we see her earnest in her endeavours to spread happiness around
her, even to the almost unparalleled extent of determining to gain
the love of one apparently antagonistic in his feelings towards herself,
in order that by a union with him she may be enabled to endow him
with all the worldly goods of which most innocently she has been the
means of depriving him. Such an episode as this calls for consider¬
able skill on the part of a writer, so very little might coarsen the
423 The Ladies Edinburgh Ma£[azine.
a'" -"-'^-i,'-
light handling necessary for scenes where the heroine is the one
determined to gain love, and to brave tlie coldness and neglect of one
to whom she is longing to give up everything. We think that the
writer has been particularly successful in her management of this
position. Not quite so happy is the incident she has selected for the
overthrow of her heroine's fortunes ; it is too close a reproduction
of that made so completely her own by Miss Ferrier in The Inherit¬
ance. However, there is some power in the scene where the repentant
Julia dies confessing her sin, which though heinous was committed
less for herself than for others.
We must not spoil the pleasure of readers by detailing the after
events of Vava's life, spent as it was for some years in a hard struggle
witli fortune. The perusal of these chapters cannot fail to interest
all readers.
There are many other characters in the book, all sketched more
slightly than that of the heroine ; but the one of these most worthy
of mention is Esme Gordon, a strong, earnest girl, with deep-seated
affections, kept well in subjection to the necessary business and
duties of life. Of the young men in the book, a less definite impres¬
sion is conveyed to the reader, who is left with the conviction that
the girls in the neighbourhood of Austyn Abbey were decidedly
superior to their companions of the opposite sex, always excepting
Hector Gordon, the true though somewhat shadowy hero of the
tale. But if the young men come short in interest, there is an old
man 'clad in an old-fashioned coat, drab gaiters, and an unmistakeable
brown wig,' rejoicing in the euphonious name of Joshua Snaggs, for
wliom every reader must conceive a strong affection.
The secret of the unexpected role played by this dear old man we
will not impart to the readers of this very readable book.
Wee Johnnie.    An Edinburgh Hospital Sketch from Life.    By
M. M. Esdaile.    Paisley: J. & R Parlane.
' AVee Jphnnie ' is a prettily drawn picture of some of the many
touching scenes taking place daily in our hospitals. The avithoress
makes the acquaintance of the little hero at a strawberry feast, given
by a large boarding-school to the inmates of the Children's Hospital.
The account of the feast, and the children's delight therein, might
make the reader feel how much pleasure may be given, by those
blessed with health and money, to the suffering poor.
In a second visit to the hospital the writer is present at the death
of little Tom, and very pathetically the scene is described, with the
mother sitting by the bed of her dying boy, declaring sadly, ' It is
real provokin', such a clever laddie and all his schoolen wasted!'
Some months after this ' Wee Johnnie ' goes to the Home for Incur¬
ables, ' sorry and frightened ' at first, but soon cheered by the com¬
panionship of Jack Nicol, one of the fifty sailors of the Strathmore
who lived for seven months on an island in the Pacific, subsisting
on penguin eggs and sea-birds, but never losing his temper during
all his privations. Much Johnnie suffered from the parting wlien
his sailor friend, dreaming of recovered health, ' managed to ship
himself off to Australia.' Some time since, Jack, still in possession
of his bad cough and good temper, returned to his old j)lace in the
Home, but little Johnnie was not there. All the hot summer he was
' so tired,' and wlien November came with its short, dull days, he was
called to his rest.
Our Library Table. 429
We can strongly recommend this little history to all who care to
hear something of the lives lived and ended in the Home for Incur¬
ables ; its tone, while pathetic, is free from the mawkishness of so
many tales on like subjects.
A Housewife's Opinions.    By Augusta Webster.    London :
Macmillan & Co.    1879.
Forty-eight short essays, written in good and terse ^English, and
■with much smartness and acumen, form the contents of this volume.
The variety of subjects treated of witness to the ready and discursive
pen of the authoress, ranging from 'The Cost of a Leg of Mutton,'
which we learn to be truly aijpalling,to' University Degrees for Women,'
and 'Matrimony as a Means of Livelihood,' concluding with what of
course cannot be overlooked by any facile female pen, 'Parliamentary
Franchise for Women Ratepayers.' We also have discussions on
many and various propositions of a semi-moral nature—'Early Rising,'
which is called an obsolete virtue ; ' Mrs. Grundy,' whose ' golden rule
is the best for us,' and by whom we are ' saved from chaos.' We
have cleverly and incontestably demonstrated to us, in the essay on
' Whatever is worth doing,' etc., that ' well' should be rendered ' fitly ;'
for ' it is absolutely untrue that everything we may wisely spend a
while on' deserves doing ' with pains and strenuousness.'
Altogether these light and sparkling chapters may well occupy
some spare hours, and will certainly awaken thought on many of the
trite and in most cases thoughtlessly accepted maxims of a woman's
everyday social life.
Linda, and other Poems.    By Jane C. Simpson.    Edinburgh :
Edmonston & Co.    Glasgow : James Maclehose.
The lovers of poetry may find no small amount of interest and
pleasure in this volume. 'The story of ' Linda' occupies one-half of
the book. She is the youngest of four daughters, the first three of
whom were very lovely, while the fourth has no external beauty, but
possesses mental charms pictured thus :
' But there's a charm beyond all outward seeming,
Known not to painter's line, but muse's dreaming,
A subtle, varying essence, strong yet tender,
A mental halo, incorporeal splendour
That still expanding aye shall brighter shine.
And this the dower, O Linda! that was thine.'
The heroine becomes a poetess, and is finally united to one whose
interest in her was first aroused by her writings. The second part of
the volume is composed of short miscellaneous poems, among which
there are many gems of tender grace and feeling. We would espe¬
cially notice the following :—'Won by a Song,' ' Twenty Years,' 'Won
and Never Lost,' and ' Above Rubies.' Sometimes the tone deepens
into passion, as in the verses 'I know not,' and 'Unutterable.'
There is only one poem which contains (for some ears at least) rather
a jarring element. We refer to ' Ritualism.' Those amongst us in
Presbyterian Churches who are accustomed to listen to the organ with
reverential love must shrink from these lines :
* For them through sounding aisles no organ pealing,
By pious fraud evoked fantastic feeling.'
430 Tlic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Further on the writer says:
' Which to the perfect eye most pleasing shows,
Loud-breathing pomp, or eloquent repose ?
In Scotland's cause no doubts my mind can sever,
Severely simple be her garments ever.'
Poor Scotland ! condemned to ugly buildings and badly conducted
music ! We are inclined rather to think that severe simplicity will
no more create the heart's devotion than true art will destroy it.
But this is the only discord among much true melody.
(Question .Scries.
IX.—Define what is meant by the Pre-Raffaelite School in Modern
Art \ Give three examples of their way of treating a subject, and
name any great pictures you please in this school.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C, care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than 5th October. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO JULY SERIES.
Best, Mariana ; second, Stella ; third, Thorough. Next Apis,
very good ; Nagol, Eromart, good.
Give from Shakspere, three instances of intense passion veiled by
a calm exterior, with any comments of your own upon each of them.
'A calm exterior veiling intense passion,' when found in Sliak-
spere, may be the result of self-control, impelled by a strong will, for
a fixed purpose, or of a long course of hypocrisy habitually concealing
every emotion, or it may be the genuine effect of equanimity in some
lovely character where 'patience has had its perfect work.' I wish
that I could select my three instances from this latter sort, but in
Shakspere, as in real life, it is the former descriptions that predomi¬
nate.
Lady Macbeth is an illustration of the first. We are introduced to
her while she was alone, reading her husband's suggestive letter, and
then her real feelings are displayed. Her woman's instinct told her
that his resolution would surely give way, and next she mistrusted her
own. But she began to school her mind, and mastered herself so
completely, that when Macbeth returned, she met him cheerfully, and
tried to rally him out of the agitation visible on his countenance.
' Your face, my thane,' she exclaimed, ' is as a book where men may
read strange matters.' Not so hers, for when soon after Duncan
arrived at the castle, he was probably charmed with her gracious
reception. Perhaps her greatest effort of self-command was while
presiding as the courteous hostess at the banquet, her mind distracted
by a guilty conscience, fear of discovery, anxiety as to the result of
the half-accomplished enterprise, and alarm at the terror of Macbeth
when he saw Banquo's ghost. This double strain to maintain his
composure as well as her own proved too much, and she was carried
away in a fainting fit.    We can trace  the progress of the physical
Stray Notes. 431
effects of such terrible repression, from its beginning in sleepless
nights to its ending in the mortal illness which needed more the skill
of ' the divine than of the physician.'
My second instance is Lord Angelo, of the pre-eminently calm
demeanour, to whom a sincere and intimate friend had said with
admiration, ' There is a kind of character in thy life that to the
observer doth thy history fully unfold.' But what was there to be
unfolded % Had Angelo ever any real emotions, good or bad \ Yes ;
and when they came they found him well prepared, not to resist, but
to conceal them, for they were all bad. But even he could not escape
the shame of discovery, and he serves to illustrate this warning:
' O what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outer side!'
I turn from him with pleasure tO' my third instance, Cordelia. She
certainly failed in external demonstration, when questioned as to her
love for her father, and. provoked the doating old king to attribute
her reserve to insensibility. But I am justified in assuming that her
feelings at the moment were intense, consisting as they did of disgust
at the insincere protestations of her sisters, disapproval of his act of
folly, and pain at being doubted ; for when we meet her again under
different circumstances, matured and developed, we are struck with
the energy of her character, the depth of her affections, as shown by
her tender care of her poor blind father, and her heartfelt indignation
at the treatment he had received from his cruel daughters. Even
then
' It seemed she was a queen
Over her passians, who, most rebel-like,
Sought to be king o'er her.'
' O then it moved her ?'
' Not to a rage.' ' Patience and Borro\y strove, who should express
her goodliest,' and the portrait, preserved by Shakspere, took its
place among ' whatsoever things are lovely and of good report.'
Mariana.
Instruction by CoRRESPONDENeE.—At the recent meeting in S.
Geoi'ge's Hall for the distribution of prizes and certificates gained by
the students of the S. George's Hall Classes, it was announced that
once more the chief honours had been carried ofT by students of the
corresponding branch of these classes. Not only has Miss Borthwick,
a correspondent, taken the first place among her class-mates, but she
has the honour of heading the whole list of candidates, upwards of
800 in number. The fourth place in tlie public list is also taken by
a member of the S. George's Hall Classes, but in this case the
successful candidate. Miss Boileau, was a student of the orally taught
classes. It may be mentioned that this student gained 100 per cent,
in Honour English Literature. Two bursaries of £20 each have been
awarded by the Committee of the S. George's Hall Classes to two
corresponding students, Miss Shepherd, Perth, and Miss Clara
Stoker, Durham.
It is with very great pleasure that we see Oxford bringing its
strength to boar on the cause of Women's Education.   This University
432 Tlic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
has now instituted an 'Examination for Women,' in addition to the
former Junior and Senior Examinations intended for girls. As a
natural consequence of these examinations, a need has arisen for some
special accommodation for lady students wishing to live in Oxford, in
order to secure the full advantages of the preparation there afforded.
To meet this need, two Halls have been founded—one named the
Ladies' Hall, under the presidentship of Miss Wordsworth ; and the
other the Somerville Hall, the president of which is Miss Shaw-
Lefevre. Might not some such Hall be founded in Edinburgh, in
connection with the Association for the University Education of
Women ?
School of Cookery.—Some of our readers may be interested to
hear that two small scholarships of three and two guineas respectively
have been offered for competition on Tuesday, October 7th, in the
School of Cookery. The written examination is to consist of the
first 46 pages of the School Cookery Book, lately reviewed in the pages
of this Magazine. The two successful candidates will be entitled to
attend any classes (except high class cookery) in the school.
A Rook writes asking if there is any place in Edinburgh where a
lady fond of chess has an opportunity of meeting others like-minded,
and of making progress in tliis most delightful of intellectual pas¬
times ? She knows there is a chess club in connection with the
Philosophical Institution, but hears that no lady is on any pretext
admitted within its doors. If no such place for ladies exists, would
any persons be inclined to join her in forming a mixed ladies' and
gentlemen's chess club?    [We invite answers to this query.—Eds.]
NoticfS t0 Corresponticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Ediuhurgh Magaziiie, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless y^M postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The Editors will be happy to receive further contributions or
suggestions for the Series on ' Country Subjects and Pursuits.'
No meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held in September. In order to suit the convenience of members,
the meeting in October is postponed till Saturda}' the 11th, when
it will be held at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m. "The usual Debate
will give place to a discussion on the comparative advantages
to be derived from the seven professorial classes [English Literature,
Logic and Mental Philosophy, Education, Experimental Physics,
Mathematics, Greek, Latin], to be held next session in the Edinburgh
Association for the University Education of Women.
CoiinUy Subjects and Pursuits. 433
Countrg Siubjccts anli pursuits.
XL—AMONG  THE  EED  DEER
Let me premise, that wdiile acknowledging a love for all
out-door sports and amusements, I would scarcely have run
the risk of being thought unfeminine, in treating of matters
connected with shooting, had I not been asked to contribute
these notes by a dear friend who has known me for years,
and is aware of the circumstances under which ray experi¬
ences have been earned.
From my earliest youth, much of my time has been spent
in the Highlands of Scotland. When very young I was my
father's constant companion; and from the many days we
spent on the hill, and hunting together, he used to call me
' brother sportsman.' Whilst owning to such a title, some
who read this may consider me rather a masculine character,
but they must not pass judgment too hastily; and perhaps
they will not be severe when tliey know that I am innocent
of ever having shed blood, and that my only shooting has
been with a drawing-room pistol at a mark.
Having always been strong and 'stout,' in the lowland
Scotch acceptation of the term, and blessed with perfect
health,—the result, I am sure, of the careful yet hardy
bringing up of our old nurse, whose receipt for it was lots of
cold water and plenty of exercise, and whose battles-royal
with the governess, who tried very hard to keep us more in
the schoolroom, I can still remember,—add to this that I was
in my youth, as I have already said, my father's constant
companion, and had strength to stand the out-door work, is
it to be wondered at that my appreciation of sport grew with
my years ? Those who have not had such opportunities,
although they may realize the true happiness and pleasures
of a country life, can scarcely understand the superlative
delights to be enjoyed under the above-mentioned circum¬
stances, but they will join me at least in thinking that time
spent in rural amusements throws town pleasures and
dissipations into the shade. There is, of course, no reason
why they should not be taken in turn, but my own experi¬
ence is, that whilst a London season is succeeded by a
feeling of languor and dissatisfaction, the same time spent
in the country, and in country pursuits, braces mind and
body with a keener relish for its simpler life, which can only
No. 58.—October 1879. 2 E
434 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
depart with old age and failing strength ; when the recollec¬
tion of past days spent in the chase, or watching the setters
on the moor, will even suffice to bring back one's youth
again.
' The world may allure with its pomp and its noise,
Yet the stings of remorse and the penance of pain
Too often are found to o'erbalance the joys,
And leave on the soul an indelible stain.
Oh ! I love the blue hills and the wide dashing flood,
But the crowds of the city are joyless to me ;
With the steed of the desert, the birds of the wood,
With health, freedom, and nature, there, there would I be !'
I know there are many who must sympathize with me in
such sentiments, and some kindred spirits who, in these
days when it is the fashion to spend the summer in the
Highlands, will warmly share my feelings.
My love for animals, and especially for dogs, has led me
thoroughly to appreciate watching them work on the hill,
showing what natural intelligence combined with good
training can do; and I do not know a more interesting sight
than a brace of well-broken, handsome setters or pointers
ranging, quartering their ground, and backing each other
when they find game. Shooting over dogs, too, seems to me
much more enjoyable, though the bag may be lighter, than
the fashion of driving and walking in line, now so prevalent,
yet no doubt a good shot feels satisfaction in the larger
result.
My fondness for sketching, too (though I am no artist),
makes my fancy for walks on the hill still greater, and from
being able to accompany the sportsmen, it has sometimes
been my good fortune to see grand views almost unknown
to residents in the neighbourhood.
But it is not of grouse-shooting that I now propose to
speak, as I think an account of deer-driving may be more
interesting to my lady readers, as more seldom seen. Many
may know the neighbourhood I am about to describe, as it is
within sight of what some sanguine proprietors hope will
become the Liverpool of Scotland. We, however, are not alone
in sincerely trusting that it may continue to be the ' Cowes'
of the north for yachtsmen, and headquarters of tourists,
even after the ' Glenmutchkin' railway is completed.
One evening in September, a kilted Mercury, bearer of a
note from our neighbour to my husband, appeared at our
door, the sender of the letter being the representative and
chief of one of the oldest clans in the "West Highlands, and
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 435
a large proprietor there; the contents were somewhat to the
following effect:—' Deer drive to-morrow ; come to eight
o'clock breakfast, bring your guest with you, and see that
your cartridges are loaded with straight powder.' The ' gillie'
returned with our acceptance, and by eight o'clock the next
morning, after a lovely seven-mile drive through the most
varied scenery, we presented ourselves at the mansion of our
hospitable entertainer, accompanied by our guest, a friend
and relative, a first-rate sportsman and good shot, then
making his acquaintance with the island, and to wliom deer-
shooting was a novelty. Being an Irishman, he declared his
presence sufficient to bring good luck; and being unusually
blessed with the national vivacity and high spirits, he proved
a most welcome addition to the party already assembled in
the dining-room.
After a hearty reception and the usual morning saluta¬
tions, we settled into our places round the table, which
groaned under the weight of good things, almost all of which
were supplied off the estate, affording a worthy specimen of
that meal proverbially so excellent in Scotland. Before us
are herrings caught in the bay during the past night; sea
trout, the result of yesterday's sport on the loch; eggs and
dairy produce from the farm, scones, cakes, and fancy bread;
before our hostess is ranged the steaming urn and tea service,
and coffee is at the other end ; on the side table cold salmon,
mackerel, lobsters, and a gigantic game pie ; not to mention
that usual concomitant of every Scotch and many English
tables, a big bowl of porridge, flanked by milk and cream
jugs; so that those who had already indulged in the tonic of
fresh sea air and a long drive, satisfied the good appetite
thus acquired by doing ample justice to the viands. But tne
repast was not lingered over, and by nine o'clock we started
from the door, escorted by quite an army of beaters, the rear
being brouglit up by ' Slydog,' the little Barra pony, carrying
the panniers packed with luncheon, and led by a kilted
laddie.
All the ladies accompanied us to the foot of the hill, when
most of them returned with our hostess, some few only
staying to see the first beat. We had a long climb to com¬
mence with, up a steep mountain track, scarcely being
allowed to stop, even at intervals, to admire the view, though
we sadly wanted the excuse; and the grand and glorious
scene below was well worth stopping to admire,—the bay,
always lovely, unusually so in its peaceful aspect, dotted
"with tiny black specks, the boats of the salmon and lobster
43^ The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
fishers away to visit their nets and creels; beyond was the
wide expanse of sea, and Colousay in the distance, shrouded
in an atmosphere of misty blue,—the mist being a sure sign
of lasting good weather,—for when rain is impending, the
island stands out clear and distinct from the water; below
us is heard the moan and dash of the waves as they break
upon the shore, very different from the thundering crash of
the deep green seas that roll up unchecked from the Atlantic,
and lash themselves into foam on this rock-bound coast
during a south-westerly gale ; across the bay one sees the
ivy-clad old eastle standing out in bold relief on its rocky
promontory, beyond it the fir-woods through which peeps
the more modern dwelling-liouse (from the turret of the
castle rises the flagstaflt" with its red flag idly flapping), and
below is the port, with the boats drawn up on the beach,
and the brown herring nets spread in the sun to dry. This
is but one of the many equally beautiful scenes in the
neighbourhood, scenes that vary under different aspects, and
with every change of weather.
But now we have reached the first pass, and a halt is
called; whispered injunctions and directions for the day are
given ; and our host goes off to superintend the beaters,
leaving orders with the keepers where the guns are to be
placed. On we tramp again, being posted in turn, and ours
is to be the furthest point. As the last but ourselves is
conducted to a sunny corner behind a grey rock covering a
good view of the pass below, from which the deer may break
either to the right or left up little glens, we hear the keeper
remark in a low voice, ' Remember, sir, stags only,' leading
our south-country friend to expect the deer to be as
numerous as pheasants at a battue. Our station was further
on, a most likely place, covering a ravine leading between
two hills to the woods on the other side. Nearly half an
hour passed as we crouched silently behind a heatliery
knoll, the silence only being disturbed by the hum of varied
insect life, and bleat of distant sheep. Gradually soimds of
the beat are heard,—the shout of a beater or yelp of a
collie dog, then two or three dogs give tongue together,
evidently in pursuit of something, perhaps they are on the
line of a deer. If so, we must look out. Nothing comes, but
after a few minutes there is a grand hullabaloo amongst the
beaters, some deer having been viewed, and they yell like
maniacs to keep them forward, but to no purpose; either
the animals scent danger ahead, or are so puzzled by the
shouting, that they fancy themselves surrounded, and break
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 437
back the way they came. We keep watch, and are rewarded
by seeing a very pretty sight, to me quite sufficient pleasure
for the day, but disappointment to those only intent on
slaying the 'antlered monarch,'—a hind, followed by her
calf, comes leisurely up the glen, and passes close by us; she
stops to look back and listen to the unusual tumult below,
then starts off, leading her little one out of danger. We
hear when the men come up that a lot of deer broke back,
amongst them two stags.
The next beat was equally unsuccessful; by the time it
was over we had reached the appointed place for luncheon,
where ' Slydog' with the panniers was waiting; yet, not¬
withstanding our bad luck, every one was in the best of
spirits from the exhilarating effect of the pure mountain
air. We all sat down upon the heather; at our feet flowed
a spring of deliciously cool water, and at a little distance
the beaters grouped themselves most picturesquely, glad of
the rest after their hard walk through the long heather,
bracken, and underwood, having well earned the good cheer
in store for them. Whilst eating our lunch the prospects
for the afternoon were discussed, our ever sanguine host
predicted better sport, and we all joined in drinking ' good
luck.'
The beat before us is looked upon as one of the best; my
husband was placed in one of the most likely passes, and our
Irish friend at another some two hundred yards off; from
our post we could overlook the birch wood down to the
shore of the fresh, which is divided from the salt water loch
by a narrow strip of land, upon which stands in a cluster of
dark fir trees the little church and manse; in the far
distance are the ranges of Argyleshire hills, amongst which
towers the lofty Ben Cruachan. The beat had scarcely
commenced when I heard the voice of the chief, who had
been watching proceedings through his glasses, shouting in
great excitement to us,' They are coming upon your right;
see, there they go, take the leading stag;' and with the
intention of keeping them going in the direction they were
following, he gave a holloa, which, re-echoing amongst the
hills, seemed to puzzle the deer. They stopped and hesitated.
We could scarcely make them out from where we were,
their heads only being visible, and we had to run round the
shoulder of the hill to get a good sight of them, on reaching
which point I saw my companion drop on his knee and take
steady aim. In looking in the direction in wliich his rifle
was pointing, I saw about a dozen deer in single file crossing
43^ TIic Ladies' EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
the crest of the hill, behind which was posted our Irishman,
the distance being about 200 yards; and though there was
no result to the first shot, at the second the leading stag
pitclied  forward  on  his   head  and  rolled  over.     Almost
immediately afterwards the report of our friend's rifle w^as
heard; and when we reached the spot, after scrambling at
our best pace over the rough ground, we found that he had
killed another  stag which was in tlie herd.    He appeared
not to liave moved since he had fired, but was munching a
biscuit very unconcernedly, and was trying to look  as if
shooting a stag was an everyday occurrence.    When asked
what he had done, he said: ' I sat very comfortably where I
was placed, got tired of doing nothing, thought I would play
with a biscuit; when the deer came thundering down the
hill, almost on the top of me, I picked out the stag, potted
him, and there he is.'    As  he  concluded these words, he
sauntered up to the dead animal lying some thirty yards off'.
Up came the chieftain in breatldess  haste, and frantic
but  pleased   excitement, and   gradually  the  keepers' and
beaters assembled, all delighted at the success of the beat,
and making their remarks on tlie size and appearance of the
stags that were lying within a hundred yards of each other.
I believe that I alone felt regret at seeing the noble creatures,
so lately graceful in life, dead.    It was, however, a striking
scene,—the gentlemen in animated conversation; our host
giving his orders in his usual authoritative tone; the keepers
with knives in their hands, coats off, and sleeves turned up,
preparing to ' gralloch' the stags; tlie beaters talking Gaelic
at the top of their voices; and their dogs sitting, looking so
wise, at their masters' feet.    A party of men is sent to cut
' cabers ' or poles, upon which the deer are to be slung; and
the boy with the pony starts at best pace for the farm at the
foot of the hill, to order a cart and to carry the news home.
The keepers having finished their work, the deer are slung
upon the cabers, and are carried upon men's shoulders; the
whole party follow the track down the hill to the farm,
where the cart is waiting; the farmer, delighted to hear of
the good sport, and not forgetting his losses through the
deer having broken into his corn field and potato plot, is
really glad that the stags liave been killed, congratulates his
landlord on so successful a day, and asks us all in to rest a
bit.    We enter his house, and find already spread out in the
parlour a repast of cheese, oatcake, scones and butter, a large
jug of creamy milk, and a decanter of Avhisky.    We feel
bound to drink the healths of the ' deer-slayers;' the gentle-
Country Subjects and Pursuits, 439
men do so in a 'quaigh' of whisky, and I take a glass of
milk, which tastes more than usually delicious after the
hard work.
In the meantime the piper has arrived, and playing a
march, he leads the way home ; we follow, having thanked
the farmer and his wife for their hospitality. The road
winds by the side of the fresh-water loch, and is a very
beautiful one ; the scene would have made a worthy subject
for the pencil of j\Ir. Alfred Newton,—the kilted piper
marching in front, with the clan ribbons streaming over his
shoulder; behind him the cart, laden with the spoil, guarded
by the keepers, carrying their masters' rifles; then the crowd
of beaters with their dogs; and ourselves bringing up the
rear,—the cortege following the winding and undulating
road, the loch on one hand, only ruffled by the wild ducks as
they flutter out disturbed from the sedges; on the other
rises the hill, the lower part of which is thickly wooded, and
rich with the deep autumn tints of bracken, birch, and hazel;
and before us at intervals is visible, above a belt of dark
green fir trees, the turrets of the old castle and its red flag.
At the lodge gate we are met by the ladies with our
hostess, who, besides being pleased that the day's sport has
been so good, is highly satisfied at the addition to her larder;
for in this country it is necessary to keep the larder full,
guests often putting in an appearance very unexpectedly.
Sidney Smith has said he objected to living nine miles from
a lemon; he would have avoided this island, where the
nearest baker's shop is double the distance, and where the
rod and gun have so much to be depended upon for supplies.
On reaching the house, the deer are again slung upon the
cabers, and carried by the men, who, with the piper at the
head, march three times round the house, according to an old
custom. The beaters are then dismissed, and warned to
attend again at a dance in the barn in the evening. We stayed
to dinner, and took part in the barn ball, where reels were
danced with the usual Highland energy, taking our departure
about midnight. The moon was nearly full, and we were
not too tired to appreciate the lovely drive home along that
road we knew so well; and as we passed by the shore of the
salt-water loch, we had the opportunity of pointing out to
our friend the round glistening head of an inquisitive seal,
that seemed to watch our approach with great interest, and
silently dived as we drew near, only to look up again a little
further out; then a heron disturbed the stillness with his
harsh cry as he left his perch upon a rock; on passing the
440 The L adies" Edinburgh Magazine.
shepherd's cottage a flock of white goats is feeding down
near the beach, looking beautiful in the moonlight; and on
the hillside beyond it are just visible the shadowy forms of
the shaggy Highland cattle.
I think my paper is long enough, though I could tell of
many equally enjoyable days, and my description of the
country comes far short of the reality; the delightful life
there, and its varied sport, can only be justly estimated by
those who visit it. M. M. C.
VI.—LIFE IN A DESERT ISLAND.
PART I.
Life in a Desert Island! A well-cultivated desert island,
it is true, containing 1100 inhabitants—but that, of course,
did not prevent it from being a desert. Robinson Crusoe,
we imagine, did not consider himself less alone for the
company of the savages who invaded his island; a simple
illustration which shows clearly enough, that it is not Society
only, but congenial society, that is required, even by those
who are most inclined to mix with their fellow-men ; and
that the man who finds himself a solitary stranger amidst the
inhabitants of, say. Cannibal Polynesia, is likely to feel his
solitude at least as much as if he were in the great Sahara
itself.
With this preliminary explanation, we will narrate the
circumstances which led to our spending three months in
our desert home. AVe had passed the previous summer at
Ischl, and had returned home with many intentions of
making a longer stay abroad next year, but, in the mean¬
while, a kind friend had offered us his Island in 'our
Northern Archipelago,' as the guide-books call it, and the
mankind of our family were eager that the offer should be
accepted. To the sportsman, no island is a desert which
contains grouse and capital sea-trout fishing; and though our
English friends looked at us with as much surprise as if they
had never heard of the Orkney or Shetland Islands before,
we were attracted by the novelty of the idea, and set off
early in June to go and take possession of our new
territories.
That was before the days of completed railways, so we
settled that we would go by sea from Aberdeen to Kirkwall,
A t Home and A broad. 441
and never shall we forget the horrors of the passage, which
stands out as pre-eminently wretched in our mind, only to
be equalled, in fact, by one other voyage—the crossing back
again from Kirkwall to Aberdeen. It is true that, in our
eagerness to arrive, we started in a storm against the advice
of the port authorities, so that, going on board one night at
ten o'clock, we did not reach Kirkwall till late in the after¬
noon of the following day. Those long hours spent in a tiny
cabin must account for the fact that, though we did sally
forth in the evening, after our arrival, to see the Cathedral
and the Earl's Palace, there only remains to us at this
moment a dim impression of their beauty, and that, to our
exceeding disgrace, we have never since been able to give to
inquiring and artistic friends, any correct account of the
architecture of these well-known ruins.
We were to start the next morning at 6 a.m. in a large
fishing smack, which had been hired to convey us, our
luggage, and some of our English servants, to our new island.
To us poor inland people, starting so early seemed an
unnecessary hardship, though we did hear mysterious and
abstruse calculations about the tides ; and we were quite
inclined to feel injured when, having succeeded in scram¬
bling on board a very few minutes after the appointed time,
we were received with much shaking of the head, and
melancholy prophecies that, with this wind, the tide would
have turned before the fourteen miles of sea were accom¬
plished, which lay between us and our looked-for destination.
We are bound to confess that this, our first introduction
to Orcadian scenery, was a disappointment. To those who
are acquainted with that part of the world, it is hardly
necessary to say that a high cold wind was blowing, and
though the sun was shining brightly, the colours of the
landscape round us were very hard and cold. We had all
of us indulged the idea that, whatever the Orkneys might be
deficient in, we should certainly find grander and more
romantic scenery there, than in any other part of Scotland.
Here were our Orkney Islands spreading out, one after
another, to either side of us, and what a different picture
there was before our eyes! Low, flat, grassy islands, a hard,
bright green in colour, rose out of a deep blue sea which
looked more like Italy, we thought, than Orkney, if it had
only been a little smoother, and not quite so coldly brilliant.
And so, in and out, through narrow passages and wider
channels, we sailed, until we reached the broader arm of the
sea by which our own island was separated from the mainland,
442 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
or Pomona, as the good people have chosen to call it, probably
from the entire absence of any kind of fruit.
We had got tired by this time of the mysteries of tacking,
so that it was a decided relief to find that we had our new
island actually and visibly before our eyes; it was higher
too, and somewhat wilder, than any we had passed before,
and though at present we could see on it no trace of human
habitation, we were confidently assured that not many miles
further on, we should find a house comfortably arranged for
us, and breakfast duly prepared—in accordance with many
previous directions—by the Orkney servants, whom with
great forethought we had engaged, and sent to take possession,
at least a week before our own arrival.
Hope revived, though it was no doubt struggling under
very adverse circumstances, for by this time it was ten
o'clock, and we had liad notliing to eat that morning. Still
the island, in tangible shape before our eyes, gave a sort of
certainty to the prospect of speedy arrival, and almost
another hour passed before some one announced, in solemn
and melancholy tones, that we had been opposite that same
bit of rock for at least half an hour. It was too true. The
wind was dead against us, the tide, which flows strongly
through these narrow channels, had turned, and there was
every prospect of remaining where we were until the wind
shifted its quarter, or the tide vouchsafed once more to turn.
Never did shipwrecked mariners long more eagerly to
reach the shore, than did we to find ourselves safe upon our
unlucky island. Finally, the men of the fishing smack took
compassion on us, and offered to land us in a little boat upon
the nearest shore, from whence we could easily walk the few
miles which lay between us and Westray House, the place
of our destination. And so we landed, and took possession,
sustained by no triumphant consciousness of a long journey
successfully accomplished, but weighed down with that sense
of depression which arises from mingled cold, hunger, and
fatigue. Never shall we forgot the walk along that rough,
interminable road, each one of us toiling painfully under the
additional weight of those cherished possessions which we
could not be persuaded to abandon to the terrible uncertain¬
ties of the fishing smack. There was still a cold wind
blowing, yet a hot sun beat down upon us, and shade, of
course, there was none. At length, about one o'clock, we
came suddenly upon a substantial white house set down
upon the sea-shore with its back to the view, and its front
aspect looking straight up the barren hill against which it
Ai Home and Abroad. 443
had been placed for shelter. A large garden wall surroTinded
it, behind which grew a few stunted bushes. But we hardly
stopped to look at the exterior of our new home ! The front
door stood hospitably open, so we hurried in, and calling for
our domestics, inquired if the long-looked-for breakfast were
nearly ready for us ?
The women looked doubtfully at each other. They knew
nothing about breakfast, they assured us, in voices which
rather jarred upon our Scotch ears, they were so painfully
English, almost American, in their intonation. Here was
the climax to our despair! Why had they not attended to
our letters ? we remonstrated quite indignantly. Oh ! there
had been no letters for the last week or more, the weather
had been too stormy for tlie post-boat to cross. Well, it was
clear that there was no use in fretting over the delay; we
would content ourselves with having mutton-chops cooked
as quickly as possible. But there was no mutton, the cook
humbly represented to us, and even we knew that we could not
expect to find a convenient butcher's shop in the neighbour¬
hood. What had the women been living upon themselves ?
was our next inquiry. ' Eggs,' they replied; whereupon
our friend's man of business, who liad kindly come over to
install us in our new domains, interrupted the conversation
with the remark that we should find tlie people hereabouts
remarkably frugal in their ways. We heartily wished them
at that moment less economical, but at our servant's last
reply a ray of hope had illuminated our faces—we would
have eggs, and bread and butter, and tea. But there was no
bread made in the island, no butter in the house; our stores
had not arrived, so that there was no tea; and our frugal
servants had finished the very last egg that morning for
breakfast! Such was the cheerful account of the contents of
our larder, and we were seized with a too profound despair
to be able to evolve any fresh suggestions. The cook came
to our rescue ; should she go up to the farm and order a
sheep to be killed, and send over to the merchant for a little
meal to make some porridge ?
We resigned ourselves to our fate. At about four o'clock
in the afternoon, we sat down to a modest repast of six plates
of porridge, and at ten o'clock at night we made merry over
some of the toughest mutton it had ever been our fortune to
eat. Truly our island seemed desert-like enough that first
evening; and to our unaccustomed eyes there was some¬
thing cheerless in the broad daylight, which seemed as if
it would never fade away into that softer twilight, M-hich
444 The Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
might make less apparent the bleak chilliness of our new
abode.
Those long days were very trying to us at first; it was
impossible to have a pleasant home evening when hungry
and belated sportsmen kept dropping in gradually between
ten and eleven at night, unwilling to believe that it was past
all reasonable dining hours, or that stay-at-home ladies
might begin to feel themselves neglected and aggrieved. It
was only later on, when we had been out ourselves to all
hours of the night, that we began to appreciate the charm of
those long evenings when the sun set indeed about 9.30,
but twilight seemed hardly to gather, as we turned reluctantly
homewards at twelve o'clock at night, and closed our bed¬
room shutters tightly, that we might cheat ourselves into the
belief that there were to be a few hours of darkness.
We soon settled down into our new home, which was very
like any old-fashioned Highland house, though Orkney
people would no doubt be grievously insulted at such a
comparison. Dislike to Scotland and the Scotch is
apparently one of their strongest articles of faith, and we
soon learned to respect the popular belief that Orkney is
more Danish than Scotch, that it has been only pledged to
the Scottish Crown, and that at any moment its lawful
owners might resume possession of tliis true Danish depend¬
ency, on the payment of the stipulated sum of money for
which it had been originally pledged.
Westray House was supposed to be a model of comfort,
and its garden, as we were often told, was the pride of all
the neighbouring islands. It was a good-sized kitchen
garden, surrounded, as we have said, by a high wall, behind
which grew what we suppose ought to be considered the
forest of the island, a small plantation of sickly trees, which
flourished until they grew high enough to peep over their
friendly shelter, and were then hopelessly stunted by the
cold sea wind. It is curious, when one is told that these
islands were once covered with grand primeval forests, to
see the entire absence of trees at present, and this great
want, coupled with the tame outline of most of the islands,
prevents one from becoming very enthusiastic over the
scenery. Our trees were not much comfort to us; they only
collected every bird in the whole island, so that there could
never be a hope of much fruit. Perhaps this mattered the
less, for, as the natives were careful to explain, June in
Orkney was merely the early spring of the year; strawberries
might be expected somewhere about December; and, in the
At Home and Abroad. 445
nieanwhile, our one procurable vegetable, potatoes, had to be
brought over once a week, with bread and washing, from
Kirkwall.
How w^e were to occupy ourselves during the three months
of our summer holiday, was the first question which presented
itself to us, and it was rather a difficult one to answer. The
gentlemen found plenty to do, even before the 12th August,
in the way of deep-sea fishing, seal-shooting, and expeditions
to a distant loch where excellent Loch Lomond trout were
to be obtained. But the high, cold wind, which never
ceased blowing, took away the pleasure we might have found
in such long excursions; and when we first arrived we got
into a habit of standing idly at the dining-room windows,
looking out over tlie sea to the mainland opposite to us, and
wondering what we could find to do in the long day tliat lay
before us.
Of course, like all true Desert Islanders, those who could
not shoot, or fish, or provide food for the family, felt bound
to do their share of work by most industriously knitting end¬
less long stockings. But we never felt that we could emulate
the zeal of the true Orcadians, wdth whom knitting seemed
to have become indeed a second nature, and who worked with
apparently equal comfort whether they were sitting quietly
by the fireside, running full speed on an errand to the
merchant, or driving home the most refractory of cattle.
They were good, simple people too, and not so suspicious as
the Fair Islanders, who will not let a stranger come near
them, for fear he should discover the secret of those strange
patterns in wliich it is their pride to knit; but then this was
to be accounted for by the fact, that in our island there were
no secrets of the art to be betrayed, and so even the knitting
could provide us with no new occupation. One energetic
member of the party did indeed determine that she would
learn to spin, but her ardour was sadly damped when she
discovered that the good woman who undertook to give
lessons, did honour to her lady pupil by carding the wool
with an old bottle of Eowland's Macassar Oil! The visits
to that cottage became very few and far between, and finding
ourselves thrown entirely upon our own resources, we set to
work to invent some new out-door amusements.
It may seem, perhaps, that we made but little use of our
opportunities, when we confess that, for some time, these
amusements culminated in the delights of sitting out upon the
rocks in front of the house, and devoting ourselves to the one
object of feeding crabs and sea-anemones.    It was astonishing
44^ TJic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
how fascinating the amusement became ; but, in justification
of our laziness, we must explain that there was but one road,
which went straight round the island, and our choice of walk¬
ing was therefore limited to walking three miles towards the
end of the island one day, and three miles in the opposite
direction on the next. The road was identical in each case ;
there was always the same bare hilly moorland on one side of
us, and the sea, rather below us, on the other. That sea view
did make amends for a good deal, to be sure; but then we had
just as fine a one from our own rocks as elsewhere. The
beauty of it, to our mind, lay in the fact that we could see out
towards the Atlantic ; and there was a sense of boundless
possibilities in that little peep of open sea, which quite took
away the feeling of being shut up as prisoners on our island
without any means of escape. Straight opposite to us ran
the mainland, as the principal island is usually called; it
was only two or three miles away, but between us and it
there lay another little green island across our narrow
channel, which barred our full view of the open sea. This
island served as a sort of door, closing us in from the full
violence of Atlantic storms; but, through the narrow open¬
ings on each side of it there rushed a stormy race, or Eoost,
as they call it there, against which no boat could ever hope
to struggle. Through these oi^enings we looked out over
the clear expanse of water, and could watch the sun dip
calmly in the sea, without any land intervening to hide bis
setting glories from our eyes.
The Eoost, as well as the cold weather, put an end to all
longings for a swim ; and so when there was nothing else to
do, which happened at least five days out of the seven, we
sallied forth and encamped upon the rocks, equipped in all
our winter garments, and armed with little fragments of
meat, wherewith to feed tlie inhabitants of our out-door
aquarium. Upon the whole, there is no doubt that the
little crabs had the best time of it, and were the spoilt
children of our sea-side establishment. We got tired of
seeing the fat, red sea-anemones entangle the crumbs of
food in their petals, and then quietly engulph them; and
the crabs were infinitely more amusing, fighting over, and
tearing up, the shreds of meat which we bestowed on
them.
Sometimes, in search of new specimens, we used to extend
our walks to rocks at a little distance from the house; but
in that case we always made a point of walking at the ex¬
treme edge of the sea-shore, for our lives were a burden to
A i Home and A broad. 447
us at first, from fear of the cattle which roamed about the
island. The nearest farmer warned us upon our arrival, that
though his beasts were, of course, as quiet as well-beliaved
cattle ought to be, still they had a dislike to strangers, and
he would not recommend us to go too near them until they
had become accustomed to us. It was in following this
advice that we acquired the habit of walking on the extreme
edge of the rocks, and this for two reasons—first, so as to
leave our enemies every room to pass us unmolested; and
then, because we were all firmly convinced that it would be
better to plunge at once into the ocean, than to face the anger
of an infuriated bull.
We grew braver after we had been some weeks in the
island, and at last the most courageous amongst us used
adventurously to cross a field with cattle in it, which made
a short cut to some cottages we were in the habit of visiting.
I cannot say that her courage was rewarded. At first we
used to watch her over the dangerous corner in much fear
and trembling ; but in time we got used to the adventure,
and thought no more of it, until one unlucky day when she
started for her walk with her hands full of eggs, intended as
a present for an invalid, and a volume of Sir Walter Scott's
Pirate under her arm, which she was in the habit of reading
to an interested cottage audience. She had hardly entered
the field when the beasts began to watch her, and before she
was half-way across, an angry cow was in full pursuit of the
unwelcome stranger. There was no time to reach the gate;
she rushed towards the high stone wall which surrounded
the field, and, with breathless interest, we saw her endeavour
to clamber over a place which wotild certaiidy have seemed
insurmountable in cold blood. Now, however, spurred on
by the feeling that the cow's horns were already at her back,
she reached the top of the wall by a superhuman effort, and
was presently standing on the other side, hatless, dishevelled,
covered with broken eggs, and much irritated, as she after¬
wards confessed to us, by the frank laughter of her cottage
friends at the forlorn appearance she presented. One of
them went so far as to declare that the cow only wanted to
be milked, but we would never listen to such a base ex¬
planation of our terrible adventure !
I think it was in consequence of this that we all solemnly
determined that in future, young and old, we would always
ride about instead of walking. There were several good-
sized Shetland ponies roaming over our island, not exactly
wild, of course, but left to wander over the hills, winter and
44^ The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
summer, completely in accordance with their own devices.
We had only to say that we wanted another pony, and in a
day or two one would be captured and brought home in
triumph. They were good, quiet little beasts on the whole,
though they had some tricks which were rather disconcert¬
ing to a nervous rider. For instance, it was rather humi
Hating, as you trotted peacefully and quietly along, to feel
your animal suddenly disappear from under you, and before
you quite knew what had happened, to find yourself on the
ground, and your mischievous pony indulging in a roll.
This was one of their favourite manoeuvres; but, on the
whole, we used to think that we had more trouble from the
ingenious way in whicli tliej^ managed to escape from us, if
we left them alone for a moment.
We remember particularly one afternoon, when we had
gone for a longer walk than usual, and one of the party was
riding, as we thought, the very quietest of our steeds. Pre¬
sently she wanted to dismount; and, as we came to help
her, our naughty little beast, finding his head free, moved a
few paces on, almost before she reached the ground. We
had only to stretch out our hand, we thought, to reach the
reins; but, behold, when we attempted it, the pony quietly
trotted on a few steps in front of us. It was a ridiculous
scene ; only, as our road was considerably up-hill, we soon
became too hot to find it amusing. As fast as we quickened
our pace the pony quickened his, and trotted forward quietly
enough, yet as if he took a malicious pleasure in just keep¬
ing out of our reach. Then, no doubt, he became excited by
success, for his next step was to take a comfortable roll
over the heather, in liopes of getting rid of the objectionable
saddle. We should have gone, we believe, all round the
island before we captured the little wretch, who had a most
provoking air of thoroughly enjoying the trouble he was
giving us; but happily it was a Sunday afternoon, and
two or three men were walking about, who kindly assisted
in the capture. We stationed ourselves in a circle round
the pony, and then, as he galloped wildly round to find an
unguarded place through ^\'llich he might escape, some one
succeeded in seizing his bridle, and in a few minutes we
were on our way home with our recovered captive walking
peaceably behind us, and tlie saddle, after all, comparatively
uninjured.
After that we were very careful; and on one occasion,
when we had gone up to one of the rocks in the hills, still
with the same pony in attendance, we took great credit t©
A t Home and A broad. 449
ourselves for unsaddling him with our own hands, for fear
he should be tempted to roll, and then tethering his bridle
securely to a root of heather, whilst we enjoyed ourselves
rowing about upon the loch. It was getting late when we
came back to our landing-place, 'and looked round with
comfortable assurance for the pony that was to help us back
again. We could hardly believe our eyes when there was
no trace of him to be seen ! We even thought that we had
mistaken the place, till a more careful search discovered to
us the saddle reposing on the ground, and not far off, some
fragments of a broken bridle. We looked at each other
blankly ; we could find no words to express our injured feel¬
ings, and so, after one effort to lift the saddle from the
ground, we silently abandoned it to its fate, and plodded
home disconsolately, reflecting that our most useful pony
had probably, by this time, rejoined his wild brethren on the
other side of the island, and that days would elapse before
we could get him caught, and brought back into captivity.
Great was our joy, therefore, when, about two miles from
home, we came upon him unexpectedly, feeding quietly a good
quarter of a mile away from the road, with his back turned
to us. Remembering our former experiences, it seemed
quite vain to attempt catching him ourselves, and our only
hope, we thought, was to hurry home and send out some
men in pursuit; but the actual sight of the enemy who had
caused us so much annoyance, roused one of our party into
energy, and she gallantly proclaimed her intention of lierself
recapturing the truant. We watched her with deep interest
skilfully making a long round to keep out of the pony's
sight, and then with a sudden spring seizing firm hold of his
long shaggy mane. The astonished animal plunged and
kicked, and tried his best to shake off the intruder; but she
on her side was determined not to be beaten, and held fast by
her handful of rougli red hair. She had, it is true, to resign
herself to patient ffoundering through the boggiest of all
ground, but resolution prevailed in the long run; with one
hand on the mane, and the other guiding the recalcitrant
pony with a walking-stick, she brought lier captive home
finally in triumph, never letting him go for one moment, until
he was safely landed within the gates of our own domain.
Notwithstanding these little drawbacks, the ponies were
really a great consolation to us—indeed, it was owing to
them that we first discovered the most beautiful part of our
island.
We were riding through a field by the sea-shore, some-
No. 08.—OCTOBEE 1879. 2 F
450 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
what farther from home than we generally ventured, when
we noticed the peculiar formation of the rocks below us, and
the way in which they gradually rose in height. Each
great black rock was split lengthways into as thin and regular
strata as if it had been mathematically divided. Huge
masses lay piled upon the golden sand, as if some giant had
torn them carelessly from their resting-place, to use, perhaps,
in a Titanic game of ' ducks and drakes.' Up to these shat¬
tered fragments the blue sea was creeping and the soft
wliite surf was curling, not angrily that day, but merely as
if it was playfully determined to leap over such unexpected
obstacles. Higher and higher grew the cliffs, as we hastened
forwards, until at last we gained a high promontory, and
fairly held our breath, entranced in silent admiration and
delight. There, directly opposite to us, almost in a line with
the cliff on which we were standing, was a bold headland of
black rock, stretching out far into the sea, on two gigantic
rocky columns, which formed a magnificent natural arch or
grotto, beneath which the Atlantic waves rushed in with
their long majestic sweep, sending up showers of spray to
be carried high into the air, until they reached the very top
of the cliff itself It was a vision of strength and ma^nifi-
cence never to be forgotten, and we only regretted that we
liad not seen it at first on a rough day, for we were never
allowed to go back there to see the waves dashing in during
a storm. It was not safe, we were assured ; we should be
blown over the cliffs : and perhaps, after all, it is as well to
keep only bright memories of such a place in our mind, so
as to be able to call up at will tlie picture of the golden
shore, the massive black rocks, and to hear once more the
cry of the sea-birds and the plash of the blue sea, with its
dark-green swirling shadows, swelling up, even on a day like
that, as if it chafed to find one rock bold enough to stand
forth in perpetual resistance to its encroaching claims. We
lingered there as if m'c could never bear to return to the
comparative flatness of our own domains ; and from that
day, when wind and weather permitted, we were never very
long without making an expedition to Scarboro' Head.
{To he continued.) M. D.
iHg Sljoes, or a iHontlj in a ILtfc.
1st Septemher 1872.—Various strange things have happened
to me to-day. In the first jjlace, I came unexpectedly on
my first and last pair of walking shoes.    I was hunting in
My Shoes, or a Month in a Life. 451
my boot box for some foot trappings a little more respectable
than my ancient, well-worn boots, when I saw a parcel that
had not been opened for many a year. I seized it greedily,
but great was my disappointment when I saw my shoes.
Fifteen years ago I took them off, meaning never to wear
them again; but I was young and romantic then ; now I am
sensible, and thirty-six.
My step-mother had just called to me in great distress,
that her three mischief-loving boys had never returned to
their dinner. They had gone early in the morning on a
wasp crusade to Halliton Park, and slie was sure they must
be stung to death, or they would not have missed feeding
time. I ventured mildly to doubt the possibility of three
sturdy imps, aged respectively nine, eight, and seven, allow¬
ing themselves to be stung to death ; but this made matters
worse, for she was sure then that her darlings, unable to
bear the agony, had thrown themselves into the river and
been drowned. There was nothing left for me to do but
propose going myself in search of the truants, as my father
was from home, my step-mother unable, and no servant could
be spared. It was seldom I went through the village, and I
scarcely ever made calls, so I had allowed my boots to
become infirm, as I always needed my money for more
pressing, that is, more obvious necessities.
I hesitated half a minute, and then boldly drew on my
long-discarded shoes. How neat and nice they were! It
seemed a pity to go out in my faded old muslin dress and
battered straw hat with those pretty shoes. Fifteen years
have passed since I wore them last. What a lifetime to
look forward to, and what a dream to look back upon ! Well,
at thirty-six I have all the more need to be careful of my
appearance, and I certainly do not seem my age by eight or
ten years; I may say that for myself. Sorrow and disap¬
pointment, worry and work, do not always make one worn
and faded, or 1 ought to be a shrivelled old hag by this time.
I drew down quickly from its peg my Indian silk trimmed
with pink; my Dolly-Varden hat, lined with the same soft
colour, which throws a temporary bloom over my cheeks; and
as a last happy thought, seized the pink Cashmere shawl
which my dear sister gave me on my last birthday. These
arrangements did not take more than ten minutes, but I
thought it necessary to run down-stairs to save a few of the
wasted seconds. My step-mother met me on the landing;
she looked worse than usual, in a very dirty pale silk skirt
and muslin Garibaldi jacket; no cap, collar, or cuffs; her
452 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
hair rolled up tight, and two or three bristly ends hanging
down behind. She invariably held up her dress indoors,
and let it sweep the gravel outside. On the present occa¬
sion she appeared anxious to display a brown stuff petticoat
trimmed with scarlet braid, and a pretty pair of feet, which
were peeping over the slip-shod shoes and through holes in
the stockings.
' Oh, Constance, if my brothers had been in danger, I
could not have stopped to deck myself out like that, I would
have run just as I was! I don't think you have much heart;
if you are ever a mother yourself, you'll know what it is.
Just think what a trouble I have with all those children, and
your father's small means! / never have time in an after¬
noon to tidy myself up and put on another gown, and nobody
thinks of helping me,' was her greeting.
This reproach being a very old grievance, I passed it over,
and replied smilingly, ' I am sure the boys are all right, I
am only going to relieve your mind by fetching them home.
I could not call at Halliton Park in that old muslin.'
' It is well you have leisure and fine dresses to put on.
Of course you have not a mother's feelings.    I could no more
have dressed myself up to-day, or spent money in' 
I knew this might go on for half an hour, in spite of her
real anxiety about her children, so said,' Do not you think I
ought to be going now ?'
' Oh, yes ! I am surprised at your staying here talking
when those dear little fellows may be all dead and buried.'
I dashed off to prevent a smile being visible which I knew
would never be forgiven. Well, care does destroy some
people's charms. Who could have believed that the handsome,
strapping young woman whose noisy mirth had made the
portraits of my noble ancestors shrink in their frames, would
in ten years have changed to this overgrown, untidy,
querulous person, who made my life a round of uncongenial
duties, and undid my work when she could! She knew I
grudged nothing for my father and his children, and so she
accepted the service while she depreciated it as much as
possible. She certainly was the chief agent in bringing such a
tribe of young ones to my father's house, but it seemed to me
the trouble and expense fell equally on us all. The second
Mrs. Ferly's sole idea of retrenchment was curtailing my
allowance; from a very handsome one it had been gradually
diminished to £25 per annum, out of which I was expected
to give presents to each new-comer, and supply any pressing
need in the house.     She  got  second-rate  servants, who
My Shoes, or a Month in a Life. 453
destroyed more by their ignorance in the course of a year
than my allowance twice over. She would not see the
necessity of small repairs, so everything was now dropping
to pieces. When she found she could not get all she fancied,
she complained of my father's small income, and imagined
herself a martyr. At first she was so jealous of my influence
she would not allow me to do anything, but her natural
indolence soon made her thankful for my help. I asked
Gertrude to send me pretty shapes from London, bought a
sewing machine, and made the most of the children's dresses.
Before I did so, they were disreputable little objects, often
in rags and patches ; very fine occasionally, but their frocks
so badly made the poor little fellows looked like monkeys.
I have tried in vain to regulate the accounts; my step¬
mother has the art of letting money slip through her fingers.
My attempt to persuade my father to send away the groom,
and a pair of the horses which were seldom used, as Charlotte
does not go out now, was also fruitless. I listen patiently
to all his schemes of improvement, and give my vote on the
side of economy. My dear father is not accustomed to be
plagued about expenses, and thinks it odd a wife and six
children should make such a difference ; for himself and me
the income was ample. I wonder if I should have had more
cares if I had married fifteen years ago. I doubt it very
much in spite of Charlotte, and at least I might have had a
bright, cheerful home, and not been weighed down by the
horror of debt which I could not control. But then I do
think I have been a help and comfort to my father, and for
long he has not wanted to get rid of his daughter.
Fifteen years ago I was young and gay, I was supposed
to be an heiress, I was engaged to be married to the man
I loved, but with my shoes I put away my thoughtless
happiness. Frank Sunbury had such a dislike to shoes, he
declared they would spoil any woman's foot. Shoes had
come suddenly into fashion, to go out again as quickly, and
I liked to be in the fashion. Mine, too, were such dainty
specimens, with high heels and large bows and buckles, so I
wore them in spite of him.
It was on a 1st of September that Frank went away and I
began this journal. I had put on my shoes to walk to the
station with him, and his last words to me were to the effect
that he hoped my taste in some minor matters would be im¬
proved before he came back again. I walked slowly home
with papa and all the Sunbury party, feeling rather low, and
imagining myself in an agony of grief, and resolved on the
454 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
spot never to wear shoes again. I remember distinctly now,
rolling them up tight in that curiously coloured paper, and
hiding them away in the bottom of the box, and then, with
tears dropping on the page, making my first entry in my
diary. How delightful sentimental grief is, when one is
young! It is a positive luxury. I could not have been really
miserable; for Frank had told me he loved me, and I had
agreed to wait twenty years for him if necessary. I was
young and hopeful, and had a happy home and all I wanted.
Frank was to write to me, and when he was made commander
he was to ask me from my father. He could not give up
his profession, and my being an heiress had prevented him
speaking sooner. Oh, that summer long ago! What
memories do those shoes bring back I Gertrude had been
married in spring, and I was feeling lonely and empty-
hearted without her, when Frank came opportunely to fill
up the gap. Oh, how I longed for a mother then to whom
to tell my hopes and fears ! How often I wondered if I did
MTong to keep our engagement, or rather our understanding,—
for that could scarcely be called an engagement which de¬
pended on so many contingencies,—a secret. Frank was so
sure that to ask my hand Irom my father then, would only
totally separate us for years, if not for ever; but his plan did
it as effectually after alL The first five years of waiting were
happy ones. I was very light-hearted, and I suppose I did
flirt as an engaged young woman ought not to have done;
for why did two gentlemen, who shall be nameless, M'ant to
marry me ? I never swerved in my devotion to Frank, and
the only mistake I made was forgetting that other people
knew nothing about it.
The unreasonable anger that the second misfortune called
forth from my usually kind and indulgent father, and those
dreadful rumours that reached me of his spending the after¬
noons with Charlotte Hoyden, Mdien he was supposed to be
transacting business with her father, were the first clouds on
my horizon. But how fast they gathered, how black they
grew!    My sunny morning ended in bleakness and storm.
The day papa told me he was going to marry Charlotte, I
received a letter from Frank freeing me from my engagement
to him. He had heard a report of my intended marriage,
and did not wish to stand in my light, and as he had no
hope of immediate promotion, it would be folly, he said, to
wait any longer. Had it not been for my father's communi¬
cation, I would have returned a playful answer, denying the
reports, and letting him see I, at least, was not tired of
My Shoes, or a Month in a Life. 455
waiting. But everything was changed, I had no longer a
fortune, we could not possibly marry now, so I wrote a cold
little note, saying I had no intention of marrying, but
perhaps it was as well for hoth, under-lined, that our engage¬
ment should be dissolved. I hoped when he heard of my
father's marriage he would understand me; and how 1 hoped
and longed for years that he would claim me still, and release
me from my bondage ! I heard of his promotion, I heard he
had a small fortune left him, I never heard of his death or
marriage, that was all. What I suffered in the year that
followed my father's second marriage, no one knows.
Gertrude and her husband offered me a home with them,
but I felt my real home was in my father's house, and
remained. I am thankful that no one tempted me then, for
I do not think ray faith would have stood it. I am almost
certain I would have married, although I had not altogether
forgotten Frank.
The arrival of the son and heir was welcomed by great
rejoicings, and I am glad to be able to say I did not grudge
my brother his heritage ; in himself he was a source of
pleasure to me, I had scarcely ever seen a baby before, and
he was a bond of union between Charlotte and me. When
babies and troubles increased rapidly we became great allies,
if never great friends. As soon as I had a motive for living
and an occupation, I ceased to be miserable; and if I have
not been exactly happy, at least I have had no time for
regret.
These thoughts and such like pursued me even to Halliton
drawing-room. I entered hastily, a gentleman was with
Mrs. Sunbury, but I scarcely noticed him, so anxious was I
to explain my mission. ' How do you do, Mrs. Sunbury ?
I have come to fetch the boys, their mother was becoming
anxious, I am afraid they have been a great torment to you,'
I said, as I shook hands, with my back towards the stranger,
who I heard make a movement as if expecting to be noticed.
' They are quite safe, and making themselves very useful
helping to gather the pears; we are shaking the large pear
tree to-day. They said they had permission to coixie,' replied
Mrs. Sunbury.
' Oh, yes! but not returning to dinner was so unusual,
that their mother got alarmed, fearing some accident had
befallen them, and I came in hot pursuit,' I said.
' I am sorry she was frightened, but glad of anything which
gives us a sight of you, Miss Ferly. Pray sit down,' con¬
tinued Mrs. Sunbury.
45^ The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
I turned round, tlie gentleman was still standing with his
hand on his chair, staring at me.
Mrs. Sunbury proceeded: ' I don't think you remember
Fred's cousin. Captain Sunbury, although I think you must
have met before, long, long ago, Miss Eerly.'
My heart jumped to my mouth; could it be Frank ?
Could that weather-beaten man be Frank ? He was so
handsome once; but he must be above forty now. Time
works wonders; it may be he.
He did not leave me long in suspense, for he came at
once towards me, with his hand oiit, saying, ' Young ladies
cannot be expected to remember people whom they have not
seen for centuries, Lucy; but I have not forgotten yov,]
giving my hand his old emphatic shake.
' Nor have I forgotten Mr. Sunbury. Fifteen years is not
so very long, and I daresay it must be that since we—met.'
I had almost said parted, but checked myself in time.
' Fifteen years this very day since I left here. I was speak¬
ing to Lucy about it just before you came in,' he answered.
I began to see the likeness to the old Frank now; the
voice and smile were unaltered. We discussed all the
changes which had taken place in the Sunbury family, but
avoided mutuall}^ any reference to the upturning in my
domestic circle. There was a moment's pause, and I took
advantage of it to say,' If you will excuse me, Mrs. Sunbury,
I will catch the boys and go home. Charlotte will be won¬
dering what has become of me.'
' Miss Ferly quite devotes herself to these boys, Frank; we
never see her now except on an occasion like the present.
But as you are here, Miss Ferly, cannot you spare us a few
moments longer ?' said Mrs. Sunbury.
I felt myself constrained to reply,' Nothing would have
given me greater pleasure; but, you see, Charlotte is so
nervous about the children. A nice change for me, Captain
Sunbury; instead of a lonely life by myself, I have a large
family now to amuse me,' I added nervously.
' I can only say. Miss Ferly, that few people would have
seen it in that light,' said Mrs. Sunbury significantly.
' But I am very fond of children,' I replied calmly. ' Where
are my truants ?'
' In the orchard. Frank,' began his cousin, but was inter¬
rupted by him with the reply, before she made the request.
' I will escort Miss Ferly to the orchard if she will allow me.'
' I shall be very thankful, for I don't like hard pears falling
on my head,' I said gravely.
My Shoes, or a Month in a Life. 457
Once more, side by side we walked, but no longer talking
eagerly to each other; almost silently we went over the
rousrh ground together.
The red earth was damp, my dress would be spoilt if I
did not lift it up, and if I did those unlucky shoes would be
seen. I hesitated for two steps, but I knew I could not
afford to ruin my dress, so I boldly elevated it regardless of
consequences. I felt him glance at my feet, and tried to
distract his attention by an inane remark on the weather.
He said,' Quite true. I see you are as fond of shoes as
ever, you are not in the least changed. I knew you at once,
and would have known you anywhere.'
' Unfortunately my conduct a few minutes ago prevents
me making an equally audacious statement; fifteen years no
doubt have improved us both,' I said, smiling.
' I hope that is true in my case. I maintain you are un¬
changed, even in the small matter of shoes. I have improved
in that particular, I am glad to say, and admire them now
immensely,' he said earnestly.
' I am sorry to have to undeceive you, but I too have
changed my opinions, and have long seen the force of your
arguments against them, and indeed have not worn such
a thing for nearly twenty years till to-day,' I answered
demurely.
He seemed puzzled and vexed, as if reading a hidden
meaning in my words. At last he said slowly, ' We are
always to be at variance, it seems; but I do not quite under¬
stand why you keep shoes when you never wear them.'
' I have a weakness for old friends, and I was very fond of
my shoes once, so, instead of throwing them away, I kept
them. I found them useful to-day when I had to start in a
hurry to seek my brothers.' As I was speaking, we reached
the orchard, and there were the boys, one with a great tear
in his jacket, busy gathering the hard little pears into great
baskets. It was quite natural to me to hear the explanations
of the little fellows that they really had forgotten the time,
and promise to make it all right with their mother, to pull
the jacket straight, and say I could mend it easily, and to
condole with another unfortunate who had sustained a large
green stain on his white trousers. The only evil propensity
Charlotte punishes severelj^ is destruction of clothes, the
trouble she imagines it may cause her making her in¬
exorable.
I saw Captain Sunbury looking much amused at; my new
role, of boys' matron.    We began to walk home, the boys
45^ The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
still full of their adventures. Then Captain Sunbury com¬
menced to tell them stories, and we reached the front door
before we knew where we were. Of course I asked him to
come in, and he did so. How ashamed I felt of the dusty
hall, the ragged stair carpet, and the drawing-room, with the
baby and all its requirements in it, varied with children's
toys, and, I think, the most of Charlotte's M'ardrobe, and
every pair of slippers she had bought since she married! I
took an armful of the latter articles out of the room to clear
a few chairs, told the boys to remain with the visitor, and
went to look for their mother. I found her reading a novel
by the dining-room fire, and she was most indignant with
me for bringing strangers into the house. I persuaded her
to put on a dress all in one piece, and hurried away to see if
any servant was tidy enough to bring in tea. The nurse,
with a clean cap and apron, might pass muster; so, after
putting the fine old china on the tea tray, and cutting the
bread and butter, I left her to bring it in when ready.
Charlotte was already in the room, resplendent in a blue
silk dress and lace shawl, and talking most amiably with
Captain Sunbury, who was praising the boys. I seemed of
no use at all till the tea came in. Charlotte opened her
eyes when it appeared, but pressed Captain Sunbury to have
a cup with us, as if it was our usual habit. I made the tea,
and Captain Sunbury handed the bread and butter. Then
he said good-bye, and Charlotte pronounced him most
agreeable, and wonderfully gentlemanly for a sailor ! I
don't know what her experience of sailors had been.
So we have met again, and I can no more think and speak
of Captain Sunbury as Frank than I can fancy myself once
more a girl.
8^/t September.—Again I sit down to write in my diary,
and I do not know what to say, this week has been so
bewildering, so tantalizing. I do not know what I wish or
expect. Captain Sunbury has gradually changed into Frank,
the old Frank of long ago. He has re-asserted his old
influence over me, but he never refers to the past. He
comes to call nearly every day with invitations for me to
luncheon, dinner, or tea, or else to join an expedition some¬
where. My shoes have scarcely ever been off my feet, and
my pink costume I sadly fear is becoming faded. Charlotte
grumbles at my gaiety, and wishes daily she had time and
money to waste like me. Papa sighs heavily, and says
children are all alike, as I help him with his weekly accounts,
and protest against a new plantation.    I seem under a ban.
My Shoes, or a Month in a Life. 459
and Frank, the cause of all, talks to me only as an old friend.
I will write no more.
IMh Sqdemher.—Another week has fled, and Frank has
asked me to be his wife. He has explained everything. He
heard I was attached to some one else, and that was why he
gave me up. Immediately afterwards he heard of a marriage,
and of course thought it was mine, as one of my rejected
suitors was a cousin of my own of the same name. When
at last he knew the truth, he was just starting on a long and
uncertain voyage, and did not like to do anything in case of
more misunderstandings. He Avas away five years. As
soon as he reached home, he came to his cousin to make
inquiries, and she was relating to him the change ten years
had made in me and my fortunes, when I walked in, he
declares, looking exactly as I did when he last saw me, and
making him feel so old and weather-beaten. My complete
unrecognition of him wounded him very much. He says
it was my coldness and indifference which prevented him
speaking sooner. But I maintain it is never a woman's
part to woo.
And now what am I thinking and how am I feeling on
the brink of such great, unexpected happiness ? Perfectly
happy, without a thought beyond ? Alas ! no, such careless
happiness belongs only to the Very young. I am thinking-
how papa will take it, and how I can break the matter to
Charlotte. She says, as no one is likely to marry me, it is
fortunate for me having her children to amuse me, and
rather grudges me that not inexpensive pleasure. And
when she hears I actually mean to marry, I know she will
never forgive my heartless selfishness. But there is one
whom I know will rejoice with me, and that is my own dear
sister Gertrude, whom I have not seen for years, because I
had no proper garments for visiting, and I would almost as
soon have disgraced her by appearing in dirty tarlatane or
soiled silk, as let her know the real reason of my refusing
her invitations. Now I can see as much of Gertrude as I
like.
22>d Septerriber.—It happened just as I feared; every one
seemed to think I was doing them a personal injury by
marrying when they did not expect it. The only real con¬
gratulations I received were from my dear Gertrude; she was
truly happy, and wished me to come at once to her and be
married from her house. My father sighed, and said as I
was past twenty-one he had no power to prevent me marry¬
ing whom I pleased; but he had hoped I would not have
460 The Ladies' Edinbtcrgh Magazine.
been so willing to leave my father's house, even although it
was not so gay as it once had been. But, of course, I was
right to think of myself, and if I thought I would be happier
with Captain Sunbury, to go. He had little within his walls
to tempt any one to stay. All this was distressing, but just
what 1 expected. Charlotte was still more provoking; she
was at first incredulous, and then showed her innate vulgarity
in her congratulations. She supposed this was what I was
running to Halliton after. She was glad I had got a beau
at last, although he w'as an old man. I might have taken
warning by her. Marriage on small means was not a bed of
roses, and Captain Sunbury could not be rich. No doubt
I was dying anxious to be married, which was not to be
wondered at, considering my age. What I expected to gain
by matrimony, she could not imagine, with such a comfortable
home as I had, and the children as affectionate about me as
about herself, etc. etc.
But this soon changed into a perpetual groan over my
unnatural conduct and selfishness. When I discovered what
this meant I was very much hurt; I do not think anything
vexed me more. Gertrude mentioned in one of her notes
that she was glad Frank was so comfortably ofT, and she
hoped I had a little store of savings, unless I had spent all
my income, which was not unlikely, on my father's second
brood. This remark puzzled me, as did also the family
lamentation over the expense and loss my marriage would
cause them. It has just turned out that £10,000 of my
mother's fortune was to be divided between her daughters,
either on their marriage or on their attaining their twenty-
fifth year. And I was never told of it! Not that I would
have used the money as long as my father's family needed
it; but it was the want of confidence that wounded me
beyond measure. I should have liked to have been married
from my old home, but as my father says he can have
nothing as it ought to be, and as Gertrude is begging and
beseeching me to come to her, I think I must go. Oh ! my
father, I have tried so hard to be a good daughter to you, I
have stuck by you when every one else left you, and I
have laboured for your comfort long after you had sacrificed
mine. I would still stay with you if it were not for Frank.
He says I was plighted to him long before papa married
Charlotte, and that I owe him my first thoughts. He says
no good comes of overburdening oneself with other people's
duties, and that it was papa who left me and sought happi¬
ness with Charlotte, and if he has made a mistake it is not
Nothing to Do. 461
my fault. He also comforts me with the hope that Charlotte
will do more when she finds there is no one to do her duties
for her. He promises to let me have the boys as often as I
like, and that I may even mend their stockings and patch
their garments if it will be any satisfaction to me.
30^/t September.—I am with Gertrude, and learning to be
happy. All my cares are disappearing, and I am becoming
quite light-hearted. Strange to say, 1 have not got a single
pair of walking shoes in my trousseau, although Frank
declares he won't know me in anything else. Farewell, old
book, you have been a consolation to me for fifteen long,
dreary years! Xo more will I write in you, for I am too
happy now to have a history to tell to your sympathetic
leaves, and thus ends the journal of Constance Ferly.
NONO.
Nothing to ©0.'
A PLEA FOR CERTAIN IMPROVEMENTS IN EDUCATION.
In these days of progress, and movement, and change,—
When to hunt out a wrong, and, of course, to undo it,
To discover a want and to minister to it,
Is every one's every-day duty,—'tis strange.
And, indeed, to my mind unaccountable quite,
That no one arises to speak or to write
On the crying injustice I'm going to mention;
That no one, I say, will invite the attention
Of statesman, M.P., philanthropic society,
Or reformers, who flourish in every variety.
To a terrible want in our male education.
Which renders that valuable part of the nation—
Our sons and our sweethearts, our husbands and brothers—
On certain occasions, by no means so rare
As to make the whole matter a trivial affair,
Quite a plague to themselves—to say nothing of others.
'Tis especially strange, when our women are touting
For all kinds of work, and are fussing and spouting.
And wanting degrees in all manner of knowledge.
And insisting on lecture, and tutor, and college,
' The form of the present appeal to public sympathy is ob¬
viously borrowed from that of the American poem, ' Nothing to
Wear '—a work less known than it deserves to be, especially as its
arguments, with trifling exceptions, are as applicable to the present
day as to the time, more than twenty years ago, when it was written.
The present effort, however far it may fall short of its model, is made
in a scarcely less worthy cause.
4^2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
That the far nobler animal suffers neglect
Of his powers in one most important respect.
I am aiming, in short, as you probably guess,
At finding some mode of providing redress
l^or the terrible misery these poor men go through,
When it rains the whole day, and they've nothing to do ■
Now female employ, after all, doesn't matter;
At best they are poor, Himsy, frivolous creatures,
And will never make lawyers, or doctors, or preachers.
But when their male partners—I don't want to flatter
Those too modest persons, but can't help admitting
That to smother thdr talents is grossly imfitting—
When masculine wits become nigh to starvation,
When masculine, fingers must lack occupation,
When possible Miltons are mute and inglorious,
When probable Newtons scarce come off victorious
I'rom a problem so simple to me and to you
As how a wet day can be safely lived through;—
In short, Avhen these beings of instincts sublime.
Having nothing to hill^ cannot even kill Time,
It's clear there is somewhere a fault, could we know it;
And, all things considered, 'tis safest to throw it
At once on our modern scapegoat Education—
Corpus vile for each man's experimentation.
'Tis true, these poor fellows have all been to school.
Where no one of them passed for an absolute fool;
'Tis true that, with straining of pockets paternal,
They went on to college, and learnt the whole course
Of sports and athletics that then were in force;
And their feats were recorded, at times, in the ' Journal.'
Then most of them went to a coach, had a cram or two,
And with pushing and pulling got thro' an exam, or two.
And entered their regiment, or office, with credit;
All this is well known,—we have heard it and read it;
The system is grand, but there must be some flaw in it.
Could Forster or Waddington find out the law in it.
When all this instruction, so wide and far-reaching,—
This varied and vast apparatus of teaching,—
Must break down at a pinch, leaving utter vacuity
In the masculine cranium, while—strange incongruity!—
Those idiots of women, with needles and pins,
A trifle of gossip and such venial sins ;
With tattle, and tatting, and netting, and knitting,
And crewel-work, all to be done at a sitting;
NotJiing to Do. 463
With pen and with pencil, piano, guitar,
Et codera, find the day too short by far ;
Experience of riches a sheer emharras,
And, if anything, suffer from real superfluity.
They feel their position, no doubt, these poor men,—        ^
They would like to be busy,—perhaps now and then
They wind us a skein, or they mend us a pen ;
They poke up the fire, and generally spoil it;
Perhaps one may get out his gun just to oil it;
But you'll commonly find you may ask them in vain
To clear up your views on the Afghan campaign,
Or to sing you a song, or to read you a poet—
To which last they will answer you : Not if they know it!
These reflections were borne to my mind very lately
By a special sad instance, which troubled me greatly.
Of a youth whom I met at the house of his brother,
A squire in some county in Wales or another.
The place was a fine one,—all mountain and wood,—
And arranged, as it seemed, for a Briton's true good.
With a moor up above and a trout stream below
(Though for hunting, I must own, 'twas very so-so),
With dogs of all breeds that a sportsman most prizes;
With traps and with dog-carts of sorts and of sizes ;
With plenty of horses in stall and in stable ;
With rooms you might sit in, and lounge in, and smoke in ;
With rooms you might eat in, and drink in, and joke in ;
But, indeed, with one want—there was no billiard table.
Well, the victim in question, a youth of position.
Good looks and good manners, who held a commission
In her Majesty's Heavies,— a lad, too, of pluck.
Who would, if he'd had any manner of luck,
I'm certain, have led the forlornest of hopes
Up the narrowest of passes or steepest of slopes.
And earned the V.C.—nay, I have not a doubt
That in that same Afghan campaign, or some other,
He'd have risked his own life like a man and a brother
For a comrade in danger, and borne him safe out—
(I'm sadly digressing.)    This young sprouting hero,
Who'd have figured thus well in a sally or march out.
On an English wet day simply went down to zero,
And the damp, so to speak of it, took all his starch out.
And left him to twirl his moustache and look blue.
Because he had nought in the wide world to do!
464 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
For it rained !    We'll not say cats and dogs,—language fails
To say how it rained,—but it can rain in Wales !
The family breakfast was over at ten ;
Our youth was not down till half-past, or scarce then;
And 'twas plain from the first that he felt in no jolly mood,
As he packed down his eggs and his muffins in solitude.
Then he vanished for an hour to some regions afar,
Poor comfort to seek in his morning cigar;
Appeared in the drawing-room, and looked discontented
At the scene of industrious peace it presented ;
Sought the mirror, and gave his moustaches a twirl,
And I thought I caught, ' Hang it, they're all out of curl!'
Here the female conclave cried in chorus together,
' Poor Charlie ! wliat ill luck for you is this weather!
You must join us in something.'    He looked round again
With that look half of envy and half of disdain,
Then sloped to the window, and drummed on the pane.
Cader Idris, before it, loomed grand in the mist;
What a subject for sketching !    Well, sketch it who list.
Not he.    He had not touched a pencil since school;
Learnt perspective at that time by rote and by rule.
Had forgotten it now.    Here, portentously yawning.
He dropped into a chair for the rest of the morning.
Took up yesterday's paper,—to-day's hadn't come,—
Eead it backwards, and ever grew more and more glum.
Had there been some young ladies, his case had been milder,
He had tried his young pinions, perhaps, at romancing;
Selected his fair one, and haply beguiled her
With that budding moustache and his excellent dancing.
But matrons are slow, it is well understood,
And a fellow's own sisters, of course, are ' no good.'
He had two—one industrious, who ' practised' and drew;
And one in the schoolroom, with lessons to do.
The former was singing.    Well, he, couldn't sing,
He'd no turn for music and that kind of thing.
'Twas all very well, but a hard-worked dragoon
Has his own things to mind; and, unless he's a spoon,
Doesn't sing serenades and make rhymes to the moon.
Here his mother deploring—what mother would not ?—
The dismal details of her Charlie's sad lot,
Took his case into serious consideration,
And decided that solid yet brisk conversation
Was the best thing to cheer the unhappy young man;
So she pondered awhile, cleared her throat, and began :
Nothing to Do. 465
' Tell me, Charlie—ahem—on the whole, my dear boy,
How did you like India ?    Did you enjoy
The scenery and climate ?'    'I rather think not.'
' No ?    Why not ?'    ' Don't know; it's so deucedly hot.'
' Were you much plagued with snakes, dear, and creatures
that bite ?
Did white ants and centipedes tease you at night ?'
' Not much that I know of.    But a fellow I knew.
Going to dress, found a scorpion one day in his shoe.
It bit him, I fancy.'   ' Good heavens ! did he die ?'
' No, he didn't; he felt rather bored, so should I.'
' Were you pleased with the natives ?'    ' The niggers ? poor
brutes.
They're not bad in their way—Brush your clothes, clean
your boots.'
' Did you find  them  quick-witted ?    Does  their intellect
grow much
By contact with ours ?'    ' Aw—s'pose so—of course—
But then, after all, you don't want 'em to know much;
It's enough if they're able to rub down your horse.'
Here the good lady paused, for a lack of invention
Stopped her tongue, and quite baffled her kindly intention ;
While Charlie, worn out, as is no ways surprising,
With the terrible strain of this long catechizing.
Once more yawned amain, thrust liis hand through his hair,
And sauntered again, with a martyr-like air.
To the window.    No pause in the drear waterspout
Gave hopes of a black cock, or dreams of a trout.
Charlie faced the full truth—there was nothing to do,
Made a desperate effort his spirits to rally,
And looking about for a decent pis-aller,
Took up with a novel, and read to page two.
So there let us leave him, till blissful repose
Shall alight on his eyelids, and banish his woes.
Here, then, is my story, and here I must end it.
The moral is obvious, as such I commend it
To general notice, and hope ere it stagnates
'Twill fix the attention of some of our magnates ;
Be preached of in pulpits, and pleaded in courts.
Discoursed of in clubs and such public resorts.
And spouted on platforms and written in tracts,
Till a remedy's found, and embodied in Acts
Of Parliament, tending through all future ages,
If not to breed geniuses, heroes, and sages,
No. 58.—October 1879. 2 G
466 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
At least to ensure, while Old England shall stand—
Dear motherly, wilful, distracting old land—
While her tears are so many, her smiles are so few.
And her skies, to say least, not invariably blue,
Nay, all so bemuddled you can't tell at all
ller winter from summer, her spring from her fall—
I say, to ensure that her sons bold and true.
Her heavy dragoon and her dashing hussar.
Her elegant guardsman and gallant jack-tar.
Shall not suffer thus cruelly from nathing to do;
And with life stirring round them,—with nature and art.
Appeals to their head and appeals to their heart.
With fiction and fancy, and every appliance
For taking by storm the high places of science,—
Find all a sealed book, just for want of that key
Which might have been theirs from their first ABC;
Mind I can't explain how, but we all shall agree
The fault's not in our boys,—so it follows of course
(Let's put the right saddle upon the right horse).
The fault's in their teachers, who, all the land through,
Must immediately model their systems anew;
Prepare for emergencies not far nor few,
And supply these poor victims with something to do.
G.
E\)c 33f3(jar of Capo U ffionte: a Cale of Stxtu=onc.
By the Authok of ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE XV.
The sun was sinking behind the mountains ere Giuseppe,
accompanied by Catina, the woman from the roadside inn,
entered the ravine where stood the dwelling of Filippo and
his family. It was late when they started from the inn, as
she could not leave the house till her husband returned from
the town, where he had gone for provisions. He was very
unwilling to let her go; but Giuseppe's melancholy account
of Livia, and of the young girl's terror lest she should die
without assistance, induced him at length to consent. The
woman herself, remembering the sweet face of Concetta, felt
inclined to render all the help she could; so, giving her
child in charge to her husband's mother, who lived with
them, she set off to walk with the peasant to the rocks, their
horse being too tired to take a second journey that day.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 467
It was a dreary road, and one which Catiaa had never
travelled before, but she suspected that Filippo and his
family had reasons for choosing so secluded a place.
Giuseppe did not talk much as they went plodding on, for
in truth he began to fear he had done wrong in leaving the
rocks, and was nervously apprehensive that something might
have liappened in his absence which would involve him in
trouble with Filippo. It had now become so dark that, had
he not been well acquainted with the entrance to the ravine,
they could scarcely have discovered it. Involuntarily Catina
drew closer to him, for she was not accustomed to such
scenes, and there was something solemn in the wild assem¬
blage of dark rocks. Giuseppe hastened his steps, as if he
had a presentiment that something unusual had happened ;
and suddenly turning the huge rock which barred the
entrance, he looked anxiously towards the low buildings,
expecting to see Concetta looking out for his arrival. Not a
light was visible, though the night had fairly set in, and not
a sound was heard.
Giuseppe called loudly on ' Maria,' thinking perhaps she
was in the sick-chamber of Livia; but there was no re¬
sponse. Again he called with greater force, but without
receiving any reply. His mind misgave him at tliis dead
silence, and he hastily pushed open the door of the little
kitchen, where a few embers still smouldered in the grate,
but there was no sign of any one being in that part of the
dwelling.
Giuseppe now feared that Livia was dead, and that perhaps
the girl had fainted in her terror ; and, with a superstitious
horror of looking upon death, he shrank from going alone
into the chamber, and stood irresolute in the little passage.
In the meantime Catina, who liad no such fears, looked
about for something to light tliem on their way; and, after
groping about on the mantel-shelf, laid her hand on a small
lamp, which she lighted by the embers, and then led the
way to the apartment which Giuseppe pointed out. They
stopped for a moment to listen before opening the door ; but,
hearing nothing, they went in, and to their astonishment
found the room empty. It was evident, from the confusion
in which they found everything, that the inmates had fled in
haste, but where they could have gone, or in what manner,
was a mystery not to be unravelled. Giuseppe had met no
conveyance on his way; and, as he knew of no other road,
he concluded they must have hid themselves in some of the
rocks; for it was impossible that th?se women could have
4^8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
walked any distance, especially Livia, whom he had left, as
he supposed, dying. He burst into violent abuse of Con-
cetta, wjio, he imagined, had made a pretence of Livia's
illness to get him away from the rocks; but where she had
fied, or who was her accomplice, he could not conjecture.
Catina, who remembered tlie unwillingness and dejection
evinced by the young girl on leaving the little inn, began in
her heart to entertain the same suspicions as Giuseppe, who
threatened violence towards the girl if he should discover
her. It was too dark to take more than a hasty survey of
the places round the dwelling; indeed, Giuseppe was too
great a coward to venture far in the gloom, so he quickly
returned to inform his companion he could find no traces of
them.
As it was impossible the woman could return to her home
that night, she set to work to provide some supper for her
guide and herself; and having partaken of the scanty meal,
she retired to Concetta's room, and soon forgot her weariness
in a sound sleep. Not so Giuseppe. He was too much in
dread of the anger of Filippo to rest, and remained sitting
by the fire the greater part of the night, turning over in his
mind every place where there was a possibility of the
women concealing themselves. The day had hardly broke
when he set himself to examine carefully the entrance of
the route by which they had come on the previous night,
and he then discovered traces of the wheels of a cart, and
also the marks of a liorse's feet on the broken lava. This at
once convinced him they had been taken away, but by whom
or in what direction he was again at fault. Catina soon
joined him in his search, being anxious to return home as
soon as possible now that she was no longer wanted to
minister to the sick woman. There was a mystery in the
aftair which she could not fathom ; and she feared to involve
her husband in any quarrel with Filippo, should she be sus¬
pected of having had any hand in the disappearance of Livia
and the yovmg girl. Having shared a hasty breakfast with
Giuseppe, she prepared to leave the rocks, feeling impatient
to reach home before her husband left the house for his daily
journey to the small seaport. He was a carrier as well as
innkeeper, and was supposed to have a certain interest in
the smuggling craft that were known to visit that port.
It was now noon, and Giuseppe had made no more dis¬
coveries. He knew not how to act. He could not leave tlie
goats or cow without some one to look after them, and if he
could have done so, he knew not where to find either Filippo
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.  469
or Claudia. After another close examination of the dwellings,
he determined to remain where he was, in hopes of hearing
something from Claudia which would account for the sudden
flight of Livia and her young guardian. The innkeepers
wife had been gone about three hours, and Giuseppe had
resumed his labours at the sulphur sj^ring, when, to his great
joy, he heard Matteo's voice loudly calling him to the house.
He ran to meet this new-comer, though almost doubting the
evidence of his senses; for Matteo had been absent many
weeks, and reports had reached them of his having been
taken prisoner, with Paolo, at the time when Filippo received
his wound. Matteo appeared to have come a great distance,
and looked wan and haggard, as if he had gone through great
suffering and hardships. Without giving Giuseppe time to
remark his appearance, he demanded, in an angry tone, where
Livia and the young attendant were to be found, as he had
sought them in Livia's room and called loudly for the girl,
but had seen or heard nothing of either of them. Giuseppe
appeared very unwilling to relate what had occurred, for he
knew he should incur displeasure by owning that he had
left them alone while he went to the inn on the plain.
Matteo saw his hesitation, and this making him more
impatient, he fiercely desired the man to speak out and tell
him what had become of the two women. Giuseppe, no
longer able to hide his trouble, gave all the particulars of
Livia's illness and Concetta's dread of her dying untended,
and her sending him to seek the assistance of the innkeeper's
wife Catina; of his surprise when, on returning in the
evening, he found they were both gone away, and had left
nothing by which they could be traced; of his having met
no one on his way who could have helped them in their
flight, and of his having carefully searched every place likely
to conceal them. Matteo's countenance underwent many
changes as he listened to those details given in a hurried
manner by Giuseppe. For a moment he looked suspiciously
at the man, and with keen eyes seemed to search his inmost
thoughts, but he quickly satisfied himself the history was a
true one, and that Giuseppe knew nothing more than he had
related. Before he again entered the house, he made the
man show him the traces of the cart and horse he had spoken
of, and examined them closely. He then questioned him of
Claudia, and Maddalena, and of Ercole—had he been there
since Filippo had gone away ? Giuseppe informed him of
Ercole's having been there more than once, and said further,
that after a long interview with Claudia, he had soon after
470 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
returned and taken away both her and Maddalena to nurse
Filippo, leaving Livia in charge of Maria. After a little
reHection, Matteo came to the conclusion that Ercole alone
could have been the person to induce Livia to leave the
rocks; he also suspected the youth's passion for Concetta,
and could only conjecture that, believing himself safe from
any interference on the part of Filippo or himself, as he
knew they were concealing themselves from the emissaries
of Garibaldi, Ercole had no doubt embraced that opportunity
to carry off Concetta. Curses ' not loud but deep' broke
from Matteo's lips as the thought suggested itself—but where
had he taken them ? Again and again he questioned
Giuseppe as to the time of his departure in search of assist¬
ance for Livia, and the length of his absence, but he could
elicit nothing further, Giuseppe never varied his recital in
the least particular. Matteo gnashed his teeth in anger as
he dwelt on every detail; and desiring him to bring him
some food, for he had tasted nothing; for tlie last twelve
hours, he sat down to consider his next course. It was
evident to Giuseppe that he had gone through much suffering
and fatigue, but to ask for particulars of his late journey
seemed impossible; for though his haggard looks spoke of
hunger and weariness, there was the usual fire in his eyes,
and the verj^ manner in which he questioned Giuseppe as he
waited on him, told of the bold, firm spirit which animated
the w^orn frame. On his shoulders he carried a kind of
knapsack fastened with a strong leathern belt round his
waist, to which was attached a large horse-pistol and a short
knife. These instruments showed he was prepared to sell
his life dearly should he fall in with enemies. He spoke
little after receiving all the information Giuseppe could give,
and appeared to be thinking deeply. After a short half
hour's rest, he told the man to give him a flask of wine and
a loaf of bread, both of which he placed in his knapsack, and
taking another survey of the rooms, he bade Giuseppe detain
any person who should come to the rocks during his absence,
and then set off at a rapid pace out of tlie ravine.
Before starting, Matteo stopped for a moment to examine
once more the prints of the horse's feet, and also the foot¬
prints of the man who had taken him out of the cart, for his
quick glance had marked the spot where it had stopped.
After a little consideration, a gleam of satisfaction lit up his
agitated features, as if he had then gained a clue to the
mystery. He walked at a moderate pace for half a league,
tracing the wheels of the cart distinctly the whole w^ay, but
Tlie Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 471
then he came to a place where the road, which was little
better than a cart-rut, diverged from the plain in an easterly
direction towards the coast. Here there had evidently been
a halt, and for some time he could not discover whether the
cart had passed over that track, for the ground was so hard
and stony, it had received little impression from the wheels.
However, he determined to follow that route, and soon had
the satisfaction of finding deeper marks of the wheels. He
examined minutely the bearings of the place, and after a
short pause, struck his forehead with his open palm, as a
bright thought suddenly presented itself. Then uttering
the words, ' Grotto of Polypheme,' in a triumphant voice, he
sprang forward with renewed energy and hope, and continued
to follow the track in which Ercole had driven the cart on
the previous day. As he strode along, no one could have
imagined it was the worn and weary man who had entered
the ravine a few short hours before, like a hunted deer. His
step was firm and elastic, and his whole bearing tliat of a
man who could not be turned from his purpose. Every now
and then he might have been observed to look anxiously at
the heavens ; for though it was now December, there were
signs of a coming storm in the heavy atmosphere, and hollow
meanings from the neighbouring mountain seemed to presage
some strife in the elements. The sun went down lurid and
angry, and a sudden blackness covered the sky, except in the
western horizon.
Matteo turned more than once in the fading light to assure
himself of being in the right path. He had walked for more
than an hour in momentary apprehension of a storm, and at
last a bright flash shot across the heavens, followed almost
instantly by a loud clap of thunder, which seemed to shake
the ground under his feet. Flash after flash succeeded each
other so quickly that he was able to see the rocky nature of
the ground he had reached, and a moment's lull in the storm
brought the sound of waves dashing furiously on the coast
at no great distance. An exclamation of joy burst from his
lips, for this told him he was nearing the object of his search.
The lull which had enabled him to hear the sound of the
waves beating on the rocks lasted but a few moments, and
the storm seemed to increase in fury as the rain fell with
almost tropical violence. He began to fear lest he should
not succeed in discovering the entrance into the grotto when
he reached it, if indeed the violence of the tempest should
allow him to seek refuge in its depths. He thought of
Concetta, and the audacious designs of Ercole; and the dread
472 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
of what might befall her, friendless and alone, gave him
courage to brave the fury of the elements, and in a manner
impelled him forward. What if he should arrive too late !
—the thought was too horrible to endure, and he cast it from
him with a fearful oath as he strode on in the darkness,
insensible to the sharp rocks which cut his feet at every
step. At length he was obliged to pause for a few moments
and take rest, for the difficulties of the path seemed to
increase. There was a sudden calm for a few minutes, and
the loud dashing of the waves on the rocky coast became
more distinct. He now felt sure he could not be far from
the cave, and only waited for another flash of lightning to
reveal its position. As if in answer to his wishes, there
shone a blaze of light over the whole heavens, and instantly
a crash of thunder followed that seemed to cleave the ground
beneath his feet, and a ball of fire fell within twenty yards
of the place where he stood. Instinctively he fell on his
knees to thank God for his escape, and at the same moment
a piercing cry for help rose from the ground beneath him.
Again it was repeated, and tliis time the voice of some one
calling wildly for Matteo made him recognise the accents of
Concetta. Without hesitation he sprang down the rocky
side of the cavern which the lightning had revealed, and
shouting her name with all the force he could command, to
assure her hel]3 was at hand, he began to search for the
narrow entrance, groping with his hands to find it, for the
black clouds had again shut out all light from the sky. But
Ercole had rolled a heavy fragment of rock across the
opening, and he sought in vain to discover it. He now
resolved to call loudly on Concetta, thinking her voice in
reply would direct him to the spot, and so it proved, though
not in answer to his shouts. Her cries became more piercing
than ever, for the violence of the storm had prevented her
from distinguishing his voice.
At length the tempest abated, and stillness as suddenly
followed. To Matteo's great delight he now perceived a
little ray of light issuing from a crevice in the rock not
many paces from his resting-place. Again he called loudly
on Concetta, and this time his cry was heard. The poor
girl, in her agony of distress, had forced herself through the
entrance to the cavern, for Livia to all appearance Avas
dying, and she desperately hoped to find some one who
could come to her assistance. So great was her alarm tliat
she had confounded the voice of Matteo with the storm;
and when, guided by her cries and the light of the lamp, he
Tlie Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 473
appeared at the opening, she sank upon the ground with
terror and apprehension, so wild and haggard was the ex-
])ression of his face from his late suffering and excitement.
He quickly lifted her from the ground, and assuring her he
had come to save her, after some time he succeeded in
allaying her fears. After a hurried explanation of the state
in which she had left poor Livia, Matteo prepared to descend
into the cavern and bring her away at all risks, for it was
evident that Concetta was in no state to return to the poor
creature. She attempted to rise, but exhausted by want of
food and fatigue, and the horror of being left to perish in
the cavern, with Livia dying at her side, she sank down
powerless and almost insensible at his side.
Matteo, as he raised her fainting form, remarked her
hollow eyes and sunken cheeks, and breathed curses on the
man whose heartless cruelty had brought her into such a
state. He fortunately remembered the wine and bread he
had brought from the rocks; and, taking the knapsack from
his shoulders, he wetted her lips with some of the wine,
which had the efieet of restoring her consciousness. He
waited till she was recovered enough to speak of Ercole's
deceitful conduct, and of his having left them when he
heard the whistling of the men, who, she supposed, must
have succeeded in capturing him, as she had distinctly heard
the reports of a gun, and Ercole had never returned to
them.
After a few moments' consideration, Matteo told her he
must, for safety's sake, carry her to some spot more secure
from observation, and then he would descend into the cavern
and bring Livia to join her. As he took her in his arms, for
she was still too weak to guide herself, she looked earnestly
in his face while she said:
' Matteo, I now call upon thee to redeem thy promise of
helping me in my need ; if thou betrayest the trust I place
in thee, be assured that though thou hast escaped the
avengers of thy first crime, vengeance will follow thee to
thy dying hour.'
He looked wildly at her as she spoke these w-ords, for his
lieart told him she had by some means gained the know¬
ledge of his past history. His whole frame shook with
agitation, but he did not shun her gaze. As he looked at
her pleading eyes, his whole nature seemed softened, and
gently placing her where an angle of the rock comjjletely
hid her figure, he knelt before her, and in a voice hoarse
with emotion said:
474 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' Lady, if thou knowest the sad history of her whose love
brought me into the wretched condition thou findest me,
thou wouldst for her sake pity me, and not pierce my heart
by doubting my truth. By the memory of Teresa I swear
to restore thee to thy father, even though my life be the
price of such a promise.'
Concetta's ingenuous countenance now expressed confi¬
dence in his words; and urging him to hasten to the relief
of Livia, she sank on her knees in thankfulness to God for
having sent this friend to her rescue, thus saving her from
the horrible fate she anticipated.
All traces of the storm had now passed away, as Matteo
took the lamp in his hand and rapidly made his way into
the cavern, almost expecting to find the poor woman dead.
The noise of his forcing himself through the narrow open¬
ing into the larger cave roused poor Livia from the swoon
into which she had fallen, and which had led Concetta to
imagine she was dying, if not already dead. The flashing of
the lamp made her at once recognise Matteo, and a gleam of
something like reason shone in her dark eyes. She evi¬
dently connected his appearance with the long absence of
her son, and forgetting all her previous alarm, stretched her
arms towards him, and with the same piteous cry implored
him to take her to her beloved Paolo. Matteo spoke kindly
to her, but avoided her questions with regard to Paolo. He
told her he was come to take her from the cave, and she
must try and follow him through the passage leading to the
entrance. The poor creature hardly understood his wishes,
but she endeavoured to rise from her rush bed. The effort
was too great in her weak state, and she sank back utterly
powerless. Matteo, seeing how impossible it was to rouse her,
for a moment determined to leave her in the cavern, at least
till he should have placed Concetta in some place of security;
for every instant rendered their position more hazardous,
should the men, whom he supposed were soldiers, sent in
search of Filippo and his band return and find him in the
cave. As he was known to be of this band, his case Avould
then be hopeless, and Concetta also might be involved in his
peril. He could not, however, bear to leave Livia without
giving her a chance of escape; so he tried once more to
convince her how necessary it was, if she ever hoped to
meet Paolo again, to make every effort to leave the cavern.
He now assisted her to rise from the bed, and holding her
up with one arm while he took the lamp in the other, he
began to  ascend  to  the  narrow  passage.     Here  he  was
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 475
obliged to leave her to herself, for the aperture was not wide-
enough to admit them together. Jivia once more fell on
the ground and groaned deeply. Matteo in despair threat¬
ened to leave her to her fate, but she made no reply. Her
one cry had been for her son, and to any one else she was
insensible. It was now plain that unless some one carried
the light while he supported the poor creature, it would be
impossible to save her; so, leaving her lying at the inner
entrance of the passage, he mounted the steps once more
to seek assistance from Concetta. As he mentioned his wish
that she should descend into the cavern again, in order to
carry the light while he endeavoured to carry Livia in his
arms, a momentary fear shot through her heart whether this
proposal might not be a plea to get her into the cavern
for some fresh trial. It was but for a moment, for she
quickly banished the ungenerous thought as she looked in
his anxious face. He understood her hesitation, and said,
with a slight tone of reproach in his voice:
' Does the Lady Concetta still doubt my truth ? Should
I subject myself to the anger and vengeance of Filippo
in aiding thy escape, gentle lady, if I held not thy pre¬
servation as a sacred promise, a fulfilment of my pledged
word ?'
Concetta had already repented of her doubt, and, giving
him her hand that he might assist her over the rocks, sprang
lightly down and followed him without more hesitation,
though not without a shudder as she entered the gloomy
cavern. The darkness seemed more intense than before,
from the contrast with the morning light. When they
reached the passage they called to Livia, but she returned
no answer; and when Matteo forced himself through the
aperture, he found she had fainted at the entrance. He
threw the mantle over her face, and half carried half drew
her through the vaulted passage, at the end of which Con¬
cetta stood with the lamp. Neither of them spoke till they
reached the open ground, and Concetta trembled as she drew
the mantle from the face of the poor creature, lest she might
find her spirit had fled. Soon, however, they had the satis¬
faction of seeing her eyes open, and the fresh morning air
revived her and recalled her conscioixsness. After a deep
sigh, she looked slowly from Matteo to Concetta, and
by degrees began to comprehend her situation. Matteo,
fearing she might renew her cries for her son, made her take
some of the bread and wine which he had providentially
brought with him, and urged Concetta to share it with her,
47^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
for she would require all her strength for the journey they
must commence immediately. Concetta looked astonished
at this information, as slie could hardly suppose that either
Livia or herself was in a state to undertake a walk of many
miles; and she knew of no other means of escape. Matteo
now told her of his having discovered the cart which had
brought them to the cavern ; and, trusting to his knowledge
of the country to find a horse to draw it, he told them of his
intention of leaving them for a short time for that purpose.
He contrived to draw the cart from its present position, and
then bade them follow him to a spot where the ground sank
into a kind of basin, formed by a little stream that flowed
from the rocks, and was not visible from the entrance to the
cavern. There they would be quite safe from observation
should any one seek them at the rocks. He carefully rolled
back tlie block of stone before the narrow opening, as Ercole
had done, and likewise obliterated every mark of their feet.
He then informed Concetta that he had brought a change of
dry clothes for her ; and taking off his knapsack, what was
her surprise when he took out of it the dress of a Neapo¬
litan Sister of Charity ! He read her astonishment in her
expressive countenance, though she disj^layed no displeasure
at the disguise he had provided, and joyfully prepared to
change the dress she now wore, which would ever be asso¬
ciated with her life of sorrow and peril during the past three
months. The dress suited her exactly, and was singularly
becoming, for the pensive expression of her features har¬
monized well with the modest garb. Matteo seemed strongly
affected as he looked at her; and Livia, as she gazed with
wondering eyes at the young girl in this costume, shrieked
out, as she had done once before:
' Where has Matteo concealed thee all these years,
Teresa ?'
So completely had her bewildered faculties confounded
Concetta with the nun who had run away from her convent
with Matteo.
The resemblance was certainly striking, and Concetta had
not been mistaken when she imputed Matteo's interest in
herself to that circumstance. She remembered his earnest,
passionate gaze when he first ran by the carriage on the
Capo di Monte, and she now blessed the accidental resem¬
blance to which in all probability she would owe her escape
from captivity, should such be the happy result of his present
undertaking.
{To he continued.)
Our Library Table. ^TJ
©ur ILibrarg STable.
Travels with a Donkey in the Cevenne.s.    By Robert Louis
Stevenson.    London : C. Kegan Paul & Co.
As a general rule, books of travel are apt to make us feel either
envious or bored. But this is a fascinating little book ; no sooner had
we finished than we began it over again. It is so utterly refreshing
to the imagination to get so entirely away from railways and high¬
ways, and almost off even footpaths, and wander in such pleasant
company as that of our author and his four-footed companion. Over
the breezy hill-tops, down the valleys whose silver streams form the
head waters of the Loire, the Garonne, and the Tarn ; spending, not
even sheltered by a tent but in a sleeping sack, here a night ' among
the pines,' there another 'among the chestnuts,' seeking shelter at
the Trappist Convent, or at the firesides of as rude and simple a
peasantry as can be found in all Europe, every step of this charming
little twelve-days' pilgrimage is delightful, and the tone and style of
the narration not less so. There is the depth and thoughtfulness
only to be found in combination with an appreciative love of nature,
not merely of her beautiful form and outward features, but of the
' passion and the life whose fountains are within ;'
and added to this, there is the genial, kindly spirit of love to man
and beast that betokens a man that ' prayeth well.'
In the valleys and fastnesses of the Cevennes we come upon a
strange and seldom-trodden by-path of history, that of the C'ami-
sards. To all Scottish readers it must be peculiarly interesting to
note how like and yet how unlike these Covenanters of the south are
to our own fellow-countrymen of bygone days ; and we are pleasantly
and intelligently guided by Mr. Stevenson through what he happily
and truly designates as ' the scene of a romantic chapter, or better, a
romantic footnote in the history of the world.' As to the donkey,
irritating at times to the point of exasperation, utterly impervious to
cane or cudgel, and requiring the manufacture of a goad before she
could be induced to ' take the hill'—in justice to poor Modestiiie, as
well as to her temporary owner, we must give a few of his parting
words from the stage-coach after selling her:
' For twelve days we had been fast companions, we had travelled upwards of
a hundred and twenty miles, crossed several respectable ridges, and jogged
along with our six legs by many a rocky and many a boggy by-road. After the
first day, although sometimes I was hurt and distant in manner, I still kept my
patience, and as for her, poor soul ! she had come to regard me as a god. She
loved to eat off my hand. JShe was patient, elegant in form, the colour of an
ideal mouse, and inimitably small. Her faults were those of her race and sex,
her virtues were her own.'
Not altogether complimentary to the ladies; but we are sufficiently
pleased with the book and its author to pardon the offence to our sex,
and recommend all to become acquainted with the donkey and its
driver, and those who have already accompanied Mr. Stevenson on
his Inland Voyage will probably be doubly inclined for a walk with
him across the Cevennes.
A Handy Manual or Gebman Literature.    By M. F. Beid.
Edinburgh : Wm. Blackwood & Sons.
This is a useful little manual, and one that we hope may supply a
want much felt by our students in their preparation for the Local
4/5 Tlie Ladies' EdinbicrgJi Magazine.
Examinations. We Iiave often been asked to recommend to them an
easy and accessible book of the kind to enable them to come properly
prepared for questions on German authoi's and periods of literature ;
this book, we think, will fully meet the difficulty, and we hope no
German student will be without a cojjy.
(Question Sales.
X.—Contrast Music as understood by the ancient Greeks, with
Music as understood by Wagner, quoting authors on both sides of
the question.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C, care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later tlian 5th November. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO AUGUST SERIES.
Best Stella, who is excellent ; second, Mariana ; third, Ekomakt,
both very good.    Thorough also gives a good and careful answer.
Give and comment upon three allusions to blindness, from three
poets, exclusive of Milton.
The poet is Nature's child. His sensitive temperament takes its
tone from her—alternately cheered, exhilarated, saddened, in har¬
mony with her countenance. No object in nature is, to him, dull or
commonplace. 'The primrose by the river's brim,' equally with
'the many-twinkling smile of ocean,' fills him with delight. To the
poet, then, as to the painter, we can scarcely conceive a greater
affliction than the loss of sight ; and were it not that two of the
greatest poets that ever lived—Homer, ' the blind old man of Scio's
rocky isle,' and our own world-renowned Milton—suffered from this
infirmity, we might well imagine that, under its depressing influence,
the ]\Iuse would expire. The thoughtful poet must often compare
his happy lot with that of those to whom ' wisdom at this entrance is
quite shut out.' The helpless dependence of the blind man on the
kindness and care of his guide, his groping movements, sightless
orbs, excite his pity and suggest similes for his verses. We shall
give instances from Dante, Shakspere, and Wordsworth in proof of
this.
The pleasure to be derived from the sense of sight is a leading idea
in Dante's ' Divina Commedia.' To live in eternal darkness, hope¬
lessly longing for the light of heaven, is misery sufficient for those in
the first circle of Hell. ' To cast oti" the scales that from their eyes
the sight of God conceal,' is the sustaining hope of the souls in 'the
jnilder shades of Purgatory.' To have the eyes strengthened to ' see
the King in His beauty,' and to gaze fixedly and for ever on the
beatific vision, is the highest happiness of the glorified sjjirits in
Paradise. Dante must have had a peculiar sympathy with the blind,
for he tells us, in his 'Couvito,' that he was himself threatened for
Stray Notes. 479
a time with loss of sight. He illustrates his dependence on the
guidance of Virgil, through the dense smoke of the third circle of
purgatory, by a direct allusion to blindness :
' As the blind man behind his leader walks,
Lest he should err or stumble unawares,
I journeyed.'
We may judge of the value Shakspere set on this sense by his
'King Lear,' for, in depicting the extreme of human misery, he
makes loss of sight the climax of the unhappy king's misfortunes.
We have a beautiful allusion to blindness in 'Romeo and Juliet,'
when Romeo, urged by his friend to give up the hard-hearted
Rosaline, and to choose a wife from among other beauties, sorrow¬
fully replies:
' He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.'
From his peaceful home at Rydal Mount, Wordsworth could watch,
with ever-increasing delight, the infinite play of light and shade on
his loved lakes and mountains. A worshipper of nature, ' the
common air, the earth, the skies, to him seemed opening paradise.'
The unhappy condition of those to whom such bliss was denied was
commiserated by him, and any alleviation which they could still
derive from their other senses, he rejoiced in. 'Blest,' he says, 'be
the song that brightens the blind man's gloom!' and again, he
speaks of 'an eye, practised like a blind man's touch.' In his
exquisite lines on revisiting Tintern Abbey, he recalls the tranquil¬
lizing effect that the remembrance of beautiful scenery gives to the
mind, and gratefully acknowledges that ' these beauteous forms,
through a long absence, have not been to me as is a landscape to a
blind man's eye.' Stella.
Strag i^otcs.
London Univee.sity Exajiixations.—It is satisfactory to see that
women are already taking advantage largely of the opportunities
afforded them in common with men of taking degrees in the London
University. As is well known, the London University exists solely
as an examining board, and lets candidates, male and female, gather
their knowledge where they will. The greater proportion of the
women presenting themselves this year for examination were formerly
students of the North London Collegiate School for Girls and the
Cheltenham Ladies' College, but some had prepared by private
study. For the matriculation examination this year sixty-eight
women candidates went in; of these fifty-one passed, twenty-nine
finding places in the honour division, and twenty-two in the first class.
These results of the matriculation examination are in themselves
interesting, but still more so are the results of the B.A. and B.Sc.
Examinations, to which some women candidates have now proceeded.
Twelve women entered for the first B. A., four for the preliminary
scientific examination, and four for the first B.Sc. examination. Of
these twenty candidates fifteen succeeded in passing, several of them
480 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
in the first division. So far as we can judge from these results,
women seem to show an equal aptitude for science and for literature.
J. H. D. wishes to ask of Hennie the following particulars about
the Incubator, described by her in our August number as having
been used with so much success by herself:—1. What is the size of
the wooden box—its length, and above all its depth ? 2. Does the
zinc tank fit the wooden box exactly ? 3. What sort of outlet is used
for the water running ofl", and what becomes of it ] Is the outlet
made in the outer box, as well as in the zinc ? 4. What is the size
of the well or box containing the eggs, and how many eggs are placed
in it at the same time ? 5. Where was the box kept, in a warm or a
cool place, a light or dark one ? J. H. D. would also be glad to know
of any special peculiarity in the ' Artificial Mother,' and will be very
grateful to Henxie for any information.
We wish to call the attention of our readers in the West of Scotland
to the Prospectus of the Glasgow Association for the Higher Educa¬
tion of Women, which is just published, and may be had on application
to Mr. M'Lehose, bookseller to the University, St. Vincent Street,
Glasgow. The lectures which will be delivered during the course of
next session (though not all at the same time) are :—Logic, Moral
Philosophy, English Literature, Natural History, Chemistry, Modern
History, Perspective, and Music. The prospectus gives full informa¬
tion about the Association's Tutorial Classes (similar to our S.
George's Hall Classes), and the Correspondence Classes in connection
with them, which prepare for all the Examinations of Glasgow
University open to women. Information is also given concerning the
Local Examinations, and the new Higher Examination for Women,
just instituted by the U^niversity of Glasgow.
Notices to Corrcsponticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies^ Edinhargh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/((M postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The Editors will be happy to receive further contributions or
suggestions for the Series on 'Country Subjects and Pursuits.'
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturda}', 11th October, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
The usual Debate will give place to a discussion on the comparative
advantages to be derived from the seven professorial classes [English
Literature, Logic and Mental Philosophy, Education, Experimental
Physics, Mathematics, Greek, Latin], to be held'next session for the
Edinburgh Association for the University Education of Women.
()
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 481
CTountrg Subjects autt pursuits.
XII.—FIELD GEOLOGY.
Gkology shares with botany this advantage over all the
other sciences, that its pursuit forces us out to the fresh air,
and the bold scenery, and the Avonderful effects of nature.
The mind does not weary itself in learning its facts, the
liealth does not suffer from prolonged confinement; for it is
l)ut a small part of the science that can be acquired from
books, or even from museums. The museum of geology is
the M'orld. Its specimens are found in the quarry and ou
tlie hill-top, by the sea-beach or the railway cutting. There
we learn not onlj^ of the present, but the past. In human
history we are often dependent on the doubtful testimony
f witnesses long since dead; in God's history of the rock.s
there is a story told, and its volumes are enriched with
abundant pictures and illustrations, that make things clear
and sure to us. No other history was ever written as this-
is, or has waited so patiently until eyes learned to see, and
minds to understand, and then said so much in so little.
It is not only history, but poetry. Its mighty spheres of
fipace and time, its vast changes, its constant appeals to the'
imaginative faculty, are of the very element of the poetic^
It lias even the prophetic power to go forwards as well as-
backwards, and teaches what will be and what was, from,
what now is. Perhaps the best book to illustrate this is
Hugh Miller's Testimony of the liocJcs. His ]\Iiltonic power^
his pictorial imageiy, his poetic fervour, must awake an echo-
in every soul, and create an interest in Geology.
And how readily this may be forwarded ! No preliminary
training in Greek or Latin or Mathematics is necessary. I will
not deny that a little Latin, Greek, Chemistry, Botany, and
Zoology, helps one more speedily to a scientific knowledge
of geology; but it is sufficient to know that most of the
rocks were once deposited as small grains in the depths of
water, along with remains of plants and animals that become
fossils, and that others were thrown up from the interior of the
earth, fused or altered, and altering all that they approached.
You know that; and you have only to go forth and see !
Perhaps an old observer may give some hints.    Provide
yourselves with very stout boots, not only with soles, but.
with upper leather of veiy tough material; ordinary ladies'
boots ot kid or morocco are sometimes finished in one real
No. 59.-XovEMBER 1879. 2H
4S2 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
scramble among stony d^ris. Wear also a strong dress,—
stones do not soil the material much, but they tear it,—and
let it be of a walking length; for trains are dangerous
as well as inconvenient on a steep hill-side. A broad hat,
too, is a comfort; for after you have fairly begun work you
cannot use your sunshade much. Of course one ought to have
a geologic chisel and a good strong hammer, with a pounding
head at one side and a point at the other, either flat or round.
The ordinary use of this is to hook off the flat slabs that
often lie facing each other, but I may suggest an extra¬
ordinary use. Clambering up a steep hill-side, you may
strike it into the earth or rocks above, and pull yourself up
by it when there is no convenient branch or projection.
Many a slip has my hammer, used in this way, saved me from.
When you have found, or hammered out for yourself, a
good specimen, you must have something to put it in. Very
scientific people ought to buy the proper bags, but ordinary
collectors may do very well with the common twine-bag,
either the sixpenny or shilling size. Baskets are incon¬
venient, and leather bags are easily destroyed, while the
twine-bag seems indestructible. As we require A^ery often
both our hands, and would sometimes like the loan of four,
it is better that the bag should be strapped on somehow,
with its mouth at the side or front, ready to the hand.
Some pill-boxes and wadding may be taken for very delicate
specimens, and perhaps a little old silk bag or two, or as
many pockets as a dress can be provided with. Some
people wear very thick gloves ; but I prefer my own habit, of
saving up all my old kid gloves, and taking two or three
pairs with me to end their days on each excursion. One
retains so much more sensitiveness of touch in the thinner
kid, and whenever the finger-tips come through in one pair,
we may change them, but we need not fling them away yet.
If we find any delicate small stones, crystals, or fossils,
nothing is so nice to help to pack them, without scratching
or breaking each other, as an old kid glove. Every finger
may hold its gem, and the palm a treasure, in comparative
safety. Above all things, do not go without your eyes, and
your eyes in the best condition that natural and artificial
aids can put them. Books can help the eyesight, for they tell
you what to look for. If possible, have a peep into some
' Geology of the neighbourhood,' or at least the guide-book,
before you go out on an excursion.
If you are resident in Edinburgh, you are in a fair centre for
geologic rasearch.   It stands on the limestones and sandstones
Cojintry Subjects and Pursuits. 483
of the carboniferous formation, and through these, repeated vol¬
canic eruptions have burst, forming Arthur's Seat, the Caltou
Hill, the Castle Eock, etc. If you walk round the Eadical
Eoad at the foot of Salisbury Crags, you will see that there
has been an outflow of lava between the strata, where it seems
in most places to have lifted the whole upper stratum as a
lid, and flowed in between, interstratifying with the stratified
rocks. Through these rocks afterwards burst a real volcanic
crater, from which various volcanic products were showered
—agglomerates, lava dust, etc. The cone is the top of the
present hilL It is very interesting to discover the story of
the hill as recorded in the rocks; to notice the effects of
weathering on basalt, as in the pillars east of Drydam Valley,
and in Samson's Eibs ; and to dwell on the various changes
that have elapsed since the little hill was glowing, witnessed
in one instance at least by the glacial action on the rock to
the south-west of the Queen's Drive. You may take another
pleasant little walk to Craigleith Quarry, and notice how
its fine white sandstones must have been deposited, and
how its rare but perfect fossil trees have been imbedded.
If there is not one visible in the quarry when you visit
it, you may see some preserved in the Botanic Garden. Or
you may walk to Burdie House, and see the limestone
quarries there, with many fragments of ferns and reeds.
But unfortunately the workmen know now too well the
value of complete specimens to let you have them easily.
You may see the same limestone in the cuttings to the
west of Burntisland, where one day I found a very fine
little fish and numerous ferns, without the intervention of
workmen. It is well to go to the geological section of the
University Museum, and study the geological map, so that you
may be able to have a general idea of the surface formations.
If you would like to see the volcanic action more thoroughly,
you might take the train to North Berwick, and walk along
the shore to Tantallon Castle, making sure the tide is suitable.
There vou will see the basalt bursting through the red sand-
stones, and enduring better the test of ages, standing out
now as peaks or dykes. The noble cliff of the Bass Eock is
but one example of this, and North Berwick Law another.
Hugh Miller's Geology of the Bass is a most useful com¬
panion amid these crags.
Even more interesting, though not so massive, are the rocks
on the other side of the Firth at Elie. For this you must
cross at Burntisland, and go through Fife. To the east of
the sandy bay of Elie there seems to have been more mud
484 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and agglomerate, more fusing and spluttering sub-marine
volcanic action. Through the dirty muddy texture of many
of the rocks you see sparkling black points, or the deep red
crystals that are so often found in the sand there, and called
Elie Eubies; or larger pieces of worn limestone rocks con¬
taining fossil, that must have either been the rocks in situ or
the worn pebbles of the old sea. This rock is comparatively
soft, and is hollowed out into fantastic caverns, whose sides
are harder masses of basalt. The finer and denser rocks are
at the west of the town, where is ' Little Arthvir's Seat,' a
beautiful little eminence of basalt, whose crystals are as pure
and complete as those of famed Staffa itself. Further on, in
the bold headland of Kincraig, there are some wonderfully
delicate basaltic pillars, curved like Samson's Eibs, and
though much smaller in diameter, much higher and more
beautiful. In the little hollows of the basaltic rocks you
may find many crystals of quartz and gypsum, generally
reddened. In coming back through Fife, you may look for
the submerged forest at Largo; the ' standing stanes 0'
Lundie,'a mile further on; the old red sandstone fishes of
Dura Den, at Leven; the sandstone caves in East Wemyss ;
and the fine cliffs of famed Eavenshaw.
In an opposite direction, the best place to study the mountain
limestone is Charleston, to be reached by the Stirling steamer.
There are extensive quarries, and fossils so numerous that the
men do not gather any, and you may find it difficult to select;
nil immense number of fossil corals, chiefly the species called
Turbinolia Fungites, or Eam's Horns, encrinites, and many
shells, from Productus Gigantea to some as tiny as a pin's
head. (These latter go into our pill-boxes.) When there,
you ought to visit the old quarries as well as the new ; for
fossils often weather out, no unimportant fact in our hard
mountain limestone, where the chisel sometimes finds it as
difficult to cut out a shell as if it were the original
designer. Mountain limestone can also be seen satisfactorily
near Bathgate, Avhere is an old mine said to have produced
silver, though I sought for a trace in vain. At Grange-
mouth coal and shale fossils are found abundantly, but this
is always a difficult and dirty piece of work for a lady. LTp
in the neighbourhood of Stirling you have good fields. The
flat alluvial soil is broken through by the basaltic elevations
of Craigforth and Abbey Craig; and the Ochils, also up¬
heaved by volcanic force, present a most interesting variety.
You may ascend Dumyat from Blair, and gather a rich
collection of crystals  and beautifully tinted stones, some
CouiitTy Subjects and Pursuits. 485
green with copper, others red with iron, great semi-crys¬
talline masses of pink barytes, mica-schist, and garnets.
Down below at the village of Caiisewayhead, just in the
north-west shoulder of the Abbey Craig, there is a little
deserted quarry of shales and sandstones. There a countr}^-
man told me 1 should find petrified plums and pears, wlncli
turned out to be iron nodules. But we found abundant
fossil trees in the different sandstone beds, and in the soft
shale many specimens of shells with their white lustre
gleaming brightly still; but they were very brittle, and
needed pill-boxes and wadding too. Just a stone's throw
off are some lime-kilns, where they burn limestone brought
from Charleston, and it was because of my finds there that
I made up my mind to visit the rocks in situ. From Stirling
you may go through tlie granitic and metamorphic rocks of
the Highlands up to the north-west corner of tlie county,
where the Old Eed Sandstone rests on the Upper Silurian,
and the ' last land' is Laurentian, of the Canadian group.
You may come south again by the Western Islands, watch¬
ing the volcanic route in the pitchstone of Eigg, and in the
splendid columnar basalts of Staffa, facing the beautiful
pink granites of Mull, to Arran, or the Giant's Causeway
on the Irish Coast. Coming liomewards, you may go down
into the lead mines of Peeblesshire, and bring up slabs laden
with glittering diamonds of quartz, quite able to give rise
to the fables of the fairy-haunted caverns of jewels.
Or if you are inclined for more extended rambles, you
may go down through the carboniferous strata of the Nortli
of England ; may visit the limestones of Yorkshire, and the
chalks of the south-east (it is strange how much younger
seem the deposits towards the Continent); then lieading
round you get into earlier rocks, through the Carboniferous
to the Devonian and Silurian of Devonshire and Cornwall,
and througli the splendidly tinted serpentines of the Lizard
to the grey granite pillars and hornblende of Land's End.
Cornwall is a county rich, too, in mineral wealth. Its
' Jews' Houses,' or Carthaginian kilns for smelting tin, are
still occasionally discovered, and it was known to tlie
Carthaginians and to Aristotle before the Romans. Tlie
Lizard is most beautiful artistically as well as geologically;
and one must ever doubly prize the serpentine steatites and
marmolites from Kynance Cove, and the asbestos from tlio
Frying-pan, as they call one of the wonderful caves near
Cadgewith. The china-clay, too, found on Dartmoor and
St. Austells, is  a mineral  worthy of observation.     It  is
4^6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
commonly supposed to be decayed granite, but apart from
the fact that granite does not in other places decay in this
way, the proprietor of one of the mines gave me his reason
for doubting it, that the silicate of potash, which is an
essential chemical compound of felspar, is not found in
connection with either the dust or the water, and it is
impossible that it should all have dissolved out.
You may turn north through the grand micaceous rocks
of Kiug Arthur's Tintagel, and Ilfracombe, and pause before
the splendid limestone cliffs of Bristol, where the thickest
beds of this rock occur. You may visit the bold peaks of
Malvern, that Langley loved, where the bright-coloured
metamorphic rocks break through the Silurian limestones,
rich in trilobites. Cheltenham, too, is worthy of a visit. The
Cotswolds to left and right of it, Cleeve Hill and Leck-
hampton, are of inferior oolite, of nearly the same range.
This stone itself, the abundance of its fossils, their variations
through the different beds of the same series, and the ease
with which they can be detached entire from the rock, offer
great attractions to a Scotch observer, accustomed to volcanic
or crystalline limestone rocks. The softness of the inferior
oolite generally allows us to clean the fossils very thoroughly
by chipping them round, and then, after allowing them to
soak over night, by scraping them with the chisel, as a cook
scrapes potatoes. How interesting it is thereby to reveal the
feathery curves of Ostrea Flabelloides, or the grooved outlines
of Trigonia! One feels like the sculptor who found his ideal
in his marble, and chiselled it forth. At Minchinhampton
Common you come on the superior oolite, very clear and
hard, and containing, though in less abundance, beautiful
fossils, such as patellas and echinoderms. The Lias caps
the charming little hill of Churchdown, where some scratch-
ings in the rock enable us to find many belemnites, grypha?as,
and some rarer univalves. Tossils are found, too, in the Lias
clayworks west of the town. But the most interesting ex¬
cursion from Cheltenham, is to Garden Cliff on the Severn,
near Westbury, via Grangecourt. There are two lines of
the famous bone-beds that stretch for forty miles, though
only from one-quarter of an inch to one inch thick. It is
not always easy to come upon them in situ, because of
their thinness in some places. But the red, white, and blue
concretionary marls are very brittle, the cliff' is always
crumbling away, and fresh sections of the bone-bed are laid
bare to fresh geologists. Few cliffs so strongly suggest a
past.    The lazy Severn creeps slowly by now, as some other
At Home a7td Abroad. 487
river must have crept in pre-British periods, laying down
the clear clay in clear water. A tidal river it must have
been; for the lower slabs are furrowed, as our sea-sand is,
and we can read how the wind blew on that long-ago day
when they were first hardened and covered. It must have
become shallower, and stretched a vast muddy, fetid expanse
at low water, the abode of death, whence death exhaled in
sulphureous steams. The cause we know not. Further up
the river was the death, here was the decay. The bones,
strangely scattered and mixed, give us nothing like a
complete skeleton. We discovered one vertebra of an
ichthyosaurus, many teeth, tusks, and scales of fish, with
coprolites, and everywhere glittering iron pyrites.
How long lasted this black death ? We know not. But the
river deepened, the water cleared, clay was again deposited,
and living fossils entombed. Monotis, modiola, and many tiny
shells line the pearly slabs. Then again came the conditions
of death, and the bone-bed was repeated ; and again the clear
clay was dropped into pellucid water, sinking and sinking,
until the depth of the cliff was deposited. Then subterranean
forces raised the low beds high, to be cut down again by the
Severn into its valley of erosion, to be levelled by time and
all its forces once more probably to a river-bed.
We may well come back through the Black Country and
the towering Cumberland hills, to our old grey town, full of
thought, for we have had much suggestion. Pdch with
treasures, too, that fade not, and retain for us memory of
the happy collecting time. But all riches have their anxiety.
We wish to name them. If no book or friend can help, the
best plan is to label them with the name of the place where
they were found, as exactly given as possible. Stones often
puzzle very wise professors if placed before them without
this association, whereas a comparative novice may find out
the name from the plates of the geology of the district.
A stni greater difficulty is the arrangement, but as that
depends on space and other conveniences, each one must
choose the way most suitable to circumstances.
Chaklotte CaEMICH.'VEL.
VI.—LIFE IN A DESERT ISLAND.
PART II.
When the wind  will  permit is a very necessary proviso
in Orkney, for surely nowhere else in the world can there
48S The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
blow such an incessant gale. For days together sometimes,
we were confined to the house or garden, by hurricanes
wliich prevented any possibility of walking beyond the
friendly shelter of the garden wall. Well do we remember
the scene when one of the party, having announced that she
was tired of being shut up for a week in the garden, insisted
upon venturing outside, and after struggling for a few steps
up the hill, turned humbly to retrace her steps, and was
blown down upon the ground as completely as if she had
been a wooden nine-pin.
One such week of storms was just over, and we had
hardly got rid of the habit of sitting steadily indoors the
better part of the day, when, one sunny afternoon, our
•drawing-room door was thrown open, and visitors wei'e
announced by our English servant, in a tone which betrayed
the importance of such an event in his eyes.
Eobinson Crusoe could not have been more surprised
when he saw the footprints of a savage. They might have
dropped down upon us in a balloon for all that we knew to
the contrary, but presently it appeared that they had arri\e(l
in a more prosaic manner by boat, and that they were old
Orkney residents, living on a neighbouring island, hospit¬
ably intent upon making our acquaintance as new-comers to
the country. Their kind friendliness was great, and they
•did not leave us until they had extracted a solemn promise
that, if the weather would permit, we would come over to
their island, to return their visit the very iollowing week,
and sj)end a day or two at their house.
This was a wonderful excitement in our quiet lii'e, and we
were all pleased when the day of our expedition arrived,
bright and fine, with a favouring wind, in every respect
•exactly what we should have wished. The distance was
almost as great as to Kirkwall, but this time everything
went on prosperously. Two hours brought us to our
destination, and we landed on an island, flatter indeed and
less picturesque than our own, but with a thriving, well-
cared-i'or look, which showed how much might be done, even
in Orkney, to turn the land to good account, and provide
for the comfort of the inhabitants. Even here, however, no
trees could be persuaded to grow; but we must suppose that
Orkney people become indifferent to this great want, for
they certainly yield to no one in passionate love and admira¬
tion for their own country. They will not hear of its having
a,ny defects, and carry their native enthusiasm so far, that
the inhabitants of one island will often pine and fret them-
At Home and Abroad. 489
selves ill, if necessity should compel them to seek tlieir
fortunes in another—perhaps not three miles distant from
their original home.
We spent a pleasant afternoon wandering down to the
harbour to see the cod boats come in; ugly-looking fishing-
smacks they were, containing a large well of sea-water round
which huge monsters were swimming in a witless, melanclioly
sort of way, as if they could foresee the unliappy end which
too surely lay before them, when their floating prisons arrived
at Leith, Aberdeen, or Glasgow.
After that we rowed across to a small adjacent island,
that we might see a herd of wild ponies driven for our
inspection, a crowd of thirty or forty pretty little creatures,
tearing past us at full gallop ; and tlien back to dinner and a
pleasant, sociable evening, which, liowever, was somewhat
shortened by the recollection of the early hour at which
our old enemy, the tide, made it necessary for us to start the
next morning on our homeward way.
We ought to have known by this time that plans need
never be settled beforehand in the Orkneys. Half-conscious
dreams of storms and tempest disturbed our comfortable
slumbers, and when we looked out of our windows in the
morning, we saw a grey leaden sky, rain sweeping over the
ground in torrents, and a raging sea, of which the surf was
carried up to the very doors of the house by the hurricane
which was blowing.
We could not feel anxious to brave sucli a tempest, ami
our kind hosts would not hear of our starting, so we resigned
ourselves to fate, and indeed, though soiTy to throw ourselves
in this way upon our friends' hospitality, we could nut regret
the prolongation of our visit. Our host was not only a
learned antiquarian; he was thoroughly devoted to his
country, and delighted in imparting to us quaint information
about the ancient history of the Orkneys. Especially did
he delight to dwell upon tlie folk-lore of tlie country, and
from him we learnt many terrible ghost stories, true tales
of brownies and helpful household spirits, and authentic
appearances of the headless horse, by which his own tenants
were so terrified that nothin"- would induce them to go out
alone at midnight.
He told us, too, the pretty legend, common to all northern
nations, of the seal-woman who lost her little seal-skin when
she was dancing with her companions on one of tlie shores
of the island; of how she married the fisherman who had
skilfully stolen her seal attire, and how she lived happily for
490 -The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
many years as a good, devoted fisherman's wife, becoming
the mother of several children, and leading in all respects a
prosaic, uneventful existence; until one unlucky day, her
children, playing in the cottage, pulled out from some
neglected hole the long-lost seal garment, and therevipon old
associations were aroused; the longing for the old sea life
became irresistible, she donned the long abandoned skin, and
in another moment the dear mother had vanished from the
sight of her astonished children, and nothing was to be seen
but a seal plunging into the water.
Then comes the sad part of the story—the grief of her
husband when he came back from his fishing, the way that
sorrow turned his brain, and all his work was abandoned
that he might watch day and night for the wonderful seal-
maidens ; how sometimes his patient waiting seemed success¬
ful. Once more the band of lovely girls rose out of the sea,
and amongst them he could see his own wife, become young
and beautiful as of old, but with a look of yearning sorrow
in her eyes whicli nearly broke his heart, as she seemed to
stretch out her arms and implore him to rescue her. Then,
as he tried to rush forward to the captive, with a jeering
laugh the whole band would dive down into the water, and
the poor fisherman was left forsaken until he pined away
and died.
Did we venture to treat such a sad story as a fairy
legend ? That very afternoon, our host declared, if it would
only clear, we should be taken down into the village, and
introduced to a veritable descendant of the seal-woman.
And so we really were; and made acquaintance with a little
red-faced old woman, who was extremely silent and uncom¬
municative, but evidently proud of her descent, to which
her neighbours insisted upon tracing the peculiarities of her
complexion.
We were supposed to be sadly incrediilous people; why,
we had not even heard of the ghosts in our own house !
We knew not of the uncomfortable little man who came
in dead of night, to pull open the curtains by the bedside
of unoffending strangers, simply because he had chosen to
hang himself in the house. No Orkney person, we were
told, would be found to sleep alone in AVestray House; but
we laughingly refused to be frightened, even by the ghost
who was supposed to haunt our garden walks, though it is
an indisputable fact, that no one could sit down on a certain
seat in that garden, without hearing footsteps marching
steadily in the distance.
Ai Home and Abroad. 491
"With such interesting stories to occupy our time, we
ceased to trouble ourselves about the weather. Indeed, our
friends assured us from the first, that they were well accus¬
tomed to entertain storm-stayed travellers. In old days
Orkney hospitality was indeed unbounded; a stranger
coming to any island, might live for months in the house
without inquiries being made as to the reason of his stay.
It is only in this century, after there had been two or three
flagrant abuses of this true northern hospitality, that people
had become more guarded in their friendships. Before that
time, a letter of introduction to one proprietor ensured a man
a kindly welcome in every island.
Two days passed without any abatement of the storm, and
as we had only come prepared to sleep one night, we began
to feel anxious to return. The tliird morning dawned, wet
and hopeless-looking as ever, but, as our hosts cheerily
informed us, with a decided lull in the wind. They would
not hear of our starting in an open boat, however, until the
weather had quite settled itself; and even when, later in the
afternoon, the sun shone out brightly, they protested that it
was too late for us to start that evening, and proposed
instead, to take us to see some caves in their neighbourhood.
There could not have been a more sudden or | complete
change of weather. The sea, protected here from the
Atlantic swell, was calm, except occasionally for a tiny
tossing wave, a little childish sob, as it were, which showed
what had been the violence of its previous passion. Every¬
thing looked brilliantly distinct and bright, and our spirits
insensibly rose higher and higher, as we skimmed over the
water in six-oared boats, so smoothly that not even the most
timid could see any reason for alarm.
"We coasted along the shore, which, though flat and unin¬
teresting at first, gradually became, like our own island,
higher and bolder, until at last we were rowing under great
cliffs, not frowning and magnificent in their forbidding
grandeur, but clothed with grass and flowers, and, I was
going to say, with sea-birds. It was in fact difficult to see
any rock at all, every ledge and cranny in the clifl" forming
a resting-place for sea-gulls, divers, cormorants, puffins, and
croM'ds of other birds, whose names, announced to us in the
Orkney vernacular, sounded utterly strange and incom¬
prehensible. These names are relics of the Danish origin of
the islanders, and finding it quite impossible to translate
them, we amused ourselves instead with watching the
manceuvres of long lines of divers, who stood like a row of
492 Tlie Ladies EdinburgJi MagarAnc.
soldiers balancing themselves upon ledges of rock near tlie
water, and then, as our boat drew uncomfortably close to
them, plunging like one bird into the sea, to emerge again
presently when their dip was over, and solemnly take u;)
their old position on the rocks.
We had rowed for some time at the foot of these heiglits,
when.suddenly, without a word of warning, the boat turned
sharply inward, and in another moment we found we had
been transported into fairyland. We were in a high vaulted
cave, tapestried with the most vivid pink and green, which
changed into every shade of varying richness of colour, as wc
looked further into the recesses of the cavern. Under us
was the deep blue sea, looking down into whose transparent
depths were to be seen gorgeous sea-anemones of tlic
briglitest orange colour, peach-like sea-urchins, serpula^
witli their crimson fringe, and other quaint sea-monsteis,
disporting themselves round little clumps and groves of
tangled, feathery sea - weed, the forests of this submarine
paradise. It required but very small imagination to fancy
ourselves in the Sea King's palace, or in some mermaid's
withdrawing-room ; the combination of vivid colours was
beyond anything one could have believed. It is, perhaps,
a base com2:iarison to say it was like the transformation
scene of a pantomime, but really it is difhcult in any other
way to give a true idea of the tender, delicate colours witli
which the cave seemed to be illuminated. We were told
the bright tints on the walls of the cavern were caused by
the sea-weeds with which they Avere covered, but we thouglit
they must also be due in some degree to the position of tlu-
sun, and its brilliancy on that particular evening, after such
a heavy storm. It is difficult to believe that the colours
are always so resplendent, or these caves would surely bn
more generally known and visited.
l>om cave to cave we rowed, each one seeming to exceed
iill that had gone before, in calm and tranquil beauty. We
were so unwilling to tear ourselves away, that it was quite
late before we got back to dinner, having stopped besides
on our way home to hold a consultation with our boatman,
and make every arrangement for a start at 8.30 on the
following morning.
The morning of our departure came at last, not bright and
decidedly fine as we had fondly anticipated, but grey, over¬
cast with heavy clouds, and with an occasional moan of
wind, which showed the storm was only gradually abating.
We came down to an early breakfast, congratulating oui-
At Home and Abroad. 493
selves that it was dry at any rate; but we found our kind
host rather gloomily tapping his barometer, and shaking his
liead over the forebodings of bad weather. He did his best
to hinder us from starting, but when we walked down to
the harbour, the sea before us looked comparatively calm ;
our boatmen, both experienced sailors, declared that we could
venture, and we, in our ignorance, thought it rather a
pleasant day than otherwise. Our friends were not satisfied,
but we refused to be persuaded, and set off with many last
words, and cheerful expectations of being home in two or
three hours.
Alas ! we were to learn by sad experience, that it is easier
to leave an island than to get back to it again. Hardly had
we got outside the harbour, when our views as to the calm¬
ness of the sea changed considerably. The wind had risen,,
as if by magic, and we found ourselves in a short chopping
sea; not amongst huge swelling mountains over which our
boat could gallantly ride, but in an angry tempest where the
short, sharp waves seemed to strike the boat in every dii'ec-
tion at once, making her crack and groan as if she were
really hurt.
We ladies had never been out in such weather before, but
tliough to us it seemed very alarming, we took comfort in
the experience of our boatmen, and sat patiently huddled
up at the bottom of the boat, whither we had betaken our¬
selves as the warmest shelter we could find. Nothing could
\>Q seen around but grey sky, and dark, white-topped waves;
the wind was not in our favour, and we went beating up
against it, fighting every inch of our way, and appaiently
hardly advancing at all. The waves began occasionally ta
break over the boat, and we were soon wet to the skin. It
was evident, moreover, that the storm was rising, not
abating, in violence, and when we came at length to the
first narrow outlet through which the tide was rushing, it
looked more like a seething whirlpool than a practicable
passage. Our fright kept us silent, though our impulse
certainly was to implore that we might turn back. To our
extreme joy, however, the boatmen themselves looked doubts
fully at each other, and announced, after a hurried whisper,
that we must turn round and run before the wind; it was-
])ossible that we might get through safely if the wind kept
as it was, but if it rose, as it seemed inclined to do, our boat
could not stand it. "Without a moment's delay, therefore,
our boat's head was turned the other way; as we heard
afterwards, to the great relief of the friends whom we had
494 IJi^! Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
just left, who had been watching us with the utmost anxiety
through a telescope; the wind was fortunately in the right
quarter, and half-an-hour's run brought us safely into Kirkwall
harbour.
To be at Kirkwall was not to be on our own island, how¬
ever; and after the first few moments of thankfulness at
finding ourselves safely back again upon dry laud, we set
our wits to work to discover how we could possibly manage
to get home that night, and relieve the fears of the rest of
our party, who would be anxiously expecting our return.
The wind would very likely fall towards evening, our boat¬
man declared, but then we could not wait in Kirkwall on
that forlorn chance; and, after all, if too much wind is
dangerous, no wind at all is equally undesirable for a
belated sailing boat. Finally, after much consideration, we
adopted the suggestion of the landlord of the inn, and hired
a waggonette to drive twenty miles down the coast of the
main island, trusting then that chance would favour us, and
we should be able to hire a boat to take us over the com¬
paratively narrow channel which separated the mainland
from our own home.
We did have luncheon, and endeavoured to dry our
clothes as well as we could in Kirkwall; but we were
thoroughly chilled before we started, and the long drive in
that bitter wind seemed literally to freeze us to the bone.
AVe were so benumbed with cold that we could hardly stand,
when we got out at last at the little hamlet, which lay
immediately opposite to Westray House. How we wished
ourselves over that channel of water! But it seemed as if we
were destined to look and long in vain. ' All the men and
all the boats were at the herring fishing,' an untidy-looking
woman informed us, in answer to our piteous entreaties; and
it seemed as if we should have no choice but to return, when
suddenly there emerged from one of the huts a miserable-
looking old man, who volunteered, with the aid of a small
boy, to be our Charon, and convoy us over our Eiver Styx
in the post-boat, which looked, truth to say, quite as old as
the wizened little man who had proposed to take us.
We never wondered, after that day, that the post-boat so
often refused to cross, thus depriving us of our anxiously
looked-for letters, which, at the best of times, never could
come in oftener than three days a week; but, even now, it
is a matter of surprise to us how we ever trusted ourselves
in such a crazy-looking vessel. No doubt our minds were
benumbed, and we could only look wistfully across at our
Ai Home and Abroad. 495
home, and wish that we were there, without thinking of the
wild bit of sea which had to be got over before we reached
it.    The wind had not gone down, and as the sea here was
partially exposed to the Atlantic, the waves were running
mountains high.   When we had got well out from shore, our
amiable boatman informed us very gruffly that there was
not the smallest chance of reaching Westray.    All he could
do was to run for the nearest shore and land us; and if he
succeeded in doing that in safety, nothing would induce him
to tempt his fate by risking the crossing another time that
night.    So we had the mortification of seeing the white walls
of Westray gradually disappear, and at length at eight in the
evening we were standing upon the shores of our own island, it
is true, but hungry, cold, and exhausted, miles away from our
friends, and, more important still, our dinner.    However, it is
possible that that long, weary walk was what saved us from
aU chills or rheumatic fevers; and when at last, at half-past
nine, we reached home, we recorded there and then our
solemn vow, that never again would we leave the safe refuge of
our island, until the time came for us to abandon it for ever.
It would take too long to tell how we were tempted to
break that resolution, by the varied charms of long sunny
days spent in seal-shooting (perhaps we should rather say, in
watching the herds of seals disporting themselves near the
skerries, for no one succeeded in getting one), or the lovely
moonlight   nights when the   delights of cuddy, or  brenth
fishing, as they call it there, tempted us to linger after the
tide had turned, and so effectually prevented us from getting
home to bed at all.    The evenings grew gradually shoiter,
the weather became worse than ever, but we were repaid
for thus lingering in the North by the grand sight of the
whole heavens illuminated with the Aurora  Borealis, not
motionless   as we see it in the South, but quivering with
throbs of life and fiery pulsations.
So when the time came for us to go away, though we had
counted the days to our start, we were positively sorry and
unwilling to leave our desert home. We had grown very
fond of the people, and had many poor friends in the cot¬
tages round aljout. We never came across a more friendly
or more interesting people,—miserably poor, it is true, living
for a great part of the year on limpets and dried fish, but
even refined in their ways of thought, and as warm-hearted
as any one could wish. We had many sad partings, and
heartily-expressed wishes that we would soon come back
again to Orkney.     Tributes of friendship, in the shape of
49^ The L adies' Edinburgli. Magazine.
wonderfully-knitted stockings, poured in upon us to the last;
and when, one bright September morning, the fishing-smack
reappeared which was to convey us, and all our worldly
goods, back again to Kirkwall, we left our island home, no
longer thinking of it as a desert, but, in the warmth of our
feelings at parting, quite ready to assent to the Orkney
creed, that Orkney is the centre of comfort and civilization,
the true Islands of the Blest; and that those who have once
enjoyed the charms of existence in such a favoured land,
never fail to return to it again and again, as the opportunity
ofl'ers.
Be that as it may, the impression must for ns have been
a transient one, for from that day to this, we have never
revisited our Desert Island, or our kind Orkney friends.
Insula.
0 Castle on the mountain !
Your roof was shining gold,
Your windows were of diamond.
In the bright days of old;
What sunshine in the chambers.
And music in the air,
A bright head at the window,
A light foot on the stair!
0 Castle on the mountain !
So old and strong in vain,
The light and song departed
Can never come again;
The grey stones brave unheeding
A hundred winters' might,
Tlie flow'ret that they shelter
I'ades in an autumn night.
O Castle on the mountain !
Your roof is saddest grey.
Your windows are a vacancy.
Your sunshine passed away ;
Wlien all the light is faded,
And all the music still,
All! wherefore stand so firm and strong.
So changeless on the hill ?
E. J. O.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 497
€t)e Beggar of Capo Di iHontc: a ^Tale of Sixtg^one.
By THE Author of ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE XVI.
We shall now make a short digression, in order to speak
of Matteo's early life, and the obligations which bound
him to Filippo and liis cause. As we have already men¬
tioned, he was half-brother to Claudia, and her senior by a
few years. Having lost liis father when young, he was left
to follow his own inclinations without restraint; for his
mother married again, and was soon absorbed in the cares
of a second family. Unchecked by any guiding hand, his
naturally wild, impulsive temperament led him into excesses
from which a father's love and firmness might have saved
him. He was kind and affectionate in disposition, and
honest in principle—never betraying any trust confided to
him. He had early become attached to the beautiful Teresa,
who returned his love with equal intensity. Like his father,
he was bred to arms, and could his untamed spirit have
submitted to military discipline, he miglit have gained
sufficient rank to have warranted his demand of Teresa's
hand ; but as it was, his frequent and notorious escaimditfi
drew upon him the displeasure of his superior officers, and
he was degraded to the ranks. Upon this the father of
Teresa forbade him to enter his house, or to hold any
communication with his daughter, whom he now attempted
to bestow on another suitor—a man twice her age, and in
every way hateful to her. Teresa, whose heart and troth
were given to Matteo, refused to obey her father, preferring
to accept the only alternative offered her—that of going into
a convent.
After delaying many months in hopeless expectation of
her father's relenting, and consenting to her marriage M'ith
Matteo, in despair she entered the convent, and after a
year's probation took the vows. Matteo had never ceased
to importune the old man to accede to their wishes, but he
was inexorable, and suffered his daughter to perjure herself
by professing a vocation for the life from which her heart
turned with loathing, rather than consent to her marriage
with the man of her choice. Exasperation at this last act
of cruelty, and despair of her ever regaining her liberty,
made Matteo resolve to persuade her to fly with him. At
length he found means, through a workman employed in the
Xo. 59.—November le79- 2  I
49^ The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
repairs of the convent, to write to her, and implore her to
yield to his entreaties. He had secured the good offices of
the messenger, who conveyed the letter, and, with his assist¬
ance, arranged everything necessary for their flight, could
she but be induced to make the attempt. Alas ! her heart
too warmly seconded his entreaties, for in vain had she
endeavoured to shut out his remembrance. Her vows were
forced, for in her heart she had never consented to them;
and thus, after a short struggle between her duty and her
love, she agreed to his wishes. With the aid of his emissary,
she contrived to escape unseen, by scaling the wall of the
convent while the rest of the community were at prayer.
Matteo was waiting beneath with a fleet horse, which carried
her many leagues from the convent before her flight was
discovered. When about a hundred yards from the place,
he made her throw off her nun's dress, and assume that of
a soldier's wife, with which he furnished her; and thus
disguised, she followed him rapidly through the narrow
roads which intersected the plantations skirting the convent
walls. He had taken the precaution to bury her nun's
dress in a deep ditch, and hoped he had succeeded in
removing all traces of their halt.
After some hours' hard riding, they reached a small
roadside inn, where they took some slight refreshment, and
rested their horses for an hour; after which they pursued
their way through the wildest part of the country, in hopes
of escaping detection. But Teresa's horse, unfortunately, put
its foot into a hole, and threw her violently to the ground.
She was much bruised on the face and forehead, and her
ankle so severely strained that she could not move without
assistance. Matteo was in despair, for night had now set
in. They had entered a deep wood before the accident
happened, and he knew not whether there was any cottage
within reach where they might obtain help. Terrified and
exhausted with fatigue from her unwonted exertions, Teresa
gave way to bitter lamentations, and she repented having
left the convent, for she Avell knew what her fate would be
should they be overtaken, which this unfortunate accident
rendered too probable. Matteo was equally aware of the
danger to which they were exposed, and the punishment in
store for a nun who breaks her vow, though he strove to
conceal his apprehensions from Terdsa. He was obliged
to leave her in the wood, while he went in search of aid
from the nearest hamlet, not supposing that there could be
any habitation in the depths of the forest.    He had not
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.   499
proceeded above half a mile when he discovered a wood¬
man's hut, and in about an hour he returned witli the
owner, prepared to carry Teresa to his cottage. Matteo
spoke of her as his wife to the peasant, and induced him to
allow them the shelter of his roof, where his wife would do
all she could for the poor lady. Teresa never spoke as they
lifted her from the ground, and Matteo feared she was more
seriously injured than they imagined. He called to her by
the most endearing epithets, and this, added to the traces of
their long and rapid journey, excited suspicion in the mind
of the peasant. He made no remark while in their presence,
but as soon as he reached the hut, he imparted his suspicions
to his wife, Avho determined narrowly to observe the young
couple. After she had bathed the bruised ankle, she pro¬
ceeded to examine a cut on the sufferer's forehead, which
was bleeding a little ; and in removing the handkerchief
which covered the wound in order to stanch the blood, she
discovered that all the hair had been cut off, and the linen
band which Tertjsa wore across her forehead as part of her
nun's costume had been forgotten, and was now visible
under the handkerchief. The woman instantly recognised
the badge, though she appeared to take no notice of it; but
as soon as she returned to her husband, she informed him of
these facts, and consulted him as to what they should do.
Though they felt pity for the youth of the parties, and
perhaps surmised something of their history, the penalty of
knowingly harbouring a runaway nun was so great, and
involved them in so much danger, that they felt themselves
bound to give up the fugitives, or their own ruin might be
the consequence.
Meanwhile Matteo was in despair, for he found the
injuries Teresa had received would prevent her being moved
for many days. They knew the active search which would
be made as soon as her flight was discovered, and that
rewards would be offered for information of her place of
concealment. How was it, then, possible they could escape,
so few hours having elapsed since they left the convent ?
They felt it would be impossible to deceive the peasants
who had given them shelter when once the search began, for
every village and house would be visited, and placards sent
in every direction. Matteo's last resource was to offer the
peasants a bribe to conceal them; but in doing this he
sedulously avoided mentioning the real character of the
lady, as he knew how great were the prejudices of the lower
classes towards those persons who had broken their religious
500 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
vows. He had not spoken a sentence before the man bade
him be silent. Their secret was known, and they dared not
help them.
Teresa, who listened with a beating heart as she lay
helpless on the little bed they had provided for her in an
inner chamber, on hearing these words, burst forth in a cry
of agony, imploring Matteo to leave her to her fate while
there was yet hope of his escape. Should he be taken in
her company, he would be sentenced to the galleys for life,
so extreme was the punishment for the crime he had
committed. All concealment was necessarily at an end after
this acknowledgment, and the peasant and his wife showed
a reluctance to render any further assistance to one who was
under so heavy a ban. Matteo could not be induced to leave
Teresa, though he shuddered to think of the present peril.
He could have borne anything alone, but the thought of the
destruction he had brought on her whom he loved better
than his life, completely unmanned him. All he could
obtain from the peasants was a promise not to betray them
if the officers of justice did not trace them to their cottage.
They hastily destroyed every trace of Teresa's dress that
might be supposed to afford a clue to her real character, and
with ready kindness provided her with such things as her
situation required. But Matteo, what pretext could have
been devised as his object in seeking so secluded a spot ?
This would be the first question likely to be asked should
the cottage be searched. And now another danger threatened
them. Before the day was over which followed the night of
their first seeking their present shelter, Teresa showed symp¬
toms of delirium; the agony of her mind, joined to bodily
STiffering, had produced fever, and she now knew no one.
Matteo knelt at her bedside, endeavouring to soothe her;
but she did not recognise him, and her piteous cries that he
would come and save her from the horrible dungeon in
which they were walling her up, wrung his very heart. The
peasant woman trembled as she listened to her ravings, and
called upon the saints to save her, or take her from this
world before she should be discovered. Even Matteo felt
almost inclined to join in praying for the merciful inter¬
vention of death, as her only hope of escape from a worse
destiny. His only thought was how to save her, for had he
not brought her into this peril ? AVhat hours of bitter
self-reproach were his as he knelt by her side, striving in
vain to calm her agitation and recall her wandering senses!
Their hosts had retired to rest, anxious and perplexed as
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 501
to what the morning light should bring. Nor were their
apprehensions groundless, for scarcely had the day dawned
when the sound of horses' feet was heard, and loud knocking
at the door awoke them from their broken slumbers. The
man put his head out of the small window in the roof, and
saw a priest and three soldiers halting in front of the
cottage. On their knocking more loudly, he became alarmed,
and hastily descended to inquire the meaning of their
search. The party had come through the forest as jNIatteo
and Teresa had done, and detecting the traces of a figure
having lain upon the grass, and the marks also where her
horse had been tied to a tree, these significant tokens left
them in no doubt as to the objects of their search being not
far distant. That same evening that Teresa had escaped,
her clothes had been found in a ditch in a plantation near
the convent, by some men who were working there, and it
was this that so readily led to the discovery of her flight.
A search was commenced immediately, and she and her
lover were soon traced to the little inn at which they had
refreshed their horses.
^latteo, worn out by fatigue and anxiety on Teresa's
account, had sunk on the floor of her chamber iu a heavy
slumber, and was scarcely conscious of the loud knocking
which had roused the peasants, until the door opened, and
a soldier, thrusting himself forward and laying his hand
violently on his shoulder, declared him his prisoner. Matteo's
first impulse was to shoot the intruder dead with the pistol
he carried in his belt, but a shriek from Ter&a—who, in
raising herself from the pillow, had caught sight of the
priest who followed the soldier into the room—diverted his
purpose ; and fearing they were about to seize her, he threw
himself on the bed before her, to screen her, if possible, from
their violence. Alas I all his efforts to save her were vain,
for he was immediately secured by the two other soldiers,
who rushed in at the command of the priest.
We will not attempt to describe the heartrending scene
that followed, for the priest had no mercy on the erring
woman; and in spite of Matteo's entreaties that they would
spare her the indignity of being bound like a common
criminal, she was rudely torn from the bed and strapped
before one of the soldiers, who, receiving his orders from the
priest, turned his horse's head once more towards the forest,
and was soon out of sight. The peasant woman and her
cowardly husband knelt trembling before the priest, who
sternly accused them of having knowingly harboured the
502 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
o
guilty pair, even if they had not been actual accomplices in
the crime. In vain they protested their innocence, and
appealed to Matteo to corroborate their statement, but the
priest paid no attention to Matteo's assurance of the truth of
what they had declared. He threatened tliem with heavy
punishment, as well as a fine, for having allowed the young
couple to take refuge in their cottage.
At a sign from the priest, the  soldiers who  remained
bound Matteo's  arms  behind  him, though he offered  no
resistance.    He could not hope to change their purpose, nor
had he now sufficient interest in life, from the moment of
parting from his beloved Teresa, to care what his punish¬
ment might be.    A gloomy sadness settled on his features,
and   turning  his  face   towards  the  terrified  peasants,  he
prayed their forgiveness for the evil he had brought upon
them, and then declared his readiness to depart.    He hoped
they would find his purse, which he had talven from his belt
the previous night, when trying to induce them to conceal
Teresa and himself from their pursuers.   He had not replaced
it, and as it contained a considerable sum, it might perhaps
serve to purchase their pardon.    The usual trial was gone
through when he was brought to justice, and he was con¬
demned to the galleys for life.    Some short time, however,
elapsed   before   the   sentence  was  put  in  execution,  and
Claudia and Filippo were made aware of his terrible situa¬
tion.   Filippo, being himself an outlaw, could not venture to
speak in his behalf, or plead his youth.    He had defied the
laws in the matter of discipline with regard to the Count
Torcelli, and had led a wandering, useless life from that
time ; he was now known and dreaded as a buccaneer of no
common daring.    Claudia, who had followed the fortunes of
her  husband,  was  strongly  attached  to  her  half-brother.
Neither was Filippo without a certain feeling of regard for
the reckless man ; he therefore readily yielded to Claudia's
earnest entreaties that he would attempt Matteo's rescue.
Filippo determined to make his way to Trieste, and, in the
character of captain of a Turkish trading vessel, wait his
opportunity of carrying off Matteo as he passed to and fro
from the prison to the galleys and the works they were
employed at on the quays.    He had a small but bold crew,
composed of seamen of different lands, but all devoted to his
interest, and holding their lives but at his command.    Their
swarthy faces and lazy habits made them easily pass for
Orientals, and the disguise of Filippo, who was almost a
stranger in that port, was perfect.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 503
Matteo for some time was so oppressed with the sorrow
that filled his heart, that he paid no heed to those men who
contrived to throw themselves in the way of the gang, as
they were being led down to the quays. He had given up
all liope of escape; for Filippo had not been heard of for
many weeks before he conceived the idea of carrying off
Teresa, and he knew of no other friend likely to assist him.
At length, one day as he and his feUow-convicts were
returning from their first task to their prison, he was struck
by the uncommon height of a man attired as a Turkish
sailor. There was something peculiar in his action and his
looks as the gang passed him, though he appeared totally
indifferent to the poor creatures as they trode their way,
bent with fatigue and exposure to the fervid heat of the
burning midday sun, chained to each other, and dragging
their weary limbs over the arid ground. ]\Iatteo thought
the man reminded him of Filippo in his walk and attitude,
and he determined to watch him more closely as tliey passed
in the evening, rightly concluding, if it were indeed Filippo,
he had some plan for effecting his escape, and would lose no
time in presenting himself again before him. A gleam of
hope shot through his heart when he observed the same tall
figure lounging near the quay, looking listlessly as they
passed, and apparently giving but little attention to the
prisoners. Some men, also in eastern costume, were occupied
at a short distance from this man—who appeared to be the
captain of the group—in rolling casks into a boat that
passed to and fro continually to a small vessel that lay off
the opposite side of the harbour.
Matteo cast a quiet glance at the tall man, who he now
felt assured was Filippo, and with a beating heart he
prepared to avail himself of any covert signal thrown out by
this silent figure. The latter,—for it was indeed no other
than his friend,—quickly perceiving that Matteo had recog¬
nised him, sauntered leisurely towards the men engaged
with the casks, and seemed to be s;ivin" them instructions
about the task they were engaged in, which brought them
considerably nearer the place where Matteo Avas at work,
and enabled him to watch every movement of Filippo and
his crew without in any way ceasing his own toil. He
observed that Filippo despatched two of his men with a
portion of the casks in the boat, and that they strained every
nerve to reach the vessel on the opposite side, while Filippo
continued to walk towards the quay where Matteo and the
gang were w^orking, studiously avoiding coming near the
504 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
prisoners. He seemed to be anxiously watching the return
of the boat, and Matteo soon had the satisfaction of seeing
the men row up rapidly round from the further side of the
harbour, and make for the quay. Scarcely had they landed,
and begun rolling the remainder of the casks down tlie
beach, when the gong sounded for the return of the men at
the galleys to their prison. They were escorted by two
soldiers, as was their daily custom—one in front, and one
closely following tliem. Matteo's place was in the rear of
the gang, chained to the last man, who was old and infirra>
and dragged his fettered limbs with much pain over the
shingly beach. The men had got nearly to the edge of
the rising ground above the quay, when suddenly two of the
Turkish sailors contrived to let the cask they were rolling
towards the boat slip from their hold, and roll violently
against the soldier who marched in front. He fell down,
evidently much hurt, for he groaned with pain and swore
furiously at the sailor. The soldier in the rear, thinking it
was done out of malice, ran forward, and immediately a.
light commenced between the soldiers and the two sailors,
Avho seemed determined on disarming them. While this
struggle was going on in front, Filippo and another of his
crew had come up unperceived, and, with one stroke of a
heavy axe, Filippo broke the chain which fastened Matteo
to his fellow-slave ; and bidding the sailors who accompanied
him carry Matteo to the boat, he strode forward to the
assistance of his followers, who were now deeply engaged
Avith the soldiers, and soon succeeded in overpowering them.
They took their muskets from them, and bound them
together, leaving them at the mercy of the slaves, who
formed a ring round tiiem. In consequence of the extreme
heat, for it was now July, there were few stragglers on the.
beach, and Filippo and his men had secured Matteo, and
escaped to their vessel before any alarm could be given to
the guard at tlie barracks. The breeze was favourable for
their leaving the port, and in a shorter time than we have
taken to relate it, Matteo, liberated from his chains and
under the protection of his powerful friend, was sailing
down the Adriatic at a speed that defied all pursuit. Hi.<j
right arm was a good deal crushed by the blow of the axe,
and this it was that gave it the painful and horrible appear¬
ance that called forth the sympathy of Ccncetta when she
first saw him on Capo di Monte. Gratitude to Filippo for
his unexpected deliverance induced Matteo to bind himself
by a solemn vow to devote his life to him, and do his
The Impressions of Theophrastns Such. 505
bidding in whatever he might command; for he had no hope
of recovering his position in Hungary liad he even dared to
re-enter that country, his life being forfeited by the double
crime he had committed. Filippo, who had never relin-
ijuished the desire of avenging the wrongs of Livia, determined
on making Matteo an instrument in the capture of Torcelli'&
daughter, but several years elapsed before a favourable
opportunity presented itself.
The appointment of Count Torcelli at Naples at length
opened a chance of success to his long-cherished scheme of
revenge, and he at once concerted with IMatteo the measures,
necessary for carrying off the Signorina Concetta, and we
know how well he succeeded. Matteo, who had never
recovered the shock of losing Teresa, of whose fate no
tidings had ever reached him, gladly embraced the wild and
adventurous life in which Filippo was tlien engaged, and
soon became as accomplished a buccaneer as himself. His-
relationship witli Claudia also gave him a claim on Filippo,
and this completed the chain of obligations, and made him
in all respects his willing coadjutor. The striking resem¬
blance of Concetta to his ever fondly loved Teresa was the
first thing that shook his purpose, but he could not violate
his oath of fidelity to Filippo. He resolved, however, ta
leave no means untried—short of incurring a breach of
faith—to save her, and trusted to some accident in the
struggle which was now taking yilace between the Bourbons
and the troops of Victor Emmanuel, to aftbrd her an
opportunity of escape without compromising him with,
Filippo.
{To he continued.)
2r|}e Impressions of ^^topili^sistus <Sudj,
It is difficult to imagine oneself competent to sit in any
kind of judgment on a work by George Eliot. Nevertheless,
as all of us who are readers are of necessity in some degree
judges, and if, as we believe, those who are the most sym¬
pathetic readers are as a rule the fairest judges, the present
writer is qualified—if in no other way, at least by a warm
admiration of many years' standing—to give her impressions
of The Impressions of Theophrastus Stich.
In the days of George Eliot's earlier novels, many of us
remember reading them with the feeling of having found a
boundless mine, or a perennial spring.   Here seemed thought.
$06 The Ladies' Edinbitrgh Magazine.
wit, humour, invention, teaching, that could never fail.    Our
feeling was:
' Age could not wither, custom could not stale,
That infinite variety.'
And this hope has been fulfilled in perhaps as great a
measure as was ever accorded to literary promise; and we
have hailed the appearance of a new book by George Eliot
with the certainty of a rich harvest of pleasure and profit.
Now, if the truth must be spoken, we are becoming aware
that limitations beset even this vigorous genius; that the
tendency to repetition of ideas and exaggeration of manner,
which seems a law of existence to the- greatest artists, is her
portion too.
There were not wanting those who, in reading the splendid
creation of Eomola, hinted, indeed most prematurely, that
the circle of the author's ideas had been already filled;
while a kindly and appreciative critic,' who sees in Roinola
' the highest tidemark any novelist, at least in our generation,
has reached,' begins to discern the ebb in Felix Holt. But
however this may be, a new spring-tide seemed to set in
with Middlcmarcli. "We saw here no failure of power, even
if the style had become a little more cumbrous, and the
teaching rather too solid.
Daniel Deronda opened the eyes, even of the most unwilling,
to see that the best days were over. Analysis of character
—always a large element in our author's work, but balanced
hitherto by a bright realism, making us seem to live in the
farm at Hayslope, or on the banks of the Floss—was here
carried to a pitiless extent, almost to the exclusion of other
elements.
Altogether, then, we confess not to have opened Tlieo-
pJirastus Sicch with that certainty of satisfaction with which
we should at one time have welcomed a volume of essays
by George Eliot. Nor do we find our misgivings at fault.
There is, indeed, much to teach, much to interest; many an
outspoken word that we are thankful for against prevalent
vices and follies; many a useful train of thought started;—
and yet we are not content!
The general impression left by the book is depressing and
discouraging. We feel, while reading it, that we are living
in a world of shams, self-delusions, and falsehoods, where
one can hardly avoid wrong doing and wrong thinking in
any matter in which one acts, or in which one entertains or
expresses ideas. There is a little vein of sneering which
1 The writer in the Westiymistei- Review, 1866.
TJie Impressions of Theophrastus Such. 5^7
spoils what is kindly about the thoughts. There is no
irreverence; on the contrary, the best chapter in it is a
protest against the tendency of the day to burlesquing things
noble and sacred. All high thoughts, beliefs, enthusiasms,
are dealt with tenderly,—Christianity among the rest,—as
the salt that tends to keep the world sweet; and a current
of sadness pervades the book that these things are passing
away. Perhaps it is impossible to exaggerate in itself the
sadder side of the truth, and to make out the world more
full of self-delusions and impositions than it is. But what
we miss is any recognition that there is amicUt all this a
purifying leaven, not in transitory beliefs, but in an influence
which cannot die, wliich, if repressed in one shape, will
spring up in another,—if it fail in one generation, will revive
in the next; and wliich, moreover, is a leaven in individual
souls also, prompting them to cast off the shams, the
delusions, the impurities that gather over them, as no part
of their true selves. If it were not for the belief in, and
experience of, this abiding Life, we must despair of ourselves
and of the world. The author, if she has to speak of our
Lord, does so with reverence, feeling sincerely that the belief
in Him and the following of His example, in as far as it has
been followed, is one of the good influences of the world.
But how far is this acknowledgment that He was, and
upheld in His day the right and the true, from the belief
that He is, and is even now the most powerful force of the
forces that move the world! She believes in beliefs, and in
the great good they do to man; but this is far different from
believing in the object of beliefs. In the one case, the good
is conditional on a certain stage of conviction ; in the other,
the good is eternal, because its source is eternal.
As an instance, though in a lower field, of what we mean,
take the passage (p. 51) where a supposed old man is
discussing the influence upon him of the scenery in which
he had been brought up:
' But I check myself. Perhaps the England of my affections is
half visionary—a dream, in which things are connected according to
my lazy, well-fed mood, and not at all by the multitudinous links of
sadder, graver fact, such as belong everywhere to the story of human
labour. Well, well, the illusions that began for us when we were less
acquainted with evil, have not lost their value for us when we
discover them to be illusions. They feed the ideal 'Better,' and in
loving them we strengthen the precious habit of loving something
not visibly, tangibly existent, but a spiritual product of our visible,
tangible selves.'
Here one is obliged to ask how the spiritual product of
5o8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
ourse'vcs can act npon its, as an external force, for good ?
and whether an illusion, in proportion as we discern it to be
such, does not lose its power of feeding the ' Better' in us ?
The setting of the philosophy of this book is disagreeable.
How much rather we would that our old friend had spoken
to us in her own character, than in that of an imaginary old
baclielor, whose account of himself, though confessedly made
\Tnder reservation, does not sound natural even for that!
The reviewer of The Mill on the Floss in the Westminster
Review of 1859 (probably the same friendly critic whom we
have before quoted), remarks on the failure of George Eliot
to assume the masculine character (the fact of her sex having
transpired in the interval between the publication of that work
and of Adam Bede). And yet at that time the assumption
went no further than the taking of a masculine nomde plume.
Here there is an attempt to assume a new personality which
is not only unnecessary, but whenever it comes to the
surface gives an impression of unnaturalness to all that is
said. There is much teaching in the chapter called' Looking
Inward,' but it is evidently aimed at others and not at self;
it is not a confession, but a veiled satirical lecture. It is
quite true that in oneself is the key to other men's experi¬
ences; nevertlieless, if you want to improve others, it is
better to speak out boldly and not to talk about yourself.
In page 7 the pertinent question is asked : ' Is it possible to
describe oneself at once faithfully and fully ?' The old
bachelor himself answers his question in the negative; on
grounds true as far as they extend, viz., that out of regard to
others who are implicated in our lives, there should be
incompleteness; but immediately afterwai'ds the satirical
vein seizes him, and he (or she) describes with somewhat of
a sneer how much of self one actually shows by unconscious
self-betrayal. But this does not compensate in any true
sense for the incompleteness left by honest reticence. It is
a wholly other matter, which should not be imported
into the question at all. We should answer No to
the question on other grounds. It may be granted not
difficult to describe oneself both ' faithfully and fully' as
regards some definite purpose. A man may fully describe
to his young friend the course of his own life so as to enable
the latter to avoid his mistakes ; he may relate the changes
of his own religious beliefs, so as to be instructive to others,
etc. etc., l)i\t at the ahyss of self he must stop. It is only
ill the sight of God that the whole being, with its contradic¬
tions, balancings, upward aims, and actual failures, can, or
The Impressions of ThecplirasUts Siicli. 509
ovrjlit to he, fully laid open. Yoii must stop somewhere, and
ivhere ? It is so impossible to say vjkerc, that you had better
stop at the threshold.
Another feature of the setting, of less importance than
this, but disagreeable, is the return to the fasliion of sham
names expressive of the qualities of the persons described, as
Touchwood, Mixtus, Scintilla, etc., the evil of which is that
you never feel you are dealing with persons, but only witli
personified qualities. Tlie device belongs to a tiresomely
didactic school on the one hand, and on the other to a
vulgarly burlesque one; and in both ways it is quite
unworthy of our great painter of individualities.
Alas! that we must again say it,—the wit has become
decidedly cumbrous. A peculiar e]jigrauimatic style of
remark that was original and delightful in the mouth oi'
' Mrs. Poyser,' has now got to savour almost of a trick—the
particular character of which is the coupling together, with
an air of unconsciousness, of things high and things low.
' One may prefer fresh eggs though laid by a fowl of the
meanest understanding, but why fresh sermons ?' ' She
does not insist on the Trinity, or on the rightfulness or
expediency of church rates.' ' A man may be a sage in
celestial physics, and a poor creature in the purchase of seed
corn,' etc. But while these, if they had not become a trick,
might still startle and amuse, there are other kinds of laboured
wit which could never have done otherwise than weary,
and which are signs of a worn-out vein that fill us with
real sorrow. Again, there are sentences very obscure in
meaning, and there are sentences turgid with big words.
Who could have expected to read such a sentence as this:
' If they drop that separatenesa which is made their reproacli,
they may be in danger of lapsing into cosmopolitan indifference
equivalent to cynicism, and of missing that inward identification with
the nationality immediately around them, which might make some
amends for their inherited privations.'
To read this, and believe it the same hand that wrote
the following thoughtfid and graceful description in Adam
Bcde of the little heroine's face:
' It had a language that transcended her feelings. There are faces
which nature charges witli a meaning and pathos not belonging to the
single human soul that flutters beneath them, but speaking the joys
a,nd sorrows of foregone generations ; eyes that tell of deep love
which doubtless has been, and is, somewhere, but not paired with
these eyes, perhaps paired witli pale eyes that can say iTotliing ; j\ist
as a national language may be instinct with poetry, unfelt by the lips
that use it.'
5 lo The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Space forbids our quoting much from the stores of wit
and wisdom which, in spite of all these deductions, still give
the bciok an infinite interest for the thoughtful reader.
With all her old keenness does the author pounce down
here and there upon a human folly, and bring it, not too
unkindly, into the light, as, for instance, in such a caustic
remark as this:
' When a man is in a rage, and wants to hurt somebody, he can
always regard himself as the civil arm of a spiritual power.'
How fresh yet full of good common sense is this:
'The danger of . . . judging of self by what one observes in
others, if it is carried on with much impartiality and keenness of
discernment, is that it has a laming effect, enfeebling the energies of
indignation and scorn, wliicli are the proper scourge of wrong-doing
and meanness. ... It is undeniable that a too intense conscious¬
ness of one's kinship with all frailties and vices undermines the active
heroism which battles against wrong.'
This is from the paper called ' Talse Testimonials,' in
which are some excellent remarks upon certain forms of
self-delusion, and among them that by which mere in¬
correctness is excused and flattered under the name of
' imagination.' ' It is worth repeating that powerful imagina¬
tion is not false outward vision, but intense inward repre¬
sentation, . . . not the habitual confusion of provable fact
with the fictions of fancy and transient inclination, . . . not
the habitually taking duck ponds for lilied pools,' etc. etc.
But while quoting these wholesome warnings as to what
imagination is not, we must refer our readers to the book
itself to learn Avhat it is, which is somewhat lengthily set
forth.
The essay unsuggestively called ' A Half-breed,' is a very
instructive one. It is a description, written with some
pathos and hardly any sneer, of a man (disagreeably named
' Mixtus ') who, without changing his convictions, has drifted
away from his early beliefs and aspirations through force of
circumstances acting, it may be presumed, on a weak and
divided will. His life is a discord; he has not developed it
according to his own ideal; from being studious, religious,
philanthropic, he has become a commonplace, prosperous,
worldly man, without vice, and retaining enough of his old
self to make himself unmsy. He has married a frivolous
wife, who ' captivated him on the worldly side of his dispo¬
sition,' and whose influence upon him is stronger than he
calculated on. Very keen is the description of him in his
' uncertainty as to his own point of view;' how, ' when
speaking to listeners whom he thinks likely to sympathize
TJie Impressions of T/ieophrastus Snch. 5 ' ^
with the earlier part of his career, he presents himself in all
his various aspects, and feels himself in turn what he has
been, wliat he is, and what others take him to be,—for this
last status is what we must all more or less accept.' Pro¬
bably many of us, whose career has been utterly nulike that
of ' Mixtus,' will feel this more or less come home.
' Debasing the Moral Currency ' is a good and important
chapter, and we could wish its principle echoed in every
form till it has shamed the ' burlesquing spirit,' ' which sees
no reason why it should not appropriate every sacred, heroic,
or pathetic theme which serves to make up the treasure of
human admiration, hope, and love ;'...' faculties on the
strain to find some small hook by which they may attach
the lowest incongruity to the most momentous subject.'
Our author well shows that this relentless mocking is ' a
sign not of endowment but of deficiency,' and that' the art
of spoiling is within reach of the dullest faculty;' and in
this chapter and that called ' Moral Swindlers,' where she
shows that the man of cultivated intellect and ' moral stupi¬
dity ' ' mistakes for an endowment what is really a negation,
viz. a lack of moral sensibility,' she reminds us of the
teaching of James Hinton, and of a line of thought which he
has made peculiarly his own.
It was to have been expected that in the chapter called
' On the Diseases of Small Authorship,' there would be much
teaching adapted to us of the Ladies' Edinhm-gh! but it proves
to be a rather commonplace satire on only one, and that not
a universal, form of disease; whereas in the essay on ' The
Too Eeady Writer' there are warnings which every young
or inexperienced writer cannot too much lay to heart. With
one passage from this paper we will conclude. The author
imagines ' Pepin' in his youth really full of thought, feeling,
ability, and impulse ; but' he early gained a hearing, or at least
a place, in print, and was thus encouraged in acquiring a fixed
habit of writing.' . . . ' It is not enough for him to keep up
the ingenuous self-reliance of his youth ; he finds himself
imder the obligation to be skilled in various methods of
seeming to know. He is gradually condemned to have no
genuine impressions, no direct consciousness of enjoyment or
the reverse from the quality of what is before him ; his per¬
ceptions are constantly arranging themselves in forms suit¬
able to a printed judgment. In this way he is irrevocably
losing the faculty of accurate mental vision. We ca^mot
command veracity at vjill. The penalty of untrtith is
untruth.' G.
512 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazi)ie.
flnibersitu (Stiucation for SHomcn in ^cotlanli.
It is not for the first time in these pages that the attention
of our readers has been called to this subject, generally in
connection with some specially interesting feature or crisis
of the work in one or other of our Associations for this
purpose in Scotland. As we stand at present, however, in
view of the opening of a new winter session, with the usual
amount of hopes and fears, chances and expectations,
accompanying the career of each student, a general glance
at what is being done throughout Scotland in the matter of
Higher Education for women, with a few details of the work
in each of our University towns, may not be wholly unin¬
teresting, even though we may have to trench upon ground
already better occupied by abler writers.
In the carrying out of every important scheme, each year
as it passes brings necessary changes, whether owing to the
rectification of mistakes, whicli is the result of experience,
or to those increasing needs of a gradual development which
afford the surest symptoms of a healthy and vigorous life.
In such a matter as education, each generation must develope
new requirements, not provided for by former arrangements,
so that there is continual advance ; and as supply in one
quarter generally awakens fresh demand in another, we see
continually movements originating in one centre, spreading
themselves in ever-widening circles on all sides. Thus fresh
Associations for Female Education are gradually formed in
new places, bringing benefits within easy reach of many who,
with limited time and means, are unable to travel far in
search of them.
It is not our intention at present to enter fully upon the
general question (involving so many others) of the advis-
ableness of University Education for women. We must
rather ask permission to consider the cause as won. No one
would support an institution unless they approved of its
object; but we shall confine ourselves mainly to a description
of what is being done at present, without attempting to meet
objections, or to enter upon the inquiry of how much more
may or can be done, whether the present limits will ever be
overpassed—whether it would be advisable to pass them—
what are to be the practical results to the country at large—
these and many other cognate questions, interesting as they
are, would lead us upon more or less hotly-contested
ground, and  require, to  do   them justice,  more  than  our
University Education for Women in Scotland.     513
present space. Before proceeding to details, the very
heading of this paper may need explanation. Some even
of those who are acquainted with the work of Girton College,
Hitchin, Newnham Hall, etc., may be ignorant to what
extent Scotchwomen can avail themselves of University
Education. To some the very words are misleading, as
implying too much; others think that they convey a promise
beyond what the reality fulfils. This led to an animated
and somewhat amusing discussion in the Council of the
Edinburgh Association, upon the change of name during the
present year.' The extreme advocates of women's rights
seemed to think that until universities had opened their doors
to both sexes alike, the term was inappropriate as the designa¬
tion of the society. We are inclined to think this was well
answered by those who held that the very word' Association'
solved the difficulty. Should the day ever arrive when
women may take their place in class-rooms alongside of men,
the work of educational associations will be at end, and they
W'ill die a natural death. Until this is so, and we offer no
opinion as to its desirableness, the present term should
satisfy both the moderate and extreme partisans.
But there are, of course, many others, men and women,
the advocates of so-called ' good old ways,' who ask, What
need of female university education at all ? Being our¬
selves strongly conservative in the matter of respect for
the wisdom of our forefathers, and unwilling to make any
change until it is proved to be a change for the better, we
yet think that old-fashioned folks need to be reminded of a
fact too easily lost sight of, viz. that every good old way
was once new in its day and generation, and doubtless
provoked hostility on that score. For many centuries it
was deemed superfluous to educate any class except ecclesi¬
astics, and down even to modern times the lower orders
were excluded, for various causes,'from any share in the
benefit. Such restrictions, of course, would be considered the
extreme of foUy and injustice now. North of the Tweed,
the principle was early conceded that the best education
should be free as air and sunlight to aU alike. The question
therefore becomes,—What, for all classes, really is the best ?
And the answer seems obvious: that which best trains for
their respective position and duty in life. These of course
must shift and vary from time to time. Woman's place and
work at home and in society are continually undergoing some
modification; therefore her training will probably do the
^ Vide Calendar of the Association, back of title-page.
No. 59.—November 1879. 2 K
514 1"^^^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
same. A good education in our grandmothers' days—and
some of our grandmothers were remarkably well-educated
women—might yet be a very incomplete one now, and even
in the opinion of those sticklers for good old days, who think
that a girl needs nothing further than the training of a good
school, they would wish this school to be somewhat in advance
of good Mrs. Goddard's of happy memory : ' where a reason¬
able quantity of accomplishments was sold at a reasonable
price, and where girls might be sent to be out of the way,
and scramble themselves into a little education, without any
danger of coming back prodigies.' Many other things are
needed besides book-learning in a good education; but where
book-learning is needed at all, there seems no reason why it
should not be of the very best, and therefore these Educa¬
tional Associations were called into existence for the purpose
of enabling women to avail themselves of the high-class
training of a University. The original promoters have been
women whose own high culture enabled them to appreciate
the benefits they sought to extend to others. Had they not
first moved in the matter, it seems probable that no steps
would have been taken at all; but as soon as they began to
ask for university education, measures were taken to give it
them as far as i^ossible; and in speaking of our Scottish
Universities, we can only express, in terms of grateful respect,
our sense of the kind and cordial support given by the
Professors, without whose assistance the plan must have
fallen to the ground. Some, of course, may have afforded
more, some less, of countenance and assistance; and of those
who approve, some may have been able to do so more
thoroughly than others ; but nowhere has this kind help been
wholly wanting, at the cost, be it remembered, of much
valuable time and trouble, imposing, in fact, double labour
on many of our hardest-worked Professors. Let those who
compare Scottish Avith English systems, recollect how, in carry¬
ing on works which require large numbers for their support,
the population of the sister kingdom supplies students by
hundreds where we can only have them by units and tens;
and how much more is available of the requisite machinery
for teaching at Oxford or Cambridge, where the large
numbers of resident Professors have, in many cases, abundant
leisure time. And with these facts in mind, far from
being surprised or discontented at their doing too little,
we are inclined to wonder at our Scottish Professors under¬
taking so much, in addition to their ordinary professorial
labours.
University Education for Women in Scotland.     515
Of our four University towns, Edinburgh was first in the
field, her Association for the University Education of Women
having been founded in   1867.    This  is as  it  should  be,
Edinburgh being not only our metropolis, but the acknow¬
ledged centre of polite literature and social importance in
Scotland.    The principle of the Association being to provide
for  women ' means of the higher education  as  nearly as
possible equivalent to that provided for men by the Scottish
Universities,' this has necessitated during the twelve years
of its existence a close adherence to the laws and require¬
ments of the University.   The teaching of each subject must
be  by its Professor, or  by a  Lecturer whose teaching  is
recognised  by him as   qualifying for  a university degree.
The curriculum of the Ladies  is  thus  kept to the  level
of the University, and the certificates, denoting the same
standard of excellence, are therefore as valuable as a degree
is  to a  graduate.     The subjects taught are ranged  under
three heads: (1) Language and Literature, (2) Science, (3)
Philosophy.    Ladies may study under tlie first head, English
Literature, Latin, Greek, and Biblical Criticism; under the
second.     Mathematics,    Natural    Philosophy,    Chemistry,
Physiology, Botany, Geology, Zoology; and under the third,
Logic and Mental Philosophy, ]\Ioral Philosophy, Political
Economy, and Education.    As far as possible, each group is
represented in each session, one or other of its subjects being
taught; and to ensure thoroughness, no course can consist of
fewer than forty lectures.    Any student, after doing a certain
amount of satisfactory work in any thre.e, classes,—and it is
advisable to select them out of two at least of the groups,—
may present herself as a candidate for the University Arts-
Certificate (provided she has passed the Local Examinations
previously), and after receiving either the Pass or Honour
Certificate in Arts, she may come up on future occasions for
examination in additional subjects, each of which will be
added to the value of her Arts-Certificate, till she has passed
in seven subjects, when she will be entitled to the full
Diploma of the Association.
It is not without incurring nmch criticism and even
censure, that the Council of the Edinburgh Association have
thus restricted themselves to the curriculum of the University.
The opposite system of admitting extra-mural subjects and
lecturers, and short courses, has had able advocates even
among the members; who sometimes think and say that
much might be gained by a wider range and the addition of
lighter subjects; and that this system is found to answer in
5i6 The Ladiei Edinburgh Magazine.
other places. But the Association adheres nevertheless to
its principle of carrying the approval of the Senatus along
with all its arrangements, and we may refer those who
differ, to the advice given in the Calendar (p. 28) to those
who are making their selection among the classes offered.
As the Calendar is within reach of all,^ we need not repeat
the exact words, but will only remark that as the object of
giving this academic training is to secure for women a more
solid course of study than is usually within their reach, it
seems reasonable to limit the work to these higher studies
for the time. Women are only too apt to be desultory, they
rather need to be encouraged to bestow all their time, strength,
and attention on the subjects required by the University,
than to be tempted to dissipate their energies on a variety
of lighter subjects; the Association for University Education
cannot adhere too closely to the university requirements.
Among many difficulties, one has been the smallness of
some of the most important classes. Greek has numbered
as few as eight students, Mathematics seven, and Latin has
once fallen to five. Yet, in order to keep to the level of
what is required in other universities, it cannot be too
strongly impressed on students, that collegiate training, to
be of much value, must mainly consist of classics and
mathematics, with their accompanying brain-work. We
believe that defective early training partly causes the
difficulty, and hope that with the spread of the Local
Examinations this defect may gradually disappear.
The general committee of the Association consists of all
subscribers to its funds, whether ladies or gentlemen, and all
of the Professors who teach or have taught in its classes. This
General Committee elects a Council, consisting of these same
Professors, and twenty-one other members. This Council
again elects an Executive Committee of nine, five ladies and
four gentlemen, three of whom must be Professors. Erom
the Executive are chosen a President, two Vice-Presidents, one
of whom must be a lady, the other a Professor—the Secretary
and Treasurer. None of these elections are for more than
three years. This winter's session opens pleasantly for the
Edinburgh students, as they now take possession of their
new and comfortable premises in 14 Shandwick Place, in
exchange for the close and crowded rooms in 117 George
Street, where they have worked for twelve years under many
inconveniences.    For the first time they have a pretty and
^ Calendar of the Edinburgh Association for the  University Education
of Women.    Price Is.    David Douglas, 9 South Castle Street.
University Education for Women in Scotland.     517
cheerful library, with various other advantages, which ought
to be a stimulus to their efforts.^
Next in point of time is St. Andrews. In 1868 a small
knot of ladies, interested in the newly-opened Hitchin
College, and desiring to start some such work in St. Andrews,
formed themselves into a committee and inaugurated the
' St. Andrews Ladies' Association for the Promotion of the
Education of Women.' They connected themselves specially
with the central committee for the proposed College for Women
in London, and are besides linked in a manner with Girton.
The excellent Girls' School at St. Andrews is chiefly conducted
by certificated students of Girton, and from their training we
may presume the higher classes may expect in time numbers
of recruits, prepared to profit by the University teaching.
Tlie St. Andrews plan is much like that of Edinburgh.
Courses of lectures have been given each year (with only
one exception) by one or more of the Professors, with
alternation and grouping of subjects as far as possible.
Literature, English and classic. Chemistry, Physiology,
Physical Geography, with Biblical Criticism, and one or two
departments of science, have thus been taught; this, of
course, cannot be regarded as a complete curriculum. We
cannot but think it a mistake that lectures have twice been
given outside of the Association; we hope that the Executive
Committee may be able, by broadening their own basis and
extending their limits, to embrace all that is needed for
their students.
The University of St. Andrews grants a Higher Certificate
to women, with Pass and Honour standard. The subjects
are those taught in the University, with History and French,
German and Italian, in addition. Candidates who pass in
four subjects, or in one with Honours and two besides,—a
language being indispensable in both cases,—receive the title
of L.A. (Literate in Arts). The work may be spread over
consecutive years, and the preparation need not be made at
St. Andrews; it is therefore of great value to students at a
distance. The Edinburgh certificate is only available for
students in its own classes. We hope that St. Andrews will
make the Local Certificate a sine, qua non to candidates for
the L.A., as it then becomes a stimulus to study all over the
country. If taken with Honours, it represents much the same
standard as the certificate of Edinburgh.
We now turn to Glasgow, whose Association for the Higher
Education of Women has been in existence for more than
1 For particulars, vide July number of this Magazine.
5l8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
three years, its third session commencing this month. We
cannot do better than give an extract from copious notes,
kindly supplied by the Secretary, upon the constitution, and
will then speak of the work done by the Association:
' All subscribers of 10s. a year are members of the Associa¬
tion for that year. At the annual meeting they elect the General
Committee of sixty members. The General Committee meet twice a
year,—they elect the Acting Committee, which consists of two Vice-
Presidents (Princess Louise being President), two Treasurers, three
Secretaries (two for the general work of the Association, and one
who takes the entire management of the Corresponding Classes), and
eight other members—all ladies. There are besides two gentlemen,
as Honorary Secretary and Honorary Treasurer, who are consulted
on business emergencies, and appear at the annual public meeting.
' The Acting Committee makes all the arrangements for lectures,
classes, etc. Several University Professors who are interested in the
Association are always informally consulted on the University side of
the work.'
It will be seen from this statement that there is no con¬
nection of the Professors ex ojfficio with the Association.
As in Edinburgh, the subjects are gathered mainly into
three groups : (1) Philosophy and History, including
Philosophy of Keligion, Logic, Metaphysics, History of
Philosophy, Ancient History, Modern History, English
History; (2) Literature, including English, French, German,
Greek, and Roman Literatures (not the classical languages,
but it is hoped to take up these in time); (3) Science,
including JMatliematics, Astronomy, Physiology, Zoology,
Geology, Physical Geography, Botany, Chemistry, Natural
Philosophy. Besides these, there may be lectures on
Perspective, Music, or any subject approved by the Associa¬
tion. The Lecturers may be Professors or their assistants, or
may be any one recommended by a Professor, and having
a university degree. The courses may be of any length, and
vary from twelve to forty lectures.
Besides these courses, there is a series of Tutorial Classes,
of which the subjects may be changed as occasion requires.
They are taught by first-class masters, and correspond closely
with the S. George's Hall Classes in Edinburgh. They
in fact help girls on leaving school to fit themselves for the
higher teaching and subjects of the University. In Edinburgh
this assistance is given outside of the Association, in Glasgow
inside of it, as a part of the work. The subjects have
hitherto been Latin, Mathematics, English Literature, Theory
of Music, and Domestic Economy; and girls may prepare
in them for the Local Examinations, of which we shall speak
further on.    The Theory of Music Classes prepare for the
University Education for Wometi in Scotland.     519
examinations of the Society of Arts, held yearly in Glasgow
in connection with the Association.
Any Professor who lectures, does so in his University class¬
room ; other lectures and the tutorial classes are held in the
rooms of the Association, St. Andrew's Halls, Berkeley Street.
There they have a class-room and reading-room, the latter
of which contains the library; books required on the subjects
taught in lectures or classes, partly gifts, partly bought with
a grant from the funds. Ordinary business is transacted in
this room, and the Lady Superintendent is there every day.
In Glasgow, as in Edinburgh, the University certificate is
now offered to women, who need not, as in Edinburgh, be
students of the Association. The first examination will be
held in May 1880 for candidates who have passed the Local
Examinations in Common Subjects. The subjects are, as
usual, in three groups, and three at least, from three different
groups, must be taken of twenty-one subjects. On passing,
the candidate will at once receive the University Higher
Certificate, and may increase its value by adding other sub¬
jects from time to time.
We must now glance at the work of Aberdeen, begun
about the same time as that of Glasgow, i.e. June 1877. We
quote from the notes supplied by a member:—
' The primary object of the Association was carried out by the
delivery, during the winter of 1877-8, of three courses of lectures,—
one on Latin Literature by Professor Black, one on English Litera¬
ture by Rev. J. Danson, and one on Astronomy by Professor Fuller.
In 1878-9 the courses were Greek Literature by Professor Geddes,
English by Mr. Danson, and Chemistry by Professor Brazier. In
the coming session the Association announces Greek Literatvire
(continued), French Literature by M. de Faye, and Physiology and
the Laws of Health by Professor Struthers. The numbers attending
these classes have not been great; in the first year 58 in English,
24 in Latin Literature, and 28 in Astronomy. Last year the numbers
were much the same, but more equally distributed. During the first
session the classes were all held in a room in the Music Hall build¬
ings, rented and fitted for the purpose ; last year, after considerable
opposition, it was arranged that the Science Class should be taught
in the Professor's University Class-Room, where alone, of course, the
necessary facilities could be had for the thorough teaching of a
demonstrative subject. The Physiology Class will, during the coming
session, be conducted by Professor Struthers in his own room, and it
is probable that in future there will be no opposition as to the
propriety of making use of the opportunities which individual Pro¬
fessors and the Senate of the University are willing to put within
reach of the Association. It must not be inferred, however, that
there is as yet any intention on the part of the University authorities
of conceding to women University Education in any complete or
extended sense. There is in truth no strong or general feeling in
Aberdeen as to its necessity.    The Ladies' Association resulted mainly
S20 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
from the efforts of an earnest minority, and has not been siipported
hitherto with very marked enthusiasm by that section of the commu¬
nity on whom its development must ultimately depend.'
A beginning is always satisfactory, as it then rests mainly
with the students to prove themselves worthy of further
encouragement. We hope that time and steady perseverance
will effect all that is wanted. As yet there can be no higher
certificate in Aberdeen for students, but the St. Andrews L.A.
is of course open to them.
This account would hardly be complete without a few
words on the Local Examinations. We hope in time to see
these considered as the ordinary test applied to secondary
education of girls all over the country; much has been said
and written in support of this view. At present we are
only concerned with their bearing on the students in
University or higher academic classes. Edinburgh first dis¬
covered this connection, seeing how often students in the
Association classes were hindered by lack of preliminary
training. The establishment in 1876 of what are known as
the S. George's Hall Preparatory Classes for Local Examina¬
tions was mainly owing to the praiseworthy efforts of a
distinguished member and student of the Association. The
ball once set rolling, the work increased rapidly; and when
the University passed the important resolution of making
the Local a necessary preliminary of the higher or University
certificate, a further stimulus was given. Correspondence
classes attracted at first students all over Scotland ; though
Glasgow, awaking to the importance of the work, wisely and
rightly undertook its own students after the first year. In
Edinburgh, therefore, the Local Certificate is a lower step of
the ladder, to be passed before entering the higher classes.
In Glasgow its preparation is an integral part of the Associa¬
tion work. There is now little or no difference between the
Local Examinations of St. Andrews and those of Edinburgh;
the certificates are pretty much the same. In all three
places the attainment of this certificate should be to girls a
first step to the work which will fit them for a University
certificate. This basis of the work is being well and firmly
laid in Aberdeen. In 1877 it was difficult to gather can¬
didates enough for a centre in connection with Edinburgh ;'
in the following year forty-eight, and last June ninety-one,
came forward. We hope that this is a beginning at the
right end, and that a supply will gradually arise of students
capable of aspiring to a higher certificate, which at present
' Six being the requisite number for a centre.
University Education for Women in Scotland.     5 2 ^
would be out of the reach of most of them. Even should
their own College be slow in meeting their wishes, the L.A.
of St. Andrews and the Glasgow Higher Certificate are open
to all; and for this latter candidates can be prepared by cor¬
respondence, a great advantage to distant students. Of course
it is only between Edinburgh and Glasgow, from their size and
importance, that any fair comparison can be instituted. It is
with no invidious intention that we point to differences in their
respective systems. Both have their admirers and adherents,
both their special advantages. If Glasgow is distinguished
by comprehensiveness and elasticity, enabling it to meet a
larger circle of requirements, Edinburgh decidedly is so by
coming nearer to university standards as to quantity and
quality of work. It is well observed that the Edinburgh
certificate is pretty much what that of Girton is to England,
while the Glasgow resembles the Cambridge Women's
certificate, taking in Newnham Hall preparation. One very
attractive feature in Glasgow is the preparation given for a
certificate in Music from the Society of Arts. We ourselves
think it an element not to be overlooked in women's
education, but as a part of the University curriculum it is
impossible to admit it among the Association Classes in
Edinburgh. There is, however, provision made by the S.
George's Hall Committee for a most attractive Advanced
Class in Harmony and the Theory of Music (in addition to the
more elementary one for the Local Examination) to be opened
on Saturday, November 8th, under Mr. W. Hately. This is
intended in some degree to meet the want, and we shall
hope to hear of its decided success.
On the subject of Bursaries much might be said, but our
space is limited. Again there is an observable difference of
idea in Edinburgh and Glasgow. The number is very much
greater in Glasgow, but the value, as a rule, is smaller,
ranging from £5 to £10. In Edinburgh they are few in
number, but run as high as £50, £30 for two years, £20,
£15 for two years, etc., being intended to assist those who
study for the Certificate, which entails a residence in
Edinburgh. They answer to the scholarships which help a
lad to pass from school to college. We hope never to see
the regulations relaxed which wisely restrict them at present
to those who really aspire to higher academic honours.
Otherwise we think there is a chance of the system being
open to great abuse, were learning to be regarded as a matter
of mere prize-taking and money value.
We must bring this short sketch to a close.    We may
522 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
perhaps have some future opportunity of touching upon the
general question of female education, and the efforts made
to give definiteness to women's pursuits; taking into account
the reasonable objections made on the score of health, and
of the added publicity given to the studies at an early stage
of womanhood. We hope the numbers are yearly increasing
of those who, thoroughly well educated themselves, will not
only try to extend the same advantages to others, but will
consider themselves bound to afford to objectors practical
evidence of how much happier and better a woman may be
in any walk of life for training which, far from feeding
self-conceit, deepens humility, enlarges judgment, refines
taste; and that in securing for herself these benefits, no
woman need lessen in the smallest degree the virtues or
attractions which the words of inspiration and the wisdom
of past generations have concurred in marking as specially
her own. L. D.
What are the stars ?    The ancients saw
The heavens at night, and heard with awe
The ' music' of the sky ;
And then their fancy framed of stars
The forms of heroes slain in wars,
Translated thus on high.
What are the stars ? the sages ask,
Unwearied with their midnight task,
Of counting systems bright;
And science answers, ' Worlds unknown,
Moving in orbits of their own,
And sending forth their light.'
What are the stars ?    The poets cry,
' Let Fancy speak and testify'
(Thus to the Muse appealing);
' Spangles of gold and silver pale.
Scattered upon Night's gauzy veil,
Its misty folds revealing!'
What are the stars ?    In accents clear
A child's voice falls upon the ear:
' God put them overhead,
That we might see the golden floor,
Which shines through them for evermore,
Whereon the saints will tread.' H. M. L.
Oiir Library Table. 523
©ur ILlljrarjj Cable.
The Life of Charles James Mathews : chiefly Autobiographical.
Edited by Charles Dickens.    2 Vols.    London : Macmillan.  1870.
Any one who takes up the Life of this well-known comedian with
the expectation of knowing before he lays it down a great deal of
theatrical gossip, the ins and outs of an actor's life, will find himself
sadly disappointed. And in more ways than one ; for not only is
Mathews' acting life skimmed over as lightly as possible,—three-
quarters of the book being given up to his young days, before he
made the stage his profession,—but his theatrical experiences were
for a long time so sad, such a string of debts and difficulties, anxieties,
even imprisonment, that the story of them leaves quite a melancholy
impression on one's mind. It is not very unnatural that the Charles
Mathews the public knew, should not have been the one he himself
cared to realize and remember. When he was growing old, and
employed the leisure hours of a popular actor in writing his own life,
and collecting those ' materials for the book ' which have been made
use of to supplement and fill it out, one does not wonder much that
he should have lingered over the happy young days of playing at
architecture, of sketching and idling in Italj', his most serious trouble
a quarrel with Count d'Orsay, a boy of twenty like himself. Few
young men have enjoyed themselves so much, or in such an amiable
and lively, if useless way. He was, of course, brought up in a quite
theatrical atmosphere, and petted frf)m his birth by all sorts of clever
and amusing people. He was a born mimic, a droll, affectionate
child. It is pleasant all through the book to trace his love for his
father and mother, and he seems to have been always sure of their
sympathy and generosity, even when, on one unfortunate occasion,
he ' put his name to a bill,' and was well scolded in consequence.
His Italian experiences began in 1823, when Lord Blessington,
who had taken a fancy to the young architect, carried him off to
Naples to study there, and to make plans for his castle (in the air) at
Mountjoy Forest. This visit was a time of perfect enjoyment,—sing¬
ing, acting, boating, walking, dancing the tarantella with picturesque
and friendly peasants, sketching temples and palaces, watching fire-flies
in the moonlight. No wonder that, with the best intentions, Charles
found it difficult to settle down to work in England afterwards.
One has an amusing glimpse of the doings of a mining company
in the history of his adventures in Wales, as architect at Coed Talwn,
under the auspices of Messrs. John Wilks, Gray, Verbeke, etc. After
his connection with this company came to an end, he worked for
twelve months in Nash's office, an architect whose ' boast might have
been that he found London brick, and left it stucco.' This work was
much too irksome for a lively young fellow like Charles, and having
discovered that a professional tour in Italy was the one thing necessary,
he started off in 1827 with his friend d'Egville,
' Blest in the thought that, all the slaving past,
I've reached the long-sought liberty at last.'
All the early part of this tour was a succession of charming adventures
in glorious places—Geneva, Milan, a villa on the Lake of Como,
Venice,—where they ' took root,' and stayed for a year,—Florence,
where their time was spent in ' a constant whirl of pleasure.' Here,
first at Lord Normanby's, and afterwards at Lord Burghersh's,
Mathewa took part in the amateur theatricals which were just then
524 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the rage, and played some of the parts which in later days made him
famous. These three delightful years were followed by a long and
severe illness, in the middle of which he was with difficulty brought
home to England. After a few more years of desultory work and
amusement, ' architecture, painting, writing for the stage, travelling,
and amateur acting,' with an autumn visit to the Duke and Duchess
of Bedford in the Highlands, living in turf huts, riding shaggy ponies,
shooting, dancing, and wading rivers,—with a district surveyorship,
the last and most distasteful attempt at a serious occupation,—the
turning-point was reached, and after his father's death in 1835,
Mathews began his theatrical career as manager of the Adelphi. He
soon, however, retired from this, and made his first public appearance
on the boards of the Olympic, then under the management of Madame
Vestris, and already the home of that light comedy in which his
special talent lay. The heading of this chapter of his autobiography
is sad and significant,—' Difficulties, 1835-1858.' These twenty-three
years include his married life with Madame Vestris, from 1838 to
1856, and the old story of debts upon debts, of hopes raised high by
a successful season only to fall more heavily, of money borrowed at
CO per cent, to pay G84 people every Saturday; of grasping Jews,
of kind-hearted sheriffs' officers, of the bankruptcy court, and then of
beginning to roll tlie stone up the hill again. At last came the climax
of imprisonment in Lancaster Castle, the description of which is cer¬
tainly calculated to give one a horror of debt, and then, immediately
after his liberatiori, his wife's death; and there the autobiography ends.
In four more chapters, Mr. Charles Dickens gives a sketch of the
last twenty years of Mathews' life, his second marriage, and his
prosperity as a popular actor. Certainly never did fortune spend her
spite on a more elastic nature. He was the very incarnation of the
word 'versatile.' His troubles passed away from him and were
forgotten. ' Except,' says his biographer, ' for the unflagging vivacity,
the irrepressible energy, and the undaunted perseverance, which faced
ill or good fortune with the same cheerfulness, there was little in the
Mathews of later years to recall the straggling manager of the Lyceum,
the hero of countless anecdotes of debts and duns and desperate
expedients.'
He was a favourite everywhere, in London, in Paris, in America,
in Australia. A perfect knowledge of French was one of his many
accomplishments, and he often acted in that language. There are
few playgoers who have not seen Charles Mathews in some of his
well-known parts. They will remember him as a most agreeable
actor, and to them this book will be especially interesting, showing
as it does how from boyhood to old age their favourite was always the
same, 'vivacious and genial.' Not, perhaps, a very strong-minded
man, but the circumstances of his life were not at any time favourable
to greatness. A true artist, who would never condescend to please
the public by exaggeration, his one aim being, as he said, ' to hold
the mirror up to nature.' It would be a good thing for the English
stage in these days if it possessed more actors like Charles Mathews.
A Nook in the Apennines, or a Summer beneath the Chestnuts.
By Leader Scott.    London : C. Kegan Paul & Co.
This  is  a  delightful-sounding  title,   full  of   lovely suggestions,
reminding one of the poet's preference for a
' castle, precipioe-encurled
In a gash of the wind-grieved Apeiinine.'
Question Series. 525
And albeit the ' nook' is only a humble villa, we have an idea that if
less romantic, our friends were more comfortable than they would
have been in a castle. An English family, overpowered by the heat
of Florence, go in the middle of June to look for shade and coolness,
and find it in this lovely retreat, from whence is dated this pretty
little volume. Its very frontispiece, the tiny town of Lucchio, makes
one's mouth water, perched up among the dizzy precipices like a
collection of swallows' nests. The party seem to have numbered several
amateur artists, and from their drawings we have the illustrations.
Their accounts of this villeggiatitra, the mountain-tops, the streams
and cascades, the flowery and ferny chestnut woods, the sunsets and
moonrises, form extremely pleasant reading, as also the episodes of
peasant life and customs, and the links with mediaeval Italian
history, and even with the long-past Etruscan age, of which we can
well believe the traces exist among a people so isolated and with¬
drawn from contact with modern civilization. To a group of
observers so capable of entering into such historical details, the
comparison of the customs around them with those discoverable by
the study of antique gems, must have been as interesting as the
account is to us. The following quotation we give as ofTering to
our minds a satisfactory solution of the problem that engages so many
of us, viz. the apparent impossibility of improving and cultivating
the taste for Art in our own country. Speaking of the peasantry of
these remote fastnesses and mountain valleys, the writer asks :
' From whence comes this love of the beautiful and of music in them, and
this suavity of manner that makes the poorest peasant speak to his superiors
with as much freedom and polish as a marquis, but without a thought of self-
assertion? Compare it with the defiant boorishness of English labourers, and
say how it is to be explained. It must be, as I have before said, because the
Italian is an older civilization, which has grown inrooted among the people,
while the English is a new one, and as yet has not leavened all classes of
society. Another reason may be the comparative freedom of the Italian
contadini. They are not like the English, mere hirelings, at so much a day
under a master, but they work their podere themselves, sometimes under a
resident landowner, sometimes alone, and instead of mere wages, they take half
the produce of the land. I suppose with this system, agi-iculture as a science is
not brought to any high stage of perfection, but the self-respect and well-being
of the working-man is a great social good.'
If this be so. Art culture seems nearly hopeless among ourselves.
However that may be, we cordially recommend this pretty and
thoughtful book,
 0 
Question Series.
XI. Give from Shakspere three allusions to the Trojan war, and
show how they are appropriate in each instance.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach Qu. C, care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
later than 5th December. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the year.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO SEPTEMBER SERIES.
Best, Eromart ; second. Thorough, very good;  third, Stella,
good.    Makiana good, but somewhat vague.
526 TJie Ladies' EdinburgJi AIaga::ine.
Define what is meant by the Pre-Raffaelite School in Modern ArL
Give three examples of their way of treating a subject, and name any
great pictures you please in this school.
So many differing views are held on this subject, that no one can
hope to do more than give an individual opinion about it.
We must look for the origin of Pre-Raffaelitism in the infancy
of art. In the middle ages Painting was chiefly preserved by illumina¬
tions, or miniatures. The small space allowed for these necessitated
a minuteness and a crowding of incident, which could only be
accomplished by the use of body-colour, and to which it readily lent
itself. It was, therefore, an era in Painting when the system of
leaving lights, not laying them on, was invented by a Bolognese
painter. This induced a larger style, and was not easily susceptible
of the same kind of minuteness of finish. The first great master of
this new epoch was Cimabue. He saw the advantage of larger pictures,
but yet his idea was but a magnified miniature. Giotto followed,
making still further advances, but individualization still prevailed
over generalization. This is the essential feature of Pre-Raffaelitism,
as it must ever be of the early stages of Art. Arts grow like in¬
dividuals, and do not at once burst into maturity. With Eaflaelle
came the maturity of Painting, when she attained to her highest
perfection in ideal or artistic accuracy.
At the present time there is a return to the minuteness of the
Pre-Rafiaelite epoch. In the last century Art had sunk very low,
and was almost neglected. Then a scliool of daubers came in, without
accuracy of drawing or of finish. As schools of design, prizes and
exhibitions, increased, the spread of art knowledge, a natural revulsion
arose against this carelessness, which resulted in the most elaborate
minuteness of attention to every detail. To this style Mr. Ruskin
has given the name of Modern Pre-Raflfaelitism. It is supposed to
be truth to nature ; but it has resolved itself into truth to a certain
conventional style, an adaptation of that used by the early Pre-
Rafi'aelites. It gives every part of the picture the same force and
distinctness. It may be objected that Nature does so; but we must
remember that the eye sees only what lies exactly before it, although
at the same time conscious of surrounding objects. Art must imitate
this fact, by subordinating all objects in a picture to a leading idea,
which is very difiicidt on account of the small surface, so easily
grasped by the eye.
Painters who are not themselves of the Pre-Raff'aelite School, have
yet led the way to it, by bestowing equal finish in multiplied details
on their canvas, a defect which is more easily copied than their
excellences. We shall give, as instance of this tendency, ' The
Railway Station,' by Frith ; ' The Light of the World,' by H. Hunt;
and ' Chill October,' by Millais. In these pictures all the details are
equally brought forward. There are no depths into which we may
penetrate for ourselves and find out or give them life and meaning.
'' The true master we behold
In what his art leaves—just untold.'
The Modern Pre-Raffaelite leaves nothing untold, he does not
believe in others' power of seeing. He only fears that they will not
perceive his intentions, and treats the world as if Art were still in her
infancy. Ekomart.
Stray Notes. 5 27
Strag j^otcs.
Edinburgh Univeesity Local Examinations.—The report of
these, as held last June, is now published. It is satisfactory to
find that 8(34 candidates came up for examination, this being an
increase of 211 on the numbers last year. Of these, 335 were ex¬
amined in Preliminary Subjects only. We are glad to see this, as it
shows how many of the candidates are doing their work gradually,
only attempting the Preliminary Subjects at first, and reserving the
Special Subjects, Ordinary, and Honour, for succeeding years. We
have always urged that, except in cases where the elementary educa¬
tion has been exceptionally good, candidates should take their
certificate gradually by three stages, and this it would seem is being
done by a large number of students. The standard necessary for a
prize was unexpectedly raised last year. Instead of 70 per cent, of
marks in two subjects, as was formerly requisite, 75 per cent, are
now required in each of two or more suljjects. This may account for
the number of prizes being smaller in proportion to the number of
candidates than was formerly the case. The actual number of prizes
awarded was, however, 96. Of these, 20 were gained by S. George's
Hall students, 17 by those prepared by private study, 12 by the
Edinburgh Ladies' College, 10 by G. Watson's College for Ladies, tlie
remaining 37 by students of 19 other institutions. The subjects
which best satisfied the examiners are Honour English—the answers
being reported as ' eminently satisfactory ;' Honour Biblical know¬
ledge—the papers being ' of great excellence ;' and Greek. On the
C)ther hand, the Mathematics are said to be ' very disappointing,' with
' a very general want of accuracy.' The Board calls attention to the
fact that the Universities of Glasgow, St. Andrews, and Aberdeen,
have now all instituted a system of Local Examinations, so we have
good reason to hope that added stimulus has been given to secondary
education both of boys and girls throughout the country. The
certificates hitherto known as Ordinary and Honour will henceforth
be termed Junior and Senior. We are glad of the change, as it may
excite in students the desire for a higher certificate. Hitherto tlie
term ' Honour,'applied to the Local certificate, lias served to mislead
many, especially women, into thinking they had gained some high-
class distinction, whereas they had merely taken the preliminary
step towards gaining the Arts-Certificate granted by the Edinburgh
University to women who have studied in the Association for the
University Education of Women, or the certificate oflered by the
Universities of St. Andrews and Glasgow.
Hennie kindly answers J. H. D.'s question in our last number :—
' The Incubator I used successfully last winter consisted of a wooden
box, 25 in. square by 14 in. deep. Enclosed in it was a zinc tank, two
inches smaller each way, the space between the two being tightly
packed with bran, the crevices well stopped up with putty, and
engineer's felt or thick baize nailed on the outside. There is a small
piece of metal piping conducting the water from the tank through the
outside wooden box, which may be finished off with a small tap or a
simple cork. The well in the middle of the tank is 6 in. square and
12 in. deep, and as many eggs may be placed in it as will lie at the
bottom,—about 24; they should be placed on bran, also some little
cup to contain a wet piece of sponge to ensure evaporation. There
is also a piece of metal 5-in. piping which conducts air from the
bottom of the wooden box, passing through the tank into the well.
528 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
terminating two inches from the glass top. The eggs should be aired
daily for a quarter of an hour, and turned. I kept the Incubator in
a bed-room which only had a fire in it during the evening, but the
warmer it is kept the longer the water keeps hot. A greenhouse is
the best. A rug should be thrown over all. The Artificial Mother is
on the same principle as the Incubator, on three sides, whilst at the
bottom it has strips of wood with some warm material nailed on to
them. Temperature should be about 60, and it is best kept in an
open shed.'
Edinburgh School of Cookery.—The winter session opened on
October 13th, and the prospect of attendance at its own classes and
at others throughout the town is greater than in any previous year.
In addition to Cookery, classes are also to be held in Cutting-out
Dresses and Underclothing, and in Sewing, Ironing and Clear Starch¬
ing, Doing-up Fine Lace; and courses of lectures will be given on
the Theory of Food, Domestic Economy, and on Sick Nursing. A
special feature of the school will be that the committee are prepared
to supply a lecture on general sanitary subjects during the months of
November and December. At the next annual meeting it will be
proposed to alter the name to 'School of Domestic Economy.'
ScACCHi fears, from no answer having as yet appeared to ' The
Rook,' that no chess-club exists in Edinburgh to the privileges of
which ladies can be admitted. She therefore ventures to suggest
that such a club should at once be organized. To be successful, it
should be in a central part of the town, the room should be bright,
and, in winter, well warmed, and if possible not fronting a noisy
thoroughfare. Excejit a few tables and chairs, boards, chess-men,
no furniture would be needed, so the annual subscription might be
moderate. Is there no possibility of getting such accommodation in
connection with the comfortable Ladies' Club Room in Shandwick
Place ? Perhaps members of the Club Room might be tempted to
interest themselves in the proposed Chess Club, if the fact of their
present membership made them honorary members of the Chess Club.
 0 
Notices to Corrrsponticnts, rtc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless y'uZZ postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturday, 1st November, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
The usual Debate will give place to the consideration and discussion
of the amendments proposed in the Rules of the Ladies' Literary
Society. All members in Edinburgh are especially requested to be
present.
Byc'ivays of History. 5^9
^Dgebjags of !l?istorg.
I.—THE LIFE OF HALFRED OTTARSON, SURNAMED
THE TROUBLESOME SKALD.
An old Northern Biography, translated from the Icelandic.
CHAPTER I.
' The gleams of the firelight dance
Upon helmet and hauberk and lance,
And laugh in the eyes of the king;
And he cries to Halfred the Skald,
Grey-bearded, wrinkled, and bald,
"Sing!"'
Longfellow's King Olafs Christmas.
It was on a long summer evening in Iceland that I first
read the saga or life of Halfred the Troublesome Skald or
poet, a follower of King Olaf Tryggvason of Norway, not
rightly described in Longfellow's poem above, as he was then
a renowned warrior in the prime of youth, and never lived
to grow old and grey. The old saga had in Iceland no
doubt an interest beyond what can be hoped when it is
introduced into the crowd of books which jostle each other
in this country. Outside the tent whose looped-up door let
in the clear evening daylight, the scene was probably un¬
changed since Halfred saw it eight centuries ago. There
were the ice mountains, pink-tinted in the sky; the blue hills
below; the undulating, dark-green foreground; the swift
torrent, that gave stir to the clear landscape; the distant
farm in the valley, with its pointed gables and surrounding
out-buildings, its sounds of barking dogs and cattle going-
homewards,—its name, and probably its fashion, the same as
it was in the tenth century. I cannot hope to reproduce
the living charm the old narrative had when read in the
strange island where it was written, and which seems itself,
with its ' crown of ice and heart of fire,' an emblem of the
cold exterior yet burning vigour of the old Norse character.
But some readers may find it interesting as a side light cast
on remote history, and as rescuing from the shadows of the
past the memory of a man who, with little to guide him but
inborn genius, did good work in his day.
There are two lives of Halfred in existence, of which this
is the shortest and the oldest. The internal evidence, too
long to go into here, gives full reason to conclude that it was
written down before A.D. 1260; but the earliest existing MS.
No. 60.—December 1879. 2 L
530 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
which professes to be a copy, is in a beautifully-written
parchment collection of sagas dating from the beginning of
the fourteenth century. Halfred himself died in 1010, fifty
years before the Norman Conquest. Those dates are very
remote; let us understand what we may expect in this
history, and what reliance we can place on its truth. These
sagas were first said by certain people who made it their
business to receive them from others and repeat them
verbatim. The Icelanders were, and indeed still are, pro¬
verbial for their strong memories; their complex code of
laws was also for centuries preserved through being learnt
by heart by the law-men and speakers. It was considered
wrong, almost criminal, not to be exact in repeating an
historical saga, and the memory was often aided by scraps
of alliterative verse, as in Halfred's life, where many of his
own verses are preserved in the text. In the course of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries most of these sagas were
first written. We have this one, probably just as it was
said, set down in the reign of our Henry the Third, before
the English language was born, though the old Norse of the
narrative is essentially the spoken language of Iceland to
this day. Some of the sagas passed through the third stage
of being edited and made more artistic and picturesque by
good authors of the thirteenth century. Ours has not had
this advantage, but is somewhat bald in style, chiefly a mere
record of facts. However, it gives a distinct portrait of the
man himself, and an interesting and quite reliable picture
of the life of the times. The last Icelandic edition of it
appeared in 1860 ; it has never been translated.
The genuine life of an Icelandic skald has much historical
value; for we must remember that the skalds of that day were
not merely like modern poets,—they were the press, they
were public opinion, they were the'special correspondents'in
wars, they were the orators, as they chanted tliemselves the
verses which they were expected to improvise at a moment's
notice. Besides these short songs, there were the long poems
or Drapa, and the shorter Flokkr, both of which cost trouble
and were carefully prepared. They cannot now be literally
translated to advantage, as they require a good knowledge of
northern mythology to follow their metaphors and figures of
speech, and have almost a language of their own, of which
the key is to be found in the Edda, and a very stiff key it is
to turn. I have tried to convey something of the spirit and
dash of the short verses without aiming at the exactness with
which I have followed the prose.
Byeivays of History. 5 3 ^
The outburst of literary power which followed the intro¬
duction of letters in Iceland, has hardly a parallel in history.
These Northmen, who were the terror of our coasts and who
were bracketed in our litanies with fire and famine, have left
behind them poems, histories, and biographies, which show
them in quite a different light to that in which they appear in
our monkish Latin chronicles. They were certainly prompt
with their weapons, but they had a strong feeling for law
and justice. In this history Gris and Halfred try a lawsuit
before they resort to a duel, and end in a compromise. Ottar,
father of the poet, after he had promised to submit to arbi¬
tration, accepts it though much disappointed. The young
ladies Valgerd and Kolfina were carefully shielded from
flirtation, and long engagements were discouraged in modern
style. Far more internal order seemed to prevail in this
strong race than among the Saxons, Franks, and Frisians
whom they plundered. To go abroad in summer on a
viking or merchant cruise and acquire property by force
or trade, was the recognised employment for a young gentle¬
man. Halfred travelled to exercise his skald craft as modern
authors try to circulate their books. Indeed, a great charac¬
teristic of these histories is constant voyaging—the sound of
the sea is in them, and the clash of arms and the fierceness
that made the Northmen a terror to all tamer lands; but the
endurance and faithfulness and high courage are there also,
Avhich lie at the foundation of all that is good in the nature
of man.
Halfred Ottarson was born in Vatns Dale, a grassy valley
in the north of Iceland, about a.d. 968. An unlucky love
affair caused him to go to Norway, where first he became
skald to the heathen Earl Hakon the Powerful. Later he
fell under the strong influence of King Olaf Tryggvason,
became his chief skald, and was converted to Christianity.
To the last, however, his poems are full of heathen meta¬
phors, he never got over his regard for the old gods, and his
royal god-father evidently thought him a somewhat back¬
sliding Christian.
He had the gift of genius, with the restlessness and
whimsicality that often go with it, and a sort of perversity
to which he owed his nickname Vandrteda Skald, not exactly
translated by the troublesome, or difficult, or dangerous poet,
\m\j for which we have no English equivalent. With all his
faults he was brave, faithful, and intensely affectionate, and
it is in connection with his well-loved leader Olaf Tryggvason
that he is especially interesting.     Two long and spirited
532 Tlic Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
historical poems by him relating the life of Olaf are still
extant, and of them Suorri Sturluson says :' From Halfred's
poems we take the knowledge of many facts that are told of
Olaf the king.' Carlyle, in writing of King Olaf s last battle,
says : ' Eumour ran among his people that he still was not
dead. " Much was hoped, supposed, spoken," says one old
mourning skald, " but the truth was, Olaf Tryggvason was
never seen in Norseland more." '
The ' old mourning skald' was Halfred, old in date biit
not in years; for he died a few years later, about the age of
forty, never enjoying life again after the death of his well-
loved king.
The narrative begins with Halfred's father Ottar, when a
boy in Norway. The time is early in the tenth century,
when the bad Queen Gunhild and her sons ruled the land.
She was the widow of Erick Bloodyaxe, son of Harald Fair-
hair.    Athelstane was then king of England.
THE  LIFE  OF   HALFEED.
AN OLD NORTHERN BIOGRAPHY.
Thorwald was the name of a man called the Wise. He lived
on the island of Ylfi, in Halagoland. His wife was called
Thorgerd, Halfred's daughter. Galti was her brother's name;
he was a rich man, and lived by the Sognfjord. The sons
of Thorwald were Ottar and Thorkel Silver, who was illegi¬
timate. There was a man called Ingjald who also lived on
the island; his son Avas Avald, and Ottar lived with Ingjald.
There was then a mighty and evil-dealing viking (or sea-
robber) called Sokki. He harried far and wide, and was the
friend of the sons of Gunhild, who then ruled over Norway;
he came by night to the dwelling of Thorwald, and told his
men that a goodly prey might be theirs, as a rich man lived
there; ' and we shall bear fire to the dwelling,' and so they
did. Thorwald went to the door and asked who ruled the
fire. Sokki answered that he did. ' What is there against
us ?' said Thorwald ; ' I remember no strife between me and
thee.' Sokki said, ' We vikings move not for that; we wish
to have thy life and thy goods.' ' This time the power is yours,'
answered Thorwald. Now the vikings attacked the house
with fire and sword, and the end was that Thorwald perished
with fifteen people, and none came out of the flames. The
vikings took all the property they could get at, and some of
them went to Ingjald's house and set fire to it. He came to
the door, and asked that all within should be allowed to go
Byeivays of History. 533
out, but they were allowed no choice of that. Then Ingjald
went to the boys Ottar and Avald and said, ' It seems most
likely that my work in tlie world is at an end, but fain
would I get ye two out of the fire that ye may enjoy a longer
life. So I shall pass you out through the secret door, and it
will be a sufficient recompense if I hand over to you the
avenging of this night should you at any time be able to
rise again in arms.' They answered that they should be
most willing; ' but we do not now see that we are equal to
bringing it about.' Then tliey were slipped out at a secret
door, and got off in the smoke, and ran out into the island
through the clash and din and roar of fire; and as they were
not ' fey,' they got clear olf, and to the house of a Bondi who
lived on the island. Ottar said to him, ' Wilt thou take us
over to tlie mainland ?' The Bondi knew them and ferried
them over to the land. They came to where some herring
fishing was goin" on; thei'e were men at it from the north
of Vagr. They said that they were poor boys, and took service
with the fishermen. With them they stayed till they came
south to the Sogn Sea; then the boys say that they wish to
go up the Fjord, as they have relations there. Tlie captain
said, ' Ye shall do as ye will, but it may fare worse with you
there than here with us; you have served well, and soon you
would get on to greater things.' However, they parted; and
late in the day they came to Galti's dwelling, Ottar's uncle,
and sat down outside the house. Galti went out and asked
who they were, and Ottar told him all. ' Fitly and rightly
have you done to come hither,' said Galti, ' go in now and
take your seats.' They were there received with good
hospitality, lived there seven or eight winters, and became
powerful men.
Now there occurred the great battle at Fitjar, where King
Hakon, Athelstane's foster son, fell, and Gunhild's sons again
won the kingdom. So one day Galti said,' I know well, Ottar,
that you are before your foster-brother, and I wish that you
shonld be a rising man ; but in these times I dare not venture
to have you with me longer here in Norway. Now I shall
give you merchandize; do you sail west to England and
see what comes of it.'
Ottar said that he would be ruled by his wish. Galti had
sold the boys' lands and taken money instead. Now the
foster-brothers Ottar and Avald sail west to England and win
property for themselves. Three or four years they traded
to England and gained much property. Then they went to
Orkney, and were well received there by good men.    Ottar
534 TJie Ladies' Editiburgh Magazine.
said then to Avald, ' It seems to me it would be well if we
were to buy an Iceland trader and go thither; only first I desire
that we should avenge our fathers, and then we should be
free of all things.' Avald assented. So they bought a good
sliip, collected a crew, and sailed for Norway. They came
up Sognfjord to Galti, and told him their projects. Galti
said, ' That will answer well, as Sokki is now not far from
here with one ship, and sleeps on land at night in a loft. I
shall get you a guide who knows the place well, and now may
Sokki beware.' E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
Coimtrg Subjcrts antt pursuits.
XIII.—HEDGING AND DITCHING.
This may appear a curious sort of amusement to bring
before the readers of tlie Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine, but I
can assure them on the authority of experience, that it is a
pursuit possessed, under favourable circumstances, of many
merits for which it may well be compared witli others of
more pretension.
' It's not very promising, is it ?'    Not exactly.
If not promising, the place before us was very pretty.
Once it had been a carriage road, bordered by a narrow strip
of grass and bushes, and a ditch on each hand, with a bank
and hedge beyond each ditch, while to the right side lay a
glorious wild wood, on the other a sloping upland pasture.
But now the road was, so to speak, all hedge,—the bushes had
grown into trees, the grass was knee-deep, the tremendous
shoots of brambles and dog-roses showed the growth of
years, a wild tangle of luxuriant Irish vegetation covered
everything,—leaving only a narrow footpath open in the
middle. And we girls had been half-invited, half-defied, to
clear the way through this wilderness. A reward had been
offered if the work was done, but coupled with a provoking
assurance that we should certainly fail; so, of course, we were
bound to conquer the briars at all costs. The trees were not
inchided in our operations, but otherwise the old road was to
be cleared; therefore we were all standing looking down the
long vista, and wondei'ing how we should get on.
We meant Maggie, the leader of the enterprise, armed
with a sickle, the point whereof was gone and tlie iron back
shaky; her cousin Margaret, who carried a stubby sort of
billhook: it had no edge to speak of, but was effective from
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 535
its weight; then myself, provided with a nameless weapon,
half spade half hook, as light and sharp as possible. It was
a sweet little tool to use, but I should not have liked to
tumble over it. Now and then jNIaggie's sister Nora, or a
stray visitor, lent us their assistance, but were only con¬
sidered as auxiliaries. There were also three tiny boys,
known as 'Maggie's Ilagged Eegiment,' whom she had pressed
into the service, and who were trusted with sickles, which I
considered a dangerous proceeding, and daily expected it to
produce a catastrophe; but as nothing ever happened, I con¬
clude the sickles were pretty blunt. With these allies we
attacked the enemy and set-to at the bushes. Maggie made
a few slashes in the front of the solid mass to give us open¬
ings, and then each took a place and worked it steadily,
cutting and clearintr and reducing to order. Now the
philosophy of a bramble hedge is like that of many other
things, you can only understand it from the inside. You may
cut away at the outside till your arms ache, and never seem
to get on, but once get enough opening to look into tiie root
of the matter, and it is surprising what a difference it makes.
You must see the main idea of any entanglement, bushes or
otherwise, before you can overcome it.
Most people have something of the fighting spirit in them,
and I can confidently say that few things are better fitted to
call it out to an agreeable extent, and to give it a comfortable
vent, than cutting away at a mass of briars. At first you
feel quite helpless among them; the long knotted stems seem
to defy you, the thorns stick out in the most insolent fashion,
and the small branches twist and twine together like prickly
snakes, till there seems neither beginning nor end to them.
But, as aforesaid, only get an opening and lay a few stems
bare, cut through one good thick one and drag it out bodily,
and you will be astonished at the gap it makes. Then you
throw it away with such a feeling of triumph, and carry on
the process till the whole mass disappears. There is a
wonderful fascination about the work; it is so amusing to see
the difference tearing away this piece makes, and then that
bit must follow, and so it goes on. Then one comes on a
nice little tree or fine fern root struggling for life under the
usurping brambles, and there is quite a moral satisfaction in
destroying the tyrants. Since those days I have never
ceased to regard a bramble as an embodiment of evil, only
feebly excused by bearing blackberries, and I can't pass a
very thick stem without wishing for my crook-handled stick
and keen little hook.
536 The Ladies' EduiburgJi, Magazine.
More difficult to destroy than the great brambles, were the
little creeping ones which tangled themselves up with the
long grass and nettles, and gave Maggie infinite trouble by
catching her sickle; but patience brought her even through
that, while Margaret laid about her so vigorously that great
gaps marked her progress. The cut branches had to be piled
on the path, which became almost impassable from the heaps
over which we had to jump every day, having begun at the
wrong end of the road. Nevertheless we enjoyed the work
greatly, and triumphed exceedingly over the rapid growth of
our clearing, as path, ditches, and hedges began to look like
themselves again. The small boys used to take the foe in
the rear, by creeping down into the ditches and cutting at
the roots on the banks, while we dragged away the branches
in front, and this division of labour Avas highly successful.
I am bound to confess that our clothes suli'ered, and that
a dress once worn for hedging hardly does for any other
occupation; but we made our arrangements accordingly,
being mostly anxious that the thorns should not get through
our boots. As for the wet, the strongest boots ever made
would hardly have kept out the dews of those thickets, and
I think we went home very moist most days. Of course, if
anybody has prejudices about wet feet, that person had
better not try hedging in a wet summer in Ireland, when
every blade of grass and leaflet of moss drips and gleams
with water, and looks, ah! so lovely under the flying lights
of the soft sky. In spite of wet we never caught cold ; we
were far too busy. And what muscles and appetites we got \
Oh, young ladies, when you are tired of lawn tennis, put on
your oldest gowns, and find a good bramble bush to fight
with !   It will do you a great deal of good.
On one occasion we were obliged to vary our style of
ditch labouring. We had worked steadily for some time,
and were resting in the shade (it was fine for once), eating
apples ; and Maggie was taking upon herself to be saucy to
Margaret and me about our scratched wrists, because a
militia ball was impending to which we were going. She
was not, so she was impertinently suggesting extra long-
gloves to cover our wounds, when Xora came on the scene
with a note. It appeared that the said militia Avanted ferns
dug up by the roots for their ball-room, and had begged for
some from Honeywell Hall. It would have been against all
the ways of the house to refuse, but nobody was available
to get them unless ' the girls' came to the rescue. So, for
the credit of the house, we agreed to desert the clearing for
Country Siibjixts and Pursuits. 537
that day and devote ourselves to supplying the needs of the
gallant —th. Accordingly Nora appeared at the hall door
that afternoon with the little cart which we Avere to fill, drawn
by the most vicious-looking mule with whom it has ever been
my privilege to be acquainted. Into this vehicle we packed
our four selves and sundry spades, and jolted down to the
clearing, the mule marcliing over our bramble heaps with
calm unconcern. Fastening up this amiable animal, which
ahoays bit when it got a chance to do so, we plunged into
the wood and dived into the little ditches cut through it,
where the great male ferns were growing. Honeywell Hall
is famous for ferns, and oh, the beauty of them, the length of
their curving fronds standing in waving crowns ! and, alas,
the size of their roots! It was harder work than cutting-
brambles digging their great boles out of the ground, though
the Irish spade, with its long handle and narrow blade, makes
an excellent lever for the purpose; but there was great
satisfaction in the work too, for one was pretty sure to win
in the end, if the ferns wei'e selected with judgment. It was
delightful, after a prolonged working and prising at the
earth all round, to feel the great root yielding at last, so that
it could be dragged out of the mould and carried off to the
cart in triumph. Sometimes it gave way before one ex¬
pected it, when a damp fall was the result. Coming to the
edge of the bank of a tolerably deep ditch, I heard a deter¬
mined ' You needn't think to do me, my friend,' arising from
below. I beheld Nora grappling with a splendid fern in the
bank, her black eyes shining through the green leaves as she
shook and ' worried' it like a tigress. With the best inten¬
tions I made a vigorous push from above with the long spade,
the root came suddenly out, and Nora fell back all in a heap
into the ditch, covered with loose earth which came down in
showers.    I don't think she much valued my assistance.
When we had enough ferns we packed our little cart,
made a hay rope and tied up the ferns, and then wondered
how we were to get them home, as we could not get in and
drive, and nobody ventured to lead that mule. However,
it settled the question by suddenly starting off on its own
account, the cart jolting and bumping over the ruts, and the
ferns waving and trembling. We could not catch the beast,
so we let it go, and fortunately it went straight to the stables
without damaging its load. I may remark that the ball¬
room looked to perfection, and the militiamen were over-
poweringly grateful to ' the fair hands which had laboured,'
etc. etc.
538 TJie Ladies Edmburgh Magazitie.
When our mile of clearing was nearly done, and hedges
and ditches looked more respectable than they had done for
years, our rubbish heaps became a serious difficulty; for as
they were, they made the path more impassable than before,
and we had no means of removing them. At last somebody
hit on the bright idea of a series of bonfires to consume the
withered branches, and this plan was carried out so success¬
fully that our ' burning days' were the most amusing of all.
We had to coax our fires a good deal at first, everything was so
damp after the wet summer; but ^\'hen once they were started
they would leap up through all the masses of briars we
could throw on. Nothing makes such pretty bonfires as
that sort of light growth. The flame has not to gnaw a way
through dull lumps, it springs up flashing and crackling at
once, and the slender stems glow in the light and keep their
own shapes till they drop to ashes. Then the smoke, too, is
not heavy, and white, and choking, but goes up in delicate
blue clouds in the still air. Fire after fire we used to make
along tlie road, feeding each with the fuel nearest to it, so
that five or six coluums of blue smoke might be seen rising
at once against the dark trees, celebrating the triumph of
our battle with the briars.
Well, the work was done at last, and the reward paid; and
then came autumn rains and all sorts of things, which drove
us to other amusements, and left nothing but a memory of
that merry, happy time which we girls spent ' liedgiug and
ditching' in our dear, disorderly. Messed old Ireland!
Constance O'Brien.
©tocr ^ruc ^Talcs.
THE GHOST OF HENLY COTTAGE.
PAET I.
Henly Cottage was a most inappropriate abode for a ghost
to take up its residence in, for it was a bright little modern
dwelling, covered with roses and yellow jessamine, and
inliabited by an old lady and her two servants. There were
no baneful memories connected with the place; for the
venerable owner had built it for herself less than twenty
years before the Ghost's advent, and had named it Henly
Cottage after her late husband's name;and property. The
only strange event that had happened since Mrs. Henly's
Oiver True Talcs. 539
occupation of the cottage, was the disappearance of a servant
girl whom she had taken for charity's sake. The little maid
was a waif whom the restraints of civilization had revolted,
and obliged by an irresistible impulse to seek the freedom
of her original gutter; and people said the old lady and her
old servant liebecca were austere mistresses. Be that as it
may, one fine October morning Prudence vanished, and j\Irs.
Henly, people remarked, took few means to recover the
wanderer; indeed she seemed anxious not to find liei', for
once, when they thought they were on the track of the
fugitive, she became much agitated, and was manifestly
relieved when it proved a case of mistaken identity.
Tongues were still wagging busily over the matter when
we take up our story one November afternoon. Mrs. Henly,
a dignified, rather severe-looking lady'of the olden school,
attired in a stiff black satin dress, which could stand without
the presence of its owner, but relieved by a becoming white
cap and muslin kerchief, sat erect in her favourite chair,
with her hands folded in front of her and motionless as a
statue. Eebecca, equally stiff and starched, but with an
expression of countenance that might rather be termed sour
than stern, was bringing in the tea.
Suddenly Mrs. Henly spoke, and her voice was a surprise;
it was rich and passionate, and suited better with the flash
of her dark eyes than the stillness of her other features.
' I cannot get that ne'er-dae-weel lassie out of my head,
Eebecca. I hope she is safe from the law's clutches, and
that we shall never see her more; but I'm wae when I think
of what her life will be, puir misguided lassie !'
' I'm wae when I think 0' our gude siller awa' in her
packs, the thieving hussy '' said Rebecca grimly. ' The
jail would have been the safest place for the like 0' her; an
impident, canistairy, cantankerous deil 0' a wean she was,
no a meenut out 0' ane mischief or anither.'
' But still no fit for a prison, Eebecca; that would have
fair ruined her, now she has a chance ?' said the old lady,
eagerly and interrogatively at the same time.
' A chance of a longer road to the gallows, madam,' replied
Eebecca, ruthlessly although respectiiilly.
Mrs. Henly sighed.
' Our new one comes to-night. I hope she will be a more
favourable specimen,' she said, after a moment's pause.
Eebecca pursed her lips and shook her head, as if she did
not share these hopes, while she said, ' I do not think she
can well be worse, madam.'
540 The Ladies' Ediiibiirgh Magazine.
The new maid arrived in due time, a very diminutive
specimen indeed, with an elfish face and a very demure
manner, which insensibly impressed her mistresses in her
favour. The same evening, after prayers, when Eebecca and
her mistress were going their last rounds to see that all the
doors were locked and the windows fastened, a child's cry
was heard at the back door.
' What an hour and a nicht to hae a wean out o' doors !'
said Kebecca to herself, for there were some inclies of snow
on the ground, and the wind was blowing a hurricane.
Suddenly the wailing cry changed into shrill screams of
pain, and with the characteristic remark, ' Some folk are
deevils,' Eebecca put her candle into her mistress' hands
and boldly threw open the door and peeped out.
Nothing was to be seen, but retreating sounds were heard
of blows and smothered screams. Undaunted, Eebecca
rushed out into the snow and biting air, in pursuit of the
' deevils' and their innocent victim. Eound and round the
house ran she, and then down to the gate and along the
highway, but never gaining upon the sounds in spite of all
her efforts. Still slie manfully pursued them till they died
away in the distance; then, hot with indignation although
chilled with cold, she retraced her steps, finding it much
easier to advance in hot pursuit than to retreat in cold blood.
Her mistress and she, after moralizing a little over the
wickedness there is in the world, and the capacity for pro¬
found slumber shown by I'olly, the new girl, who slept
through all the disturbance, retired to their respective
chambers.
Polly proved herself obedient, active, and intelligent, and
the only fault Eebecca could detect, after subjecting her to
every test likely to prove the natural folly of young woman¬
hood, was a love of gossip. She never uttered a word at
home; but abroad she talked enough to make up for it,
judging from the unconscionable time she took in doing
errands.
She had been in the house a week and a day, when at the
stroke of midnight a stranoe rumbling noise was heard in
o o o
the attics, and immediately afterwards she ruslied down to
Eebecca's room on the ground floor, crying, ' Come quickly,
mistress, they're murdering a wean on the roof of the house,
I hear it quite plain.'
Before Eebecca could utter a word, from the top of her
fourpost bed came sounds of a violent struggle, as if a lively
child Avas being smothered, interspersed with sudden screams,
Ozver True Talcs. 541
and  groans, and gurgles, becoming gradually fainter and
fainter.
Unable to disbelieve her ears, Eebecca jumped up and tore
down the curtains and drapery, revealing only bare poles and
rafters.
' Let me gang hame, dear mistress, this hoose is no canny,'
said the sobbing girl.
'Nonsense ; it's jist thae folk that were here afore wi' that
puir wean they are doing their best to murder ; but they'll
no be back again the nicht,' replied Eebecca more confidently
than she felt.
But it was only with the utmost reluctance, and after
many tears had been shed, that the girl consented to return
to her bed, while Eebecca sought her mistress, who had rung
her bell to inquire what was the meaning of the strange
sounds she heard. After hearing the whole history, she
agreed with Eebecca it could only be those disreputable
people outside, and being wakened up in that sudden way
had caused the hallucination that they were actually in the
room.
Tor some days peace and quietness reigned at Henly
Cottage, and then the terrible noise aroused once more the
innocent inhabitants; and Polly appeared at Eebecca's door
with pale cheeks and distended eyes, crying wildly,' Save
me, save me, I saw her!'
Eebecoa, thus wakened out of her first sleep, was a little
scared, and consequently very angry, and she shook Polly
violently to recall her scattered senses, saying, as she did so,
' Hoot toots, you're dreaming, lassie ! Have you been steal¬
ing the jam that you canna sleep quiet in your bed o' nichts ?'
' But I saw her quite plain,' conftnued Polly in a subdued
whisper; ' a little thin lassie wi' red hair, in a long white
nightgown, and something white rolled round her head.'
' Gude save us !' ejaculated tlie woman.
Polly sobbed violently without speaking.
' It's yoursel' you've seen in the glass, you doited hussy !'
Eebecca continued with a show of indignation.
' I wiss it was, but I am no pale blue, nor hev I flaming
eyes, nor hev I' 
' Havers !' interrupted Eebecca fiercely, to prevent further
revelations ; ' ye need a dose, that's what ye need, to put
thae daft fancies out 0' your head. But I'll gang up the
stairs wi' ye and see this wonderfu' sicht.'
Eebecca rose accordingly, and accompanied the sobbing
girl to her room.    All was still and quiet now, but Polly
542 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
pointed out the very spot where the apparition appeared to
her, when she started up awakened by the rumbling noise.
No persuasion Avould induce her to remain alone in the
room, so she took refuge beside Eebecca till morning.
A thorough investigation of the premises followed next
day, in the hope of discovering the Ghost in perchance a
starving cat, a vagrant owl, or an erratic bat; lout nothing
was seen that could in any way account for the sounds.
Polly, who appeared with pale cheeks and heavy eyes, on
being told grimly by Eebecca that she would be forgiven for
disturbing a decent house in the middle of the nicht if she
promised never to do it again, and never to say a word about
it to any one, threw her apron over her head, and sobbed
bitterly without uttering a Avord; and all day she continued
to sob at intervals in a suppressed but none the less aggra¬
vating; manner.
That very afternoon, on being sent to the butcher's, she
suddenly fainted in the shop. After being revived with the
usual village remedies of burnt feathers and friction, she
conjured the butcher's wife in a voice of terror not to whisper
what had occurred to any one, in case of her mistress or
Eebecca hearing of it. This only aroused the woman's
curiosity; and on being hotly pressed to give a cause for her
physical and mental distress, the poor girl told her story
with much greater detail than she had done to the old ser¬
vant, and Mrs. Mutton had no difficulty in recognising the
lost Prudence in the apparition. She was anxious to go at
once to Mrs. Henly and demand an account of Prudence,
dead or alive ; but Polly's alarm at the idea made her quite
hysterical, so Mrs. Mutton promised to do nothing more in
the matter unless the Ghost appeared again.
Shortly the ghostly presence spread all over the house.
As soon as it became dark, chairs sprang into the middle of
the floor, candles were blown out, china was thrown down,
and shrieks of fear and yells of horrible laughter were heard
everywhere, above, beneath, and all round the room.
It was in vain that Eebecca strove to keep their unholy
possession a secret from the outer world; it leaked out some¬
how, and nobody found it possible to send anything to the
house except in the evening, in order to give themselves a
chance of hearing the demoniac noises.
Poor Mrs. Henly became seriously ill from the exposure
and disgrace her ghostly visitor entailed ; for people began
to say that there must be some good cause for this extra¬
ordinary visitation, and that no doubt poor Prudence's bones
Owcr True Tales. 543
were mouldering somewhere iinburied, and were thus crying
out aloud for vengeance and Christian interment.
Late one evening Mr. Jklutton arrived himself with some
meat that ought to have been sent in the morning, and
boldly asked Rebecca what reason her mistress gave for
the disturbances in her house that were scandalizing the
neighbours.
' Have you been annoyed with strange noises, Mr. Mutton,
for we have not been complaining of any ?' said the old
woman dryly.
Then Mr. Mutton puffed himself up and said grandly,
' You know very well to what I refer, Mrs. Eebecca; and in
the cause of suffering humanity this affair must be investi¬
gated.    Why, I have even been told that' 
At this moment a voice, the very voice of Prudence, came
up apparently through the stone flags of the kitchen floor,
' Kind Mr. Mutton, save me, save me ! help, help ! murder,
murder!'
A choking sound followed, and then a shriek of fiendish
laughter. At the same time the candle was blown out, and
invisible hands twitched Mr. Mutton's cap off his head; and
without waiting for further manifestations the valiant gentle¬
man took to his heels, with no thought of suffering humanity
except that represented by his own person, and never stopped
till he reached the village.
When Eebecca returned with a light he had vanished, and
Polly was found, paralyzed by terror, lying on her face on
the floor in a state of semi-unconsciousness, from the effects
of which she did not recover for several days.
At the suggestion of a well-beloved nephew, Mrs. Henly
now took the bold step of sending for the police to protect
her dwelling, as some of the extraordinary noises heard
during the night resembled the filing of iron bars, and the
voices sounded as much outside as in. The village constable
was a brave man, but catching ghosts is no common duty,
so he brought a neighbouring policeman to help him, and
together they marched up and down, and all round about, to
the immense gratification of the village children.
At the eerie hour of twelve, Mrs. Henly popped her head
out of the window and called out eagerly, ' I hear some one
moving below, constables.'
Before the men could reach the spot, Polly called from
above,' Oh ! they're here now, I hear them quite plain, the
wood will be through in a minute.'
They were still staring upwards when Eebecca screamed
544 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
from the other side of the house,' Quick, men, quick! the
loons are here now!' Kound they ran accordingly, but
nothing did they see.
' They must have got into the house somehow,' said the
men, and commenced to search the lower flat, when, strangely
enough, the sound was heard distinctly outside again, and
out they rushed to see—nothing.
It was very mysterious, very, but the police were on the
track, and were not to be easily foiled. One man, the
stranger, remained outside, while the policeman of the place
took up his position within, ready to rush out at a given
signal on the culprits.
Muffled voices, furtive footsteps, and a grinding noise
approached a window; up flew the sash, and out of the
aperture Tam Glen thrust his body, and grasped—thin air;
while within reach of his hand, at his very nose, a voice said,
' Hoo's Jenny ?'
At this query Tam fell backwards, for Jenny was the
name of the only woman he had ever loved, although he had
deserted her for his present wife. If his excellent partner
ever heard of the Jenny episode, his life would be a series of
ingenious tortures. The thought gave him courage to throw
himself once more out of the window, and this time he found
himself grasped by some one. He struggled fiercely to free
himself, and seized in his turn his captor, who tried hard to
get away.
Finding he could scarcely hold him, he cried out, 'Jamie !
help, man, help !'
' Oh ! is it you, Tam ? 'Deed, I thocht you were the Ghost,'
said the voice of Jamie himself.
' And I thocht you were the Deil,' returned Tam, loosing
his hold. ' And I believe it is the Deil himsel' that's here,'
he added below his breath.
At that moment from the house came the frantic screams
of the dying child, and the distracted men flew from room
to room after the sound. Now it was here and anon it was
there; they never reached one place but the shrieks began
to die away; they never left it for another but they re¬
commenced with redoubled force. In the stampede their
lamp was thrown down-stairs, and could not be found.
Voices from invisible beings whispered taunts in their ears;
they heard footsteps passing and repassing them, and the
rustling of dresses on the stairs; bottles were drawn and
liquids poured out apparently quite close to them; the
entertainment being varied by cats mewing, dogs barking,
Ozver True Tales. 545
and pigs squealing, animals known never to be allowed near
the cottage. At last the men were fain to call for light and
help to the still more terrified women who had shut them¬
selves up in their rooms.
Eebecca issued forth in wonderful attire with the peace-
restoring light, exclaiming, ' 'Deed, an' if this is all the good,
ye can do us, my men, 1 think ye had better keep away.
Siccan a Pandemonium as ye hae raised in a decent hoose,
let alane a leddy's, I never saw the like o'. We never saw
sic sights nor heard sic sounds as ye hae caused this waefu'
nicht.'
' "We can defend you against flesh and blood, but no' against
speerits, let alane deils,' returned Tarn stoutly.
' Is it quiet at last 1' asked Polly's frightened voice, and
her white face peeped over the staircase in a listening
attitude. ' They are coming again !' she screamed, and beat
a hasty retreat.
The men waited for no further dismissal, but ran from the
place without looking behind them. The Ghost, however,
made no more disturbance that night.
The Ghost, altliough keeping strictly invisible, now became
bolder in its acts of aggression; valuable china fell off the
mantelpiece without the agency of hands, tables were upset,
and chairs ran across the floor, and a sound as of a whirr of
demons' wings often accompanied the worst deeds of mischief.
Eebecca belonged to a very strict religious sect, which we
need not particularize; its present pastor was an energetic
and much esteemed man, who possessed a wonderful
influence over evil spirits when encased in human bodies.
Eebecca was very anxious that clerical aid should be called
in to meet their present emergency, and persuaded Mrs,
Henly to allow her to invite her spiritual guide to exorcise
the evil spirit that had taken up its unauthorized abode in
their house.
He came accordingly, armed only with the book of Holy
Writ, and sat up reading with the frightened women till
nearly midnight; for many of Eebecca's cronies and co¬
religionists had begged to be present on the occasion. Mrs.
Henly, feeling not quite sure of the proceedings, found it
convenient to be ill, and had retired to bed.
The Ghost was apparently frightened, for not a sight or a
sound gratified the assembled multitude. The clock struck
twelve—disappointment was visible on every face except
the pastor's.
' I think it's fast, though,' whispered Polly,
No. 60.—Decembeb 1879, 2 M
54^ The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The pastor solemnly closed the book; at the same instant
a shriek of eldrich laughter filled the room and made every
one's blood curdle, while a voice cried close to the worthy
gentleman's head, ' Come hame, come hame !'
A cold air swept through the apartment, extinguishing the
candles, and before the pastor's trembling lips could frame
an appeal to the unholy visitant, a well-known voice long
silent on earth hissed in his ear,' Come hame, feyther, come
hame ; I'm keeping a fine het corner for ye doun here !'
Utterly overcome with the associations called up by those
never-to-be-forgotten tones, the pastor exclaimed in an agony
of contrition, ' Truly my sin has found me out!'
A scene of indescribable confusion followed, the women
screamed, the Ghost indulged in shrieks of laughter, the
chairs commenced to dance, and invisible hands pulled hair
and twitched off caps.
' Can ye no pit up a prayer for us ?' cried out an old
woman. The pastor accordingly commenced the Lord's
Prayer, not being able to think of any other in his agitation.
The sounds and movements suddenly ceased as soon as
Rebecca appeared at the door with a light. All the old
women hurried out of the house as fast as they could hobble.
The pastor, as white as a sheet and shaking from head to
foot, explained that he had had an only son who had been
indulged in everything after the manner of only sons. The
lad was clever, and the father, proud of his talents, thought
nothing too good for him. One day he got an incoherent
note from the young man, saying unless he received a con¬
siderable sum of money next day something dreadful would
happen. The father thought of going at once to see what
was wrong, but on second thoughts wrote a letter of ex¬
postulation, neither denying nor acceding to the request, but
demanding a full explanation of his conduct. The next
news he received was that his son's body had been found in
the river, and that he was supposed to have fallen in
accidentally. He concluded by exhorting Eebecca to repent
and confess her sins as the only means of avoiding judgment
both here and hereafter.
' We are all sinners in God's sight; but truly it is a lying
spirit that says we are worse than our neighbours, or had
aught to do with that hempy Prudence's flight,' said Eebecca
stoutly.
' That is not the spirit in which God's judgments ought to
be received,' replied the pastor gravely.
Eebecca would have had no hesitation in pronouncing a
The Extension of Cojfee-Houses. 547
like verdict upon other people's misfortunes; but somehow,
when things touch ourselves, they assume a different form.
Job's comforters are never popular, although always highly
respected people, and Rebecca felt unwarrantably angry at
being turned into a warning instead of pointed out as an
example, so she answered rebelliously to her pastor, ' If it is
God's judgments and not the Deil's capers to mystify and
deceive poor mortals, the men on whom the tower of
Siloam fell were not worse than their neighbours, so the
Scripture says.'
' But is not to be worse than our neighbours all that is
required of us Christians ? God forbid '' he returned fer¬
vently.
And Rebecca echoed,' God forbid !'
Thus the discussion ended amicably.
{To he continued.)
By C. L. Johnstone.
How are coffee-houses or other places of resort and recreation
for the working classes to be provided on a scale adequate
to their wants ? This question is often asked, but the mode
must vary according to the character and wealth of different
districts. In a large town, experience shows that a coffee-
hall selling only cheap coffee, cocoa, tea, and light provisions,
will pay, owing to the number of customers it can always
command ; but in smaU towns, which also need coffee-halls,
this is not invariably the case when they are set up in addi¬
tion to the usual supply of public-houses and refreshment
shops. The difficulty has been met in several ways. A
local benefactor has given the house and fittings to start with,
and the receipts of the coffee-hall need only defray the
current expenses. A respectable person has in some cases
been found to act as attendant for merely board and lodging,
and fills up odd hours with other work; but a coffee-house
generally requires the entire energies and thoughts of the
attendant, leaving no time even for sewing. A coffee and
refreshment room has been opened by the Sisters of the Church
in Kilburn Park Road, which they hope may be self-support¬
ing, and as they give their services gratis, one large item in
the expense is deducted. Here and there a man and his wife
have undertaken one as a private speculation, worked in it
entirely themselves, and are making a comfortable livelihood.
548 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
In these instances there is seldom a room for games, concerts,,
or reading. Everything is on a small scale; the customers
come in and have their breakfast or tea, or cup of coffee as the
case may be, and then go away. Others, of which there are
many specimens in London, combine a dining-room. In
small country towns the managers know the hours and days
at which they are likely to be most engaged, and when a
man and wife keep a coffee-house together, one of them can
carry on some other occupation. Eetired servants are well
fitted to keep coffee-houses of this description, and they may
often profitably combine it with a lodging-house.
In districts where private speculation cannot be induced
to undertake a coffee-house, and where private philanthropy
is not ready with its aid, a company, Avliich has answered so
well hitherto in London, Liverpool, Birmingham, and Leeds,
seems to be the most feasible way. A guarantee fund about
three times as much as the yearly rent of the house, and the
wages of the attendant, should be set aside; and if possible,
the attendant should be a shareholder, as it gives him an
additional interest in its success. If the shares are at a low
price, not more than 5s. or 1 Os., or even £1, working men might
be induced to take some; for the more people who are
interested in the matter the better, as success or failure is in
the hands of the public. Although working men are often
induced to put their savings into more speculative concerns,
we think that the loss consequent on a possible failure of the
scheme should be borne, at least in part, by those to whom
the loss of half their shares would not be seriously felt, and
that an inducement might be held out to the working class
to subscribe to it, by the guarantee fimd being supplied by
the municipality, thus securing the shareholders against a
loss. Town rates provide and support free libraries without
any chance of a pecuniary return; and a coffee-hall and read¬
ing-room is likely to reduce the rates in another way, by
diminishing drunkenness, and also with this public support
it would be very unlikely indeed that the guarantee fund
would ever be called for, if there were well-selected attendants
and good management.
It is calculated that on an average a hundred and forty-
two millions a year have been spent in this country on
intoxicating liquors during the last five years, so that if only
a small portion of this sum can be diverted to coffee taverns,
they will have no need of extraneous support.
In places where a scarcity of money, a fear of loss, or
other  causes, prevent  a  company from being formed, we
TJie Extension of Coffec-Houses. 549
think that the municipality might reasonably give some
encouragement to the cause of temperance by entirely
undertaking the establishment of a coffee-house. We should
suggest that, at the first opportunity, it bought a shop in a
good situation, or still better, a well-known public-house, and
iidvertised for a tenant, who would set up a coffee-hall on
principles stipulated in the lease or agreement at his own
risk. The rent might for the first year or two not be in
proportion to the price paid for the building, but it might
be raised when the coffee-house had been fairly established
and proved remunerative. In time the cost would be repaid
to the community by fewer committals to jail, and con¬
sequently less poverty. Even when there is a working
population ready to receive it gratefully, it is doubtful
whether in a very small village a coffee-house can supply
its refreshments at the low price which would make it a
boon to the labouring man, and give him also a room for
recreation and reading, unless it were undertaken by the
proprietor of the village shop, or combined with some
indispensable trade. But then there would be the fear that
it would be neglected and fall into disuse. Yet a village is
never too small to support a public-house, and generally
more than one. Probably the time is still far off when the
only public-house in a village will be on the pattern of the
' Cocoa Tree,' Pinner, or of the ' Tom Hughes,' in London,
where coffee, tea, and cocoa will be supplied cheaply to the
traveller, and if he wants brandy or gin he wiU have to buy
it with a medical certificate at the apothecary's or druggist's,
shop; yet if a licence to sell intoxicating liquors were
refused to a village inn, and the house re-let on condition,
that coffee, tea, cocoa, and unintoxicating beverages were
sold all day long at the bar instead of beer or spirits, it
would doubtless answer pecuniarily just as well as it does
now, and one temptation to the villagers to drink would
be removed.
One cause of the failure to make coffee-houses self-sup¬
porting in some small towns has been, that the coffee-house
has come as a supernumerary, and not attempted to combine
the accessories which help to support a public-house, such
as stabling, and beds for a wealthier class of travellers;
but care must be taken that, in attracting richer customers,
the original object of the coffee-house, to provide cheap
imintoxicating liquors and rest and amusement for the work¬
ing man, should not be allowed to fall into the background.
The   difficulties  in   the   establishment  of   self-supporting
5So The Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
coffee-houses apply to the small towns and villages. In the
large provincial towns such as Liverpool, Birmingham, Leeds,
Bradford, etc., they have been eminently successful from a
moral and pecuniary point of view; and as these were
founded by companies (except one at Leeds) who have
ascertained that they are profitable investments, they are
likely to be increased from the same source as the need
arises in these districts.
The movement has indeed made such rapid strides during
the last eight months, that the cxuestion as to their augmenta¬
tion has to some extent been answered, although where coffee¬
houses have been set on foot merely for profit, there may
be need for improvement. When the dividend is not
limited, it is tempting to try for a high one before anything
else, and the most elaborate coffee-halls, such as St. James's
Hall, Leeds, do not in large towns often pay as well as the
smaller coffee-houses. Where this motive prevails, a model
one, founded by the municipality, would excite emulation,
and raise the standard. To work in each town where it is
possible with the local resources, to encourage private
enterprise, and to improve the coffee-halls already doing-
well, would go further to secure the popularity of the move¬
ment than anything like a purely benevolent organization
on a large scale, from which the more independent working
men might keep aloof, and which might make enemies of
those who have founded coffee-halls with a purely com¬
mercial purpose. One difficulty in a municipality taking
upon itself the foundation of a coffee-hall, is, that there are
still many people (though these are lessening every day)
who require to be convinced of the need for them, and a
proportion of the members of a town council might belong
to this class. There are towns such as Birmingham and
Leamington, which have made ample provision from the
rates for a free library, and continue to support it, while we
see Cheltenham still refusing to make a grant for the same
purpose; and this divergence of views would be found as
regards coffee-halls, although, if there were a choice between
a coffee-hall and free library, the coffee-hall is the most
necessary, and not likely to be totally unremunerative.
There are many who advocate that a coffee-hall should be
conducted on a missionary system, and that the attendant
should be emj^owered to try and induce the customers to
take the temperance pledge; in short, that a coffee-hall
should be an institution where a distinctly religious tone
should prevail.    Keligion ought never to be out of place, and
The Extension of Cojfee-Hotises. 551
where the last system has been found successful, as we
believe it has been in Liverpool, Leeds, and some metro¬
politan districts, or in those coffee - halls in which it has
been once introduced, we shovild not for a moment desire to
see an alteration ; but there is a portion of humanity, and
those whom we Avish to draw from public-houses are among
them, to Avhom religion is a stumbling-block, and Avho Avould
be deterred from entering a coftee-hall if their eyes were
likely to fall upon Scripture texts, and if it were to asso¬
ciate them in the minds of their felloAvs in any way Avith a
religious establishment, or even Avith the Avord temperate.
We may wonder at the mental tA\'ist Avhich this objection
displays, but Ave must look back at the morbid fear of what
was then termed ' methodism' and ' cant,' Avhich prevailed
among the upper class in the early part of this century, so that
General Sir Neil Campbell asserted in 1815, that it required
more courage in an officer to let it be knoAvn that he read
his Bible than to lead a forlorn hope. That feeling, like
other fashions, has passed from the upper class to a portion
of the lower; and much as Ave may regret it, we have to
take human nature as Ave find it. And if coffee-halls are to
obtain general support, and to act as rivals to the public-
house in the eyes of the roughest part of the population, Ave
must abstain from giving them a religious or a sectarian
colouring. We see the influences busy among the Avorking
classes, and the infidel tone of some of the literature Avhich
has a large circulation exclusively among them,i and we
must be prepared for the feelings engendered by such studies,
and conduct some, at least, of our coffee-halls on a system
which opens them to all classes of ill-regulated thought,
instead of practically reserving them for only well-ordered
and well-disposed Avorking men. Even a Scripture text in a
place Avhere gossip is talked, games are played, and comic
songs may sometimes be sung, may lead to flippant jokes
(for semi-educated men are in this way much like school¬
boys), Avhich have a bad effect on the hearers ; and perhaps
it is better not to run the risk of it, except Avhere the mental
cultivation in a district is known to be so high that there is
no fear of its being incurred.
In a country village far from a large town, the public-
house, which is often the labourer's only place of recreation
and amusement, seldom contains any room more comfortable
for him to sit in than a dingy tap-room; but it is warm in
^ The writer's experience lies chiefly in England, and this may not
apply so much to Scotland.
552 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
winter, lie meets acquaintances, sees a newspaper, and is free
for a time from the noise of his children and home cares. If
it were not for the money lie spends, and for the chance of
his returning home drunk and unable to work the next day,
his absence from the crowded cottage would be a relief to
his wife when she has to clean the house, bake, wash, or
put the children to bed. Working men's clubs, which are
'now very general, are deserving of encouragement; but as
their advantages are usually limited to the members who
pay a small subscription, and they are therefore chiefly sup¬
ported by a sober, well-directed class, they are by no means
a substitute for coffee taverns, and are, moreover, not open
all day. A village with a scattered population of 900 gene¬
rally maintains, at least, two public-houses, particularly if a
hi"h road runs throuoh it and brinfjs wa^aoners or carriers.
The agricultural labourer is a conservative being, and if a
coffee-hall were introduced into his village on the scale which
is attractive in the larger towns, he might enter it once to
see what it was like, but would probably continue to regard
a seat on the settle by the tap-room fire as the most com¬
fortable place. Assuming that a town coffee public-house
company came to the assistance of these country villages in
default of a local company, or a local benefactor, or any
grant from the rates, we should advise that it took an
opportunity to buy up one of the public-houses, and establish
it on the principle of the Nag's Head Cocoa House in Chester,
with accommodation for horses, but it should provide cheap
beds for poor travellers as well as a bed-room or two for a
richer class. The tap-room should become the coffee-room,
and there should be a room available for picnic parties,
village concerts, or other festivities, which room might contain
the library, and pains should be taken to obtain the patronage
of the agents of local estates or trades, so that they might
come there to conduct business with their tenants and work¬
people, and draw attention to it. Near large towns a tea
garden is also remunerative. If a public-house cannot be
obtained, an ordinary house might be adapted for a coffee¬
house, but it should be on the high road, and furnished with
an attractive sign-board, and a trough for horses, so that the
dullest agriculturist could not fail to find it. Coffee-houses
being allowed by law to be open longer than licensed public-
houses, gives a great advantage to the coffee-house, which,
moreover, to make its way, should never open later than
5 A.M. Newspapers and books are an important addition ;
and  there  are  so  many people  who  take  in periodicals
The Exteitsion of Coffee-Houses. 553
and never care to bind them, as well as newspapers, that
if the need were once known, there would probably be
little difficulty in obtaining a gratuitous supply. If there
were a difficulty in obtaining in this way a local news¬
paper regularly, a charge of Id. a month, or even more,
for permission to use the books and newspapers would
furnish this, and would no doubt be readily paid.
At the ' Cocoa Tree,' Pinner, which in some respects
resembles this description of coffee tavern, the newsroom
had hardly been opened a year when it had already sixty
members, each paying 2s. 6d. per quarter. But these,
probably, scarcely come under the designation of working
men, as Pinner contains in the neighbourhood an exceptional
number of resident gentry compared to its working popu¬
lation, with prosperous tenants, and is a favourite resort for
botanical classes (who meet at the 'Cocoa Tree' weekly) and
other holiday-makers from London. We are now speaking
of villages such as only contain four or five resident gentle¬
men's families in the parish, and which only support three
or four public-houses,—a proof of their poverty,—while there
are other parishes which contain no resident gentleman
except the clergyman, and the land is owned by an im¬
poverished absentee. The manager of this village coffee¬
house ought to be a total abstainer, and if a reliable person
could not be found to take it at his own risk, should be paid
with some respect to the receipts, so as to interest liim in its
success. He should in that case also be a shareholder; but
we think that a person belonging to the neighbourhood
might generally be found to take it gladly eitlier at a
moderate rent or else free for the first year, the rent to be
put on the second year, when both parties had learned their
chances of success. Unless the manager was interested
pecuniarily and otherwise in the cause of coffee-houses,
there might be some difficulty in always separating his
advantage from that of the company's. But a coffee public-
house of this description would have every chance of success,
as in the country a cow, fowls, and pigs might be kept with
profit by the manager, and the garden might also help to
supply the dining-room. It is important tliat a coffee
public-house in a village should sell milk in small quantities
for the benefit of the poor ; and it is almost equally impor¬
tant that the manager, or the cook employed by him, should
have studied cookery on the principles taught to artisans at
the numerous schools of cookery emanating from South
Kensington.    The waste usual with an inferior cook would
554 '^^'■^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
thus be avoided, and cheap basins of soup and warm dishes
could be supplied to the labouring man for his supper at the
smallest cost. Hot decoctions, such as warmed gingerade
and peppered beverages, might be furnished for the benefit
of those who have injured their livers and digestions with
spirits, and require some sharper stimulant than coffee or
tea, or in very cold weather, when, if a labouring man has
been much exposed to rain, they have a useful and reviving
effect.
At Wem in Shropshire, a small market town, an old-
established public - house, called the Buck Head, .was
presented to the town, repaired and furnished, to be used as a
coffee tavern of this description. The vicar of Grinshill
(Rev. J. Wright) undertook the arrangements, and placed in
it a man and wife, who receive 15s. a week for their services,
all being found except washing, and a girl under them at
wages of £7 a year. The vicar receives the money every
week, buys the provisions, paying ready money ; and up to
Michaelmas Day 1878 it had paid its way with a few
pounds balance, and he expected it would do so for the
subsequent quarters. There is a small library and reading-
room attached, for the use of which Is. 6d. a quarter is paid,
but it is little used; and there are six bed-rooms and beds,
ranging from 6d. to Is. a night, which are constantly
occupied. The livery stable is remunerative, the charge
being 3d. a feed of hay, 6d. of corn, and 3d. the ostler. A
cup of coffee is Id., tea l|d., a ham sandwich 2d., potatoes
and other vegetables Id., a plate of beef or mutton 6d., bread
and butter Id., etc. Probably when the Buck Head has
been longer established, the accounts will show a larger
balance ; but then it is obtained rent-free.
At Cranborne in Wiltshire, with a population of 1100, a
coffee-room has been established under the auspices of the
vicar (Rev. H. Rogers), and is highly appreciated by the
parish. A former schoolroom, of which half the rent is paid
by the vicar and half by the Foresters' Club, who also make
use of it, was fitted up for the purpose, and is open to all
comers from seven to ten, except on Sundays, and once a
month on the foresters' court night. The active manager
and his wife make the coffee, which sold well during the
winter; but there is a fair attendance of men who do not
buy anything at all, only smoke and read the newspapers,
of which one or two are supplied every day by friends. At
first one bagatelle board on a stand was bought through the
Exchange and Mart for £3, and parties of four or six played
The Extension of Coffee-Houses. 555
at it, the losing side paying a halfpenny each per game. As
it was very popular and the chief source of revenue, two
more boards were obtained through the same agency; and
draughts and dominoes are provided, but with no payment.
Boys of sixteen were originally admitted; but it was found
necessary to raise the age to seventeen, as they began to
prefer the coffee-house to the night school, which, as the
vicar observes, is better for them, and youths are also noisy
and disturb the older members. In many other coffee¬
houses it has been found necessary to exclude young boys,
as when they are admitted their fathers frequently keep
away; but in those coffee-houses which are open all day, we
think they might at least be allowed to come in for refresh¬
ment before seven o'clock in the evening, unless a room
can be especially appropriated to them, as is the case in
Manchester.
The receipts at the Cranborne Coffee-Eoom average about
4s. a night, which pays coal, oil, attendance, and coffee sold
at a penny per half-pint cup. Ham sandwiches pay well,
and also ham sold in slices to take home. About thirty
men resort to it every evening, and the vicar is of opinion
that a coffee tavern would pay there, provided it had a club-
room and reading-room, and that the manager had a small
farm, or some trade, to occupy him in the day-time, as his
wife could easily manage the little business done before
7 P.M.
Unless coffee-houses are established on self-supporting
principles, they will assuredly be only temporary institu¬
tions. Parochial rates are in most places heavily burdened
for schools and other purposes, and could not be expected to
grant assistance, when it was once practically demonstrated
that the coffee-hall was being worked at a loss ; but there are
county towns which from assizes, races, markets, and fairs,
draw a large number of excursionists and idlers periodically
from other parts, and have many public-houses, and many
little refreshment shops, but not one coffee-hall. These are
favourable fields for such an experiment, particularly if
there is, in addition to other attractions, a military depot, or
if it is the headquarters of the militia recruits when they are
annually called out.
In large towns we think that both the coffee public-house
—that is, a public-house in everything but the sale of intoxi¬
cating liquors, and let to the manager—and the coffee-hall
such as we now see conducted by a company in Liverpool,
London, and  Birmingham, might  be  successfully worked.
556 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
As regards its combination with a refreshment-room for
working people, we think that this is the only way to make
such refreshment-rooms succeed. Some years ago there was
a movement throughout the country for providing cheap
dining-rooms for labouring men, and several were established
in our larger towns; but we believe that Glasgow is the
only place where they have continued to provide meals within
the means of the poorer mechanic and labourer without a
positive loss. In other places, except at Bristol, they
were gradually closed, having been frequented by clerks
and persons above the class of mechanic, and some of them
were even at last deserted by these for various reasons ;
sometimes because the provisions deteriorated in quality; at
other places because there was a want of cleanliness in the
arrangements. Dining-halls are not as much needed as
coffee taverns, which supply the warmth, the cheerful
■company, the resting-place, and the beverage wliich other¬
wise can often only be obtained by the working man in a
licensed public-house ; but they would nevertheless be great
boons to many, particularly to single men living in lodgings.
The question has been asked, ' Why should a working man's
dining-hall succeed in Glasgow and not elsewhere ?' One
reason given is, that Scotsmen are more easily satisfied than
Englishmen, and will dine on a different kind of food;
another that Scottish are more economical than English
cooks. Since the cooking-school movement, the second
reason ought no longer to apply; but there is doubtless
some foundation for the first, since, like a Frenchman, the
Scot will make a meal on broth, which an English workman
is apt to despise. Haggis, a favourite Scottish dish, is also
a cheap one; and potatoes are cheap in Glasgow, from its
extensive trade with Ireland and America. But an English
workman in his own home will eat liver and bacon, and
often considers pigs' fry a luxury. There is no reason why
a chea'p diuing-hall should not supply him with a dinner
from some of the parts of mutton and beef which his wife
buys for him at home, if it cannot sell slices from a joint at
a price within his reach. If all coffee-houses which supply
meat sold potatoes or some other vegetable, it would make
the dinner more economical, wholesome, and nourishing, as
well as more agreeable; for the labouring classes in this
country often suffer in health from a want of variety and of
fresh vegetables in their diet. We see no reason why the
larger coffee taverns which possess a second room, or a large
room, should not provide a hot dinner of cheap materials at
The Extension of Coffee-Houses. 557
a certain time in the day for working men. Pies of every
description are always popular, and where fish is plentiful,
it might be supplied. Potatoes and liver, Swiss or cottage
pie, beef's cheek, sheep's head, and Australian meat warmed
with potatoes, pigs' fry, bacon pudding, liver and bacon,
potatoes and sausages, curry and rice, and Scotch broth,
might be sold at 2d. or 3d. per plate in those towns where
wages are low, and the working people not accustomed to
luxurious fare. The receipts for artisan cookery taught at
the school in South Kensington contain other dishes, which
might be sold at an equally low price.
In 1863 the Bristol Dining-Hall was opened, and, we hear,
pays its way, though the class who dine there are not quite
the same as the frequenters of the Glasgow dining-rooms for
working men. Bristol, like Glasgow, contains merchant
sailors who, with their wages just paid on coming off a
voyage, would gladly avail themselves of such a place of
resort. A dinner consisting of a basin of soup, a slice of
bread, 1\ oz. of the best beef, and 5 oz. of potatoes, is sold
for 5d.; but in the climate of Scotland this would hardly
satisfy the appetite of a hungry working man, and a larger
portion of cheaper material is more appropriate to his needs.
At St. James' Hall, Leeds, a dinner of a small plate of meat
with two vegetables or potatoes and bread, is furnished for
6d., and at the Eose and Crown roast meat cut from the joint
cost 6d., and cold 3d. or 4d. The English mechanic is usually
particular about the quality of his food, and the close or
heated rooms in which he spends most of his days in many
kinds of trade, gives him a smaller appetite than the navvy
or agricultural labourer, with whom quantity is more than
quality, and whose maladies, when not produced by drinking,
are almost always caused by exposure to weather and in¬
sufficient nourishment. At the same time, the agricultural
labourer, whether Scotch or English, can seldom afford to
give so much for his dinner as the mechanic, and this applies
to some of the small tradespeople and other dwellers in
country villages.
At Atherstone, a town of not more than 4000 inhabitants,
a coffee tavern has been set up at the cost of £1500. The
receipts for the first three weeks averaged £38 a week.
Besides thirty-three in Liverpool, and those in London,
Leeds, Manchester, and Birmingham, Hull contains eight
coffee-halls founded by one company, which hopes to
inaugurate four more by the end of this year; the Stafford¬
shire  Cocoa  and  Coffee  House  Co. has  opened  eight in
558 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Wolverhampton and the neighbouring towns ; Newcastle-
on-Tyne possesses five; Edinburgh has four; there are two
companies at work in Macclesfield; and Stockport and
Dundee, Worcester, Wem, North and South Shields, Preston,
Chorley, Nottingham, Haslingden, Eotherhani, Blackburn,
Nestou, Bromsgrove, Ashton, Accringtou, Stalybridge, Marple,
Derby, Leicester, Leamington, Leek, Birkenhead, Blackpool,
Parkgate, Brighouse, Aberdeen, Annan, Aylesbury, Wakefield,
Beverley, Doncaster, Southampton, Portsmouth, Plymouth,
Dumfries, Oldham, Heywood, Gateshead, Sunderland,
Tewkesbury, GreeuAvich, Warminster, Harrogate, Bideford,
Oxford, Glasgow, Thame, Brecon, Haverfordwest, and Festi-
iiiog, have all opened one or more.
Pinner, a small market town, contained eight public-
houses within an area occupied by not more than 700
people; but the Cocoa Tree Temperance Public House,
a picturesque country tavern opened in June 1878, bids
fair to rival them. Its receipts have hitherto averaged
4 per cent., and, contrary to the experience of larger
towns, its business so far has been less in the winter
months among an agricultural population than in the
summer. The proprietor lives near enough to superintend
it, and visits it twice a day, often giving his personal assist¬
ance ; the manager had previously served in a London coffee
tavern, and the manager's wife is a pupil of the Kensington
School of Cookery, assisted by a servant in the housework.
The provisions are at the usual coffee-house price, and during
the summer hot suppers of soup and vegetables were
provided for haymakers. In the winter pea soup is sold at
2d. per pint. The coffee-room is opened at 6 A.M. The
total outlay, including land, building, and furniture, was
about £2800; and it is expected that the bed-rooms will be
let to persons requiring summer lodgings, and prove remune¬
rative, besides which a cricket club meets there and uses
its field. This is, perhaps, the first experiment of a country
cocoa-liouse on the footing of a village country inn, only
without intoxicating liquors, and its success so far is an
encouragement to follow it up.
A village coffee-house has been opened at Great Horkes-
ley, near Colchester, by the rector of the parish, where a
disused Primitive Methodist chapel was obtained for £60,
and though the population is only 800, the nightly attend¬
ance averages 30, and the sum of £1 for coffee, tea, and cake
is taken weekly, which pays the expense of the provisions
and the woman in charge of the room.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 559
As prices vary in different parts of Great Britain, it would
be unwise to adopt a uniform coffee-hall tariff; but it is
generally found that cocoa is more popular than coffee or
tea, and that tea is the most expensive to supply; also that
home-baked pastry is more economical, more substantial,
and more appreciated than the lighter kind supplied by
confectioners. Many coffee-halls had a struggling existence
for the first year, but survived by dint of perseverance and
a search for defects; and their extension is proceeding in all
parts of the country with a celerity rarely seen in any com¬
mercial project.
V(st Beggar of Capo oi IHonte: a EaU of Stxto'-one.
By the Author or ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE XVII.
While leaving Matteo to devise means of conveying Livia
and Concetta from the cavern, we shall return to follow the
fortunes of Filippo.
Under the pretence of transporting merchandise to
Messina, he had taken the opportunity of lauding a party
of the men who sailed with him from Eeggio in Catania;
then giving the charge of the vessel to a tried comrade, and
taking Paolo with him, he headed the party himself Matteo
had been sent to the little port to Avatch the movements of
Garibaldi's troops, noAv fast pouring into the country, being
also charged to pay occasional visits to the rocks to see that
the Avomen remained safe in their seclusion. As Ave have
seen, he returned more than once, and held long conferences
Avith Claudia; and Avhen obliged to join Pilippo and his
foUoAvers, he deputed Ercole to take his place at the port
and keep guard over his charge at the rocks. Nothing but
a peremptory couimand from Filippo Avould have made him
thus devolve his task on Ercole, whose personal interest in
Concetta he had long suspected. Eumours now reached
Ercole through one of the spies employed by Filippo, of
disasters to the little band. Surprised in their place of con¬
cealment, after a desperate resistance some Avere severely
Avounded, and several others, including Paolo, made prisoners.
Filippo had received a severe wound in the hip-joint, of
which he might have died but for the strength and energy
of IVIatteo, Avho, in the confusion Avhich followed the attack,
had carried him to one of their many hiding-places amidst
the hills.
560 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Though rendered helpless for a time, Filippo was nothing
daunted by this reverse, and took advantage of his forced
inaction to concert fresh measures against the hated
Piedmontese. His chief anxiety was for Paolo; for Filippo
tenderly loved his afflicted sister, and grieved to think that
any harm should befall her son. His anxiety greatly retarded
his recovery, and it was in this extremity he resolved on
sending for Claudia, as Matteo might then follow the move¬
ments of the party who had taken Paolo prisoner, and
endeavour to ascertain the place of his confinement. Thus
it happened that Ercole was deputed to bring Claudia to her
husband, but he had no instructions as to Maddaleua's
accompanying her mother. This point, however, he was
only too glad to concede to the girl's clamorous entreaties, as
it gave him a greater chance of success in his designs upon
Concetta. He had no scruples such as burdened Matteo's
conscience in regard to keeping faith with his leader, for his
keen foresight told him that Filippo's was now a falling
enterprise, and that his chance of success was daily less
hopeful. His traitor heart made him rejoice at the mis¬
fortune that had befallen Filippo and his family, for it tlirew
them more completely into his power. Filippo, who, though
stern, was generous, had never doubted the fidelity of the
youth, entrusting him with the secret of his hiding-place, and
instructing him how to forward his wife on her journey, and
see her in safety so far. The treacherous youth availed liim-
self of this confidence to mark well every particular of the
route, and the resources still left to Filippo, as well as his
means of resistance, should he be attacked in his place of
refuge, determining, should such a necessity arise, to purchase
his own safety by betrayal of his leader.
Matteo, in the meantime, had gone through many hard¬
ships. After many days and nights of weary travel, of
exposure to cold, hunger, and want of rest, he at last found
himself at the town of Taormina, where he learned that a
vessel containing Garibaldian soldiers lay off the coast, wait¬
ing the return of a party who had succeeded in expelling
some of the Eoyalist bands who still liovered about Catania;
that some prisoners had been brought to Taormina, and
amongst them the son of the renowned buccaneer and brigand
Filippo; that a high price was set on his capture, for it was
surmised his father would strive to recover the young man,
and so throw himself in the path of those who even now
were searching for him. It was also said that a heavy guard
was placed over the prisoner.    Matteo quickly understood
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 561
from this account that they held the supposed son of Filippo
to be a prisoner of no common importance, and that unless
some scheme could be devised for his release, his life was in
imminent peril. Garibaldi would only be too glad to strike
terror into the hearts of the followers of the bold brigand by
doing summary justice on the son. Matteo was in despair,
for he knew how impossible it was for him to get back to
Filippo and consult on the means for his rescue, even
supposing such a scheme practicable, as every day lessened
the youth's chance of life. Could he but gain access to the
prison, he might, under some disguise, find means through
the jailor, who was known secretly to favour the Bourbons,
to speak with Paolo, and gain some information that might
direct him in his attempt at rescue. The difficulty was to
get speech of the jailor without exciting suspicion.
After much reflection Matteo resumed his old disguise of
the ' Beggar of Capo di Monte,' as the dress least likely to
attract attention; for Sicily could boast as many mendicants
as Naples, and few were able to detect his foreign accent in
that wliining appeal which was his usual greeting to the
passers-by. He had taken up his position for some time on
the road leading to the j)rison, and almost despaired of gaining
an entrance, when he observed an officer in uniform issue
from the gates, evidently taking the route which would oblige
him to pass where Matteo still lay crouching on the bank.
Swinging himself forward in the peculiar manner we have
already remarked, he began his well-learned cry of Qualche,
cosa per la carita, Signor. The officer stopped instantly, and
while he appeared to be feeling for his purse, narrowly ex¬
amined the features of the beggar. He had too long studied
the particular description of the Beggar of Capo di IMoute,
not to know that the man who crouched before him at that
moment soliciting alms was the person whom he had so long
been in search of. Matteo, in his turn, had been struck
with the appearance of the young soldier, whose tall figure
and handsome features bespoke him Hungarian rather than
Italian. He was so interested in this discovery, that for a
moment he forgot to urge his petition; and when the young
stranger, who was in truth Count Eudolph, spoke to him,
asking some unimportant questions to gain time for consi¬
dering the course he should take with the Beggar, Matteo's
countenance, in spite of his efforts to be calm, betrayed his
agitation, for he had instantly recognised the well-remembered
accents of his native tongue. Rudolph quickly perceived
his disturbed manner, and laying hold roughly of his shoulder,
Xo. CO.—December 1879. 2 N
562 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
leclared him his prisoner. Suspecting him of some design
u thus haunting the precincts of the jail, he was about to
summon the sentinel to his aid, but before he could raise
liis arm to beckon to the man, Matteo had taken his resolu¬
tion ; for in an instant the truth tiaslied upon him, that here
was the lover from whom Concetta had been separated,
i'ilippo had told him of the attachment existing between the
cousins, and wlio therefore was so likely as her betrothed to
seek amid the chances of war to discover the place of her
concealment ? With ready wit he determined on making
his own knowledge of her captivity the price of Paolo's
restoration to his family. Dropping his usual whining voice
and Neapolitan drawl, and rapidly seizing Eudolph's arm,
ere he had raised it for the signal to the guard on duty, in
language as pure as the Count's own polished accents, he
implored him for his own sake not to attract the man's
attention, for he had that to impart which concerned himself
alone. Without awaiting further permission, he gave him to
understand he was acquainted with the place where the
Signora Concetta was concealed, and that he would undertake
to effect her escape and bring her to the Count on condition
of his securing the life and liberty of the prisoner Paolo.
Count Eudolph was much astonished at being addressed
in the Magyar language, and in words so much above what
he should have expected from the wretched figure before him.
He hardly knew how to believe the evidence of his senses;
but when tlie beggar mentioned Concetta, and he saw that
he might through this man obtain information of her retreat,
he forgot his usual prudence, and eagerly questioned Matteo
as to the particulars of her capture, which yet remained a
mystery, asking what was the reward demanded for this
intelligence so unlooked for, and so welcome. He desired
that everything might be told him, as not a moment must
be lost ill preparing for her deliverance.
Matteo was secretly rejoiced at the young Count's im¬
petuosity, for he felt that Paolo's fate in all probability hung
upon securing his interest. Perceiving that he had efi'ectually
excited the young man's hopes, and prevented his summon¬
ing the guard, Matteo proceeded to tell the conditions on
which alone he could sell his secret. At the mention of
Paolo's name a shade of distrust passed over Eudolph's
brow; he now began to fear he was being made the tool ot
a conspiracy to release this prisoner, over whom so strict a
guard was enjoined. Matteo read his suspicion, and also
his agitation, and at once said, unless the Count would pledge
TJie Beggar of Capo dl Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.   5^3
his word for Paolo's release within a week from such time
as he was made acquainted with Concetta's retreat, he would
die rather than reveal it.
' Miscreant,' said the Count in a stern voice, ' dost thou
dare to tempt me to betray my trust ? Not even the sweet
hope of regaining her who is dearer than my life, shall make
me forget my honour. I have listened too long already to
thy false tongue, and now thou slialt reap the fruits of thy
l)oldness. Let go thy hold, I say, or by my soul thou
shalt repent it.' For his eye had fallen upon the man's
bruised arm, and he remembered Signer Ciprani's account
of the beggar's shattered limb.
jMatteo, however, still kept a firm hold on the Count,
imploring him to consider his offer; and artfully exciting
the young man by mention of Concetta's sorrow and
suffering.
' How know I that thou hast the power to lead me to her
should I consent to interest myself for the prisoner Paolo ?'
said Rudolph in a broken voice, for he was carried away by
his love for Concetta, and his desire to liberate her and save
her from further suffering, so cunningly dwelt upon by
IVIatteo. ' Bring me but to her presence, and thou mayest
trust to my honour for fulfilling thy desire.'
' Nay, Sir Count,' replied Matteo, in a tone of deep mean¬
ing, ' when life and liberty are in danger, experience hath
taught me to trust no man's mere words. If I can bring
thee some token of the Signorina by which thou mayest be
assured I have spoken the truth, wilt thou then consent to
my demand ? Thou hast the power to preserve the prisoner
Paolo from present harm, and if thou swearest he shall be
forthcoming in safety when I return with the promised
pledge, I will be more generous than thou hast been in thy
thoughts of the poor beggar, and will accept thy faith.'
Count Rudolph hesitated no longer, for every pulse beat
Avildly at the hope held out to him of recovering the lost
treasure. He promised nothing, however, tliat could
compromise his duty; but he felt assured, should he indeed
be so happy as to recover Concetta, he might rely upon her
using her influence with the Count Torcelli to obtain the
release of the prisoner. How this strange Beggar had become
master of his secret with regard to his cousin, he could not
guess, but that he knew the history of their early attach¬
ment was beyond a doubt. He thought he might venture
to promise the Count Torcelli's influence with Garibaldi to
deliver up Paolo to his friends, when the chief should be
564 The Ladies' Edmburgh Magazine.
made aware how much his own happiness depended on the
recovery of Concetta. Yearning for some token of her
safety, he now bade Matteo at once set forth on his
errand. No second bidding was needed; but as he turned
to retrace his steps, Matteo said once more:
' Swear by the honour of a INIagyar, no harm shall befall the
youth ere I return and meet thee at this spot.'
Eudolph, for a moment, was disposed to resent what
sounded like a doubt of his promised word; but anxiety to
speed him on his journey conquered his pride, and he re¬
plied, in a frank voice,' On the honour of a Magyar, I swear!'
Matteo's eyes lighted up at this, as, looking at the young
man with a speaking glance of satisfaction, he strode away
rapidly, anxious to assure him of his truth and earnestness.
We can now understand his despair at not finding Concetta
at the rocks; for he had exerted himself to almost more than
human efforts to reach the secluded ravine, travelling day
and night, never allowing himself an hour's rest, and now to
have lost all traces of her almost maddened him. Not only
would Count Eudolph deem him an impostor, but every chance
and hope of rescuing Paolo would be gone. His solitary
journey had given him leisure to reconsider his scheme of
rescue and to lay his plans more thoroughly. He remembered
the ruby ring which Concetta had once refused to part with
on the Capo di Monte, and doubted not it was the ring of
betrothal between Count Eudolph and herself This he
must now find some means of getting into his own hands as
a pledge to Count Eudolph of his truth.
After a search of nearly an hour, Matteo returned to the
anxious women, who were getting uneasy at his long absence,
and informed them he had borrowed a horse from one of the
neighbouring peasants. He was well known in that part of
the country, and had often helped the poorer class in procur¬
ing luxuries which had never passed through the custom¬
house. He now determined on taking Livia and Concetta
to the little port of Aci Eeale, and leaving them in the charge
of a friend of Filippo's on whom he could rely while he
returned to Taormina to redeem his promise to Count
Eudolph. He now told Concetta of his plans for her, and
of his meeting with the Count, and begged she would give
him her ring as a token of her being in safety. She listened
with eager attention and iiushed cheek while he related
the particulars of his meeting with her lover, for this was
the first intimation she had received of his having taken
part in the struggle for independence.    Her heart whispered
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one. 565
that a hope of recovering her had been his real motive in
joining Garibaldi's enterprise, and a sweet feeling of con¬
fidence in his success shed its balm over her wearied spirits.
She well knew that when once Eudolph should be informed
of her retreat, his sheltering arms would protect her at
whatsoever risk. Poor Matteo unconsciously sighed deeply
as she drew from him the slightest particular connected with
her cousin, and again his lost Teresa seemed to stand before
him, as with quivering lips and with tears of joy in her beauti¬
ful eyes, Concetta hung upon his words. Though unwilling to
disturb the train of her thoughts, filled with sweet memories
of past and anticipations of future happiness, he remembered
how short a time remained for his return to Taormina, and
gently said:
' The Signora must not linger on the road, or Count
Eudolph will too readily suppose some deceit has been
practised upon him, and in revenge'—here he lowered his
voice so as not to alarm poor Livia—' may give up Paolo to
the fury of the soldiers.'
This was quite enough to make Concetta forget herself;
for pity for the distracted mother, whose very life
seemed to hang upon that of her son, made her eager to
secvire her cousin's interest for Paolo. She scarcely dared
to think what part her father might be obliged to take in
the afi'air, and what horror and remorse would follow, should
he ignorantly condemn his own son to an ignominious death.
She turned pale as this fear presented itself, and suddenly
entreated Matteo to take her with him to Taormina for fear
Eudolph might refuse to give up Paolo to himself. She
assured him she would sooner undergo any fatigue or hard¬
ship on their route than endure the suspense of not knowing
whether Count Eudolph had waited for his reappearing.
Her heart suggested a thousand fears, and Matteo saw how
unwilling she was to part with her ring. Something must
be decided at once, or all hope of reaching Taormina would
be lost. How to take Livia without endangering their own
safety was the difficulty, so lawless were the bands of soldiers
traversing the island. Concetta saw his perplexity, and
after a moment's consideration, suggested that her dis¬
guise as a sister of charity travelling in charge of a sick
woman was sufficient, for in the country they were about to
pass through, so sacred was that calling, that none would
molest a woman engaged in such an office, be she young or
old. Matteo consented on one condition, and that was, that
she would not attempt to make herself known to Count
566 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
a'" -"-"-'i)'
Eudolph until he gave her permission; for he had reasons
for keeping his real character concealed until something
definite could be arranged for Filippo's safety as well as
his own. Livia was gradually told of their meeting Paolo
at the end of their journey, and Matteo endeavoured to
impress on her bewildered faculties the necessity of abiding
by his instructions in everything. With this injunction
they set out towards Aci Eeale; but their progress was so
slow with the wretched animal they had hired to take them,
that in dread of reaching Taormina too late, Matteo deter¬
mined now to give up the land journey and to engage a
passage in the first vessel leaving the little port.
On their arrival about mid-day at Aci Eeale, they for¬
tunately found a vessel preparing to sail that same night.
Matteo conducted them to one of the small seafaring houses
of refreshment on the quay, long frequented by the crews of
the smuggling craft on that coast; and being well acquainted
with the inmates, was able to procure a few necessaries for
the wearied travellers, without exciting suspicion or calling
forth any remark. The woman of the house was too much
accustomed to receive strangers in questionable circum¬
stances to take particular notice of the women who now
sought shelter at her house;' but the youth and beauty of
Concetta involuntarily softened her usually abrupt manners,
and supposing her to be engaged in a work of charity, with
much kindness she offered her the use of her own bed, that
she might rest until the vessel sailed, a kindness which
Concetta thankfully accepted, for the agitation and fatigue
of the last two days and nights had told severely on her
delicate frame. Livia, assured of finding Paolo, had become
more tranquil, and Concetta, with a gentleness to which the
poor creature was little accustomed, persuaded her to take
advantage of the few hours' rest now aiforded them.
Several hours had been passed in tranquil sleep when
Concetta was awoke by the loud voices of the sailors preparing
to weigh anchor and leave the port. So heavy had been her
slumber, that she was not at first conscious of the meaning
of these cries, until Matteo, knocking at the door of their
apartment, bade them lose no time, for the vessel would be
under weigh in a few minutes. Eousing Livia, Concetta
helped her to rise, and then admitting Matteo, they took the
still dreaming woman by the arms and led her gently but
hurriedly forward. The air was soft and balmy, and the sea
as calm as in summer. The moon, now almost full, rose
majestically, and threw its broad liglit over land and sea.
The Beggai'of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one. 567
defining every rock and peak, and bringing out the volcanic
mountain in wondrous beauty. Concetta, as she looked on
the little port now fast fading from her sight, recalled the
night of her first landing on the coast, and the horrible dread
that liad taken possession of her mind as she realized
Filippo's intention of carrying her into the interior of the
island beyond the reach of help. Her heart swelled witli
gratitude as she contrasted her present feelings. A joyful
expectation lighted up her hopes, for she trusted ere another
sun had set to be safe under liudolph's protection. Matteo,
who was leaning over the ship's side at a little distance,
stole many a glance at the sweet face now radiant with
happiness. He seemed to read her heart, and unwilling to
break the spell, he quietly went to the other end of the
vessel. The very sight of her, awakened feelings he had
long crushed into silence, and he became restless and finxious
to cast off the sadness which filled his breast as he recalled
his lost Teresa. Entering into conversation with the captain,
he soon became interested in his narrative of an encounter
between some soldiers and a young brigand, who, the captain
informed him, had been wounded and taken prisoner the
day previous to their sailing, near the Grotto of Polypheme.
Matteo instantly recognised Ercole as the young brigand,
and skilfully drew forth a full description of the youth and
every particular of his capture. The captain, not suspecting
Matteo's personal interest in the matter, boasted of the
knave's cleverness in having secured his liberty by betray¬
ing the hiding-place of the smuggler Filippo, whom the
soldiers had been so long and so fruitlessly in search of.
Had not the man at the helm called out at that moment for
some instruction from his captain, Matteo must have been
discovered, for a dreadful oath burst from his lips on hearing
of this treachery of a comrade. He did not dare trust him¬
self to renew the conversation, but sat meditating gloomily
on the intelligence he had received, and how it might affect
the fate both of Concetta and Paolo. He now returned to
his place near Concetta, and she remarked with some anxiety
the troubled working of his dark features. Could anything
have arisen to shake his purpose or make him less her
friend ? She feared to ask the cause of his evident distress,
but tremblingly waited for some explanation of his altered
manner. At last he drew near to her, and in low tones told
her of Ercole's treachery, and the danger it might bring to
all of them, for he himself was well known to belong to
Eilippo's band.    Concetta's heart sank as she listened, for
568 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
now every hope seemed dashed again. Without Matteo's
help how was she to gain access to Eudolph ? Yet she was
too generous to wish to sacrifice him by exposing him to the
danger of being taken prisoner, should they fall in with
Garibaldi's soldiers before Eudolph was assured of her
escape. Much anxious conversation passed between them,
but they could decide on nothing till Matteo had redeemed
his promise to Count Eudolph which he had sworn to do,
should his life be the forfeit. He now entreated Concett»
to be calm, fearing her agitation might attract the attention
of the captain. A breeze sprang up at daybreak, and the
little barque made such great way that before noon the town
of Taormina was in sight, and the captain prepared to land
the passengers, as the vessel was not going to unload her
freight there. Matteo's courage rose at hearing this, for he
knew not what part the captain might have taken should he
have discovered the relations existing between Filippo and
himself. He gave many instructions to Concetta as to her
conduct on landing, and then rousing Livia, who had relapsed
into a state of half-consciousness, he quietly waited by her
side while they neared the shore. In half an hour the
vessel had entered the port, and Matteo, with Livia on his
arm, and Concetta aiding her tottering steps, left the ship
without exciting the suspicion of the captain, who looked
after the retreating form of the lovely girl with secret pity
and admiration, wondering at the piety which, as he
imagined from her dress, had condemned so fair a creature to
so joyless an existence.
{To le continued.)
C!)rtsttnas=Cf)ime5.
To Hox. Mes J. F. Montgomery.
New-christened bells ! ring your first Christmas-chime,
Your first glad tidings of the wondrous Birth:
Henceforth in our fair city, through all time
Your voices mingle with our holiest mirth ;
' Glory to God—Peace and good-will on earth'—
While from the choir and vaulted aisle the tone
Ascends, of Christmas-anthems to the Throne,
Our Library Table. 569
Stately this fair cathedral, as it stands,
Faint symbol of a glory we expect—
The Clmrch Unseen—slow-fashioning in the Hands,
Patient and sure, of the Great Architect;
Gathering e'en now the crowd of His elect
From earth's four winds—a white-robed choir—to sing
An ' endless Alleluia' to the King.
L. D.
©ur ILiijraro ^aljlc.
Whin Bloom.   By Robina Hardy.   Edinburgh : W. P. Nimmo & Co.
A more than ordinarily jjretty little book of poems, some of them
in gracefully written dialect, and all truly Scotch in their mingled
humour and pathos. We are glad to observe that the pretty vignettes
by different artists are well engraved by a lady. This is a charming
little gift-book for the season.
Catherine and Cbaufubd Tait.    Edited by Rev. W. Benhara.
Macmillan.    1879.
It does not need many words to recommend a book which so
naturally recommends itself wherever the names of those who have
written it and of those who are commemorated in it are known and
valued. And this implies a very wide circle, for England, Scotland,
and Ireland are all interested in the Archbishop and his wife. A
probably unusual number of persons were bound to them by ties of
affection and gratitude, and a much larger number, who never saw
their faces, have felt and will feel their influence for good, it may not
be too much to say, in all English-speaking lands.
Their history has long been, in a measure, public property; for
most people who can look back some twenty-three years, remember
the thrill of sympathy that passed through the land for the sorrow
that desolated their house. The full history of that time of trouble
is now, apparently after some struggle with natural reserve, given to
the world. The truthful and pathetic narrative, in the mother's own
words, possesses an enthralling interest for most readers, and we do
not envy those who could read it in a coldly critical spirit.
This narrative by Mrs. Tait, and the manly and simple record by
the Archbishop himself of his lost wife's career, are, in our opinion,
the valuable parts of the book. Had there been no more, we think
it would have been in its kind, and for its purpose, perfect, and we
rather grudge that memoirs of such worth should beset in a medley of
less valuable reminiscences from other pens, including here and there
an anecdote or a jest hardly worthy of the grave dignity of the
whole. The special memoir of Craufurd Tait, too, might perhaps, in
a book for general use, have been omitted. Excellent and loveable
as he was,—one, we hope, among many other devoted clergymen and
loving sons,—he was yet not a public character, and had not had time
to show the whole worth that was in him. In as far as his life
touched his mother's life, and as his death formed, in the editor's
570 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
feeling words, not so much the great sorrow as 'the crowning victory'
of that life, he was fitly noticed, and more perhaps was needless.
With Catherine Tait the case is different. A strictly womanly
woman, and filling with the nicest tact the true wifely pai't in the
joint labours, there is something in her character singularly rounded
and complete, which makes it well worthy to be held up to the light
for an example. Hers seems to us, with all its sorrows, to have been
an enviable mind and an enviable life, remarkable in its straight¬
forwardness, its singleness of aim, and its joyousness in achievement.
One of the writers in the medley which we have ungratefully
decried, says justly in speaking of it, 'Don't you think that very
great bodily activity combined with such very great spirituality and
devotion is a very rare thing /' We think it is, but it is cheering
and animating to see that it is not impossible.
Many people will probably take up this book with a sensation of
wonder, possibly amounting to distaste, that such very private and
sacred matters should be made public ; but we believe they will lay
it down again with a feeling that they are the better for its perusal,
and a feeling therefore of gratitude to those who have made it
possible.
XII.—Write a story to Tennyson's 'Mariana,' either North or
South as you prefer.
Answers, not to exceed six hundred words, to reach.(^w. C, care
of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh, not
Liter than 5th January. The best answer will be inserted, and the
two next best named, in our next issue ; and prizes are offered to the
first, second, and third of the competitors at the close of the yeai'.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO OCTOBER SERIES.
Two Answers only; of these. Thorough, excellent. Stella,
second ; good in first part, rather slight in second.
Contrast Music, as understood by the ancient Greeks, with Music
as understood by Wagner, quoting authors on both sides of the
(piestion.
The state of music among the ancient Greeks has given rise to much
discussion and research, but remains on many points a vexed question.
Burney, in his History of Music, says:—' The first public use of
music was in the service of religion, and the first private use to
alleviate labour and care, and to express hilarity during social
happiness.' This agrees with what we find in Plutarch:—' The first
and noblest application of music is in offering the tribute of praise to
the immortals, the next is the purifying, regulating, and harmonizing
the soul.' The cultivation of music among the Greeks was confined
in great part to the higher ranks, of whose education it formed an
essential part. Music was reputed a powerful agent in forming the
mind of youth, and in rousing the spirit of courage and patriotism.
The lyre and the flute were the principal instruments ; the former
had four strings at the time of Homer, but gradually increased to
Stray Notes. 57r
twelve. On public, solemn, and festive occasions, the Greeks accom¬
panied their songs on these instruments. They must have had a
national music corresponding in its qualities to the character of the
people and their language ; it was not only foruied out of those
elements which are furnished by nature, but was carried to a high
degree of excellence as an art. It is generally supposed the Greeks
had no musical rhythm excej^t that which regulated their poetry, at
all events it is certain that their music and poetry were most
intimately connected.
Wagner's ideas on the subject of music may be best given in his
own words. He says :—' Music, as separated from words and actions,
—independent, orchestral, and instrumental music,—has reached its
utmost development, and its further advance can only be an advance
into the inane ; while the music that is still associated with words,
operatic music, has broken itself up into a number of separate forms,
as aria, scena, recitative, which correspond to no real varieties of
emotional utterance, and in the aimless production of which the art
is in danger of paralyzing itself. This process must be checked ;
music and words must be brought back into close connection and
mutual dependence ; the artificial opera forms must be abolished,
and a new and homogeneous musical drama be created of which the
author shall combine in himself the now differentiated functions of
poet, composer, inventor and director of scenery and stage appliances,
so that the entire creation may boar the impress of a single mind.'
Wagner seems to forget that dramatic music is first of all music, and
has its own intrinsic laws. It may malce concessions in the interest
of the drama, but can never give up the.se laws, on which rests its
whole existence. Dr. F. Hiller defines Wagner's ideal to be :—
' A drama, in wliich the situations shall be such as belong to the
emotional world, the action of which moves fast enough to keej) up
the interest of the public, but not too fast to prevent the music from
developing with the necessary breadth ; the dialogue in which shall
not express enough to make the music unnecessary, nor so little as
to render music impossible ; and lastlj', the diction of which shall
not make the composer despair, either on account of its extravagant
beauty or its excessive dulness.' He goes onto say, that a man's
theories have their origin in the powers and sympathies he was born
with. Wagner seems first to have been passionately attracted by
dramatic art, and only afterwards to have acquired a taste for music.
Thorough.
Stray liotcs.
The Prizes for our Question Series will be announced in February
1880, when the last answers of the present series have been received.
A new series will be commenced in January, to which we invite
the attention of competitors.
Edinbukgh Ladies' Literaky Society. — On Saturday, 22d
November, a Malinte Mnsicale et Bramatique was given by this
Society, assisted by several artists and amateurs. It took place in
the charming drawing-room of a relation of one of the members of
the Society, to whom had been committed the chief management of
the entertainment, and was a brilliant success, showing that the
Literary Society rejoices in many kind and talented friends.    The
572 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
first part was a pleasant concert given by professional and amateur
performers, the latter being, for the most part, members of the
Society. The second, or dramatic part, included a charming little
Comedie de Salon,—^ The Morning Call,'—sparkling with ' good things,'
and most gracefully and admirably acted; .and 'Box and Cox,'
in its operetta form, by Sullivan. This last well-known farce, in its
new and most appropriate musical dress, is greatly improved, the
music bringing in a really pretty element, besides greatly enhancing
the unsijeakably absurd and comical situations and dialogue. It was
capitally played and sung by three first-rate performers. The tender,
soothing pathos of the ' Lullaby ' to the rasher of bacon, the dramatic
force of the dnet about the 'Treacherous Cat,' and the serenade
with suggested piano, guitar, and concertina accompaniment, delighted
the crowded and appreciative audience. We have only to regret
tliat, owing to limited accommodation, many were disappointed of
admission who would gladly have been present.
S. George's Hall Classes.—These are now in full operation, and
give every prospect of success. The numbers of oral students have
increased this year, Mr. M'Glashan's class alone numbering over
forty students ; the Advanced Harmony Class also seems to be, as
was expected, very attractive. On the other hand, the corresponding
students are fewer in number than in any previous year. This was
only to be expected, being due, of course, to the fact that other places
liave followed our good example, and are doing their own work ; so
that we may really hope and believe that the cause of Secondary
Education has received a stimulus, and been materially helped
tliroughout Scotland by the establishment of these classes in
Edinburgh.
Debates of the Ladies' Literary Society.—A fresh series of
subjects for debate will be issued to Members of the Society with
their January Magazine, and they themselves are invited to send, in
December, suggestions as to topics for debate during the ensuing
year. These may be addsessed to the President of the Society, 5
Chester Street.
Nottrrs to Corrcspontirnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless full postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
tlie Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
lield on Saturdaj', 6th December, at 5 Chester Street, at 10.30 a.m.
The election of office-bearers will take place ; and the Debate will be :
Is Gothic Architecture superior to Greek, Neo-Greek, and Bj'zantine I
^
t* -*
■'...t-kt.- j
V.
-*^   I
■'4
I
