£      «^»'® ?i-^ ^^ _^
^
*''!* . ■
iSir-"
;:<'■
t *l!^.   1
National Library of Scotland
*B000444681*
u 'ic)3
II
H
%l
THE   LADIES'
EDINBUEGH
MAGAZINE
BEING
A NEW SERIES OF "THE ATTEMPT."
VOL.   I.
EDINBURGH: MACLAREN & MACNIVEN.
MDCCCLXXV.
EDINBURGH :   PRINTED  BY  COLSTON  &  SON.
^r 1936 ^
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Bonnie Little Mary, by Lutea Reseda, 207
Christian Woman's Work in India, The, by S. S. Hewlett,
225, 278, 309, 335
Dragon of the North, The, by E. J. 0.,
25, 33, 60, 101, 1-12, 165, 197, 229, 261, 293, 325, 357
Dreams, by Melensa,         .      155
Enigma, by Jane B. Ballant^ne, .        .        .        .        .        .173
" En Route to Italy," by Mrs. Brewster Macpherson, . 11, 40
Exhibition of the Royal Scottish Academy, The, by M. E. T., 77
Features of the Face Indicative of Character ?   Are the, by
Martyn Hay, 365
" From Italy," by Mrs. Brewster Macpherson,            .        .        . 282
Halcyon Days, by Gratia,  128
Highland Spring, A, by Enna,  140
Hopping-Time in the "Garden of England," by Gratia,     .        . 342
In the Twilight, by Joan Scott,  86
lona, by H. A. B.,  174
Literary Merit tested by Popularity, by Ircene, .        .        .149
Miss Thackeray's Fairy Tales, by E. V. Lynne,          .        .        . 110
Musical Season, Our last, by Our Notebook,      .... 133
Old Home, The, by Martyn Hay,  61
Our Library Table, 30, 132, 388
Patience, by Joan Scott,  308
Puppy's Paradise, by Estelle,  117
IV
Contents,
PAGE
Qualities Essential to the Novelist, On some, by Procla,     .        . 1
Reverie, A, by Naomi S. Smith, 24
Shadow and Sunshine, by Melensa, 260
Shield of Achilles, The, by Jeanie Morison,        ....      277
Sonnet, by Jeanie Morison, 52
Temptation, by Mrs. Brewster Macpherson,        ....      341
Tischendorf, The late Dr., by Sigma, 94
To my Lady, by R.,  254
Walt Whatman's " Leaves of Grass," Thoughts on, by Joan Scott,    17
Werburga of Chester, by Procla,
52, 87, 119, 155, 187, 221, 246, 313, 347, 373
Woman's Work—
L Introduction, by Phoebe Blyth, 184
II. Girls' Schools, by Louisa Innes Lumsden,       .        .      208, 238
III. Engraving on Wood, by B. B. M'Laren,        .       .        .      272
IV. Nursing, by Probationer, 301
v. Medicine   a    Profession   for    Women,   by   Eliza   W.
Dunbar, M.D., 383
VI. Years, by Naomi S. Smith,     . ....      380
THE
LADIES' EDINBURGH  MAGAZINE.
©n some ^ualiti^s (Kssalial to tlie ^uuelist.
In order to attain to some idea of what qualities are
essential to the novelist, we must first inquire, what is the
task which he has to perform ? The world of fiction is a
very large world, and that province in it called the Novel
is a most extensive and growing province. Of late years
it has been widening its limits in many directions—con¬
quering a new nation there, here claiming a new science
for its own, appropriating a new sect in religion, or
dilating on some great chapter in history. And in pro¬
portion to the extent of its efforts is the difficulty in
finding an answer to the question. What is a novel ?
Difficult as the answer may be when we look at the
ingredients in many novels, if we look at their essence
alone it cannot fail to be this—a novel is a work
of art. It must always be so, even where, as in many
cases, the art is but as a drop in a whole bucket of science
and speculation.
A novel is a work of art, though not generallj^, nor
necessarily, of the highest kind of art. The following
remarks by a fellow of Balliol College may throw some
light on art, in its relation to philosophy and to human
life:—" Mere copying is not art. The artist brings nature
before us, as we have seen it, perhaps, only once or twice
in our lives, under the influence of some strong emotion.
He does that for us which we cannot do for ourselves ; he
reproduces those moments of spiritual exaltation in which
'we feel that we are better than we know'—moments
which we can remember, and of which the mere memory
No 1.—January 1875. A
2 The Ladies Edinhuagh Magazine.
may be the light of our lives, but Avhich no act of our own
will can bring back. It is not till the distinction has been
appreciated between nature as it is and nature as we make
it to be, between that which we see and that which
' having not seen, we love,' that any branch of art can be
reckoned in its proper value."
The writer of these remarks then goes on to contrast
the matter-of-fact aspect of the source of our knowledge
with the aspect of philosophy, art, and religion. The
former takes our knowledge to be exclusively the result
of the action of human thought; the latter admits the
co-operation of nature by the transmission of images.
The view of art, taking its stand on this basis, involves
the absolute fusion of thought and things. The
habitual interpretation of natural events by the analogy
of human design, is but an anticipation of, and a step
towards, such a true conquest of nature. This habitual
interpretation is a proof that, " to the ordinary man,
nature presents itself, not as something external, but, like
a friend, as ' another liimself.'"
Pure emotion is the medium of the true conquest of
nature thus daily anticipated. In it " the experiences of
life are held together, and the animal element is so fused
with the spiritual as to form one organisation, through
which the same impulse runs with unimpeded energy.
Then man has made nature his own, by becoming a
conscious partaker of the reason which animates him and
it. The attainment of this consummation can only
approach realisation through the operation of a power
which can penetrate the whole man, and act on every
moment of his life. But that power, which, in the form
of religion, can make every meal a sacrament, and trans¬
form human passion into the likeness of divine love, is
represented at a lower stage, not only by the unifying
action of speculative philosophy, but by the combining
force of art."
Art, then, is the celebration of the union of man with
nature. And he must be one with her, else whence those
untold feelings of sympathy with her sublime moods, of
yearning after her loveliness ? That only arouses our
feeling, which has something akin to ourselves; we
know this from our intercourse with our fellow-men ; we
may know it too from our intercourse with nature.
Those thoughts of the Oxford graduate present to our
minds a philosophy, under the shadow of which we may
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magzaine. 3
live happily. Not so that other philosophy of the French¬
man, worshipping the human, yet placing before it a
"fatality that must be accepted." And this is the
philosophy which we trace in the writings of George
Eliot. Which view is the more favourable to art, that
whicli shows us nature as the friend of man, or that
which represents her as an adverse and superior power?
What, then, is the place which the novel holds among
Avorks of art? To our age it stands in the same relation
in which the drama stood to an earlier age: the drama,
in its turn, succeeded the epic. Poetic art spoke first in
the epic. Man was one with nature, with a oneness so
complete that it was unconscious. The powers of nature
and of heroes Avere one to him ; man and nature worked
together. Hence the old epic, so simple, so grandly
objective, so bound to the hearts of nations.
Then came the drama. Man poetised his higher moods
and nobler actions. Thus he gradually grew more
subjective; new varieties of the drama called for new
phases of thought and character. Gradually this study
of human nature grew to essays on men and manners,
and then to stories of men and manners, or novels. The
novel was less high art than the drama, but it described
men more faithfully, and thus led to a more exact esti¬
mate of character. Still it is a work of art; it must be
so, if it fulfil its mission aright. It must give large and
true views of life; it must epitomise the feelings and
actions of existences ; it must have some ideas besides
those of character alone ; it must go only where imagina¬
tion and feeling can go with it.
That the history of the world revolves in circles is a
remark frequently made by careful observers. Looking
at the novel from this point of view, should not we
expect it soon to quit the field in favour of some other
species of production ? Are not its frantic attempts to
scale the heights of science and philosophy a proof that
every pathway, every track in its own level ground, has
become a too common thoroughfare? With the next
revolution of the wheel of literature, possibly the drama
may again come uppermost. Not as it was before ; less
exalted above life, more expanded over it; less star¬
gazing, looking more around; exalting real life and real
human beings into a region of poetry. And then, why
should not the epic reappear ? At a stage when advance¬
ment in many things shall have been attained at the cost
4 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
of a vast amount of subjectivity, the learner will have his
task by heart, and man will have accomplished the true
end of being; he will again be one with nature. But not as
before ; not in the old way of making human the torrent,
the sun, the stone; but in the knowledge, deepened into
feeling, of nature's vast powers—powers ever working for
man and with man.
Such an attempt to estimate the novel in its relation to
philosophy, art, and history, may form a suitable basis on
which to take our stand while we proceed to contrast
two of our greatest novelists—namely, George Eliot and
Thackeray—with regard to some qualities essential to
writers of fiction.
1. Breadth of Subject.—This quality in fiction depends
chiefly on the number and variety of characters intro¬
duced, and on the importance of the actions about
which they are engaged, and of the events by which
those actions are determined. As to the number and
variety of characters they portray, George Eliot and
'I'hackeray are tolerably equal. They both draw their
characters from all ranks, though, in her earlier
novels in particular, George Eliot paints the lower
classes more largely than Thackeray ever does. In
reading Middlemarch, we are well-nigh bewildered by
the various groups of heroes and heroines long before we
have been introduced to all of them. In Vanity Fair
we have fewer characters, but they appear on a larger
stage, and the hum of the world's voices in history, and in
stirring events, forms an accompaniment to the whole.
Thackeray's novels are essentially novels of society; we
conjecture, if we did not know, that he was a frequenter
of London society, and knew thoroughly its tone, and the
style of comment passed on all Avho compose it. His
heroes and heroines are men and women of society; he
gives them only those virtues and vices which make
themselves readily felt by all around; generosity, un¬
selfishness, true nobility, are his standard virtues ; greed,
hypocrisy, self-seeking, all fall beneath his imsparing lash.
George Eliot, on the other hand, likes better to paint men
singly than in groups ; each individual is to her a world
for research. With regard, then, to breadth of subject, we
may say that George Eliot and Thackeray both paint
men in great numbers and varieties: that while George
Eliot's delineations of individual character are more
studied and more  careful, Thackeray, on the contrary,
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 5
paints men more in the mass, more in onthne, and more
with a view to the general effect.
2. Truth to Nature.—Truth to nature in literature is
not merely correct description; it is description with
thought and feeling added to it. When the author
describes scenery, we give his words poetic truth only if
he enters somewhat into sympathy with the object
described. George Eliot does this perfectly in her
description of Dorlcote Mill at the beginning of the
Mill on the Floss: here feeling is in harmony with what
is seen, and the poet is identified with the landscape.
Take this short passage from it:—"How lovely the little
river is, with its dark, changing wavelets I It seems to
me like a living companion while I wander along the
bank and listen to the low placid voice, as to the voice
of one who is deaf and loving. I remember those large
dipping willows. T remember the stone bridge." The
author is evidently depicting scenes of childhood, and
the vividness of poetic insight makes imagination and
thought keep pace. Nature becomes a living companion ;
the passage is one which only a true poet could have
written. Thackeray has a somewhat similar passage,
where Esmond revisits Castlewood after an absence of
fourteen years:—" He had not seen its ancient grey
towers and well-remembered woods for nearly fourteen
years. There was the fountain in the court babbliii g its
familiar music, the old hall and its furniture, the carved
chair my late lord used, the very flagon he drank from.
Esmond rose up before the dawn, passed into the next
room, where the air was heavy with the cdour of the
wall-flowers," &c. In this passage we have the vivid
painting of a fond memory. Yet the things are still
things, not friends : it is a picture possessing Dutch
correctness; that of George Eliot floats in a mist of poetry.
In depicting such scenes she is superior to Thackeray.
This poetic feeling, however, does not accompany her
throughout in her delineations of human character.
The French writer Taine says of Dickens, that he is a
man who, with a stew-pan in one hand, and a postilion's
whip in the other, takes to making prophecies; and it may
be said of George Eliot, that she is a writer who, with a
dissecting-knife in one hand, and an artist's pencil in the
other, takes to making characters. But the dissecting-
knife has so much to do, that it leaves no level surface on
which the artist's pencil may expend its beautifying lines.
6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The   character  is   cut  open, and all its ingredients are
separated  into  little  heaps.     In hardly any  character
throughout     Middiemarch    does   this   strike     us   more
forcibly than in that of Rosamond Vincy.    George Eliot's
hatred of the ordinary conventiona] young lady is well
known; but she rather defeats her own object by over¬
drawing the vices of that unfortunate being.   No character
in the book awakens our wrath more than that of Rosamond
does.    We are so strangely moved by this character, that
we have very strong doubts as to its truth, and are at
least certain that it is overdrawn.    It has been remarked
of George Eliot that her characters of men are inferior to
those of women.    This Avas true of Adam Bede ; and it is
true of Ladislaw.    His attributes are scattered about over
the book in such a way that we never sec the whole man
at once ; he always appears to us through a dim and misty
medium. George Eliot's favourites, too, are subjected to as
severe an anatomising process as her aversions; and this
process is so perseveringly continued, that we have no
opportunity of standing off to view the general effect.
All is detail and scrutiny from beginning to end.    This is
mental anatomy,—psychology carried beyond the realms
of ar(.    It is as if some one who kept a den of creatures
in order to observe their actions, had taken us into this
den, and we there beheld these unfortunates, with all the
fresh   bloom of youth scraped off, and Avere obliged to
observe, in a light so strong as to render partiality im¬
possible, the perverse workings of their vicious natures.
Does  not   true   art,  in   her   communings  with  nature,
always keep the veil of reverence before her eyes; and does
not her love of the beautiful lead her to observe less that
which is ugly 1    Besides, in a book whicli professes to be a
nDvel,  and therefore a history of human life, we expect
some adherence  to   a   law   which   regulates   historical
compositions; namely, the canon of historical objectivity.
And does not   Thackeray adhere  to this  law 1    The
very superficiality for which he has been blamed is a proof
of this.    He looks more on his characters with regard to
their actions than to the springs of those actions.    Tak¬
ing men more in the mass, he goes less deep; and yet, at
the foundation of the actions of each lies a psychological
truth, which  finds  its   outcome  in  those  actions.    We
know,  from   the  moment  of   our  first introduction to
Rebecca Sharp, that that young woman possesses intel¬
lect, without either heart or principle; and to show us
The Ladies ICdinhurgli Alagazine. 7-
the workings of that character, Thackeray does not make
incisions into her mind in order to show what is going on
there, but he reflects those internal processes in a series
of consistent actions throughout the book.
We find, then, that where George Eliot anatomises,
Thackeray describes. The power of description is a
power more suitable to a novelist than that of anatomis¬
ing, inasmuch as it is more purely imaginative. It seems,
therefore, that on this ground Thackeray is more true to
nature, and also on the ground that the portraying of
thoughts and feelings must be comparatively a matter of
conjecture, whereas the recording of action may in all
cases have its foundation in reality.
3. Humour and Pathos.—The humour of Thackeray
appears chiefly in grotesque situations ; that of George
Eliot, in witty sayings. These are exactly the qualities
to be expected from a describer of action on the one hand,
and an anatomiser of character on the other. The humour
of George Eliot appears chiefly in epigrammatic sayings
and in conversations. These are so well known that it is
unnecessary to quote any of them. The power of
putting witty sayings into people's mouths, and that of
making them perform amusing actions, are totally
different, and Ave can hardly rank one above the other.
It seems, however, that the former belongs more naturally
to a woman who has lived in quietude with thoughts and
feelings ; the latter to a man who has lived among actions.
With regard to pathos. Returning to our idea of art as
a sympathy with nature, we expect to find that sympathy
heightened where the author writes of human feeling,
just in proportion to the greater kinship between the
author and other men, than between the author
and a tree or a woodland scene. Here, if anywhere, we
may hope to find art one with nature, and the poet feel¬
ing all that his hero feels.
Take any one of George Eliot's most pathetic passages.
Art is never wholly merged in sympathy. Every out¬
ward detail, every phase of thought and feeling in the
mind of the person described, is noted with a Diirer-like
correctness. We find, on the contrary, that when
Thackeray rises to pathos he is no longer only describing
feelings, he is feeling them too ; and the reader catches the
impulse, and his heart bleeds for the sufferer or sufferers
as the case may be. Such is the effect of true pathos.
George Eliot lacks enthusiasm ;   Middle-march especially
8 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Avants it. Adam Bede had more; so had the Mill on the
Floss. In the case of this Avriter, observation seems to
have killed enthusiasm, and placed contempt in its stead.
Art is essentially sympathetic; a want of sympathy
makes a defect in art.
4, The Moral Tendency, and the after-thought in the reader's
mind.—Morality ought to pervade true art in such a way
that its presence should be insensibly felt. It ought not
to obtrude itself in the form of advice, epigrammatic
sayings in the style of La Bruyere, or plain indications of
vices to be censured. If we Avant a proof of human
depra\'ity, Ave have it in the fact that people cannot read
a simple story, long or short, Avithout asking Avhat is the
moral of it. Surely the English nation must be the most
immoral one in the world, for it is they more than any
others, Avho seem to feel the need of a moral attached to
each novel or story. And their novelists liaA-e seen this
want, and have met it. They have pointed their morals
in the sharpest Avay, and adorned their tales Avith satires
of the most cutting description. The French writer Taine
says the English are too moral. Their novels are too little
works of art, and too much moral essays. So far he is
right, but no further; not Avhen he reproves the English
noA^elist for not casting the glow of beauty over vice, nor
making human nature attractiA^e in any form, no matter
what its character may be. Moral beauty belongs to art
as much as any other kind of beauty does; only it must
pervade it, not form a heterogeneous excrescence from it.
Both George Eliot and Thackeray moralise too much ;
they are too satirical. Thackeray is an avoAved lay
preacher, and sermonises openly and constantly; and his
sermons have in many instances had the desired eifect
among those for whom they were intended. Moraliser as
he is, he is tender to human nature: he attacks it con¬
stantly, despises it sometimes, and hates it—never.
Neither do Ave hate even his worst men and Avomen; Ave
are able to laugh at them, because he does so himself.
George Eliot, as we might haA^e expected, moralises in
epigrams and in mental anatomy. Her sayings are A^ery
deep and wonderful, though sometimes heavily John¬
sonian. She does not abuse her victims so heartily and
openly as Thackeray, neither does she treat them to so
much irony as he does, nor laugh so heartily at their
human Aveaknesses ; but she turns them over and oA'er,
and looks them through and  through,   till every little
Tlte Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 9
speck and mole has been discovered, and then leaves them
for us to gaze on; and lo ! the glory has departed.
Scorn and contempt in an author are infectious; and we
begin to feel the same for our species. Where these are,
cheerfulness and hope are at an end. Not hope for the
pleasant ending of the novel, but for the ideal of
humanity. Does such hopefulness form a necessary
element in the teaching of the novelist, and is the want
of it a flaw in his work ? Art and nature, as I showed
before, are one with each other. Where nature is
looked on as an adverse power, a fatality that must be
accepted, then they are no longer one. Art, too, dons
her weapons against fate; but in her very feebleness, her
strongest weapon is her scorn; and she is certain of
defeat. And by virtue of this very scorn and opposition,
she is no longer art in the true sense. The calm of
artistic power is displaced by a liiorbid foreboding ; and
where this is the case, feebleness is the inevitable result.
The afterthought occasioned by George Eliot's woi-ks is
in most cases tinged with melancholy. This is partly due
to the fact that, having adopted a new and painful
philosophy, she has also entered upon a new and difficult
path in religion. It is a path where reason has much to
do in rectifying the conclusions of an unthinking faith.
!So hard is this task, so wide the field in which this effort
is made, that despair has overtaken the seeker for truth—
despair of human help, despair of finding alone a way out
of the labyrinth. No wonder, then, that melancholy ensues,
and pervades her pages and the minds of her readers.
Our only comfort, after reading her works, is the thought
that possibly the fate of her noblest heroes and heroines
does not embody her type of the fate of humanity.
Believing the future to be built up on the basis of the
past, and every failure or success to be a paving of the
way for something different, we cannot help seeing that
those who fail in carrying out noble efforts are sacrifices
to the general good. Others will see their fruitless
efforts, will carry them on to success, and achieve a praise
not wholly their own. George Eliot then, perhaps,
chooses her noblest characters from among those who are
sacrifices to the good of humanity. The wreck of those
noble aims, while it, leads to a sense of the smallness and
weakness of the individual, cannot extinguish the hope
which those very aims have kindled, a generous hope on
behalf of the whole human race.
No. 1.   Januakt 1875. B
lO The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Such a thought alone can reconcile us to the fate of
Dorothea ; and it is but a shallow reconciliation, when we
consider the place she has won in our regard. Not only
are her own aspirations not met, but she is given to one
of an infinitely lower life and aim. She who had been
trying all her life to find out her religion, and who found
it only in a perpetual seeking after the Beautiful and the
Good, is consigned to the care of one who carries his
religion no further than to admire the Beautiful and the
Good when he sees them.
Dorothea, like St. Theresa, goes out even through the
wilderness after her religion. "Will Ladislaw sits com¬
fortably in his arm-chair, and allows his religion to come
to him. And it comes to him in the shape of Dorothea.
How tliat St. Theresa ever found her way out of the
desert to the fireside of Will Ladislaw, and chose to
remain there, I cannot conceive; she must have been
labouring under some hallucination brought on by fasting.
To Dorothea, at the very outset, the author may seem
to have addressed some such imaginary warning as this:—
Aim high, seek to reconcile your faith with your life; act
nobly, believe largely, and then marry an ordinary man
at the end of the chapter.
AVith regard to the after-thought occasioned by
Thackeray's works, it is in no way tinged with religious
melancholy, nor very deeply with melancholy of any
kind. In religion he has apparently, more like a Scribe
than a Pharisee, adhered to the traditions of his fore¬
fathers ; they are enough for him, he rests in them, makes
his noblest characters do so, and wishes all the people in
Vanity Fair would do the same. And we close his books
with a feeling of hopefulness. He never ends in the
minor key; after a little interlude of sadness, his tones
quickly resolve themselves into tones of joy, and he
marches his characters off" the scene with an accompany¬
ing flourish of trumpets, which gives us to understand
that each has at last found his right place in the world,
has met with justice at the hands of his novelist, and is
at peace with all around. And is not such peace with
external objects one of the requisites of true art, one of
the phases of unity with nature ?
AVe find, then, in summing up the foregoing remarks,
that, while George Eliot dissects men, Thackeray de¬
scribes them in the mass; while she excels in descrip¬
tions of nature, and in  mental  analysis,  he  excels in
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 11
narrative objectivity; while she shines in humorous
sayings, Thackeray is great as a describer of grotesque
actions; while she'records feelings, Thackeray feels them;
while she preaches covertly, Thackeray does it openly;
while she leaves a melancholy after-thought and an un-
definable sadness, Thackeray leaves us wdth a cheerful
impression of poetical justice, and a hope that things in
general are not going wrong. The points in which
Thackeray excels—namely, the narrating of action,
practical humour, pathos, a happier after-thought, a sense
of poetic justice—are all essential ingredients in the
novelist's power.
George Eliot surpasses Thackeray in her descriptions
of nature and in Avitty sayings ; but she excels him also in
mental analysis, and in the power of producing melancholy
feelings—two qualities which are not indispensably neces¬
sary to the novelist. The very fact, then, that her
greatest power—namely, that of mental analysis—does not
necessarily belong to the novelist, is enough to show that
we ought not to assert her supremacy in that direction.
Still, no one can deny that she possesses genius of the
noblest type; and nowhere do we feel more constrained to
acknowledge this, than where she oversteps the proper
limits assigned to her as a novelist.
Procla,
(Bn  %Q\\\\ to  JtaliT.
BY THE AUTHOR OP "GIFTS FOR MEN."
Leigh Court.
We visited Clifton on our way to Italy, and had one
happy week there with dear friends. They took us to
see the pictures at Leigh Court. I have twice had occasion
to love the name of Leigh; once for its woods, and once
for its pictures. Those woods were life to me one spring.
After months of anxious watching and weeks of personal
exhaustion, it was delicious, witli my recovered treasure,
to wander there, and with her to gather early violets.
We were unconscious trespassers, and did not know that
we had transgressed beyond the public limits, till, at the
approach of Easter holiday-makers, gaps in hedges and
12 Tlie Ladies^ JEdinburgh Magazine,
walls were all filled up, and we found no entrance to our
paradise. The banishment, however, was not complete;
for if shut out from Leigh, we were still free of a part of
the same woods in Nightingale Valley.
The Leigh woods stretch along the summit of the great
cliffs opposite Clifton. There are superb views from the
pathway wdiich skirts the cliff, but a child wanders more
freely and safely away fi'om those precipitous heights;
so I and the httle one left the larger glories, and haunted
the inner glades. There our delights were many. The
trees were still leafless, but the trunks were stately;
lofty pillars with sculptm-ed tracery running down their
whole noble length, looking as if the rains of centuries
had hardened on them as they ran; the buds were all
bm-sting, and the variety of their complicated folding gave
us enough to wonder at. CroAvds of ferns frolicked far
and near, and nestled iipon the outspread branches of the
trees. The ivy hung in heavy wreaths; delicately tinted
wild roses were blushing here and there; violets and
anemones and primroses, the green heads of the lady's
mantle, and the tassels of the Dog Mercury, showed fair
among the dead leaves of the past year's woodland.
Various moss and arum leaves covered the groimd, and
the whole air was athrob with the singing of birds.
Kind nature took us into her embraces there, and
soothed and restored our souls with a thousand healing
touches; and our praise of God for the spring left a
blessing on those woods, which compensated for our
unlawful wanderings.
When next I learned to love the name of Leigh, it was
not soothing but a stu-ring-up that I needed; and again
I found just what I required from the bounties of the
place.
There are trials of a kind for which we are ourselves
responsible, which are due more largely than we care to
own to the incommunicable bitterness of the heart itself.
Such trials do not injure the body, but they deaden the
soul; they induce a weariness of conflict, and lead into
the reaction of a deliberate refi;sal to feel at all.
In a dream once, I found myself choking, stifling in
deep waters; something like great masses of clinging
■weeds imprisoned my feet, so that I could not get out;
and the horror of the situation was heiglitened when I
discovered that this was my own hair, which had all f;illen
off.    At last 1 struggled on shore, and feebly walked away
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 13
from the water. After a while, I turned to look at the
depth I had escaped, and behold ! there lay a tiny patch
of bright green bog moss. " The earth is full," I exclaimed,
" of deep waters; and tiiis little pool, so shallow that it is
already overgrown with the sphagnum, was enough
nearly to drown me." In the same manner I now look
back and feel a like wonder that my strength all fell from
me, and that I felt as if I Avas drowning in a trouble
which already is hidden under gentle results; but at the
time I went to Leigh Court, I had but newly scrambled
to the firm earth.
I had another dream once. I was pushing my way with
a companion through a Titanic Vanity Fair. I hate a city
at all times, and this city was terrible. The houses were
as high as mountains; the roar of its traffic, the rattle of
its carriages, were like sounds that may accompany the
devil's dance of innumerable whirling pillars of sand and
stones driven by howling winds over rocky deserts. The
pressure of the crowds was hideous; I felt all squeezed
and bruised as if I ^vere forcing my ^vay through thickly
thronged fat bulls of Bashan. At last that pressure forced
us aside into an enormous flesh-market, hung round as
far as the eye could reach with carcases. A sort of
twilight pervaded the place, and Ave were alone in it.
My companion sat down in it with a sigh of relief, and
said she was thankful for the cool and the quiet, and
would gladly remain there always. I think other minds
than mine must know the temptation to make that sort
of " covenant with death" after a lengthened period of
over-intensity. The will revolts against any further call
upon sympathy, and hardens itself, and says, as Israel said,
" The scourge shall not reach us."
I was in the crisis of that temptation when I was taken
to Leigh Court, willing to sit down in the cool quiet of
unfeeling death. One look at a face there " annulled that
covenant with death." It was the face of Leonardo da
Vinci's " Creator Mundi;" the face and hands of the living
Word of God, by whom the worlds were made. The
hands were large and powerful, instinct with diverse
power, nervous energy vitally present in the thin fingers,
cunning faculty in the square turned-back thumb of
mechanical genius. One hand held the globe, the other
was raised in command, and light was rising within the
universe at that command. The surface of the globe
reflected the green of His garment and the embroidery of
14 The Ladies Edinburgh, Magazine.
His vesture. His face was inspired with all life; not only
with the majestic word of power; not only with the sub¬
tile strength of organizing intellect; not only with the
sacrificing energy of the priest; not only with the sacri¬
ficial foreknowledge of the Cross, of the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world,—but with all these, and also
with the rich possibilities of laughter, with the terrible
possibilities of the derision of One that sitteth in the
heavens. Looking upon that face, I could sympathize
with the calling forth of the grotesque forms which
crawled over the earth when first redeemed from chaos,
when, it may be, revolted foes were forced into the forms
of " complicated monsters," " chimeras dire."
Leigh Court is full of priceless treasures. Raphael's
•' Procession to Calvary," and fine replicas of his " Julius
IL," and of his missing " Madonna di Loretto;" an
Epiphany said to be by Giovanni Bellini, but by Crowe
and Cavalcaselle attributed to Giorgione ; Domenichino's
" St. John," said by Mrs. Jameson to be that artist's
finest single picture; two superb Titians; Rubens'
magnificent " Conversion of St. Paul," and " Woman
taken in Adultery ; " Murillo's serene " Virgin resting on
her Way to Egypt"; Velasquez' "Adoring Virgin," and the
altieri Claudes, two pictures which cost their possessor
£12,000, are a few pre-eminent among its jewels. The
"Adoring Virgin," attributed to Velasquez, but on account
of the ideality of the face believed by Dr. Waagen not to
be by him, but by some unknown Spanish painter, is a
most unusual thought. The Virgin is represented, I
imagine, at the moment when the power of the Highest
overshadowed her. She is not caught up and away
from earth as in Murillo's " Immaculate Conception." As
woman, and not as goddess, she receives the mystery.
She is sinking forwards, with her arms outspread, her
hands open expressive of adoration, yet instinct with
caress. Her eyes are raised, but raised away from the
light towards which she is drawn—away from the light
which transfigures her.
Kubens' "Woman taken in Adultery" is a magnificent
study of various expression. The Scribes and Pharisees,
blear-eyed and malicious, or fat, sensual, and subtle ; the
dignified Joseph of Arimathea looking earnestly at the
Christ; the yoimg man gazing with half-admiring pity
and curiosity at the woman, more interested in her than
in the controversy,—are all touched with a masterly hand.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 15
Even greater than the power displayed in this picture is
the dramatic force of the scene where Saul is struck down
on his way to Damascus. Dr. Waagen says of this
picture, that terror is strikiugly expressed in the face of
the prostrate Saul. I could see no terror there. It
looked like the face of one in a death-like swoon ; with
an expression on the features such as is sometimes seen
on the face of the dead, as if the spirit held converse
apart from the body, and yet informed the body ; as if
the spirit threw upon the body the influence of that com¬
munion, when asking " Lord, what wouldst Thou have
me to do'?" it was prepared to receive the answer
through those whom it had persecuted; the answer which
bursts forth in Mendelssohn's wonderful "Arise, shine!
for thy light is come."
Dr. Waagen's remark on Guido's " Cleopatra " amused
me by its literal truth. He describes it as " extremely
pleasing in feature and expression." Charming qualities,
which, however truly descriptive of the picture, scarcely
raise before the mind's eye that creature born of fire and
water. One of the hands looks white, and dead, and
leathery,—perhaps, if we like to so imagine it, from the
poison having begun to work; but Guido's hands are
often failures, at least to the eyes of the inartistic.
The name of Michael Angelo is given to a curious little
picture of the Crucifixion, but as the only easel picture
which Michael Angelo ever painted is in the Tribuha at
Florence, this, though perhaps taken from the Thunderer's
design, is probably by one of his pupils. It shows us on
either side of the Crucified two figures standing, and
immediately above them two others, of wlmm we see
only the heads looking out of a low-lying cloud. The
head on the right and the figm-e on the left are weeping
and lamenting; the head on the left and the figure on
the right are gazing at the Crucified, too absorbed in
contemplation to show any access of grief. This curious
geometrical disposition of figures and feelings has
the effect almost of a riddle, and takes away from the
impressiveness of the treatment of the awful theme at
first sight; but there is a certain poAver in the work which
lays hold of the imagination after a while, and I found myself
often dwelling upon that strange conception of the dual
completeness of emotion and contemplation uniting the
family in heaven and in earth, where the angel above took
up the feeling contrasted with that of the mortal below.
16 The Ladies' Edmhurgh Magazine.
I delighted in a " Virgin and Child " by Vandyke ; a
lovely picture, in Avhicli the Child lies asleep on a high
bed, and the mother stretches over to gaze on His face.
The faces are not idealised, but are sweetly and purely
human; and I confess I think that a mother's love over
her babe is the more divinely represented the nearer the
artist keeps to the natural truth. This picture, lovely as
it is, shares in a peculiarity which has always struck me in
Vandyke's sacred pictures, as contrasted with his portraits.
I scarcely dare venture the remark, but it has seemed to
me, that while Vandyke's portraits are all miracles of
art, his sacred subjects, treated with the most lovely
truth to nature, are to some degree careless in drawing,
and in some part or other of the figures affect one as im¬
perfect in art. The exquisite " Virgin " in Munich is, if I
may venture to say so, a good case in point. The Baby
has fallen asleep in a position which makes it diflicult for
the mother to move, and she turns her head slowly and
constrainedly to Joseph, who, coming up behind her, has
evidently just been checked by her whisper into fatherly
caution not to wake the sleeper. The feeling is exquisite,
but it seemed to me the drawing contrasted strangely
with the magnificent portraits which hung in the same
gallery.
One great charm about Leigh Court is the perfection of
its arrangement, and the courtesy Avith which visitors are
treated. The delicious little room in the Seminario at
Venice is the only place I have come across, either in
England or on the Continent, where we found an equal
consideration. At Leigh Court the butler received us as
if we had been honoured guests, took us iuto one of the
rooms, handed each of us a plan of the walls with names
of the pictures, and left us to enjoy ourselves, with the
intimation that he would be ready to take us further
whenever we chose to call him. His own delight in the
pictures was genuine. The considerate provision made
for the real enjoyment of visitors to his treasures so fihed
me with gratitude to Sir William Miles, that when we left
the house I turned round to pour out fervent thanks
before his portrait, Avhich hangs in the hall; and when¬
ever I call up the memory of that delicious place, it is
with renewed thanks to one who has the rare gift of
giving in giving, and where he gives freedom, gives it
nobly.
Lydia Brewster Macpherson.   :
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 17
i^hou^hts on telalt Mhilman's " %uu^ jjf %i^m.'*
Is there anything more beautiful than grass ? Is there
any scent comparable to the fragrance it can give us ?
Do we not associate it in our minds with all that is pure
and fresh and lovely—with the glistening of the dew-
drop, and the song of the lark, and the bleating of the
lamb ? Then truly Leaves of Grass is no inappropriate
title for a volume of poems where purity and freshness
form some of the chief characteristics. Wherever the
author leads us (and Avhere does he not lead us?) we
seem to breathe the fresh invigorating air of heaven, not
as a chilling blast, but as the summer wind, laden with
summer scents, quickening the pulses of life and hope.
In the open air he addresses us, and the open road is
his favourite theme. We must go forth to hear him, out
of the school, out of the church; but, perhaps, we shall
return thence blest with the strength he has given us,
cheered with the vista he has disclosed to us. For he
says—
" I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,
T lead no man to a dinner-table, library, or exchange,
But each man, and each woman of you, I lead upon a knoll,
My left hand hooking you round the waist,
My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and a plain
public road."
Shall we not rejoice at the indication of such a road?
for many travellers, especially the young travellers, are
standing now perplexed in life's way. They hear a din of
voices crying " Infidelity!" "Danger!" " Terrible times!"
They are aware of strange doubts working in their souls,
coming, they know not from whence, tending they know
not whither. And a voice on one side says, " This is the
way, here alone is peace ; " and a voice on the other, " Nay,
here, and here only, is peace." But there is that " plain
public road," and the head bent in anguish may be raised
in joy, and the trembling feet may go on, gaining steadi¬
ness as they go. How do the travellers walk there?
They simply go straight forward with a fearless step,
not too anxious about duties, but accepting and perform¬
ing them as they find them. Not too anxious about truth,
yet ever preserving the essentials for finding it—a pure
heart and an open eye.    Listening reverently to every
No. 1.—JOJUAKY 1875. C
18 The Ladies Edinbimjh Magazine.
voice, but acknowledging the authority of one only, the
Divine voice within them. Rejoicing in all progress, and
in all that tends to the liberty and happiness of man.
Loving mankind intensely, loving also the animals,
loving nature, seeing God in all. Not dwelling too much
on the future, but carrying with them, deep in their souls,
a calm conviction that all will be well.
We are not venturing upon a criticism of Whitman, nor
pronouncing where his place should be amongst the rank
of poets. Great though he is as a poet, it is ratlier as a great
man we love to think of him; for does not this name bring
him nearer than the other ? And he is one to whom every
man and woman may draw near, for he has a touch for
each, and a Avord for each. It is a great Heart that speaks
to us through these poems, the heart of a Christlike man
burning Avith an intense yearning love for the whole
human race, and full of hope for man as limitless as his
love. No race, no individual, however degraded, is
beyond this hope. For example, in the " Saint au
Moude," w^hen addressing all the different tribes of the
earth, from the highest to the lowest type, " the Austral
negro, naked, red, sooty, with protrusive lip, grovelling,"
he says to the latter,
" I do not prefer others so very much before you either,
I do not say one word against you ;
Away back tliere, where you stand
(You will come forward in due time to my side"").
And in the poem entitled " Faces," where, amongst the
pure and beautiful, the "sacred faces of infants," and the
" illuminated face of the mother of many children," we
have also those of the vile and the mean brought before
us, he says,
" I see them, and complain not, and am content with all;
Do you suppose I could be content with all, if I thought them
their own finale ?
Spots and cracks at the windows do not disturb me;
Tall and sufficient stand behind and make signs to me,
I read the promise and patiently wait."
Doubtless the ground of this hope lies in his faith in
man. He fully recognises the divine in himself and in
all men. Alas for the theology that would destroy this
faith, teaching as one of its primary lessons (in spite of
the contradiction  of facts) the utter vUeness of human
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 19
nature ! What thanks do we not owe to the poets and
other teachers who help us to rise above this atheistic-
theologic mist (for is it not atheism to deny God's
presence in His greatest work 1) and enable us to look at
the divine side of things, and thus strengthen us to the
"bearing," "enduring," and "hoping" of all things,
because we "believe all things." No one denies our
obligation to love our fellow-men, but is this possible
without having faith in them ? Whitman has given us a
picture of the struggles and aspirations of the soul in the
following lines:—
" Ah, poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats !
Ah, you foes that in conflict have overcome me !
(For vchat is my life, or any man's life, but a conflict with foes—
the old incessant war?)
You degradations—you tussle with passions and appetites ;
You smart from dissatisfied friendships (ah, wounds the sharpest
of all!)
You toil of painful and choked articulations; you meannesses ; you
shallow tongue-talk at tables, my tongue the shallowest of
any ; you broken resolutions ; you racking angers ; you
smothered ennuis ;
Ah, think not you finally triumph—
My real self has yet to come forth; it shall yet march forth, over¬
mastering till all lies beneath me ;
It shall yet stand up, the soldier of unquestioned victory."
How true is every line to nature! How pathetic the
illusion to that "sharpest" wound! How triumphant the
assurance of victory! Poor human soul, so often wounded!
so often baffled! pining for heights that seem never to
be reached, yet, glorious human soul, offspring of God,
thyself a " God, though in the germ."
Do we admit this divinity in human nature? and if so,
where shall we limit it? Shall we acknowledge it in the
spiritual part, and deny it in the material? or shall we
view the whole as divine ? Our American brother has
answered these questions for us. He calls himself " the
poet of the body, as well as of the soul," and asserts, " if
anything is sacred, the human body is sacred." Is not
this a true leaf of grass? Is not the scent of the clover
here ? It is altogether so sweet and refreshing to see the
body thus exalted, to hear it declared sacred in all its
parts and functions. Another leaf Ave may take up is the
individual love. Again and again it is expressed in these
poems, and its intensity is not less than the universal
love. It is touchingly beautiful to see a soul like our
poet's so full of strength and self-reliance, yet dependent
20 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
upon sympathy as for its very existence, unable to stand
(at  least  joyously)  alone.    And   who w^ould   envy the
strength that is independent of human sympathy ?
Thus he speaks of himself—
" I saw in Louisiana a live oak growing ;
All alone stood it, and the moss hung down from the branches ;
Without any companion it grew there, uttering joyous leaves of
dark green ;
And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself ;
But I wondered how it could utter joyous leaves standing
alone there, without its friend, its lover near—for / knew
I could not."
Love is with him "the base of all metaphysics," the
answerer of " terrible doubts." Speaking of the latter
he says—
" When he whom I love travels with me, or sits a long time
holding my hand ; then I am charged with untold and
untellable wisdom, I am silent—
I require nothing further."
Yet we have a hint given us of an unsatisfied thirst,
and of the expectation of the soul to find the " Perfect
Comrade " hereafter. His belief in immortality is strong,
and his thoughts of God and death are deep and sublime.
He does not seem to have much sympathy with the
priesthood. Probably in his sight its members deal too
lightly with sacred subjects ; and he does not hesitate to
apply to them the terms " Bat-eyed" and " Materialistic."
We hear him addressing his own soul in these words—
" Ah ! more than any priest, 0 soul, we too believe in God,
But with the mystery of God we dare not dally."
But though he allows the mystery, he has also assured
us that—
" No array of terms can say how much I am at peace
About God and about death."
Here the brother's hand is reaching us, strengthening
us w^th its touch amidst the darkness, and fears that
surround us concerning the awful unknown and unknow¬
able Death, while liis voice—the inspired-poet voice—
whispers peace. The Unknown seems know^n to him.
It is with him the theme of themes, filhng him wdth an
almost passionate joy and adoration. He has unveiled
for us the statue of the so-called " King of terrors," and
we behold the form of a tender Mother!    He has brought
i
The Ladies Edinhurgli Magazine. 21
us nigh to that Embrace, from whose supposed iciness
we shrank back appalled, and we feel nought but the
warmth of Love ! Has ever poet helped us thus ? Have
any given utterance to such thoughts as these ?—
" Praised be the fathomless universe,
For life, and joy, and for objects, and knowledge curious,
And for love, sweet love.    But praise ! praise ! praise !
For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding Death.
Dark mother, always gliding near with soft feet.
Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome 1
Then I chant it for thee.    I glorify thee above all;
I bring thee a song, that when thou must indeed come—
come unfalteringly.
Approach, strong Deliveress !  When it is so.
When thou hast taken them, I joyously sing the dead ;
Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee.
Laved in the flood of thy bliss, O Death ! "
We must bear in mind the fact that this is not the
language of one to whom life is a burden, nor of an
ascetic, despising and withdrawing from the world, but
of one who can enter into its joys, and who is possessed
of great mental and bodily vigour. But he conceives of
that other life as possessing so much more fulness and
completeness than our present one, that in comparison
the latter is but the shadow, the former the reality.
" Pensive and faltering.
The words ' the Dead ' I write,
For living are the Dead
(Haply the only living, only real.
And I the apparition, I the spectre)."
Death is to him an almighty, never-failing friend. His
eye pierces beyond the dark tragedies of life, and catches
the beams of her glory. His ear is quickened to hear her
voice even above the cries of human agony. And he
says to us,—
" Did you think Life was so well provided for—and Death,
The purport of all Life, is not well provided for ?
I do not doubt that wrecks at sea, no matter what the horrors
Of them, no matter whose wife, child, husband, father, lover has
Gone down, are provided for to the minutest point.
1 do not think Life provides for all, and for Time and
Space, but I believe Heavenly Death provides for all."
We should be inclined to deem this perfect confidence
too unnatural were it alivays unshaken ; but we have in
the little poem, " Yet, yet, ye doAvncast hours," tokens
given us that the sunshine is sometimes obscured.    We
22 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
have seen it somewhere remarked that a tone of triumph
runs through the Bible. The same may be said of the
Leaves of Gr'ass; and when the author gives us a
picture of himself, contemplating all the terrible things of
life—wars, and famines, meannesses and cruelties, and
adds, " I see, hear, and am silent," we conceive a
majesty in this profound sorrowful silence. It is not the
silence of despair (that word seems unknown to him), but
the silence of the deep human soul, suffering and waiting
till a light shall break on the problems of life. We have
said that Whitman resembles that Poet of all Ages, the
Christ; and one of the deepest of his poems is the one
entitled " To Him that was Crucified," in which he claims
for himself (and for all who do not merely sound the
name of Christ, but who understand Christ) a union with
Him in His great work, which he conceives to be the
making men " Brethren and lovers as we are." It is a
poem particularly suited to our times. It has a divine
peace in it; and to turn to it from the endless discussions
and controversies of the religious world, is like leaving
the dusty crowded thoroughfare to enjoy nature's own
delicious calm. Amongst other striking pieces, we may
point to the pathetic " By the City Uead-House," the
heart-stirring " Pioneers," the sublime " Burial Hymn"
(President Lincoln's), and the " Passage to India," in
which we have the following magnificent lines :—
" O thou transcendent!
Nameless !—the fibre and the breath !
Light of the light, shedding forth universes, thou centre of them!
Thou mightier centre of the true, the good, the loving !
Thou moral spiritual fountain ! Affection's source ! Thou reservoir !
(O pensive soul of me ! O thirst unsatisfied ! waitest not there,
Waitest not haply for us somewhere there, the Comrade Perfect ?)
Thou pulse ! Thou motive of the suns, stars, systems,
That circling move in order safe, harmonious,
Athwart the shapeless vastnesses of Space !
How should I think—how breathe a single breath—
How speak— if out of myself
I could not launch to these, superior universes ?
Swiftly I shrivel at the thought of God,
At nature and its wonders, Time, and Space, and Death,
But that 1 turning call to thee, O Soul, thou actual me,
And lo! thou gently masterest the orbs,
Thou matest Time, smilest content at Death,
And fillest, swellest full, the vastnesses of Space."
These extracts have been taken from the complete
edition of the Leaves of Grass. A few years ago, Mr.
Rossetti edited a selection of these poems, with a prefatory
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 23
notice, which gives us some interesting information about
the author's Hfe. We read of his tender devotion in nur¬
sing thousands of sick soldiers during the late American
War; hoio lovingly, we can well imagine from the great
tenderness of feeling that breathes through his poems
Mr. Kossetti is a stanch admirer of Whitman, but we
cannot help regretting the negative ^ralsQ he gives him,
when he says, " He is not a corrupting writer." On such
an important point we look for something more positive.
If he is found to write freely about the human body, we
think the thoughtful and refined will find a reason for his
so doing in the fact that to him the body is so sacred.
And we cannot think that anyone giving the book a can¬
did perusal could fail to perceive the high tone of the
author's mind, and how he longs (as the true poet ever
must) for the purity and exaltation of the human race.
We have been led to make these few remarks upon
this remarkable book, because we have reason to believe
it is not very well known on this side of the Atlantic. As
we said before, our object is not criticism, but simply to
bring the author before the reader's notice. Very pro¬
bably thel after will be ready to exclaim, " Is this a poet ? "
How unmusical are his sentences ? How void of rhythm ?
Yes, but listen to his own definition of the poet; and if
you find the picture fair, read his works, and then judge
how far he corresponds to the ideal. " He judges not as
the judge, but as the sun falling round a helpless thing.
As he sees furthest, he has the most faith. His thoughts
are the hymns of the praise of things. On the dispute on
God and eternity he is silent; He sees eternity less like a
play with a prologue and denouement. He sees eternity in
men and women."
Since he awakens harmony in souls, shall we not forgive
his frequent want of rhythm ? Certainly he makes us feel
how great a thing it is to be a man, how equally great to
be a woman. Life, and the common things of life, he clothes
and crowns with beauty, yet preserving the fairest robe
and the highest crown for '• Heavenly Death."
Joan Scott.
24 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
%   %t\}tXXt,
Purple touch of fitful shade,
Trembling where red blossoms made
Brightness in our forest glade.
Yonder tripping of a hare,
Startled from his hidden lair
Into clover-scented air.
Pretty leaves, all gold and white,
Glowdng in this happy light,
But falling in the cool night.
Falling lightly—lightly dead.
On a sweet and dewy bed ;
While their brothers over-head
Linger out each little day.
Linger, warmed by sunny ray,
Who so glad at heart as they ?
One came to meet me years ago,
Just when the leaves were falling so-
Just when the sun was lying low:
And I, among the beauty here,
Was looking wide and far and near.
Wondering what had made it dear.
n.
Golden gleam of harvest moon,
Keeping all the hills in tune,
Like the march of light in June.
Dying edge of crimson light,
On the brook of crystal white,
Shining dimly in the night.
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 25
Folded is each heavy rose;
Silently each apple grows,
Hoio, perchance the night-bat knows.
Silently the dew descends, • /
Drinking it each fiow'r-cup bends,
Thankful for the joy it lends.
Silently the angels come,
And whisper quietly to some,
Happy thoughts about their Home.
One who met me years ago
Dwells in a land I do not know;
But it is Christ who wills it so.
We strolled among the beauty here,
And looking wide and far and near
I know noio what has made it dear!
Naomi S. Smith.
" They've dug the crypt for darkness;
The aisle the red lights pave,
Without is the tvrilight cloister,
Within the sunlit nave.
Beyond is the choir for prayer and praise.
And the chapel for a grave."—W. Thobnbuey.
When I let my thoughts dwell on the days of my youth,
how clearly 1 see before me our Benedictine house of
Caserta in Magna Grecia, as it then was ! The path Avas
steep which led up to it through the oli\'e and pine wood,
and at each turn of the road stood a little shrine,
where pilgrims might pause to rest and pray ; but when
you reached the meadow where the monastery stood, it
was a fair Avide space, with a stream running through it,
and bordered by Avoods, above Avhich the rocky mountain-
peaks rose into the sky. It Avas all quite secluded ; the
stream turned the mill which groimd our corn and filled
our fish-ponds, before it danced doAvn the hillside on its
way to the sea, seven stadii distant.    From Avithout, the
No. 1.—Jancaey 1875.
26 T/w Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine.
house showed but a high white enclosing wall, four square,
with a mighty arched door and a postern, and with the
roofs of the buildings within and the high church bell-
tower alone showing over it; but within how beautiful
and busy it was ! There was the Abbot's house and the
hospital, the dormitory of the brothers, the workshops of
the masons, carpenters, carvers, and weavers; for all we
needed for ourselves or our poor, we ourselves wrought
within the walls. There was the church, and the cloister,
then only down one side, but already the pride of our
house. For on the open side Avere double columns, and
the capital of every column had a different foliage carved
on it; and they themselves stood on strange beasts,
winged and clawed, to show that even the haunting
terrors of the wilderness might become servants and sup¬
porters of our Holy Church. One of these beasts was a
dragon, his tail interlacing the columns, and his strong
claws grasping the pedestal; he looked as if some St.
George had not slain but subdued him, till the evil was
departed from him, and the power only remained. This
dragon I have portrayed on this parchment as the
initial letter and emblem of those things I am about to
relate. At the entrance, two winged Lombardic lions
were carved, sitting with stern faces, as if to guard the
portal. And all was wrought in white and yellow
marble we had quarried out of the cliffs above, or
the worser parts in the finest brick and stone. How
beautiful the cloister would look when the sunshine
glowed on the golden-tinted marble of the columns
and architraves! and under the round arches the
shadow was so dark that none could see from without
who paced within. Our windows were all small and
round-headed, save the wide one high on the tower, that
the clang of the bell within might be well heard. Many
came from far and near to see our cloister, which was
designed by our brother Ambrosius. a great architect,
and the monk I loved best; lately dead at the time of
which I shall now speak. I could just remember
twenty years before this time, when I was but five
years old, how when everyone expected the end of
the world, when all work ceased, and the very mill
was silent, while never-ending processions and ser¬
vices went on; still the click of the chisel of Brother
Ambrosius was heard working at the cloister arches.
The Superior and others would reprove him; but he would
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 27
say—" And if He comes, how better could I be found than
carving? But, look you, there is still so much carving to
be done here on the arches, and in the world about, that I
do not believe the end of the world will come for long, till
we have all time to finish." In that year of our Lord 999,
if there was a thunderstorm or a shock of earthquake,—
and there were several,—all the peasants of the neighbour¬
hood used to run up to the monastery and crowd within
our walls, beating their breasts and bemoaning them¬
selves, and confessing out loud to any of the fathers who
would come near them; and they, absolving right and left,
seemed often too frightened to listen to a word. Then the
lord of Borca came one day, with his lady on his horse
behind him, bringing their little son, a beautiful child of
three, Astolfo, to dedicate for ever as a monk for their
sins; for they thought even a child-monk in the family
was better than none at such a time. He was very clever
and spirited, as was shown in the worst fright we had
that year. One festival day, all were so tired of penances
and expectation that the Superior granted a recreation
for garden-work, and a festal meal on the meadows. It
was a beautiful day in autumn, and we boys played merrily
on the grass, while the brethren reclined at meat, and
even dared to talk and laugh again; when suddenly
there sounded one terrible clang, like an instant's thunder,
yet with a strange tone of music in it, and then silence
again. All started up and ran hither and thither, most to
the church. I screamed, too frightened to stir; but Astolfo
took my hand, and saying, " Come, I have thought what
to do Avhen the fire begins," ran with me headlong down
to the fish-ponds, and jumped in with me up to our chins.
Will it be believed that not the more ignorant lay
brothers only, but a few of the choir monks themselves
shouting out, " Follow the blessed child, he is inspired I "
splashed in too, and there we all sat shivering for what
seemed to me a long time, till Brother Ambrosius came
down all shaken with laughter, and lifted out Astolfo and
me, saying, " Come out, you wiseacres, who prefer stewing
to burning; all may see that you know what you
deserve; come out and see that this is all because Brother
Grimwold thought the old bell-rope might last till the
end of the world, though it was nearly worn through, so
of course down came the great bell." Then they all came
out; but one old lay-brother, between fright and cold, died
of that wetting, so it was the end of the world to him.
28 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
As for Astolfo, he remained my best fi-iend; he grew tall
and strong; but though now twenty-three, he was still in
the novitiate. They made him renew his dedication
when he was twelve years old, or no doubt he would ere
this have left the cloister; but though bred a choir monk,
he joined as much as he could in the outdoor work,
directed the quarrying in the mountain, the road-making,
or at home the mill.
'• Were it not for the mountain quarry, and the wolves,
and the wild swine, I must run off, my Laurentio," he
would say to me, "let what will befall my family, who
think they may do what they like, now they have a
cloistered son." In truth, Astolfo's brother, the young
lord of Borca, w'as an evil man, and was hated by both
vassal and neighbour. One day, far off in the woods, he
met Astolfo carrying a boar-spear. " What business hast
thou moulding on the chase % " he said; " go home and do
penance for thyself and the family." '"Well met," said
Astolfo ; " I rejoice to be able to help one of the family on
the road to penitence." And so saying, he gave the
young count a good beating, none of the hunters daring
to interfere with a monk of Caserta, and their lord's son
to boot. I also, though now six-and-twenty years old,
had not taken the final vows ; and though I loved our
house, I as well as the master of the novices doubted
my vocation. Chiefly I delighted in architecture and
carved Avork, in which I had been considered an apt
pupil of Father Ambrosius. At that time I knew little of
the miseries of the world without, though ever and anon
people flying from their enemies would seek for refuge
with us; and peasants ill-treated by their lords Avould
settle on our farms, where none dared to touch them, and
which were respected by the fighting men of the Greek
Emperor and the Roman Emperor alike. For neither the
Capitan of Byzantium nor the Prince of Salerno had any
jurisdiction over us; we were a daughter house of the
Benedictine Abbey of Monte Casino, which owed allegiance
to the Pope alone; and save for the confirmation of our
Superiors, we never heard aught of the Abbot of Monte
Casino. So "\ve governed ourselves, an island of peace
and plenty, and carving, and writing, and music, in the
midst of the turbulent seas of fightings and confusions
and troubles outside. The Saracens were our one great
danger, but hitherto they had done us little harm, owing
to.the timely rescue the surrounding lords and peasants,
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 29
together with our own vassals, brought us, when at three
different times they attacked us. We were, as I said, six
stadii from the sea, and thus the less exposed to their
galleys. The most dangerous attack they ever made on
us was so completely repulsed that our people pursued
them to their galleys, capturing and destroying one, and
making a great slaughter. There I was found a little
boy of four, remembering little but that my name Avas
Laurentio, and that I had been carried away from sweet
ladies who loved me, one night of flames, and clash of
weapons, and bloodshed. The monks, and in especial
Father Ambrosius and Father Anselmo, master of the
novices, had cared for me ever since.
And now, as I said, I was a young man, and the autumn
winds of the twenty-second year of my stay at the monas¬
tery were beginning to blow. It is now many years ago,
but it seems to me as yesterday, that just as we had
finished the office for nones, and were returning proces-
sionally from our chapel to the refectory, there sounded a
loud knocking at the outer gate, which I, as servitor of
the week, hastened to aid the porter to open. Rarely
came a knock so late at our door, for we were not on the
way to any place of pilgrimage or city, and our visitors
were wont to come with the poor at the time of the noon¬
day dole. My heart beat with expectation, for who could
tell what chance was toward ? Because of my age, our tall
sad Superior, the very glance of whose eye daunted the
boldest of us—yes, even my own friend the fatherly Fra
Anselmo—had of late spoken often of the time when I, a
son of the house, should seal my vow and end my long
novitiate. To belong for all my life to that community
of sixty monks, never to see the great wide world that
lay beyond these woods and that sea, never to mix with
the stir of men in camps and courts and cities; above all,
never to see those wondrous buildings, those palaces and
temples wherewith the great men who had preceded us in
the land (although heathen) had endowed it, I could not
promise all that yet. I had seen a ruined temple and a
vaulted hall, some said a bath, not far from Caserta, which
made me long to see more. And when Fra Anselmo
would speak with light in his eyes of that glorious saintly
company gone before us, among whose fragrant memories
our lives should pass, sometimes indeed I caught some¬
thing of his fire, but oftener longed, if only for once, to
enter the world in which they moved, and see perchance
30 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
a real St. Sebastian in chain and mail, or a live St. Doro¬
thea bearing roses. So with these wishes strong in my
heart, I hurried to the outer gate. Often, indeed, do our
wishes fulfil themselves; and yet the fulfilment may be
quite other than what we short-sighted mortals dream.
E. J. 0.
{To be continued.^
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Gath to the Cedars.    By S. H. K.    London:
Frederick Warne & Co.    1874.
The writer of these journeyings in the Holy Land we
have reason to believe is a lady whose travels have
extended over other and far different scenes from those
here described, a somewhat adventurous visit to Lapland
and the North Pole having furnished her most recent
experiences as a tourist. The book does not profess to
throw any new light on the localities of Sacred Writ,
already so thoroughly and frequently described; but the
spirit of intense sympathetic interest in Avhich it is
written, and as shoAvn, for instance, in the account of the
first sight of Jerusalem, renders it admirably calculated to
form a preface to a personal visit of the scenes narrated.
The halo of feehng which the mind of the writer throws
around all she sees, preserves her from a too matter-of-
fact dissent from the legends and romanticism which
have overgrown, in the lapse of ages, the scenes of biblical
incident. Sonie adventures are described with consider¬
able humour, the start from Kuryetein to Palmyra being
a good instance of this. The interview with the Sheikh's
son on the same occasion, and the descent on mnle-back
through snoAv to the Cedars of Lebanon, are but two of
the many instances in Avhich the pluck of the lady traveller
met with its reward in her entertainment.
The volume is profusely illustrated Avith large wood¬
cuts, many of Avhich are very admirable. Though
denominated "original," it does not appear whether they
come from the pencil of the authoress herself.
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 31
Ada and Gerty: A Story of School Life.    By L GUIS A M.
Gray.    Edinburgh:   Maclaren & Macniven.    1875.
We have much pleasure in bringing Ada and   Gerty
before the notice of our readers.    It is a faithful picture
of school life as it is to be found in our best schools, where
the physical as well as the mental needs of the pupils are
carefully attended to.    The scene of the school is laid in
one of the best parts of Edinburgh, and so vividly has the
author brought before us its situation and surroundings,
that it is with difficulty we restrain an exclamation of re¬
cognition.    The characters of the girls are well and clearly
drawn, so that we see, not a dull troop marching two and
two through the streets of Edinburgh, but a number of
individual human beings with idiosyncrasies and desires of
their own.    The most interesting and beautiful character
is that of Ada.    The author shows considerable power in
her portraiture of this child, whose lively disposition and
keen sense of the ludicrous are always leading her into
scrapes, and bringing upon her the wrath of " Miss Maria,"
the well-intentioned but rather hard schoolmistress.    But
it is impossible not to love the generous, noble-minded
Ada, from our first introduction to her in the midst of one
of her merry pranks, on to the last chapter of the book,
when the high spirits have been tamed, and she bravely
and  lovingly prepares to   meet that at which many a
strong man shudders.    In contrast to Ada the author has
very artistically placed, in the close proximity of chief
friend, the more sober-minded but staunch and sturdy little
Gerty.    The book is altogether one which, though pro¬
bably intended for young people, is well worthy of per¬
usal by their elders.   The tone throughout is high, without
any attempt at preaching, the composition is easy and
good, and the pages sparkle with school-girl fun.    If we
were to find any fault with a work which has given us so
much pleasure, it would be that the young ladies indulge
in a few Scotticisms which would certainlv have sentenced
them to " forty lines " at least, had they reached the ears
of " Miss Maria."
Patricia Kemball.     By E. Lynn Linton.    London:
Chatto & Windos.
Patricia Kemhall is the name of a very interesting book,
and of its heroine who is also very interesting, and more¬
over an upright, noble-minded girl.    Her character stands
60 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
emphatically against his superiors. Thus to have objects
of reverence and maxims for conduct laid before him, was
enough to make him distrust those objects and slight
those maxims. The strict regulations of his mother's
house were galling to his independence, and his submis¬
sion to them was dogged, and sometimes even mechanical.
All the time he was in secret revolving theories in his
own mind, and becoming daily more reserved and less
cheerful in his demeanour.
The society of Trevor was not congenial to him, less
on account of the strange notions of that individual,
than because he felt that the nature of the man had
no meeting-place for his own nature. He felt as if he
and Trevor were two waifs or strays sailing apart
on an infinite sea, which no wind or current could
ever bring nearer to each other. Trevor's society sug¬
gested to him no better idea of himself than this. He
did not know whether his companion felt the same with
regard to him, and he was too indifferent on that subject
to revolve it in his mind.
" There is Chester I " said Trevor suddenly, as they
gained the summit of an ascent. " There it is, the dear
old Royalist town, the slow stupid Tory that it is! Did
it ever strike you, Mrs. Holme, that Chester has met with
the usual fate of old Tories'? It has nothing particular
to do; the progressive men of the day are doing every¬
thing, and the poor old town has nothing to do but eat
his cheese, which is very good, restore its cathedral,
and keep green the memories of Charles I. and St.
Werburga."
" I am sorry you despise the making of cheese," said
Mrs. Holme, " for I believe it to be one of the fine arts,
which no educated person should be without."
Trevor, however, was not listening, and this was
strange conduct in him. Why did he suddenly flush,
and then grow pale ? Why, as he looked away past the
gentle slopes and curved lines of woodland at the town,
with the river flowing past it, did he look as if that town,
or something there, was all in all to him? We devise
interpretations for such looks in our companions, and
then forget them till the wave of time casts them
up  again.
Meanwhile, they again lost sight of the town, till,
about half an hour later, they found themselves close to
Bridgegate.    The carriage rolled quickly over the stony
The Toadies Edinburgh Magazine. 33
^bt   ^ragou   of  tbc   Hortb.
CHAPTER   II.
" Deep, deep the greenwood round them waves,
Their abbey and its close of gi-aves.
* * *
Yet banners flashing through the trees
Make their blood dance and chain their eyes ;
The bugle music on the breeze
Arrests them with a charmed surprise.
Banner by turns and bugle woo ;
Ye shy recluses, follow too ! "—Mathew Arnold.
We threw the great gate wide open, and I for one was
somewhat disappointed to see without only a well-
apparelled and somewhat obese monk on his mule, with
two attendants. As I turned back to announce his degree
to tlie community, leaving the porter to bring him in.
" Come here, my son," lie said, " and tell me how long
thou hast inhabited this monastery."
" Years ago," I answered, " I was taken a young child
from a shipwrecked Saracen vessel."
" And thou art not yet professed 1 It is well thy face
pleaseth me; go and announce the priest and monk
Damasus to the Superior."
Our Superior, Father Crysolarus, ordered us to form two
lines in the Refectory, chanting " Apostolica Dilectis-
simi," for our priestly visitors were received with much
precision ; and so the stranger enlered, and I saw no more,
as with the younger novices I retired to our lower hall.
Of course they were talking of the stranger; and Astolfo,
ever anxious to hear something new, coaxed Bartolo, a
lay brother, to change gowns with him, that he might go
to the stables to rub down the horses and gather news
from the stranger servants. Thereby he ran a great risk,
for, contrary to his wont, the prior came among us before
vespers, so no change of gowns again was possible ; and
had I not seized the utterly confused Bartolo by the arm,
and pulled his cowl over his eyes, and thus led him into
the chapel beside me, it had gone hard with Astolfo. But
none discovered the change, so that time he escaped
whipping. And after vespers he came back, smelling
foully of the stables ; and they changed gowns, and we
novices strolled out into the vineyard.
" 0 Laurentio," said Astolfo to me, " such M^onders as
I have heard—dearly bought, however, had the old Prior
Ko 2.—FEBunARV 1875. E
34 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
guessed. These men have only ridden here, indeed, from
iSalerno, but tliey tell me that lying beneath our own
cliiFs, and we may perchance see it when it goes forth, is
a water-dragon, an enormous glittering ship of war,
filled with men of blood, fiercer tlian the Saracens, from
countries further away, where snow and ice all the year
round have starved the wild giants out of their homes;
you have heard them named before—tlie Normans—and
none know whether they come peacefully or in wrath.
Oil, if but once I could fight as St. George with that
dragon, or, if they are peaceful, sail away with them
into the wide world in search of war and love and
adventure."
The novices crossed themselves to hear him, yet some
looked wistfully to seaward, where, save for the fishing-
boats, Ave rarely saw a sail, for the course to Sicily lay
outside the bay, whose shores were yet six miles from
Caserta. And so we talked on of ships and travel and
war, till the kindly old Fra Anselmo came among us.
"Ah, children," he said, "your very looks tell of light and
worldly talk. What! all herding together with rapid
gestures and flushed cheeks; you do not know how often,
were you in the felse vain world, you would long for
the true joys of the cloister life. You have talked enough
even for recreation-time; take up some light work: where
are your colours, Lupo? Could you not paint that sunset
sky? Giulio, seek flowers to deck the stranger's colla¬
tion. Nestoriax and Palladiax, finish me the Greek
notation you wot of, and the rest of you go and practise
the new Credo; but you, Laurentio, folloAv me." So we
did, for our rule of obedience for novices was, that we all
obeyed the commands of any brother (or frater) till
another might counter-order, save that the Prior's com¬
mands came first, and could only be reversed by the
seldom interfering Superior.
" My Laurentio," said Fra Anselmo, as we went through
the corridor, "hoAv T long to see thee one of us, no longer
herding with the giddy boys I "When wilt thou find the
courage and singleness of mind of a true monk ? Now thou
art to come to the workshop—the stranger, Brother
Damasus, has sent for thee there."
Damasus was there with the Prior when we entered;
he was looking over my little clay models of arches and
capitals and friezes, altars and tombs and what not, such
as I partly dreamed out for myself, partly borrowed from
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 35
recollection   of  that  temple and  bath  whereof I  have
spoken.
•' Truly," said Fra Damasus, '" here is design, here is
fertility of genius ; only let me take the youth with me to
visit Salerno, and he shall return with the answers to
your letters from Monte Cassino after he has seen some¬
what of architecture, and improved his natural powers.
And, Prior, he may make this convent and chapel a model
for all Magna Grajcia."
With what a thrill of joy I heard these words! the
joyful thotiglit of travel almrjst overborne by the still
intenser delight of hearing that those poor forms over
Avhich I had pondered and considered so much, and Avhich,
when most altered by me, still seemed the same to the
people in the monastery, Avere, indeed, worth looking at
—Avortli executing—might, perhaps, wrought out in stone
or marble, add to the beauty of our dear house of Caserta.
The Pi'ior said in a grumbling tone (he could not brook
our receiving praise), " I wish, for the honour of our poor
house, you had chosen any other novice to be your com¬
panion and our messenger. It is true, I should have
feai;ed for the flighty Giulio or Astolfo, that, casting away
perfection, they might have become men-at-arms, but they
Avould be good seculars. Whereas this youth—a name¬
less captive of the Sa.racens—had he not by the charity of
Fra Anselmo been brought up as a regular monk Avith all
learning, might have served as lay brother and mason to
the convent, having neither the vocation of a true monk,
nor the courage and prudence needed for worldly
success."
"Nay," said Anselrao kindly, "that remains to be
proved." " And," added the stranger, " a novice has little
need of worldly courage—at least one who journeys Avith
me; for but for aspirations the Avorld cannot satisfy, I Avas
born to Avield arms; and as it is, I find my joy in encour¬
aging and protecting weaker brethren."
So thence Ave went to the Superi(n", and before the
evening collation it Avas decided that I, the eldest novice,
should next day attend Fra Damasus on his journey to
Salerno, and thence to Monte Cassino, deliver certain
formuhie from our house to the Great Benedictine house,
perfect myself in architecture there, and return in a year,
more or less. My head SAvam Avith joy as I sat Avith the
wondering noA^ices at our table at collation. The lamps
were lit, the fare was mended, and the hall decked in
36 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
honour of our guest, and all looked gay. Then Fra
Damasus, who was a personable man, but with a wander¬
ing eye, a sharp nose, and acute mouth, and a face that
twitched, told us how the perils of robbers he had gone
through in his mountain journey had decided him upon
returning by sea; and fearing the unworthiness of our
little ships in autumn, he had sent a servant to the great
ship of war in the bay to crave a passage to Amalfi or
Salerno; " for from what I hear," he said, " they needs
must pass that way. Northmen they are, but I bless Our
Lady I fear them not, though tl^e whole coast trembles
before them; they are good friends to have. Christians
now, and kind to all priests. There was old Ulf I knew
well; he took me a voyage in his ship and heard mass
daily; and at last, I hear, he turned monk in the Island
Abbey of Lerins, off Provence. He drove the Saracens
off our seas wherever he came, and took payment from
the coast for doing so. But you have late visitors, holy
father—surely not evil ones," and he crossed himself as a
long loud knocking was heard at the outer gate. It was
my week to open the gate, but it was such an unheard-of
knock, that strange thoughts of unholy visitants flashed
through my brain; and this Astolfo methinks guessed, for
he went with the porter and me, and aided us to unbar.
Without stood many men in the moonlight; one told us
hastily he was Damasus' servant, who had been to the
great ship, and that these men had accompanied him back
again. He spoke as trembling. Then one stepped for¬
ward and said in broken Itahan, '-Lead the way in; I
shall stay here the night." And he strode in after us with
many men, but some stayed without the gate. Astolfo
was bold enough to ask his name, and the stranger
answered, "Herser^ Thorstein," which Astolfo pronounced
to the best of his power as lie opened wide the refectory
door, and the glittering lights fell on the stranger and the
wild-looking followers who crowded up behind him. We
could now see that this was not a tall, but a broad and
square man, about forty years old, with a reddish face
and yellowish-brown beard and hair. He had bright blue
eyes, and his ftice was as if well marked out, but rough
hewn, and tlie carving not finished. Yet he looked
honest, and moved rather slow, and spoke softly till
in anger, and then his voice could ring through the tem-
l Herser or ser, a title often given in ancient Norway to persons of dis¬
tinction.
The. Lcdies Edinhurgli Magazine. 37
pest, either of war and strife or of wind and sea. He
was clad, as were his men, in a coat of glittering iron
scales, and was armed Avith a long sword, axe, and dagger.
Everyone rose as the shining fignre stepped in; some
showed fear, others curiosity ; Father Crysolarns seemed
quite unmoved.
" I am here on a friendly errand," said the Northman,
" from my leader, the young viking, S^vend Hrolfson, to
a certain Damasus who wishes to cruise with us."
" A viking—that is a pirate," whispered Astolfo to
me as he glanced at our Superior's side, where Damasus
had been sitting ; and lo ! he Avas there no longer. Only
after awhile he rose as if from beneath the table, mur¬
muring, red and panting, " My ring, my signet, I had
dropped it." " If he had." whispered Astolfo, " one of us
novices must have groped for it."
" Swend Hrolfson," continued the Northman, " bids
me say he will carry you and one attendant to Amalfi, on
condition you speak tlie inhabitants fair to give us
winter quarters, for thereabouts he means to pass Yule.
It is true he might take them, and the Amalfi people
might fear us much, had we not an envoy from the Bene¬
dictine monastery on board; but he means peace at
present to all."
" It is well," said the Superior; " and you, Brother
Damasus, can take our boy Laurentio; the servants may
follow by land." Damasus also said, " It is well," but me-
thought not so freely as the other. Then we set meat
and our best Avine before the Northmen—and Herser
Thorstein ate quietly and spoke ciA'illy, but alike to the
meanest lay brother and to the Superior himself.
" Your wine is good, my host," he said at last; " by
your leave I shall send some to the men outside."
" It is time for Compline, my son. Will you not call
them in to the service ? " said Crysolarus.
" No," said the guest, " they may wait outside; and for
me, I don't caie for songs I don't understand, though you
do sing rarely in Italy; but 1 am one of the tld faith—
Odin's man."
" Not a Christian! " said Damasus ; and on the other
shaking his head he faltered out, "then I fear my duty will
hardly permit my travelling with y"u. Father, you Avill
not let your lamb Laurentio depart Avith heathen Avolves."
" Wolves AA'e are," said Thorsteiu quietly, " therefore
rouse us not Avhen I tell you you are just the passenger
38 Tlie Tjadies Edinburgh Magazine.
we wanted.    We have  need   of a priest, and want an
important man at Amalfi, and go you must."
Damasus, trembling, kept answering, " Fain would I,
but conscience forbids ;" and Fra Anselmo began. " Let me
go instead," Avhen Thorstein suddenly, though he looked
unmoved, raised his voice, which pealed through the hall.
" Harken, you monks! Are you subjects of the Catapan
of Byzantium, or of the Lombard Duke of Salerno, or of
the Emperor Henry of the West ? "
" Of none," said the Superior firmly; " we owe alle¬
giance only to the Abbey of Monte Cassino, who hold
their charter free from the Emperor Charlemagne."
" Then by all tlie rules of war," tlumdered Thorstein,
" knoAv that your lives and all you possess are forfeit to us.
We have just received news of our ally Dato, the Lombard
who last season was defeated and reduced to great straits
by the Byzantium Emperor. Pandulf, Prince of Capua,
and his brother Ateuolf, Abbot of ]\Ionte Cassino, offered
him a refuge, and swore to protect him. What have
they done ? For a large sum of money they have de¬
livered over to the soldiers of the Greek Emperor the keys
of the fortress of Garigliano. where Dato found a refuge.
Dato they have cruelly murdered, throwing him, sewn
in a sack, into the sea. Some Norman knights they have
killed, and others are their prisoners, and we are now on
our way to join our coimtrymen and our Neustrian
kinsmen, and the army of the Emperor Henry, to punish
these evil men. And now, old man, show reason if thou
canst why we should not seize on the treasures of this
house, and put ye traitor monks to the sword."
Still methinks I see the aspect of the hall; many of
the monks huddling together with pale scared faces;
Damasus trembling like the confection jellies we used to
serve up on festivals; the Prior standing white and
speechless, the novices open-mouthed and amazed. Not
Astolfo, whose colour grew bright, and who drew himself up;
and for me it seemed as if at last something was happen¬
ing—and I Avas half glad. Some looked quite unmoved,
in especial Fra Anselmo, who craved leave to speak, and
then said—
" Look at us, Northman, and you may see we are quiet
monks who believed ourselves at peace with all the world,
of which we knew so little that one of us had asked to
sail with you. If the Abbot of the Motlier House be a
traitor—alas the day ! but we knew nothing of it.    Now
The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 39
if thou wilt kill us, do so: our lives are given away in our
vows ; but think first if it would be a fitting deed for a
brave warrior."
" Just so," said Thorstein. " It is lucky for you that we
are Odin's wolves, not Christians, like others of our race
who care more for Dato. We don't much care about your
lives either, one way or another; we kill sheej) when we
are hungry, not for the killing of them. Let this man be
ready with another to sail with Swend by noon to¬
morrow, and he will be satisfied. But if you are wise, do
not wait for him to send for you, for he would then at
least burn the house and drive you away, if not invite a
few hawks and wolves to a feast."
Now   arose   a   great   talking   and  hubbub,   everyone
imploring Damasus to go in peace, and he trembling so
that he scarce could stand.    Where was all his boasted
courage gone ?   Anselmo and others offered to go instead,
but Ciysolarus forbade them, saying the Northman must
have his will.    He meanwhile despatched some men to
the ship,  whom  we beheld speeding  down  the  rocks,
and ordered more wine up to the guest quarters, whither
with the rest he went.     Compline was said with shaky
voices that night,  and then Astolfo took up the wine
he longed to carry to the Northmen, an honour no one
envied him; and I, leaning out of the window, heard them
laughing and talking far into  the  night.    This  rather
soothed my spirits, perturbed at the idea of sailing away
with those  dread warriors.    And when  the  community
met with their lanterns in the corridoi' to proceed to the
chapel for  Nocturne  Vigilie, Astolfo  squeezed my arm,
saying, " He is a glorious man;  see what he has given
me—I   may  never use it, I must give it up if I take
the  vows,   but   I  shall  keep  it   till   then,   in   memory
of having once seen a brave warrior;" and he showed
me under his robe a jewelled dagger.     I started with
alarm   for   fear  the   Prior  should   see   the   glitter,   but
Astolfo seemed quite changed and reckless, and instead
of going to his cell went back to the guest-house, where
were   the   Northmen.    As for  me,   I  lay  long  awake,
pondering over the quiet days gone by, and the strange
fate that seemed now before me.      There was much that
I shrank from, and yet how disappointed should I have
felt had any other novice been chosen to sail away in the
Northern Dragon Ship. E. J. 0.
{To be continued.)
40 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
"(gtt  ifluf£  to  Italg."
IL—The Italian Schools in the Louvre.
By the Author of '* Gifts for Men."
It must be confessed that the greater number of pictures
Been in churches and galleries do not minister delight,
and do not elevate the imagination. We may be fortu¬
nate enough in the midst of much half-acknowledged
dreariness to feel now and again the touch of a life-
awakener; but if we wish to profit by the accumulation
of the treasures of art, and to receive from its multi¬
tudinous hands, and are not able to so profit as practical
artists, we must make ourselves alive to the histories of
the men, of the schools, and of the times from which
these pictures emanated. We must quicken our minds
to appreciate, however dimly, that this dazzling web of
art is not merely an aggregate of pictures, but is part of
that marvellous emanation from the spirit of the ages by
which " Man, not men," but ]\Ian made in the image of
God, clothes himself with light as with a garment.
" Through the cold mass of marble and of colour his dreams pass,
Bright threads whence mothers weave the robes their children wear."
"Language is a perpetual Orphic song,
Which rules with dedal harmony a 'throng
Of thoughts and forms which else senseless and shapeless were.' "
Such an effort to appreciate art can indeed never reach
its goal in the experience of most of those who take a
holiday on the Continent, for their life's work and
interests are otherwise fully occupied, and " art is long,
and life is short." Still the effort results in an ever-
increasing consciousness of the presence of a knowledge
too great for us to grasp, and this humbles and elevates,
strengthens and refines the mind, as no mere looking at pic¬
tures ever can. In connection with this aim, a knowledge
of the several schools of art is of importance, not only to the
connoisseur, but to the mind of everyone who wishes to
take an intelligent interest in the things he sees. I trust,
therefore, I shall find indulgence for some dryness if I
devote this paper (as on my way to Italy I did my time
in the Louvre) to a rapid review of the Italian schools
there.
Tlie Ladies Eilinhurgli Magazine. 41
The Louvre gives scope for a very fair knowledge of
the schools of Italy. There is nothing of the art which
preceded Cimabue, nor of his contemporaries. There
are only two specimens of the school of Sienna; one
picture by Taddeo di Bartolo, who, though individually
great, belonged to the decadence of Siennese art, and one
by his third-rate follower, Turino di Vanni.
The Florentine school is well represented; and though
many most important names are missing, we can see the
mountain-tops of inspiration in Cbiabue, whose "Madonna
degli Angeli,"^ though injured by restorers, is still like his
masterpiece in " S. Maria Novella ; " in GiOTTO the
founder of the rules of composition, whose " Six-winged
Crucified Seraph " ^ is just vanishing from sight, while
from his outstretched hands and straightened feet flow
mysterious rays to pierce the hands and feet of St.
Francis, faint from his forty days' fast, and overcome
with ecstacy ; in Paolo Ucelli, the father of perspective,
whose gallery of portraits has great significance for lovers
of art;* in Pesellino, the experimentalist in colouring
and in the use of mediums, of whose rare works the
Louvre shows three; * and in Ghirlaxdajo, who so
gathered up " the long results of time " in his grasp of
all that had been done before his day, and so radiated an
all-pervading influence that Cavalcaselle says the history
of Italian art might be summed up in the three names of
Giotto, Ghirlandajo, and Raphael. The Louvre has one
of his finest and latest works in " The Visit of the Virgin
to Elizabeth." '
Second in importance to these only as regards the
nature and degree of their influence, we find the following .
names :—Fra Angelico. His " Coronation of the Virgin,"
though not allowed by critics to be of the master's very
best, is a picture that must delight all lovers of that
lovely soul whom Lord Lindsay characterizes as "the
especial voice and exponent in painting, of tliat religious
rapture or ecstacy produced by the action of the spirit or
of the moral principle on sense throiigh the medium of
the imagination." Whether we look at the transparent
veil which hangs over the kneeling Virgin's dress of
delicate crimson and tunic of blue, at the purple-winged
1 No. 174. 2 No. 209.    Others attributed to Giotto are by his pupils
» No. 184. y y   •
* Nos. 290, 233, attributed to Fra Filippo Lippi, as also is a picture in the
Ex Campana. ' No. 2U4.
No. 2.—Feercaky 1875. F
42 The Ladies" Edinhnryli Magazine.
angels robed in azure and green and rose, at the regal
glory of the Messiah, the incrusted richness of the
canopied throne, the nine differently-tinted symbolical
marble steps which lead up to the consummation of the
Church's mystery, or at the varied adornment of the forty
saints and martyrs, Ave shall laugh with dehght over the
magic of such shimmer and gleam of dehcate colouring
as is nowhere else to be found. Our delight in the
colouring Avill still be subordinate to the joy in such
purity and spiiitual dignity and divine innocence as never
Avere pictured, save by him whose every touch was con¬
ceived in prayer and perfected in praise.'
Of Fra. Filippo Lippi the Louvre boasts one of the
masterpieces;- of the very rare works of LeoxardO DA VlN'CI,
the most wonderful man of the IGth century, who, as if
by inspiration, anticipated nimieroias scientific discoveries
of later days, we find not only three genuine ones, but
the star of them all,^ the portrait of ]\Ioua Lisa, mother of
Lorenzo di Credi; we find also SlGXORELLl, the anatomical
student and the forerunner of Michael Angelo; and Fra
Bartolomeo, the friend of Savonarola and of Raphael,
whom he almost equalled. His " Annunciation" in the
Ijouvre is one of his three masterpieces. *
All the names of the Florentine school have interest,
but to choose amongst them, next perhaps to those Ave
have mentioned (still keeping Avithin the Lou\'re confines)
are Sandro Botticelli, of strongly individualized poAver,
Avhose melancholy Virgin Avriting the Magnificat, Avhile
the child holds the forbidden fruit, is almost a replica of
a gem in Florence; Passigxaxo,' whose works are ex¬
tremely rare, and Avhose studio, through his pupil LudoA'ico
Caracci, Avas the birthplace of the school of Bologna;
Vasari, the author of the delightful but inaccurate Lives
of the Painters; CiGOLI, who AA^as master of the "starry
(xalileo," before he abandoned art to find sorroAV and
immortality in the paths of science.
There are many pictures of the Lombard school, under
AAdiich general term the Louvre catalogue includes the
schools of Parma, Mantua, Modena, Cremona, and Milan ;
and Avith reason, since all these Avere in their different
degrees founded upon the Avorks of Leonardo da Vinci.
CORREGGIO burns the star of first magnitude in this
firmament.    He founded no school, but had a host of
1 Xo. 214. 'No. 234. 'No. 484.
«Xos. 64, 195. 'No. 180.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazbie. 43
imitators, eminent among whom were Lanfraxco, the
painter of cupolas and the unscrupulous enemy of
Domenichino: and AxDREA Dl Salario, wliose exquisite
" Virgin of the Green Pillow" is a delight to look at.^
There are four very characteristic works by the coarse
and vigorous Caravaggio, who began life as a mason,
and availed in his single strength to carry out an
independent study of nature at a time when the blight
of imitation was I'ar spread over the world of Italian art.
Emers 5n remarks, I think, in his Representative Men, that
the mind needs defence most of all against those who
deserve its veneration; but it seems to me that defence,
to be effective for good, must be founded on the heights
of a reverential appreciation, and must not be haunted by
the destructive forces of reaction. Caravaggio had a
defence against the influences of the master minds of
Leonardo da Vinci, Kaphael, Michael Angelo, and
Correggio, before whom all originality seemed perishing,
but it was the defence of the reaction of a soul lacking
in reverence and incapable of spiritual affinities with the
good and the great. He therefore " wrought no deliver¬
ance in the land." He studied nature, indeed, but it
was the nature of a coarse and degraded humanity. His
" Death of the Virgin,"^ for instance, gives us the expiring
mother of Christ " accurately copied from the model of a
stupified and intoxicated woman." The vulgar realism
which produces disgusting results when it intrudes into
spheres higher than its own, does none the less achieve
real successes when it delineates scenes of a life such as
its own, and " The Fortune-Teller " and "Concert" of the
Louvre are, like all Caravaggio's pictures of such subjects,
full of life and character, and to some extent they partake
of the spirit of Giorgione, whose works Caravaggio had
studied.^ It is interesting to compare Carcvvaggio Avith
the contemporary school of Bologna, over some members
of which he exercised a marked influence.
The school of Bologna was an offshoot of the Lombard
school. It was foimded by Ludovico Caracci, the son of
a butcher, and upheld by his two cousins, the brothers
Agostino and Annibale Caracci, and Antonio, Agcstino's
natural son. This school, called Eclectic from its pro¬
fessed aim of not imitating any master, but choosing the
excellences of all, brought about a revival of taste; but
proceeding  as  it   did   on   the   avowed  study   of   older
' No. 403. 2 No. 32. ^ Nos. 33, 34.
44 The Ladles Edinhurcjli Magazine.
masters rather than of nature, the impulse it gave could
not be lasting. The tide might seem to be rising again
as long as the wave lasted of their works, but the ebbing
of the waters was not stayed.
More than a fourth of the pictures of the Italian
masters in the Louvre belong to tins school. The
Carracci alone have thirty-three pictures (of which
the "Virgin warning the Inftmt Baptist not to wake
the Sleeping Christ," is very beautiful in one style,^ and
" Hercules Strangling the Snakes" in another.^ DoMEXlCll-
INO, their chief glory, the modest shrinking genius, doomed
during his lifetime to be eclipsed by the brilliancy of his
rival Guido, has thirteen; his devoted friend FRANCESCO
Albaxi has twenty-two; and GuiDO twenty. Amongst
Guide's works the series of" Hercules and his Labours" is
very famous, and mythological subjects Avere better
adapted than sacred ones to his powers. It is difficult, in
looking at his lovely female heads, to realize that he
painted them from the head of his colour-grinder, a man
of most repulsive appearance—"using his model." as Mr.
Fairholt observes, " as a means of producing beaut}- by
contrast alone."
The chief interest of Bologna does not belong to the
later school of the 16th century, but to the name of
Francesco Raibolini, called Fraxcia, who was born in
Bologna in 1450. Francia learned the secrets of painting
from Lorenzo da Costa of Ferrara, and his early works, of
which the Louvre " Ci'ucifixion " ^ is a specimen, show the
ruddy colom-ing and sharply-contrasted tints of the
Ferrarese school, to the ranks of which indeed Cavalcaselle
consigns him. Towards the end of the 15th century the
works of Perugino were taken to Bologna, and the study
of these gave rise to Francia's second manner; while to
his later friendship with Raphael is attributed his third or
Eaphaelesque style, of which the Loiivre portrait (if by
Francia at all) gives an example.* Through all his
changes of manner his (Avn individuality is very persistent.
There is much affectation and a curious geometrical dis¬
position in the pose and arrangement of all his figures;
but I deeply love the purity of his virgins, the loveliness
and sweet naivete o! his musical angels, the simple
admiration of liis adoring saints, the inspired inTiocence
of his infant Christs, generally occupied in some manner
' PTos. i;-,6, 137. = Xo. us. 3 No. 31S, ter.
' No. 31S.    318 is perhaps the most interesting of the three.
The Ladies ?Jdiiilnirgh Magazine. 45
with the birds Avhieh serve as emblems of the human
soul. Raphael, some assei-t, was flattering Francia when
he said that his virgins were the most beautifully devout
that he was acquainted with, but I always felt he spoke
but the simple truth.
The rise of the peculiar school of Ferrara Avas mainly
due to the influence of Piero della Francesca, the great
Umbro Florentine, and its development was ruled by
the spirit of Andrea Mantegna. Massive, however, as are
the names of these nursing fathers, the artists of Ferrara
were never first-rate : of those in the Louvre, the alle-
goi'ies of Lorenzo da Costa are the most interesting.^
Gextile da Fabriano,^ Nicolo d'Alumxo;'' Pintur-
RlCCino,* Perugixo, of whose early style No. 442 is con¬
sidered the finest existing example, and his pupil,
L'lXGEGXO," suffice to give us a good view of the
Umbrian school, and to prepare us for the sweetness
of Raphael, of whose paintings there are no less than
thirteen, besides eight copies. Amongst these are
his famous portraits of Count Castiglione •* and Joan of
Arragon ; ^ of which last, however, he painted only the
head.    There are three forms of conquest over evil.
First, the conquest by the Archangel Michael. Of this
we have two modes of treatment; one in a small picture,
painted when he was quite a boy, which I failed to find.**
.]\Ii's. Jameson describes it as "a curious and fantastic
rather than poetical little picture." Very diff"erent in
simplicity and grandeur is his maturer wt)rk. The
glorious vision, poised on wings of shifting hues, begirt
with dazzling armour, a purple mantle, and his golden
hair floating backward on the wind of his rushing pursuit
of the falling fiend, has just alighted on the prostrate
monster, and raises aloft the spear to pierce the writhing
demon. P'lames burst from the earth, where, in futile
defiance, the devil grovels and struggles in vain to rise ;
held down for all his brute force by the lightest touch of
the calni-browed angel.
Nothing can surpass the beauty of this picture, Init
the triumph it records is an imperfect triumph at the
best. It is but the conqiiest through prevailing power;
it is only the binding of the evil.    The angel may bind
1 Nos. 175, 170. 2 No. 202. ' No. 31.
* No. 292.    Doubtful if \>y him, but a fine work.
* No.  37.     A heavy, iiniiiterestiug picture.
' No. 383. ' No. 384. « No. 380.
46 Th". Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the monster. He may be serenely unmoved by the
conflict, but that very serenity chills the soul that looks
on him ; and one involuntarily wonders if in the presence
of God, and among the burning ardours that surround
the hiding-place of love, the angel's soul will never rise,
and thrill through all his strength the memory of that
Lucifer, Son of the IMorning, and of the hideons thing
he had become, and of the dwelling in the darkness of
the pit wherein, with unvanquished Avill, he still defied
and cursed the Son of Man.
No, such a triumph as that of the Archangel is not
enough; is futile and unsatisfactory, endurable only
in the hope of a better conquest more truly commen¬
surate with the omnipotence of the Omnipresent.
Secondly, In the small picture of " St. George and the
Dragon " ' we have the magnificent calm assurance of the
Christian warrior. Calm as the Archangel, and by reason
of his flesh and blood subject to be torn to pieces by the on¬
slaught of the foe, he is yet more glorious in his unmoved
serenity than the dreadless immortal. The horse is rear¬
ing, with " his nostrils all wide ; " the lance has shivered
in the fight; the dragon is close upou the knight, and in
the act to spring; but the face of the saint is serene and
unmoved, his sword is raised above his head, prepared
with unerring blow to strike the monster dead. The
landscape is slight; a few slender trees and rocks show
a desert place. The only flaw in the picture is the figure
of Cleodoiinda, or Saba, as some call her, who is running
away in a manner quite unworthy of her who cried out
to her offered deliverer, " Fly, 1 beseech thee, brave
knight, and leave me here to die." This is a conquest
more complete than that of Michael, but even this does
not satisfy. The monster will shortly be there, dead
indeed, not only bound; yet will that vile carcase pollute
the air, and the bleached bones of his victims will never
live again ; and what can atone to those who have been
bereaved, for the dead that return no more ?
Thirdly, We have the exquisite " Vision of St. Mar¬
garet."^ With girlish vivacity, and a look of wonder in
her wide-open eyes, the graceful form moves swiftly
forward. Radiant and undefiled, she has risen from her
loathly prison in the dragon's belly, and the hideous
monster lies with wide-open jaws and glaring eyes, power¬
less to move his loathsome coils, or to stir the ribbed wing
' No. 381. 2 37P.
The Ladies' Edlnhwgh Magazine, 47
on which the white foot scarcely rests in its dainty step¬
ping. The palm branch is held in one hand by the saint,
while the other hand gathers up her drapery from contact
with the fiend. Nothing can surpass the loveliness of her
face and gesture, and the exquisite background of a forest
glade harmonises wonderfully with the scene.
" Milde Margarete that was God's raaide—
Maide Margarete that was so sweete and milde,"
was the daughter of a priest of Antioch, and became a
Christian through the teaching of her nurse. Alybius,
the governor of Antioch, seeing her beauty, desired to
take her for his wife ; but Margaret avowed herself to
be the bride of Christ. This confession drew upon her
the keenest persecution. Finally, she Avas thrown into a
dungeon, or, according to Raphael's version, exposed in a
wilderness, where Satan, in the form of a dragon, came
upon her—
" Maiden Margrete
Lok^d her beside,
And sees a loathly dragon
Out of a hirn glide.
His eyen were full griesly,
His mouth opened wide,
And Margrete might nowhere flee ;
There she must abide.
" Maiden Margrete
Stood still as any stone,
And that loathly worm,
To herward gan gone,
Took her in his foul mouth,
And swallowed her, flesh and bone.
Anon he brast—
Damage hath she none I
Maiden Margrete
Upon the dragon stood ;
Blythe was her harte,
And joyful was her mood." '
This triumph of the unresisting sacrifice,—this triumph
not by might nor by power, but by the Spirit of the
Lord of Hosts, satisfies us more than that of the arch¬
angel or the armed knight. It is completer and more
perfect; for that mystery of destruction, which having
been, must be for ever, is thus robbed of its feting, and
captivity is led captive. Theref )re, in Christian art, the
conquering hero, when he stands before the throne, is
^ Quoted from the Auchinleck MSS. in Mrs.  Jameson's Sacred and Legen¬
dary Art, from which I have taken the legend.
48 The Ladies^ Edinhurgli Magazine.
never accompanied by the overthrown foe; but the
martyr bears forever the memorial of his suffering, and
the dragon, led by silken thread, forever Avitnesses to
the triumph of the guileless child. Yet oven this is not
enough to satisfy the infinite demand of the infinite soul
of man for a conquest infinite as eternity, infinite as God.
Jesus crucified for us, entering into the fulness of His heri¬
tage, through the tastiug of death for every man, alone
sutfices to reveal the glory of the Father's kingdom;
and that revelation is great beyond the power of words
to speak or of art to represent. Only in hours of deep
communion the vision floods upon the soul witli a glory
as of consuming fire, and the spirit knows the everlasting
choice between the obedience unto death and the ever¬
lasting forfeitiu'e of the great reward; between the shame
that, lasting for a moment, may be despised, and the ever¬
lasting bui'nings of the everlasting shame ; the choice
between the presence before the throne, as of the saint or
of the dragon; between the individual glory and the
individual loss.
Pictures of the school which Kaphael founded, called
Roman, from its having drunk largely at classic sources,
abound in the Louvre, and give full opportunity for the
study of the decadence of Italian art. One of its pupils,
PlERlxo DEL Vaga, is intimately connected with the late-
timed and shortlived school of Genoa, of which the
Louvre shows works of all the principal masters.
Strozzi,' a Genoese of romantic history, worked much
in A'^enice, to which we will noAV turn.
Venice affords in painting an interesting parallel, as
noted by Liibke, to the position of Rhodes and Perga-
mos in the history of sculpture. In both, at the demand
of rich merchants, an increased effort brought forth
rich results, at a time Avhen the world of art was other¬
wise swamped with mediocrities.
The school of Venice owed so much to the influence
of Andrea Mantegna, that we must first dwell a little
on him ; and the more so, as the spirit of this wonder¬
ful man swayed the whole of North Italy. Squarcione
of Padua was a tailor and embroiderer. It is doubt¬
ful if he ever painted at all himself; if he did, he
was at any rate personally but little proficient in the
art. He had, however, a gift of teaching so amazing,
that he has been called the " fatlier of painters."     Pupils
' Nos. 412, 413.
The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 49
crowded to him, and he is said to have had as many
as 137. His fame derives its kistre principally from the
name of Andrea Mantegna, his adopted son. Andrea
received his first lessons, no doubt, from his foster-father
Squarcione; but he imbibed much from the works of
Fra Filippo Lippi, Jacobo Bellini, and the sculptor
Donatello. The friendship between him and Squarcione
came to a violent end, as soon as he insisted on giving
his own name to his works, Squarcione till then having
profited by their fame : or, according to A^asari, as soon
as he married Bellini's daughter. From that time the
foster father maligned and opposed his brilliant foster son.
Mantegna worked very largely at Mantua, under the
auspices of the art encouragers, Francesco Gonzago and
Isabella d'Este, but his last days were a sad commentary on
the proverbial advice not to put trust in princes. When
he was upwards of seventy years of age, ruined by
imprudent speculations, and too weak to work, Isabella
refused to help him, and haggled over the price of a bust
of Faustina, which, on account of his indigence, he offered
her. This bust he prized so highly, that the parting
with it is said to have hastened his death.
The Louvre has four of ]\Iantegna's powerful com¬
positions, and, to my mind, contains nothing more
fascinating.
The " Madonna della Vittoria "^ is spoken of slightingly
by Crowe and Cavalcaselle, and is supposed in part to be
the work of Francesco Mantegna; but- I admired the
picture intensely. Perhaps even an inferior work by so
great a mind has more power to charm, tlian more
perfect results from lesser souls. The Virgin sits upon
a throne, upon the marble steps of which is engraved the
representation of the plucking of the forbidden fruit. A
thick arbour full of clustering apples arches over her head.
The arbour is hung with chains of jewels and branches of
coral; and this coral had evidently some meaning in
the painter's eyes, for a kneeling St. Elizabeth holds a
crown of the same. St. Michael and St. George hold up
the Virgin's mantle on either side. St. Longinus (as
Patron Saint of Mantua) and St. Andrew stand behind
them, St. John and St. Elizabeth in the foreground;
and just touching the steps of the throne with his knees,
the young Duke of Mantua adores the Virgin, and is
blessed by the Child,
' No.- 250.
Ko. 2.—Februaki 1S75. G
50 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
The idea is common in art of symbolizing the Salvation
by the same symbol as the Fall; as in this picture in the
embowering apple trees. It is suggestively in keeping
with the contrasted false promise and true hope: the
false promise that spoke of a magic attainment, through
the eating of the forbidden fruit, of the knowledge of
good and evil, and the true hope which bids us strain
after that same knowledge, exercising our faculties of
judgment in choosing between the good and the evil.
It is impossible, of course, to impart by mere descrip¬
tion any conception of so subtle a thing as the power
which casts its spell over such work as Mantegua's ; but
I cannot leave the small room which is enriched by his
treasures, without saying a few words about his allegories.
" AVisdom triumphing over theVices "1 is full of the strangest
figures. It is far fr(jm being beautiful, and, Ruskin says,
must ever be revolting to women and children. Again, in
spite of high authority, I must plead guilty to feeling the
fascination of great power. Minerva, Chastity, and
Philosophy drive before them into the waters (I suppose
of Lethe) a herd of Vices. A Avoman Avitli Satyr's legs
flies, clasping in her embrace a number of frog-legged
babies ; a wild-looking woman dashes through the water,
leading in a leash a fiit man who has only the stumps of
arms, and who wears an expression of the most disgusting
good humour on his sensual face ; a. centaur carries off
through the stream a splendidly attired female figure. A
horrid-looking half-human tree has an inscription rolled
round it containing a prayer to the celestial Virtues to
drive from these abodes the hideous monsters of the Vices.
Justice and Temperance flying above the scene approach
in answer to this desire. " The Allegory of Parnassus,"—
with Apollo and the dancing Muses, the listening Mercury,
the toying Mars and Venus, the mischievous Cupid, and
the jealous Vulcan,—is a more graceful composition, and
full of lovely figures. Mantegna's Triumphs of Csesar,
second in value only to the cartoons of Kaphael, are at
Hampton Court, but they are much destroyed.
The Art of Venice welled in the 15th century from two
fountain heads, the Vivarini and the Bellini, and was
influenced in its rise by the Umbrian Gentile da Fabriano
and by Mantegna. Of the Vivarini the Louvre shows
nothing, and it professes to have more than critics allow
to be genuine of the brothers Bellixi.   The so-called por-
' No. 252.
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 51
traits are not accepted either as portraits of the Bellini
or as being their workJ
The "Reception at Constantinople of a Venetian Ambas¬
sador " ^ is a characteristic work by Gentile Bellini, and
interesting as recalling the visit of Gentile to the Snltan
Mehemet, and his horror when the royal critic supported
his own vieAv of the right delineation of a beheaded body,
by having a slave's head struck off before the artist's
eyes.
Cavalcaselle denies for GlORGlONE both of the fine
Louvre pictures which glory in that name.^ The twenty
TlTLVNS do not all pass muster as being genuinely by
him, but of the undoubted ones there is a rich variety.
" The Entombment," the wonderful portrait called
" The Man with a Glove," and the picture long known
as " Titian and his Mistress," are among the best.*
The last-named picture has a psychological as well
as historical interest, for it is supposed to be the
portrait of Alphonso L, Duke of Ferrara, and his third
wife, the peasant Duchess. Alphonso's second wife,
Lucretia Borgia, of infamous repute before her mar¬
riage, became noted for every virtue as his wife; and the
third wife, said to have been of character as low as her
birth, reformed in the same marvellous way after her
marriage to him, and was almost canonized for her good¬
ness by the people. There is scarcely a great name of
Venice not represented in the Louvre; but it is time for
me to draw to a close.
Of the school of Naples, the latest of the Italian schools,
six artists have works in the Louvre. Of these LuCA
GlORDANA, called " Fa Presto," on account of his wonder¬
ful rapidity of execution, and Salvator Rosa, are the
best known. The Louvre Salvators are superb speci¬
mens of the master's style.'
Lydia Brewster Macpherson.
' No. 69. ' No. 63.
' Nos. 43, 44.    Attrib. to Pelegrino and Seb. del. Piombo.
* Nos. 465, 473, 471. ' Nos. 358, 361.
Note —All the Nos. ai-e red. The Louvre Catalogue is difflciilt to use, which may be
my excuse for this paper. Most of the Italian pictures are In the first three rooms to tlie
right of the stair.
52 The LaJiefi' EJinburyli Magazine.
bonnet.
"Ye are the light of the world."
I WATCHED one eve, as pale the moon arose,
White cloud against the clear, still, autumn sky—
Sky cold and blue o'erhead, though western glows
All warm and red the sunset's cramoisie.
Alas ! methought, for them by land or sea.
Who trust yon Crescent wan for guiding light;
And westward turning, gazed while gradually
The sun-lit fires were quenched in hues of night:
Then upward glanced again—when, lo, all bright
In deepening blue o'erhead my Crescent shone !—
From setting sun she'd caught the parting light,
T' illume the gloom with glory not her own :—
So, midst earth's dark, oh Christ, give me to shine,
Lightless myself, yet bright with light of Thine.
Jeanie Morison.
'SStcrburga of  €\\i^\tx.
CHAPTER  I.
When an individual is in a state of repose, wo judge of
his character in outline ; when he is in a state of activity,
we judge of it in detail. Neither judgment is complete
without the other.
Let iis take as an example, not an individual, but a
town. Stretton is.neither a Welsh nor an English town,
though situated in Wales. Its inhabitants cannot boast
an unmixed descent from the undaunted superstitious
Cymri. Neither are they wholly Saxons ; yet their in¬
domitable energy points to a preponderance of the latter
element.
The town of Stretton has an intense character, yet it
is not an interesting one ; that is to say, it is not rcknantic
or poetical. That it is interesting is proved, however, to
the Strettonians themselves, by their thinking it so; that
it is intense, is proved to all by the extreme activity which
there alternates with complete repose.
Look first at its activity. The market-day has arrived.
It is dangerous to drive a conveyance out of Stretton on
The Ladies" Edinburgh Magazine. 53
the morning of this day. Down the naiTow steep street
you must go, wishing your conveyance were only half
the breadth it is, so imminent is the danger of getting
locked in the wheels of some market-cart, or of letting
your horse measure noses Avith some other animal coming
up the hill. For the street is too narrow to admit of a
double file of vehicles. In the lanes out yonder it will
not be much better, and wo to the conveyance that meets
another in these lanes on a dark night! Enter the
market, and in spite of the crowds who are on their Avay
to it, you will still be afraid that the supply is greater
than the demand. The larger part of these crowds con¬
sists of women in neat white caps or bonnets; hardly a
Welsh hat is to be seen. Conspicuous among the custom¬
ers is Mr. Wood, the overseer of the neighbouring coal¬
mines of Pen-rhyn; he likes to spend a forenoon in
feasting his eyes on bacon, eggs, cheese, and ripe fruit,
instead of on heaps of coal and sheets of coal-dust. He
is so used to superintending, too, that he likes to control
the supplies of his own household; and his weak-minded,
delicate sister, who is the only other member of the
family circle, or rather section of a circle, is doubtless
very thankful for this fancy of dear Bernard's, and
remembers to give thanks for it among the other iimumer-
able mercies in her lot. Not the least of these mercies
was a large, rickety, and old-fashioned vehicle, something
like a covered gig, but still more like a would-be open
chaise. The only occasion on which Miss Wood entered
this conveyance, was when, on Sunday morning, she
proceeded in it up the steep approach to Stretton on her
way to church.
In the market hall we have seen Stretton in its active
week-day life; in the great church we may see it in its
Sunday repose. The people of Stretton are not very
pious, though they might be, if a fine, even remarkable
old church, with decorations and monuments within,
could inspire devotion. As it stands at the top of the
hill on which Stretton is built, the church, with its fine
tower, panelled throughout, and decorated with statues
of saints, forms an interesting feature in the landscape
when seen from a distance, and a subject for study when
near at hand. The inhabitants, however, with the excep¬
tion of a few very superior individuals, are generally more
occupied in studying the appearance of themselves and
their neighbours, than that of the sanctuary which they
54 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
are visiting.    Sunday is to them not only a rest-day, but
a   very  great   dress-day.     Indeed, w^ere  it not  for the
bonnets on the women's heads, and the fact of being in
church, we might almost fancy ourselves at a ball or an
opera.    I am  not going to criticise them   too severely,
however, but to observe a few of those who have been
called superior.    There is Miss Jane Williams in a bright
green bonnet and lavender muslin dress ; she has a little
boy on each side  of her, and is endeavouring to make
both her nephews, who can hardly read, follow the service
in   the   Prayer-Book   without losing the place.    This is
rather hard work for Miss Jane, and work which seems to
have no other result than weariness for both her and the
boys; so she is very glad when the sermon begins, that
she   may  gaze  at  the  stained   windows,   and  wonder
whether  John  the Baptist or the   Woman of Samaria,
whom she sees there portrayed, would have understood
the religion of the nineteenth century as expressed in that
sermon.    In a private gallery, between two pillars of the
choir-aisle, sits young Squire Trevor, of Glanhafon.    He is
occupied in  looking at his hands, first comparing them
with each other, and then with the roof, in the decoration of
which he seems to find another discourse besides the one
he is hearing, so intently does he gaze upwards as he
leans back in   his  arm-chair.    And, to tell the truth, the
sermon was one which required to be supplemented, as it
seemed to   draw its  text  rather from expediency than
from   any  other source.    So, at least, thought Randall
Holme, the young son of the late rector, who, with his
mother, occupied a square seat on the right hand of the
pulpit.    He looked grave and attentive, but his thoughts
were in reality fiir distant.    In his intent way of gazing
before    him,   he   involuntarily   gave    offence   to   Miss
Columbine Watteau, who was affiicted with  St. Vitus's
dance,   and   fancied  that Randall  was  staring   at her;
whereas the truth was, that during the half minute he
spent in looking at her, his thouglits Avere so occupied
that  he   was  hardly  conscious   of her  existence.    Mr.
Bernard   Wood  had  observed the  gaze,   however,  and
did not fail to treasure it up in his memory.
After service, the church door formed a rendezvous for
acquaintances. Squire Trevor habitually shunned the
small-talk of the Stretton gossips, Mrs. Holme was,
however, not included among these. Her late husband
had been a true and disinterested friend to the Squire;
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 55
and when his widow was poorly left, Trevor had at once
made over to her a neat house, with a couple of acres of
ground, which adjoined the southern march of Glanhafon.
Nearly two years had now elapsed since she had gone
with iier son and daughter to inhabit this dwelling. Her
daughter, however, had now been for nearly a year at school
ill Chester; but the midsummer holidays were approaching.
The Squire heard Mrs. Holme say to Miss Wood, " To¬
morrow, I regret to say, we are engaged. I intend to
bring Malvina home from school for the holidays, and
Randall will accompany me."
That evening Mrs. Holme received a note in these
words :—
" Dear Madam,—1 intend to visit Chester to-morrow
on business; as 1 hear you are going there, may I ask
you if you and your son will do me the favour of sharing
my landau for the drive? Should you agree, it will be at
your door at any hour you choose to name.—I am, yours
truly, CoNWY Trevor."
Mrs. Holme hesitated before accepting this kind offer.
A sense of humiliation was inseparable from the acceptance
of such repeated acts of kindness from one on whom she
had no claim.    Still the cost of a hired conveyance would
have been serious, and the stage-coach was comfortless.
So she accepted, and agreed to start at eleven.    When the
note was gone, she began to take another view of the
matter.    Had Squire Trevor not acted without delicacy
in thus  making his own company a part of the favour
bestowed t      Though  rich,   young,   well connected,   and
possessed of many friends, he was not the sort of man
with whom Mrs. Holme felt she could make any approach
to intimacy.    His conversation was charming, his manner
faultless, but the tone of his mind had an element of in¬
considerate self-assertion which was beyond the pale of
Mrs. Holme's sympathetic instincts.    This quality oozed
out slightly, on innumerable occasions, in petty vanities,
in intentional shocks to the feelings of others ; yes,, even
to their deepest feelings.    Mrs. Holme often recalled with
pain an incident which she regarded as an instance of
this ; it  had occurred   soon  after  her husband's   death.
An   eminent   revival   preacher   had   visited   Stretton;
crowded   meetings  were  held  daily  in   the   Methodist
meeting-house.    Conwy Trevor came to one of the meet¬
ings.     On   this   occasion   many   of   the   women   were
56 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
in tears; not a few men prayed aloud. Trevor had
sat next to Mrs. Holme and listened to the address,
and then, during the singing of a hymn, he had hastily
risen from his seat and left the hall. On her asking
him afterwards the reason of his conduct, he had answer¬
ed, " Such meetings are blasphemous, irreverent; I would
rather proclaim myself a leper in the market-place than
pray aloud as these men do. Such excitement can but
nave a double degree of deadness as its result; you will
see whether my words come true." And, indeed, Stretton
seemed now as spiritually dead as ever, but Mrs. Holme
remained as unshaken in her faith in the revival preacher
as she did in her horror of Trevor's conduct. ]t was im¬
possible that such a man could be a safe companion for
Randall, for ways of thinking were infectious. She would
be very careful during the drive to-morrow, and on all
future occasions, not to overstep the bounds of common
intimacy.
When the morrow brought a note in the cramped hand¬
writing of Miss AVood, offering her " chaise," as she called
it, for the drive, Mrs. Holme felt a pang at the impossi¬
bility of accepting the offer. Such a course would have
solved all her difficulties, practical and sentimental. But
it was out of the question; and caution, not escape, Avas
the only alternative left.
Squire Trevor, on the eve of an enterprise, was a being
to whom care was luiknown. Duties and burdens were
alike hidden beneath the wing of excitement, and the
elasticity of his spirit was expressed in the lightness of his
step, and in the gay manner that conveyed a greeting to
all he met.
Mrs. Holme looked tranquil, almost happy, as she
seated herself the next morning in Squire '1 revor's car¬
riage, while Randall and Trevor entered it after her. The
neat widow's bonnet was not too severe in its outline or
lack of colour, for a face that had not lost all the round¬
ness and bloom of youth; and it Avas pleasant to see that
the widow for the time was not conning the tale that her
weeds too plaiidy told. She was dwelling on the calm
and cloudless present, partly because she was again to
see her daughter, partly because siie had come to the con¬
clusion that she had done right in accepting the Squire's
kindness, and that he was on the whole a more suitable
acquaintance for her son than Bernard Wood, who had
not many more ideas in his head than a turnip.    All this
Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgh Mayaziiu bl
the widow said to herself in her charitable way, but
she would not for the world have breathed it to any living
being, least of all to Randall. At the same time she had
resolved to be no more than polite, and to restrict
the conversation to general topics.
Squire Trevor's present mood was such as to make it
next to impossible for her to keep this resolution. He
was inclined to be very jocular, and also to be very
scientific, for at present science was his hobby. He had
as many hobbies in his head as he had hunters in his
stable, and the number was considerable; but the differ¬
ence was, that he rode each hobby in its turn to death and
then dismissed it, while his hunters had each only an
occasional field-day, and were retained even when super¬
annuated. On this occasion his scientific propensities
were shown by the large botanical case which was
strapped across his right shoulder, and the geological
hammer which peeped out of his pocket. The road
at first wound roimd the foot of a hill, where strips
of forest alternated with large field-patches. On the left
was the river Alyn, almost hid from sight by the willows
that wept over its banks. After driving for about half an
hour, they gained the open valley, which stretches on to
another range of low wooded hills. The view of these
softly undulating hills, with their graceful outlines, was
such as to suspend the mind in that middle region
between awe and indifference. The neat houses of the
villagers too, with their porches overgrown with ivy and
roses, spoke of a genial mood of nature, crowned with
artistic effort on the part of man. Even the soot-
begi'imed collier, with his red cowl and loose jersey, had a
cheerful look as he trudged along the footpath; and an
exhilarating impulse was given by the bright morning
and pure air, that seemed to say to all, Live, and enjoy
living.
By our three travellers this precept was obeyed in
different degrees—most perfectly, perhaps, by Squire
Trevor. On the carriage arriving at the foot of a steep
incline which they must ascend, Trevor said, " Ah! here
is the lovely village of Neston, just the place for an old
soldier to retire to with four thousand a year; such woods,
such splendid fox-covers, such a lovely peal of bells;
enough to make one a saint with cheerfulness and good-
humour.    By the way, are you a geologist, Mrs. Holme % "
" I have not the pleasure," said the widow, languidly.
No. 2.—FEBEUAKr 1875. H
58 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
" Ah ! you do know it is a pleasure; that is a great deal.
I am anxious to inquire about some fossils here, so I shall
walk for a little, and meet you at the top of the ascent."
Randall too alighted, but instead of following the
nimble movements of the Squire, he walked slowly up the
hill. As Mrs. Holme sat in the carriage and gazed after
her companions, she remarked a striking contrast between
them. Trevor might be some ten summers older than
Randall, yet, to judge ti-om his activity, he might have
been thought to be the younger man. Descending with
deer-like bounds the steep bank that led to the river, he
crossed a small wooden bridge, and quickly disappeared
round an angle of the opposite bank. Randall, on the
other hand, walked slowly up the hill, one hand dangling
listlessly at his side, the other holding a book which he
was not reading. With his head bending forward, he
seemed to be looking only at the small piece of road im¬
mediately before him. \\'hen the carriage stopped at the
summit of the ascent, Randall quickly regained his seat
in it, but Trevor was still out of sight. Presently,
hoAvever, he appeared, running up the hill at full speed,
and thus shaking his botanical case so violently that the
fossils, if any, which were in it, might safely be expected
to be shivered to atoms.
" Mrs. Holme," he exclaimed, when they were again in
motion, and he had seen after the safety of his fossils, " did
you ever think of envying the mammoth and the rein¬
deer, who, thousands of years ago, roamed together
through the forests ? How they must have laughed at
the idea that men, possibly their own descendants,
would one clay consider themselves the lords of creation.
Look at that toad in the grass; would you not scout the
idea that the race of toads might some day develop
into a new set of lords of creation, who would displace
man from his supremacy ?    Yet who knoAvs 'i"
Mrs. Holme, who was absolutely unscientific, and did
not, on the whole, approve of scientific men, merely asked
the Squire whether he had obtained the fossils.
" Here," he said, opening his case, " is the tail of a
Rhizodus in perfect preservation, found, by a man whom I
employ in this Avay, at the outcrop of the coal-measures
to the west of Stretton. The Rhizodus is especially
interesting : I intend to write a small pamphlet upon it,
in connection with the theories of progression and
natural selection, which it is by some supposed to
disprove."
The Tjadies Edinburgh Magazine. 59
Mrs. Holme did not Avish to hear anything more about
the Rhizodns : modern science was more than distasteful
to her; she thought it wicked, and wanting in reverence.
Belonging to the Church of England, she yet was Cal-
vinist enough to rate the individual higher than the Church,
and to believe the Spirit to be attainable only through
the very closest conformity to the letter. It thus neces¬
sarily followed that she would, on religious grounds
alone, rate the individual higher than the species, and
reject with horror the conjecture that hinted at a
primordial form and ancestors arboreal in tlieir habits.
Having SAvorn fealty to the letter as her liege lord in all
matters of religious observance, she could not, without
oftending that lord, even take into consideration any
theories of Avhich his system contained no suggestion.
The only way, therefore, in which she could exercise her
private judgment, was by pronouncing all such theories
to be Avicked and hurtful. She thus took the shortest
cut to a conclusion, Avhich, at the cost of a greater effort
of thought, she might possibly have reached by a more
satisfictory, though more circuitous Avay.
" (Jome, Randall, do not look so gloomy," said Trevor
to the lad sitting opposite him, Avho Avith dreamy eyes
seemed to see, and yet not to see, the landscape. " The
Avorld is not quite extinct yet," he added; " and, indeed,
Ave  shall come in sight of Chester immediately."
Randall had by nature very ardent and sensitive
feelings, Avhich, by the constant and almost exclusive
society of his mother, had of late asserted themselves
unduly, until they had groAvn morbid. The aspect of
the country Avhere he lived had tended to increase this
tendency. Long lonely musings in the Avoodland
haunts Avhich surrounded his home, had deepened,
and perhaps narroAved, the poetic current of his
thoughts. Hence his character might have run the risk
of becoming unduly feminine, had it by nature been
inclined to be so. Instead of such a bias, hoAvever, we
find in his nature a certain independence and a tendency
to mental pugilism. The infantine period, of physical
pugilism had long since passed away; and Randall,
instead of regarding indiAaduals of his OAvn standing as
beings to be fought Avith, had been learning to regard
them as beings to be lived Avith. But here mental
antagonism had stepped in, and levelled its shafts
not only against other lads like himself, but even more
60 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
emphatically against his superiors. Thus to have objects
of reverence and maxims for conduct laid before him, was
enough to make him distrust those objects and slight
those maxims. The strict regulations of his mother's
house were galling to his independence, and his submis¬
sion to them was dogged, and sometimes even mechanical.
All the time he was in secret revolving theories in his
own mind, and becoming daily more reserved and less
cheerful in his demeanour.
The society of Trevor was not congenial to him, less
on account of the strange notions of that individual,
than because he felt that the nature of the man had
no meeting-place for his own nature. He felt as if he
and Trevor were two waifs or strays sailing apart
on an infinite sea, which no wind or current could
ever bring nearer to each other. Trevor's society sug¬
gested to him no better idea of himself than this. He
did not know whether his companion felt the same with
regard to him, and he was too indifferent on that subject
to revolve it in his mind.
" There is Chester I " said Trevor suddenly, as they
gained the summit of an ascent. " There it is, the dear
old Royalist town, the slow stupid Tory that it is! Did
it ever strike you, Mrs. Holme, that Chester has met with
the usual fate of old Tories'? It has nothing particular
to do; the progressive men of the day are doing every¬
thing, and the poor old town has nothing to do but eat
his cheese, which is very good, restore its cathedral,
and keep green the memories of Charles I. and St.
Werburga."
" I am sorry you despise the making of cheese," said
Mrs. Holme, " for I believe it to be one of the fine arts,
which no educated person should be without."
Trevor, however, was not listening, and this was
strange conduct in him. Why did he suddenly flush,
and then grow pale ? Why, as he looked away past the
gentle slopes and curved lines of woodland at the town,
with the river flowing past it, did he look as if that town,
or something there, was all in all to him? We devise
interpretations for such looks in our companions, and
then forget them till the wave of time casts them
up  again.
Meanwhile, they again lost sight of the town, till,
about half an hour later, they found themselves close to
Bridgegate.    The carriage rolled quickly over the stony
The Ladies' Ed'mburgli Magazine. 61
streets, till it halted at the Deva Arms. Here the horses
were to rest, and the travellers separated, after having
agreed to meet again in the cathedral at four o'clock in
the afternoon.
Procla.
(7b be continued.)
A  SKETCH  FROM NATURE.
It has often been asserted that childish feelings, whether
of joy or gi'ief, are slight and evanescent; that early
sorrow is only on the surface, and childish impressions
are effaced by the lapse of a few months. It seems to
me, on the contrary, that the affections of fresh young lives
arc so deeply imbedded in the nature, that the very
memories of happy or sorrowful days are preserved with
an intensity totally beyond their worth, and live when
other and subsequent feelings have long ago died out.
I was only fourteen when I left the place which is to be
the subject of my pen to-day, and yet, amid the many
more exciting scenes I have since witnessed, none have
so happy, so clear, so touching a retrospect to me, as the
home of my childhood. It was not for any extraordinary
beauty in itself,—for the house was an old-fashioned, high-
shouldered, two-winged house, the walls of the older part
completely buried in cherry trees, rose and ivy bushes
alive with the ceaseless twitter of sparrows; a great
lawn stretching on three sides, intersected by a babbling
stream, where we fished for trout, and where onl}^ slimy
eels would take our bait; a great background of dark
pine wood; an old-world triangular garden filled with
huge sAveet-smelling cabbage roses, wall-flower, balm, and
other country blossoms, with wide-spreading beech and
plane trees scattered here and there, an ancient rookery
in the high branches, one of whose members fell the first
victim to my brother's gun, and was surreptitiously
plucked and cooked in the playroom, where we children
greedily devoured the unsavoury morsel, with the keen
appetite which always accompanies forbidden fruit. Sliall
I ever forget how our consciences suffered, when the very
62 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
next Sunday the clergyman read out of the old Levitical
Law that ravens were unclean birds, and forbidden to be
eaten ! How guilty we felt, what furtive glances we stole
at each other, wondering if our sin was legible to the
congregation on our faces,—with what remorse we thought
of our momentary enjoyment I Alas for the tender
conscience of childhood I I doubt if breaking one of the
ten commandments now-a-days w^ould cost us as much
as did this unwitting breach of the old Law.
Each season was remarkable for its own peculiar beauty,
and filled with its individual interests. The short winter
days—in particular one year, when a snow-storm lasted a
whole month, when the road was blocked up for weeks, and
a path, whose white walls Avere higher than our heads,
was cut between the house and the stable. The spring—
when over the bright green grass, jewelled as it was with
snowdrops and crocuses, we watched the young lambs
frisking and bounding across and across the burn ; or the
summer evenings,—when the long shadows lay on the
lawn, when, tired of play, we threw ourselves under the
shade of the wide-spreading chestnut tree, and watched
a thunderstorm come up from the west; expectant nature
waiting its approach, the lovely sycamores drooping their
broad leaves, the aspen almost fearing to tremble, the
beasts huddled together in one corner of the field, the
lurid light which crested the topmost cloud, the first
w^arning growl or flash which winged our timid feet, and
sent us helter-skelter to the house. Oh, those glorious
days ! when we filled in the boundless outlines of life's
possibilities wath the most brilliant colouring; when,
buckling on our armour, we longed to rush into the arena
of busy existence, and fight the world, the flesh, and the
devil with all the fearlessness of youth ; when as yet no
minor tones had made themselves heard in the music of
our lives.
How w^e loved the long Avalk through fields of waving
corn, by the lane bordered with wild-rose and hawthorn
hedges, where our feet sank in purple thyme, to the
quaint old church, which stood high over the river
on a precipitous bank, surrounded by moss-grown old
gravestones dating centuries back ! We could hear the
murmur of the river through the half-opened windows,
which somewhat diverted our attention from Avatching
the gambols of the numerous mice which lived in the
tattered old cushions, or from calculating the progress
The Ladies Edinhu7'gh Magazine. 63
the fungus had made during the week on the damp
mildewed flags with which the building was paved.
Very frequently our grand old Newfoundland dog
accompanied us, and would mount to the gallery, and,
planting his huge paws on the desk of our pew, looked
solemnly down on the congregation below. The church
Avas noAV knoAvn only by the name of the village near
Avliich it Avas situated: but my brother, who Avas about
fifteen years of age at this time, and had most Jacobitical
and High-Church tendencies, hunted up some old records
about its antiquity, and Avrote a most marvellous poem,
called " The Fane of Saint Fergus," savouring greatly of
" Black Prelacy," or even of the " Babylonitish Woman "
herself, speaking Avith great contempt of the men in
" Geneva goAvn and bands," avIio had usurped tl c place
of the- cowled brethren of St. Fergus ; and many other
dreadful things, Avhich Avere enough to make the old
abbot and monks turn in their graves. Brought up as
Ave were in the strictest Presbyterianism, our admiration
of our brother's talent was mixed Avitli horror at his
heterodox notions. HoAvever, Ave copied the poem siu-
reptitiously, and distributed it among an admiring circle
of friends.
Of course the place Avas haunted. I do not ask anyone
to credit the assertion, for I arn aAvare that the belief in
ghosts, like every other remnant of the good old days, is
dying out in these times; but I firmly believed in them
then, and am not sure that I don't now.
I only knoAv that strange sights and sounds, Avhich
could not be accounted for in a rational manner, had
been seen and heard in that house ; that my grandmother
and mother, in the young days of the latter, had more
than once, in the dead of night, searched for some one
Avho could never be found, but Avliose steps had been dis¬
tinctly heard in different parts of the house; that not one
of the servants or people about the home-farm Avould
have crossed the lawn after dusk alone ; that we children
were aAved to an unrestful sleep by gruesome tales of this
same ghost; that not only ourselves and the people
about Avere conscious of some inA'isible presence, but per¬
sons Avho had never been near the spot, or heard of its
being haunted.
For instance, one autumn, a band of harA^est labourers
had come to the farm, and there not being sufficient
accommodation for two young Avomen, the bailiff came to
64 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the house to ask if they might be allowed to sleep in an
old lumber-room in the attic. This was agreed to. You
must remember they had just arrived, and had had no
communication with anyone about the place; indeed,
this would have been difficult, as, being Highland girls,
they understood little English,
About eleven o'clock, two scared, white-faced figures
burst into the servants' sleeping-room below, demanding
angrily who had come to frighten them, for a figure had
entered and stood by the head of their bed, waking them
simultaneously, and only gliding away when they
hurriedly asked who was there. Of course this only
corroborated the fact of the ghost's existence in the
minds of the sleepy servants. The two girls steadfastly
refused to go back to the attic, spent the rest of the
night by the kitchen-fire, and, breaking their engagement,
left such a terrible house early next morning.
That the place had a bad name, and was widely known,
was evident from the following fact. I am writing of a time
before a railway was made iu that part of the country.
A canal from the county town to a smaller one, twenty
miles further north, ran through two miles of our property.
A passenger-boat went by day, and overnight several coal
and lime boats were towed along the stream, the crew
consisting of a man at the helm, and a lad who walked
along the bank, guiding and urging on the horse.
Whenever the boat touched the boundaries of our place,
the boy jumped in beside the man, and nothing could
persuade him to resume his post till the uncanny place was
past. One night they thought their fears were to have a
dread realisation, for on nearing the shadow of one of the
many bridges across the canal, about half-a-mile from the
house, suddenly the horse stood stockstill, planted its
fore-feet firmly, pricked its ears, and gazed steadfastly in
the bank of furze dividing the highroad from the towing-
path. The older man cracked his whip, swore, expostu¬
lated—all in vain : he could see nothing, and only heard
the eerie rustling of the dry pods of the broom bushes.
At length, tired of urging the boy to go to the animal's
head and force him on, he jumped out, and, peering into
the shrubs, lie discovered the apparently lifeless body of
a man. They tied the sagacious creature, to whose
wonderful instinct the poor fellow probably owed his life,
to the bridge, and carried the unfortunate man to our
house, where he lay for many weeks in a state of uncon-
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 65
sciousness. He was a young doctor who was returning
from a late visit, when his horse shied, throwing its rider
over the parapet among the bushes below.
There was a sort of curse upon the place. Many
generations past, people said it had been obtained by its
then proprietor by treacherous means. When the oldest
part of the house was knocked down, a skeleton was
found under a hearthstone, and some weird prophet of
the time had pronounced a doom, which has been
strangely verified to this day. It was, " That son should
never succeed sire.'' It has been so for long; no matter
how sure the succession has seemed, some untoward
event has happened, and the place has changed hands.
No wonder, then, that we grew up with morbid tendencies,
and a belief in a fate we were powerless to struggle
against. Some dim foreshadowing of the future must, I
think, have come home to our consciousness ; and when at
last the sombre looks of the heads of the household, which
had for some time been a mystery to us, were explained,
our sorrow was far greater than our surprise. When the
fiat went forth that we were to leave our cherished home
in a few weeks for a long sojourn in France, and that
never again should we call it ours, we roamed about in a
restless, objectless manner, talking with bated breath, and
moving with gentle footfall, as if death were in the house.
How, as the time grew nearer, we, without any arrange¬
ment, but as it were by unanimous instinct, found our¬
selves always in our favourite haunts in doors or out,
endeared as they were by their respective associations,
and filled with sweet memories often recalled now by the
accidental sense of scent or sound.
How on the last morning of all we went, with brim¬
ming eyes and silent voice, from chamber to chamber,
kissing the very walls we were never more to see; to the
nursery, where we had often gone to sleep paralysed by
terror of unknown evils; the play-room, which to this day
the sight of plovers' eggs always calls up vividly before
me, from the fact of our being merrily engaged boiling
some we had found in a field one night, when we were
suddenly arrested in the act by our governess coming to
tell us of the dangerous illness of our mother. How
clearly I remember the heavy hearts we four children
took away Avith us that night! How a large, heavily-
curtained bed puts me in mind of the following day,
when we,   awe-struck  little   ones, were taken  into   the
Ko 2.—Febrl-aM 1875. I
66 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
darkened room to say the last good-bye; from which
room, thank God I our dear one feebly struggled back to
life and to her children. I do not recollect if we paid a
farewell visit to the schoolroom ; it was only connected
in our minds with most imsentimental punishments and
tasks ; but we plucked grasses and heather from the
meadow and wood to ieep as sacred things.
We immediately rushed into heroic verse, describing
our agonised feelings with the minutest distinctness,
talked of ourselves as aliens and exiles, hinted darkly at
foreign graves, where cypress and yew would cast a
shadow over broken hearts, spoke of the Channel as if it
were the Pacific Ocean at the very least, and breathed
forth the utmost defiance and contempt of our Gallic
neighbours !
kSome of these remarkable poems are still extant; but I
am glad to say the feelings which dictated them have
long ago given place to more Christian sentiments;
that the exiles were restored, after the lapse of a few
pleasantly spent years, to their native land; and that the
aforesaid dismal trees were not called upon to cover the
tombs of strangers.
« » » « *
I had not seen the dear old place for many years, until
one day, finding myself in its vicinity, I walked some
distance to revisit the old haunts, and see the changes
which time had wrought—time, whose loving, tender
hand adds new beauty to everything it touches, and over
the many enormities of art and architecture spreads a
green mantle of ivy, or tones down Ihe garish colours of
ugly tints with mellow mosses or soft grey lichens.
If only time had wrought the change! but, alas ! the
place had fallen into the hands of a man possessing
unlimited wealth, and his chief amusement consisted in
laying out and improving (?) the property. He had meta¬
morphosed it so that all the old cherished landmarks were
swept away. Spacious lawns and terraces were now,
where before was a wild undulating woodland, where
we children used to sink knee-deep in ferns and blaeberry
bushes : where the green meadow in which we found the
first primroses sloped down to the brook by the old saw¬
mill, with its fresh smell of newly-made sawdust, there
was a trim vegetable garden with a high wall and
straight bordered walks, through which I passed with a
full heart; and in the lovely old dell stretching for miles
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 67
up through the wood, and down which tumbled and
gurgled a brook over mossy rocks, sometimes screened
by a confusion of greenery; the dell—the idol of our
childhood —the one spot I was sure they could not spoil.
Trim gravelled walks, bordered with stiif privet and box
hedges, were cut by the burn-side, where lovers could
walk abreast and talk politics or the state of the money
market without having their tempers or attention dis¬
tracted by brambles catching their dresses, instead of the
rough and narrow track, wandered over here and there
by woodbine trailers, or a trickling rill dropping from a
green mossy rock far up on the bank, where our lovers 
But my imagination is running away with me, for in
those days we were too young to possess such appen¬
dages, unless boy-lovers, Avho, I daresay, were ungallant
enough to leave us to stumble as best we might over the
stepping-stones, and only laughed when we missed our
footing.
I looked in vain, and with a sore tugging at my heart¬
strings, for the scene which had " orbed into the perfect
star, we saw not when we moved therein;" for even
the dank pool, where the frogs croaked and the stunted
alders grew, where we lowered our voices as if some¬
thing eerie hung over the place, where we hastily
plucked the grey cup rnoss with its silver and scarlet
edges, and hurried on in the fast-deepening twilight,
hearing the young owl's dismal cry behind us. Where
had it vanished ? Most of the hill and moorland where
we used to watch the timid deer bounding gracefully
over the ground, or standing at a lovely picture
against an open sky, was cultivated, and converted into
corn and turnip fields; the pool was drained, and the
water utilised for purposes of irrigation. If this be
civilisation, commend me to the wild savagery of nature !
Surely, T said, with a last waning hope, where the
brook widens and falls into the little lake in the pleasure-
grounds, no change can have taken place. The little
rustic bridges, insecure certainly, but most picturesque,
must still be there, covered with those lichens, which
were thus prettily described by a friend of mine—
'' So tenderly, lovingly, ye clasp
The headstone lone and cold,
And your gentle arms ye fling around
The ruins grey and old.
Ye hrusli with your silent silver wing
The rocks by the brooklet's side.
68 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
As ceaseless ever your task ye ply,
And onward still ye glide."
I wandered on. The beautifully rugged edges of the
stream, where the water eddied among reeds and grasses
into tiny hollows, where harebells stooped over to see
their pale reflection, were shaved down and cut to a
hideous evenness; the bridges were superseded by plain
varnished planks and railings, and where before the
stream divided, forming a miniature island covered with
shrubs and weeds, was a mound carefully formed and
surmounted by a wooden house, in shape something
between a Noah's Ark and a Swiss chalet, for the abode
and comfort of two black Australian swans, who were
quite in keeping with the appearance of the place.
The only thing they could not touch was a group of
grand old Scotch firs, standing in all their inexpressible
dignity, looking so different and yet so beautiful under
every aspect, whether towering above the storm, with
the snow weighing down their dark branches; or with
the red autumn sunset lighting up their rugged bark, and
tipping with glory the ever-green pines, the only un¬
changed friends of my childhood. I did not ask after
the ghosts; no doubt they had been improved away with
other things.
I sat down to still the wild beating of my rebellious
heart. Home, and yet no longer home! Why was it
not still ours, who loved it so well, and to whom every
stick and stone was a beloved friend and face? Ah!
it is sb hard to teach oneself that all must be for the
best, that the tearing asunder of ties, and the parting
from our dearest possessions, is one of life's greatest
lessons.
Even now, Avhile I write, thousands of recollections
crowd upon my brain—scenes long forgotten spring into
lenewed and sudden life before my misty eyes—scenes
BO lovely, they were an idyll in themselves—-the broad
river on whose silvery bosom, rich Avith the evening tints,
glided a boat before the current, it and the two uncon¬
scious happy figures seated in it, alike drifting they
knew  not  where,   wrapt   in  the  warm   light   of life's
summer days.   The but if I follow further the leadings
of my recollections, it might be truly said that the
garrulity of old age had come to me before the allotted
time. Martyn Hay.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. G9
Cljt   gragon  0f tht  |tflri§'.
CHAPTER   III.
" Beheld so high upon the dreary deeps,
It seem'd in heaven—a ship, the shape thereof
A dragon wuig'd, and all from stem to stern
Bright with a shining people on the decks."—Tenxyson.
Our little river ran through a deep rocky ravine just
before reaching the sea. Hardly could a sunbeam force
its way down into the chill depths, where pale plants
hung dripping from the crannies of the dark rocks over
the water. The usual way to the sea led along the
rocks above, but a pathway led down into the cleft to a
poor httle cell, where for many years a hermit had lived—
some said a holy man; others, one that by terrible
penances tried to purify himself from foul crime. We
had heard he was gone away, but I thought that could
not be, as I passed along the path at the top at noon
the day folloAving the coming of the Normans, for I saw
how Herser Thorstein and two or three more had gone
down to the cell with the miserable Damasus, who there,
methought, sought strength for his further journey.
And indeed there was something in his mien and step more
assured as he came out of tlie low door and went swiftly
on with the Northmen, as if the severe hermit had some¬
what consoled him. Ah! how unlike was that soft idle
Damasus to my dear brave Father Anselmo, with whom
I had lingered so long that all the rest had gone before
me, and now I had to run down the last steep descent
to be iu time on board the great ship of war. There she
floated in the deep water close inshore, one dazzling
glitter of many colours and gold. Thirty great oars on
each side lay out on the water; and aloft they were
spreading wide coloured sails on the three masts. Round
the bulwarks many shining shields w^ere hanging; in front
was a high raised deck; and behind, the poop rose also,
thronged with glittering figures. At the prow, with
head throAvu back over the forecastle, a great gilded
dragon crest was seen, and its barbed tail curled over
the poop. The oars seemed its legs, and the sails its
wings, and it seemed to have a life of its own, like some
splendid yet evil beast, or Leviathan himself of whom we
chant in the Psalms. A moment only I looked, full
of delight and curiosity,   and  then I ran over a long
No. 3.—llAEcn 1875. K
70 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
plank on board, none noticing me save Thorstein, who
nodded kindly as he stood on the poop ; and the oars
Bmote the water so that it foamed all around, and in a
few minutes we were far from the rocks; the wind was
blowing, and filled the great sails; the oars were drawn
in, and we were away over the tossing grey water.
I stood in what I afterwards knew as the waist of
the vessel; nor could I well have moved thence, for the
movement and rolling became so brisk that I found my¬
self more at my ease lying down under a bench close
against the side of the ship, the sleeping quarters of the
men, when the gurgle of water in my ears, and the noise
of creaking, hauling, and trampling, all blended together
in a pleasant dreaminess. It was afternoon when I woke
up again. I liked now the feeling of the rolling of the
ship over the waves, and would fain have talked to the
great fair-bearded men who lounged about the benches,
or leaned over the brightly-painted vessel's sides. But
they shook their heads, saying, "No Italian," till a young
fellow, Kolbiorn by name, the skald or poet, as I learned,
of the crew, came with some food, which he spread
between us on the bench, and by means of the Italian he
had picked up, and the knowledge I had of the written
Teutonic language in which the Niebelungen LAed, one of
the treasures of our library, was written, a knowledge
which was soon improved into a good acquaintance with
the spoken Norse, we were ere long chatting merrily.
Kolbiorn was small, slight, and handsome, and far more
gaily dressed than any man on board. He wore golden
armlets and various jewels, all presents received for
songs, as he told me. I soon found he loved all pretty
things, especially and. chiefly himself, and that he Avas
ready to put anyone's thoughts into a song for him,
and yet he might laugh at those very thoughts the next
day in another song. But how these rough men loved his
song!—it was " Kolbiorn, sing us of the heroes," or
" Kolbiorn, pray—a song about old Norway," or " Kol¬
biorn, sing a song for Thor," or " a song to my love Gun -
hild at home ;" and he was ever ready.
Now, while we talked, I saw how on the poop was a
clear space of raised deck, shaded from the sun by a striped
curtain, red and yellow. Under it, by a table, sat among
others Damasus, with his back to me, his cup in the air,
like a light-hearted man-at-arms. What mii-acle had so
cured his terror ?
The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 71
" Ought I not," I said to the Northman, " to go and
attend on Father Damasusl "
" Nay," said he, " the merry Father does not want you.
Father! he looks younger than his son, and likes his wine.
I only ho])e he won't lure our Swend into a drinking-bout.
There beside him, that tall bony man, with long red hair;
that is Sea-king Swend, the lord of us all, except when he
is too drunk to stand, and then Herser Thorstein takes
command."
" And when Thorstein is drunk f
" That he never is; he is rather melancholy, for his own
ship was wrecked : that is why he is aboard of us. Also,
we think he is in love with Hertha, and is too old for her—
he was at sea before I was born. Look! there comes Hertha
with her ancient maiden out from her cabin under the poop.
There is our mistress, our goddess Freya. For her sake we
endure her brother Swend, the red fox; for no bigger beast is
he, for all he looks so tall and strong. Syades can lead him
with a string. Then he is a wizard, or wishes to be thought
one; and some say can coin the red gold Swend loves best
of all things, out of baser metals. Thorstein there cares
neither for gold nor wizard, but he can cow Swend, and
Ave would all follow him to the death, for he is a first-rate
warrior and sailor, and many a time he has saved our
beauty, our darling—the Dragon."
The Dragon indeed! of course I thought he was going
to say the lady. And so there were women on board. How
should I, bred up all my whole life apart from them, com¬
port myself towards them ? Terror possessed me, and I
exclaimed—" Women on board ! "
" Two, and soon perhaps another. Do joxx know what
you, or rather your gay young Father, are wanted for V
" To ask for winter quarters at Salerno."
" Ask ! does the bear ask the sheep's leave to lie down ?
There is not a port in the whole world where our Dragon
would not come in and take what she wanted—the dar¬
ling. No. But there is a lady who owns a fair castle and
lands near Amalfi, and Swend's idea is to marry her and
live there for the winter, and then perhaps join our Chris¬
tianised cousins from Neustria, who are coming more and
more to this coast, and establish a fair dominion here. The
lady will not marry one of Odin's men, and so a priest must
come as messenger, and if she will have Swend, christen
him and marry them. If she will not have him, well—
he may carry her off, unless Thorstein can prevent it; for
72 7he Ladies' Edinburgh Afaga~ine.
he is very sorry for the lady—and, by Thor's hammer! so
am I. When Swend is drunk, he may treat a woman as
he would a man—and that would be ill indeed ; and then
he has already two or three wives, and the one in Norway
—Ingeborgd—is a proud woman, who would never be
second."
" What! a Christian maiden marry a man with two or
three wives ? How little the monks knew, when they sent
Damasus, what the errand was. He can't know now, or
he would protest, though I fear he is but a coward."
" No," said Kolbiorn; " to my eye—and I am a fair judge
—he may have mischief in him, but not cowardice. How¬
ever, I daresay, Thorstein knows his way through the
wood: he is like the bear, a silent tongue, and nine men's
wisdom. I tell you all this because you have a good face,
and have read the Saga of Sigurd. Only why they were
so resolved to have you on board, the Gods and Syades
alone know."
" ]3ut Damasus chose me," said I.
" Maybe, but Thorstein and Syades chose you, and
no one else, which Avas more to the purpose," answered
the other; " there they summon me. Keep your know¬
ledge of our language to yourself, and you may find out
more yet; meanwhile see who comes out from under the
forecastle, Syades himself," and the youth flung himself
quickly over the benches towards the poop, while one
came forth from the low door under the forecastle, who
at once arrested my attention, as I had seen him with
Thorstein at the convent. This was a thin spare man,
with high dark features, and wearing a long robe. He
greeted me kindly, speaking perfect Italian, and invited
me to a seat beside him on the forecastle, to which we
mounted by a ladder from the waist. The sunset was
now beginning to burn in the sky to seaward, and as we
talked the darkness came on apace.
" And so," he said, " thou art convent bred, and sent
forth to see the world in a heathen ship! What were
the holy brothers dreaming of? had the seer of the
monastery a vision of their novice converting Swend, or
are you a runaway from discipline'? how came ever such an
innocent lamb among northern bears, Gaulish wolves, and
Saracen leopards ? "
Now I liked not the man's bitter laugh, and yet there
was something that drew me towards him—some strange
attraction, which led me to speak freely.
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 73
" Sir, I am sent to travel in part to perfect myself in
my art; and am here, I believe chiefly because, I know
not why, you wish it. Are you perhaps a master builder ? "
I asked, because I saw he was neither sailor nor warrior,
yet a man of commanding presence.
" Thou hast guessed it, a master of many arts, though
indeed to these old monks the worst of the beasts, the
leopard—Syades the Saracen; Swend's slave taken in
fight, and yet his master."
An unconverted Moslem.    I felt a strange shudder.
" Oh, noble sir, have you then heard "
" Ay, heard what can be heard," he said, laughing,
" and I remain—like all Spain, like the East, where all
learning rose—Moslem still. But indeed it is not of these
matters that I chiefly concern myself, not with what
is above and out of our reach, like that golden sunset
cloud; not with what is future, death and what comes
after, which must come whether we strive or lead easy
lives, but with what is around and present, that I occupy
myself now. We ask questions about the life and destiny
of man, and of the purpose of the Deity, and weary our¬
selves in vain. One answer comes from your Christian
priests, another from Kolbiorn the skald, who leans there
with his harp on the bulwark ; another from the bigoted
followers of Mahomet. Rather do 1 choose to put
questions to nature than to man ; to the stars about the
rules which guide their wanderitigs, to the elements
which build in their endless combinations all we see and
all we are. For these answer; it may be a very low and
shy reply, but yet it is something—a true response; and
as we grow older, we can question with more skill. Now
the first look at a young face tells me what the man's
qualities are, as an old face tells me character and history.
I discourse so to you, my son, because I read in your face
at once the quality that dares to look at nature with
clear eyes, unblinded by book learning."
I had never heard words like these; and while I
disputed them, they somehow cliarmed me. Long we sat
on the forecastle ; the sunset had yielded to night, but
the ship steered her course by starlight. A tent was
thrown over part of the waist of the ship, and many of
the mariners lay down to sleep beneath it, under the
rowing benches. The sounds of carousal had died away;
Damasus was in a cabin beneath the poop, and now
doubtless  slept :   and  still  the strange  man with  the
74 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
restless dark eyes talked on to me. Most interesting
was it to hear him speak of the hidden power of numbers,
especially as shown in the great craft of Architecture,—
princess of all the arts, and of the societies of craftsmen
and masons, bound together by awful vows and secrets,
and possessing a knowledge and brotherhood beyond
other men, from which roots sprang the fair edifices, not
raised by Christians alone, but by heathen also, and
Moslem, alike bound to work together in brotherhood for
the glory of their craft. And he said of me, that he
knew by a little birth-mark, as of a ripe fruit stain near
the left eye, that great powers, of a sort he rather
guessed than knew, were mine. In short, when long
past midnight I lay down under the tilt in the waist,
and tried to sleep amid the sleeping men around me, my
head swam and my spirits danced with strange wild
hopes regarding myself—I, a poor unknown orphan,
brought up by the good charity of the community. It
was a strange place for a Benedictine novice to be in,
but I do not blame the brotherhood, who thought when
my journey was settled I should go a short voyage in
a well-ordered ship of Christian Normans, under the
guidance of an experienced monk ; not as now, in a
heathen vessel, Avith a Saracen sage or wizard as my
chief companion. Our ship even, as I suspected, was
not bound straight to port, but cruising about like a
dragon indeed, seeking for prey. At last I slept, and
dreamt that I rode all night in a waste land after Syades,
who suddenly turned and called on me to strike spurs
and leap over a wall as 1 thought; but even as I rose to
the leap, I saw it was Father Anselmo who looked at me
like a man who has got his death-blow; while beyond,
Syades rose dilated in the air, huge and black as a
threatening fiend; and while I strove to cross myself
and cry out, I siiddenly woke ; and lo I the network of
ropes overhead, and the sea-birds skimming across a
clear, bright, morning sky.
And like the mosaic of an angelic head with a golden
halo against a clear blue background, there appeared in
that morning sky a radiant vision that all the years of
busy life have never since dimmed in my memory. I
thought at first some blessed spirit had come to chase
away my evil dream wth its pure presence, but I soon
perceived it was indeed the Lady Hertha, Swend's sister,
whom I had as yet seen in the distance  only, who was
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 75
standing near on the gangway which ran round the
waist of the vessel. Her golden hair stood off" round her
lovely face as though blown back in a winged flight, the
pure white of her forehead warmed into the colour of a
pink shell on cheek and chin, her clear blue eyes caught
mine as she turned to me with a radiant saluting smile,
and Avished me good morning in good Italian. It seemed
as if my very being leapt towards her, and that I was no
more my own. I stammered, and could hardly answer
or raise my eyes beyond the deep blue folds that fell
over her feet from the gold and broidered girdle, though
I Avas aAvare CA^en of the little dark blue and gold Greek
coif on her shining hair, and the white fur that mixed
with the blue on her bodice, scarcely whiter than the
pretty hand \Adth glittering rings she held out to me.
" Are you yet accustomed to our ship ? " she went on;
" do you like it ? I fear you must feel it lonely, so few
talk your language."
" Nay, lady," I ansAvered, " that dark man Syades talked
to me all yesterday evening; most learned discourse."
" Yes, I saAv Iioav he held you by his talk; he used to
speak to me, but I did not much like him. I wished to
tell ytu," and her colour deepened, "thatI am baptised—
a Christian; also Asmund and tAvo or three of the men;
but Ave know very little, and you must teach us some¬
thing. I hoped much Avhen I heard a priest Avas coming
on board, but this Damasus seems Avanting in gravity
and mildness; more like a joA'ial man-at-arms than a
minister of the Church."
" Poor Damasus would be but a sorry man-at-arms;
for all his big Avords he is an arrant coAvard," I answered,
laughing.
" No," said Hertha, " he is a bold lad, I think; and
you knoAv I have been brought up among fighting men,
and often seen combats. That priest, mark me, Avill go
far in a fight," she said, earnestly, as I still smiled.
The lady seemed as anxious to coiiA'ince me as if I
Avere not but a poor novice, and she the chief's sister in
brave apparel; but so it was always with her; she had
the courage and honesty of a braA'e man, and the quick,
subtle Avit of an able woman, and Avith it a sort of con¬
fiding tenderness and earnest Avish to please we see often
in children, but seldom in people Avho are much in the
Avorld.
"It is a pity he is a priest," she continued; "he might
76      - Tlie Ladies' EJbihurgh Magazine.
have been a brave warrior. Ah, do not yon be hasty;
be sure you have a vocation before the last vow is
made."
"It is so difficult to tell," 1 answered. "With Father
Anselmo, who is a saint on earth, I have a vocation ; away
from him, I doubt it sorely."
And so Hertha and I grew more and more friendly ;
last night I had thought I could never have spoken to
women, and to-day it seemed they were easier to talk to
than ever were men. I felt I could lay all my life before
her and take her counsel, and she understood and was
interested as none ever seemed before, and told me much
in return as we slipped easily through the murmuring
waves, not far from the purple mountains of the coast.
The wind died quite aAvay in the afternoon, and the ship
was rowed close inshore and anchored. I heard we were
soon to land, and most of us might sup and sleep, if we
chose, on shore. I was resolved to do so, for near the sea
on the lonely plain stood three great, solitary, noble build¬
ings, ancient temples, with stately rows of columns—one
of pure white, the others of red flushed marble—stand¬
ing in lonely grandeur before the range of purple hills
that rose in shadowy softness beyond. They moved my
whole heart with wistful yearning; but while I leaned
over the ship's side gazing intently at them, a harsh voice
behind me shoiited, " What means this, Brother Lam-entio
—this neglect of thy superior—this constant talk with
Saracens and women '? Down on thy knees, silence on thy
obedience, and take the chastisement thou hast merited;"
and Damasus stood over me, flourishing the cord taken
off his girdle; and as, according to rule, I dropped
on my knees, he cauglit me by the ear. This was not
fair, but it was very like our Prior, who was our chief
trial, so I was used to it all.
" Now," said Damasus, and stooping down he half
lifted his cowl; and lo ! the young face and laughing eyes
of Astolfo looked forth; but I was so fortified against
blows in my silence that I made neither start nor soimd,
though I gazed with utter wonder. " Good lad," said he,
" thou hast taken it without an Oh or an Ah, so that is
enough. Oh, Laurentio, but this cowl is hot—I may wear
it back now. I could not think how to tell thee secretly
enough, here where one is always in a crowd. So here
we are, off together, as I was wont to dream; one of us
at least never to return to the old nest.    Stand up now I
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 77
No one but Syades and Thorstein and a few more know
of the change, and I may breathe again."
" But how is all this V I said ; " Avhere is Damasus ? "
" It is all part of a plan of that wily old fellow, Herser
Thorstein, a man I would follow to the end of the world.
When he had talked to the real Damasus, whose fat sides
never stopped quivering—ah, Kenzo, how couldst thou
mistake us 'I—Thorstein, I say, called out, ' This fellow's
cowardice will ruin all. Swend will drive him mad with
fear!' ' Try me, only try me,' I said; ' I am no coward,
though a churchman;' for you see I am in minor orders,
and our Thorstein knows no difference. So next day,
when we passed the hermitage on the way to the ship, in
we slipped, and I took Damasus' dress and left him mine;
and he is there, playing the hermit "—and Astolfo laughed
more and more. " Pulse brought by the country folk for
him to eat, straw bed, and the discipline. It will do him
a world of good. I wonder when he will dare tell who he
is, and creep away ; for of course if this is known, after all
his talk, he can never hold up his head again. See, his
very goAvn is all lined Avith satin and fur,* like any court
lady ; mine must feel rough after such plumage. But he
may keep it, for I shall never cumber myself with it again.
The saints be praised, I never took the final vows, and by
St. George and the Dragon, and this dragon—who must
be a better beast at heart than he looks in face, as he
cari'ies me to freedom—my cloister life is over, my Lau-
rentio."
E. J. 0.
(7b be continued.)
Jih^ (gxtiibilion of the ^opl ^tcttish %aitm\x,
OxCE more we take up our pen to describe in the pages
of the Ladies Edinburgh Magazine the works that adorn
the walls of the Royal Academy Galleries. Our painters
and our poets, what a debt of gratitude do we not owe
to them! Like as the Avelcome sun by its tardy beams
dissipates the murky atmosphere that envelops our
town-enforced life, so does the touch of their pencil, and
* The monks of Monte Cassino gave much scandal about this time by wear¬
ing the " habit " made in silk, instead of coarse wool, as ordered by the rule of
St. Benedict.
No. 3.—March 1875. r
78 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the thought of their brain, lighten up for us this work-
a-day world, and transport us, in mind and feeling, along
with themselves to nature's leafy solitudes. With them
we climb her loftiest moimtains, we revel in her sun¬
shine, or shrink and shiver beneath her dreadful storms.
Where have not our artists wandered to ? They have
been north and south, east and west, and have brought
back in their hands glowing transcripts of the scenes
they have visited. We have here tlie sensuous gorgeous-
uess of the East, and the calm loveliness of the West;
the sunny radiance of the South, and also the mighty
blast from the North.
From among the numerous examples that line the
walls we can choose but a few. Shall we, as we pass
along, point out to our readers the marvellous technique
that in Alma Tadema's " Cleopatra" arrests the atten¬
tion and excites the admiration of the entranced spec¬
tator ? or shall we stop at " Our Northern Walls," and
almost shrink from the fury of the mighty waves that
foam and fret before us ? Shall we admire the dramatic
power displayed in " State Secrets," or stop in tender
sympathy before the human interest of the " Turning-
Point" % Oiir own Academicians and Associates have also
come powerfully to the front. Rarely have we seen
finer examples of their several styles than those that are
in this year's Exhibition. And before closing our pre¬
liminary remarks, we must give ourselves the gratifi¬
cation of calling attention to the good and true work
that has come from the hands of our yovmger artists—
they who in the future will themselves be in the van,
and upon whose efforts will rest their country's place
among the great artists of European fame, when those
among us who now bear the heat and the burden of the
day will be of the past.
We must now, however, take the Catalogue in our
hand, and proceed at once to discuss a few of the
pictures that hang upon the walls ; bearing always in
mind that although there are many we should like to call
attention to, it is only the most striking amongst them
that we have space to advert to.
North Octagon, No. 15—" Running Water", by G. P.
Chalmers. This is a picture of great technical skill: there
is good painting here thrown away—we were about to
say—upon a barren subject. We have " Running ^Vater"
most  admirably  painted;   had  Mr.  Chalmers   given   us
The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 79
something to look at in the middle distance, or a back¬
ground in which there was a more tangible interest,
this would have been one of the finest, as it is un¬
doubtedly one of the cleverest, examples on the walls.
No. 32—" The Warning before Flodden," by John
Faed. The painting of these very ordinary-looking
people is very finely executed. The faces are almost
as smooth and as polished as if on ivory. But if this
picture shows a vast amount of mechanical skill, it also
shows a great lack of mental power. This is surely
not the "wild-haired Seer" that as a sudden vision
flashed before the dismayed king and lords ; neither is
this round-faced monarch the sad and dolorous James,
who sought to make his devotions at Lithgow, " that
God might send him good chance in his voyage." Mr.
Faed has failed in his mental grasp of the scene that
the old legend convej's. No. 53—" 11 Pescatore," by
Erskine Nicol. Mr. Nicol's fame as a delineator of
Irish humour is too well established to suffer any
diminution from the somewhat commonplace examples
tliat he has sent of late years to these walls. This is
an ordinary but well-posed figure of an Italian fisher¬
man, intent upon his useful occupation of catching fish.
No. 59—" The Covenanters' Communion," by Sir George
Harvey. This is one of Sir George Harvey's early
pictures, and is no doubt well known to our readers,
so as to need little comment here. Suffice it to say,
it is in Sir George Harvey's happiest manner. There
is an earnest simphcity in the countenances of these
God-fearing men and women, that tells a true tale of
the stuff that our Covenanting forefathers were made
of. Little recked they of danger, or of death itself, if
only eternal life were gained. Their pastor and leader
is well brought out in the stern and tried lines of hia
face; and the very significant fact that danger is near,
is well and subtilely told in the upraised eyes of one of
the group at the Communion Table while laying his hand
significantly and quietly upon the arm of the elder by his
side, thus telling that the foes are at hand, Avithout dis¬
turbing the Avorshipping people Avhile partaking of the
holy rite. No. 74—" The Escaped," by W. Q. Orchardson.
This is a picture of considerable dramatic power. The
bloodhounds tell us plainly the scent they are upon.
As a piece of animal painting we, however, prefer No.
295, in Great Room,  " Oscar and  Bran,"  by the same
80 Tlie Ladies^ Edinhurgh Magazine.
artist. These dogs are admirably painted. Mr. Orchard-
son has a fine bit of colour in No. 206, " Monsieur and
Madame."
We now come to No. 77, North Octagon—"Peel Castle,
Isle of Man," by Sam Bough. AVho is not acquainted with
this artist's unrivalled talent, and also with his equally
startling defects ? The atmospheric effects of broad sun¬
shine are here capitally rendered; but look at these
unhappy horses that the still more unhappy carter is
endeavouring to guide in the way that horses are wont to
go, while they are crossing their spindle-shank legs and
jibbing about in a way that only Mr. Bough's horses
would ever attempt to do. But we must look at Mr.
Bough's " Peel Harbour. Isle of Man "—No. 171, Great
Room. Here we have this very clever artist at his best
—the dash of the waves upon the harbour, the dismantled
'wreck struggling amidst the storm-troubled sea—the
spectators in the foreground cowering before the sAveep
of the wind—the lifeboat putting out amidst the tossing
of the comparatively smoother water, are all given with
the verve and realistic effect that Mr. Bough is so well
able to convey. It is to be regretted that the general
tone and colour of this spirited picture is scmiewhat
marred in its eff'ect by the close proximity overhead of
Mr. A. D. Reid's beautiful picture of " Sea Weed," and
of which the deep rich colour rather impairs, by contrast,
the paler hues of Mr. Bough's " Peel Harbour."
North Octagon, No. 120 —"Tak' your Auld Cloak
aboot ye!" by John Watson Nicol, son of the great painter
of Irish life. We would point to this picture, among
others, in support of our remarks upon the good and
true work that our younger artists are sending out into
the world. The younger Nicol has in this picture taken
a " firm grip " of his subject. The canty old man in the
chair, with his sonsy old wife standing beside him, with
the " auld cloak" in her hand, are life-like specimens of
true Scottish folks.
We now come to No. 107—" Our Northern AValls," by
Peter Graham. This great painting has already run the
brunt of much diverse criticism from the London Press;
but whatever judgment may be pronounced upon the
picture as a whole, no one who has seen it can deny that
here we have indeed the storra-tossed ocean, in all its sound
and fury, rushing and leaping in resistless force against
those black beaten rocks.    We all but hear its roar, as the
The Ladles Edinburgh Magazine. 81
foam of the waves spreads white and vapoury over the
surface of the sharp jagged rocks, on which swoop doAvn
hungry and screaming cormorants—fit accompaniments of
this desolate spot. It is a most powerfully painted picture,
and overwhelms the spectator with a sense of the
majesty and grandeur of nature in her stormiest aspects.
Great Room, No. 177—" Christ and Mary at the
Sepulchre," by Sir Noel Paton. We have before now,
we think, expressed the opinion that this is not the age
for such a subject as this painting endeavours to realise.
Our modern painters lack the unquestioning faith, the
sure conviction, that gave to the Old Masters not only
the imagination to conceive, but the realising hand to
perform. The Saviour was to them a man who walked
the earth as they did themselves, and His mother a
simple-minded Israelitish woman, and they painted them
as such; they endeavoured also to embody something
beyond and yet within these realistic men and women—
whether they succeeded or not, it is left for posterity to
judge. But what is this scene before us ? What does it
represent ? Certainly not the event as described in Holy
AVrit; and we do think that Sir Noel Paton's fancy plays
more naturally and easily around fairy-land and folk¬
lore, than about such exalted subjects as the one before us.
We now hasten on to No. 224—" Cleopatra," by Alma
Tadema. Here indeed is tlie hand of genius in this
wonderfvil specimen of a master's art. In the pose of the
head and shoulders, in the living expression of the eye,
in the varying flesh-tints of throat and bust, in the
sensuous and powerful organism, we recognise the dark
Egyptian Queen who enthralled in her toils an Antony
and a Caesar.
No. 234, by W. j\I'Taggart, is a fine picture, excellently
conceived and painted. The force of the gale driving
the boat through the liissing sea, is in fine contrast to the
calm courage of the men within, who are holding their
own in the midst of the stormy sea, and have the boat in
steady keeping. The broad expanse of angry waves in
the middle distance, with the fleet of fisliing-boats in the
perspective, are truthfully rendered; while the general
tone and colour of the scene are in fine keeping. Mr.
M'Taggart has also, in No. 200—" The Fern Gatherers,"
a very charming bit of colour. We have rarely seen a
prettier or brighter child's face than the little girl who
is looking out upon us in the foreground of the picture.
82 Tlie Ladies^J Edhihuryh Magazine.
Passing over some beautiful landscapes by Messrs.
Beattie Brown and John Smart, we arrive at the one
picture that may perhaps be called the picture of the
Exhibition. We allude to No. 290—" State Secrets," by
.John Pettie. Mr. Pettie's fame is well established in a
larger field than this, but never have we seen from his hand
a more powerfully drawn figure than that of the red-
robed Cardinal engaged in his treasonable occupation,.
Here is no exaggeration, but here is also artistic effect
of the highest kind. Observe the light, how skilfully it i,s
thrown upon every line of the figure—how the calm
powerful face stands out from the carefully-studied
surroundings—how good is the contrast between the
dominant will of the unscrupulous priest and the scared
look of the attendant friar. The ascending smoke of the
half-burned papers, with the whole of the accessories, are
capitally delineated, without being unnecessarily obtruded
upon the spectator's attention.
We have referred by a single word to a picture
which tells very sAveetly and prettily a tale of do¬
mestic interest—No. 412, South Octagon—"The Turn¬
ing Point," by Alexander Johnstone. The wife inter¬
ceding with her wayAvard husband is most tenderly
and pathetically drawn—the poor little girl innocently
looking up at her weak-minded but obstinately-willed
father; the pretty home-scene which we feel trembles
in the balance, and may ere long be a scene of deso¬
lation and misery; his wicked tempters, in the shape
of those evil faces looking in at the pretty casement
window. We involuntarily tremble for the result, know¬
ing as we all do the miserable weakness of human
nature; and we fear that the dram-shop which looms in
the distance may prove the rock of destruction to that
sweet woman and child. The texture is somewhat hard,
but the sad story is so delicately and finely suggested
that it is impossible to pass over this very interesting
picture.
No. 475 is a remarkably humorous picture by W. E.
Lockhart. Don Quixote is the hero of this scene, and
his faithful squire, Sancho Panza, is standing a little
in the background, engaged in stuffing into his mouth
huge pieces of bread-and-butter; his attitude and ex¬
pression show him to be true to himself and to his
master; he is feeding his inner man, and looking on
with equanimity at the poor Don's mad capers among
Tlie Ladles Edinburgh Magazine. 83
the paste-board Moors. This inimitable scene is ren¬
dered with great and true humour; and although the
painter's brush does not seem to have been wielded wdth
the same force and precision as it was in " The Dying
Matador" of last year's Exhibition, it is, nevertheless, a-
picture that must add considerably to the artist's fame.
For one moment we must look at a sweet pastoral
scene by a foreign artist, V/axI Bourle, whose name Ave
do not recollect to have seen in our Exhibition before,—
No. 615, South Room. This picture is full of sweet tender
feeling, and is beautifully painted. Two children, a young
girl and little boy, are seated on the ground, the young
girl looking up at a butterfly; the attitudes of both
children are perfectly natural and simple, and yet are full
of a tender grace and beauty that our home artists do
not seem able to render in the children of our own
country. Probably the fault lies as much in the rugged-
ness of the children themselves as in the artists' rendering.
Before leaving the South Room we must call attention
to two surprisingly meritorious works by young artists.
One is No. 592, by W. B. Hole—" Her Wedding Day," a
charmingly depicted scene, rendered with very fine feeling
and in capital tone. The other is No. (535—" Near the
End of the Weft," by J. C. Noble. This last is a picture
of great merit, and recalls to recollection, both in treat¬
ment and subject, examples of Joseph Israels' admirable
pictures Avhich formerly apjDcared in these rooms. We
nave great reason this year to rejoice over our younger
men. PoUok Nisbet has some admirable studies of Venice
architecture and interiors, also a more ambitious picture
in this room. No. 650—"Becalmed ; Early Morning on the
Lagunes, Venice;" but we have no space left in which
to call attention to these paintings, and must pass rapidly
on to the works of Jlessrs. John Smart, John IVI'Whirter,
Beattie Brown, Waller Baton, Alexander Eraser, and
others, whose beautiful landscapes demand most careful
and attentive study. Before adverting to them, how¬
ever, we must call attention to a magnificent landscape
by Sir George Harvey in the Great Room, No. 11)8—
" Scenery in the Highlands." This landscape is in Sir
George Harvey's best manner. AVho can paint skies to
rival such a sky as this % It is a glorious picture, with
mountains and valleys, water and trees—a scene that a
Claude would have delighted to paint.
Mr. Smart has devoted himself to mist-painting this
84 The Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine.
season; and were it not that his mist is more than suffi¬
ciently misty, Ave should be well pleased that he has done
so. In No. 401, South Octagon—" The Valley of Mists,"
we almost feel as if we could take it up in spadefuls and
trundle it away. It is nevertheless a \-ery fine picture,
and Avorthy of this artist's rapidly-rising fame. Mr.
Smart has brought home some very striking scenes from
his summer sojourn in the Highlands. We Avould men¬
tion more especially No. 144, North Octagon—"Loch Lub-
naig;" and No. 365, South Octagon—" A Bad Day for the
Hairst." Mr. M'Whirter has a fine picture of a grand if
gloomy subject in No. 87, North Octagon—" Glencoe."
Mr. Waller Paton has several very bright and pleasing
landscapes, in his usual tone and style of treatment.
We, however, prefer No. 312, Great Room—" Moonlight
near Dollar." This is a A^ery characteristically treated sub¬
ject ; and No. 186—" On the Dee at Kirkcudbright," is a
remarkably bright, pretty little picture, Avith a fine
perspecti\'e of flowing river. Mr. Beattie BroAvn has
some A-ery fine landscapes; as also Mr. John Nesbitt.
This last artist has a charming sea-piece in the South
Room, No. 632—" Sunset GIoav." Mr. Alex. Fraser is as
iisual true to nature and hard in texture in his seA^eral
landscapes—too numerous to notice. He has a charming
little thing, gloAving in colour, in No. 367, South Octagon
—"Thrush's Nest and Wild FloAvers." We should call
attention to Messrs. Wingate and OsAvald as haA'ing made
immense strides forward in Nos. 1 and 640 of the former,
and in Nos. 75 and 433 of the latter ; but hoAvever much
tempted, we cannot linger OA^er the landscapes, as Ave Avish
to say a few words, before concluding, upon the animal
paintings and the Avater-colours.
Mr.Gourlay Steell has several fine examples on thcAA'alls.
We Avill, hoAveA^er, content ourselves Avith examining Nos.
308 and 4(i6. No. 308—" Rough Art Critics," is a painting
full of humour. Some lively felloAvs of the bull species
have taken it into their stupid heads to take umbrage at
an unfortunate artist's paraphernalia, and during the un¬
lucky man's absence are poking their noses into his port¬
folio, and examining into the meaning and use of his large
sun umbrella. One of these inquisitive bulls has his slimy
nuizzle deep among the leaA^es, another is preparing to
gore and rend to pieces the unlucky camp-stool, a third is
kicking up his heels, and Avith his tail in air is CA'idently
Avorking himself up into a fuming rage.    Their stupid
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 85
anger is quite natural, and yet most ludicrous; and we
consider that Mr. Steell shows genuine humour in making
these animals act according to their nature, and yet so
absurdly. He does not give them human intelligence
behind their animal physique, as was latterly too much the
habit Avith the late l;'.mented Landseer, who was too apt
to put a man's ready wit and feeling behind a dog's muzzle.
In JNTo. 466—" A Warm Day in the Higldands," we have
a splendid specimen of a bull standing in a pool of water.
This fine animal is perfect in colour and form, and would
not discredit the hand of the great Rosa herself.
A very fine example of animal-painting is to be seen in
No. 387—" Noonday Rest," by Mr. Denovan Adams. This
very beautiful picture is a perfect gem of animal-painting.
The cattle are most exquisitely painted, and are reclining
in the foreground of a very pleasing landscape. Mr.
Denovan Adams has two other examples on the walls in
Nos. o8 and 78—both very fine examples of animal-paint¬
ing. The bull terriers in No. 78 are all that bull terriers
should be in form and texture; in No. 58 we have a fine
landscape with lovely deer in the foreground, coming
down the stream and " Scenting Danger." Mr. Alexander
also deserves notice for several very meritorious examples
of animal life; he is one of our younger artists avIio are
coming so well to tlie front in this year's Exhibition.
Before leaving the rooms we must for a brief space look
at the Avater-colours. Mr. Bough has as usual one or two
most effective pictures. Mr. Burton has several admirable
examples in Nos. 775, 800, 864, and others. We should
like to call especial attention to Mr. Pollok Nisbet's No. 818—
" Sketch on the Grand Canal, Venice." The transparency
of the water and the firmly-painted houses in the back¬
ground are alike admirable. Our clever young townsman,
Mr. Manson, has two finely-painted children in " Spring"
and " Summer." We are glad to meet with Mr. J. T. Reid
again in Nos. 766, 809, 863, after his long sojourn in Skye,
of which these three pictures are characteristic sketches.
Mr. Houston has a fine example of his rich depth of
colour in No. 1001—"The (lood Captain." We have a
lovely view of " Bolton Abbey" in No. 956, by William
Miller. In No. 720—" The Refreshing Draught," by Sir
John Gilbert, we have an idea of what can be accomplished
in water-colours, in depth as well as transparency and
delicacy of tint. This is a magnificent figure subject.
Our lady artists are also most pleasing and successful
Ko. 3.—Maech 1875. M
8<) llie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
contributors to this delicate and lovely branch of art.
The names of Mrs. 8tewart Smith, Lady Dunbar, IMiss
AVarren, Miss C. T. G. Gumming, Miss M'Whirter, lAliss
Ross, and Miss J. S. Lander speak for themselves; but
there are also other lady contributors, who, although they
cannot take rank with these veterans in art, are entitled
to much encouragement for their success in their various
styles. This North Room alone, witli all these lovely water-
colours hanging on the walls, of which the greater portion
are left unnoticed, Avould repay days and days of close
attention. We can remember the time when water-
colours were quite an unnoticed feature of Scottish art;
but how different is it now that the Water-colour Room
has become one of the most popular and eagerly-sought-
after places in the Galleries of the Exhibition.
M. E. T.
%\\ \\\t i^ii'ilight.
My love, as we sit in the twilight,
Thy true hand clasped in mine,
I look back, the hours recounting
Since first my heart was thine.
The morning smiled when thou sought'st me
In her bright and gracious hours:
Through her dew-gemm'd paths thou ledd'st me,
■   And decked me with her flowers.
At noon, when the sun shone fiercely,
And rougher grew our way.
Then love round each threw a shadow,
And love to each was a stay.
As we reached the day's declining,
Did not our souls receive
Still deeper draughts of gladness
In that hallow'd hush of eve I
Yet now, as we sit in the twilight,
Thy true hand clasped in mine,
I call this hour the sweetest
Since first my heart was thine.
Joan Scott.
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 87
WinhiwQR of  (Chester.
CHAPTER   II.
Ox the southern wall of Chester, and entering from the
foot-way, stands an old square-built house. Situated at
an angle in the wall, and facing south-west, it commands
a view of the estuary of the Dee, and by its look of
solidity and elderliness might almost be thought to have
undertaken the supervision of all the traffic upon the
river. It seems to claim the same kind of regard as that
we feel for an old nurse, which is made up of placid
affection without any romance in it. Could we connect
any romantic association with it, it would be this, that it
probably occupies the position formerly held by a Roman
tower, and that a Roman soldier in the ancient Cestria
may have looked from an embrasure instead of a window,
over the same country, down the same river, out to the
same blue sea, as the inhabitants of this house now look
out upon from its windows. The only feature in the
house which attracts interest for itself is a small addition
to it, which runs along the lower part of the western
gable. This addition has only half the depth, and two-
thirds of the height, of the whole house. It is much more
cheerful in aspect, however, for it has a bow-window
facing south, and it can only be entered through the
garden. It is, in fact, a separate dwelling, though wearing
the air of an appendage.
Randall Holme had preferred a solitary walk in Chester
to accompanying his mother to the school where his sister
was placed. The poor boy had, at this period in his life,
an insatiable thirst for solitude, caused in the first place
by the want of congenial society, and in the second by
the mood of mind wdiich this want had induced. Circum¬
stances had been cruel to Randall, in depriving him of the
opportunities for improvement which other young men
have. At the time of his father's death, his school educa¬
tion was finished. Then grief had reigned supreme in the
household, and this of itself had altered the prospects of
the children. The daughter had been speedily sent to
school, in the hope that she might soon return to be a
companion to her mother. Randall, in the meantime, had
been kept at home, and subjected to neighbouring tutorial
influence; while the hope had been held before him of
88 The Ladles" Edinburgh Magazine.
going to college after his sister's return. All this seemed
quite wise and natural, and I\lrs. Holme cannot be blamed
for not wishing to be left alone; but still Randall suffered
to gratify the wish. It was the mother, not the tutor,
who was stern; so that Randall shirked his lessons from
laziness, and his home duties from perversity. He had no
inducement to learn anything thoroughly, except the wish,
expressed by his mother almost daily, that he should
become a clergyman. She extolled the clerical profession,
spoke of his dead father, and of her hopes that Randall
might live to become like him. But Randall, amid the
tender and hallowed memories of his father, had other
memories of long rehgious tasks, serious penances for
slight offences, and severe punishments for graver faults.
He therefore deprecated the possibility of becoming a
clergyman, or if at any moment he allowed himself to
contemplate it, it was with the accompanying requisite
of a modified clerical temperament braced by a rarefied
clerical atmosphere. And now he was in his twentieth
year, with no plans formed for any future career, no
active principle save that of opposition to authority, or the
mental antagonism above mentioned. But the moral and
sentient part of his nature was only hemmed in on one
side, that it might assert itself the more vehemently on
another. Hence the habit of abstraction, the yearning for
some ideal mode of life, some perfect object of love, to fill
and exalt the emptiness and lowness of his present state.
And this secret craving of his seemed to be hindered rather
than helped by the presence of others, which was to him
another name for want of sympathy.
Thus it is no matter of wonder that he wished to take
a solitary walk in Chester. As ho passed along the
" rows," many of the foot-passengers turned to look again
at the tall handsome youth, who seemed quite uninterested
either in the quaint ornamental gables or in the modern
inhabitants of the old town. Indeed, the so-called " sights "
of the town rather oppressed than attracted him ; he had
often seen them before, and there were so many stairs to
be ascended in passing from one street to another, and so
m.any passers-by with preoccupied or vacant faces, that
Randall, weary at last of walking about in the town,
betook himself to the city walls. Here the view which he
had to the far horizon imaged forth the dim ideal after
which his mind was craving. Slowly and dreamily he
walked on, looking now away to faint outlines of hills,
The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine. 89
streaks of grey and rosy cloud, fields with cattle browsing
on them; and now into the narrow roiighly-paved alleys,
or in at the windows of smoky tenements, Avhere men he
knew not and cared not for were toiling and striving.
He had ever the secret hope that some sight or incident
would realise to him something of the ideal world he
dwelt in. AVhen he had walked more than half-way
round the walls, the old house above mentioned appeared
in view. The angle where the wall abruptly turns east¬
wards at this place forms a tempting nook for an idle
f)asser-by to loiter in. Randall remained standing here to
ook into the distance. The day was warm, yet cloudy.
To the south-west a vast sheet of grey cloud overhung
the estuary of the Dee, making the smooth Avaters of the
river look dim and mysterious, and extending far up into
the heavens. A long lake-like rift in this cloud, near the
summit of it, was filled Avith red light, looking almost like
a sea of blood. Clear against this rift the loAver edge of
the cloud stood out in tower-like outlines. It looked like
some enchanted castle adjoining the abode of the sun,
yet unenlightened by it, and halloAving by its dimness all
that was Aveird and unearthly. Presently the gloAv faded
from the rift, the cloud edges closed around it, and the
red light and the weird castle Avere lost to sight. " Is this
like life?" thought Randall; "Ave see the beautiful, oh for
hoAv short a time ! and the measure of our joy is the
measure of quick-coming grief at its departure. The fairy
region of the possible fades aAvay into the grey expanse
of the real."
Presently he was roused from his reverie by the sailor¬
like call of some men on the river bank beloAv. He
looked down, and saAv tAVO men busily hauling in a barge
Avhich had been tugged up the stream. It was ladeu
with sacks of meal, and some half-dozen bargemen Avho
were on board seemed revelling in rest from labour. It
was a cheerful scene, and almost made Randall yearn for
hard work that might be folIoAved by such pleasant leisure.
Then from behind him there sounded a voice. It Avas
the voice of a woman singing. It had a rich, full tone,
Avith a bird-like clearness and simplicity. Turning round,
he saAv that it must come from within the room of the bow-
AvindoAV. The AvindoAv was open, and he stepped nearer,
thinking he might possibly make out some of the Avords.
The music suddenly ceased, hoAvever, and as he stood
looking up into the AvindoAv, a figure appeared Avithin it.
1)0 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Half-turned from him as she stood in the window,
he saw before him a woman clad in the garb of former
days. A close-fitting dress of a pale yellow colour,
with roses and green sprays woven into it, clothed
her slender figure ; while a train of the same, falling from
the shoulders behind, added grace and dignity to her
appearance. Her auburn hair, confined by a simple
black bandeau, fell in a profusion of curls over
her snowy neck. She and her companion were evi¬
dently too much preoccupied to observe Randall as
he moved straight in front of the window. Then he saw
the hand of a man waved as if in gesticulation; he
caught sight of a man's face as it bent eagerly forward :
it was Squire Trevor! And now the young woman
stood facing him ; she was looking straight out at the
window, in the direction of the cloud-rift he had seen,
but not sadly; her large, lustrous eyes seemed to
promise all blessedness; her mouth was half opened, as
if to speak; the whole face had a happy spiritual ex¬
pression,—a something, he knew not what, such as Ran¬
dall had never seen before. He Avas quite near her,
and he stood, how long he knew not, gazing into that
spiritual face, and yet unseen, for the two were quite
absorbed in their conversation. Then she moved from
the window.
Randall walked rapidly away. Was this, then, the
business that had brought Trevor to Chester ? He who
seemed so absorbed in science and in other hobbies, had
he leisure and inclination for sentimental scenes such as
this? And supposing that he had time, had he power
and soul enough to attract such a woman as that?
Randall walked on, hardly knowing whither he went,
hardly observing that he was retracing his footsteps.
Coming within sight of the Roodee or race-course, he
instinctively descended the steps that led to it, and
threw himself upon the sward. Boys were playing at
cricket; children were running about; elderly people
were sitting on benches or on the grass. Randall saw
them all as in a dream. Some birds were carolling
in the sky above him, and he thought, " They are ha]ipy;
their little lives have only cheerfulness to l3ring; but I,
how different!" And through all his waking reveries
he still saw the face he had seen in the window. He
thought, " she is like the birds, singing for joy of heart;
she is one of those who look out beyond the city walls."
Tlie TmcUcs' EdinhurgU Magzaine, 91
He thought she must have some key to perfect happiness
such as he had never even dreamt of; he thought
he must and would see her again. And now he could
not think of Trevor without pain, but he consoled him¬
self by the reflection that Irevor saw him just as he
would see a fish through water in distorted outline,
not in his real identity. It seemed to him therefore that
Squire Trevor must carry about with him a false and
valuable medium, through Avhichhe could not but see the
characters of all other men, and see them dimly and
waveringly. It Avas impossible, then, that Trevor could
in any length of time gain such a feeling about that
Avoman as Kandall had gained by a single glance.
HoAv long Randall had remained thus absorbed he kneAV
not, biit people Avere beginning to go home. He started
up, and, looking at his Avatch, saw that it Avas already
half-past four. His mother would haA^e left the Cathedral
in despair of meeting him. He cpiickly hurried thither,
but dream-life Avas still so strong Avithin him that the
reality of lateness impressed him but hazily.
On reaching the Cathedral, he entered it by the south
porch, and Avould have proceeded to Avalk up the nave,
but seeing seA^eral people leaA'ing the building by the
opposite porch, he fulloAved them, hoping to find his
friends among them. He found, hoAvever, that a gentle¬
man Avhom he had mistaken for Squire TrcA'or Avas an
utter stranger to him, and he Avas thus in the position of
an appendage to a party exploring the cloisters. He Avas
soon wrapt in the contemplation of the clustering iA'y
that mantled the cloisters, and the gently waving
shadoAvs Avhich it thrcAv in the cool sandstone recesses.
Brought thus in ahcav only of the amenities of monastic life,
he thought how pleasant it mu.«t have been to be a monk
long ago in the Abbey of St. Werburga, that he might
have sat for a whole summer afternoon poring oA^er
romances in the cloistered alleys. AVhen the dismantled
carrels, or chambers ftn- study, at the south-Avest corner of
the cloisters, Avere pointed out, he transferred his affec¬
tions to these, and chose for his occupation rather the
reading of some of the disputations of the fathers, or the
copying of some rare and illuminated manuscript, in the
inspired seclusion of one of these monastic recesses.
Randall Avas not in a sight-seeing mood, however, and
Avhen he re-entered the Cathedral, it Avas rather to seek
for his friends than to explore the wonders of the build-
92 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ing. So he walked straight up the nave, peered along
the transepts, then went straight through the choir and
presbytery to the Lady Chapel. But no one was to be
seen, save here and there an old woman at her prayers.
The choir was noAv filled with a dim religious hght of
many colours, that tempered the gloom of the old carved
oak with motley hues. Randall, on retracing his steps
down the church, paused a little west of the lectern, in
front of the choristers' seats. Casting his eye over the rich
stall-work, he looked at the lofty main arch east of the
choir, into which the organ seemed to soar on brazen
wings. Gazing then upwards beyond the arch, he felt
himself dwindling into awe-struck insignificance. The
warm light upon the stalls greeted him like a cheering
message as he again looked around him. He was weary
in body and in mind; and reassuring himself with the
thought that his friends had not yet arrived, he seated
himself in one of the choristers' seats, to gaze more at
leisure on the wonders around him. What he gazed ou
in reality was the land of dreams.
Randall, on re-entering the Cathedral from the cloisters,
had not failed to observe, over the porch opposite to him,
a canopied niche with an antique stone figure in it. This
he had supposed to be the figure of Werburga, the patron
saint of the Cathedral. He had observed it mechanically
and unthirddngly ; yet it formed, notwithstanding, a link
in the chain of his remembrances. And no sooner had he
entered dreamland, than his figure came to join itself to
that which was now the central image in his thoughts.
He fancied he saAV the figure of Werburga float down
from her niche, and glide noiselessly up the nave till she
stood in fr(jnt of him. The figure wore a long, almost
colourless robe ; her hair hung in loose ringlets over her
shoulders. With a face of unearthly paleness, and eyes
full of spiritual meaning, she told him that this her
Cathedral was the type of her own life. Oppressed by vain
and worldly suitors, she had built herself round by the
walls of monastic seclusion, and fled from those who
would take no denial. And thus, in a pure and saintly
life, in founding religious houses, she had found the
highest happiness. Her concluding words were distinct
in Randall's mind when he awoke. " Should anyone
cross your path who is crafty and vain as Werbode my
suitor was, do not stay to contend with him ; remember
mv words ; withd)-aw."
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 93
Randall was rudely awakened by a sensation that
made him fancy he was falling over a precipice. On
opening his eyes, he found himself thrown forward upon
the reading-desk, and on standing up, discovered to his
surprise that the seat was so constructed as to prevent
the occupant from acquiring a habit of sleeping during
service; it was movable, and as soon as the head bent
forward the seat did likewise. He was glad that no one
was present to witness his discomfiture; and the last
word of the saint, " Withdraw," which haunted him,
seemed peculiarly applicable to his present situation. He
reflected, however, that this was somewhat pusillanimous
advice, fit only to be followed by a woman and a nun.
He was even inclined to beheve that had St. Werburga
met with a suitor more congenial than the crafty Wer-
bode, she might not have been so willing to withdraw
from the world, and the calendar might have boasted of
one saint fewer than it possessed.
Preparing now to leave the Cathedral, Randall was
arrested by the sound of a voice talking. It seemed to
come from the wall behind him. He looked in that
direction, but an old arch which had been built up seemed
to yield a double denial to the possibility of any sound
penetrating it. Walking down to the north-west angle
of the choir, he perceived where it joined the transept a
small and ancient-looking portal. It was half open, and
beyond the screen that stretched across the doorway he
peeped into a email room. A row of white robes hanging
along the wall, showed that this was the choristers'
vestry. That it was also the music-room, was shown by
the piles of music-books on the table opposite the door.
Within the door, and half-hidden by the screen, was
an ancient sedile of curious construction. Advancing
cautiously and silently, Randall seated himself on the
portion of the sedile which was hidden by the screen.
Here, by bending his head forward so as to bring it into
a line with the screen, he was able to see all the occupants
of the chamber without being perceived by them. Six
chorister boys in white surplices were seated on a bench
at the further end of the room, while opposite to them, the
side of her face towards Randall, stood a woman—the
same he had seen in the bow-window.
Was he, then, again so near her as even to hear her
speak % Were these the features he had seen in his
dream?    It was like  another dream;  he  dared hardly
No. 3.—March 1875. N
94 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
trust his eyesight. Her attitude was noble and natural,
as, with the same flowing garment and simple tresses, she
stood, with one hand slightly raised, the other hanging
gracefully at her side, her eyes gazing intently before her,
her lips moving eloquently.
She must have been speaking for some time already, yet
Randall, by listening attentively, was able to conjecture
that the Avords now pronounced with such clearness, and
accompanied by such grace of manner, formed part of
an improvised lecture on music.
Procla.
(To he continued.)
i^\u hit §r. i^isthfttdorf.
To many in this country the tidings of Dr. Tischendorf's
death came with something of the pang of a personal loss.
Not only was the department of scholarship in which he
laboured one that has an interest for all, but his own
career was marked by a brilliance of achievement, which
never suffered expectation to fail till, ere yet the end had
been thought of, hope was checked by the knowledge,
first that failure of health, and now that death had
arrested the cunning hand and brain, till then unresting.
Now we can but turn to the past, and sorrowfully count
the gains that, as his, can be added to no more. But it
is well to do so, not only that Ave may know the great¬
ness gone from us, and gratefully appreciate what this
man has done, but also that, giving him his due place in
the line of biblical critics, we may understand what is the
work he has left behind, and, so understanding, be ready
to welcome those who after him shall carry it on further
towards completion. The few pages that follow cannot
indeed claim to do anything towards this end; they
crave indulgence merely as a feeble attempt to contribute
towards making generally known the history of a scholar
whose labours were for the benefit of all. Few personal
details can indeed be given. This, however, seems to be
of the less consequence that Tischendorf's was one of
those lives which, devoted to the pursuit of a single
absorbing aim, derive all meaning and interest from that
aim:—nay, he may be said to have had no life apart
from the central purpose that gathered to itself all his
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 95
energies, and shaped the current of his existence. What
that purpose was, and how fulfilled, it shall be our object
briefly to shoAV.
Lobegott Friedrich Constantin Tischendorf was born
on the loth January 1818, at Lengenfeld in Saxony. We
are told that his father was a physician, but have no
particulars either of his family or of his own boyish
years. He received his early education at Planen, and
from the " Hohe Schule" there passed to the Uni¬
versity of Leipzig, where he devoted himself to the study
of philology and theology. While there he wrote a prize
essay on the text of the New Testament, in which were
enounced principles of criticism very similar to those
afterwards followed out by him. The interest in biblical
scholarship, of which he thus early gave proof, he further
manifested by undertaking as his first literary worlv the
preparation of a small critical edition of the New Testa¬
ment, which was published in the following year. This
edition does not seem to have been of great value either
in itself or as compared with those which were afterwards
to come from him. But in more than one respect its
publication was an epoch in Tischendorf's life. The work
itself fixes the point from which, theoretically, he started
in his labours as a critic, and practically, as we shall see,
it was instrumental in shaping his career.
In the Prolegomena Avhich formed part of the volume,
Tischendorf expressed his general adherence to the prin¬
ciples of one of two critics, whose theories were at this
time being warmly discussed in Germany. A few words
of explanation are here required.
What is known as the Received Text of the New
Testament (substantially that of Erasmus, with improve¬
ments and additions from the later editions of Stephens,
Heza, and the Elzevirs) has long been acknowledged
by scholars to rest on utterly insufficient authority,
inasmuch as the MSS. from which it was formed were
both few and recent. Earlier critics, however, were
content to collect various readings from fresh sources,
and to append these to the text, Avithout attempting to
determine their value on any definite principles. \X^ith
Griesbach may be said to ha\'e commenced the science of
comparative criticism as applied to the New Testament.
His_ editions (let, 1774-77; 2d, 1796-1806) contained a
critical text, based on an array of classified authorities;
and though the soundness in some respects of his critical
96 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
principles may be matter of question, there can be no
doubt as to the benefit which he conferred in definitely
laying down principles by which the evidential value of
the various authorities for the text might be estimated.
The stage into which the discussion of the problem, now
recognized as that of approximating, as far as might be,
to the original text of the New Testament, next passed,
was that represented by the two critics, Scholz and
Lachmann, already referred to.
Scholz divided the existing MSS. and versions of the
New Testament into two families, the Alexandrian and
the Byzantine, which may (roughly) be said to contain,
the former the more ancient, the latter the more recent,
documents extant; and maintained that the text is to be
determined on the authority of the Byzantine family,—
i.e., of the recent, though more numerous, as opposed to
the ancient, though fewer, authorities. Lachmann, on
the other hand, held that the text of the New Testa¬
ment should be founded exclusively on the testimony of
the most ancient MSS., along with that of the Latin, as
the oldest, version. The question raised by the publica¬
tion of these two contending views was thus a twofold
one :—
1. Given a more ancient text, say of the fourth century,
is it necessarily nearer to the original than one more
recent ?
2. Are we in possession of the materials from which to
form a fourth-century text %
Tischendorf, in common with most of the instructed,
answered the first of these questions in the affirmative.
As to the second, he felt strongly that Lachmann's
labours were defective, in respect of the amount of
materials made use of by him, and we can imagine him
impressed with the necessity of a complete review and
examination of the oldest existing documents, and of
a thorough-going comparison of them with the earliest
versions and other sources of evidence.
If we are right in supposing that Tischendorf was
possessed by this conviction, and by the desire himself to
fulfil a task for which he must have been conscious of his
own capacity, nothing could have been more seasonable
than the commission wliich—doubtless in consequence of
the notice of the scliolars of Leipzig drawn to the young
aspirant by his edition of the New Testament—was at
this time offered to him.    This was to visit, on behalf of
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 97
the Saxon Government, the different European countries,
with the view of collating and procuring MSS. The
career for which of all others he was best fitted was
thus opened to Tischendorf—a career on which otherwise
he might not have been able to enter, for at this time so
slender were his resources that he has told us himself he
Avas unable to pay for the cloak which he took with him
on his journey.
During his absence from Leipzig, Tischendorfs most
lengthened stay was in Pai'is, where he was employed
on an arduous but important task. This was the
preparation for publication of the famous MS. of the
Bible known as the Codex Ephrjemi (C), which, since
brought from Florence by Catherine de Medici, had lain in
the Royal Library. This copy is supposed to have
been originally made in the fifth century, but its vellum
leaves have been made to do double duty, and above
the first writing, present a copy of the works of Ephraim
the Syrian, a celebrated saint and religious writer of the
fourth century. The difficulty of deciphering the ori¬
ginal writing may be imagined. It has been increased
by the vellum having become darkened and stained
through the use of chemical applications to obliterate the
second writing. After much toil, Tischendorf was able to
send a transcript of the MS. to Leipzig, where the New
Testament portion was published in 1843, while he was
still absent. Besides preparing his edition of the Codex
Ephrsemi, Tischendorf while in Paris examined the other
uncial MSS. preserved in the Royal Library there, and
brought out no less than three editions of the New
Testament.
In 1842 Tischendorf visited this country, and en¬
joyed an opportunity of examining its MS. treasures.
The following year he went to Rome. The Vatican
Library is, as might be expected, rich in valuable MSS.—
above all, it contains what at the time we speak of was
the oldest copy of the Scriptures known to be in ex¬
istence, the celebrated Codex Vaticanus (B). But such
was the jealous care witli which it was guarded, that,
in spite of the utmost anxiety on his part, Tischendorf
was not allowed to see it more than twice for three
hours each time. Another Codex in which Tischendorf
was interested—the only uncial copy known to exist of
the Apocalypse—he was " forbidden to collate afresh, but
having been permitted to make a facshnile of a few
verses,  while  thus   employed he  so   far  contrived   to
98 Tlie Ladies^ EdinhurgJi Magazine.
elude the watchful custodian as to compare the Avliole
MS. with a modern Greek Testament."
Towards the close of 1843 Tischendorf returned to
Leipzig, where the printing of the Codex Ephrtemi was
going on, and required his superintendence. He did not,
however, remain long here, but in 1844 started on a
journey to the East in search of fresh MSS. The libraries
of the monasteries of the Greek Church are rich in such
treasures, utterly wasted on their present possessors, who,
as a rule, are too stupid and ignorant to make any use of
them, or even to appreciate their value. A notable
example of this Ave have now to relate, whereby hangs a
tale, though a well-known one. The scene was the famous
]\Ionastery of St. Catherine, which since the sixth century
has covered with its vast range of buildings the slopes of
Jebel Musa, a peak of the Siuaitic range, and peopled, if
not enlivened, the solitudes of the desert with its colony
(if monks. Here, among a basketful of waste-paper
destined for the lighting of stoves, Tischendorf s practised
eye discerned some sheets of vellum. These he rescued,
and found to contain part of the Septuagint version
of 1st Chronicles and Jeremiah, with the whole of Nehemiah
and Estlier. Having further ascertained that more of the
same MS. was in the convent, he tried, in order to save it
from destruction, to enlighten the monks as to its value.
He would fain have carried off some of these other sheets,
but was not allowed, and had to leave the monastery
content with the possession of the forty-three leaves
snatched from tlie flames.
Tischendorf found abundant occupation on his return
to Leipzig in preparing for the press the results of the
last few years' labours. In 1845 the Old Testament
portion of the Codex Ephrajmi was published; and this
was followed in 1846 by the " Monumenta Sacra Inedita,"
containing transcripts of six MSS. of the Gospels, and
the various readings of that of the Apocalypse, already
mentioned. Also, in 1846, were printed the leaves
brought from the Convent of St. Catherine, under the
title of Codex Friderico-Augustanus. In 1850, Tischen¬
dorf, who since 1845 had held an extraordinary professor¬
ship in the University of Leipzig, received a chair in the
Faculty of Theology. In the spring of 1853 he again
visited Egypt in search of MSS.
The preparation of a fresh edition of the text of the
New Testament occupied him between 1856 and 1859.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 99
In the latter year a lastjonrney was made to the East, and
now Tischendorf was rewarded by the great discovery of
his hfe. By way of aiding his researches, Tischendorf
had secured, ere starting, the patronage of the Emperor
of Russia as Head of the Eastern Church. Thus, on
returning to the convent of St. Catherine, he was
received with all due honour. His one desire was to
obtain the MS. which, since the first sight of it in 1844,
he had never been able to forget. Inquiries since, how¬
ever, had proved unavailing, and he feared the treasure
was now lost to him. One day, to his intense delight
and surprise, a MS. was put into his hands, which proved
to be the very one he was in search of—a complete
copy of the Bible of the fourth century, as old as the
Vatican Codex. He himself records that he was
unable to sleep that night—that he even danced—for
very joy I The monks were persuaded to present
the MS. to the Emperor of Russia, and Tischendorf was
himself the bearer of it to St. Petersburg, where it now
lies in the Imperial Library. In 1862 it was published
under his care, and is known as the Sinaitic Codex (A).
Tischendorf's position as the first biblical critic in
Europe was now fully recognized, and honours flowed
in upon him from all quarters. On the occasion of his
last visit to this country, in 1865, the English universities
conferred on him their degrees. In 1869 he was created
a Count of the Russian Empire. He was in correspond¬
ence with learned men of all countries. His own life
continued to be spent at Leipzig, which throughout was
the centre to which from his wanderings he always
returned. Here he is described as having had his
home, not, as might have been expected, in one of the
qiiaint thoroughfares of the old part of the city,
but amid the open air and sunshine of the modern
streets which stretch into the surrounding country.
Personally, too, in the great critic, we are told
that there was nothing of the book-worm or recluse.
He seems to have been generally amiable and simple,
willing to impart from his stores of information to all
who consulted him, and entering with heartiness into
the interests of others. A tincture of vanity and self-
appreciation, almost innocent in the openness of its
expression, seemed in harmony with a character having
in it much that might be called child-like. In con¬
troversy   Tischendorf   fell  into   the   usual   fashion   of
100 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
theological disputation; and if he got hard blows now
and then, showed himself quite capable of returning
them with no less force. So at least we may judge from
the controversial parts of a popular work by him on
the Origin of the Four Gospels, which passed through
successive editions in 1865 and 1866, had a wide circu¬
lation in Germany, and has been translated into English.
When Tischendorf entered the lists of theological contro¬
versy, it was as the champion of orthodoxy. But it was
not here that his laurels were gained,—it is in the calmer
region of sacred scholarship that his labours and his fame
will live; and the greatest boast that can be made for
him is of the incorriiptible fidelity to facts which makes
the value of the scholar's service to truth.
An edition of the New Testament formed the close, as
it had formed the beginning, of Tischendorf s literary
career. He had now examined almost every uncial
MS. in existence, as well as many others. Many Codices
he had published for the first time; some discovered by
himself, others imperfectly known before. Above all, he
had doubled the amount of the most ancient evidence,
by placing beside the one already known MS. of the
fourth century, another still more perfect of the same
date. H e had thus thoroughly prepared himself for the
fulfilment of the task which had been the ideal of his
life—to form a New Testament text as nearly as possible
identical with that of the original writings. This final
task occupied him from 1865 onwards, the text being
completed in 1872, but the Prolegomena left unfinished
at his death. The principles on which he worked were
the same as ever. His researches had but enabled him
to apply them more perfectly. The reliability of the
most ancient MSS. in our possession he held to be proved
by their general harmony with versions and quotations
of a still earlier date. The text was therefore formed
mainly on their testimony, no regard being paid to the
" received text," as such, but, in cases of disagreement
among the selected witnesses, later authority and
internal criteria being made use of. The result remains—
to be tested by time ; and if standing that test, to be
regarded more and more as a legacy of utmost value.
In 1873, before this work was completed, Tischendorf
was seized with paralysis. Repeated attacks followed,
and in the autumn of 1874 he died—prematm-ely in one
sense, yet having within comparatively few years accom-
phshed the labours of a long life. Sigma.
X
D E B J^ T El S
PROPOSED   FOR   DISCUSSION   BY
W\te ladies'  (Kdinburgh  litcrarjj  ^ociii^,
SESSION  1875-76.
1. Is there a Standard of Taste ?
2. Was Wellington a Greater General than Napoleon ?
3. Can it be Discovered from the Light of Nature alone that the Soul is
Immortal ?
4. Was Mary accessory to the Murder of Damley?
5. Has Scepticism produced a Worse Effect  on Society than Super¬
stition ?
6. Can the Characters of Men be known from the Features of their Faces ?
7. Is the Realistic more in accordance with the true Principles of Art
than the Ideal School of Painting and Sculpture ?
8. Was Cromwell a greater General and Govenror than Washington ?
9. Are the Writings of the Lake Poets consistent with the Principles of
true Poetry ?
10. Have Animals any Recognition of Moral Responsiblity ?
11. Whether is the Celtic, the  Saxon, or the  Norman Element in our
Literature at present the most powerful and most elevated ?
12. Is the Existence of an Aristocracy advantageous to a Country ?
13. Should a  Government  interfere  with  the   Religion of its Heathen
Subjects ?
14. Does the Study of Physical Science tend to shake Religious Beliefs?
15. Should the Management of Railways be transferred to the Govern¬
ment ?
16. Is the present Condition of France favourable to the General Advance¬
ment of Europe ?
17. Can the Drama be made at the same time Popular and Instructive ?
18. Should Home Rule be conceded to Ireland ?
JVo. j is to be discussed this Month, April 6th.
The above Debates are only suggested, not imposed, and any
Lady may propose other subjects.
All Members are requested to take part in the Debates, which
take place the first Saturday of every month; and Papers by
Members in the country will be read by town Members.
Communications to be addressed to the Presidents of Debate,
care of Messrs. Maclaren & Macniven, 138 Princes Street,
Edinburgh.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 101
^ht   ^ragon   of tfje   l^orlh.
CHAPTEE     IV.
" Maids are safe upon land, they should not come on board ;
Were she Freyja of maiden, beware,
For that dimple on cheek is a pitfall for thee,
And those fair flowing tresses a snare."—Tegnir Frithiolf's Saga.
Not often does it happen that our sweetest waking
dreams take form and more than fulfil to the eye all that
the fancy pictured. Yet so it was with me the day fol¬
lowing our arrival at Psestum or Poseidonia. My art-
dream stood on the shore, these glorious temples, with
the hills behind and the desolate marsh on either side, lost
in the blue to the north, and with the village of Agrapoli
glimmering white to southward; and beside me was my
heart's dream, the angel-apparition of Hertha. The wind
was still light, so in the aftei'noon most of us went ashore.
Half the morning I had talked with Hertha on deck. I
had told her something of our sacred offices, and her
sweet voice had followed me in some of our Canticles, which,
alas ! had never sounded to me so beautiful. And espe¬
cially would she dwell on words about the sea. " Mare
vidit et fugit" she said. " Ah ! Brother Lorenzo, when you
have sailed as much as I, how wonderful will it appear to
you that there is a Power that can quell the sea ! " She
spoke of my sailing ; oh, if I could but thus sail with her for
ever, I thought; but I said, " The old Greeks thought
its power uncurbed; see the fair temple ashore, it was
raised to the power of the sea that they called Poseidon,
and invoked it, not its Maker and Ruler."
" Yes," said Hertha ; " He who made it can rule it; but,
in a way, every free spirit is stronger than the sea. Look
at Thorstein, he fears it not—it can but drown him; and
as he does not mind that when it comes, the worst storms
do not trouble him. When I am afraid, I like to stand
near him, though he believes in Fate only, hardly in an
after life. However, he did say to me that if there were
one, he thought the Christian Faith must point the way,
for it spoke to all; whereas the Odin Valhalla was meant
only for fighting men." And she went on with the first
of many entreaties that I would speak to Thorstein of our
No. 4.—Apkil 1875.
/>
i'n\ •
^7
\
'^Tl'S
y
102 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
faith, while I felt for the first time a pang of that sinful
hatred which later burned into my very soul.
It was a quiet sunny afternoon when I rowed ashore
with Hertha and Thorstein. Witliin one of the great
marble temples an awning was stretched over the green
marble columns, and by Thorstein's orders large fires were
blazing to destroy the foul air-poison that hung like a curse
over the once beautiful city. It was mostly piles of ruins,
roses and autumn flowers twining and growing over them,
and laughing out of black vacant windows. But a few
houses were inhabited, and by poor, pale, terrified people,
serving our sailors with trembling fear. However, they
had brought wine, and good beef in plenty was roasting
at the fires.
" Swend and the lads have been scaring the folk out of
their senses as usual," said Thorstein as we landed. "I
must see that this beef and wine is not all strand-hug, if I
have to quarrel with Swend about it; or perhaps I shall
wait till he has drunk."
" Oh, wait," said Hertha hastily, while I asked what
strand-hug meant.
" It means victualling the ship without paying," said
Thorstein, " and used to be the custom everywhere at
home, but now it is forbidden by law in Norway."
" Thorstein says it is one of the bad things that the New
Faith has put down," said Hertha.
" I don't know about putting down," he answered, " as
long as King Olaf thinks it may be used against any one
in Norway who belongs to the old faith."
" Yes," she said, laying her hand on his arm, and
smiling at him as I could not bear to see, "King Olaf
is enough to make a brave man hold on to Odin against
his heart's thoughts, and I, till I sailed south, never
knew what the Christian religion was like, but I see
now why most men of mark in Norway and Iceland
have taken it."
Now we had reached Neptune's Temple, and Thorstein
and the men were piling cushions between two columns
for her to sit on; for all, unless perhaps Swend, treated
her like a queen. Kolbiorn the Skald drew near with
Thorstein and Swend, and reclined near her feet; a little
way o& sat Syades, half shown by the flaring fires that
after sundown glowed more bright and ruddy on the
noble lines of building. The men were busy preparing a
great feast, and Astolfo, ever restless, had tucked up his
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 103
goAvn and was working with them, chatting with the
Northmen, cheering the villagers, and finding unexpected
stores of fruit and corn.
Meanwhile Hertha went on telling me of their former
life, the others sometimes taking up the story. She told
of the long winding sea-inlet that went deep into the
heart of the mountains, of the great wooden hall that stood
on the knoll by the shore, with the green grass round, and
the clear water reflecting all in its depths in front; of
the countless crowd of sea-birds that whirledround, and
our own Italian birds which built their summer nests in
those cool northern solitudes. She told of great shadowy
pinewoods, and rocks like diamonds of never-melting
ice, and of peaceful homes, where all men were free, brave,
and happy, and had enough. But the king of the country
had come preaching Christianity to the free inhabitants;
and if any, as must happen among freemen, needed time
even to ponder before he left the old faith of his fathers,
then "woidd King Olaf burn and slay without mercy. And
so Hrolf her father found one day all his great houses and
barns fired by the king's men, when he would not take
Christianity only because Olaf commanded him; so he
fitted out his Dragon ship and sailed away into far lands
on a sea-roving expedition wjth his wife and son and
daughter, not daring to leave any behind. Now Hrolf
and his wife were dead, and their kinsman Thorstein's
ship had been wrecked, so he had come on board theirs.
" Now I have found Christianity quite other than I thought
it, and at our last winter-quarters in Spain I took baptism
with several more, and Thorstein thinks rather Avith me,
and Swend and Kolbiorn too, I believe. So I think we
might now go back to my dear Norway, where King
Olaf would surely make an atonement and leave us in
peace."
" No, no, lady," said Kolbiorn, " another gay southern
winter must lie before us," and he broke into song, as
often. Now, though I had a natural power of learning
languages, much exercised in the cloister, I must here
stop to say that but for much help in after times from
Kolbiorn the Skald I could not have written so plainly
what these talks were. Also he was most ready to help
in translating into our vulgar tongue any of the little
songs that seem the Norseman's natural way of speaking;
not that this was easy, for he spoke in no such exact
measure as the  Latin tongue exacts, but rather chose
104 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
words for the beginning and end of his lines of the same
sound, Avhich I partly imitated in Italian. And this new
form of poetry has now become well known and popular,
so it is strange to think that it was brought from the far
frozen North to our flowery land, the home of ancient song.^
But the charm lay in the rich musical voice that, aided by
lightly-touched strings, chanted the little song—
"Autumn wastes the southern bowers—
Autumn fades the summer flowers—
Autumn gives the storms dommion,
And our Dragon folds her pinion.
When the spring's blithe breeze is blowing,
And the swans are northward going,
And the chains of frost are breaking,
Then, from winter dreams awaking,
Shakes her wings and sallies forth
Our brave Dragon of the North."
" Autumn does not destroy here as in most places," said
Thorstein, avIio stepped back from the outer darkness into
the great circle of fire-light, his hands full of sweet roses
and violets, which he tumbled into Hertha's lap. " Look
at all these growing still about the ruins."
Then I told how I had read in the old poems of Italy
praises of the twice - blowing roses of Peestum, and
Hertha said, " You sing of them too, Kolbiorn; sing a
little soft lay, and you shall have the best rose among
them for a reward."
At once Kolbiorn sang, and sweetly too—
" Every land has a spring rose,
When the meadows are flowery sweet.
And a thousand odorous blooms
Crush we under our careless feet ;
But all praise to the roses here,
Roses flourishing twice a-year.
'' Every life has a spring, love-
Spring for flowers, and love for youth ;
Some can give, in their latter years.
Sweeter love, and of tenderer truth ;
Praise to the love so rare and dear,
Hoses flourishing twice a-year."
' It is fair to say that though some authorities consider that Italian rhyme was first Intro¬
duced in imitation of the songs of the Northmen, Tiraboschi and oth^-s maintain that the
Trouhadours from Provence originated it. Should this be true, wc can only suppose that
they revived in the 12th century a form of poetry that had died out for a few years after the
date of our story.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 105
Sidelong his eye glanced at Thorstein, whose cheeks
burned, while Hertha was seeking among her roses for
the best as a guerdon, when Swend's harsh voice
broke in.
" Love for youth ! I should think so. Come young and
old to food, to wine; that mind is the joy left to you
greybeards, so come and enjoy it. The squirrel and the
wolf may go a-wooing with grey hair because they never
were brown, but no one else, my lads. Hear my song—a
truer one than yours, my Kolbiorn," And he shouted
out—
" The fox, the wolf, the dog, and the bear,
Went all to woo the little brown hare :
She said to the fox, ' You are rather small ;'
She said to the bear, ' You are much too tall;'
She said to the dog, ' You are old and grey ;'
She said to the wolf, ' My love for aye.'
The dog is brave, but grey and old ;
The wolf, tho' grey, is young and bold ;
The old grey dog is king of the wood,
But the wolf is grey before he is good.
Sing me a song like that. Skald, while we eat—a
true love-song, not that feigned rose nonsense borrowed
from the weaklings of the land."
By this time the meat was being served to us who sat
by Hertha on silver plates, with napkins,^ while the men
mostly gathered round the roasts and cut off pieces with
their daggers.
" What a noisy fool that is !" whispered Astolfo, who
was now sitting by me. " Though I hardly understand a
word he says, I feel sure his talk is worth no more than
the howling of our new red puppy at the moon. How
ever comes he to have such a sea-nymph for a sister!
And he is jealous too—jealous of Thorstein's power and
Kolbiorn's singing. Watch him now," for Kolbiorn was
preluding on the strings; and, not without mischief in his
eye, soon he dashed into another song:—
' The manners of the early Northmen were more refined than is always realised, or indeed
than those of some of their late descendants. Thus we read, in an almost contemporary
Icelandic history, of how a chief, about this date, Brenner-Flosi by name, if we remember
rightly, on being served at dinner with an old ragged napkin, cut off a piece of the table¬
cloth to use instead, and handed it on to hia men.
106
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" Now fly the frost-giants.
Snow-drifts so hoary,
Triumph the Summer gods,
Spring is in Norway.
Thora the white-handed
Weeps by the Swan's bath ;*
Odin's wood horses f
Bear Eystein from Norway;
Birds on the rigging sing,
' Eystein loves Thora.'
" Warm over Valland,t
The summer sun, glowing,
Flames on the corn land
And broad rirer flowing ;
Wander together there
Hero and maiden ;
How she clings weeping when
His ship is laden ;
Birds on the rigging sing,
' Eystein loves Laura.'
" Autumn in Italy,
Fruit-laden, glorious.
Froths up the wine-cup bright
For the victorious ;
There, 'neath the treliced vine,
Raven-haired Flora
Smiles on the hero brave.
Her Norse adorer.
Birds on the rigging sing,
' Eystein loves Flora.'
" Storm on the hill-top.
And snow in the doorway ;
Few of the heroes
Have won back to Norway ;
Wrecked on the wintry way.
Poor in their native bay—
Still the birds sing their lay.
Answers them Thora,
' Thou wind, inconstant, light,
Blow back the hero bright;
See if they welcome thee—-
Laura and Flora.'
But when he crossed the sea,
' Whom I love, loves but me,'
Laughing said Laura.
' Shall I be one of three ?'
' Never ! ' said Flora."
Peals of laughter answered this song, in which all
joined but Swend, who began at last, with a face as red
as his hair, " Why not! and why not, I say ?"
"Why not, indeed," laughed Thorstein; "and then
this is not Norway, and Ingeborg is not here, Thor and
his hammer be praised for the din we have missed."
" And as for the birds," continued Swend, " I know
very well what they mean. Master Skald; and for all
you think me so stupid, perhaps I may be clever enough
to wring their necks. Why should there be maidens in
Valland and here too if one may not speak to them ?
and there are plenty in Valhalla, as we all know."
" So there are, my Swend," said Thorstein. " Cheer up;
who knows but they may think moi'e of you than those
stupid mortal maidens who are so apt to listen to birds."
" Yes, that is true," said the chief thoughtfully; " and
I don't know what much else there is in Valhalla, for the
fighting must be rather dull when you know you are
sure to win."
• Periphrasis for the sea. t Periphrasis for ships.
% The coast of France between the Seine and the Loire.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 107
" There is always beer," said Thorstein.
" Beer! I don't believe it; it must be a mistake ; the
runes must mean wine, the warm wines of Italy." By
this time a good deal had gone down Swend's throat.
" No, no, there is nothing but beer promised—so drink
the wine while you may, Sea-king, only with the more
moderation, as it is costly, and we have to pa}' for it."
" By all the gods of Asgaard, I am not going to pay ;
those slaves of the Greeks are bound to victual their
lords." Swend was growing fierce and noisy, but at this
moment a horse's feet were heard, and the challenge of our
guards, and a horseman rode rapidly into the circle of
light, and flung himself down. " Help for my Master,"
he said, in a Teutonic tongue, "who is sore beset in the
village there by the sea—Agrapoli; he is a Norman
knight, and they are all Saracens."
Some of our men were always armed, and Thorstein
sprang up, and putting on his helmet, gave quick
directions, then swung himself on the stranger's horse,
and galloped off" the way he had come. After him rushed
a dozen men with Astolfo, who tucked up his gOAvn
and ran with the swiftest; others, who were left,
gathered up their weapons, but Swend did not move.
"Hold hard, lads !" he shouted ; " enough are gone to
take a town, let us stay by the drink." Nor did Hertha
seem disturbed, only she told her old carline Bergliot to
get ready bowls of water and bandages, " for perhaps
there may be wounds, and at least the men will want to
wash their hands." This she did, grumbling that if ever
they had a pleasant dinner ashore, their L oki-luck brought
a fight in.
" Remember you are a Christian, and don't talk of
Loki," said Hertha; but the old woman muttered on, that
she did not know the saints by heart, so surely the old
gods would do to swear by. The messenger, who was
eating busily, now looked up and said—" So you are
Christians ; the fellows told us you were heathen vikings,
but I was sure one Northman would stand by another
against blue-men whatever their faith, so I came to you
for help."
" I hope our help will come in time," said Hertha.
•'Oh, plenty of time, lady ; my master could fight that
township all night, only it was poor hungry work. He
is the Norman knight, Sir Rainulf from Valland. I am
his shield-bearer, Ivar.    We wander about doing good.
108 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and getting into all sorts of mischief. We have been to
Rome on pilgrimage, and now we go to the war at
Monte Cassino, having been lately looking for a poisonous
dragon,^ said to infest the country; which, by good
luck, we cannot find. As to the Saracen village, I asked
my knight for his shield, meaning to ride quietly through
with the cross turned inwards, but no ; of course he must
display it himself and get attacked. Numbers made the
townsmen bold, so I thought it best to ride for it, and
give the alarm here. I left him fighting in the street,
but he will soon be here," he concluded with a long
draught of wine ; "he has Loki's own luck."
Bergliot stopped short by the man. " Surely by your
speech," she said, " you must be from England ? "
" From Ilvytby, dame, iu Northumbria."
"And I too, I am from Northumbria," said the old
woman, seizing both his hands. " Oh, how your voice
calls back the old homestead! Would I were back again
instead of tossing for ever on the weary sea! "
" Dame," said Ivar, " I feel like a bear that has found
honey. I am as tired of riding about the world as you can
be of sailing.    Sit, sit, and let us talk."
" But you speak Norse," I said; " are you Norse also in
England?"
" Yes, in Northumbria—all but the thralls of the land,
and our king Knut rules Denmark as well as England,"
they answered; and then talked eagerly together. Norse¬
men in England, in France, in Italy, in the far East,
Norsemen everywhere, and everywhere lords of the land.
Were they not rather than we the true descendants of the
conquering Romans, who used to rule the world? Were
theynotthebravestofmen,thefairest and noblest of women,
while we could but serve them, and perhaps die for them ?
So thought I till the horses' tramp was heard returning,
and Thorstein appeared, and with him the first I ever saw
of these Norman Frenchmen that are now lords of this
land, and have just taken Sicily also. I thought, so
would I carve St. Sebastian. His armour was beautifully
wrought; his belt glittered with gems ; the crest of his
helmet was a falcon of gold, with drooping wings, and
the head advancing in front. Beneath, the knight's face,
straight in feature, like an old bas-relief, shaven to the
thick moustache, looked out from under the steel edge, a
This dragon is historical, as I need scarcely add is Sir Kainulf.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 109
little grave, but quick and eager. He was tall, slender,
and strong, and reined in his horse with a grace that
made our Thorstein look a little rough. Thorstein
named him, and after a general salutation he sat down at
the feet of Hertha.
" They gave little trouble," said Thorstein, who, like
Sir Rainulf, was washing his hands; " I could not get at
more than two of them to wound."
" No," said Rainulf, speaking Norse, but, as they told
me, with a French mixture, " they never came well up
to me either, only crowded up the way. I was half vexed
with Ivar for calling help, yet glad to see you, sir."
Now the footmen came back, breathless with running
only, for the village folk had not waited for them to come
up. Among them Astolfo, who told me this with many
regrets, and how Thorsteiu charged in on the mob, and
scattered it in a moment; " and what think you of the
dainty French knight? There he is at Hertha'sfeet already.
Holy Mary! hoAv they all worship her! I never knew
women Avere so much thought of out in the world."
Eainulf turned very respectfully to Astolfo and said,
" How swiftly you ran, holy father! Had I seen you
were a cloister monk, I should have offered my horse.
You came of course to tend the wounded ? "
" Nay, my son," said Astolfo gravely, for he had his
cowl on, " know that I, Brother Damasus, but for aspira¬
tions the world cannot satisfy, was born to bear arms,
therefore I ran up so fast; yet let no man be uneasy
about my safety, for had there been danger, the aspira¬
tions would have carried me as fast back again."
Kainulf looked hard at him. " Brother Damasus—I
should know you surely, but yet it cannot be the same."
Thorstein broke in, " One more song, Kolbiorn; a good
one for our guest, and let him give the subject. What
you love best, Sir Rainulf—a lady—your country—
arms? "
" What I most desire is renown," said the Norman,
" but let it be a song a Christian knight can hear."
" Renown then, Kolbiorn," said Thorstein, " the best
of subjects, but without the old gods, and without
Valhalla."
"And without beer, and without the swine that run
about ready roasted for the hero-ghosts,—I understand,"
said Kolbiorn, and sang,
No. 4.—Apeil 187o. P
110 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" O for the gift of a lasting fame ! j
O for the joy of a glorious name ! '
He who sleeps to wake no more, i
What to him are his steeds of pride,
Flocks that feed along the shore,
Herds that graze on the mountain-side 7 ;
What to him are his ships so fair,
Fine white wool and corn in store, ]
When with heavy tramp they bear
Over the threshold of his door
Him who shall return no more ? j
What are folk in gay carouse, I
Tender touch of wife and bairn, |
When away from the fire-lit house I
Snows are drifting round his cairn, .
And the wandering winds deplore :
Him who hears their wail no more ? I
" Only this that the children tell, j
How the warrior strove so well, '
That the land is the brighter for him ; |
Oh may the earth rest lightly o'er him ! i
Unforgotten and loved and sung,
A light to guide the way of the young ; I
A fair renown is the gift we implore '
When ■we sleep to wake no more."
With this the evening ended •  some of us went back to j
the sliip, some slept in the ruins; and the next day we l
stood out of the bay with a fair wind, and sailed past j
Salerno. E. J. 0. i
(To be continued.)
" People here, too, are people, and not as fairy-land creatures."
There are two ways open to greatness as a novelist.
One to create a new style—to bring some ground into
subjection to the pen; the other to raise fresh crops
from fields already cultivated. Writers who come under
the first category can need little arithmetic or memory
for their summing-up. Richardson's puppets—repre¬
sentatives of a single passion, but scarcely human beings,
except in the name—are insipid to us, living in places
i
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. Ill
that were likewise but names. Scott's genius dis¬
covered that places might be made realities, and so
vividly described them that they almost seemed to give
life to his puppets. Thackeray and Dickens first put
real human nature on paper, and the puppets disappear.
Thackeray places human nature before us; Dickens
paints its eccentricities. These four men appear to have
brought all life under dominion of the pen, and it would
seem as if there were no more unreclaimed land to fence
in. It would seem that, for the future, novelists must be
content to aim only to improve our cultivated land.
And indeed there is plenty room for invention in this
narrow sphere.
Miss Thackeray is a successful worker of this sort.
But in addition she can claim the merit of a great
invention—the combining of the modern novel with the
fairy tale. " Pamela " and " Clarissa Harlowe " are tamer
to us than the tamest of modern three-volume novels.
They are buried in the foundations of the building
that has risen upon them. But " Jack the Giant-Killer "
and "Bluebeard" seem as if they would always flourish
beside their modern congeners, like a grand old cathe¬
dral alongside of a pretty painted brick iron-pillared
Dissenting chapel. Lewis Carrol struck a new chord
when he gave us " Alice in Wonderland," but she
too soon had a host of imitators, who seemed bent
on " draining the wells of fancy dry," and never tried
to sing a song of their own invention. Kingsley's
" Water Babies" appeared about the same time as our
friend " Alice," and was another fresh breath from fairy¬
land. This last year has brought us to a new oasis in
the desert, in the shape of Miss Thackeray's book,
entitled "Bluebeard's Keys, and Other Stories," a con¬
tinuation of " Five Old Friends." Alice the dream-child
and Tom the water-baby, in " Friendly Chat with Bird
and Beast," took us with them to fairy-land, but Miss
Thackeray has brought fairy-land to us. She has
changed Bluebeard from an ogre into a morose, con¬
science-stricken Italian marquis of the present day,
and Fatima into a merry Irish girl. Under her touch
Jack's beans change into shares in a newspaper; and
instead of, as of old, having to climb up the stalk to
storm the giant's castle, our modern Jack reaches Sir
George Gorges (his giant) by means of his articles in
the   " Excelsior"—the   newspaper   he   took   shares   in.
112 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
There are the same fairy tales that delighted onr
childhood, in " Five Old Friends " and " Bluebeard's
Keys"—the same plot, if it may so be called; but
fairy princes and princesses have changed into people
whom we know and meet in every-day life. Miss
Thackeray tells us in the introduction to the " Sleeping
Beauty," that after reading some of the fairy tales which
have charmed so many generations of children, she
wondei's how it is that these old stories outlive all newer
rivals, and keep their place on the nursery book-shelves.
How is it, she asks, that the princes and princesses
never grow any older, their castles fall to ruin or
need repairs? How do their dresses, including the
memorable seven-leagued boots, never wear out? How
is it that " Cinderehfi," "Jack and the Bean-Stalk,"
" Prince Riquet," and a host more of " old friends,"
always remain young? The Hatter in "Wonderland," as
every one knows, quarrelled with Time; and that func¬
tionary, being offended, stopped at six o'clock, and
refused to " move on." Six o'clock was the Hatter's tea
hour, and as the clock always pointed to six, tea-time
went on for ever with the Hatter. Perhaps in the fairy
tales we speak of, the children fought with Time, and he,
refusing to move on, left them for ever in the nursery?
H., Miss Thackeray's friend (or rather Miss Williamson,
as she calls herself in her writings), suggests that the fairy
princesses are to be met with among our own acquaint¬
ances, and their history is the history of common mortals;
therefore the old tales have held their own through
all these years, because they assume the character of
many friends we know. Then, as H. and Miss Thackeray
sit by the fire, they count up wlio amongst their own
acquaintances would suit the characters of the heroes
and heroines of fairy literature. Cecilia Lulworth is
transformed into the Sleeping Beauty; Cinderella we
learn to love anew as Ella Ashford; Little Red Riding
Hood, tramping cheerfully through the wood to her
grandmother's, is changed into pretty Patty Maynard,
and the Wolf is her cousin Reme ; Jack the Giant-Killer
is a brave yoimg clergyman, who fights against a giant
that lives in foul sewers, and from there comes out to
pounce on his prey.
Along with " Bluebeard's Keys " we have " Jack and the
Bean-Stalk," "Riquet h, la Houppe," and the "White Cat."
The second of these is certainly the most difficult tale to
Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 113
work out, and, when done, the most ingenious. Cinderellas
we often see, and Sleeping Beauties too, and many fierce
Bluebeards march through the Avorld; but who now-
a-days knows a Jack who climbed up a bean-stalk till he
reached the giant's castle? Miss Thackeray tells of one who
lived or lives in our own time, stormed the giant's castle,
carried away the hen that laid the golden eggs, and the
golden harp, in the shape of the giant's daughter. With
much ingenuity she keeps to the well-known features of
our old friend. The widow, the cow, and all are there;
yet she brings them in so ingeniously that they seem to
belong to the new face, although they help to recall the
features of a long-forgotten friend. Hans Lefevre is
Miss Thackeray's Jack. He is the son of a farmer, who
died when Hans was about seventeen, leaving behind him
also his widow, Hans' mother. After the farmer's death
things go wrong at the farm. Sir George Gorges, the
squire, is the modern ogre. He keeps a lease that Lefevre
got from him, and pretending that this lease is lost, takes
some valuable lands from Hans and his mother. Jack
loses all interest in the farm. He sees it cannot pay
without the marsh-lands that the greedy ogre has stolen
from him. The cow has at last to be sold. Hans takes
it to the market, and with the mojiey he gets for it is
tempted to buy shares in a local Radical newspaper—so
the cow of old is sold for what appear at first sight
worthless modern beans. His mother upbraids him for
this seemingly foolish squandering of their money, but
the investment turns out to be a profitable one. He
makes his first visit to the giant's castle on the news¬
paper business, and bears away with him the hen that
laid the golden eggs in the shape of the recovered lease
of the marsh-lands, which makes the farm profitable. He
carries it away when Sir George Gorges has fallen into a
drunken sleep, like the ogre of old. The widow thinks
now that Hans will settle to work quietly, and the farm will
pay as it did in his father's time. But it is not so. Jack
has seen Lina Gorges, the golden harp of Miss Thackeray's
tale, and longs to possess it too. Some parliamentary
business in connection with the " Excelsior " leads him
again to the giant's castle. Lina is standing at one of
the windows, with the golden sunlight streaming down
on her. He persuades her to fly with him ; Lina nearly
consents, but does not like to leave the ogre (her father) ;
and as Hans carries her off she cries, as the golden harp
114 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
did, " Papa, Papa 1" The giant wakens, and while pur¬
suing them falls against the window ledge and never
recovers from the blow; and Jack transports his golden-
haired bride to his mother's house.
Miss Thackeray's power does not alone lie in her
portrayal of characters, but their surroundings as well.
So powerful is her rendering, that we do not merely say
coldly, " This is a vivid and truthful picture, but we
insensibly breathe as we read the very atmosphere of the
place described," says the Times in regard to the land¬
scape-painting in her "Village on the Cliff," and it
applies to her fairy tales as well. In them we have pictures
of quiet English life, and of sleepy English villages, of shady
Fontainebleau, and breezy Normandy; or, as in "Riquet a
la Houppe," we lose our way, like Sylvia, in a Swiss pine
forest, forgetful of everything while listening to the tor¬
rent roaring through the " green mossy glen," and watch¬
ing the " shifting sunlight" shining on Mont Blanc.
So vividly are all the varying scenes painted that
we feel as if we had a change of air with each
new story. In "Bluebeard" we are carried over the
Alps to Rome itself, and see across " walled gardens and
stone yards, beyond the spires and domes of the great
city to the greatest dome of all, that rises like a cloud
against the Campagna." We see the old palaces by
moonlight as well as sunlight. We enter St. Peter's,
where " dim columns stretch far away in fire and cloud to
other shrines and saints, and far lights burn through a
silent haze." We come out again into the glare of a
" dazzling Italian day," where we meet a quaint band of
Roman peasants tramping through the streets on their
way to the country, and two little Italian children dance
before us, and lift up " their soft monkey hands " for the
silver coin that is held out for them; then they caper away
with the prize to their " beautiful Albinian mother, who sits
watching them, with her chin resting on her hands, and a
great basket of violets shining at her feet." With many
like pictures Miss Thackeray illustrates her tales, and no
enchanted scenes in the fairy tales of old were more
enchanting than these with which Miss Thackeray strews
her stories.
Though the main features of these fairy tales are quite
original, we can trace in all Miss Thackeray's stories
a slight likeness to her father. No two people in
this  world   were,   are,   or  ever will be,  exactly  alike.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 115
Wendall Holmes, iu his " Guardian Angel," shows how
the features, temper, or some trait of character, after
lying dormant for generations, will be produced in some
far-ofi" descendant. It may be only a glance, a turn of
the head, an inflection of the voice, but these features we
haye inherited from many different sources. We catch
in Miss Thackeray's writings a mere glimpse occasionally
that reminds us of some of her father's. The likeness
between Thackeray and his daughter is slight cer¬
tainly, but she has the same knack of giving her char¬
acters ingenious and appropriate names, and of writing
as if all the people iu her tales were her intimate friends,
and she or rather Miss Williamson were constantly
moving behind the scenes, as Pendennis and Titmarsh
did in her father's works; like him, she never ends a story
sadly, but only lets the curtain drop when all is in a
fair way to finish off agreeably. In her remodelled fairy
tales it can scarcely be otherwise, for you know how all
the old friends ended, do you not ? You remember how
" they married and lived happily ever afterwards," as
surely as they opened with " once upon a time " % Perhaps
Miss Thackeray has refrained from modernising the best
known and loved tale of nursery literature, the " Babes in
the Wood," as she could not break through her usual
rule and let the curtain drop on a murder. Perhaps it
is an inherited dislike to have a dismal ending, for none
of Thackeray's conclude except in sunshine. In his un¬
finished "Shabby-Genteel Story" it seemed asif at onetime
he would wander away from his usual path, for he says,
" it was to have a melancholy ending—for how should it
have been gay ? The tale was interrupted at a sad period
of the writer's own life. The colours are long since dry; the
artist's hand is changed." But he could not leave so.
He took up his palette and brush, after letting them lie
for so many long years ; and in " Philip " we again hear
of Caroline Gann, the little Cinderella of the " Shabby-
Genteel Story."
Miss Thackeray resembles her father, too, in the way
she fills in the background of her stories with people to
whom she has introduced us before, and who, though we
may only see them in the distance, interest us far more
than if the said background were filled in with new char¬
acters. For instance, in " Pendennis" we feel more
interest in George Warrington when we know he is a
descendant of Harry Esmond and the  elder Virginiana,
116 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
and in the " Adventures of Philip " we meet a group of
old acquaintances.
All Miss Thackeray's tales begin with an introduction by
Miss Williamson, who with " Friend H." and her grand¬
children we meet sometimes by their own fireside, where
once they are disturbed by the Beast in the shape of
Guy Griffiths. Sometimes they are visiting at Lulworth
Hall. Again we join them in the " Normandy Cure's
Garden," where they meet the White Cat, and pass a
summer at Fontainebleau, and we are introduced to Ked
Riding Hood, her grandmother, and the wolf.
This happy idea of filling in their stories with old
familiar faces is a very pleasant Thackeresque feature.
Listen to one who is famed for telling good stories, and
you will find he doubly interests his hearers by making
the actors in his tale be people whom his audience already
know. The Thackerays knew how to tell their stories
well—knew how to keep up the attention of their readers
by this trick. They knew how much pleasanter it is
when ushered into a drawing-room, where you expect to
meet only strange faces, to find some friend whom you
thought you would never see again. You have only a
few minutes' conversation with them, but in that time
you recall many pleasant memories. I am glad Miss
Thackeray has inherited this capacity from her father,
for it gives to all her stories, as it did to his novels, not
only a deeper interest, but also feeds the idea that their
characters are real men and women, and not merely
players got up to strut through their parts; and when
the show is over, to use Thackeray's own words, we say,
" Let us sliut up the box and the puppets, for our play
is played out."
Miss Thackeray is fond of giving her characters
appropriate and suggestive names, as her father had also
a knack of doing. We remember his Lady Bareacres,
'' Lord Methuselah," Lady Moses, and the Honourable
Misses D'Arc, " Lord Magnus Charteris, son of the Earl
of Runnymeade," and a host more that crop up all
through his works. His daughter in her stories has
tried to keep to the fairy-tale names as much as possible,
without bringing in any far-fetched title that we should
not expect to hear now-a-days. Cinderella would not
do for a modern tale, so the two first syllables are
cut off", and Ella remains. Still Miss Thackeray was not
satisfied, but remembering how her heroine was associated
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. IIT
with a desolate fire, she has surnamed her AsMord. " The
AVhite Cat" is Blanche, Bluebeard is Barbi, and Tom
Ricket's princess, whom he twice met wandering in a -'weird
fantastic forrest," is appropriately designated Sylvia.
The names in the " Sleeping Beauty " all recall a sense
of peaceful drowsiness, as for instance Cecilia's surname
of Zuhvorth; and her aunt, who hovers about like a good
old fairy, is Mrs. Dormer. Did Miss Thackeray in¬
tentionally call her " Sleeping Beauty" Cecilia, a name
signifying blind,^ so that when Prmce Frank the Free
kissed his cousin, he should open her eyes ?
Little of Thackeray's sarcasm appears in his daughter's
works, but once or twice we have a passage in which
it seems that Miss Thackeray has taken up her father's
pen. The description of Mrs. de Travers in " Bluebeard"
is one example. How she pinches, starves, and slaves
" to keep up appearances." How she grows suddenly
affectionate to her before-despised daughter Fanny when
she becomes engaged to the rich Bluebeard; Iioav she
revels in her daughter's prospective riches; and how she
talks on every available opportunity of her father-in-
law Lord Tortillon ! On Mrs. Ashford, Cinderella's step¬
mother, Miss Thackeray again lavishes some of her
father's sarcasm.
When you have read her stories, you will find that,
besides renewing your acquaintance with the old tales of
your childhood, you have also learnt to love a host of new
faces who will be companions for yoTi in the long winter
evenings. You will always be glad to take them down
from their shelf and trace in them the likeness to the-
•' Five Old Friends" of nursery days, while the jingling
of " Bluebeard's Keys" will play a pleasant accompani¬
ment. E. V. Lynne.
AVORRY Loquitur.
This world's a pleasant place enough,
But might be much improved,
If all that I find hard or rough
Could be at once removed.
' Mias Yonge's "History of Christian Names."
Ko. 4.—April 1875.
118 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
If little dogs were kings indeed,
Served faithfully by man,
Whose office is to tend and feed
The Dandie Dinmont clan;
If all the whips were snapt and burnt,
Save one which should be kept
Till fellows like old Punch have learnt
To treat me with respect;
If all the chains and collars tight
Were cast into the sea.
Save Punch's, when he wants to bite,
And grinds his teeth at me ;
If all the great big dogs that growl,
And roll me with their paws,
Were soon taught manners, made to howl.
And sentenced by the laws;
If they were fed on barley meal
(And not too much of that!) ;
It makes me shudder when I feel
Their rude familiar pat;
If I could run about all day.
Without a call or frown.
And make the whiskered cat my prey.
And hunt the rabbit down ;
If I, returning from the chase,
Bespattered o'er with mire.
Could take my seat without disgrace
Before a blazing fire;
If there were always some one by
To let me out and in.
To rub my little waistcoat dry,
And make no useless din ;
If I could eat my supper there,
Outspread upon the rug;—
(A fireside nook with dainty fare
Is exquisitely snug I)
If chickens had four gizzards each,
If curries Avere unknown,
Mustard and pepper out of reach.
And sauces let alone ;
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 119
If biscuits every day were baked,
Quite thin and crisp and sweet,
The cook's full credit being staked
On what / choose to eat;
If rich pound-cake were on the shelf,
Close by the water-bowl,
And I could always help myself
Without the least control;
If scents, and salts, and snuff, and smoke,
Could be abolished quite.
And I were free from any yoke
To roam by day or night;
If it were never broiling hot.
And never freezing cold;
If I could regulate my lot.
And keep from growing old;
If all the world were made for me,
And Puppy were its king,
I have no doubt that it would be
A very perfect thing,
ESTELLE.
grbiirp of dfhfister.
CHAPTEK   III.
" My children," the speaker said, " in these times of
devious thought and untamed imagination, where can we
find a safer guide than music? Beautiful as she is,
she allows herself no undue liberty on that account,
but remains true to the laws that are fixed, as it were, by
eternal decrees, for her guidance. Follow a phrase, or a
series of phrases, in music ; trace the many voices of the
fugue, or the polyphony of perfect orchestration; stop at
any note; instead of being confused, perplexed, disap¬
pointed, you may, if your soul be in harmony with the
piece, return by a simple act of memory or of progres¬
sion to the key-note, and all may be resolved into a
fitting close.
" How sad it is when an artist, be he poet or musician,
descends from his elevation, loses the key-note of his art,
his inspiration, and becomes a mere copyist!    The poet
120 Ulc Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
becomes a mere writer of rhymes, the artist a sign-
painter, the musician exchanges harmony for noise.
Yet the poet, even should he remain a poet, is prone to
wander from his theme into inextricable mazes of tangled
fancies; and where is the key-note that, once struck,
shall restore the theme to his memory ? He may find it
after a painful search ; but in music, it is written legibly
on the laws of the art, from which it is inalienable.
" So, too, with the life of man. That, my children, is
the noblest life which has its key-note always at hand,
always lending a double grace and a double euphony to
every passage. ' Tell me the key-note, and I will tell you
whether the phrasing is true or false,' said the great
Sebastian to an aspiring young composer. And thus, tell me
the key-note of your life ; only then can I tell you whether
your actions bear a true or a false relation to it. Ah,
my children ! what a pain must it be to ears used to the
harmony of perfect life, to hear the discords of false
sciences and philosophies that are clanging all around us !
You and I, who are musicians, know that ere we write a
piece of music we must know the key-note; but these
philosophers have begun to frame their theories with¬
out knowing it, and expect that it will come quite
natm-ally into its place at the close. Is not this an un¬
warrantable conclusion ? Or if they have a key-note, it
is a changeable one, which they place first high and then
low, to suit the mood of their variable caprice. "J'he
true theory of the universe seems yet far away from
them ; may they find it at some period!
" But while they are waging war about words and
things out in the cold discordant world, we have our
little realm in peace. My children, let us dwell within it.
How perfect is music ! In her dominion there is neither
summer nor winter; she is uniform, yet never tedious.
And she is not more perfect in temperament than in con¬
stitution. Strength and sweetness, love and logic,
science and art, dwell with her in perfectly equal propor¬
tions. Does feeling fly with her even to supernal heights,
and then look around for some standard by which to test
the straightness of its flight ? Her exquisitely framed laws
at once yield an unfailing standard, according to every
note its value and its position, with regard to the whole.
Where is the earthly empire that has dealt as justly by
its subjects as music by the members that constitute her
being V    Again, does she wish to show her strength, and
The Ladies" Edinburgh Magazine. 121
by a series of resonant chords, bold leaps, abrupt move¬
ments, to assert her supremacy, and sliow her perfect
knowledge of law by her ease in obeying it ? Is feeling
then appealed to, that she may sanction that Avhicli law
seems proud to own ? Feeling will then glory in a
result by which the duality of science and art is merged
into perfect unity, and by Avhich the two are bound
together by a tie so indissoluble that it seems to have
existed from the very beginning of time."
She ceased speaking, and while the chorister boys were
rising from their seats and proceeding to remove their
white garments, she turned and saw Randall, who re¬
mained fixed to the spot, gazing at her. He suddenly
became aware of the intentness of his gaze, and the un-
warrantableness of his position; and, colouring deeply, he
rose fi-om his seat, bowed very low, and said in a faltering
voice, " Pray forgive me ; I was looking for some friends ;
the voice attracted me, and I could not "
"Ah ! do not apologise," said the fair lecturer, the shade
of embarrassment she had felt giving way to sympathy
with Randall; " our lessons are seldom honoured by the
presence of visitors."
Charmed with her frank civility, Randall ventured to
raise his eyes to her face, and he saw there a look of such
ineffable good-humour, mingled with a degree of roguish-
ness, that he could hardly believe the utterer of the sub¬
lime thoughts he had heard and the woman now before
him to be the same person.
" You are a stranger in Chester? " she asked.
" Yes, and I had agreed to meet some friends here at
four o'clock."
" Four o'clock ! and it is now half-past five."
" Is it possible !" exclaimed Randall, in dismay. " Ah!
could you direct me to the school of Miss Langley ?"
" Certainly I can, as I go there myself every day ; it is
one of the nicest old houses in Chester, near the bridge."
" Many thanks," said Randall, and with a low bow he
hastened away from one Avho was now inseparably asso¬
ciated in his mind with the patron saint of Chester.
Miss Langley hved in one of the oldest houses in Chester.
It was a house which might be said to be in its prime;
old enough to have acquired the habit of being comfort¬
able, and yet not old enough to have begun to lose it.
It had a tiled roof; and its gable, which faced the street,
was decorated with fine old wood carving.    Randall, now
122 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
on his way thither, had no diflSculty in finding the house,
as his asldng the way to it had been merely a saying
something without knowing very well what he said. So
new to him had been the glimpse he had obtained of the
*' power of harmony" ^ to lighten the " burthen of the
mystery," that all save the speaker and the words spoken
had retired into a dim background in his mind.
On reaching the abode of Miss Langley, he was shown
into a parlour, pervaded by a subdued and softened light.
The window, to shut out from view the row of dingy
houses behind, was composed of small square panes of
Belgian glass of various greenish tints, which, looked at
through an imaginative medium, might give a vague idea
of green fields far away, giving balmy rest to weary eyes
that gaze often on stone walls. A few paintings which
hung round the room increased the effect of cheerfulness.
Very soon Miss Langley appeared, a tall elderly woman,
with a benign smile and piercing grey eyes. She shook
hands emphatically with Randall, and bade him be seated.
The poet Shelley has somewhere remarked that the
love of things, such as plants, birds, or even ornaments,
comes to us only as a substitute for some human love
Avhich we have lacked or lost. Hence it must be that
lonely human beings have often such an inordinate love
of things. Yet of such beings there are many who,
instead of subsiding into the love of things and posses¬
sions of their own, are ever seeking to glean scraps of
affection from the harvest-fields of others. Family affec¬
tion is imperfect at its best, and constantly leaves some¬
thing undone, some want unministered to, some feeling
unsympathised with. Miss Langley, in her school, in all
her dealings with her fellow-men, had ever sought for
stray tasks like these, and had performed them with
unflagging zeal. Friends of her own she had, whom it
was to her a second nature to love and to esteem. But
her charity was extended not only to these, but to all
indiscriminately; and this it was which gave to her man¬
ner something mechanical and even spasmodic, something
almost of the quality of a charitable machine, which
distributes acts of kindness in a regular and systematic
way, with or without any feeling to prompt them. Not
that Miss Langley had any formed intention of acting in
this automatical way; she only exemplified the fact that,
' See Wordsworth " Tintem Abbey."
J
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 123
let the benevolent say what they will, it is impossible for
even the largest human heart to contain all its fellow-
creatures and continue to act naturally at the same time,
" I am very sorvj indeed that your mamma has left,"
she said to Randall, bending her head with a jerky
benignity; " she left this house with your aister some
time ago, expecting to meet you at the Cathedral. But
you do look so tired; allow me to order some refreshment."
This was not unwelcome to Randall, who had eaten
nothing all day. He faintly thanked Miss Langley as
she rang the bell, and felt inwardly grateful to her for
continuing to talk to him without expecting a reply.
" You will rejoice to see your sister again, and so much
improved; perhaps I ought not to say so, but, you under¬
stand, she is not under my tuition. Her French and music
are all that I could wish, but English! I despair of find¬
ing a good master for English; the excellent one I had
has been ordered to the south of France in bad health, and
I fear he will never return."
" I am afraid I do not know of any," said Randall, in a
voice so low and altered that Miss Langley started and
looked at him keenly.
" Overwork?" said Miss Langley, in a grave voice.
" No, not that," said Randall; " rather the reverse."
A servant now entered with refreshments for Randall.
" I fear you have had a very exhausting college session,"
said Miss Langley, looking sympathetically at Randall's
pale face.
" Oh, no, I have not been at college at all; it is only
the exhaustion of to-day."
" But you will certainly go there soon, for I hear you
are to be a clergyman."
"Who can have told you that? " said Randall, starting
back with an amazed look; " it is the very last pro¬
fession I should choose."
" Ah, poor lad! " said Miss Langley, in her most sooth¬
ing tones; " come, I did not mean to vex you. But let
me tell you, you will find enough of difficulties in life
without making them for yourself; a few years hence you
will know what real struggles are. I know some even
younger than you who are already fighting the battle
manfully. For instance, there is Mademoiselle de Rehmar,
or simply Werburga, as she is usually styled."
Here Randall started and reddened involuntarily. Miss
Langley continued :—" Werburga de Rehmar has had a
124 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
hard life for one of her rank and prospects. She lives
here with her father, a German baron, who has lost all his
property in some iinaccountable way. His wife was a
native of these parts, and when, not long after their
marriage, she fell into delicate health, he brought her to
reside here, as she earnestly desired to do. Their
daughter was born here, and, by her mother's wish, was
named after the patron saint of Chester. The mother
died soon after, and poverty for the baron and his
daiighter seemed to follow close upon this bereavement.
Werburga can have no recollection of the elegant mansion,
about two miles from Chester, where she spent the first
year of her life. All her memories are centred in a humble
dwelling on the southern wall of the town. The Baron de
Kehmar is a literary man, who has distinguished himself
more particularly in scientific pursuits. He was naturally
anxious that his daughter should be well educated, and
while he taught her all the solid branches himself, he sent
her for accomplishments to my school. I could not avoid
seeing that even this was a great tax on his resources,
but my offer to take her at a more moderate charge only
hiu-t his pride. Then the child herself came to me; 1
shall never forget her earnest look that day, the air of
determination, almost bordering on pride, with which she
said, ' Miss Langley, I "wdll willingly teach in your school
all that I already know, if you will only allow me to have
lessons in piano and singing in return.' I drew her
towards me and kissed her on the forehead: I was too
much overcome to speak. Since that day we have been
fast friends. I could not but marvel at her father permit¬
ting her to take this step, but she has such a Avinning
Avay that no one can refuse her anything."
" And does she still give lessons here'?" said Randall,
with an almost vain efibrt to steady his voice.
" Yes," answered Miss Langley, "she has made herself
quite necessary to me; I tremble to think what the
school would be without her. She has even taken the
place of my English master for the last three months,
teaching so efiiciently that the class is even more advanced
than it usually is at this stage. And all this in addition
to her choir duties at the Cathedral, her acting as amanu¬
ensis to her father, besides her other lessons here."
" She will break down soon," said Randall; " all this
is too much for a young girl."
" That is what I fear also," said Miss Langley.    " And
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 125
besides, her poor father is far from strong, and will in
course of time, I fear, require all her attention. Her own
character, too, gives me some anxiety. If she has any
fault, it is that of caprice. Like many geniuses, she does
things from impulse, and begins to work with an ardour
which cannot possibly last to the end."
"It is to be hoped that you may ere long find an¬
other teacher of English," said Randall. " You may rest
assured that I shall do my best to find one for you."
j\Iiss Langley was pleased, and even a little surprised,
at Randall's eagerness to assist her; but she connected
it with no other idea than that of obliging civility on his
part.
" I shall take the stage-coach at seven," he said, rising
to take leave. Miss Langley bade him a gracious adieu,
and he began his homeward journey with a mind full of
new thoughts and new plans, occasioned by the events
of the day.
Squire Trevor, in the meantime, in whom consideration
for his horses Avas at all times a ruling motive, had not
suffered them to remain standing at the door of the
Cathedral for more than a quarter of an hour after the
time appointed. During that brief space, however, he
had contrived to show Mrs. Holme and her daughter
some of the beauties of the Cathedral, which he was quite
sure they had never remarked before. Standing beneath
one of the pillars of the nave-aisles, he said, " You see
how Gothic architecture carries us back to nature. The
principle of the tree-stem unfolding into branches is by it
invariably followed. In these pillars you observe broad
mouldings, whether round or square ; follow any one of
these mouldings up beyond the capital, every one is there
developed into three or more delicate branches, which of
themselves are sufficient to form a diagonal or a cross-
vaulting in the roof We have thus the principle of a
great spreading tree in this the purest of all styles of
architecture. For a contrast to this, let me lead you for
a moment to the cloisters." On reaching the cloisters,
Trevor, with a wave of the hand meant to include their
whole range of vision, said, " Here we have the lapse of
the early English into the perpendicular, one of the steps
towards the growing utilitarianism of modern days." Mrs.
Holme, observing that the roofs of the cloisters were tiled,
ventured to ask the age of the tiles. " Ah! that is a
minor matter,"  answered Trevor; " tiles can be put on
No. 4.—Apkil 1875. R
126 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
any day; they have nothing material to do with the
style of the cloisters generally. Those thin mouldings,
and alternated piers and buttresses, tell of degenerate
days, when British architecture began to lose the simple
sublimity of the Gothic, and to choose ornament for its
own sake."
Malvina Holme, though much impressed by Trevor's
remarks, was in too excited a state to receive them
thoroughly into her mind. The events of the day were
unusual to her, as they broke the routine to which, as a
school-girl, she had of late been accustomed. And her
excitement was not altogether of a joyous nature; though
pleased to return home, she had some cause for regret in
leaving Chester. Malvina was a tall brunette, with spark¬
ling eyes, and hair with a ripple in it. When she spoke
and smiled, something of the freshness of a spring day
seemed to hover about her; she was not a creature meant
to grieve often or long; her disposition was too passive,
and possibly too phlegmatic for that. Neither brilliant
nor clever in the ordinary sense of these words, she yet
had a wonderful capacity for learning by means of the
affections. But even in affection she was passive, and
rather accepted friendship than sought it for herself.
With this passiveness, her nature had in it something
plastic, which caused it to be easily moulded by those
whom she loved. And now there was beginning to dawn
within her some sense of the lofty and beautiful in life,
which was in part a reproduction of the ideas and dreamy
aspirations of Werburga de Rehmar. Unperceived by
her companions, she stole round to the north-eastern
angle of the cloisters; for was not all this place sacred
to Werburga, and might she not here for a few moments
dream of the living friend who seemed to her so much
greater a saint than the ancient Saxon foundress of the
abbey? On the northern walk of the cloisters, where
the shadows were already creeping up the wall, she
paused at a rustic seat which was a favourite haunt of
her friend's. Here the young lover of nature and art had
planted a beautiful white jasmine, which had twined itself
round the framework of the seat, bespangling it with
star-like flowers, and had begun to creep up the old
sandstone wall. The little white flowers looked kindly
at Malvina, and she thought they breathed the name of
her friend. Presently they all turned, as if blown in one
direction; a door opened close at hand, and Werburga
entered and stood beside her.    As Squire Trevor, very
The Ladles Edinburgh Magazine. 127
soon after, was re-entering the Cathedral, he glanced into
that dim recess, and saw two women in pale-coloured
dresses clasped in each other's arms. Malvina's face, as
she rejoined her friends, bore the traces of tears, and the
face of Trevor was pale and almost stern as he seated
himself in the carriage with Mrs. Holme and Malvina,
and ordered the coachman to drive to the White House,
near Glanhafon.
Mrs. Holme was profuse in her apologies for Randall's
non-appearance, and even felt some anxiety about him;
but Trevor seemed to think nothing of it, and was
certain he would arrive at home that evening. The
bright mood of the morning seemed for the time to have
forsaken Trevor. A few monosyllabic remarks were all
he uttered for the first few miles. The soft evening air
had meanwhile soothed the spirit of Malvina, and with
the volatility of youth she exchanged her feelings of
regret for bright dreams of the future.
" Mamma," she said at last in a half whisper, " it would
be delightful if you would invite Werburga to spend the
holidays with us; she lives in such a small house, quite
alone with her father, and is not going aAvay at all."
" I should be glad to give you pleasure, my dear, and
to do her a kindness; but tell me, Malvina, is she not a
strong-minded person—one of those modern platform
women of whom I have such a horror 1 It would break
my heart if my dear girl were to become one of these."
" No indeed, m.amma, she is best loved among women;
and that, Miss Langley tells us, is a sure sign that there
is nothing manly in her character."
" I will think of it, my dear; but remember, if she does
come, I shall not encourage forwardness, but always call
her Mademoiselle; and you, I hope, will do the same."
This dialogue had been carried on in low tones to avoid
disturbing Trevor. It seemed, however, as if he had
heard some not unwelcome news, for the expression of
his face at once became more cheerful. He had not left
Chester to-day without a keen pang of disappointment.
The visit had been one of many, which, from mere visits
of business, had grown into visits of business and pleasure
combined. In Baron de Rehmar, as a contributor to a
leading scientific journal, he had found a kindred spirit.
He had introduced himself to him at first as a reader of
the journal, and one anxious for enlightenment. The shy
student, charmed by the genial frankness of Trevor, had
met with  favour his  advances to intimacy, and spent
128 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
many hours in earnest discussion with him. The society
of the daughter had, on these occasions, not been wanting,
to listen to the talk, and to charm its intervals with
music. To-day Trevor had found the daughter alone;
she had sung to him, had talked with enthusiasm about
music. On Rehmar's return from a special engagement,
Trevor had expressed to him a wish, long cherished by
him, he said, that he and his daughter should come to
Glanhafon on a visit. To his amazement, the Baron had
declined at once, decidedly, and without giving any
reason. Trevor tried to think that the daughter looked
disappointed; and on leaving the house, the pang he
felt had revealed to him, that till now he had not known
what those visits had been to him. But he was in the
habit of Avorkiug oif such feelings by diverting his
attention to something else; and he had at present
floating in his brain a scheme which he longed to carry
out, and which occupied a large space in his El Dorado
of fancied bliss. The conversation he had overheard
between Malvina and her mother threw a ray of bright¬
ness into his thoughts of the future, and imparted
indirectly an increased definiteness to the mode of
operations which he was endeavouring to mature in his
mind. Procla.
(To be continued.)
AN  ANCIENT  FAIRT-TALK.
'' Blending of waters and of winds together,
' Winds that were wild, and waters that were free."
—r. W. H. Myers.
" I LOVE everything that's old ! " says Goldsmith—" old
friends, old times, old manners, old books, old wine." And
I venture to add to his list, old tales. Have you ever
lifted the cover of an old-fashioned jar, where some
ancient dame has stored up her rose-leaves, and stirring
about among them, wondered at the marvellous sweetness
bottled up so long in the ugly old receptacle? Just
such a feint fragrant perfume of the past clings about
some of the old-world stories : they have a dainty aroma
of their own, pleasant even to our fastidious senses now-
a-days.    Here is one of the prettiest among them.
Once upon a time,   long  years   ago,   there   lived  in
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 129
Greece, ruler over the Trachinian country, a king named
Ceyx. He and his queen Alcyone kept court at Trachis,
their rocky capital, upon the shores of the Malian Gulf,
close under the shadow of Qilta, the noble mountain robed
in pine and oak.
Dark and sombre were the pine-groves upon G^ta;
sullen was the sound of the waters upon the Malian
strand ; but blithe and unshadowed was Trachis, and the
palace which was the home of tliis royal pair, for it had
everything which could give it sunshine—love. No
portraits of Alcyone have come down to us, but there can
be no possible doubt but that she was fair—as a fairy¬
tale heroine ought to be ; and as for her husband Ceyx, I
am sure he was valiant and hero-like, for when for the
first time there came a cloud to dim their wedded
happiness, he behaved as a brave man should.
The sorrow was no great thing, only the necessity of
a brief separation while Ceyx made a voyage across the
sea to consult the oracle at Claros,—yet it cost Alcyone
many bitter tears. She had a coward fear of the sea,
which was unreasonable; for seeing it was so near a
neighbour, she might as Avell have lived on friendly terms
with it. Many and many attempts did she make to
dissuade Ceyx from his purpose; and it is a marvel he
resisted, seeing how eloquent were the words, how sweet
and pretty the caresses, which were her weightiest argu¬
ments. Nevertheless Ceyx, smiling down at her from
the height of his hero-stature, which made those two
standing together seem as G^ta beside Trachis", held his
own valiantly, and would not yield.
Then she changed her pleadings to tearful prayers,
that she might at least go with him across that grand
fearful sea which was her ever-present terror. But he,
though his heart was all the time yearning to grant her
petition, still denied himself, and, harder, her,
" Beloved! " he cried, " all things else will I share Avith
thee ; but danger, never! "
And so with a long embrace he put her from him, and
departed alone.
Long now and desolate were the days to the grieving
Alcyone; wakeful were the nights spent in longings for
the absent; dreary her morning watch and evening vigil,
as she strained her eyes to scan the far horizon for her
lord's long-tarrying sail. But at last one evening the
Queen's heavy-hdded eyes, weary with grieving, closed
tired out upon her pale cheek; whereupon her maidens
130 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
bore her to her couch, and rejoicing, left her to slumber,
lulled by the croon of waves upon the shore.
Then night—like a mother darkening the room, that
her child may sleep the sounder—came and drew a curtain
over all the land, and over the world of waters; yes I
and with finger on her Hp hushed the disturbing earth-
voices  only the sea still murmured on the shore.
Alcyone slept.
Slept! not knowing the long-watched-for sail had
hovered in sight at last, and that Ceyx could already
discern the faint far-off beacon-light which burned by day
and by night upon the heights of Trachis. Slept I not
knowing of the clouds driving fiercely over the firma¬
ment ; of the stars veiled in awful blackness ; of Avinds
that rose sighing and sobbing ; of waves that beat madly
on a rocky shore.
But as she slept the dream-spirits hovered round her
couch.    A vision rose  before  her She saw  as
in waking hours the waste of waters ; the crested waves
tossing and foaming; but oh! a helpless ship
struggled in their grasp—a Laocoon done to death by
crudest serpents ; and on the ship's deck stood a gallant
hero facing death, with eyes fixed upon the shore! . . . .
Then the moon glided from behind a cloud, and its
pale light gleamed upon the hero's face. At that sight
a great cry burst from Alcyone, and with the cry she
awoke.
Oh! how the winds rushed wailing through the pine
groves! Oh! how the waves broke sobbing on the
shore!
In the drear grey dawn, dim and mysterious as the
twilight of a dream, a woman glided with swift steps
out from the palace portals, down through drowsy
Trachis, down, still down towards the rocky Malian
strand. Alcyone ? oh ! never surely Alcyone the happy
wife, this desolate mourner, with bended head and
despau-ing eyes !
She had wept when Ceyx bade her farewell, but now
there was no tear in her eye as she gathered her robes
around her and went to meet her sorrow.
No sleeper roused for her faint footfall, but as she
passed, the pines upon ffita's friendly mountain were
stirred with pity and murmured among themselves:
" Alas ! he comes no more !" And the river Sperchius,
rushing to the sea, babbled sorrowfully, " He comes no
more !"    And every wave which broke upon the strand
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 131
echoed and re-echoed in its falHng, " He comes no more !"
Alcyone heard, and her desponding heart caught and
repeated like the refrain of a song, " He comes no more,
no more! "
For in those days mortals understood the language of
Nature, with its many different dialects of tree and bird and
flower. Ears not deafened by meaner voices listened
reverently to hers, and in their very love grew to com¬
prehend more of her than we can ever do. Eyes not
blinded by the greed of gold—by hard, practical, un¬
worthy aims—were clear to dive into her treasuries; and
many a pretty conceit, and many a tender secret, did
Nature, the great mother, whisper to men.
And now, oh! sorrowful Queen, avert your eyes, for
you have gained the shore at last, where the treacherous
sea comes fawning to kiss your feet, while the winds
touch soothingly your golden hair. But what is this
dark burden the sea bears upon its heaving breast % A
storm-tossed form, with streaming hair, drifting ever nearer
and nearer—now upborne by the swelling billows, noAv
sinking low into deep wave-furrows. The Queen's wistful
gaze, fixed ever seaward, notes it at once, and a shriek of
anguish breaks from her pale lips.
0 immortals ! whose serene eyes look ever down from
tranquil heights upon human grief and human struggle,
look now, and have pity!    Let that cry reach your ears !
Alcyone stretches   out  yearning  hands  towards  this
precious _7?o<sam coming back to her embrace 
the wave stirs the hair upon the noble broAv, ah! so like
life ! .... It seems to her as if the still white face were
only waiting her welcome to kindle into smiles as in other
happy home-comings, and with a mad loving impulse the
desolate wife casts herself upon the Avaters to clasp her
husband Ah ! the passionless souls  enthroned
upon Olympus are touched at last! One puts forth a
transforming hand, and lo ! in the caress Alcyone and
Ceyx, mortal no more, are changed into Halcyons, and
hover together, once more imited tender lovers, above the
restless waves.    They have done Avith grieAnug noAv.
Alcyone's raiment is a shining plumage of feathers,
more lovely than any royal robe, yes! even in a fairy
tale! Touching and beautiful to see is her care for her
mate, as in age or sickness she upholds his feeble flight:
wonderful too are the songs she sings him, poised lightly
on the summer wave. But pleasantest of all must it be
to watch her and the descendants who bear her name in
132 The Ladies^ Edinburgh, Magazine.
mid-winter days, when they make their nests upon the
waters and brood over their young, for then the repentant
sea, grieving for its victims, calms its restlessness for their
sweet sake ; the winds hold their breath, and sailors sail
fearlessly, for no tempests threaten in the Halcyon days.
■ • * • • •
This is the legend of Alcyone : as true perhaps as most
other fairy tales. One thing I know for certain: All that
is noblest in Alcyone—her love, her tenderness, her faith¬
ful self-devotion—these at least are immortal, and ride for
ever unchanging upon the waves of time.
And even in these far-off days, whenever we mortals
on our way through life reach fair havens where for a time
storms are hushed and every wind is tempered, remem¬
bering Ceyx and his faithful Avife, we turn to one another
and say, rejoicing,
" These are Halcyon Days! " Gratlv.
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
The Maid of Killeena.    By WiLLlAM BLACK.
Edinburgh : Blackwood & Sons.
This is a pleasant book to take up when you wish
to pass an agreeable hour or two. It is not a long-
draAvn-out three-volumed novel, but a group of short
tales, each a pleasant study by itself. In the Maid
of Killeena Mr. Black takes us up to the Western
Islands, where we make the acquaintance of Ailasa
Macdonald, a second "Princess of Thule," and in it we
are regaled with pleasant pictures of wild coast scenery
and the simple manners of the islanders. In the other
tales we hear again of Tita, with whom Ave shared " The
Strange Adventures of a Phaeton " a few summers ago.
From the bleak coast that surrounds Killeena we are
taken to the Black Forest, where we see how Queen Tita
Avon her Avager. Then Ave are told of the legend of the
Billiard Club, in which our old friend Belle, who sang so
sweetly in that long drive from London to Edinburgh of
the " North Countree," plays an important part. " The
Fight for a Wife" is the most amusing and the best
Avritten of these tales; and no one, I am sure, Avill grudge
the time spent in reading this novelette, in Avhich Mr.
Black gives us so much fresh air and beautiful and
varying scenery.
The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine. 133
(Dur  ^asl  Pustcal  ^^asoit.
It is now twelve years ago or more that we passed for
the first time a winter in Edinburgh, fresh from a
German provincial town, and with our minds well stored
with the music given at its winter concerts. Had we
then been asked to give a sketch of the Edinburgh
Musical Season, the task Avould have been far easier than
now, when, on our retiirn to this town, we remark an
extraordinary progress in all matters relating to the
" ideal art which underlies the rest." Some German
friends were here at that earlier time, and it is much to
say that the romantic halo, compiled of Scott's Novels,
Queen Mary's History, and Mendelssohn's Tsles of FingaJ,
tlirough which they had viewed all things Scotch,
suffered no serious diminution through contact with
reality. However, as regards our music, they were
critical, not to say heretical. " You told us this was a
musical country," they used to say reproachfully ; " there
seems to be only untutored melody, never sung in
harmony by the people as with us; and if in chorus,
with only the variations produced by half the voices
being flat. Some of the airs are pretty, but you do not
surely ground an assertion that the nation is musical
on the raw material, the simple national songs found in
many, especially mountainous countries; as the Swiss
' Jodel' songs, or the Tyrolese melodies, or the Muleteer
Songs of Spain, which belong to nations who have done
next to nothing in musical art. Your songs have
certainly brightness of colour and a charmingly
characteristic rhythm, and last and chiefly, capital words
whether tender, humorous, or martial; words that no
doubt have preserved you from the miserable vulgar
trash in vogue among the English populace, who seem
chiefly to enjoy a debased form of comic song; and
yet," these misbelievers would continue, " music has
been cultivated as an art in England as never in Scot¬
land; there is a school of good aiid characteristic English
Church music; and the English Madrigals are as de¬
lightful as original in style, only for some inscrutable
reason the English people no longer sing them."
Any good Scotswomen may supply our indignant
defence of the general superiority of Scotland, and our
strong assertion that  there  was, as we do thoroughly
No. 5.—Mat 1S7S. S
1 34 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
believe, a great deal of genuine, if latent, musical taste
in the country; and the end used often to'be that the
Germans would remark mischievously, that as music in
its highest development, the Orchestral Symphony, was
apparently not to be heard in Edinburgh, no one could
say Avhether we had strong musical susceptibilities or not,
" pure music " being to us an unknown art. And when
we thought of. the twenty winter orchestral concerts,
the daily band, the Gesangvereins, and cheap available
opera at the above-mentioned German city, we had a
suspicion that they were not quite wrong.
In those days we had here in Edinburgh, for about a
month, a very fair opera company, the singers repeating
some of their songs in the Music Hall, chiefly for the
benefit of those who thought it wrong to listen to them
in the theatre. The Choral Union, or some such society,
gave occasionally an oratorio; Mr. Halle had begun his
charming pianoforte recitals to small audiences in the
now extinct Hopetoun Rooms; there wa& sometimes a
very creditable chamber concert, and some very good,
and a good deal of very indiflerent, solo and part singing
in private houses, which we only allude to as showing
that then as noAv in our society there was a good deal
of iuteresi shown in music. There was also the " Vocal
Association," a too small but otherwise good amateur
choi'al society. Concerts of " Scotch songs" were of
course not wanting, and we think this is a fair summary
of our musical season at that time; we can recall no
orchestral concerts, certainly an adequate orchestra ■vvvas
a thing unheard. What a change we have now to record!
We have had this year about a dozen orchestral concerts,
an advance which speaks for itself; Mr. Halle and Herr
von Biilow have given the one three, the other two crowded
recitals; the Professor of Music has given fortnight]}^
organ recitals ; there have been three or four so-called
" Opera concerts," several oratorios, about ten operas
with stars, and a few " chamber concerts." Here is,
comparatively speaking, quite a feast of music; let
us go a little into details about the bills of fare and
the guests.
To begin with the highest music. A wandering
orchestra, chiefly engaged in London, has given in Edin¬
burgh, conjointly with Glasgow and other towns, a series
of winter concerts; our share being eight, of which two
were choral—namely, the ever-fresh and too seldom heard
Tlie Ladies' EJlnbmgh Magazine. 135
"Seasons" of Haydn, and Benedict's picturesque if not
solemn or dignified oratorio of " St. Peter." Of the latter
we think it may be said that the secular music, such as
the charming fisherman's chorus and storm ou the lake,
is more successful than the sacred parts. The other six
nights we had genuine orchestral concerts, generally
aided by one singer; the programmes were excellent,
and once we had an opportunity of seeing Herr von
Biiiow as conductor, a post in which he is considered to
excel, and also of hearing him in a Concerto, a never-to-be-
forgotten treat. This concert was the best of the series, for
it may be said that although the orchestra included many
excellent players, it was numerically thin, and sometimes
a little wanting in unity and vigour. The performance
of the different numbers was seldom perhaps beyond
criticism, if not sometimes faulty. It was, however,
a great treat to hear so much well-selected music, even
if the rendering were not always perfect.
Quite otherwise was it with the three concerts of the
(Reid) Festival, conducted by ]\lr. Halle, when the
fulness and roundness of tone produced by an adequate
number of performers, and the perfection of the ensemble
brought about by a sufficient number of performances,
whether in rehearsal or not. causing the whole splendid
body of sound to move like the keys of a piano under
the complete control of a single intelligence, Avere
perhaps all the more deliciously satisfying from contrast
with less first-rate renderings. The light and shade,
the exquisite pianissimos, the fine readings of the music,
made these concerts, for those who care for pure music,
a full and unalloyed delight. The programmes, too, full
of good things new and old, were as satisfactory as the
rest. It will be long ere we can forget the playing of
Beethoven's Second Symphony, and the " Athalie"
Overture at the Reid Concert, and the way the orchestra
acquitted itself in Schubert's tender Symphony, or the
splendour of the wind instruments in the Riemi Over¬
ture. Madame Norman Neruda lent her assistance to
these charming concerts, also appearing at Mr. Halle's
Recitals. These, in their own line, were thoroughly
good, perhaps more enjoyed than the orchestra by those
who from circumstances confine themselves almost
entirely to the study of pianoforte music; and besides that
ever-bright and constant star, we had this year the meteor¬
like effulgence of Herr Hans Von Biilow darting across our
13G The Ladies Eilinhw^gli Magazine.
horizon; or, in ordinary language, three performances by
a pianist with exceptional genius and a bent towards
the most modern school of music, who, by the enthusiasm
■which possesses hira, has a tendency to carry his hearers
off with him in a whirl of sympathetic emotion. If
Halle is a faultless guide and sound musician, Von
Bulow is a magician, wild, original, and wayward. An
imitator of the latter might probably land in eccentricity
without genius. But Ave are tired of the comparisons
between these two great performers which have been so
rife of late; both are consummate artists, and to be
included among the first pianists of the age ; would only
that we could hear them both weekly give their diftereut
readings of the same music !
If Herr von Billow had here probably the coldest
audiences he ever met with, it must have been con¬
solatory for him to have found them among the most
crowded; and at his last recital his reception was less
chilling, though it did not depart far from the traditional
Edinburgh immobility. We fear this well-known char¬
acteristic is not here entirely due to critical acumen, for
it is often the least artistic number of a programme which
most rouses the applauding part of the audience ; but
partly proceeds from that undemonstrative national
character which makes it difficult to train a lowland
Scottish child to say " Thank you," and partly from real
slowness of musical perception. However, we generally
pay to music here the '• great homage of silence; " and
as it is most cultivated by the ladies, perhaps the applause
is no fair criterion of the appreciation of our audiences.
On another point we think our musical critics are
hard upon us, in blaming as they do that rush to the
doors of the Music Hall before the end of a concert, which,
to on-lookers and would-be listeners, no doubt, seems
most ill-bred and selfish. But the hall itself, and the
awkward arrangements connected with it, is, after all,
the great cause of this : many less pretty halls there
may be, many far worse for souikI, but a more thoroughly
uncomfortable one for the audience it would be hard to
find in a great city. The so-called " Reserved seats,"
where one's chance is taken among thirteen numbers, are
mere upright, hard, divided benches ; and should the room
be full, they are so jammed together that it is fortunate
if the bench in front does not cut against the knees of
the people in the row behind ; while the ventilation is so
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 137
imperfect, that no wonder if, at the end of a long full
concert, the one idea of every man, woman, and child
present, is to escape down the staircase to air and freedom
of limb, while five minutes' start upstairs gives a quarter
of an hour's advantage by escaping the jam at the doors.
But, allowing for all drawbacks, our audiences are
growiug more appreciative; musical culture is much
more diffused, even among men, than formerly. "Wit¬
ness the good work performed by the "Sacred Har¬
monic Society" and the "Amateur Orchestral Societ}^,"
and the evident interest which University students
take in music, by no means of the most obvious kind,
some of it, of the highest artistic character, performed
by the Professor of Music at his organ recitals. These
given once a fortnight on an organ of rare beauty and
power, especially in the sweetness of its softer stops
and the richness and depth of its bass, have done much
to familiarise the students, to whom they are open, aud
the other invited hearers, with the best music. As so
many of the audience consist of young men at the im¬
pressionable age, it is difficult to over-estimate their power
in waking up a knowledge of and taste for really fine
music among those of the hearers who have natural gifts,
which in former days would probably have remained
uncultivated. As it is, the University Amateur Society has
just given us quite one of the most enjoyable concerts
of the season, the students sustaining the choral parts
with great spirit and good taste, an excellent orchestra,
remarkably well conducted by Professor Oakeley, giving
us specimens from the three greatest orchestral writers,
and the whole concert having a kind of appropriate
youthful gaiety and dash.
The so-called " Opera Concerts," consisting generally
of hackneyed songs taken out of operas, deprived of their
dramatic surroundings and orchestral accompaniments,
we think please rather less than formerly—a sign of
growing taste, partly due, no doubt, to the spirited
protests which have here, in the cause of Art, been
freqiiently made against them. They have the one
advantage of allowing singers to display their voices
with the least possible trouble to themselves, and at
the least possible expense to the concert-giver, for almost
the same programme is generally repeated at all the
provincial music halls where they appear, and the so-
called " conductor " accompanies on a piano.    When we
138 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
remember what a number of admirable songs, written
for the concert-room by the first masters, are neglected
by those excellent singers, who give us merely disjointed
operatic fragments, or an occasional ballad, apt to be of very
poor quality, we confess that such entertainments become
not only dull but tantalising. It is different at the Opera,
Avhere we have opportunities of hearing solo-singers of
such excellence as to make us overlook, it must be owned,
the very low standard, thought good enough for us,
attained by orchestra, chorus, and scenic arrangements.
Indeed, we can enjoy .the performances of solo-singers more
thoroughly in a small house, where every note and
gesture tells, than in a vast space like Covent Garden
Theatre. We certainly have seldom any novelty given
us, and the last one, the " Talismano," cannot be counted
as a success. No wonder the British pviblic is anxious
for the new sensation of a " Wagner " Opera.
The position of this master has been so much discussed
here of late, that we venture, with much diffidence, as
writing of a question on which there is division in some
sections of the musical world, to make a few observations,
the results of our own experience. People who are not
inclined to allow the extraordinary claims of his great
admirers, who call him the Weber of the age for instance
—we have, indeed, heard him mentioned in the same
breath with a far greater name—should not, therefore, be
characterised as " not liking Wagner." There is so much
we do like in his music. For instance, the first time of
hearing the " Tannhiiusor Overture," we were carried
away by it. Afterwards, as with the " Overture to
Guiilaume Tell," its charms certainly diminished, perhaps
from the mind being stimulated by imitations of natural
sounds, or other not legitimate means, which delight more at
first hearing than on repetition. Doubtless Wagner wields
that mighty instrument, the modern orchestra, with great
skill, and gives us lovely snatches of melody. All allow
that he is a very clever man, though the self-satisfaction
which mars his writing about his own music makes one
suspect that it is talent rather than genius that he pos¬
sesses ; or if the latter, that it finds its vocation in poetry
rather than in music. But before he can be ranked among
the chief musicians, let him produce a symphony, or some
other sustained musical work in which the music does not
lean upon the drama. At present, as his admirers also say,
we can only really hear him in opera.    But we went to a
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 139
splendid opera-house in Munich, where everything is done
to enhance effect and promote illusion. Wonderful scenery,
with the costly effects of a modern pantomime, crowds of
well-trained actors on the stage, real horses probably, or
real swans—everything real, or, as they say technically,
practicable, that can be ; exquisite dresses, first-rate
ballet; and like a serving-maid, assisting all this, music,
which cannot be accused of thrusting itself into promi¬
nence, or in any way existiiif^ for itself—music quite
subordinate, often vague, and often dull.
The followers of Wagner tell us nothing can be more
unnatural than people in an opera breaking into a trio or
quartette in the midst of an anxious situation : granted,
but the musical drama is and must be mixed art, which
permits neither art to attain its highest development.
Wagner does not get rid of the absurdity, for in a des¬
perate situation people do not even sing recitative to
a full orchestra; on the contrary, we think that by
subordinating the music he weakens it, so that it cannot
wing us across the non-natural conditions by its own
force. Take, let us say, the opening Drinking Chorus of
Robert Le Viable; wdthout scenery, words, and singers, it is
still on the piano highly suggestive of a warlike carousal.
It is significant that the words are, as far as we have
seen, printed with the extracts made from Wagner's
operas for the piano, and very necessary they seem
generally, to show even his admirers what they are
to see in the music. In fact, while other musicians lean
more on the music in opera, Wagner leans more on
drama and scenic effect. This may have its advantages,
and be a most interesting variety of opera, but we con¬
fess we do not see in it the elements of a great discovery
or a great revolution. AVe believe that the highest music
can never be equally linked to the drama, far less subor¬
dinate to it; it is and ought to be too absorbing; it
soars on its own path too high to be fettered by any
necessities or laws other than its own, which it is not
profane to call divine. Again, the noblest dramatic art
needs no aid from music ; would the quarrel between
l^rutus and Cassius gain by Wagner's setting it to the
orchestra ? Also the noblest painting can never be
scene-painting. After all, suppose this stupendous
modern drama of all the arts to be achieved by means
of enormous outlay and trouble (no cheap joy for the
million   this),  does   it  not  appeal  more  to  the   lower
140 TJie Ladles' EdinlmrgJi Magazine.
faculties than the pure arts do % Is there not something
of the painted statue, of the wax-Avork about it—some¬
thing like giving Beethoven's " Pastoral Symphony"
with scenic illustrations, which has absolutely been
attempted, leaving as little as possible to the imagina¬
tion, and ending by cloying it, as too well-made toys do
the children, who often prefer something suggestive,
which excites rather than satiates the fancy ? It must
be conceded, however, that Wagner's operas always
charm more or less from their poetry and beautiful
orchestration; and we hear with consternation that
"Lohingrin" is to be disguised in the conventional Italian
garb in London this year. A translation, especially into
Italian, can never render justly its mystical German
charm. However, as the author has permitted it in Italy,
perhaps he will also suffer it here.
But we must hurry from this long digression to a close;
it Avill, Ave hope, be excused on the plea that it is difficult
now to speak about the music anyAvhere without some
allusion to Wagner.
Space will not permit us to tell of the pleasant
chamber concerts, usually assisted by the Dreschler-
Hamilton family (for Ave have already been croAvded
out of the April number of this select Magazine, and our
words must be few enough to suit May), nor, indeed, Avill
time, as some of these concerts are, as Ave Avrite, yet to
come. Otherwise our musical season may be considered
as over, and Ave think we may congratulate ourselves, in
spite of some draAvbacks Avhich it is only honest to notice,
on its having been the most brilliant and satisfactory
ever enjoyed by Edinburgh. " OuR Note-Book."
%  gtgltlanri   ^}?ritt0.
On gleaming loch and homestead grey
The mighty hills look down ;
Stern is their aspect, and their peaks
In sombre outline frown.
No blade of grass as yet has sprung,
The sheep may crop in vain;
Each heathery broAV, so dark and dead,
Might never flush again.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 141
Those rocky ribs of granite grey,
How scarred and seamed their face.
Where winter tempests sweep, and streams
Dash down at headlong pace !
O lonely Bens, so old and hoar,
Go veil your brows in gloom.
For broodii:g mists and warring winds
Are yours by ancient doom.
What share is yours in all the stir
Of wakening life and power,
The sweet new life that thrills the earth
Now in spring's choicest hour ?
For, lo! what wealth of bud and leaf
Hath burst from every tree ;
The larches lead the joyous dance,
With birches waving free I
The plane, a leafy mass of shade,
Dreams of the summer heat;
The cherry blossoms fall, alas !
Too swiftly at our feet.
How gay the beeches' tender green,
And bronze the oak-leaf's hue !
In masses bright, the golden gorse
Lends richness to the view.
Plaintive and sweet from woodland boughs,
I hear the cuckoo's note.
Or brooding now o'er glimmering seas,
Its echoes seem to float.
Yon pearly sky of clearest blue
Looks down upon the lake.
Which straightway dimples into smiles
As dancing ripples break.
Sleeping and waking—death and life,
A contrast old as Time;
Yet ever new, and welcome still
As in Earth's vernal prime.
Then hail the genial influence
That steals through heart and brain ;
That sings of youth, and hope, and love.
Till we too join the strain ! Enna.
Ko. 6.—Mav 1875. T
142 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
cDbc   gragon   of tlje   llortb.
CHAPTER     Y.
'' There now to him who sails
Under the shore, a few white villages,
Scattered above, below, some in the clouds,
And glittering through their lemon groves, announce
The region of Amalfi ;   then, half fallen,
A lonely watch tower on the precipice,
Their ancient land-mark, comes."—Roger's Italy.
High on the hill-top were the great castle and the little
township of Asile, where the Lady Valeria now lived,
and watched day by day the dangers that beset her.
She Avas heiress of great lands, but powerless to help
herself; and her vassals, headed bv the old Seneschal.
Fazio di Forli, only cared that she should ally herself
with one strong enough to protect them from Greek,
Saracen, or Norse plunderers. Swend the Viking had
tracked her out, and might, unless, as her people wished,
she yielded peaceably to marriage with him, besiege
and plunder the castle. Pandulf, the Lord of Capua,
dared not protect her if he woiild; and also he and his
brother Ateuolf, Abbot of Monte Cassino, were known
as treacherous even beyond the wont of the Greeks.
Her wealth and her beauty were all dangers the more
to her; and so the little lady, surrounded by her maidens,
gazed with a heavy heart on the deep-blue sea below
where the Dragon ship glittered, with many a sparkle
reflected from flashing steel or burnished gold. Almost
she wished that she had never been taken from the
quiet convent in the cathedral city (where she had
lived since, many years ago, the Saracens had taken
the castle and killed her father), and reinstated in
her rights by the Normans. Four years ago, a few
of them, not more than forty war,riors, had landed
on these shores. They were Christian Normans from
Valland, and were returning from a pilgrimage to
Jerusalem. So fearless were they, and withal so
powerful, that men wondered if perhaps the warrior
angels inspired and led them. Thousands of Saracens
were at that time on the coast, demanding as usual
great treasure from the inhabitants as ransom for their
lives. The Castle of Asile was then one of their prin¬
cipal  strongholds;   below it  they  were  wont  to land,
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 143
there the leaders lodged, and the country all round
swarmed with the turbaued warriors. But the forty
Northmen from France cried shame on the trembling
inhabitants; they caused the men of the cathedral city
to arm, and led them themselves to victory: these forty
had cleared the coast, and retaken the castle, and driven
the Saracen army with great slaughter into the sea;
and then, refusing all reward for their combats in the
cause of Christendom, they had sailed back to Normandy.
But more Normans had been invited by the inhabitants
to protect them from the fury of the Saracens and the
bad government of the Greeks, and several had come,
Osmund and his brothers, Rainulf and others ; and though
in the previous year they and their ally Drogo had been
overpowered by the great army of the Byzantine Emperor,
and Drogo had lately been betrayed by the treacherous
Abbot of Monte Cassino, and executed, yet the rumour
had arisen that again the Normans were coming in force,
and, aided by the army of Henry the Latin Emperor,
would give order and peace to the distracted land.
The old seneschal, Fazio di Forli, stood by his lady, all
in black velvet and gold chains, but pacing uneasily, and
twisting his hands, as he said, '■ If I might but say your
ladyship would marry the Norseman, willingly would I
go on board."
" Say nothing," said Valeria, " except that I will see
the Benedictine monks they have brought to confer with
me this very afternoon. Oh ! if I could but escape and
hide among the ruins, they Avould never find me."
" Lady, lady, that Avould be worst of all; they would
seize the castle, and us, and me, and torment me to tell
where you were ! and if, perhaps, I could not! Oh ! holy
St. Agata."
" You should not know, cowards that you all are," and
she flung herself weeping on the cusliions. crying out
that there was neither faith nor manhood left in the
land.
So we thought too, when an hour later old Fazio and
his servants stood on our deck, bowing and cringing to
Swend, and assuring him there "would be no difficulty
about the marriage, if only Swend would be baptised ;
yes, on the very morning of the wedding.
Our ship lay close under the great mountain cliffs that
here dip straight down into the clear sea, which has
wash.ed and fretted away the red rocks at their base into
14-4 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
deep caverns and winding archways, where you could see
the water lapping in a purple shadow, and hear the song
of waves that had wandered far from the hght, and
were feeling round the dim hollows within, once the
abode, as tlic old poets tell, of the witching sirens.
Flowers and wild vines clung to the crevices of the
rocks above, and wherever a little soil could lie, there,
golden in fruit and green in foliage, stood the orange and
citron trees, and their sweet scent was wafted down to
us. A little fishing village was nestled among the rocks
like a cluster of martins' nests ; and on one side, where
the great purple hills receded from the shore, you
could see the white domes and spires of the cathedral
city glittering round the sweep of a wide bay. In the
sleepy noonday glow the Northmen lay about under
the awnings, or lounged over the bulwarks, languid and
silent beyond their wont, save some who swam sportively
about the rocks and caverns. Swend did not rise from
his cushion on the deck as he asked if Valeria had sent
him a token as he expected. No, Fazio had brought him
no token; the illustrissimo knew what ladies were, seeming
averse to marriage, even when they wished it; but her
vassals Avould see the contract fulfilled; where could
they find a nobler lord, a braver protector? "Your excel¬
lency," he whined, as Swend looked fierce, " we are all your
servants; if she sliould run aAvay, we would find and
restore her ; oh ! be not Avroth Avith us."
" You will gain here a fine following of true hearts, as
the cook said of the rats," said Thorstein. " Why,
Swend, I would ratlier be lord of AVestmansei, where
all the people are gulls and rabbits, than live with this
hare-hearted folk ; let us send the monks to hear what
the lady really says." And as Astolfo and I moved to go,
" Say we will take her castle if she will not take me! "
shouted Swend. " But no," added Thorstein as we went
over the side, " as they are coming to blows at Gaeta, we
must not be tangled in a fight with our allies instead of
our foes.    Let us just hear the answer."
So Astolfo and I were soon riding on mules with the
old Fazio up a steep rocky path close by a foaming tor¬
rent, till in about an hour we had reached the gate of a
strong and lordly castle. Passing through various courts
and corridors, we gained a little room with small windows
looking seaward, and there sat the little lady Valeria
on piled-up  cushions of richest  embroidery left by the
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 145
Saracens. She seemed to me an elfisb little creature,
wbose large dark eyes bad a balf-tender, balf-artful look,
wbose every movement was as graceful as a bird; but in
sooth her aspect and talk moved me as little as a bird's
fluttering and twittering. Astolfo seemed quite at his
ease as she bowed and said to him, "Holy father, or
rather," with a little laugh, " Keverend brother, you come
as an envoy from Swend the northern sea-king?"
" Rather, lady," he answered, " from Herser Thorstein,
and I must ask to speak with you alone."
The attendants withdrew, and he continued, '' As I
come from him, you know already that it is not to treat
of your marriage with Swend, but of helping you to
avoid it, that I come to speak."
" I know, I know," and she clasped her little hands
eagerly; " when Thorstein came here, something in his
face made me cling to his knees and implore him to
rescue me and my people from the red Swend. Then he
said. Tell him to bring a priest to treat with you, and to
promise he will take baptism. Thus we shall gain time,
and very likely he may refuse; and, at all events, the
priests will be on your side, and they have much power.
And will you be on my side?" Her black eyes grew soft
as she turned them on Astolfo, who threw himself at her
feet.
" On your side, yes, heart, soul, and sword, and all I
have."
" Keverend brother I" said the lady, starting up.
" No brother, but a novice who will never be a monk,
whose heart and arm are all yours, whether you deign to
glance at him or not. Yes, lady, Thorstein has told me
all, and how Swend has a haughty wife in Norway; and
he bids me tell you to refuse bravely this marriage; at
the very worst he will himself quarrel with Swend in
your defence, though he would be loath to challenge his
kinsman; but he thinks in a few days Swend will care
less for the alliance, as other things are going to happen,
and all will go well. The Neustrian Normans will soon,
he thinks, establish such law along this coast that the
land will have peace beneath their sway."
The lady was, I could see, very timid, but Astolfo
greatly assured her; and bidding her fear nothing, we
took our leave, and were soon speeding together on foot
down the mountain path. Two well-mounted horsemen
hustled past us suddenly at a narrow turn—they were
146 Jlie Ladies JuJinhunjh Maj.
cicuie.
Rainulf and his squire. He saluted us, and turned again
from above. I seem now to see him, the evening sun
shining full on him as he rose out of the shadowy ravine,
glancing on the ripple of his armour and the gay blazon
of his shield, and on his earnest, beautiful face. '• Brother
Damasus," he said, •' tell Thorsteiu I am going to offer
the lady Valeria my help," and turned and rode on.
" MeddHng peacock," said Astolfo, and went on Avith
the endless talk about the fair Valeria, which he had kept
up the whole way, I heeding him as much as I did the
torrent which brawled down alongside. But he roused
me at last by saying, " And what plan can Thorstein
have ? the men love him, and many hate red Swend ;
could we not stir up a tumult and take away Swend's
command? Thorstein could marry the girl his sister—I
see he likes her, the ship would be her dower, and that
madman put out of the Avay."
" Thorstein is too honest for such treachery; Hertha
would never consent, and I," I said, half choked with
wrath, " would fly to Swend and warn him, should you
wish to carry out the plot."
'•My Renzo, why so hot?" he laughed; "a comrade's
chatter is not a plot. Has red Swend won your heart, or
is it the stout-armed yellow-haired Hertha? "
I shut my lips tight to keep back an answer, and felt
the days were gone far away when Astolfo and I were
friends who shared all thoughts ; but he was, as ever, frank
and gay, and talked on merrily till we came down to the
edge of the sea. Here, on a long strip of level sand
between the high rocks and the sea, many of our men
were exercising themselves by throwing spears. Midway
between ship and shore floated Hertha's little skiff, a
purple shadow on the emerald sea; a loose, dark cloak
fell about her, and her braceleted arms gleamed white as
she leant on the oars, and her golden hair seemed to
reflect the glitter of the evening sky. As we appeared
she shot under the shadow of the sliip; Thorstein swung
himself down into the boat, and she rowed him asliore.
After a minute's talk low with Astolfo, he continued
aloud, " Yes, fiither, have a fling with the spears if you
will, only you must get rid of the monk's frock," and he
pulled off Astolfo's silken robe, and there stood the
goodly youth in his jerkin as comely as any around.
'• Thanks, Thorsteiu, for helping in very deed to unfrock
me," he said, " for I am not going back again when this
Tlie Ladleti Eduihurgk MayaziiLe. 147
busmess is over; indeed, I have just been thinking why
should I not woo Valeria for myself—what say you t"
" That you are a brisk man, and a Lombard, so not far
removed from our race; but you must learn to protect a
lady before you wed her, so come to the spears."
" Astolfo," I broke in, '' remember who you are, a poor
Benedictine novice; how can you hope to win a lady with
castles and lands?"
" Who am I ? Lord Astolfo of Borca," he said, with
angry mettle—" a match in nobility for any lady in the
land, for all that I have been washing floors and carrying
wood for a swarm of peasant monks till they have forgot¬
ten it. Dear Renzo," he went on in a softer tone, " be
not vexed; but yoii peasants can never tell how hard that
service is to gentlemen; and I could not please them
either,—it was all rebukes and the discipline; but now,
evlva la gnerra, viva ValeriaT' and he tossed a spear high in
the air and caught it again. Thorstein laughed as he said,
" You must be one of us; but as to work, we say in Nor¬
way, the freeman does with one hand what the thrall does
with two. It is not idleness that makes a free lord, but
being his own master, doing what he thinks right, and
fearing neither foe nor fate." And they went to the spear-
throwing and left me alone feeling I was not one of them.
But then a soft voice sounded near, " Come, Fra Lorenzo,
and let us watch the casting," said Hertha; and the spell
was round me again, and I stood by her in perfect happiness,
seeing what marvels Thorstein could do with the sjiears
that seemed, when cast from his hand, to have a life of
their own like birds, and alight just where he willed it,
while Astolfo proved an apt pupil. Anon Swend came
striding hastily up, and asked what news from Valeria.
And when Astolfo stood forth and said frankly that she
refused to have him, I saw, indeed, it was well he had not
Damasus to deal with. For he flashed into wild fury; he
seized Astolfo by the collar and shook him violently—
" And you dare to bring this message !" he shouted.
" I dare all things in their right places," said Astolfo,
steadily, while Thorstein tore them apart; but he could
not prevent Swend from levelling the spear he carried at
Astolfo, while he shouted, " Then die, thou false mes¬
senger !" Our novice faced him and never blenched—it
saved him, for Swend, lowering the spear, turned next on
Thorstein. "Thou here, as ever, thwarting! this must
have an end."
148 The Tjadle,.s  E luibiiryli Magazine.
"A bad end, kinsman," said Thorstein. "What now?
turning on a monk with a message. If jon must fight,
challenge Rainulf; he has given the protection of our
friends to lady and castle; he is one of the fortj who
saved the land; he is an excellent fighter; he would give
you glory or death."
" Kinsman, ay, you remind me of that, but you may
strain the bond too far; at least, my lads," and Swend
turned to the men, " you shall get plunder in that castle
to-morrow."
" An ill way that with a worse end. as the salmon said
of the net," answered Thorstein, " so we should be counted
pirates by the men we came to aid!"
1 saw, meanwhile, with terror, how Swend still fingered
his spear; his red hair stood up round his purple face, he
looked like a wild mad bull. Eight in front stood Thor¬
stein, not touching him now, but watching, with his hand
slipping towards his sword hilt. All the men gazed
anxiously and silently, and I saw how they feared Swend,
if they did not love him; and in another moment the
storm must have burst, when Syades glided up and whis¬
pered in Swend's ear. He gained his attention, for the
Viking turned slowly away with him, and the danger was
passed for the time.
The men began to talk and laugh again as if nothing
strange had happened, only Astolfo muttered between his
teeth, " If I could but fight him, I would give ten years
of life to fight him." Now the stars were coming out all
over the deep-blue sky, and men began to turn shipwards.
Hertha, Avho walked Avith Thorstein, turned and said,
'• Come with us, Fra Lorenzo;" but he added carelessly,
" Oh, there will be plenty of boats." And so they passed
on together and the others went also, till I found myself
left alone. I was too restless to follow, but kept wandering
up and down in the starlit darkness between the wild
rocks near the cavern and the little fishing village that
lay all asleep half a mile down the coast. A white church
gleamed on a little hillock at the entrance, and I mounted
to it. ^lidnight was past, and the door was locked. Had
the church been open, that might not have happeued which
did happen, for then I sorely longed to kneel at the altar,
and feel round me again the holy presence which nerves
to duty and self-renunciation. But it was shut, and I sat
without in body as in mind among the chill graveyard
crosses thinking of Hertha with a kind of wild possession,
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 149
as if my whole being had but one goal. Hertha—Hertha
to be mine for all time, now and always. But, oh ! good
heavens—what could I do ! If I broke from the cloister,
what was I but a nameless beggar, not even trained to
the arms which might win her, my sea-princess ? And
3'et I felt she liked to have me near her, and her last Avord,
vieni, sang sweetly in my heart. As I thus thought, the
voices of two fishermen moving towards the boats came
up to me. " And why does Fra Lucio stand up there
always grinningunburied among the skulls?" "Because
he was a saint, and the people still like to see him."
" Then would I not be a saint for the night wind to
whistle among my poor dry bones. Nay, and they say
he walks; he is somewhat restless for a saint; perhaps he
seeks now some of the good things he threw away in
Hfe."    •
" Hush, blaspheme not the saints. Holy Virgin! what
is that?—the cowled shadow near the mortuary," and
their voices died into terrified whispers, and their steps
were lost in the distance, while I, the shadow, gazed into
the mortuary near which I stood. Within the grating I
could just discern the glimmer of skulls and bones, and a
dark figure standing upright in a corner. All the joys of
life he had laid down before he had joined that grisly
company. Oh, why ? Why not enjoy life, and love, and
sunshine, and beauty before the dry, desolate end? As I
dreamt on, I was aware of one beside me, and saw it
was Syades the Saracen. " The night is cold," he said;
" autumn draws on apace, and a heavy heart chills even
a young frame. See, I read your heart, and I can cure its
pain, only trust me and follow me."
Now 1 trusted him not, but yet I followed him.
E. J. 0.
(To he continued.)
litcrariT ItTcril tested bir po}jutaritg.
It is said that the Welsh Bards laid down, as a rule,
one thousand years ago, that every composition should be
for the increase of delight, the increase of understanding, or
the increase of goodness. There could hardly be worthier
motives for writing, and it would be well if all authors
would bear them in mind, especially in these later days,
No. 5.—Mat 1875. c
150 The Ladies' EcUnhurgh Magazine.
when of making many books there is no end; and it would
be well also if the world could summarily get rid of works
which flagrantly violate those principles. In the follow¬
ing brief consideration of Avhether an author's popularity
can be taken as affording any proof of his literary
excellence, we shall, 1 think, find the old Welsh prin¬
ciples of composition of some use in forming a judgment.
First of all, what do we mean by popularity ? Speaking
roughly and generally, I suppose we mean a certain appre¬
ciation or recognition of merit called forth by some persons
or things in the minds of the many, felt by the greater
number almost instinctively, and often subject to no rules
or due to any causes which can be assigned with distinct¬
ness by those who feel it. Some kinds of admiration are
valuable because we know that they can only proceed
from a trained eye and intelligence; the excellence which
calls such admiration forth is below the surface, and can¬
not be found except by those who know how to look for
it. This is necessarily the admiration of the few, and is
confined to a limited circle'. But excellence connected
with the hopes and fears, joys and griefs, strength and
weakness of ordinary human nature, appeals to a very
much wider one, and if we find in any writer a power of
touching those chords, and a response true and clear from
many hearts, I think we must acknowledge in him the
hand of a master of his art, and in his power a real proof
of literary excellence. Of course it must not be forgotten
that there are different kinds and degrees of popularity.
There is a baser as well as a nobler side of human nature,
and the response which coines from thence may be just as
genuine of its kind ; but I exclude it from our definition
of popularity, for I believe that in the long-run it will be
overpowered by the silent, gentle, gradual victory of
things really pure, true, lovely, and of good report. There
is one test which will generally, I think, distinguish true
and deserved popularity from that which is false; namely,
lastingness, if we may coin such a Avord. The test can¬
not of course be applied to living and modern writers, but
we may certainly believe, in their case, that the apprecia¬
tion which is wide and general in their own generation
for what they have done towards the increase of delight,
of knowledge, or of goodness, will be endorsed by those
who come after. There are many instances in the past of
this tribute of appreciation being granted by a writer's
immediate contemporaries, withdrawn, more often through
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 151
neglect than by dehberate judgment, by the generation just
after, and then being lavished once more on the man and
his works centuries after the busy hand and brain have
ceased their labour. Shall we say that his popularity has
failed to stand the test—that his excellence was over¬
rated? Not so, surely. Have we not rather an additional
proof that the approval of the many testified to his real
literary excellence'? Passing clouds obscured it for a time,
manners changed, modes and subjects of thought took a
different turn, a host of noisier and nearer claimants for
attention arose; but there was that in his writings which
finds an echo in many hearts ; they are read once more,
praised once more, and he is recognised again as " one of
those rare souls whose thoughts enrich the life-blood of
the world." There is perhaps hardly a great writer in the
Avorld of literature whose glory has not thus resembled
the moon among the drifting clouds; she is steadfast
though she seems to waver, and so is his merit unchanged
though public opinion may fluctuate concerning it, or pass
him by for a time unnoticed; and the recollection that
such partial eclipses are not unci)mmon, might often con¬
sole the risen generation for the disregard with which it
sometimes sees the favourites of its own youth treated by
the rising one.
Let us glance hastily at a few works Avhich have
earned undying fame, and I think Ave shall see that it is
closely connected with Avhat the writers did for the
increase of delight, understanding, and goodness. Of
Shakespeare, whose name will at once occur to every one
as having fulfilled all the old AVelsh conditions, and
interwoven himself, his thoughts, his very words in the
minds of his countrymen, who oftentimes talk Shake¬
speare without knowing it, of him we will only say that
he is an instance of appreciation but partially enjoyed in
life—so partially that the man and all his surroundings
have almost passed beyond the ken of those later genera¬
tions which have done such ample justice to the imperish¬
able works of his genius. A master's hand has sketched
the contrast for us in that brief scene in Kenilworth at
the Privy Council Chamber door:—" The player bowed,
and the earl nodded and passed on—so tliat age would
have told the tale : in ours, perhaps, we might say the
immortal had done homage to the mortal."
That great novelist himself shall be our next instance
of true popularity extending far and wide.    There can
152 TJie LadieH Edinburgh Magazine.
be no doubt about the estimation in which his own
generation held the works which for years excited the
wonder, admiration, and curiosity of every class of society,
which are known wherever the English tongue is spoken ;
yes, and in foreign lands as well; which have increased
dehght, knowledge, and goodness for every reader, old
or young, prince or peasant, and not a line in which
would cause the great author one moment's self-reproach
as he lay awaiting death. He made the dead past live
again, and many a one might say of his tales, as the
great Duke of Marlborough is reported to have done of
Shakespeare's chronicle plays, " They are all the history
I ever knew." How happily and neatly have two worthy
comrades in the rolls of literary fame touched off the
spell which the mighty enchanter cast over the most
unlikely minds, where in the Ayrshire Legatees the
honest minister of Garnock (who would as soon have
kissed the Pope's toe as touched a '• novelle") beguiles
the tedium of the steam-boat journey from Greenock to
Glasgow with the fascinating pages of a History of the
Jacobite Troubles, "aneut the hand that an English gentle¬
man of the name of Waverley hadin it, and finds it 'wonder¬
ful inter-esring.'" And again, where, in Miss Ferrier's
Inheritance, Uncle Adam, of rugged exterior and tender
heart, constant to the romance of his youth, finds refuge
from the uncongenial society of Rossville Castle in the com¬
pany of Dandy Dinmont and Meg Merilees, and would
burn the book if the scoundrel Glossin did not meet with
his due reward.
Sir Walter's popularity has suffered some eclipse within
the last few years; a younger rival has for the time
dethroned him, and enjoys at present a larger amount of
enthusiastic and not always discriminating praise. But
thoxigh the rising generation does not know its Scott as
well as it knows its Dickens, time will re-establish the one
in his rightful place without detracting from 1;he just esti¬
mation in which the other is held. Charles Dickens is de¬
servedly a popular writer, and in spite of faults and weak¬
nesses, his works have contributed very largely indeed to
innocent pleasure, to the opening of men's eyes to the
existence of many social abuses, and, best of all, to that
sense of brotherhood between high and low, the want of
which would make society fall to pieces. Our next
illustrations of the testimony borne to literary excellence
by the appreciation of the many shall be draAvn from a
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. .153
graver class of works. Fourteen centuries ago, one of the
greatest souls that ever lived was struggling through
long years from darkness to light, and has left behind
liim the record of his spiritual experience. Why have the
Confessions of St. Augustine such a ftiscination and value to
this day? Why, but because all humanity re-echoes
consciously or unconsciously tlie cry Avhich he has put
into words, "Thou bast made us for Thyself, and our
hearts find rest in nothing out of Thee;" and that
wonderful revelation of the great mind which he has laid
bare, has been a guiding light, a helping hand to many
other souls tempest-tost on the waves of this trouble¬
some world, teaching them how they may " rise on
stepping-stones of their dead selves to higher things."
There is another book stamped for all time with the
appreciation of thousands who have learnt from its gentle
teaching the secret of inward peace. It may or may not
be the work of its reputed author — the name of the
writer may have passed into utter oblivion ; but his voice,
whether it be that of Thomas a Kempis or of another, is
" the direct communication of a human soul's belief and
experience out of the far-off middle ages." There is, I
think, no passage more touching, more true, or powerful in
all George Eliot's marvellous writings than that from which
I have just quoted, describing the strange chance which
brought the stormy, passionate, hungering soul of poor
Maggie TuUiver into contact with the Imitation of
Christ. You will forgive me for recalling the very Avords
to your memory.
" She took up the little old clumsy book with some
curiosity ; it had the corners turned down in many places,
and some hand, now for ever quiet, had made at certain
passages strong pen-and-ink marks long since browned by
time. Maggie turned from leaf to leaf, and read where
the quiet hand pointed." To her as to many others it
came as an unquestioned message, and, continues our
great novelist, " I suppose that is the reason why the
small old-fashioned book, for which you need only pay six¬
pence at a book-stall, works miracles to this day, turning
bitter waters into sweetness; while expensive sermons
and treatises, newly issued, leave all things as they were
before. It was written down by a hand that waited for
the heart's prompting; it is the chronicle of a solitary
hidden anguish, struggle, trust, and triumph not written
on velvet cushions to teach endurance to those who are
154 Tlie Ladies' JEdinburgh Magazine.
treading with bleeding feet on the stones. And so it
remains to all time a lasting record of human needs and
human consolations ; the voice of a brother who ages ago
felt and suffered and renounced, in the cloister perhaps,
with serge gown and tonsured head, with much chanting
and long fasts, and with a fashion of speech different from
ours, but under the same silent far-off heavens, and with
the same passionate desires, the same stirrings, the same
failures, the same weariness."—(Mill on the Floss, p. 266.)
To the last example I shall give, the word popularity
applies with perhaps greater propriety than to either of
the two preceding, for it has earned the love of the poor and
ignorant—of those whom we call the masses—to a greater
degree than any other book that ever was written, probably.
It is more than 200 years since one of themselves, a man of
the people, " walked through the wilderness of this world,
and lighted on a certain place where was a den, and laid him
down in that place to sleep, and as he slept he dreamed a
dream." The truth embodied in the story of that dream, told
in quaint, picturesque, vigorous language, has indeed " en¬
tered in at lowly doors," and goodness, knoAvledge, and do-
light owe much of their increase among the humble and the
ignorant to John Bunyan'simmortal parable. It has its faults,
but we need not stop to criticise them ; in spite of them
all it has fascinated childhood and age ever since it was
given to the world, and has been a key to the under¬
standing by the lowly and uneducated of a divine book
and a yet diviner life, of which it is written in words
applicable to the Pilgrim s Progress itself,
" That he may read who binds the sheaf,
Or builds the house, or digs the grave,
And those wild eyes that watch the wave
In roarings round the coral reef."—In Memoriam.
One word more and I have done. If popularity or recog¬
nition of merit is really a proof of true excellence in liter¬
ature, some may be disposed to ask Avhether it should
be consciously striven after. Certainly not; and it is
through doing so that many have failed to earn undying
honour. The author should labour, like every one else,
with his might, and even if earthly fame is denied him, or
if he does no more than serve his own generation, the
evening is coming, and then—" Alles lobt der Meister."
Irgene.
The Ladies' Eclinhurgh Magazine. 155
g r c it m %.
What are they, that come to us at dead of night,
When o'er our wearied eyes sleep's soothing veil is drawn?
What are they, that flood our darkened sense with light?
Dreams, Heaven-sent dreams!
Have we through the dreary day been sad and Avorn ?
Have we felt life's burden all too great to bear?
They wait to comfort us, on wings of peace upborne,
Dreams, Heaven-sent dreams!
What are they, that come to us when on the deep ?
Far parted from our loved ones, ne'er to meet again.
What  mingle, softly,   haunting tones with waves that
sweep ?
Dreams, Heaven-sent dreams!
Around us, only the lone sea that hath no shore.
Above us, only the cold stars that guide our way.
Yet, instant, to our home they bear us back once more.
Dreams, Heaven-sent dreams!
And what are they, that come to us when life is old ?
When we like sheep have gone astray, yet grieved for sin.
What shadow solemn forth the far-off" sheltering fold ?
Dreams, Heaven-sent dreams!
They come to us in youth, our soaring hopes to crown,
They come to us in age, to give back Avhat is lost.
They come to us at death, our trembling fears to drown,
Dreams, Heaven-sent dreams!
Melensa.
tolcrburp of  (Kltcslcr.
CHAPTER   IV.
" Pray come here, Randall, and help me to tie up this
geranium, it is drooping so sadly."
Randall walked across the room to where his sister, in
a light summer dress, stood in the window tending some
hot-house plants. It was the morning after the expedi¬
tion to Chester, and Randall, after a late breakfast, had
156 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
just entered his mother's parlour. Here he found not only
his mother and sister, but Squire Trevor, who had come
thus early to call.
" Do you think," said Malvina in a low voice to her
brother while he was helping her—■' do you think it woiild
be possible to train some white jasmine outside this win¬
dow?    I should like it so much."
" -You girls are all so fond of white things," said Ran¬
dall ; " why not rather have a passion-flower, or something
with meaning in it, instead of that unpleasantly scented
jasmine? But, Malvina, you are not crying? Oh dear!
I did not mean to vex you; I will help you to train it;
come, I will do it now."
" Randall," ^^T-d Mrs Holme, " pray come and sit by me
for a little. Squire Trevor has something to say to you;
and you, Malvina, pray be good enough to go and see
that the new rose-trees are properly pruned."
Malvina left the room, while Randall, prepared for some¬
thing trying, seated himself in a resigned manner beside
his mother.
Trevor opened the conversation. " Still in dreamland,
Randall ? In what region of the world do you intend to
wander and lose yourself to-day ? I am glad to see, how¬
ever, that you succeeded in arriving at home."
Randall never had anything to say to Trevor; his ideas,
his courage, almost his identity, seemed to evaporate in
the presence of that individual. So he sat silent, and
allowed his inother to remark, " Randall will learn in
time, I hope, to save his friends anxiety."
" I should like," said Trevor. " to help him to learn that
lesson now. It is for this that I have come this morning.
Trust me, Randall, I would fain be of use to you; and let
me tell you that you can be of great service to me. I
am in want of an amanuensis ; will you undertake the
task?"
Twenty-four hours before, Randall, in spite of timidity,
would have given a decided refusal. But much had hap¬
pened since then; the day in Chester had formed a crisis
in his history. Before, it seemed as if cold precept and
stern example had held him aloof, and awed him into iso¬
lation ; now, some higher spirit had surely come near to
him, and taken him encouragingly by the hand. All last
evening the Avords of Miss Langley had haunted him:
" There are some even younger than you, who are already
fighting the battle manfully;" and these words, together
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 157
with many of those he had heard in the music-room of the
Cathedral, and which, he felt sure, had been better under¬
stood by him than by those for whom they were intended,
had set themselves to a kind of melody, which had kept
time with the motion of the stage-coach, melting into
tenderness with the glow of the sunset, and gaining a
hallowed intensity from the light of the moon and stars.
At the close he had added this refrain, which now re¬
echoed through his whole being, leading captive both will
and affections: " The first task that offers itself to me, I
will accept and perform." And now this refrain had
grown into a vow, so solemn and uncompromising, that it
left no room for choice or hesitation.
" Y es. I will undertake it," said Randall, promptly, and
with such firmness and gravity that ]\Irs Holme involun¬
tarily turned her head and looked at him keenly. He saw
a slight raising of both eyebrows and shoulders, and a
tremulous movement of the eyelids, as if they were trying
vainly to keep guard over the actions of her son. All this
seemed to say, " How can you, without consulting me,
agree at once to go with a man of whom you have heard
me say that his influence is doubtful?" Mrs Holme might
succeed in expressing all this to her son by a momentary
look; it Avas but momentary, however, and quickly check¬
ing all signs of perturbation, she turned to Trevor and
said—
"Mr Trevor, you have already explained to me how
you think the work will benefit both yourself and Randall,
by assisting the one and stimulating the other; but," and
here the widow smiled with her lips, " will you allow me,
as Randall's mother, to ask you, of what nature are the
manuscripts Avhich it will be his task to write out for
you?"
" My dear madam," said Trevor, in a low, confidential
tone, " let me suppose for a moment that you distrust me
as an intellectual guide for your son. On the other hand,
you have perfect reliance on his rectitude and indepen¬
dence of mind; your admirable training, his own cha¬
racter, warrant such a feeling on your part. The manu¬
scripts, I will confide to you, which I intend, with his help,
to prepare, are destined to exercise their full influence only
over the extremely young and the uneducated. Now,
your son is to be classed among neither of these; he can¬
not, therefore, be subject to the influence of the writings
in question."
No. «.—Mat 1875. X
158 The Ladies  Edinburgh Magazine.
The plausible way in which Trevor thus substituted
flattery for satisfactory explanation, led Mrs. Holme to
overlook the hitch in his reasoning. The possibility of
a smaller degree of influence had not been contemplated ;
yet such a possibility left room for much that might be
hurtful. The adroit way in which Trevor had praised
her for her training of Randall, induced her, for the
time at least, to look upon her son as fully equipped
with all the weapons of truth, and with no vulnerable
part where the shaft of error might pierce to harm him.
If physical invulnerability has never yet existed but in
the pages of legendary lore, where is its mental coun¬
terpart to be found'? Mrs. Holme, as we have previously
observed, arrived at her conclusions quickly, generally
taking the short cut of either feeling or prejudice, to
save a long stretch of the road of reason ; on this occasion
it was gratified feeling which supplied lier with an un¬
usually short route to the goal desired by Trevor.
" I understand," she said, " and I feel much flattered
by the confidence you place in my son; I trust he may
fulfil your expectations."
If Randall felt any gratification at all, it was in a much
less degree than his mother; he did not falter, however,
in his purpose. The refrain and the voav were still
dominant in his brain, like some solemn chant that seemed
to express life's noblest aspirations, and to raise him to
a height from which the opinions of Trevor seemed to
him as insignificant as a grain of sand to an eagle soaring
in the air. Should the grain of sand, however, enter the
eagle's eye and disturb its vision, it would acquire a great
and unwished-for significance.
" I am ready to do as you wish," said Randall, in a low
but firm voice. " To-morrow morning, if you choose, I
will begin the work."
Trevor was more than satisfied with Randall's frank
acquiescence, and it was agreed that, during the next
six weeks, Randall should reside at Glanhafon, only spend¬
ing the Sundays at home with his mother and sister, as a
compensation for parting from the latter so soon after her
return from school.
Trevor returned liome well pleased with the result of
his expedition. He should have assistance; his work
would make progress; but was this the chief source of
his gratification ? There was another secret cause, which
he hardly dared name to himself, and the power of which
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 159
he would not consciously acknowledge, for it hinged upon
the question, had Randall been left to spend some weeks
at home in the society of a certain visitor who might
arrive, what would have been the result? l^ut Randall
would be absent, while the circumstance of his being at
Glanhafon wouldform a connectinglinkbetween Glanhafon
and the White House, with all its occupants and visitors,
whoever these might happen to be.
On the following morning, Randall, after a tender
farewell from his sister, and an admonition from his
mother, is driving slowly, with somewhat melancholy
thoughts, up the long winding avenue, where the beech,
lime, and ash mingled their variously tinted leaves over¬
head, and ever and anon bent their branches lovingly
over the little stream that gently laved the bank be¬
neath. The sighing and whispei'ing of the wind through
the trees is accompanied by the soft rushing sound of
the brook and the carol of birds; and while the sun darts
now and then a fitful gleam across the shady path,
Randall has mysterious dreams of a chequered future, full
of uncertainty and agitation, dread and longing, with alittle
gleam of happiness to lighten it here and there. But
there is a steady purpose in his mind, and it is with
compressed lips and a calm, if not cheerful look, that he
nimbly alights, and ascends the stone steps at the door
of the mansion-house of Glanhafon.
The door which is now opened forms the entrance to
a large building in the modern baronial stjde, the massive
front of which, with its turreted gables, almost hides
from view the ancient mansion-house, which modestly
nestles beside it, like a wren beneath the pinion of a swan.
That relic of bygone simplicity, which forms the right
wing of the house, has dwindled down into a mere adjunct;
and yet it is to the larger structure something of what
the soul is to the body; for its largest room, the old
hall, has now become the library, and has been made the
receptacle of all the dearest heirlooms left by former
generations to their descendants. From its walls and
shelves the heart and intellect of the departed speak
plainly. And it seems that Trevor likes to hear these
voices of the past, for he almost lives here, leaving to fade
unused the elegant furnishings of the more modern apart¬
ments. With his taste for the real antique, however,
he combines a love for its imitation in art; and he has
shown it here.
460 T^ie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
All round the room, the walls, to the height of five
feet, are of finely-carved oak, which, at the end opposite
the window, rises to the ceiling, and stands forth in the
form of bookshelves. The remaining walls have the
space between the oak and ceiling hung with tapestry.
Through the broad low window, which runs along the
wall at about six feet from the floor, only the sky and tree-
tops are visible ; but a flood of light falls on the writing-
table and centre of the room, as if to say. Here is abundant
light to work by, with no outer view to distract the
attention. The rafters of the ceiling are supported by
broad beams of carved oak going transversely, and up¬
held at the corners by stone corbels, on which are carved
fleurs de lis, crosses, and stars. The fireplace, which
rises to within two feet of the roof, has its front decorated
with elaborate oak carving, with the Trevor arms blazoned
on oaken shields and banners ; the inner part is of stone.
But here this Flemish fourteenth century work is at an
end ; in the other furnishings of the room, modern com¬
fort has supplanted antique stiffness ; the thick Turkey
carpet and inviting easy-chairs tell of the march of
luxury.
In one of these chairs Trevor is reclining at the moment
of Randall's arrival. With one hand dangling carelessly
over the arm of the chair, he is with the other drawing
back the hair from his forehead. He starts up in his
chair when Randall is shown into the room. "Ah! you
have come just in time ; my ideas were growing too
numerous to remember, and I had no one to commit them
to paper, a task which I dislike performing myself. Can
you begin now % "
" At once," said Randall, and seated himself Avithout
further invitation at the writing-table. Trevor, with
the abstracted air of an inspired prophet, stood upright,
and looked steadily at Randall for nearly a minute,
without thinking of liim in the least. He then began to
walk very rapidly to and fro in the room, with an air
which seemed to say, Something important is coming now.
How any amount of thought, even the smallest, could be
compatible with such rapid bodily movement, was to
Randall a problem he could not solve. After about half-
a-dozen turns through the room, Trevor remained stand¬
ing in the far corner, where the light from the high
window was faintest, and gave forth, in a slow and
sententious   manner,   the   following   words:     " What I
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 161
now wish you to write out f(5r me, consists of thoughts
on a new system of education. These are suggested
chiefly by a German work which I have been perusing;
it was recommended to me by Baron de Rehmar, and is
entitled, Neuere Ausichten iiber die Erziehung; von
August Lobegott Zinnthaler, Professor der Kiinste und
Wissenschaften am Hofe seiner Durchlaucht Christians
des Grossberozogs zu Uiiterthorgau. This Zinnthaler, as
he tells us in the preface to his work, was one morning
smoking quietly in his study, the windows of which
overlook the street, when he saw some children pass by
on their way to school. He threw a few pfennigs
among them, and called out, ' Here, my little Liebchens,
come in, and I will teach you something much better than
what you learn at school.' They came flocking in, and the
Professor chalked upon a black board some rhymes, which
I have, to the best of my ability, rendered into English.
Here are the words :—
' When chaos opened wide its chasm,
Out flew a wondrous protoplasm,
And out of this, and this alone,
All animals and plants have grown ;
Thus whales, potatoes, turnips, bees.
Poppies and tadpoles, men and geese,
The reptile, saurian, toad, and worm,
All sprung from one primordial form.
Thus, when I take my walks abroad.
See pumpkins springing from the sod,
See men and beasts, and creeping things,
Web-footed birds, and birds with wings,
And many creatures great and small,
Living as plant or animal;—
I think, with awe too deep to tell,
Of that strange nucleated cell,
Within primeval fungus hid.
Which was the one primordial form
That held all living things in germ.'
There is much more in the same style, but I shall quote
no more at present. This simple method of Zinnthaler's
delights me, as it delighted the children, who said it over
and over till they knew it by heart; and very soon the
streets of the capital of Oberthorgau re-echoed with these
Darwinian rhymes, if they may be so called.
" What I shall now add, pray be kind enough to write
down.
162 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
"The knowledge which man has about himself has hither¬
to been too psychological; education has begun at the wrong
end. The spiritual has been all in all, while the material
has been disregarded as of inferior importance. And not
content with occupying itself about the soul while resi¬
dent in this state of being, imagination has even dared to
assert definitely what becomes of it when it leaves the
body. Passing over the primitive form of this belief,
which declares that departed spirits haunt the earth, I
come to the Asiatic, Vedic, and Buddhist theories of
emanation and absorption. These culminate with the
Alexandrian Greeks, among whom I am amazed to find
Proclus presuming to tell us the exact mode of the soul's
reabsorption into the divine source. But, returning to
this mortal scene, I find that, taking it alone into consid¬
eration, education has been beginning at the wrong end.
It has been branding itself with a stigma of ingrati¬
tude, contempt, disregard, towards ]\Iatter, the universal
mother of us all, the untiring, indefatigable producer of all
things, whether tangible and mundane, or intangible and
ethereal.
" It is therefore my earnest desire to elaborate a system
of education, beginning at the right end.  I intend to plant
my heel on the neck of imagination, and to hold it writh¬
ing in the dust till the chariot-wheels of Bober fact and
clearly ascertained truth have passed over.    This inten¬
tion bears on the very face of it, that my maxim must be.
Look outwards.    We are all too self-conscious ; we begin
by asking, Who  am P?   when  that is the  question  we
should end with.    I shall restrict the inftmt mind, there¬
fore, to the study of external nature, making the facts of
natural history and science take precedence even of the
history of man.    This may come later, Mdien the import¬
ance of facts has begun to be clearly seen.    Not till the
mind is well advanced shall I suffer poetry to be read,
and even then this must be done with caution.  And here
I enter upon a wide field in my scheme of education.
Devoted to poetry as I am, I cannot but feel solicitude
about the erroneous ideas which even our best poets haye
suffered themselves to entertain with regard to the origin
of man,   and  his  relation  to   other  existences.    I see,
therefore, that emendated editions of onr best classics,
with copious notes, are imperatively called for.    Here,
for instance, is a case in point.    In Handet, Act I., scene
1, when Horatio is asked, ' Who is there ?' he answers,
Tlie Ladles Edinburgh Maga^ine^ 163
'Apiece of him.' Now, by this-answer Horatio errs in
calling his body ' a piece of him',' as if it were possible
for his mind to be separate from it. He ought to have
said, ' Horatio is here present in totality, as a result of
evolution.' For the object I have in view, I should think
an annotated edition, not only of Hamlet, but of Shak-
spere's Tempest, would be eminently useful, specially for
the interest about Caliban. For it would show how Shak-
spere erred in his idea of the half-brute, half-man, by
making Caliban show a highly-developed feeling for nature,
while his other powers were still in the semi-brutal con¬
dition. Yet to perform such a task it would be necessary
to work out from observation and experience the true
idea of a missing link, which we should find to be far
removed from fehakspere's idea (if, indeed, that Avriter
ever contemplated the possibility of such a ligament being
sought for), and still further from Browning's speculative
philosopher in fishes' clothing.
" But let us pause now; I will not weary you to-day.
That you may, however, better understand the subjects
with which I am occupied, so as to be more able to assist me,
I shall advise you to read some of those scientific volumes
which I am procuring in monthly parts, and which, though
in a popular form, contain really all that is necessary for
our purpose."
Randall was not sorry when Trevor thus released him
from further work for that day. Wonder was for the pre¬
sent so strong within him, that doubt had scarcely begun
to assert itself. It Avas now only two o'clock, and he was
his own master till seven. He took his hat and strolled
out. The sun was at its height, and he mechanically
chose a path Avhere shade and solitude combined their
charms. The high beechen hedge gave a bioad enough
shade for one person to walk in; and when it ended, he
found himself in a plantation of young trees. Here a
flight of rustic steps led up to a charming Swiss chalet.
Ascending a stair to a gallery running round the upper
storey of this rustic edifice, he seated himself on a bench,
and began to gaze around him. Trees were on every side,
save in front, where a stretch of grass sloped downwards
to the river Alyn, and formed a pleasant haunt for a herd
of roe-deer. Some white clouds were slowly sailing with
the gentle breeze that rustled the leaves on the trees.
Such a tranquil scene might well have chased away
care from a mind more perturbed than Randall's.    With
164 The Ladies  EdinburglL Magazine.
him it seemed to have power, not only to soothe, but to
stimulate to reflection. Opening a volume he had brought
■with him, he was soon deeply engrossed in its contents ;
and from the deep earnestness of his expression, it was
evidently not a book of an amusing kind. For the next
three weeks at least, almost every day found him again
at the chalet, employed in the same way. Every morning
he wrote for three hours to Trevor's dictation; occasion¬
ally he rode or drove with him in the afternoon, but more
usually he was left to his own devices. What led him to
spend so many quiet hours in reading? Had the spirit of
study at length possessed him, after tarying so long?
Had he some private end in view? Time will show; but,
in the mean time, we do not think that he is working out
the views upheld by Trevor.
It was late one afternoon in July, about three weeks
after Randall had gone to reside at Glanhafon, that he
was sitting as usual on the bench at the chalet, when he
heard a panting sound close at hand, and looking up, saw
his dear Newfoundland dog, come to see him all the way
from the White House. The dog ran up to him, licked
his hand, wagged its tail violently, and made other demon¬
strations of extreme joy at seeing its master. "Ah, Bodo !"
said Randall, "so you have found me out at last;" and
here followed a long affectionate address to the dog, which
we will not repeat, as our readers are probably acquainted,
from their own experience, with the things which are
usually said on these occasions. At the end of this philo-
zoic rhapsody, however, he remarked, "Ah, you are look¬
ing towards the house, Bodo! Is some one there whom
you have brought with you?'' He rose from his seat, and
followed the dog as it bounded along the footpath by
which it had come.
As he comes nearer the mansion-house, whom does
Randall see walking towards it from another direction?
Squire Trevor, with Mrs. Holme on his right hand, and on
his left,—not the patron saint of Chester, but her name¬
sake.
Procla.
(7b be continued.)
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 165
(bht   Srarron   ai i\)t   t^oxih,
C H A P T E K     VI.
" Choose the darkest part o' the grove,
Such as ghosts at noonday love,
Dig a trench and dig it nigh
Where the bones of Laius lie ;
Altars raised of turf or stone,
Will th' infernal powers have none ;
Answer me if this be done !
' 'Tis done.'"—DrydEN.
We turned inland towards the mountains, and as we
moved among the shattered rocks, I foimd myself confid¬
ing all my grief to Syades. Far overhead I could see a
spark of light shining from the watch-tower of Castle
Asile, and anon Syades, pushing aside some bushes, dis¬
covered a built entrance in the steep cliff-side. Here Ave
knocked, and there came a woman to the door, quiet and
well apparelled, not young nor old, but silent and sad.
We entered, and sat in a small yet high room, the roof
being the living rock, and a great fire burning at one end;
over it hung a caldron, and beyond, the low-arched black¬
ness stretched away without bounds.
" And so, poor youth, thou art pining away from fierce
longing to fulfil thy life. Well, thy heart shows thee the
way to walk in, the only goal of happiness for thee.
Walk on bravely, then, and fear nothing: how say the
Northmen %  ' Faint heart never won fair lady.'"
" It is cruel mockery to speak thus to me!" I exclaimed :
but Syades seemed, as he answered, to grow taller and
more commanding. " Listen, boy. Did I not tell you that,
renouncing joy, I had followed wisdom and power only ?
The joy I have relinquished for myself I can give to
others. I can give you all you desire ; 1 know how you
can win wealth, power, and Hertha. I know also how
you may lose them all. I scorn to deceive you in aught;
there must be a compact between us: I shall give you
happiness; you must increase my power. I have cast
your horoscope, and know both the hopes and the dangers.
First, you have taken no binding life-vows."
"No," I said; "even the time of my novitiate has expired."
" Then the first step is to renounce the cloister and vow
obedience to me."
" To you, a Saracen!  I dare not, I cannot."
No. 6.—June 1875.
166 llie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
" Listen, fool. This vow in no way interferes with your
religion, with which I desire not to meddle. Many
Christians have taken it; it more concerns your joining
a society of craftsmen of our Art, who may greatly aid
you, than anything else. You shall be one of a band of
brothers sworn in all things laAvful to help each other;
you shall help me to a lost treasure, indeed my own; and
when these promises are made, I give you at once wealth,
power "
" And Hertha ? "
"And Hertha—but for one obstacle which needs a
further step. The Stars, the IntelHgences round, who
know more than we, all give the same rede. That
obstacle is Herser Thorstein. Not that Hertha loves him,
but that he loves her, with all the strength of his fierce,
uncurbed soul. He will win her or kill her; he is far too
strong for thee, my poor Laurentio, without my aid ; with
it we may subdue him. But for that to come to pass
thou must take a further oath of enmity against Thor¬
stein. Swear neither to forgive nor spare him, and all
is done."
"But," I faltered, "such an oath is not allowed to a
Christian man."
" I thought some monkish scruple might come in the
way," said Syades, contemptuously^ " therefore I told
thee all, not to entrap thy delicate fancies. But if, indeed,
thy Christianity permits this Avild heathen to seize thy
Christian bride, to treat her cruelly when he has her—for
fierce love and indiflPerence never are happy together—it
is not the Christianity of your knights and champions who
swear to destroy the enemies of your faith, not the
Christianity of your offices, where you chaunt — Qui
oderunt te, Domine, oderam, Perfecto odio oderam illos: et
inimici facti siint mihi."
" I will—I will oppose him to the death; but an oath
of enmity—I dare not take it; and he has only been kind
to me, though I hate him. Oh! Heaven forgive me! I
hate him!"
" His kindness would soon go, did he not despise you
too thoroughly to care for your adoration of Hertha.
Credit me, if he thought of you as a rival he would have
you scourged out of the ship. Do you know what a man
of blood he is, outlawed from Norway for manslaughters?
they call his sword Death's-touch, tliey call him Kilhng-
Thorstein.    No, there is but one good use for him in the
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 167
world, which I will now show thee. Vivia," he said,
turning to the woman, "canst thou find nothing further;
is all btill in the Cento Colonne ? "
"All is still," she said. "Methinks the Dragon has
wandered forth, or gone deeper down, for I have thrown
down many a torch, which has gone out before there was
the glimmer of a scale."
" Or it may be the foul vapour rises," he said. " Neycr
heed ; we will look for ourselves, Laurentio, if, indeed,
thou art not too weary, for the way is long, and the fetid
air is dangerous."
Syades, the sti'ange woman, and I walked a long way,
first in underground cavernous passages, then for awhile
in the night air, following some trace the woman only
knew through the darkness, for a heavy fog had blotted
out the stars. At last we came where a faint sky-reflec¬
tion showed the ghmmer of a waste of waters, shallow, as
I judged from the black fringes of sedges that stood out
of them here and there.
" Beware here of the air," said Syades, giving me a little
box of strongly aromatic spice to hold to my nostrils.
Now again we turned underground, carrying torches, one
alight, and descended some steps into a huge black space,
the depth below and the walls around being equally im¬
penetrable to our feeble light. But within the circle of
its raj-s I saw a feAv columns, stately, shapely, and
perfect, telling of endless vistas of them leading away
and away, melting into the darkness. The place was to
me most awful, a still portal to the Infernal regions, like
an unhallowed death, presaging a terriljle aAv.dving. It
seemed not less so when Syades called for more light,
kindled several torches, and fliuig them far, illuminating
for an instant a forest of pillars, and then falling, instan¬
taneously extinguished below.
"Is there water down there?" I asked.
" No," said Vivia, " poison—poisoned air. You would die
like that fire were you to descend the steps further."
" You know," said Syades, " how Castle Asile had long
been held by my people, and how four years ago it Avas
torn from them by these Northmen, of whom Rainulf was
one. May the curse of the Prophet light on him! El
Arish, Avho ruled in Asile, had gathered together great
treasures, and hidden them; so when they slew him, no
man knew where to find them. My art points to this
spot, but they are  guarded by a familiar spirit he had
168 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
evoked, it may be, in the form of a dragon; it may be that
the dragon, who has been seen here, is but a strange acci¬
dent. Certain it is that one sacrifice, one human sacri¬
fice, the spirit must have, before mortal man can touch
the treasure.^ Here, then, lies your way with Thorstein ;
I will aid you to contrive that he should be this sacrifice.
Nothing easier ; it is only to show him how he can win
from Rainulf the honour of killing the dragon, and then
all will go well. If we find the treasure, you are absolved
from your oath to me, for I shall go into far lands for life;
and as for Thorstein, the world will be none the worse for
having a bloody heathen pirate the less in it. I show
your course ; you need not decide now to follow it."
He turned from the fearful place, and soon I breathed
more freely, even in the heavy night air, without the
caverns. " Who would think now how fair a region this
was in the time of the old gods, before the Christians held
the land," said Syades. " See, all this dreary overflow of
the little river yonder has only come because the way of
the water into the great cistern has been blocked up ; so
it settles and stagnates into this foul marsh, and the poi¬
soned air has settled in the cistern below, where the clear
water used once to lie stored for baths and water-supply
for the glorious Romans. It has become, as your prophets
say, an abode of satyrs, an habitation of dragons; yet half
a day's labour witli an axe, and the water would run into
its old channel; the poison would be gone, but the trea¬
sure would be lost for ever. Ah! how the land smiled
when Pallas and Aphrodite were honoured here—wisdom
and beauty, instead of ignorance and foulness! How is it
cursed beneath the sway of your unwashed saints!"
We were climbing as he spoke over rougher, wilder
ground in a rocky gorge, Avhich let little of the faint star¬
light penetrate its depths, till I was aware of a square
doorway with sloping jambs and a narrow lintel, such as
often leads into ancient tombs, exit in the rock. The door
yielded to the touch of Syades, and gave admission to a
fair chamber with columns on either side, and stone seats
running round what might have been called the apse,
before which stood a tripod or altar. All was empty and
silent, shown by a strangely diffused bluish light.    Syades
' Even within the present century it was popularly supposed that such a
treasure existed concealed in a grotto near Xaples, which could only be found
by means of a human sacrifice, and the unpopular old King Ferdinand was
accused of intending to sacrifice a new-born child for this purpose.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 169
pointed to a stone seat near the entrance, and as I sat
down,—" Once more," he said, " qniet thy scruples; wealth
and Hertha are offered to thee; thy religion is left unas-
sailed; art thou willing ? "
"I am," I answered; and Syades said—
"Look then on this talisman; look steadily, and never
cease to wish for her it dimly figures forth."
He put into my hand a gold coin; on it was embossed a
fair head, very like Hertha, and I gazed on and on. I
cannot describe how all my being seemed drawn into one
narrow line, till even that dAvindled, and I only knew of
the face, and that Syades stood by and waved and Avound
his hands, as though Aveaving some Aveb around me. I
knoAv not hoAV long it Avas ere, at a signal, I looked up
Avith dazzled eyes, and saw Hertha herself, as it seemed,
floating in air, yet stooping like an angel out of the dim
blue light, and smiling sweetly on me. And this vision
haunted me through all that folloAved that night.
Then Syades spoke, but his voice sounded far and faint,
" Swear to obey me, as a vassal his lord, as a squire his
knight, as a monk his abbot,—Giuro"
" Giuro" I said, and " E giurato " sounded in deep chorus
all round the room; and I became aAvare, but, as in a
dream, Avith no surprise, that in every seat Avas a black-
robed form, and where the tripod had stood a fire was
burning on the ground.
" Thou hast SAvorn it on Cross and Koran ; is it Avell
sworn ? " said Syades, who now grasped both my hands.
I answered, " Yes," and again the echo came in startling
force from the veiled figures.
And noAv began the strange sei'vitude to Syades the
Saracen, Avhich so marred my life. Where he beckoned,
there I folloAved; Avhat he commanded, that I did: save
with a strong effort, all choice for me seemed gone. When
he fixed his black eyes on me, I read in them his com¬
mands, and he seemed aAvare of my inmost thoughts.
Alas! when I hardly kncAv if he were man or fiend, the
bondage seemed closest, the chain most firmly riveted.
And now he led me forwards toAvards the fire, round Avhich
lay Aveapons, and sqi;ares, and triangles; and I can tell
little more, for some of the oaths Avhich I SAvore one after
another, invoking terrible imprecations on their betrayal,
as they concerned not me, but the Society to Avhich they
admitted me, I can never be absolved from. Sufiice to
say that I learnt to know, and swore to serve, many per-
170 The Ladies'' Edinhuryh Magazine.
sons thus bound together, and in some sort connected
with various crafts, chiefly my own of building. There
came also an oath not to reveal aught of what I had seen
that night of the Dragon's Lair, save and only when per¬
mitted by Syades. And again, at his commaiid, I re¬
nounced the cloister, and he drew off my novice's gown,
and with my own hands I thrust it into that unhallowed
fire, already burning dimly with blood of victims.
Then Syades spoke—" Brethren, is there an enemy for
this neophyte to guard against, to fight against—who
should perish by his hands l "
And the answer came—" Thorstein Sigurdson, his foe
and ours."
" Swear, then." said Syades, " never to spare him by
land or sea; swear to save from him his helpless victim ;
swear not to be reconciled to him, save in word, and to
wait only time and place to destroy him as you would an
evil beast of prey ; and burn this in token of the oath."
And he gave me two sticks bound together in a cross by
a scroll, on which I could trace the words Thorstein
Sigurdson.
I held it in my hand. As I said, I was like a man half
asleep, yet some echo of old days struggled through the
evil dream Avhich oppressed me, and there was silence.
My hand held the cross above the fire, when from very
far away came the faint clang of some convent bell ring¬
ing for Nocturna; Vigilce, and the Cloister—the pure, calm
Cloister—seemed for a moment to close round me, when
Syades suddenly struck my hand so that the cross dropped
into the fire, and the wild voices shouted, '• E giurato I"
" No, no," I said, and strove to clutch the cross, but
caught only yielding scorching flame. A shriek seemed
to rend the roof, the fire blazed high, and as I fell to earth,
wild forms seemed whirhng and blackening round me, and
shapes of horror rose through the gloom, which darkened
as my senses left me, and a long insensibility followed.
When I woke, I at first could recall nothing. I was in
a fair chamber, a high window let in daylight, and I lay
on a soft bed. The walls were painted with bright de¬
vices of genii and dancing girls ; vases of ancient shape
and a marble bath and a shining mirror I could see ; all
was of a luxury I had only before seen in passing glimpses
of rich men's chambers. As I turned, my hand struck a
little bell, the sudden tinkle of which was answered by a
young serving-man, who entered, saying—
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 171
" Does it please ray lord to rise, or shall I bring refresh¬
ments iirst? "
" I shall rise, nothing ails me; but where am I, what
place is this ? "
" This is your own Castle of Asile, my lord; but all
questions, I was told, should be answered by the sage
Syades, who waits his excellency's pleasure."
And then it all rushed back to me, and I directed that
as soon as I was dressed Syades might come. And so I
took the perfumed bath, and found ready for me secular
garments—the surcoat of rich dark velvet, a nobleman's
jewelled cap and phime. Even my crucifix was gone ;
but roimd my neck I found the gold medal with Hertha's
face, and left it there. I glanced round the room, half
fearing that my eyes should meet some heathen
emblem, but was so relieved at seeing a silver crucifix
over the bed that I put off till I was dressed the orison
that was yet not said, when Syades entered the room.
The servant followed with food, of which I now felt the
want.
" A fair greeting, my Lord Laurentio," said Syades, as
the man left the room. " Yes, you have much to ask—
but eat first. That long ceremony of which we shall now
speak no more tries young nerves. Know you how long
you have slept? From Tuesday at dawn till Wednesday
afternoon ! Eat—all is well over, and then come to the
friends who await you." Syades spoke courteously and
respectfully, but I felt his strange poAver over me from the
moment he entered the room. I was trained in obedience,
no doubt; but never to the Prior nor to Era Anselmo, nor to
the Superior himself, had my obedience been as prompt
and easy as to Syades. And so I ate while he continued
his discourse, letting me know about myself without
exactly relating anything.
" It was no small joy to me when I went back to your
convent at Caserta, under whose walls I was wrecked
more than twenty years ago, to see what a fine young
man you had grown, you, the beautiful child, the only
son of the Marquis, whom I had saved at the storming of
this castle. Had you been a poor spiritless moulding, I
would have left all this alone, but now you can prosper;
all is at your feet'; nor is this a face and form that fair
ladies are wont to scorn." As he spoke, he held to me a
mirror, and in the dark-eyed youth, clad in a lordly dress,
I could hardly recognise the humble novice of Caserta.
172 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
How was it with myself?—did I indeed cast off my former
life as lightly as Astolfo ? As yet I hardly knew ; 1 seemed
still to dream, but yet the thought came with a tumult of
joy, that I was now in some ways the equal of Hertha.
I said little, however, and I believe I slept again beneath
Syades' waving hands, for it seemed quite   dark  when
he beckoned me to follow him, and we  left  the  room
together, passing  through long empty corridors.    Now
high doors opened on wide valves, and a great hall, all
glittering with torches, appeared before me, thronged with
peo^ile.    All the brilliant figures bowed,  every plumed
hat was   doffed, as I advanced down  the   hall.    Music
pealed from the galleries above ; who was it ?—Old Fazio
di Forli,  who advanced towards me reverently bowing,
and   offering golden keys  on a broidered cushion said,
" These to our long-lost lord, the Marquis Lorenzo d'Asile."'
It was Valeria herself, who came forward with a shy sweet
smile,  saying, "Brother, all the weary weight of land
and power I give back so willingly to the real lord, only
give me a little love ;" and she embraced me before them
all.    It was Astolfo, dressed like a nobleman, who seized
my hand, saying, " Let me first greet the Marquis ; " con¬
tinuing  in  an  undertone,   " and   so, my Laurentio, the
monks told Syades thou wert the boy who was wrecked
with him  after  their  storming of tliis castle—the boy
Syades was carrying off to his own land; and Thorsteiu
knew Swend would never trouble Valeria more, if her
brother were found and she were not the heiress, and so
he aided thee : but Valeria is better than an heiress ; she
is the sweetest lady that ever resigned a coronet."
Now I returned their greetings silently, for again a
dream, but qiiite another one, came over me. I knew
that great hall again, but I seemed to see it larger and
wider, filled with as great a multitude, but rushing to and
fro with shotiting and shrieking, and blood and flame.
Above the high seat where the escutcheon -vVas carved
in stone, I seemed to be aware of a lady, doubtless
my mother, who then carried me in her arms, who moved
or hid something; and as I mounted the steps, I laid
my hand-on the sculptured stone just where she did
so many years before—a spring yielded to my finger,
which slipped in, and on it sparkled, as I withdrew it, a
ring of one great emerald, and graven on it my father s
device, for it was his signet-ring, lost from the day the
castle was taken; and as I held it up, the old retainers
Tlie Ladles' Edhihurgh Magazine. 173
knew it, and shouted for joy; and I felt within myself that
it was all true, and that I was indeed the Marquis d'Asile.
Yes, it was no dream, it was true, that at the banquet I
sat on the high seat, with Swend the sea-king on my
right hand, and Kolbiorn next, translating what he
said.
" So Syades says thou wouldst fain wed Hertha, and
art ready with a gift for me. Well, thou shalt have her.
He told me a few days ago thou wert the undoubted lord
of the castle. Our women are subject to their fathers
or to the head of the father's house till marriage;
then, indeed, they are free, and will live with no man
Avho does not suit them. Mind thou that, and please
her well, brother-in-law, and make her love thee," and
he struck me gaily on the shoulder, " and we w411 hold
the marriage feast next week, for I am off to the war,
and wish for no woman on board." And so, in festival
and rejoicing and song, the evening sped away; and yet
to me how far more joyous than the carousal of the night
was the anticipation of the morrow ! E. J. 0.
(^To he continued.)
I SLEEP on the mountain, I rise with the sun.
And swift to the valley I noiselessly run;
I wander in forests beneath the green trees.
And follow the birds as they sport in the breeze.
When day is advancing and noontide is hot
I love the seclusion of some retired spot.
Where, hid in a sheltered and cool airy nook.
On the landscape in sunshine I pensively look.
And tinge with my pencil each object so bright.
To soften the radiance of Sol's dazzling light.
Though homely in aspect, and sombre in hue,
My touch will give beauty and charm to the view;
A scion of darkness, a daughter of night.
My figure must spring from the rays of the light.
Claiming half of the woi'ld, I am modest withal,
Contented to follow the great and the small;
This arrangement, however, I sometimes resent.
And venture to herald a coming event!
Xo. S. - Juke 1875.
174 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
The forms I assume are most varied and strange,
Every person and thing I include in my range—
The hut and the palace alike I may storm,
So noiseless my footstep, so subtle my form.
I look very charming when loyally seen
Behind a fair Princess, and robed like a Queen.
Anon, I'm a monkey, and then I'm a bee.
At one time a carriage, another a tree !
I strut with a dandy, and walk with a grace
When I follow a lady in jewels and lace;
I run on four legs, and a tail I unfold,
And personate freely the young and the old.
Half hidden by willows, I bathe in the stream,
Illumined at night by the moon's silvery beam ;
Then under the oak-tree I calmly repose,
Or hide from the night breezes under the rose!
To resemble each thing is my birthright and dower
I imitate all to the best of my power.
I resemble the good, but no laurels have won;
My head is quite empty, and heart I have none.
I resemble the bad amid evil and strife.
Yet never did wrong in the course of my life.
One object of dread I am called to precede,
Fulfilling my mission with sorrow indeed—
To the bed of the dying 1 cautiously steal.
And there my sad errand in silence reveal.
I rest on the brow ere the spirit has passed,
And Death follows me o'er the threshold at last.
I visit the churchyard, and add to the gloom
Of the cedar and cypress o'erhanging the tomb;
I lean on the gravestones, and mourn for the dead
Who now from my empire for ever have fled.
While they enter regions of glory and light,
I hasten away to the confines of night!
Jane B. Ballantyne.
J 0 n a.
" I mo chridhe, I mo ghraidh."
(lona the home of my heart, lona the abode of my love.t
The Pioneer lay opposite Staffa, rolling heavily, and few
other cargo of tourists were Avilling to trust themselves
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 175
In the boats and go ashore over the Atlantic swell.
There was no rowing into Fingal's Cave this boisterous
day, nor even landing near its entrance. We were landed
at the other end of the little island, and scrambled first
over an expanse of rocks covered with slippery seaweed,
then along a terrace or series of terraces fringing the
shore, composed of innumerable broken - off" shafts of
basaltic columns. The short pillars at the side of the
island soon increased in height, and turning the corner,
we beheld the magnificent entrance of Fiugal's Cave,
that glorious vestibule fronting the ocean, where the
lofty, massive, brown, symmetrical colonnades support
the superincumbent mass of rock, glowing with golden
lichen. No crowds of unsympathetic tourists, no fami¬
liarity produced by frequent visits, can weaken the
impression made by that pillared front of Staffa. Under
the new aspect of this day Ave had all that we missed
in the halcyon calm of our previous visit. For we
enjoyed in perfection the sound referred to by Scott in
the well-known passage—
' Where, as to shame the temples decked
By skill of earthly architect,
Nature herself, it seemed, would raise
A Minster to her Maker's praise.
Not for a meaner use ascend
Her columns, or her arches bend :
Nor of a theme less solemn tells
The mighty surge that ebbs and swells,
And still between each solemn pause
From the deep vault an answer draws,
In varied tone prolonged and high.
That mocks the organ's melody."
That was truly a " new sensation." Each wave thundered
up the cave, rolling on to its extremity, and as it receded
—ere the next followed—there was a moment's hush, and
then, drawn from the fretted roof, came that long, deep,
musical, tremendous boom, thrilling one like the deepest
stop of the grandest organ ever built. It was the
Eublimest sound I ever heard. Every time the surf
rolled up, it seemed to shake the cave, which was dim
with spray. I stood in a niche between two columns,
and I could have stood for hours to listen to that wonder¬
ful anthem, which at regular intervals swelled through
the " temple not made with hands."    Looking out seaward
176 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
over the tumbling Avaves, there was the far-famed island
of lona, the cathedral tower rising lonely frum the bleak
shore. Thither we were soon making our plunging, roll¬
ing way, and on all accounts I rejoiced to approach the
white sandy extremity of lona. Its green hills, yellow
barley fields, tall cathedral, and white cottages, came
successively into sight, and we gladly anchored in the
comparatively calm waters of the Sound, about a mile
wide, which divides lona from Mull.
Though among all the islands which fringe the west
coast of Scotland, few are less stiiking in outline, less
distinguished in natural features, than this little one, dear
to all Christendom for its memories ; yet it has a sweet,
homely charm of its own, even at first sight. On this
sheltered side it has a cheerful, peaceful, inviting aspect,
very unlike the character of its western shore, exposed to
the full fury of the Atlantic. This is especially felt when
it smiles its w^elcome to storm-tossed voyagers, who see
in it, as we did, a haven of rest after an unpleasant
passage. We landed, and before an hour had passed
we watched from the door of our cottage on the shore
the Pioneer steaming away with her passengers. Then
we triumphantly felt that we were monarchs of all we
surveyed, and our right there was none to dispute. The
ruins of the Nunnery were near our house, and behind
them a green and rocky hill tempted us at once to a
climb. The air was cold and pure ; the evening sunshine
brilliant, giving a more vivid green to the grass and a
brighter purple to the patches of heather that bloomed
among the grey crags. On reaching a cairn, marking the
top of the hill, we sat down to study the whole island,
now spread before us. It is only three miles long, and
its breadth varies from a mile to a mile and a-half. The
greater part seemed to be a rocky desert. It was a wild,
strange view, as the sun sank into the Atlantic. The full
moon rose in splendour, and later a broad stream of light
lay across the tossing waters of the Sound.
The following morning was beautiful. Everything
looked bright and joyous, the sunhght bathing green
grass and wave-worn rocks, craggy hills and gaunt ruins,
white-washed cottages and stranded boats, the blue waves
of the Sound, and the Avarm-tinted granite of the opposite
coast of Mull. Our first stroll after breakfast Avas along
the shore to Martyrs' Bay, where for ages it has been the
custom for funerals to land.    The coffins were always
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 177
placed on a little grassy eminence, while the procession
formed to convey the dead to " lieilig Oran." Up this
sandy sliore, to this smooth green mound, and thence
along the " Street of the Dead," multitndes of the great
of their day have been borne, from distant regions, to
sleep in the holy soil of lona.    Thus King Duncan was
" Carried to Colm's KiU,
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors.
And guardian of their bones."
I spent the wliole morning in the Martyrs' Bay. The
exquisitely clear water assumed hues of vivid green and
violet as it ran up the pure white sand. These smooth
glittering sands are composed of shells ground finely by
the sea, and are strewn with marine treasures, lovely
delicate seaweeds, and fairy shells so minute that if it
were not for their bright tints the eye could scarcely
detect them.
We devoted the afternoon to a leisurely survey of the
ruins, through which  previously we   had  been  hurried
with a throng of tourists.    The Cathedral, built chiefly in
the early part of the thirteenth century, had of course no
connection with the most soul-stirring period of lona's
history.    The oldest edifice is St. Oran's Chapel, dating
from the end of the eleventh century;  but no building
now remaining in the isle can claim to have sheltered
Columba or his disciples.    This heroic missionary, as is
well known, arrived in lona from Ireland in the year 563,
with twelve companions.   From the end of the sixth to the
end of the eighth century, this little island was an illus¬
trious seat of learning, and centre of missionary operations
which extended over Britain, and even to the continent
of Europe.    The zeal of the "Culdees" for the dissemi¬
nation of Christianity carried them as far north as Orkney,
and as far south as Italy.    The localities associated tra¬
ditionally with that  brilliant   era are quite out of the
reach of tourists, who are landed here for one short hour,
few of them knowing what they have come to  see, or
what history attaches to the bleak ruins through which
the guide hastens them.    From the sixth to the seven¬
teenth century, lona was called "I," " li," "la," " lo,"
"Eo," "Hy,"   "Hi,"   "Hie,"  " Y,"   or  " Yi,"   simply the
Island,   or   " Icolmkill,"   " I-Columb-Kill,"  "Hii-Columb-
Kille," the " Island of Colunibas Cell"    When one passes
a few days in lona with the companionship of Heeve's
1T8 The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazhie.
edition of Adamnan's Life of Columha, the early history,
standing out so clear amid the mists of the sixth century,
becomes wonderfully real and vivid and near. And the
isle itself, crowded Avith memories and places of interest,
seems to expand into a country. Every creek in the
shore, every knoll, every hollow, almost every crag, has a
name and a story.
Another glorious moonlight night allured us to visit
Rcilig Oran between nine and ten o'clock. Passing the
ruins of the Nunnery, passing Maclean's Cross, standing
beside the way glistening in the moonlight, Ave entered
surreptitiously by a gap we had noticed in the afternoon.
and stood within the halloAved enclosure,
" Where rest from mortal coil the Mighty of the Isles."
" Where, beneath the showery west,
The mighty kings of three fair realms are laid."
Forty-eight kings of Scotland, eight kings of Norway,
and four kings of Ireland, are said to have been buried here.
But of the ancient royal tombs no trace remains, except
certain heaps which mark the foundations of the chapels
erected over them, and which are called still lomaire van
High, " Ridge of the Kings." Strange in the pale light
looked the grim figures lying in effigy on flat tombstones,
chieftains whose names made the isles tremble, their galleys
carved above their heads, gigantic swords at their sides,
the sculpture and the Latin inscriptions fresh as if done
yesterday. Among the crowded slabs which commemo¬
rate warriors, abbots of " Y," and great men of many
ages, one or two plain modern tombs stand erect, with
the names of a Mackay or a Macdonald, " Tenant in
Icolmkill." What an impressive scene ! I stood among the
dust of centuries, looking on the moonlit Sound of lona.
A resplendent glitter stretched across its restless Avaters;
beyond, in dark outline, rose the low rocky hills of
Mull, and to the left the ruins of the Cathedral Avere black
against the shining Avaves. No sound broke the solemn
silence, except the distant crash of the sea among the
cluster of rocky islets off the point of the Ross of Mull.
On entering the roofless chapel of St. Oran, I Avas
startled. It Avas very dark inside, and a figure, Avith
sword by his side and galley over his head, stood up
against the wall, Avhite in a stream of moonlight. Such
an " eerie " feeling came OA-er me that I scarcely dared
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 179
.to go forward and satisfy myself that the appai-ition was
solid stone.
The next day was the perfection of beauty. Inna
did not look "placed far amid the melancholy main,"
but a "precious stone set in the silver sea"—one of
" the green islands of glittering seas." The serene
water was streaked with brilliant green and lilac, and
Eileanura, "the Isle of Storms," seemed tied to the
north point of lona by a band of deep purple. We had
the amusement to-day of seeing the tourists come and go,
and we appreciated our delightful solitude all the more
after the hour of stir and commotion which brings all
lona to the neighbourhood of the landing-place. The
Pioneer was leaving, and we watched her steaming away
over the summer sea, tracking with white its intense blue,
ere we started for a long expedition. We had the great
advantage of having for our guide a gentleman thoroughly
acquainted with the history of the island, a native of lona,
who for some years had been a missionary in India, and
was now at home on a visit. The day had reached its
culmination of loveliness, the granite shores of Mull
glowed with their warmest pink, the Sound wore its
most enchanting blue, the cliffs of Burgh, the isles of
Ulva and Gometra, and the towering peak of Benmore,
were all steeped in the richest  azure.    Mr   led us
southwards by a road through level barley-fields, possess¬
ing no interest except that which attaches to every foot
of loua, and no beauty except the lavish sunshine that
poured down on them. But it was here, doubtless, that
Columba and his associates (who were as practical as
heroic) worked with their hands, and taught tlie inhabit¬
ants how to cultivate the soil. As we walked, our friend
read to us the pathetic narrative of the last liours of the
saint, by his disciple aud successor, Adamnan. The road,
straight as a Roman " street," at last turned ofi" towards
the west, and we had a view of the boundless Atlantic
on the other side of the island. The first of the objects
of our walk was '■'■ Cnoc-an-AingeV in Gaelic, " Colliculus
Angelorum" in Latin, in English "The Angels' Hill,"
where legend says Columba used to converse with
angels when he went forth to pray and meditate at
eventide. It is a lovely spot, a softly-swelling, smooth,
green eminence, covered with close, fine, lawn-like
grass, spangled with wild flowers, large geraniums,
eyebright,   scabius,   and   milkwort.     The   contrast    is
180 The Ladies" Edinhurgh Magazine.
remarkable between this sweet mound and the rough,
rocky character of the lona hills in general. It seems as
if the " Footprints of Angels " had left a blessing there.
Reclining on the soft flowery slope, we drank some de¬
licious milk brought to us from an adjacent farm, and
dreamed of the past. One can well believe this was a
favourite resort of Columba, who was a poet as well as a
saint, and can imagine him watching from here many a
sunset over that illimitable ocean. The sea view is very
grand, and we had as a foreground a beautiful level
green plain,
" The grassy Machar,
Soft and smooth, lona's pride."
Rugged, craggy hills rise out of this green plain, like
isles out of the sea, and north and south of it the coast is
rocky and fantastic, tortured into the strangest forms by
the force of the Atlantic. Between the rocky headlands
there are tiny bays, with shores of pure white sand. In
one wild iron-bound bay is the celebrated " Spouting
Cave." We had not time to go down to it, but we could
see the jets of spray shooting high into the air at intervals,
as the waves rushed into the cave, and were forced up¬
wards through the aperture in its roof.
Leaving the sweet Cnoc-an-Aingel behind, we crossed
one more field of ripe barley, and, turning from the culti¬
vated region, we struck into a huddled mass of rough
wild hills and bald crags. Soon we found ourselves in a
very singular glen, a long, level hollow, neatly walled in
by steep hills on all sides but one, where it sloped down
towards the sea. There was something weird about the
look of this place, and its complete solitude and silence.
It is Gleann an Teampull, " The Glen of the Temple,"
where the Culdees are said to have built a place of wor¬
ship. Some eay it was the site of a monastery, destroyed
in 1203. Our guide now led us in and out, up and down,
among hills and crags. It was a wilderness, a labyrinth,
where a stranger would need a compass to guide him, or
he might wander round and round, and imagine the
island to be ten times the size it really is, so strangely is
it tossed up, the hills are so like each other, and there is
no semblance of a path anywhere. We had still occa¬
sional glimpses of the sea, but clouds were rising out of it;
the sky was already half overcast, and the wind began to
whistle.    At last we came to a lonely dell, high up among
The Ladle.H  Edinburgh Magazine. 181
the hills, and Mr, -, stopping short, said, " Here is the
celebrated Cathan Cuildich." This is the most inte¬
resting spot in lona, the " Culdees' Cell," pointed out by
tradition for ages as the place where Columba and his
associates fii-st set up Christian worship. Fantastic rocks
enclose the green hollow except on one side, where the
opening is filled up by the grand view of the Atlantic,
with a few islands in the distance. It is strikingly wild,
secluded, and picturesque, just such a place as would be
chosen for the celebration of a Highland communion. In
the middle is a circle of masonry, overgrown with grass.
Here, probably on the site of Druidical rites, those
apostolic men worshipped God. These crags must have
echoed back their hymns of praise: they must have
looked on that sea. Here was first planted the standard
of the Cross which was upheld so bravely; here was first
kindled the light which burned so brightly and shone so
far. " There shall be -a handful of corn in the earth,
upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall
shake like Lebanon."
We left Cathan Cuildich very reluctantly, ascended and
descended many little hills, crossed many bogs, climbed
many dykes, and at last saw the top of the cathedral
tower rising as a landmark by which to steer our course.
Dunii, the highest hill in lona, was now on our left. A
broad, grassy, level causeway, known as " the Bishop's
Walk," soon brought us to the familiar road, a little
beyond the Cathedral. The sky by this time was black
with clouds, the wind was blowing in heavy gusts, and
the Sound was strangely changed from the brilliant blue
of the morning. We had scarcely reached cur cottage
before the storm began," and it raged furiously all night.
Wlien Ave looked out in the morning, we felt indeed
" Placed far amid the melancholy main ! " The Sound
was covered with foaming, rolling waves, and the rain
was driving wildly from the south-west. The tempest
howled through the cottage, and as the day went on, the
screeching under the doors and through the keyholes be¬
came so intolerable that, for the sake of peace, we set all
the doors open, and alloAved the wind free passage. It
had been arranged that this day should be spent in an
expedition to Port-a-Churraich, "The Bay of the Coracle,"
or of the " Wicker Boat"—the scene of Columba's landing
—at the south end of the island. Till late in the after¬
noon, we hoped the weather might improve and allow us
No. 6.—Jdhk 1875. 2 A
182 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to go there by land, though not by boat; but the storm
increased in violence every hour, and Ave were obliged to
give it up. This was very disappointing, for, next to
Cathan Cuildich, the bay where Columba first set foot on
this shore is tlie most interesting place in lona.
We had a second wild night. I can understand what
an old resident in lona said to me, that often during a
winter hurricane at night, with everything quivering, and
the spray flying from shore to shore, she felt as if the
little island must break from its moorings, and be half¬
way to America before morning! The gale, however,
moderated considerably abcmt noon, and soon all was
blue and bright again. I found the Martyrs' Bay strewn
with seaweeds of enormous size, three colossal specimens
of which I dragged with toil and labour to our cottage.
I determined to turn the short time that remained to us
in lona to good account by climbing Dun-ii. Though
this hill is only 330 feet high, it is a steep and difficult
climb, as it rises very abruptly, and is almost entirely a
a mass of bare rock. I sat long, leaning against the cairn
on its top, to take in at leisure the wild and glorious view.
Scott's lines were ringing in my head—
" The Abbot comes ! " they cry at once,
" The holy man, whose favoured glance
Hath sainted visions known.
A ngela have met him on the way,
Beside the blessed Martyrs' Bay,
And by Columba's Stone :
His monks have heard their hymnings high
Sound from the summit of Dun-Y,
To cheer his penance lone."
Thirty islands are visible from Dun-ii—from Skye in the
north to Islay in the south. Looking west and south,
the vast Atlantic stretched, blue, but still agitated and
foamy, chafing the sterile shores of loiia, breaking over
its rocky points in clouds of spray, burying in white surf
its attendant islets, and raging in the bay that contains
the Spouting Cave, where the jets seemed shooting up to
a height of sixty or seventy feet. North, I saw Staffa
with the white breakers at its base, and the strange chain
of the Treshnish Isles, and on the east the narrow Sound
parted lona from Mull. 1 looked over the whole of the
little isle, Avhich has attracted for so long the interest of
Christendom—an interest growing still.    Except the fer-
The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 183
tile "Machar," it looked a craggy wilderness, one of the
wildest of the " hoarse Hebrides." What a history lay
mapped out below me ! There, at the south end, was the
locality where Columba landed, and made this tempest-
nru'sed island " the glory of the West." There, near the
bay, was the hill, to the top of which Columba, after com¬
ing ashore, sent one of his friends, to ascertain whether
any trace of the Irish coast was yet visible on the hori¬
zon, for on this point depended his remaining in Hy.
Being assured that Ireland was finally out of sight, the
great missionary, turning his back for ever on the native
country that was too dear to him, ordered his vessel to be
buried, keel upwards, deep under the white beach, and
set his face to the solemn life-work he had chosen.
Hence that hill is called Carn-Cul-n-Erin—"Hill of the
Back to Ireland." Not far from the base of Dun-ii, I
could trace the hollow where the Cathan Ciiildich remains
still, sole monument of the pure worship established in
563. On the other side, there was the Martyrs' Bay, and
the road along which, century after century, when tlae
memory of Columba had given sanctity to the very soil,
funeral processions had passed from thence to Reilig
Oran. I thought of the succession of zealous missionaries
who, during the golden age of Hy, had left these grey
shores, to evangelise not only the British Isles, but France,
Switzerland, Germany, and Italy ; and then of the dark¬
ening days which set in at the end of the 8th century,
when again and again the Norse rovers descended here,
ravaging, burning, and slaughtering—
" They have lighted the islandH with ruin's torch,
And the holy men of lona's Church
In the temple of God lie slain."
The Cathedral and the other ecclesiastical buildings
suggested to me a new period in the history of lona,
after the obliteration of the Culdee order. The two
plain Presbyterian kirks were significant of a later era;
and thus, looking from the top of Dun-ii over this little
sea-girt space three miles long, thirteen centuries seemed
to unroll themselves. It would have been easy to spend
hours in that eloquent solitude, but 1 saw the Pioneer
in the distance, just making her way round Staffa—an
unwelcome object, warning me to descend.
When I returned to our cottage I found groups already
formed on the beach to wait the coming of the steamer.
184 TIic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
She had only seven or eight passengers to-day, and her trip
had been a very rough one. AVe did not get on board
without much tossing and difficulty, fur the Monk's wave
was rolling heavily between the shore and the anchorage.
We were soon away. The cheerful village passed out of
sight, last of all the tall Cathedral tower; and then the
rugged shore, where Avind and spray leave scarcely a
trace of green, looked like an uninhabitable island. The
pitching of the steamer increased every minute as we
approached the open Atlantic. No sooner had Ave
emerged from the Sound of lona than we encountered
a wild sea in getting round the point of the Ross of
Mull. We were in an archipelago—rocky islets on all
sides, the sea raging among them: they were one
moment buried in the snowy surf, the next showing
again their dark shapes, the water pouring down them
like an infinity of cataracts. The coast of Mull here
consists of huge blocks and slabs of reddish granite,
thrown one upon another, with hardly a vestige of
vegetation. High up these the sea rushed, bursting
into clouds of spray. There are a multitude of sunken
rocks, in addition to the visible ones, and the Pioneer's
course lay close to the shore—so close that one imagined
that each wave, as it came on, must hurl her on those
savage crags. It was an exciting scene. The " floods
clapped their hands; " the Pioneer rolled so that no
passenger could pretend to keep his footing; and amid
flying spray, and dazzling foam, and the sunlight glint¬
ing on the enormous waves, and a general joyous uproar
of waters, we had our last view of lona. Once round the
southernmost point of Mull, we were in a quieter sea.
This was my first visit to lona, but not  my last.    1
have been no exception to the ancient rule—
" There never yet came one to Ee,
But he did com* times three."
Roman's   Witix\\.
Introduction.
H. A. B.
In former generations, when the proper sphere of woman
was discussed, the question was generally decided by the
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 185
consideration of any course of action being "Avomanly "
or " unwomanly." There was and is no fixed standard by
which this term can be applied, but this did not render
it the less decisive : and under shelter of it, strange incon¬
sistencies were tolerated. It was '• womanly " to dance
or sing before assembled thousands, but it Avas " un¬
womanly " to speak to a small number, even in behalf of
the oppressed or wronged; it was " womanly " to write
weak or sentimental novels, but " unwomanly" to ap¬
proach grave and important subjects; it was " womanly"
to appear in the hunting-field, and to be present at the
death of the fox, but " unwomanly " to come to the help
of the sick and wounded ; it was " womanly " to use the
needle, but not the gravers style ; it was "womanly " to
starve for want of food, but " unwomanly," or at least
unlady-like, to work for self-support.
Between the past and present of what is expected from
woman, many points of contact exist. Now, as then, she
is considered as by nature the guardian of infancy, child¬
hood, and youth ; now, as then, it must be she who so
regulates and overlooks domestic matters as to make the
wheels of life roll smoothly under her care; now, as then,
she must represent and defend the highest form of Chris¬
tian morality, of self-denying religion, of all-pervading
godliness ; and should she ever withdraw from one or
other of these high functions, it will be well neither for
herself nor for society. But while this is so, and some
would greatly limit woman's field of action, many have
now wider views regarding them. Statesmen refer to
the number of women necessarily thrown on their own
resources as a " grave social fact," and remark that among
the questions which we have to answer are, "How to manage,
when from year to year more and more of our women are
becoming self-dependent members of the community ?
how to secure to labour its due honour ? how are we to
make ourselves believe, and bring the country to beUeve,
that in the sight of God and of man labour is honoiurable
and idleness is contemptible?"
This change has been brought about by various causes:
some ascribe it to the greatly increased and rapidly
increasing wants of high civilisation, which make it diflfi-
cult for the exertion of one to supply the needs of all that
are connected with him even by family ties ; others take
a more gratifying view of the change, and consider that
it  has  arisen  from  the higher  estimate  now  made of
18G Tlie Ladies  Ediyiburgh Magazine.
woman, in her intellectual nature as well as social
position, which would afford her varied powers full scope
for development. Some importance is also to be attached
to the progress of machinery, which has greatly interfered
with the domestic character of female industiy. We must
admit, too, that we sometimes look in vain for the chival¬
rous feelings of the middle ages, when men shielded
and cared for all who were less strong than themselves.
Experience also has shown that " capability " in various
directions is not a question between men and women, but
between individuals of either half of the human race; so
that the question now arising in many quarters should not
be. What can women do ? but. What is it wise or expedient
that women should do ?
The conviction is now widely spread that it is neither
wise nor expedient that a woman should leave unem¬
ployed any powers which she can exercise Avith comfort to
herself and with advantage to others ; nor is it now con¬
sidered wise that she should exhaust her strength and
injure her health by a continiiance and excess of frivolous
occupations aiming at nothing higher than amusement.
With this conviction comes the enquiry how she can be
more worthily employed ? To this question various
answers will be suggested by the mere names of Elizabeth
Fry, Sarah Martin, and Florence Nightingale in philan¬
thropy; of Maria Edgeworth, George Eliot, and Elizabeth
Barrett Browning in literature; and of Miss Hosmer,
Rosa Bonheur, and Elizabeth Thompson in art.
These departments, in their higher aspects, are not how¬
ever to engage us at present; we propose to consider
woman's work on what may be termed its prosaic side
—i. e., as a means of providing a livelihood—" gaining
money," some would call it; "being independent" is its
definition by others.
Many of those whom we have named have made their
way through difficulties and in spite of opposition which
few could overcome; nor is it needful that this should be
the only entrance to a successful career. AVith the view
of assisting those who propose to qualify themselves for
self-support, a series of papers Avill be published in this
Magazine, each of which will furnish particulars of one or
other of the industries and employments open to educated
women—the opportxmities of preparing for them, the pro¬
bable outlay both of time and money, with the results
that may be expected when the time of preparation is
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 187
past. Papers have already been secured, from those
whose experience gives weight to what they say, upon
the Higher Education of Women—on 8ick-Nursing, Medi-
ciue, and Engraving; and others will be provided on Art
Employments, Offices in Public Institutions, and Home
Employments. The importance of such information must
be apparent to all who have noted the rapid changes of
circumstances through which many pass in a commercial
country like our own; and how often, from sickness or
other causes, women are required to be not only self-sup¬
porting, but helpful in maintaining others.
Even when such a necessity never occurs, those who
qualify themselves to meet it have a great advantage in
the calmness with which they can look forward to coming
years, in the higher health they enjoy from having regular
and interesting instead of desultory and aimless occupation,
and in the firmness and elevation of character they acquire
from pursuing a definite aim for a prolonged period of
time.
The fitness of woman for mission work has not been
adverted to, simply because the many bright examples of
women engaged in this work have long made it a recog¬
nised field of exertion for them—as it must continue to be.
AVhile many other avenues for employment are open to
women, none is so lofty an exercise of whatever her
powers may be, at home or abroad, in the privacy of the
home circle or in the wider sphere of public work, as that
by which she seeks to win new subjects to the kingdom
of God, or to lead others on to more loyal allegiance to
the Prince of Peace, who " by His divine power hath
given," to woman as well as to man, " all things that per¬
tain to life and godliness." Phoebe Blyth.
Mcrburrja of €\\nUx.
CHAPTER    V.
The patron saint of Chester moving towards him in bodily
form Avould not have caused Eandall more surprise than
did this young ladj-, now clad in pale blue, who walked
between his mother and Trevor. For though he had
spent all his Sundays at home, the reserve which Mrs.
Holme habitually mnintained towards her children, had
caused her to withhold from him the fact of the approach¬
ing visit of Werburga.
188 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" Randal]," said Trevor, " let nie introduce you to
Mile, de Rehmar. I met the ladies just within the gates,
and persuaded them to walk so far with me, by promising
to show them the hot-houses, and send them home in the
waggonette."
In vain did Randall try either to speak or to raise his
eyes to Mile, de Rehmar's face ; he had a nervous twitch¬
ing about the mouth, and a gulping sensation in his
throat. Werburga, however, seemed quite at her ease,
and in the height of enjoyment. " Ah I " she said, " we
have met before, in the Cathedral. I hope you found your
friends that day ? " Randall had recovered himself so far
as to say " Yes." Then turning to Trevor, she said, " Oh !
it is delightful to breathe this air ; I could sit on the grass
here and breathe it for ever."
Mrs. Holme looked disapproval, but Trevor answered
gaily: " Well, I shall allow you three more breaths of this
excellent air, and then I shall beg you to tear yourself
away from it, and to inhale a little of the air in my
drawing-room. My piano is longing to be heard again;
it is suffering as severely as a novice under the vow of
silence.    Grant us one little song."
" Willingly," said Werburga. " I owe you one at least
in return for this charming walk." When they had
entered the drawing-room, and she was seated at the
piano, she said, "What shall I sing? First something
sad, and then a merry song to end with ? "
" By all means," said Trevor, " make us weep bitterly,
and then make us laugh afterwards."
"Then I shall sing you papa's favourite melancholy
song, called ' Vergebliche Sehnsucht.'
Preluding with a few grave chords, she sang the song,
of which the first and last verses are here given:—
" Mir traumt', du wolltest kommen
Und sitzen neben mir ;
Da stand eine grosse Scheidewand,
Zwischen mir uud dir.
Gibt's denn kein Wiedersehen,
Wo Liebe nie erbleicht ?
Geister die mich umwehen.
Die flUsteni nur ' vielleicht!' "
While she sang this song, Rand was thinklling all the
time that he had heard that voice ore, singingbefa merrier
The Ladies' Edinburgli Magazine. 189
strain. He liked it even better now. But to look at her,
and to hear her sing and talk, it was too much ; he could
not realise it. How was it that Trevor could hear all,
and yet seem so unconcerned ? To Randall this was an
unsolved mystery.
" That is beautiful," said Trevor, when she had finished;
" but please let us have the gay song at once; if you
keep us waiting for it, I shall go mad with melancholy."
" Then I shall sing what papa calls my Summer
Ballad, because it is somewhat in the style of a ballad,
and he thinks it is meant as a rejoicing at the coming of
summer. To a graceful and lively strain she then sang
these words:—
'' I have walked 'neath silent stars,
Asking dewy night to tell
Where her fair abode she hath
Whom 1 loved, and love so well.
One by one they sink from sight,
Comes with dewy step the day,
Shows me in her blessed light
Her I loved, and love for aye.
Walking in the woods, I said,
O ye birds of dawn, I pray,
Carol till with airy tread
Comes the maid I love for aye.
Chanted loud the little thrush,
Bang the lark her silver bell.
Till from out a flowering bush
Came the maid I love so well.
Then I took her by the hand.
Thinking only, all the day,
I am walking with the maid
Whom I loved, and love for aye."
"Ah!" said Trevor, at the close of this song, "that
is very different; I feel quite cheerful now."
Mrs. Holme tried to make Randall talk to her, and
tell her something of his life at Glanhafon, but with¬
out success; she could gain only monosyllabic answers.
Neither was Trevor in a talking humour after the ladies
had left; so, to escape a dull evening, Randall, under the
plea of a headache, retired early to rest, and lay awake
half the night thinking of Werburga, and also, it must be
No. 6.—JusB 1875. 2 B
190 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
owned, feehng somewhat angry with his mother and
Trevor for not having informed him of the approaching
visit of that young lady. Had he been of a suspicious
nature, he might have fancied that they had planned his
absence at this time. But he dismissed that idea at once
from his mind, as unworthy of consideration.
The next morning, after the writing was finished,
Trevor said to Randall, " Really it is a mistake to shut our¬
selves up in this glorious weather, letting the sun peep
at us, instead of going out to look him in the face. A
truce to writing for one day at least; to-morrow we will
let the sun shine upon us all day. Do you know Castell
y Waen ? "
" Yes," said Randall.
" I shall send Jones down to the White House with a
request that the three ladies may accompany us thither,
and we will call for them to-morrow forenoon."
Randall did not study much that afternoon; the thought
of a whole day in the society of Werburga was like an
immense wave that filled his mind and carried everything
else out of it.
When the message arrived at the White House, Mrs.
Holme and Malvina received it with composure. Wer¬
burga, however, clasped her hands, and exclaimed in a
delighted manner, " Oh ! how charming, to see the inter¬
esting old castle, and to have another talk with the clever
squire!" Mrs. Holme looked as if on the point of reproving
a naughty child. Werburga, however, without seeming
to observe this, continued in a low voice to Malvina,
" and then to think that we shall escape the visit of Mr.
Bernard Wood to-morrow evening; it is too delightful."
Mrs. Holme heard this distinctly. " Mademoiselle ! " she
exclaimed solemnly, iiut Mademoiselle was already in
the midst of another burst of delight, expressed in under¬
tones to Malvina; so the word and the look were alike
thrown away upon her. j\Irs. Holme was an enemy to the
unrestrained expression of feeling; she thought that all
tidings, whether pleasant or otherwise, should be met with
an appearance, at least, of undisturbed equanimity. Wer¬
burga, on the other hand, had been trained by her father to
a frank expression of all her thoughts and feelings; she
had learned to mistrust any mood of mind which would not
bear such expression, and to banish it accordingly. But
that surface equanimity, which formed one of the articles
in Mrs. Holme's creed of conduct, might be only like the
Tlie Ladies'' Edbihiirgh Magazine. 191
smooth surface of a lake, that at the same time is hiding
storms in its bosom, all the more violent because forbidden
to appear. The feelings of disapproval now frequently
expressed by Mrs. Holme both in word and look towards
Werburga, had no hurtful effect upon her brave and
courteous nature. Finding that sympathy between them
was not to be looked for, she treated Mrs. Holme with
civility, and even deference. In her intercourse with
others, however, the consciousness tliat she was being
inwardly commented on by that lady, did not impose the
slightest check on the expression of her thoughts ; it
seemed, on the contrary, rather to encourage it. Malvina
enjoyed the society of her friend most when her mother
was not present. The announcement of an intended
visit from Mr. Bernard Wood on tlie evening of the
following day had caused Mrs. Holme some uneasiness,
for he was not a visitor whom she wished to see frequently
at her house. She had been trying to find some pretext
for declining the honour of his company, when Trevor's
invitation arrived and removed the difficulty. The
gratification of Werburga at escaping this visit raised a
new wonder in Mrs. Holme's mind. What cause could
Mademoiselle have to dislike the man ? That, for the
present, remained a mystery.
It was a pleasant party that drove, the next morning,
between leafy hedgerows, past green fields and under
shady branches, away to the south-west of Stretton.
The road was level and easy enough at first; the talk
was lively; and great amusement was caused by the
efforts of Werburga to pick up a few words of Welsh.
"I always like to learn languages," she said ; " but this
Welsh is so outlandish; I am afraid of it."
" Ah ! " said Trevor, " I can teach you a simple enough
phrase. It was the first remark of Gryffith when he
arrived in Wales,—Gryffith, the frequently baffled, the
manacled prisoner, and finally the king of North Wales,—
when he landed at Aber Menai from the shores of Ireland,
weary and warm and thirsty, he called out to an old long-
bearded Druid in white vestments, " Cwrw da! "
" It is like the cry of a crow or a sea-gull! " said Wer¬
burga. " What does it mean? God bless you ! or It is a
fine day?"
" No indeed; something of a much more mundane
character ; it means ' good ale.'"
" Gryffith was a sensible man, to ask at once for what
192 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
he wanted," said Werburga; " and I hope all his descend¬
ants do the same."
The road now began to ascend gradually, and soon
became very steep. It was cut out of the side of a moun¬
tain, and overlooked a precipitous bank. Mrs. Holme
looked slightly nervous, and clutched Randall's arm.
Werburga, looking up, saw three tall beech-trees, growing
at the top of the mountain, on the verge of the precipice.
" Those beeches remind me of the solitary pine-tree in
Heine's poem," she said; "what can they be dream¬
ing ofr'
" They do not require to dream of anything," said Tre¬
vor, " when they have such a fine view constantly before
them. Look there ! Do you see that grand range of north¬
ern hills, with little white houses nestling here and there
in the woods on their skirts? And now, look straight
down; there is the river Dee, a thousand feet below you,
brawling past the famous bridge. Were it only a little
clearer we might see the sea to the north-west."
Descending the hill on the southern side, the scenery
became veiy beautiful, with hill and dale, meadow and
forest intermingled. After passing a lake on which a
number of swans were calmly floating, they came in sight
of Castell-y-Waen.
"What is the meaning of the name?" said Werburga;
" 'wean' in Scotch means a child."
"Yes!" said Trevor; "but 'gwaen' in the Cumbrian
language signifies a meadow or unenclosed space."
"Well, it is certainly not childish in its appearance.
What a noble building, with five towers in front, a large
one in the middle, by which we enter! But—oh, hor¬
rible!"
They had suddenly turned an angle in the avenue to
the castle, and beheld, on the level turf close to the road,
a table-cloth spread, and covered with viands in abun¬
dance. Round it were seen, some sitting, some reclining
on the grass, a party, among whom were Mrs. Williams
and her daughter Jane, with the two nephews, Miss
Columbine Watteau, and—his face enlivened by a broad
grin—Mr. Bernard Wood.
" He is the inevitable !" said Werburga, in a whisper to
Malvina. Then she said aloud, "i\h! there is Mr. Ber¬
nard Wood! can he have known that we were coming?
But to put table-cloths down in this dehghtful scenery I
It is profane! "
The Jjadies Edinburgh Magazine. 193
Trevor was amused, and ordered the coachman to stop
while they exchanged salutations Avith the party. When
they drove on, he said with a resigned air, "They are
going to follow us up to the castle immediately."
Accordingly, when they obtained admission, Trevor
acted as if he were determined to see everything worth
seeing before the other party should appear. Begging
the ladies not to waste time over the pictures and armour
in the large hall on the ground-floor, he hurried them up¬
stairs to the principal drawing-room. Here portraits of
kings, queens, and other great personages, hung round
the walls. Trevor, pointing to one, said, " There is that
brave Sir Thomas to whom this house owes its warlike
fame; he stood out boldly against Cromwell and Lambert
his general. A little further on we have his grandson,
whose hospitality has been sung by the bard Huw Morris.
It must have been after a handsome entertainment at the
castle that Huw composed the penill, where he says
that its halls flow with rivers of beer, and that it has
m.ountains of bread and beef for all who choose to partake.
Poets, after all, like good living; they will praise good
wine rather than a sharp sword; at least such seems
to have been the case with Huw Morris."
" Ah ! you are too severe," said Werburga ; " I believe
that starvation and sentiment go together, sometimes at
least."
" If you think the poets such ethereal beings, let me
show you the portrait of a poet's wife. She was the
daughter of our hospitable hero, and the widow of an
earl when she married Addison. Yet she never forgot
her first husband so far as to look on her second as an
equal."
" Then she was quite unworthy of him," said Wer¬
burga. " Was it not as great an honour for her to be the
wife of a man of genius as to be a countess ?"
" Ah!   I   fear  you  are  literary-mad.     Think   of   the
Eosition   she   held;   she  could  not  possibly   exalt   her
usband to it."
" Position I" said Werburga ; " I hate position.    It is a
tyrant which cheats us of our better selves."
" It is conventionality you mean," said Trevor ; " that is
a different thing."
" Yes, but in her case the two went hand in hand;
and I despise this conventionality so much, that were it
the way to Paradise, I should prefer not to go there."
194 Tlie Ladles Edinburgh Magazine.
" So you are a worshipper of nature and genius," said
Trevor ; " who would have thought it ? And may I ask,
is it the fine arts alone that you would thus exalt on
a pedestal for universal homage '? "
" Yes," said Werburga, " the arts alone ; your beloved
science should be condemned," she added quietly.
" Ah, then you are at open warfare with your father and
myself.    You dislike scientific studies f
•' I dislike the theories to which they lead," she
answered ; "they are so many and so groundless. I can¬
not bear this Darwinism and evolution theory which papa
is continually writing about, and which you also seem to
dote upon. I have an idea of my own on these subjects,
which is suflicient for me."
" And pray what may that be ? "
" The leather theory," answered Werburga.
" The leather theory !" said Trevor in amazement. " I
must beg you to explain yourself."
" Why, the idea that we are all developed out of old
leather. What is more likely ? I am sure Darwinism
is not."
" Ah ! you are making fun of us," said Trevor. " But
here they come !"
Mr. AVood and his party now entered the spacious
drawing-room. Mrs. Holme advanced to meet them, and
was speedily occupied in assisting Mrs. and Miss Williams
to admire the view from the windows. Presently Mr.
Bernard Wood was to be seen in an earnest tete-a-tete
with Mrs. Holme. Had he come here to-day to fulfil the
purpose of his evening visit ? Evidently his talk was of a
grave nature, for he knitted his brows, and gave side¬
long downward glances with his dull grey eyes, as much
as to say, This is a serious matter, but I have it on good
authority. When Mrs. Holme rejoined the others
afterwards she held her head a little more erect than
usual, and looked sharply at her son, who at the moment
was conversing with Werburga. Eandall and Werburga
had not talked much together, they had merely inter¬
changed sentiments of dislike with regard to such subjects
as Randall was engaged in writing upon to Trevor's
dictation, when Mr. Bernard Wood came up to them.
" Admiring the scenery. Mademoiselle ? " he said, seeing
that Werburga had turned from him to look out at the
window. Then, with a bland deferential air, he added,
" I see you are a person of good taste."
" Indeed I hope so, Mr. Wood," said Werburga, coldly.
The Ladies' Edinhnrgli Magazine. 195
" No one brought up by such a father as yours could,
fail to be so."
Werburga could not answer this; coming from another
person, it might have been a pleasant remark, but the
way in which Mr. Wood spoke gave her an instinctive
sense that he was insincere. But then the question rose in
her mind, " If he felt no friendship for her or her father, why
persist in trying to show it, as he had always done?
Why not act in accordance with his real feelings, if they
were feelings of indifference ? If of dislike, what then ? "
She was thankful when Malvina approached and began
to talk with her. They were speedily joined by Trevor;
and Randall and Bernard Wood moved off together.
" What a nice person Mile, de Rehmar is ! " said Mr.
Wood ; " do you know the baron her father ? "
" I have not the honour," said Randall.
" Then let me give you a piece of friendly advice; do
not know him. There is about him, I will confide to you,
a mystery which I have never been able to fathom ; some
ugly secret, I suspect, hushed up at home, and which he
fears may overtake him here."
" You do not mean it," said Randall, in an agitated,
manner, his eyes flashing fire.
" I would it were not so," said his companion, glancing
coldly at Randall's flushed face; " but there is something
in the presence of that man that tells me he cannot be
innocent. If he be so, why shut himself up as he does ? "
" He is a student," said Randall, " and all students love
seclusion. Mr. Wood, I consider it utterly unnecessaiy
f(jr you to spread this calumny; let me beg that you will
do so no more ; and for myself, I decline the honour of your
society any further." AVith this he bowed slightly, and,
turning from Mr. Wood, walked back in the direction in
which they had come. He descended the stairs, and going
out into the court, found Miss Columbine Watteau there,
seated on a brass cannon; she had a headache, and pre¬
ferred the air. He stood by her, and tried to amuse her
by conversation. But he was not in the mood for it, and
when the others appeared, he followed his inclination, and
wandered away into the woods alone.
He threw himself down at the foot of a spreading beech-
tree, put his hat over his eyes, and tried to think. The
feeling of displeasure with his mother and Trevor had
now given place to a stronger feeling against another.
The words of Bernard Wood, like a sudden and violent
blast, had brought to its height the tempest that racked
19G The Ladies Edinhurgli Magazine.
his soul. Was he not like Orpheus, but without the lute,
willing to descend even into Hades to seek the one he
loved, and finding himself debarred thence by a three-
headed monster that glared on him with cruel eyes, and
showed its greedy fangs ? There was the head of doubt
and debate; this was the obstacle which represented
Trevor and his opinions. Such reflections as these raised
in his mind seemed to belong to quite a different sphere
from the holy imaginings called forth by the love which
he felt. That was a thing which could exalt him to the
seventh heaven in self-forgetting adoration, or bid him
cast himself into the sea with joy at the bidding of the
object of his love. There she sat, enthroned like an angel
amid the images which artistic genius had called up around
her; while here—! These grovelling conjectures about the
nature and origin of man were not to be mentioned in
her presence; it was desecration to assert that they
were true of a race to which she belonged; he could
not think of her and of these things together without
an aversion to the latter which must inevitably give
them the lie ; for was not love another name for truth %
But if these guesses were true, what then ?—a careless,
aimless existence like that of the brutes, fit only to be
cast into the dust-bin of material waste at its close. If
this were all. a truce to higher aspirations.
But the monster had two other heads. Alas! one of
them had green eyes. Some one was always coming
between; Trevor was always there. If she bestowed a
few words on him, Trevor was ready, like the lion, to
take his share, to take all. And lastly, the insinuations
of Bernard Wood. Oh I he knew it was wrong, but
he hated that man. The distrust of him which he had
always felt had now reached its climax. Henceforward he
should meet with nothing but indift'erence from Eandall,
possibly something worse. He involuntarily clenched his
fist. There was a rustling sound in the tall ferns near
him; he looked up, and saw astray fawn that turned
towards him its timid, innocent eyes; so tame was the
animal. "You are better than some men," said Randall,
starting up, and thus frightening the fewn away while
he turned to rejoin his party. The desponding fit was over
for the present, and he felt comforted by the reflection,
that he should spend the following Sunday at home in
the society of his mother and sister and Werburga, while
neither Trevor nor Mr Wood would be at hand to exert
their disturbing influence. Procla.
The Ladles' Edinhurgli Magazine, 197
%\t   g r a g 0 n   0 f 1 j) c   I); 0 r t Ij.
CHAPTEE     VII.
" Where art thou, beloved To-morrow ?
When young and old, and strong and weak,
Rich and poor, through joy and sorrow,
Thy sweet smiles we ever seek 
In thy place—ah, well-a-day !
We find the thing we fled—To-day."—Shelley.
It may be well for our novices, who sometimes deem that
in laying down this world's goods they lay down this
world's joy, that I should relate something of the vexa¬
tions and troubles of the morrow of that festive night.    I
had wealth, and the consciousness of noble birth—a strange
pleasure to one hitherto regarded as a foundling; and the
bride  of my heart was promised me; but yet  the day
would not go smoothly, even without the weight of the
secret vows I did my best to forget.     It was Michael's
Day, and we heard mass said by a grim-looking chaplain
in the castle chapel; and then, as the wind was crisp and
the sky clear, Valeria Avished me to go Avith her out hunt¬
ing.     But I, Avho only Avaited for SAvend to awake to go
on board ship, excused myself as being too busy.     Then
she said, might she go attended by Signer Astolfo; but
before they started, she prayed me to dismiss the coAvardly
old Fazio from his office of seneschal.     This I did, ap¬
pointing Syades, as he desired, in his stead; Avhereupon
the chaplain appeared,  and  said  he Avould   stay in no
household where a Saracen bore office, and so Avent his
Avay;  Avhile Valeria told me how Thorstein had before
said lhat Syades Avished for that office, and counselled it
should not be giA'en him, as it was dangerous to give
power to Saracens on this coast.     I reproached Valeria
for not telling me this in time, but she, laughing gaily,
said it mattered little ; and then she and Astolfo, like two
light-hearted children, rode off together, Avith huntsmen,
hounds,   and  horn, leaA'ing  me to Avait the  waking of
Swend from the heavy sleep which had followed tlie deep
drinking of the past night.     It Avas not till high noon
tliat we reached tlie ship together, where an unAvonted
stir prevailed.     Men Avere caulking her sides, getting in
stores, and furbishing arms.   Thorstein Avas giving orders,
and Ilertha was not to be seen.    Had she gone aAvay ? I
No. 7.—July 1875^ 2 C
198 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
thought, while my heart drew all together with a pang.
No; Thorstein, who clasped my hands with kindly words
on my new fortune, saying he had known it long, and
believed me worthy of it, added that Hertha had gone early
to high mass at the Cathedral City, escorted by Sir
Rainulf, but would be here anon.
"And the lady has my horse," said Ivar, who was talk¬
ing with old Bergliot down below. " He will carry her
well if you like to buy him, now she is to leave the ship.
A worse will serve me, as I don't mean to drag after my
knight any further, but turn squire to Dame Bergliothere
till we reach England."
" What! Bergliot oflF to England !" said Swend,
"Ay, sir," said the old woman. "Now my lady is to
go ashore, she may choose among ftiir maidens for her
women. I am too old and homely, so I go with my
countryman here, first to Rome, to get rid of any sins one
may have picked up by the Avay, then back to rest at
home."
" We are both too old to worry about sins and long
rides to mass, like xnj master. Here he comes with the
lady," said Ivar, as indeed Rainulf and Hertha appeared,
wdth some attendants on horseback, on the narrow strip of
sand. Thence Hertha was fetched by a boat, and came
on board, looking more lovely than ever as she saluted
me, and wished me all joy of my recovered lands.
"After her," said Swend, "and urge your suit." And
after Hertha I sped to the end of the deserted poop,
where the curled tail of the Dragon now supported a silken
awning. What I said I know not— at least it was fervent
—but Hertha was cold, far colder than when she said
Vieni a few days before, and her words fell on my heart
as a few large hailstones fall into the heat of a thundrous
summer day
" Marquis Lorenzo, I know that I must leave my home,
the ship, and that you can make me a great lady in this
land. I think also you really care for me; but hear a
few calm, true words. I have only thought of you hitherto
as a monk who could not marry, and I did like you then ;
now you seem to me a stranger. I have always hoped to
be able to give my love when I gave my hand, and I can¬
not give it to you."
" Because I am a stranger, as you say. Give me but
hope you will love me some day."
" I cannot tell," said Hertha; " let me go in peace,
The Ladies' Kdbihurgh Magazine. 199
when my brother sails, to the Convent of Amalfi, and
then "
" And then I may see you, and vou will learn to love
me?"
" I dare not say so ; let us end this," and Hertha turned
round and SAvept by me, summoning Thorstein to her
side. She was nobler, greater, stronger in all ways as a
Avoman than I as a man, I felt. I Avas, hoAvever, noAV so
determined to bend her AA'ill to mine that anger began to
mingle Avath the love I bore her. Later, Ave all sat
together on deck, with friiit and Avine before us, but an
uuAvonted silence and constraint AA^eighed down all our
spirits, till Hertha asked Kolbiorn to sing. As she spoke,
a bright ray fell on us from the Avestering sun.
"A greeting from Frey," he said, and sang—
" Oh, Frey in the Northlands,
Thou sweetest of powers,
I'hy kiss on the mountains
Turns ice into flowers.
Thy smile on the meadow
Is joy to the fold,
Thy touch on the maid's hair
Turns flaxen to gold.
" Oh, Frey in the Southlands,
How dread is thine ire !
Thou lord of the death-bow,
Thine arrows are fire !
Thy light touch is madness,
Thy warm kiss is death ;
Thy smilfi on the marshes
The pestilence breath."
" It is ever thus Avith thee, Kolbiorn," said Thorstein;
" Avhat is true here is false there for thee. Is it not the
same life-giving sun here as in the cool north, kindly
everyAvhere, though in different ways ? "
" Thorstein, methinks, is lost in the wood altogether,"
said  Kolbiorn ;   " he   hopes   Frey  has  power here  toe-,
because the gun has, but then his name here perhaps is
Apollo, or St. Sebastian shall we say % " and his word
floAved into song—
"When Thorstein goes his sires to greet,
The death-shoes bound about his feet,
200 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Where all must go when called by fate—
AVhere will he wander desolate ?
He cannot find Valhalla.
The old gods live no more for liim ;
The new faith is unknown and dim ;
All paths are hidden from his eyes.
Nor found the way to paradise—
Though lost the old Valhalla."
" Everything is but a game to thee," said Thorstein,
sadly; '' hast thou, then, never felt how the beautiful
Christian Sagas might be the best things in life, if they
were true? But were they so, the people here, who
believe them, would be better than our countrymen,
instead of worse."
" Not all of them," said Hertha, with glowing cheeks;
" and these people are of a conquered race, ours are brave
and strong; and when the grey dawn of the faith has
risen to full day, you will see what a noble nation ours
will become."
" Our old Sagas cannot be mere fables," said he; " and
what great difference there is between Avhat we thought
right before, and what the new faith commands, I for one
cannot see."
"Yes, one thing at least," said Hertha, turning to me
with a smile; " ti-e are told to forgive our enemies: is it
not so, Marquis D'Asile ? "
A tumult of thoughts made my cheeks burn, while
Thorstein said, " Forgive those who do harm—nay, there
would be no living in such a world. Down with the evil
people that are our enemies!" and " Down with them! "—
"Serve them up as a banquet to the crows!"—"Make the
young wolves drunk with their blood!" echoed from
others, while all the men drank the pledge.
" Nay," said Hertha, " forgive them, love them, keep
them from hurting you, but conquer evil with good.
Speak, Marquis, you who are so learned."
But I (though longing in all ways to please Hertha)
had nothing I could say. Soon I rose to take leave, after
bidding them all to a banquet in my castle on the
morroAv. Swend went a little way with Syades and me
up the hill,
" There is more meal shaken into the porridge," he
said. " Bergliot tells me Hertha has just told Thorstein
she will only marry a Christian, and they have had quite
a quarrel, so your Avay is cleared.    Thorstein, indeed, with
Tlie Ladies Edinhiirgli Magazine. 201
ship and gold gone to Riin I^ he is no match for her. But
our Ilertha is a shy bird, so make no slight move to scare
her; clutch her once for all, and hold fast; never mind
maids' coy fancies. Syades will tell thee our plan, if
she does not consent to hold the marriage-feast on board,
on Thursday. We will have a priest up at a lonely chapel
in the woods he knows of—thither will I bring Hertha,
and thou ehalt take her away, will she, nil she. So
courage; I shall say nothing yet, but if I do speak, it
shall be so thoroughly to the purpose that our Hertha
will be glad to leave my guardianship for yours."
Astolfo and Valeria were just alighting in the castle
court as I returned, and talking to a ragged, miserable-
looking monk, in whose hanging cheeks and wrinkled
face I did not at once recognise the formerly pompous
Fra Damasus. But his voice was as gay as ever, as he
said—
" So here is the young lord,—a thousand greetings to
him ; St, Agata herself must have kept him from taking
the vows ; I can see her saying of you two—' No, no,
you shall have them, brother George, they are far too
warlike and spirited for me. I won't be so hard on the
mortal maidens, too, as to take them for myself.'"
She might have said it of Astolfo, but never of me,
who in sooth was but a shy backward cavalier; but
I was pleased with Damasus' words, and with the new
respect he now showed me. " Don't ask me of my life
at the hermitage," he went on; "oh, boys, boys, may
I never again be taken for a holy hermit and treated
as such! Once I made off, and the people brought me
back again. At last I wandered here on my way to
poor Monte Cassino, which I hear is encompassed by
armies."
"And don't you go there, father," said Astolfo ; "your
aspirations would be carrying you into the thick of the
fight, and your wind would never serve to get you out
again. Here is the Marquis in want of a chaplain—in
great want, weddings are in the air ;" and he looked
inquiringly at me, who, nothing loath, bade the monk
stay for the time at least as chaplain in my castle. Then
we all busied ourselves with preparations for the feast
of the morrow. It was not difficult to make the halls
and galleries splendid, as the Saracens had left quantities
' Goddess of the Sea and the Drowned.
202 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of rich stuffs and gilded vessels and silver lamps; and
the austere Norman pilgrims had not plundered, when
they took the castle. Yet the rooms, when all was ready,
seemed, however brilliant, more like the palace chambers
of some Eastern magician than the halls of a baronial
castle. And the same underlying touch of Saracenic
magic disturbed my pleasure. Syades dared to say
to me, " Now, mark me, Hertlia, unless protected by
Thorstein, will consent to this alliance with content,
which will deepen into love. But he wishes to mar all,
and he may succeed. It is only letting him know to¬
night the haunt of the Dragon, and he will be eager to
get the honour of killing it—it is but showing him
the way, and he vanishes from your path for ever."
Now, tliough I repelled his horrible whispers, I felt with
terror the new power he had over me. I was aware of
his presence without seeing him; I knew when he drew
near of his approach; it was ever as if two wills
struggled within me—his and my own.
But all these sombre thoughts were forgotten in the
gaiety of the festival. Valeria had collected many gay
cavaliers and fair ladies from the country round; after
the banquet, the tables were cleared and the dance
began, and sweet music pealed from the riclily hung
galleries far into the quiet of the autumnal night. The
young hostess was brilliant and winning ; the Northmen
gave themselves up to the joys of the time before re¬
turning to the wintry sea, and the Italian ladies were
only too willing to listen to the sweet speeches that
meant the less, as their ship was seaward bound.
Though indeed the whisper went round that the
goodliest man in all the rooms was the Neustrian Norman
Kainulf, even as all agreed that, whoever came second,
the Lady Hertha was queen of the festival. For me,
wherever I chose to cast my eyes, answering smiles and
softest words greeted me, till I began to think my cold
and distant Hertha was foolishly insensible of her great
good luck in having won the heart of the rich young
marquis. Towards the end of the feast I had succeeded
in leading her away under pretext of showing her some
choice art-treasures, when, on passing a window-seat
in the lonely gallery, she saw Thorstein sitting gazing
down at the sea, and stopt short, laying her hand on
his shoulder. He started at her touch, but neither spoke
nor rose.    '• Ah, dear sea," she murmured, with tears in
Tlie Ladies Edluhurgh Magazine. 203
her eyes ; " oh my Norway, shall I never see you more ?
Bear them my greetings, Thorstein."
" Dear lady," he answered, " I and my men leave the
Dragon-ship to-morroAV. You know Swend and I have
of late been like fire and water; I only stayed for your
sake.    I go by land to the war with Rainulf"
" And you too leave me, kinsman," she said, with bitter
potulence ; while he replied, gently, " I am always ready to
serve you when you desire it, kinsAvoman." Hertha
Avrapped her head in her veil, shook off my hand, and left
us hastily, while Thorstein laid his hand on mine to detain
me, and said, " And so you love Hertha truly, and care for
all your possessions chiefly that you may give them to
her, I do not wonder, for, besides her beauty, she is
about the most gracious maiden that ever lived on earth.
To a brave man the happiness of his lady is dearer than
his OAvn." He paused, and I thought, " Is he going to ask
me to resign her ^" But I answered, " You too care much
for Hertha r'
" Yes, I care more for her happiness than for anything
but honour in the world. You have only seen her lately,
but I loved her when she was a little maiden of seA'eii,
and used to run doAvn to the landing-place when my boat
came in with her pretty greeting. And Avhen she Avas
older, and I saved her from the burning homestead, and
rode all night over the fells with her fair head nestled on
my shoulder, lest they should make my little girl a king's
captive, did I not care for her Avelfare then, as now, above
all things ?" He paused, and the music swelled up sweetly
in the silence. Then he went on : " This change of faith
has made some change between us, but still I am her true
friend. She may learn to love you—you can give her so
much. What can 1 give her but a rough boat on the
barren sea ? But look you, my young lord, you must not
hurry her. We men do not altogether understand maidens
—sometimes they hardly understand themselves. Give
her time ; let her rest aAvhile in the Convent of Amalfi, as
she wishes, so she may learn to think of you as a young
champion, and not merely as a monk: and, take my advice,
send aAvay that Saracen; he is not fit to be about an
honest man's house."
" It is Swend Avho arranges for Hertha," I answered,
coldly.
" SAvend," said Thorstein ; " you know what he is—his
wits are all droAvned in ale—he can only drive before
204 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
wind  and  tide.     He  is   no   guardian   for   a   lady   of
birth."
" At least he is her brother, and you have hardly a right
to interfere."
" I am her kinsman," said Thorstein, with undiminished
gentleness, " and I will not see her Avronged." He turned
again to the window and looked out as before, as Syades
approached, and whispered to me, " Kemember." But I,
feeling a deep shame aroused by the word, went rapidly
back to the hall, where my guests were now taking-
leave.
" In two days, then—the mountain chapel of St. Cliris-
tofero," said Swend, with his wild laugh. " Bring no one
but the priest, and I shall bring only the lady and a trusty
guard. I asked her just now, and she won't fix a day, so
we will settle it all for her, brother-in-law."
And so he and the rest took leave, and Syades escorted
me to my chamber, saying the evening had not gone so
ill. Hertha had 'not actually refused to have me, and
Avould have to submit to Swend's way of doing so. " And
if we had only sent Thorstein to Hela, as Kolbiorn has it,
it Avould have been better still; but there your nerve
failed you, my lord."
The cool grey-green olive Avoods seemed full of mys¬
terious promise as I rode through them two days later in
the dewy morning, with only Damasus, as I had kept my
purpose a secret from all. We left the horses at a farm,
and thence wandered about a mile on foot to the lonely
chapel. The silver-stemmed trees surrounded it closely
on all sides, except where a little clear space at the west
door let in a glimpse of the distant sea, and there a small
stream glanced in sunshine for a minute as it sped from
the forest above to the forest below. The little chapel
was empty, but fragrant with the orange twigs which
strewed the floor. Damasus entered the little sacristy by
a low door to the east, and left me sitting in the western
porch, till I heard the sound of voices, and an armed
Northman, Eric by name, ran past me with a nod. " I am
to guard the door behind," he said, " and Hacon watches
the path below;" and he disappeared behind the chapel,
while Swend, with Hertha on a mule, appeared in front.
She started on seeing me, and said, "Have you deceived
me, brother? do the nuns not wait for me here, then?"
" No, your husband waits for you," he said, lifting her
off the mule, and sending it with a blow down into the
Tlie Ladies Edlnhurgh Magazine. 205
woods. " The Marquis, like a true lover, ready to over¬
look all your vagaries. Here is chapel and priest—the
real Damasus this time—and, mark me, unwedded hence
you do not go," for Hertha had drawn up her head like
an angry swan, half defiant, half alarmed.
"Not thus," she said, "shall Roll's daughter be wedded.
I have told this gentleman I would not marry him now."
Swend interrupted. " You must; our honour is pledged.
He has given me for you the money needed for the war."
" I am then bought and sold. Marqiiis, I will be forced
into no wedlock ; 1 will not marry you."
Then Swend broke into fury; in vain I interposed, and
implored Hertha only to trust and take me. Swend con¬
tinued to say even bitterer things in Norse, which enraged
me even while I did not fully understand them. At last
he seized her roughly by the arms, and thrust her over
towards me; and then, looking round in real terror, she
cried, " Let me go, let me go alone to the chapel, and
speak to the priest. He will hear what I have to say; he
Avill help me."
" Let her go ! " I exclaimed, and glancing reproachfully
at her bruised arm, she moved slowly into the chapel
where Damasus stood, and closed, the door.
Swend burst into a loud laugh. " Why, Marquis, you
look quite scared; the wild bird can only flutter, don't
let her go—and when once her word is given, you will
have a tender bride. I know them well, our free
maidens. As they say at the farms. To-day the whip
and to-morrow the oats for the wild mare."
I was very angry with Hertha for so scorning me, and
more so Avith Swend for his violence, and paced uneasily
about, till after many minutes had passed, Swend said,
" Well, they have had time for their talk now. Art thou
resolute ?    If she resists I will hold her at the altar."
"Yes," I said, " she belongs to me now, and for her
own weal I will take her away with me." And so say¬
ing. I opened the chapel door. Straight in front I saw
Damasus sitting on the ground, gagged and tied to the
altar-rails; behind me Swend shouted, "Call Eric!" while
at the same moment some one rushed past me and flew
upon him. I ran through the sacristy to the east door
calling on Eric, but there was no answer, and the door
was locked. Back to the west door only in time to see
two wrestling men fall heavily into the brook, and that
the one who struggled on to his knees on Swond's chest
No. :.—JuLr 1875, 3 D
20G TJie Ladles Edinburgh Miujazine.
was Thorstein. Rapid footsteps now sounded on the
path, and Hakon appeared. Thorstein, who held Swend's
throat with his left hand, while his face was under water,
slipped his right hand up to his own side, flakon, with
drawn sword, rushed upon him, but Thorstein's axe was
out; there was a deafening clash of weapons; the sword
flew into the air, and Hakon rolled backwards, his head
streaming with blood, and lay. I was utterly bewildered,
though I had drawn my sword; but no time for thought
was given me, for Thorstein now leapt out of the brook
npon me, wrenched the sword from my hand, and dragged
me into the chapel. I felt at once I was a child in his
hands of iron, and, more quickly than I can tell, he had
bound my hands, and strapped me with my own belts
tight to a pillar, and then he darted oft" to where he had
left Swend. Him he now dragged into the chapel almost
insensible, and bound him, too, securely to a pillar, but
seated on the ground, as indeed he was unable to stand.
Then he disappeared, but soon returned dragging Eric, also
bound hand and foot, gagged and bleeding. He left him
on the floor, and carefully searched us for weapons, all of
which he took away out of the chapel; and then return¬
ing, looked reproachfully at Swend.
'' 1 was almost ashamed to suspect you enough to fol¬
low you through the Avoods, Swend," he began; " but it
is well that dogs' ears are pricked when wolves prowl.
Be thankful I have not sent you this time into another
world, where Rolf would hardly welcome a son who came
out of a brawl for ill-treating his daughter. For you,
Marquis, you had better go back to your convent, as
it appears you can neither fight men nor guard ladies.
And you, priest—be quiet, I am not going to cut your
throat ; "  for Damasus' face was distorted with terror
as Thorstein went up to him with a drawn dagger. " I
will treat you better than the rest; I will give you back
your weapon, your tongue; " and he cut away the gag,
doing the same for Eric, with the words, "I am sorry I
had to hit you without warning, but you are not much
the worse, I think; Hakon, I fear, is finished."
" No, no, Herser Thorstein, I am none the worse," said
Eric; " and you had to do it, as there were five against you."
" Only three," said Thorstein; " two do not count.
Now," he continued, looking round on us from the door,
" you may stay here for awhile; I will see you are not
disturbed.   It is a good fast trap you have set, only as
The Ladies Edinlurgh Magazine. 207
it happens you have caught your own fingers in it. What
say3 the saw ?
' A bird in the net
Is not taken yet '—
and Hertha is safe. Better luck to you Avhen you better
deserve it;" and -with a quiet laugh he went out, lock¬
ing and barring the door behind him. ^Ve all gazed at
each other ; Swend, who looked like a hideous gurgoyle,
his red dripping hair hanging in straight lines over his
furious face, was muttering vows of vengeance ; Damasus
was trembling all over; while Eric, Avho lay like a log on
the floor, burst into a loi;d laugh.
" How did he manage you all I " he asked, " for, after all,
Ave were four armed men, and two on guard. He knocked
me on the head so soundly as he came up that I knew
nothing more till this minute, biit no doubt the lady went
straight out at my door, and got a good start. Well, I
call it manfully done: I always said he was the quickest,
briskest man on board; and," he added, examining his
boTind arms and feet, " how thoroughly well he has made
the knots, like the true sailor that he is; ah ! we shall
miss him badly on board the Dragon-ship." E. J. 0.
(To he continued.)
Ronnie   1 i 11U  |fl a r lt.
BOXNIE little Mary was all the world to me;
Bonnie little Mary, who so blythe as she,
Singing in the forest, or laughing by the fire,
No one, in her presence, of life could ever tire!
Happy in the sunlight, or happy in the gloom,
Merry by the sea-shore, or in the darkened room,
She carried in her bosom the source of all delight,
And all things seemed so bright to her, because her eye
was bright.
Bonnie little Mary! her gleeful heart has gone,
My sunlight set and darkened in the eyes where once
it shone;
My life is fled, the world is dead, for she has gone away,
And there's no more light nor music in the dulness of
my day! Lutea Keseda.
208 The Ladies' Edinhuryh Alagazine.
Roman's   Morli.
II.—Girls' Schools.
Among the many fields of remunerative labour which
are now beginning to be thrown more or less unreservedly
open to women, the profession of Teaching offers almost
Avithout question the highest advantages. This was, as
we know, far from being the case formerly; and it is to
the reformation which the education of girte is even now
undergoing that botli the present change in the profession
and the large possibilities of development in store for it
in the future are due. Few people surely will deny,
whatever may be said for or against a woman's entering
other professions, that the teaching of her own sex at
least is one which seems stamped by nature as most un¬
mistakably hers. And yet women are only now beginning
to claim their full share in, if not exclusive right to, one
of its most important and certainly most honourable
branches, school-teaching. That this has hitherto been
to a surprising extent in the hands of men, cannot be
gainsaid ; indeed, the ordinary phrases with which we are
all familiar in school prospectuses, " the advantage of the
best masters," " first-rate masters, " &c., sufficiently prove
how universally Avomen have been ousted from a province
Avliich it seems the merest truism to say is theirs. But
public opinion is at last changing, and people are beginning
to admit the, one would fancy, self-evident truth that
a woman is the proper instructor of women, and that
she is capable of undertaking every branch, elementary
or advanced, of education. The day, then, cannot be far
distant when teaching will claim a new place in the
estimation of society, and will be recognised to be a pro¬
fession as honourable for women as it already is for
men, demanding in their case, too, special, careful, pro¬
longed, and very probably expensive preliminary ti-aining ;
no longer, as formerly, to be taken up hastily, in an ill-
prepared amateur sort of way, or, as it sometimes is in
later life, because prospects more congenial have failed;
but ensuring, on the other hand, in full return for the
time and money so spent, rewards far richer than were
ever dreamed of under the old system.
I shall not attempt fully to enter into the causes which
The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 209
led to the system of entrusting so much of a girl's educa¬
tion to masters; it will be sufficient to mention at once
the most evident and the most important,—the fact that
women have been, and still to a great extent are, incom¬
petent to teach advanced subjects, or indeed too often
any   subject, thoroughly.      This   sounds  harsh,   and   of
course I gladly   admit  not   only  that  there  are  luany
exceptions, but   also that   mere   ciistom, justified  very
likely in former days by  the  scarcity of lady-teachers,
still exerts a strong influence on a school-mistress, and
leads her, in deference to the foolish prejudices of parents,
very often to employ a master where a lady would be
amply competent to do the work required.    The incom¬
petence of governesses, too, as we all know, is due raiber
to their misfortune than their fault, the means of obtain¬
ing a really good education having been hitherto within
the reach of comparatively few.    Many of them, moreover,
are   already   in    London   and   elsewhere   energetically
availing themselves of the new sources of improvement
so lately opened to them.    Employers, too, are to blame
in  still  persistently   demanding   from   a   governess   an
amount of varied knowledge incompatible with depth and
thoroughness, especially when we consider the early age
at which she generally begins her work.   Supply, of course,
meets demand, and absurd requirements on one side are
answered by absurd professions on the other; while em¬
ployers and employed alike, in sheer ignorance of what
real mastery   and real teaching of a subject mean, are
probably serenely self-satisfied.    But society, represent¬
ing the rough-and-ready common   sense of the  world,
pronounces that the education of a girl must be, as the
phrase goes, " finished," and the  resource  is   genei-ally
school for a year or two.    Here most of the teaching is
in the hands of men, " professors "   of different branches,
and society is forthwith satisfied that their pupil must be
thoroughly "accomplished."     Zealous reformers  tell us
that the  education of our boys stands in need of great
improvement.   What in Heaven's name shall we say, then,
of that of our girls ?
What we can truly say has been already said in the
report of the Schools Enquiry Commission, which I shall
presently quote; and relying on such unquestionable
authority, we may without hesitation pronounce the re¬
sults of the present system of education by means of
"first-rate" — at all events, as we  know  to   our  cost,
210 Tlie Ladies' Edinhiirgh Magazine.
expensive—masters to be lamentably bad.    And without
wishing to say one word against  masters   as   a   class,
except that they are by no fault of theirs in a position
which does not properly belong to them, I cannot but ques¬
tion whether the rather common theory, that it is desirable
for girls of sixteen or seventeen to be taught by a man,
on the ground that they are thus more interested and
more  stinndated to  excel  than they would be Avere the
teacher of their own sex, is a true or safe one.    No doubt,
did men and women mix more freely and simply together
than they now do, and in relations not of amusement
only,  but of common interests,  studies, cares, pursuits,
among many happy results this too would follow, that it
would be a matter of little moment whether a girl or
boy either up to any age Avere taught by a man or a
woman.    The  question whether he or she was a good
teacher would be all-important :  but can any one assert
that this is  commonly the case in the close, hot-house
sort of moral atmosphere which prevails in so many girls'
boarding-schools?     Separated more or less inevitably
from the outer world, ill-provided with facilities for active
physical   exercise,  the safe  outlet which nature herself
points out for high animal spirits (indeed, to the shame¬
ful neglect of the average girl's healthy physical develop¬
ment doctors bear ample testimony, and might do so yet
more strongly if they Avoidd), under strict surveillance,
the supposition apparently being, in this as in several
other matters in a girl's life, that if she is not carefully
trained, repressed, gxiarded, guided, forced into shape, as
it were, like some clipped yew-tree in an old garden, she
is sure to become something utterly unwomanly, as if
Avomanliness were some toilsomely acquired virtue, and
not   nature's   own   free   gift — Avhat   Avonder   if   a  girl,
Avhether high-spirited and fun-loA'ing  or dreamy and
romantic, is from difterent motiA'cs cA^er on the watch for
any possible chance of diA^crsion  from  the  monotony of
boarchng-school life, and if the result is the sentimental
or simply nonsensical folly Avhich has made the very name
of school-girl a reproach ?    Under such influences, is not
the " stimulus " giA^en by the master apt to be of a mixed
and not altogether Avholesome sort ?  I cannot but suspect,
too, that it is difficult for a master, from his more imperfect
understanding of his pupils' characters, to })e so interested
in them as a lady teacher Avould be, or, perhaps, so impar¬
tial.    Here, hoAvcA'cr, I i-cach mere guessing, and stop.
The Ladies' Edbilarijli Magazine. 211
The system is indeed sufficiently condemned by its results.
Of course it would be most unjust to lay the blame
entirely on masters. Everybody, we may assume, has had
the best intentions, but there has been no organisation ;
things have been left entirely to hap-hazard. Long ago,
in 1841, Dr. Arnold felt this, and wrote as follows to Mr.
Justice Coleridge: "I feel quite as strongly as you do the
extreme difficulty of giving to girls what really deserves
the name of education intellectually There
is nothing for girls like the Degree examination, which
concentrates one's reading so beautifull}-, and makes one
master a certain number of books perfectly. And unless
we had a domestic examination for young ladies to be
passed before they came out, and another like the great
go before they come of ago, I do not see how the thing
can ever be effected. Seriously, I do not see how we can
supply sufficient encouragement for systematic and
laborioiis reading, or how we can ensure many things
being retained at once fully in the mind, when Ave are
wholly without the machinery which we have for our
boys."
Evidently the country recognises the education of its
sons to be a matter of national importance. To say
nothing of its universities, which, with all their learning,
their wealth, their venerable beauty, and storied memories
of the past, remain still jealously shut against women,
spite of their own large debts to wise and wealthy women
of the olden time, schools are provided in unstinted
abundance for boys; some perhaps, as reformers tell us,
sorely in need of change, but still there they are, actually
in existence, not requiring to be with infinite care and
pinching economy nursed into life. ]\Iunificent endow¬
ments, time-honoured buildings, scholarships to encourage
learning and help the poor—all, in a word, that can be
devised to kindle the zeal and loyal affection of the
Bchoolboy for his school, are theirs. What has the nation
done for its daughters? Where are the stately schools,
with their little settlement of pleasant boarding-houses
clustering round them, which we might expect to find for
girls'? A change f)r the better has, indeed, begun. Some
girls' schools already exist, and soon it is to be hoped
there will be more, which are better able to stand the
comparison with those of the boys, though a great
Harrow or Rugby for girls is still a thing of the far-off
future.    But the majority of the schools for the daughters
212 .'Hie Ladies' JEdinhur(jh Magazine.
of our upper classes cannot stand this comparison in any
respect. They are things of a day, they have no name,
no prestige ; neither socially nor intellectually, to speak
genei'ally, can their teaching staff compare ^vith that of
tlie schools where boys of the same rank in society are
educated. And even when, under a wise and liberal
mistress, a school is really good, it endures but one life¬
time and passes away, or, it may be, undergoes in new
hands an entire change: as it inherited no noble tradition
from a venerable past, so it leaves no tradition as an heir¬
loom to the future.
How is it that we, so eager, if not overwise, about the
education of our boys, have till lately been so careless
about our girls ? For a reason very simple and extremely
cogent to the British mind, shortly expressed thus: " It
doesn't pay to educate a girl highly." Now, it is useless
to declaim against this as an unworthy view of education.
Comforting ourselves with the belief that a large and
enlightened minority exists, let us try to meet the majority
on their own ground, be that high or low.
It does not pay, or has not paid. Granted, and why
not ? Because the education of girls has hitherto been
conducted in a make-shift sort of way, superficial schools
" finishing"—by the help, too, for the most part of men,
not women—a structure whose foundations have too often
no existence save in imagination: because there have
been no richly endowed schools with highly paid assistant-
mistress-ships, and whose head mistress-ships constitute
valuable prizes for scholarship, experience, and general
moral and intellectual power, well worth the winning
of any lady either compelled to work from straitened
means, or embracing her profession from the pure love of
it. This admits of no question. Granting even that some
school-mistresses make large fortunes, this is true only of
comparatively few; and in any case, when we compare
these ladies with the recognised heads of the profession
among men, the head-masters of the great public schools,
men who hold indisputably so high a position both
intellectually and socially, we cannot deny that the latter
are, in the world's estimation at any rate, superior. And
if we compare further the staff of the former with that
of the latter, the inequality will strike us still more
forcibly. On the one side we find ill-paid, imperfectly
educated governesses; on the other, cultured, highly-
salaried   gentlemen,   qualified   for   their  work,   the  im-
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 213
portance of which is thus practically recognised by long
years of school and university training.
We may be loath to admit that this is a true picture,
and may each perhaps be able to recall some school or
schools of which the above would be a grossly exagge¬
rated description. Still, I think, if we face facts fairly, we
must admit that in the main it is correct. And though
better days have dawned, there is still ample room for
further progress. The work has, however, been vigor¬
ously begun. Besides the Endowed Schools Commis¬
sioners, to whom we owe a deep debt of gratitude for
their enlightened and liberal action in this matter, several
companies or associations of private individuals, parti¬
cularly the Girls' Public Day-School Company, are now
at work. Here, as elsewhere, I feel witli regret that,
owing to my ignorance of the state of educational affairs
in Scotland, I can only speak of England. This, I hope,
will be understood once for all. Nor can I state even
approximately the number of such companies in exist¬
ence. Girton College does not, of course, come under
our notice here, nor the University Extension, or any of
the other lecture or correspondence schemes, our subject
being strictly schools.
Now, wherein do the new schools endowed by Govern¬
ment, or under the management of public companies, differ
from the old ? This question will be best answered by
quoting the Report for 1874 of the Manchester High
School Committee : " If the question be asked, ' What is
the peculiar and special merit and claim of this school ? '
the Committee reply that the special merit and claim lie
in the security offered by public governors of the school,
and an independent and frank yearly report of the school,
and in the moderation of the terms on which such high
education is offered."
The Girls' Public Day-School Company thus describe
their aim : " The school system will be specially adapted
to meet and correct the defects pointed out in the Report
of the Schools Enquiry Commission : Want of thorough¬
ness and foundation; want of system ; slovenliness and
showy superficiality ; inattention to rudiments; undue
time given to accomplishments, and these not taught
intelligently or in any scientific manner; want of organisa¬
tion. Serious endeavours will be made to train the pupils
for the practical business and duties of life."
No. 7.—JuLi 1875. 2 E
214 21ie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
To enlarge further upon this would be idle. The need of
thorough reform is plain, and in this, as in everything
else, publicity means security; while the fact that the
government of the school is in every case in the hands
of a council, secures a permanent, not a mere transitory
good.
But that neither in ]\Ianchestcr nor anywhere else is
public opinion yet ripe for a reformation in girls' education
as thorough as those who are alive to its defects would
wish, is clear from the reports both of the Manchester
Committee and of the Endowed Schools Commissioners.
The former, in applying for subscriptions, write : " The
Committee say, further, that such a school for girls has
become manifestly a requirement of the times in all
large towns, that women's interests in education have
hitherto not had justice and fair play, and that such
a school is a pressing need in this city in particular,
and would still only scantily provide for Manchester's
daughters what has been provided without stint for Man¬
chester's sons."
The latter in their report for this year say: " We have
endeavoured to give substantial effect to the direction of
section 12 of Endowed Schools Act, 18G9, which requires
us to provide, as far as conveniently may be, for the exten¬
sion to girls of the benefit of educational endowments.
Something we have been able to effect in this way, and
we only regret that our success has not been greater.
This provision of the Act has been found in many cases
to be unacceptable to those concerned in the manage¬
ment of the endowments. Even where an endowment
was large, and had improved, or was likely to improve,
greatly in value, our proposal to apply a portion of it to
female education has frequently encountered determined
opposition, and seldom received active support from the
looality. Under such circumstances, it requires much
firmness of purpose on the part of those concerned in
the administration of the Endowed Schools Acts, to give
adequate effect to the intentions of Parliament in this
matter."
A melancholy account of English public opinion!
Time, however, may be trusted to overcome this " de¬
termined opposition," whether it chance to spring from
mere clownish dulness, from selfishness, or from a vague
dread of the effect to be produced by the new system
on the character of girls.    For an honest dread of this
Tlie Ladies' Edlnhurgh Mugazine. 215
sort undoubtedly exists. To many who set, and rightly
set, a high value on refinement of manners, the very
words " college" or " public school" convey, when
applied to girls, an unpleasant shock. It is well-nigh
impossible for them to believe that girls may be just as
refined, as lady-like, in a public as in a private school.
I would venture even to say more dignified; and dignity
is of the very essence of womanliness. But it would be
absurd to waste words in trying to prove this by argu¬
ment. Were but the fashion of supporting the new
schools once set by a few sensible and public-spirited
people, of whose social rank there could be no question,
these prejudices of class and fancy would melt away
like snow in spring. And, certainly, unless the upper
classes are content to see their daughters outstripped in
the race of knowledge and culture by those of the lower,
they will have to reconcile themselves to its changed
conditions. Even now we hear reiterated complaints
that governesses are not to be got, or that their claims
are far higher than they used to be. And this is but the
beginning. Soon we shall find that those ladies, com¬
paratively few in number, who are competent to teach
well, and prefer becoming private governesses to under¬
taking school work, will require higher salaries and
higher social consideration than we have ever been in
the habit of granting. And thus the increased cost of
home education will drive people to have recourse to
schools ; and as high-grade public schools become more
and more common, social prejudices will disappear before
the advantages they offer.
Turning now from the pupils to the teachers, I think
it will require only a brief statement of facts to convince
both the parents or guardians of girls destined to make
their own way in the world, and also those ladies who,
from whatever cause, intend to enter the teaching
profession, that high education does already " pay,"
and will pay yet more hereafter. And this is an argument
which neither canny Scot nor practical Englishman
will pass by unheeding. A glance at the following
short list of the salaries offered to Head-mistresses of
endowed schools (copied from a much longer one drawn
up by the Head-mistress of the North London Collegiate
School, to whose kind help in such details I gratefully
confess myself much indebted) will show on what
liberal  principles   the   Commissioners  have   done   their
216 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
"Work.    These   salaries   are   among   the   highest   which
have as yet been sanctioned by law.*
*
Salary of Head-Misteiss.
Capitation Fee.    Minimum.
Maximum.
Bedford High School         (1st grade),t£3 to ^£5
£300
£700
Koan Schools, Greenwich (3d  ,,   ),        1 to    2
400
700
Wyggeston            .            (2d   „   ),        1 to    3
300
700
Hatchan                .            (2d   „   ),        1 to    2
300
500
Hoxton                 .            (3d   „   ),        10/ to £1 10/
225
525
Grey Coat            .                                    10/to £110/
230
530
Westminster (1st grade),                          1 to    2
220
340
Ilminster High School                               3
400
In those schemes which are not yet established by law,
the highest salaries are as follows :—
Salary op Head-Misteess.
Capitation Fee.        Minimum.        Maximum.
Maynard's Girls' School, Exeter,      £3 to £6 £ 400 £ 700
North London Collegiate School, 2 to    3 900 1300
St. Paul's,        . . . 3 to    6 1100 2000
The salaries offered by the Public Day-School Company
are, I believe, considerably lower than those of the En¬
dowed Schools; but as the funds of the Company increase,
these doubtless will be increased also. £250 a-year,
besides capitation fees, and in some cases house, fire, and
light in addition, is, I believe, the average given.
The position of the head-mistress seems to be toler¬
ably independent, and to entitle her to a great
deal of practical power. 1 quote again the prospectus
of the Public Day - School Company: " The duties and
authority of the Head-mistress are thus defined by the
Council: ' Subject to bye-laAvs and regulations of the
Council, and to an annual inspection and examination of
the school by independent examiners, the Head-mistress
will have the management of the studies and discipline
* Schemes for establishing between sixty and seventy schools have been drawn up, and
about forty have become law.
t 1st, 2d, and 3d grade are the terms used to distinguish the Endowed Schools.
In a 3d-grade school the fees are from £2 to £8 a-year; the pupils leave at 14.
..2d .. .. 6 to   12 .. .. 16.
Ist-grade {hoys' schools prepare for the Universities),     .. .. 19.
Latin, Greek, Mathematics, &c., are not taught in Sd-grade schools.
Many schools are, as a matter of fact, 1st and 2d, or 2d and 3d grades mixed.
High and Middle Schools are the terms used by the Public Day-Sohool and other Com¬
panies.    Ihey correspond to 1st and 2J grade respectively, but are also often combined in
one School as Senior and Junior Departments.
The Ladies Ed'uihurgh Magazine. 217
of the school, and will be consulted in the selection and
appointment of all assistant teachers, whose emoluments
will be settled by the Council.'" The Council, by the
way, is composed of men and women; and this holds
good of all governing boards of the new schools, whether
endowed or established by Companies. The Cheltenham
Ladies' College, having been recently reformed, no longer
offers an exception to this rule. The advantage thus
secured, and the importance of the principle involved, are
so evident that I need not insist farther on them.
Assistant Mistress-ships are not so highly paid as they
ought to be, and undoubtedly will be in time. £200
a-year, which is the highest now attainable in the Chel¬
tenham Ladies' College, might well be increased; and in
other schools, I imagine, the highest salaries do not
exceed this. For a beginner no doubt £120 or £130
a-year is sufficient, but would £500 a-year be too high a
maximum for the teachers of advanced subjects, such as
Classics, Mathematics, Natural and Moral Science ? I
cannot think so. These subjects demand for their mas¬
tery long study, and therefore a considerable outlay of
money. Elementary teaching would not, of course, re¬
quire to be so highly paid; it might be, under careful
supervision, committed to student teachers, a class of
whom is attached to each of the public day-schools.
From this short statement of the salaries already attain¬
able in schools, it has been made, I think, abundantly
evident that to educate a girl thoroughly does pay; that
in fact such an investment of time and money is both
secure and profitable. Even this preliminary outlay,
however, may be lessened by means of scholarships, of
which a considerable number are, I believe, already offered
under various conditions. Of the want already felt of
certificated assistant teachers there can be no doubt. Only
the other day a member of the Girls' Public Day-School
Company, the Dowager Lady Stanley of Alderley, wrote
on this subject in the Times; and I have myself repeatedly
heard the same complaint from persons well acquainted
with educational matters ; indeed, the number of such
teachers required in England has been roughly calculated
at more than a hundred thousand.
But a merely commercial view of this subject would be
exceedingly incomplete. Can nothing, then, be said in
favour of school work, except that it ensures sooner or
later a comfortable income?    Those already engaged in it
218 TJie Ijadies Edinhurgh Magazine.
know from experience its absorbing pleasure and interest,
and it is not therefore their objections that I would try
to anticipate and answer here, but those of a large number
of ladies Avho flatter themselves that they will still be able
to secure private governesses on much the same terms as
before, because they offer, in addition to what they think
a fair salary, the inducement of a comfortable, possibly
luxurious, home.    " This surely," they say, " is preferable
to £150 or £200 a-year, with nothing 'found' and hard
work."    Now, of course,  " tastes differ."    A really com¬
fortable home, wnth fair work and £120 or £150 a-year.
is not to be despised.    But the average salary of resident
governesses is, according to Mrs. Kitchener's " Calendar
of Teachers holding Certificates," only £80 a-year, £150
and  £50 being  the extremes;   nor,  certainly, are most
county and professional families able to afford much more.
Besides, making every allowance for favourable circum¬
stances, admitting that the good sense and kindly feeling
of true gentlefolks can do much to render the governess's
position pleasant, still it cannot but be in many respects
a difficult, possibly a painful, one.    In one situation she
must be able to dispense almost entirely with the equal
companionship   of   grown-up   people  without  becoming
morbid, while in another she is expected to take her part
in society, rather an undefined one, with unobtrusive ease.
Do we not even sometimes hear sensible and kindly people
say, " I don't urge my governess to come into the draw¬
ing-room when I have company, because I cannot be sure
that my guests Avill treat her pleasantly % "    They may'
themselves despise the little-minded   folly wdiich looks
down on governesses as on inferiors, sometimes partly
excused, I grant, by the equal folly of governesses—but
they cannot check it.    Nor will anything put a stop to
this thoroughly illogical  and  uncomfortable view of a
governess's position, until governesses cease to be, so to
speak, a mere drug in the market.    This change, as I have,
said, is beginning to come about, and were the advantages
offered by schools once fully recognised, the old conditions
would be entirely altered, and the results must be what I
have already anticipated.
If we try to compare the two lives, that of a private
governess and that of a head or assistant mistress in a
school,—even putting aside, as still a mere fancy picture,
the position in which the full development of the public-
school system must eventually place these mistresses, one
in every essential point corresponding to that held by
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 219
head and assistant masters in high-class boys' public
schools,—most of us, I think, will give the palm to the
latter. There is, we must at least allow, more tone, more
colour in it. The stir and life of a great school, the
interest of teaching large and varied classes, the credit
obtained by the success of pupils in public examinations,
the congenial companionship of so many ladies engaged
in the same work and caring for the same things, the
dignified and independent position held—these surely fill
life very full of interest and pleasure. Nay more—can
we forget the wider sphere of usefulness, the larger oppor¬
tunities of making omr own brief, fleeting life, thus become
a part in one great organisation for good, immortal in the
results achieved?
I am inclined to insist particularly upon the indepen¬
dent dignity of the posts now offered, because it is pre¬
cisely this that Scotland has been strangely backward in
allowing to women. And yet Scotchwomen surely do
not lack, any more than Scotchmen, the national charac¬
teristic, that proud independent spirit which has been the
lieritage of our rugged little nation from time immemorial.
Education in Scotland is a subject into which, in my
ignorance of many of the influences at work, 1 dare not
venture far. Still, I cannot but protest against the
climax reached by Scotland in the unnatural system of
committing girls' education into the hands of men. It is
actually, I understand, no uncommon thing for purely
girls' schools in this country to be under the headship of
a master; the recently reformed Merchant Maiden School
in Edinburgh is a glaring example. I have heard this
practice severely, and, in my opinion, most justly con¬
demned in England, nor could I offer any defence. Pos¬
sibly, however, it may be said that the system meets an
immediate want; that whenever improved schools shall
have produced women fit to take the highest place, Scot¬
land will assuredly not be backward in giving them their
due, and that meanwhile the school gains by having a
competent head. Yet how is it that no great difficulty in
finding suitable head-mistresses has been encountered in
England? For my part, I cannot but agree with our
English critics that this unnatural system is insulting to
Scotchwomen. Even in our most elementary schools
there is the same depreciation of a woman's work and
capacity. All parties, I suppose, are so far agi-eed that
there ought to be a "female teacher" in every mixed
school.     In fact, the Government grant, extended only
220 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
on the condition that sewing is taught, is too strong a
practical argument not to overcome all resistance. But
the question, what place this teacher ought to hold!—
whether she should be restricted to the charge of the
smaller children, and should teach sewing only to the
elder girls, or whether the girls, big and little alike,
should be her pupils, the master retaining only the boys—
is still a disputed one. Clearly, in the first case, the
" female teacher " is simply the master's assistant, hold¬
ing a place completely subordinate to him, while he draws
a salary beyond comparison larger than hers, and is con¬
sidered responsible for the whole school, junior depart¬
ment as well as senior. In the second, she is mistress as
he is master, holds an equal position, receives pay in fair
proportion to her work, and shares the responsibility and
the credit of her school with no one. This second plan
has been, I believe, largely adopted in England, and good
salaries are given to the mistresses of such schools. Cer¬
tainly it makes no extravagant demand. Why should a
woman, we may fairly ask, be condemned to fill, irrespec¬
tive of capability, a subordinate position, and to do no
work save the most elementary ? Has she not some
right to say that the instruction of the girls is her
province, just as that of the boys is the master's? Of
course, by adopting this plan we relinquish what some
authorities consider an advantage, the co-education of
boys and girls,—a system, besides, endeared to us in Scot¬
land by ancient custom. I cannot, however, help suspect¬
ing that most of the advantages which the girls at
least are supposed to derive from it, are but shadowy and
doubtful. The only really important one, as I believe,
the reference of the work of both boys and girls to a com¬
mon standard, could be easily secured by subjecting both
to the same examinations under the same conditions.
It is not, I believe, proposed either in England or Scot¬
land that women should be placed at the head of mixed
elementary schools. And yet it is possible that many
women might be eminently fitted for such a post. Some
reformers, as we all know, assert that boys, even up to
thirteen or fourteen years of age, should be taught by
Avomen, and that they would be found far more docile and
willing pupils by a Avoman than by a man. Be this as it
may, we need not consider it here. The field of teaching
is wide enough, even if restricted to girls.
(7b be continued.)
Louisa Innes Lumsden.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 221
%l\ £rb II r3;t  of  d{hcs 11*r.
CHAPTER   VI.
RaxdALL was not the only individual Avho had returned
from the day's excursion in an agitated frame of mind.
Had there been thunder in the air, or was there some¬
thing mysterious in the surroundings of Castell y Waen
Avhich belied its appearance? Could there still be the
impress of some foul deed haunting the place, and insidi¬
ously affecting all who came there ? Mr. Bernard AVood
was too prosaic to ask himself these questions, yet there
Avas at work in his mind a disturbing influence which
asserted itself too powerfully to be set aside. The hurt¬
ful words he had spoken at the castle, not only to Ran¬
dall, but to others, were closely connected with his own
character and previous history. As a distant relative of
the late Baroness de Rehmar, he had regarded her with
interest—nay, if reports were true, even with a tenderer
feeling. Were this the case, how could it, in a nature
selfish and narrow as his, be reconciled with the profes¬
sions of unchanging esteem and affection Avhicli he made
to the Baron ? It had certainly rendered him, both at
the time of de Rehmar's marriage and later, more keenly
aware of the events in the Baron's life tlian of those in
the lives of other men. And his nature lacked that ele¬
ment of generosity which could make the happiness of
others a source of rejoicing, quite apart from personal
feeling. Yet, strange as it may seem, both during the
lifetime of the Baroness and ever since, he had veiled
these feelings, and remained an intimate and obliging friend
of the family. At her death, seeing the Baron overcome
with grief, and shrinking with all the terror of an unprac¬
tical nature from the management of money matters,
which he had hitherto left in great part to his wife, Mr.
Wood had stepped in, and offered to assist him in this
task to the best of his ability. He had offered to get his
property in Germany let to the best advantage, even
undertaking to receive the rents, and to pay them into
the bank in Chester, where they would be at de Rehmar's
disposal. The Baron had gratefully accepted the offer,
and felt almost humiliated when Mr. Wood refused to
accept of any acknowledgment of his  services, further
No. 7.—JcLT. 2 r
222 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
than the permission to remain the Baron's friend.    It is
true that, when the rents for the first year came in, de
Rehmar remarked that they were exceedingly low, and
very far short of what he had expected;   but this Mr.
Wood   easily answered by informing him that land in
Germany was at present at a   discount, when military
affairs   were   uppermost   in   the   mind   of   the   nation.
And    as    time    went    on,    de    b'ehmar   thought   that
surely   the   German  mind  must  have   become   a  good
deal more military than ever, so   contemptible  seemed
to   him  the  money  value which  was thought   a   suffi¬
cient rent for his land.     To him it seemed unaccount¬
able   that   rents   could   thus   dwindle    away  year   by
year.    Yet he shrank from a personal inquiry into the
state   of   his  finances, partly from native  indolence  in
such  matters,   and partly  from  a  sense that  to  do   so
would betray a want of confidence in one to whom he
believed  himself deeply  indebted,   and   whom  he  was
bound in honour not to oflend.    Mr Wood was pleasantly
aware of this feeling towards him on the Baron's part;
and from the fact of the latter being a foreigner and a
man of reserved habits, he thought it unlikely that any
other would supplant him in the intimate terms on which
he stood with the Baron.    It was such a thought, tliough
he would hardly own it to himself, that gave him uneasi¬
ness when he observed the homage and engrossing atten¬
tion of which Werburga was the object from both Trevor
and Randall.   The possibility that another might stand in a
nearer relation to the l^aron than he himself did, was one
which Mr. Wood could not calmly contemplate.    When
he asked himself the reason for this feeling, a horrible
chasm seemed to open in the ground before him.    But all
this mental struggle was hid away, as   it were, in the
inner safe of his being: in those outer parts that were
accessible to the ourrencj^ of daily life he kept a friendly
feeling for all men, and for the Baron in particular, along
with a very pretty and would-be romantic appreciation of
the charms of Werburga.    He thought a lady of her rank
and distinguished character ought not to be too cordial
towards any stray young men whom she might happen
to meet;   something unusual was in store for  her, for
which   she   must wait calmly and with   dignified  com-
l^osure.     It  was some   such   reflections   as these  that
had prompted the visit to Mrs Holme, which had been
thwarted ;   and   on   their   meeting   at   the   castle,   he
2'he Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 223
would have sought an opportunity of insinuating these
notions into the ear of Werburga, had she not turned from
him so coldly in the great room, and thus perhaps kindled
the spaj'k which had burst into a flame in the words he
had spoken to Kandall. It was not to Randall alone that
he had confided his important discovery with regard to
the Baron's character; Trevor and Mrs. Holme had also
each received a share of the disclosure, and had done so
with greater equanimity, as well as with greater coldness,
than Kandall. As far as they were concerned, he could
form no idea of the result his words might have; but
with Kandall, it was evident that he had missed his aim,
perhaps brewed mischief for himself, possibly made an
enemy for life. The Baron, in his turn, must be warned
against Randall at once, and what opportunity better
than the present, when the daughter was absent from
home, and he could count with certainty on a private
interview? The following day, accordingly, found him
on his way to Chester.
The place where a votary of art or literature produces
his works must always have a peculiar interest of its
own. Whether it be a large and luxurious study,
like that of Trevor, or a mere bandbox overlooking an
orchard, such as the writing-room of Cowper at Olney,
such a haunt cannot but wear the impress of that part of
the man which is often the purest as well as the strongest,
namely, the intellect. The " den " or workshop of Baron
de Kehmar was a long, narrow room, of which Cowper
might have said, as he said of his own, that its occupant
looked like a wax figure in an old-fashioned picture-
frame. The room contained objects which betokened a
great variety of intellectual pursuits. There were plaster
busts of Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven, now grown grey
on their brackets. There was the old spinnet-like piano¬
forte, too, with its loose jingling notes, evidently a sacred
possession. There was a prie-dieu in the corner, with
antique-looking prayer-books lying uj^on it, and in the
book-shelves were many devotional as well as musical
works. But to find out what branch of study is now in
the ascendant, we must look at the writing-table in the
centre of the room, which is laden with books and manu¬
scripts of a scientific nature. Here the laborious student
passes many hours daily in earnest study, only now and
then striking a few chords on the old piano, by way of
recreation.
224 The Ladies* Edinbiwgh Magazine.
De Relimar did not like to be disturbed in this retreat,
and there were but two people in the world who dared
to enter while he was busied there. One was his
daughter, the other—in virtue of his position of trust—
was Mr. Bernard Wood.
On the day after the excursion, accordingly, that
worthy had come to Chester. He went straight to the
Baron's house, and, according to custom, entered his study
unannounced. The Baron started back in his chair with a
bewildered look; his mind had evidently a long way to
travel before it could arrive in the scenes of daily life.
While it is performing that journey, Mr. Wood walks for¬
ward, and quietly seating himself opposite the Baron,
turns his grey twinkling eyes towards him.
" Business has brought me to Chester to-day," he said,
bending his bullet-shaped head, " and I could not leave
town without seeing you."
The Baron de Rehmar might be about fifty years of
age. His hair was sprinkled with grey, and his tall
figure had already acquired a considerable stoop through
constant study. Plis fine eye and open expression in¬
spired confidence. Naturally he was a mm of inde¬
pendent character and cheerful disposition. But the
pressure of poverty and bereavement had bent the up¬
right pillar of independence, making it encroach beseech¬
ingly on the territory of others, and seem as if sympathy
and support were necessary to its existence. In two
respects only, and those belonging to the sphere of
thought and affection rather than to that of the will,
had he preserved his independence of mind. One Avas
the untiring search for new discoveries in science, with
the fixed rule of drawing his own conclusions from them;
the other was the absorbing love of the Fatherland, as
he always called it. Nothing but the memory of his
wife could have induced him to live out of the Father¬
land; and Mr. Wood had frequently heard him declare
that if his daughter did marry, he hoped it should be
none but a German of her own rank.
Now thoroughly awake to the presence of his visitor,
de Rehmar languidly dropped his pen, and leaning back
in his chair, folded his arms and sat expectant. Mr.
Wood raised the subject of landed projierty in Germany,
which seemed ever near to his thoughts, and was pro¬
ceeding, for perhaps the fiftieth time, to explain the
reason why rents were now so Ioav, and to express a
The Ladies Ed'uihurgh Magazine. 225
liope that they would soon improve in value, when the
Baron interrupted him, saying—
"Come, sir; you must know that when my head is full
of money, everything else runs out of it; and it is so
heavy that it weighs down my spirits as well as my brain,
which opens a sad prospect for one who has no company
to enjoy but his own. Tell me something about Strettou.
Have you seen my daughter since she went there % "
'■'• Yes ; I had the honour of meeting her the other day,
but so surrounded by friends that I found it almost
impossible to obtain a word from her."
" And who are these devoted friends?"
" It would take too long to repeat their names; but I
may tell you that the chief among them were Squire
Trevor and Mr. Randall Holme."
De Rehmar sighed deeply, and looked in blank abstrac¬
tion out at the window. Not much more passed between
him and his visitor; but when Mr. Wood rose to take
leave, de Rehmar said, " Should you see my daughter
again, pray tell her that I miss her sorely; however, I
shall write to her this evening."
And, indeed, that very evening he wrote Werburga a
note, in which he complained of severe indisposition, and
requested her to come home without delay. The com¬
plaint was partly true, yet, on the whole, it was but a
pretext.
The next day was Saturday. Werburga received her
father's letter in the morning, and resolved to set out
at once for Chester. Mrs. Holme tried to persuade her to
wait at least till the afternoon, Malvina clung to her
with tears, and begged her to remain. But she would not
yield, and in little more than an hour she was on her way
home, leaving poor Malvina disconsolate.
" My dear child!" exclaimed the Baron as he received
her with open arms at the door of their dAvelling. " are
you again there ?    I have missed you so much I "
" And I you!" answered Werburga. "But, papa, I have
enjoyed myself." They came into ihe sitting-room to¬
gether : de Rehmar seated himself in an arm-chair, while
his daughter knelt down beside him, and, looking up in
his face, began, in the most naive way, to relate all that
had taken place during her visit to Stretton. Only two
people she had seen there whom she did not much like,
and these were Mr. Wood and Mrs. Holme. The Baron
smiled, but raised his finger reprovingly; " but the others,"
226 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
she added, " they were charming. Malvina was the dearest
girl; and Mr. Randall Holme, her brother, was so amiable
and so shy; and Squire Trevor, he was so amusing and so
clever."
" And your poor old father," said de Rehmar, " you will
find hirn but dull company now, I fear. Ah, child! I
have missed you."
Werburga answered by a caress, and an assurance that
he was the nicest person in the whole world, and that she
would never leave him.
De Rehmar said nothing in answ^er to this determination,
but he inwardly vowed that the shy Randall and the clever
Trevor should have as few opportunities as possible of
again meeting with his daughter. Had Mr. Bernard Wood
been able to read M'liat was passing in the Baron's mind,
he Avould have congratulated himself on the result of his
conversation with him.
" My child." said de Rehmar, in a quick abrupt way,
" should you be sorry to leave Chester ? "
" Papa ! what do you mean % "
" Only that I should like to go away. Why should we
not retire to some quiet spot in the country, where one
is not constantly stared at, and where heavy bills are not
always waiting to be paid? I am too poor and ill to live
in a town."
" But, papa, we are hardly in the town here. And think
of my work! Without that, we should be poor indeed.
Let us first try whether we cannot live still more quietly
here. I will tell Rogers to admit no visitors except your
most intimate friends. And I will work very busily, and
we will be quite quiet and happy, and those tiresome bills
will all be paid very soon.    Will you let me tiy?"
Of course de Hehmar consented, as he always did to
any reqviest made by his daughter.
Randall, in the meantime, on that Saturday morinng,
had set out for Glanhafon with a lighter heart than usual.
The prospect of the next two days was very pleasant to
him, and with quickened step and eager eye he walked
up to the door of his mother's house, and went straight
to the parlour. Mrs. Holme was there alone ; where were
the others? "Werburga has gone home," said his mother,
" and Malvina is in her own room." Randall felt as if a
blow had stmmed him. He left the room without a word,
and sought his sister. She was weeping bitterly. This
was too much for Randall.     He strolled  out  into the
The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 227
shrubbery, and began pacing rapidly up and down a walk
that led through it. For nearly a week she had been
living in his mother's house, and he had never seen her
there. Why had he been thus banished, and not even
told of the expected visitor? And to allow her to go so
soon! Had he been there, he would not have suffered it.
He felt almost angry with his mother. Certainly there
was not much hope for her of pleasure in his society. Ho
said nothing more on the subject, asked no questions; but
his grave, abstracted look and prolonged silence, broken
only by monosyllables, showed that something was wrong.
He accepted Malvina's endearments in silence ; even Mrs.
Holme was touched, and sorry for him, and asked anxiously
what had vexed him. Did he find his present work dis¬
tasteful ? Surely that must be the cause of his melancholy.
The real reason of it never occurred to her.
On Monday morning Randall wont back to Glanhafon,
and wrote for Trevor as usual. Trevor remarked that he
was extremely quiet. He strolled out alone in the after¬
noon, came in to dinner, but ate hardly anything, and retired
early to his own room. The moon was nearly full, and
shone high and clear in the heavens. Randall threw his
window wide open, and looked out upon the woods, that
seemed dreaming in the mist of moonlight. He said to
himself, "Now she is in Chester, in her father's house, and
I ."   He hummed to himself the melancholy air he had
heard her sing. All his life and destiny seemed to be at
the command of one person ; apart from her, it was but a
living death. Was not the feeling he had for her a
stronger tie than that of relationship, or of any of the
commonplace shackles of ordinary hfe ? Was not duty
as well as fate pointing imperatively to her? Suddenly
he stood erect with tlie calmness of resolve. Selecting a
few books from a pile which lay on the table, he put them,
with some other things, into a knapsack, which he
slung over his shoulder. He quietly descended the stairs,
and passed noiselessly through the hall, where a light
was still burning, unbarred the great door, and went out
into the night. He felt the balmy night-air like a hand
laid in blessing on his forehead, and gently closing the
door behind him, he breathed a silent prayer for those he
was leaving, and began to walk at a rapid pace. He
directed his steps towards a plantation that skirted the
northern march of Glanhafon, where the light of the
moon  was  sufficient  to  guide   him  past  all  obstacles,
228 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Looking up occasionally as he proceeded, he saw
dark clouds with deeply - serrated edges flying rapidly
along; while above, in a calmer sky, sat the moon
enthroned, Avith white clouds floating quietly around her.
Such, he thought, is the real life of man when contrasted
with its ideal. Storms of passion hurry us without pause
from place to place—we have no rest, no tranquillity;
Avhile yonder in the heavens sits the image of peace and
perfection, from which we seem only to be hastening
away. The trees around him looked like dark spectres ;
they rustled their leaves as he passed, and seemed to say,
" No rest." But when he came out of the wood, and found
himself on the open road, he saw the last of the dark
clouds passing away. About the moon all was clear save
the space filled by the little white clouds, that looked as
unruffled as the breast of a swan. " There," he thought,
" is the symbol of that hap[)y innocence which reigns in
simple state in the midst of earth's dark night, and calms
the troubled spirits of men into mute adoration. I, alas !
have seen it but too seldom!" lie checked the sigh that
was just rising, and, walking steadily forwards, braced
himself with tlie thought that every step was bringing
him nearer to Chester, and to Werburga.
Procla.
{To be continued.)
The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine. 229
^\t   gragon  of iht  llorllj.
CHAPTER    VIII.
" Hunting out of doors
You'U have, and multitude of hares to course,
And after you come home, good cheer enough ;
And sweetest ladies at the board above.
And comely-favoured youthful bachelors
To serve them, bearing garlands for true love.
And still let cups of gold and silver ware,
Runlets of vernage-wine and wine of Greece,
Comfits and cakes, be found at bidding there.
And let all those who in your banquet share.
Sit with bright faces, perfectly at ease."
Folgore da San Geminiano.    13th cen.
ThorSTEIN had made the knots so well that all struggles
served only to draw them tighter ; and when the sun
began to shine through the western window, we were
still prisoners. I was sickened with vexation and the
weary constraint of being bound on my feet to the pillar,
and Swend continued alternately vowing vengeance on
Thorstein, and reproaching us for our tardiness in the
scuffle. Damasus spoke up for himself; he said he was
sitting quietly persuading Hertha, when something sprang
on his neck behind like a falcon; then he found Thorstein
was holding his throat, and threatening his life with a
dagger ; and while Thorstein was binding him, Hertha
fled through the sacristy door. Damasus, methinks, was
quite consoled for his own bonds by seeing SAvend tied
up so tight; and he and Eric, who was a light-hearted
fellow, grew quite merry together as to the time which
might pass before we were liberated, for none knew at
the ship whither the captain had gone.
" Well," said Eric at last, " I have not heard of a wed¬
ding like this since the marriage of my grandmother
Thorhalla.    Will you hear a Saga, Captain ? "
" No, none," growled Swend, " till the one which tells
of the vengeance of Swend Hrolfson on Thorstein
Sigurdson."
" That will not be such a good Saga as the story of my
grandmother. Listen, you others. A fierce Viking called
Oddo sailed one day to where a great hall stood on the
shore, rich to look at, and with fine cattle on the hills,
No. 8.—August 1875. 2 G
230 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and men and maids and corn fields. ' Who owns all this ? '
he asked; and was told, Torhalla the fat, the widow of
Ord. He said then he was in need of a wife, and would
take her, or her goods without her.
" Out came Torhalla, a dame of fifty, and as big as a
cask. She seemed pleased enough, if but she might cruise
with her bridegroom in the ship. Otherwise her men
should fight. So it was all settled, and her people began
to store the ship with gold, and cloths, and rich wines.
Among them worked a slave girl in mean apparel, but
very fair, and on her Hugor the mate cast his eyes, and
prayed her to come aboard with him.
"' Nay, but if you will give up sea-roving and marry me
here,' she said.
" So he stayed, and his comrades called him the slave's
slave. Torhalla embarked, with an array of damsels as
big and awkward as herself, for she said, ' Slim girls do
not set me off well.' When they sailed she poured of
her own wine for captain and crew, and it was so well
bewitched that they all slept heavily. Then Torhalla and
her big maids bound them all like us, and worked the ship
themselves—for they were all lads but the Carline, and
she was a witch-wife (the foster - mother of the real
Torhalla), who wished for her pardon from the king. So
she sailed to where he was, with the crew of bound
Vikings, and she was forgiven, and all the Vikings who
would not take service with the king were executed.
Worse off than we are, priest."
" Then your grandmother was not married after all,"
said Damasus.
" No, no, the mate was my grandfather, and found he
had married the real Torhalla, who had disguised herself
to escape from the Viking. But in good time, here is
some one at last," for the face of Astolfo appeared at
one of the high narrow windows, gazing in utter amaze¬
ment.
" Is this the wedding party I see ? " he said at last,
" where is the bride ? are you all bewitched ? " Swend's
face checked his laughter. " Don't let any more chatter¬
ing crows look through!" shouted he; " open the door and
cut the bonds at once."
" Ay, without keys," said Astolfo, " it will take time."
" Toss us down your sword then," said Eric ; " I think I
could cut myself free meanwhile." Presently Astolfo was
battering at the door, but before he and others could
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 231
break it in, Eric had deftly rolled on the sword, and cut
a hand free, and then it took him little time to get us all
loose, and when the door burst open we were stretcliing
our stiffened limbs. Swend rushed away without a word
as soon as the way was clear; Astolfo, staring, asked
many questions. " You were so long away that when
Syades owned where you were, I thought it well to look
for you. Then I saw blood on the path, and following
the trace found a dead Norman drawn aside into the
thicket. Oh, Lorenzo mine—better love the ladies of our
own land, than run after these wild powerful women of
the north."
" I wonder," said Eric, " if Swend and Thorstein are
likely to meet now; if so, there would be a fight worth
seeing."
" Thorstein is gone hours ago," and Astolfo ; "he rode oft
fully armed with all his men and many others on the
mountain road to Naples. They will be there by this
time."
" Was Hertha with him % " I asked.
" Hertha, no ! Only men-at-arms. I was in the crowd
which gathered to see them pass—a goodly array of well-
appointed warriors."
So Eric went whistling down the hill, and we returned
to Asile, I crestfallen beyond words. Syades said it was
even as he expected; Valeria implored me to care no
more for the proud shy damsel of the north, who was, she
said, more like one of the old white marble statues dug
out of the heathen tombs, than a real woman of flesh and
blood.
In the evening Astolfo told me he had pledged himself
to Sir Rainulf to go with him to the Avar next day, as his
squire, in lieu of Ivar. " There," he said, " I may win
fame and fortune, and 1 pray you to let me lay them at
the feet of Valeria your sister, and some day make her
mine."
" Yes, go and practise arms, my Astolfo," I replied ;
" win fame ; and as to fortune, Valeiia will have enough.
I see in this outside world nothing but fighting readiness
counts for anything. Yet I thought once it was not so with
Hertha; how she listened for hours to what I told her."
" Yes, Lorenzo, you have a silver tongue ; all may yet
come right if you win to speech of your lady. It was a
bad plan, methinks, to hurry her so ; now she is quite
scared, and heaven knows whither she has winged her
232 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
flight. Another thing I think bad: you owe Syades
something—but beheve me, sending him off with costly
treasures would be less costly than keeping him here.
He takes too much upon him; what would Father Anselmo
say!"
"He is a monk—and in the world you follow the world's
ways; well, as far as I haye seen of the world, it holds
nothing so wise or so good as our Fra Anselmo. "I tell
thee honestly, Renzo, I love him twice as well, now I am
no longer bound to the cloister. I would he were here.
How truly he said neither you nor I had a vocation! "
Thus spoke Astolfo, putting on his new plumed helmet
before the mirror, turning his head this way and that, like
a crested bird.
Next day he departed with Sir Rainulf, and Valeria and
I were left alone with Damasus and Syades. We watched
together from a balcony the great Dragon-ship rowing
out from the bay to gain an offing, and then glittering
away to seawards under the purple cliffs of Capri. The
fair ship! my happiest hom-s had been passed on board
of her; but Valeria said—
" With what terror I saw that ship first come, and with
what a light heart I see her go, brother! Little I guessed
what treasures she would bring me. We always hoped
the little boy, who was carried off at the siege twenty
years ago, might be alive somewhere; and Thorstein it
was who, on hearing this, said Syades, the Saracen cap¬
tive, had been at the storming, and been wrecked with
the child near a convent in the south. So Thorstein
went to look for you there, though he never let Red
Swend into the secret, as he would then have been likely
at once to have carried me off, and made an end of you.
When Swend was told, you had been recognised, so it
Avas too late for that; besides, he had a great bribe by
way of a gift for Hertha, which was all he really cared
for. All the people who knew my father thought you so
like him, that even before you remembered where the ring
was hidden, none doubted."
None doubted; what then did I owe Syades ? But
little, for Thorstein would have made him bear witness.
My lands would have been recovered without that miser¬
able vow, which had not availed to win me Hertha. And
then how free and brave I would have felt; how much
truer a guardian for the tender Valeria, who was trusting
all her weal to me.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 233
The days went on ; we could find no trace of Hertha.
She was not in the convent at Amalfi—she seemed to
have vanished like a falcon gone down the wind. Syades
sought for her everywhere, and was also busied in
gathering a garrison for the castle. Many of the men
he engaged were Saracens, hut when they showed me
they belonged to the Society I felt forced to accept
them.
Meanwhile we heard that the forces of Henry the Ger¬
man Emperor had come to fighting with the Greek
armies. Gaimer the Prince of Salerno, Pepon the Patri¬
arch of Aquila, and Belgrim the Bishop, commanded
different divisions under the Emperor, which defeated the
Greeks in the open field, and wrested from them several
fortresses. But the war, which was raging as far as
Naples, did not disturb our coast further down. The
Normans fought alongside of Gaimer, as it was he who
had first invited them over from Neustria; and we heard
how, wherever the Normans appeared, the war had gone
against the Greeks. Still the armies of tbe Emperor
Basil were very large, and as they had utterly defeated
Henry's forces under Dato only a few months ago, the
issue was not altogether certain.
One evening in the month of October, a lonely cavalier
rode up to the castle, and we greeted him with great joy
when we saw he was Kolbiorn the Scald. He had been
slightly wounded, and made it an excuse, he said, to draw
ofi^ from the war, for Swend, in his rage against Thorstein,
had, contrary to all that he before meant, taken part with
the Greeks. Many of his men liked this so little that
they had openly gone over to the other side. But Kol¬
biorn wished, he said, to put a little space between leaving
the Greek and joining the German and Lombard cause.
Swend had made up his crew with outlaws and pirates of
all sorts, and the ship had no order nor discipline since
Thorstein was gone. " And as for Thorstein, people say
the greatest things of him. He is as good a champion as
any of the Normans, and has the best head of them all.
Swend is more furious than ever at the news which
comes—how Thorstein has been sent for to consult with
the Emperor Henry, how he and Rainulf and Osmond are
called for wherever need is greatest, and how he is distin¬
guished above all in the camp. 1 must have ready some
songs in his honour, therefore I have come to you.
Marquis, for a good study of Italian and Latin.     I will
234 The Ladies Edinburgh Alagazine.
teach you Norse in return, and we will be able to sing and
write the story of the war when it is over."
So Kolbiorn and I settled into a life that, but for my
unappeased longing to hear of Hertlia, and the weight of
Syades' presence, would have been full of enjoyment. We
hunted in the morning with Valeria, or we rode about
exploring the glorious ruins left us by the old Romans.
Then, ■when early darkness fell, came the banquet, with
the wines and the southern fruits Kolbiorn liked so well,
and afterwards music and poetry. Sometimes we had
guests, but were oftener by ourselves, beside the fire of
roaring chesnut logs, exploring old manuscripts, or Kol¬
biorn composing, and I translating, love songs and war
songs and hunting songs.
" Ah, boys," Damasus would say, " I call this life in¬
deed. How foolish are these people who train their whole
souls and bodies for the one silly purpose of knocking
each other on the head! How pleasant to hear of the
wars beyond Naples and down in Apulia, when they come
no nearer us, like the sea beating on the rocks which
fence the land! I am thankful I have sense as well as
courage; not like Astolfo, who runs into perils like a
sheep, because he sees others do it."
One day we were belated by losing a falcon, and I
said to   Valeria  that   as   time  pressed   we  had  better
ride  straight to   Asile   instead   of   making   the   usual
circuit,   and  she   answered   that  the  straight  way  lay
across a marsh where the malaria was dangerous, but
that we could ride fast through it safely enough that
chilly  afternoon.    And  so  we galloped  by the marsh,
near   which   I   knew  was   the   subterranean  columned
labyrinth.    It  was  far  nearer my  castle   than   I   had
deemed; and when I remarked this to Syades, he took me
that same night through a secret door in the hall, down
through winding hidden passages to where Vivia still
sat  in  the  vaulted  room   with   crucible   and   caldron.
Here she and Syades were wont to fuse and mix strange
elements,   searching   for    the   philosopher's    stone.      I
shuddered to think that  all that darkness and  poison
and mischief were so near our bright-looking halls, and
I formed the idea of building up the passage into the
hall, and the great cistern at its opening in the rocks,
and so destroying all access.    But Syades, in the tone
I could not resist, replied, " You forget, my lord, that
my property as the heir to El Arish, my treasure you
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 235
have sworn to recover for me, lies there. No, my lord,
as soon as that treasure is won I go, and you may build
up the whole labyrinth, but it will cost a man's life—one
of the thousands who fall in the wars."
" Will any one do to go down these steps ? it need
not be Thorstein."
" Any one," said Syades, " but as it must be done
willingly, it had need be one of those hot-headed beasts
of prey in pursuit of game, Rainulf, Osmund, who I
care not, so that he goes of his own choice with a good
heart."
After this I took refuge in thinldng as little as possible
of the noisome vaults which underlaid the joyous castle,
even as the shadows of evil darkened the depths of my
life, which on the surface was happy enough. For I
could not but think I should find Hertha; and Kolbiorn,
to whom I discoursed much of her, cheered me in another
way. He said one evening, as we sat alone by the bright
wood fire, that she had always had only a sisterly affec¬
tion, he was sure, for Thorstein; for she had been in no
hurry to marry him, when it would have been best for
her to have done so. The two years since Rolf had died,
Swend had been growing more and more drunken and
violent, and every one had learnt to depend on Thorstein.
' But when you came, she told me herself that the young
monk had put into clear beautiful words what before had
been tangled and confused in her thoughts. She praised
you more than Thorstein liked, I assure you, till Swend
checked her with his rough laughter. But she is a proud
high-spirited maiden, or she could never have kept her
brother in check as she has ; and the thought of being
bought by you, and shoved over like a bale of goods to
a chapman without leave asked or given, must have filled
her with indignation. Courage, Marquis! Thorstein at
least knows where she is, and he is reasonable, and will
not prevent any marriage she likes. A man like him is
not in love like us young ones ; he has dozens of other
things in his head besides : his love is rather like that
wine in yesterday's flask ; a little flat, a little gone in the
flavour, less spirit in it, if more bitter."
" Why, you sang how ' Every life has a spring
love,' but the best lives only bore the roses of love
twice."
" That Avas only a song. Marquis, the mere cup of
Braga, all froth and fancy, meant for Thorstein too ; here
236 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
is one for you,"    And he preluded a little on his harp,
and then dashed out—
" The swans flew far from northern lands,
Briyht in the north is the summer sea,
To the warm blue seas, and the flowery strands ;
And it's 0 in the north I fain would be.
" They swam in lakes by ruined towers ;
So wild in the north is the winter sea ;
And pranked their wings in citron bowers.
And it's 0 in the south 1 fain would be.
" How fair they were to the southern man !
So soft is the wind in Italy ;
He made a cage for a northern swan—
But the wind in the north is full of glee.
" A cage may break, and a swan may fly ;
I'he south is fair, but the north is free.
No trace in the sea, no track in the sky.
And it's 0 for the dash of the northern sea."
" Do you mean," I asked, " that you think Hertha is
gone over seas 1 "
" No, I mean a song, and nothing but a song. A Saga
should be true, but a song may be what you like—or,
indeed, don't like,—for that matter." And he went away,
singing—
" And its 0 in the north I fain would be."
It pleased me well that both Kolbiorn and Valeria
cared for me, and that my vassals and servants found me
a good lord ; but, alas ! I often felt how ill I had played
my part since I had left the convent's shelter for the
world's work. I had been, and was, a slave to my passion
for Hertha, and had thence become the miserable slave of
the Saracen, I had a jealous dislike of the brave, honest
Thorstein, while I was yet aware he was the best man
I had came across in the worldly life; though it consoled
me certainly to think that I had not fully consented to
that oath of enmity against him. With all these thoughts
I longed for the chanted offices to which I had once
been so used that they had somewhat lost their force;
and so when Christmastide was come I resolved to hear
something of them again.
It was Christmas Eve, and I walked alone to the Cathe¬
dral City, a distance of about three hours, to attend the
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 237
midnight mass. The cathedral steps were thronged when
1 arrived, and a glow of light brightened through the
night, as the heavy door-curtain was pushed aside by the
stream of entering people. With them I passed the arched
doorway into the cathedral, which was lit with such a
multitude of tapers that the vault of the roof above the
high altar was clearer to the eye than ever it was by
daylight, while the great columns cast black shadows
where they crossed the blaze of light, and the side chapels
were mostly hidden in a soft gloom, the darker from the
dazzling radiance of the choir I stood in the crowd
facing the high altar when the mass began. Out pealed
the triumphant music, and the earthly mists which had
so bewildered me of late seemed lifting, and the glorious
realities which make all the woes and joys of our short
mortal lives seem so small and so trifling, once more shone
on me, and I breathed again the pure air of my youth.
Nearer the altar than I the lights glittered on the brilliant
armour of a knight, so that his form caught my eye, and
I saw that beside him stood or knelt a veiled lady. Anon
sweet voices in the western gallery were singing the
hymn, "Gaudet chorus coslesfium," and the man turned his
head, and glanced round. Then I saw the light-brown
hair falling long in northern fashion, and the steady quiet
face, embrowned by sea-winds, and I knew it was Thor-
stein, though he looked somehow younger and more
polished, clad as he was like a Norman knight, and shaved
to the heavy moustache. I edged nearer through the
crowd, and felt I could not be deceived in the graceful
veiled figure beside him. The mass was soon over, and I
saw how Thorstein crossed himself like the rest. He is a
Christian, I thought, and Mea Culpa, with a pang. Then
when all the people began to stir, some going to other
altars, others leaving the cathedral, he took his com¬
panion's hand, and together they went to a dark side
chapel, far down the nave. Iron gates separated it from
the aisle; one single lamp burned before the altar, so that
I could slip in after them unobserved, and cower in a dark
corner between the altar side and a confessional. Then
Thorstein, turning suddenly, shut the gates, and sat
down in front of the altar, quite near me, beside the
lady; who now, throwing back her dark veil, disclosed, as
I expected, the golden hair and radiant face of Hertha.
E. J. O.
{To be continued.)
No. 8.—August 1875. 2 II
238 Jlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
^utomall's   %atiirh.
II.—Girls' Schools.
{Continued.)
Breaking short, then, a digression which might lead us
far from oxu' subject, let us consider what qualifications
and what certificates of proficiency a lady ought to
possess in order to be siu-e of success in school-work.
And first we must ascertain what the subjects tauglit
in the new schools are. In the prospectus of the Norwich
High School, which may be taken in this respect as a
sample of High and Middle Schools, and also of First
and Second Grade Endowed Schools, these are stated
as folloAvs :—" Religious Instruction, Reading, Writing,
Arithmetic, English Grammar and Literature, Histoiy,
Geography, French, German, Latin, the Elements of
Physical Science, Drawing, Class Singing, Harmony,
Gymnastic Exercises, and Needlework. In the Senior
Department there will be advanced classes for Ancient
HTid Modern Languages, Literature and History, Mathe¬
matics, the Elements of Moral Science and of Logic,
Physical Science (especially Physiology as applied to
Health), Social and Domestic Economy."
Certainly there is here wide scope given to a lady to
consult her own inclinations as to the subject or subjects
she may choose to teach. No smattering will pass
muster; but, on the other hand, thorough mastery of
any subject will be fully repaid. L. M. H., in her useful
little Year Book of Woinens Work, after laying it down as
a " maxim for teachers in the present day that the pass¬
ing of some recognised examination, and the possession
of a certificate of some kind, are essential to permanent
success," goes on to enumerate the means of doing so
which at present exist, beginning as follows:—" The
highest certificates attainable by women are the Degree-
Certificates of Girton College, Cambridge. These certifi¬
cates are conferred on examinations in the same papers,
and held on the same conditions as those that qualify for
Degrees in the University of Cambridge, and are really,
though not formally, equivalent to a university degree.
The certificates, like the Oxford and Cambridge degrees,
are conferred only on resident students who have gone
through a systematic coiirse of education."
Tlie Ladies Edinhurgli Magazine. 239
Next in value, though at a great distance, are the cer¬
tificates granted by the London University, one on pass¬
ing the General Examination, which corresponds to the
Matriculation Examination of the male students of the
University, and one, called a Certificate of Higher Profi¬
ciency, on passing an examination in some special subject.
Certificates may also be gained by passing the Higher
Local Examinations (now open to men as well as women)
of the University of Cambridge, and the Junior Local
Examinations of the Universities of Oxford, Cambridge,
Durham, Edinburgh, and Dublin, open to boys and girls
under eighteen. In Ireland, Dublin University and
Queen's University, Belfast, hold examinations corres¬
ponding to the Higher Local Examination of Cambridge,
This list is not exhaustive. I refer those who wish for
further and more detailed information on the subject to
the Year Book already mentioned. It only costs a
shilling, and contains a great deal of useful information.
Candidates for the London University and Cambridge
Higher Local Examinations may obtain instruction in
most of the subjects set for these examinations by attend¬
ing courses of lectures given at University College,
Gower Street, by professors of the college, under the
management of the Ladies' Educational Association of
London. A boarding-house, where ladies not resident
in London can be received, is not far from the college.
Courses of lectures which have particular reference to the
Higher Local Examininations are held also in Cambridge,
and ladies who wish to attend them can be received (on
terms which vary according to the accommodation re¬
quired) as boarders at The Hall, Bateman Street, Cam¬
bridge, a temporary residence—Newnham H51II, which is
intended to accommodate thirty boarders, not being yet
finished.
There are, I believe, some scholarships offered in con¬
nection with the Higher Local Examinations, but I regret
that I cannot state either their value or the conditions of
obtaining them, except that one, to be awarded in June
1875, must be held at Girton College.
It is impossible for me, from my ignorance of
Scotch matters, to do more than mention the courses
of lectures given in Edinburgh under the management
of the Ladies' Educational Association, or the certifi¬
cates granted to women by the University of Edin¬
burgh.    I may safely say that no lectures anywhere have
240 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
been so successful, or more deservedly so. Of the cer¬
tificates it is imfortunately impossible to speak with
such unqualified approval. They have, beyond a doubt,
especially the honour certificates, a very high real value,
but they lack the stamp which a recognised standard alone
can give. I at least have failed to discover any such
standard after carefully reading pages 20, 21, 22, 23 of
the Report of the Association.*
Referring all those who wish for further information,
especially on the subject of training colleges for elementary
schoolmistresses, to the Year Book so often quoted, I pass
on to consider the certificates pronounced as we have seen
to be the highest attainable, those of Girton College,
Cambridge. They are of three sorts, and are thus enu¬
merated in the prospectus of the College :—"A certificate,
called a Degree Certificate, will be conferred upon any
student whose proficiency has been certified to the satis¬
faction of the College, according- to the standard of any
examinations qualifying for the B.A. degree of the Uni¬
versity of Cambridge, provided that such student shall
have fulfilled, so far as in the judgment of the College
may be practicable, all the conditions imposed for the
time being by the University on candidates for degrees.
"A certificate, called a College Certificate, will be con¬
ferred upon any student who shall have passed, to the
satisfaction of the College, examinations similar in sub¬
jects and standard to those qualifying for the B.A. degree
of the University of Cambridge, the following deviations
being permitted: the substitution of French and English
or German and English for Latin or for Greek: the sub¬
stitution of English, French, and German for both Latin
and Greek; the omission, in case of objection, of the
Theological part of the examinations.
" Certificates will also be granted for proficiency in
single subjects.    Such certificates will be of three classes,
* The Houldsworth Bursary of £30, tenable for two years, is offered each
alternate year to the most successful student of the Local Examination.
The National Union for the Education of Women also gives an annual
bursary of £25 to the best student. The holder of this bursary may pursue
her studies as she pleases ; but to the Houldsworth is attached the condition
that she shall become a candidate for the University Certiiicates in Literature,
Science, and Art.
It is also hoped that ere long other bursaries may be forthcoming; one of
£30, tenable for the next two sessions, has been placed at the disposal of the
Executive Committee.—[Ed.]
Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 241
and will be awarded with reference, as far as possible, to
the standard of University Honours."
In these details the constant reference to the University
standard, even where the subjects are left to the option
of the individual student, is, 1 think, the most striking
point. This is in fact the foundation-stone of the Girton
edifice, the mainspring of its educational system.
The second and third certificates require no explana¬
tion. The advantages they oiFer to a student who wishes
to give undivided time and attention to any particular
subject, especially modern languages, which have as yet
no place in the University course, are at once evident.
The Degree Certificate, however, requires some explan¬
ation. It may either be equivalent to the ordinary B.A.
degree of the University, or it may be " in Honours," the
addition meaning that the student has passed one or
more of the University Honour Examinations, better
known by the time-honoured slang of Tripos. Such
passing is, I must mention, informal, being unrecognised
by the University, but it is not the less real in fact. As
yet no student has taken either a College Certificate or
a certificate in single subjects. Since the opening of
the College in 1869, thirty-one students have been in
residence for longer or shorter periods ; eight from various
causes left without taking any certificate, sixteen are at
present in residence, and seven have gone through the
full course and passed final examinations in the Mathe¬
matical, Classical, and Natural Sciences Triposes, six
obtaining Honours and one the ordinary degree. One
student of the Hall also passed lately in both the Mathe¬
matical and Classical Triposes with great credit, having,
like the Girton students, but unlike all other students of
the Hall, submitted to all the conditions imposed by the
University on candidates for Honours. These conditions
are: that the candidate shall reside for not more than ten
or less than nine terms, and shall pass an additional
Mathematical Examination besides the Previous Exami¬
nation, or Little-go.
All, I think, who know what the standard of these
Tripos examinations is, will allow that to have taken
Honours in them speaks well for the zeal and industry of
the Girton students, especially when we consider how
unprepared they all were on entering college; some know¬
ing no Greek at all, others little Latin and less Greek, all
very little and one absolutely no algebra or geometry.
2 i2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
Such being the standard of tlie Degree Certificate of
Girton, it is plain that its claim to be the highest attain¬
able is undeniable. There is, indeed, no real comparison
between it and any other, the General Examination of the
London University being equivalent only to that examina¬
tion of its male students which tests and certifies their
knowledge at the beginning of their University course,
while the Cambridge Higher Local Examinations are
described as having a smaller group of compulsory sub¬
jects than the London, and as aiming in these at thorough
rather than advanced knowledge.
I am, of course, well aware that the course pursued by
the students of Girton College as regards examinations
has not escaped censure from those who hold that these
University examinations are faulty, and I think that
women should not, as they say, imitate men in following
the old grooves, but should strike out some new line for
themselves, and aim at excellence in that. But, first, is
there not a somewhat perplexing vagueness in this
advice % What line, one may ask, ought men to be com¬
pelled to resign entirely to women % And secondly, is it
not the case that, however faulty in some respects these
Honour examinations may be, they are still the highest
that exist for testing proficiency in certain subjects ; and
if some women at least wish to study these subjects-—
perhaps that they may afterwards teach them—on what
ground ought they to be denied examination by the
highest standard?
Disapproving as I do—none more strongly—of all silly
talk, the object of which seems to be to pit women against
men in a sort of intellectual race, and of all premature
attempts to prove anything whatever about the relative
mental power of the sexes, believing that we have not yet,
and may not perhaps for generations, have the requisite
data for drawing any conclusions, I yet hold firmly that
the principle of submitting the work of men and women
to the same test is the right one. Putting aside every
consideration save that of the barest fair-play, is it not
plain that to refuse this is simply to refuse to alloAv women
to compete on equal terms with men in the common
labour market ? This is especially true now that the
education of girls is ceasing to be a mere farrago of un¬
scientifically taught accomplishments, and is being
approximated closely to that of boys in subjects and
methods of teaching.    Yet I would not be understood as
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine, 243
defending the present system of University examinations,
the competitive element being in my view indefensible,
though no doubt difficult to eliminate. The claim, how¬
ever, to be judged by a recognised standard is perfectly
distinguishable from a claim to be allowed to run a neck-
and-neck race for distinction with other candidates. And
of one thing at least Ave may be confident, that whether
the present English University system really deserves
all the hard words bestowed on it by reformers or not, its
" machinery," to use Dr. Arnold's already quoted expres¬
sion, is still beyond comparison superior to any in exist¬
ence for women. Women, therefore, lose at all events
nothing (save the doubtful privilege of becoming a
corpus vile for educational experiments) by adopting it,
faulty thougli it may be. Nor, I think, could a much
more hopeful prospect be offered them than that of shar¬
ing in future equally with men in all those reforms and
improvements which time, and the anxious consideration
of experienced and far-sighted thinkers, cannot but work
in the universities, I trust the day is not very far dis¬
tant when this prospect will be legally theirs.
Truth compels me here to confess that I have not
always approved of the means adopted by the authorities
of Girton College to further their views, although I do
agree with them in their principle, and am so far grateful
to them for consistently adhering to it.
Judged by the test we agreed upon befc^re, its profes¬
sional value, the (xirton system must be admitted to be
eminently successful. Five certificated Girton students
have engaged in the work of tuition; two are assistant-
mistresses—one mathematical, the other classical—in the
Manchester High School; one is a lecturer in physiology
and zoology at the Cheltenham Ladies' College ; one is
assistant-mistress at tlie North London Collegiate School;
and one is resident assistant-lecturer in mathematics and
natural science at Girton College. I may also mention
that another certificated student, who was for two years
resident classical tutor at Girton College, has been at
different times requested to become a candidate for four
headmistress-ships, but has, for private reasons, declined
to do so.
Now, though the success Avithin the reach of Girton
students, so far as high certificates can command it, is
likely to be always greater than tha.t of others, there are
two   considerations  which  somewhat  equalise   matters.
244 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The firstis that theTJniversity of Cambridge does not at pre¬
sent officially recognise Girton. As regards University Ex¬
aminations, therefore, the College is dependent more than is
safe or desirable on tlie goodwill of the examiners. Hither¬
to this goodwill has been strikingly manifest, and no serious
fears therefore need be felt for the future. Besides, time,
among other good things, can hardly fail to bring recog¬
nition by the University, and affiliation of the College to
it. This first drawback therefore has no practical weiglit
whatever. It is different with the second, Avhich is that
the Girton College course is both prolonged and expensive,
not perhaps absolutely, but relatively to other means of
preparation. It extends over three years ; or, in the case
of Honour students, three years and a-half. The fees are
100 guineas a-year, and only half the year, which half is
further divided into three terms, is spent at the College.
Manifestly this must be beyond tlie means of many.
Several scholarships and exhibitions have, however, been
granted every year; the following are offered for 1875:*—
An exhibition of the value of £50 a year for three years
has been offered on certain conditions by Mrs Tubbs.
Gilchrist Scliolarship.—The Trustees of the Gilchrist
Educational Fund offer a scholarship of the value of £50
a year for three years, to be competed for at the Uni¬
versity of London General Examination of Women in
May 1875.
A scholarship of the value of £50 a year for three years
is offered by Lady Goldsmid to the candidate who shall
pass best in the Entrance Examination in June 1875.
The scholar will be required to read for a degree
certificate.
A scholarship will be offered in connection with the
Cambridge Higher Local Examination in June 1875.
The above, it will be remarked, do not fully cover the
fees, but some full scholarships of £105 for three years
have been already, and might be again, awarded. I fear
I have dwelt at a wearisome length on Girton certificates
and scholarships, and will only add that no student is
obliged to take any certificate (unless bound to do so by
the conditions of a scholarship), or to pass any examination
except two,—the entrance examination, and the College
examination at the end of the academical year. The stijf-
ness of the latter depends, moreover, on the student herself;
* This paper was written in May.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 245
if she chooses to study many subjects, it is, of course,
hard ; if few, easy.
What certificates may be granted at Mr. Holloway's
proposed University for Women, what may be their
standard, and what their consequent value, are, like
most other points in the scheme, uncertain. In any
case, however, this institution—whether it can make
good its ambitious claim to the title of University or not
—may, and I hope will, do valuable work. It must, at
all events, secure good teachers, and these, as it is not
to be like Girton, situated close to a university, must to
a great extent be women. This seclusion, by the way,
giving, as it does, great facilities for out-door games,
boating, &c., proA^ed by the experience of Girton to be
essential to health during hard study, is, in my opinion,
an almost unmixed advantage.
Here, then, will be a fresh field for lady teachers, and one
which ought to be even more pleasant and more remunera¬
tive than school-work. Certainly, such a "University"
must out-bid the schools, at least if it is to secure the
best staff of resident teachers.
I wish I could say anything certain about the position
and salaries of the Mistress and Resident Lecturers of
Girton itself; but considerable difference of opinion seems
to prevail on this subject among the committee who form
the governing body, and it is consequently still in a very
unsettled state.
I have now I hope shown, however imperfectly, that
the great change which the education of girls is at pre¬
sent undergoing has already produced a corresponding
change in the position and emoluments of teachers, the
full development of the new system being merely a matter
of time; and that the salaries already offered to head
mistresses sufficiently prove a thorough and systematic
course of training to be an investment both profitable and
secure; finally, the necessity of possessing some recog¬
nised certificate of proficiency has been insisted on, and
the means of obtaining such certificates, particularly that
of Girton College, have been described in detail.
If I have given wished-for information, or have awakened
in any one the faintest spark of enthusiasm or ambition to
enter the noble profession, of which, until lately, I counted
myself a member, I shall have done all I ventured to hope.
But, before concluding, let me say yet a few words about
my own college.
No. 8. - AUGU3T 1S75.
246 llie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
My subject has hitherto constrained me to dwell exclu¬
sively upon the mere money value of the education Girton
offers. But need 1 say that this is very far from being its
chief merit? Not thus can the claims which it has on
the loyalty and gratitude of its students—claims deeply
felt by us all—be estimated.
But any description of it would be out of place here.
Even were it otherwise, I should hardly dare to attempt
so difficult a task. The student's life at Girton miist be
lived before its charm can be felt and its value known.
This brief acknowledgment must suffice.
Louisa Innes Lumsden.
CHAPTER VII.
MOEL Vamagh is the highest of the range of hills which
lie to the south-west of Chester, and can be clearly seen
from that town. In the evening, when its tall peak is
bathed in the sunset glow, it seems as if it would fain
express to human beings something of the meaning of its
name—the Motherly Hill; so warm and genial is the glow,
so worthy of reverence the height to which the mountain
rises. One evening, at the hour of sunset, a few days after
Werburga's return home, de Rehmar was standing near
the south-west angle of the wall, gazing at this hill, and
dwelling intently on the varied hues of the sky beyond it.
Looking round, he saw near him, similarly occupied, a
young man of distinguished appearance, evidently some¬
what pale and worn, and with an earnest and even dreamy
expression of countenance. He was gazing, now into the
distance, and now, eagerly and anxiously, in the direction
of the Baron's house. Presently he turned towards de
Rehmar a face which might be like that of Sir Percival
while still in search of the Grail—grave, dissatisfied, even
sad. Coming a little nearer, he said, "Excuse me, sir:
may I ask you which is the house of Baron de Rehmar?"
The Baron looked keenly at him while he directed him
to the second house on the wall, with a garden gate as
its entrance. Seeing evident signs of agitation in the
young man's face, a vague surmise crossed his mind, and
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 247
he added, "But the Baron is not at home at present,
and will not be so for some time." Eyidently somewhat
disappointed, the young man bowed his thanks, and
walked rapidly away past the house indicated. In a
few minutes he was out of sight.
Leaving the town, he took a road that led towards the
hills, and walked quickly along it for about two miles;
then turned to the left down a lane, with a brook over¬
shadowed by trees flowing at the side of it, and entered a
small farm-house which stood by the lane. Passing
through the kitchen, which was payed with flagstones, he
ascended a wooden staircase, and entering a modestly
furnished room, he threw himself into a chair near the
window. Part of the town of Chester was discernible
from this window, and the young man appeared to be
studying the prospect with great interest.
On the eyening when he had set out to walk from
Glanhafon to Chester, Bandall had walked steadily all
the way, only halting once or twice for a few minutes to
look around him. When he reached the town he heard
the church clocks strike three. To go at this hour to an
inn and ask for lodging would have been the most practi¬
cal course; but it seemed to Randall to be a course which
would have matched ill with the rest of his conduct—
better to wander dreamily on yet awhile, and to see what
fate would bring. He accordingly turned to the left,
crossed the large bridge over the Dee, and took a road
which led in a westerly direction. The first streaks of
dawn were soon visible, and he easily found the farm¬
house above mentioned. All was still around him ; even
the cocks had not yet begun to crow. Finding his way
to an outhouse, he discovered that it contained a goodly
pile of hay; and stretching himself on this, he threw his
cloak over him and soon slept a dreamless sleep. When
he awoke, the sun was high in the heavens ; he emerged
from his hiding-place, and looking round him, was so
pleased with the quiet and retired look of this abode that
he knocked at the door of the farm-house, and asked if he
could have a lodging there. His request was granted,
and he was soon established in a tolerably furnished room,
where he assured the mistress of the house that a window
looking towards Chester had far greater charms for him
than one looking to the hills.
The remainder of that day was spent in walking about
restlessly in the lanes and fields, or dreaming in his seat
248 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazme.
in the window. What course was he now to follow?
Two things had to be done. One was to make arrange¬
ments for carrying out the plan he had formed for his life
here, for that he should remain here for some time was a
settled poiat. The other was to write to Trevor and
explain the cause of his sudden flight. First, however,
fearing that his mother and sister might be suffering some
anxiety about him, he wrote a few lines to Malvina, tell¬
ing her that Glanhafon had become insupportable to him,
so that he could stay there no longer; but here he felt
that he could do some good; what that was she should
hear later. He begged her to give his love to his mother,
and to tell her that he was how far better occupied than
he had been before.
So entirely was Randall's mind preoccupied by the new
phase of life on which he was entering, that he consider¬
ably under-estimated the effect his conduct might have on
others. Such is generally the case when we pursue any
object passionately: for the time being, it is our all in
all; we see it surrounded by such a halo of glory that our
eyes are dazzled, and when we take them away from it,
other objects are indistinctly seen.
What then was it that Randall was about to do % To
discover this, we must accompany him on a walk which
he took the following morning. But that his conduct
may not appear too strange and Quixotic, we must bear
in mind that Randall had in his nature, to a greater
degree than most young men have, both ignorance of the
world and mental independence. This combination of
qualities would lead him to perform very unusual actions,
remaining at the same time utterly ignorant that they
were unusual. Thus, while he was acting solely from a
determination to carry out his own line of conduct, a
worldly-wise observer might have supposed that he was
actuated by the motive of defiance of custom and prece¬
dent. The peculiar circumstances in which he was now
about to place himself were not more peculiar than the
state of feeling which acted as a spur to drive him on¬
ward. On the one hand, there was the feeling, bordering
on aversion, with which he regarded Trevor and his
theories; and on the other, alongside of it, the passion,
rising even to adoration, which he felt for Werburga. So
strong had been the conflict between these feelings, that
while working with the former individual against his will,
he had felt as if every moment were carrying him further
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 249
away from the latter. On the one hand, restraint, irk¬
some tasks, only a barren waste for the heart to feed
upon ; on the other, freedom to choose his own abode
and occupation, and nearness to the object of his love!
All this he had planned and chosen for himself, and now
he was to begin to carry it out. He walked the next
morning past pleasant pastures, under the shade of fresh
green boughs, into the town of Chester, and threading
his way through the " Rows," found himself at the door of
Miss Langley's abode. He had, however, some mis¬
givings when he rang the bell. Even though Miss
Langley were at home, he should feel some awkward¬
ness; were she absent — which was more than likely,
seeing the holidays were not nearly over—he should be
utterly at a loss. Miss Langley was at home, however,
having just returned from the country ; she received him
graciously.
" Ah ! Mr. Holme, I am glad to see you have not for¬
gotten me ; and tell me, how is your sister % "
" I believe she is well," said Randall; " but, indeed, I
have scarcely been at home since I last saw you."
" Indeed !    Have you been travelling ? "
Randall proceeded to tell Miss Langley, just as if she
had been an old friend, all that had happened to him
during the last few weeks. There was one topic, how¬
ever, which he did not mention at all — namely, his
feehngs for Werburga; indeed, he did not once pronounce
the name of that young lady. Miss Langley was both
pleased and amused, however, with the naive way in
which he spoke of those tiresome, prosy, scientific
papers which he had been writing out for Trevor, and of
the wonder he had felt whether there were any truth at
all in these new discoveries.    He then added—
" When I last saw you, Miss Langley, you spoke some
earnest words to me, which from that day to this have
haunted me continually. I had been living without any
fixed purpose in life; and you spoke to me of some even
younger than I who were already fighting the battle man¬
fully. Those words of yours impressed me so deeply that
I resolved that I would undertake the first work which
presented itself to me. It was this work of Trevor's.
But, as I have told you, I found it most uncongenial from
the first, so that during my leisure hours, which were
many, I have been busily cultivating my favourite taste
—namely, literature.    I have been both writing and read-
250 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
ing a good deal, and have, I hope, studied Shakespeare
to some purpose."
" Ah! " said Miss Langley, playfully, " then you are
the very person I wish to see. Suppose you were to
become English master, and so help me out of a diffi¬
culty ? "
" Certainly, I will!" said Randall, at once relieved from
a great awkwardness ; " that is exactly what brought me
here."
" Oh, indeed ! I did not mean it," said Miss Langley,
now becoming embarrassed in her turn; " believe me, I
was only in jest. I should never dream of making such a
request to you, who have a very different career before
you."
There are not many young men in Randall's circum¬
stances who would aspire eagerly to the position of
teacher in a ladies' school, or who would not hold up to
ridicule any one of their number who did so. But Ran¬
dall hardly knew, and was too indifferent to inquire into,
the opinions of others on this subject; what he was doing
he did with simplicity and whole-heartedness ; and it was
with something like disappointment that he heard the
opinion of the world re-echoed in the words of Miss
Langley—" This is not your vocation." Yet somehow he
fancied that it was; possibly, however, were he to assert
this, Miss Langley might ask for his college certificate;
alas ! he had nothing of the kind. All this passed rapidly
through his mind, and then he answered—
"About my future career I have nothing to say; it is the
present alone that interests me. I ask of you as a favour
that you will accept my services. Even if it be only for
a few months, you will save me during that time from
an employment which I dislike, and from the other alter¬
native of no employment at all."
" Be it so then !" said Miss Langley, with a tremble
in her voice. " I feel that I am accepting a great fevour,
and shall write to Mrs. Holme on the subject this very
day."
'• Pray do not," said Randall; "I had rather you left
that to me."
"As you wish," said Miss Langley; and after a little talk
on the subject of how, when, and where the new school¬
master was to begin his duties, they parted, Randall
promising to call again in a few days.
It was not without great satisfaction that Miss Langley
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 251
had heard from Randall's lips the effect which her words
had had on him on their former meeting. From the half-
view of his conduct which she obtained from this standing-
point, she, with the aid of her own benevolent character,
pictured Randall to herself as one of those modern knights-
errant who go about in unpicturesque clothing, assisting
their fellow-men in what seem unromantic ways. Had
she known, however, that her part in the matter consisted
only of a tiny, half-heard accompaniment to the melody
which Werburga, with potent fingers, was playing on
the chords of his heart, she would have looked upon him
as less removed from the days of chivalry than she ima¬
gined. All the romantic devotion and homage which the
knights of old felt for women in general, and for one
woman in particular— this was the motive which led them
to enter the lists, and to win the fair by their prowess.
Some feelings akin to theirs now inspired the breast of
this modern knight; but he had looked in vain for some
field like the tournament, on which to win the favour of
her who had won his heart. After all ways had been
pondered over, all means thought of, it had then come
to this;—in want of any other field, the school-room was
to be the field of action ; it M^as there that he was to
win his spurs, show what he was capable of, and com¬
mand her attention as well as that of others. That he
was possessed of great powers, was a fact which even his
most intimate friends hardly recognised, so dreamy and
indolent had he appeared hitherto. Miss Langley, when
she thought the matter over at leisure, found that these
two qualities formed nearly the amount of her knowledge
about him; but she reflected that he might possibly be¬
long to that select class of beings who acquire knowledge
almost by intuition—as a kind of second nature.
His course for the future being now definitely arranged,
one duty connected with the past yet remained to be
done. This was to write to Trevor. He felt that were
he to leave this undone, Trevor might possibly attribute
his disappearance to personal dislike, and be unwilling to
excuse it. If he wrote, however, and explained how it
was the iincongeniality of his work which had driven him
to act as he had done, he felt sure that Trevor, who was
not without a dash of eccentricity himself, would excuse
this unwonted behaviour in another, and even respect
him for not stooping to work as a dog or a horse
would do, against his will.    All this he felt convinced of.
252 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and yet the writing of the letter was a task he almost
shrank from, as likely to cost him more time and thought
than he could spare from the more serious duties which
he had now undertaken.    He began, however, to ponder
the matter seriously, and to ask himself what it was that
had chiefly induced him to forsake Trevor in this manner.
There were reasons in his own mind that spoke for them¬
selves at once; but the answer of his heart was, Werburga.
True, he   wished to be  independent,   disliked restraint,
w^as anxious to devote himself to literature ; but all these
motives seemed to be floating only in the upper current
of his being ; down in the depths, his heart was throbbing
from some other cause ; that was the great motive—Wer¬
burga.     That his life   and fate might in some way be
linked   with  hers,   as he   believed  nature  had   already
established  a   rapport   between   them;   that  some   seal
might be set to his passion which might render it inalien¬
able ; this was the deep, the real, the unavowed motive
of his conduct.    He had such a feeling for her, that only
to see her pass along the street was a joy sufficient to
fill his heart for days ; and he rejoiced at the thought
that this was now a daily possibility.    It was his one
thought every time he walked  towards Chester, and he
looked at others whom he met only to remark that they
were not Werburga.   He felt that he had not the courage,
even though she had lived in his mother's house, to go and
see her in her own home ; this seemed to him as impos¬
sible as to call on a spiritual being.    By going at stated
times  to Miss Langley's,   however, he  would probably
meet Werburga, as if by chance, and perhaps find opportu¬
nities of speaking to her.    But all these feelings he must
set aside for the present, and write to Trevor.    Finding
it necessary to have a tangible means of collecting his
thoughts, he  seated  himself,  directly after  his   return
home, at a table with pen and ink, and after a great deal
of thought and hesitation, wrote the following letter:—
" Dear Sir,—As you have at all times freely expressed
your opinions to me, I think it is only fair that I should
do the same by you. When you have read this letter,
you will understand why I left you so suddenly; and if
you do not forgive, and even make allowance for, the step
I have taken, I shall find to my grief that the trust I had
in your manliness and generosity has been misplaced. It
eeems to me,  sir, that there are two parts of a man's
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 253
nature which ought never to be trampled upon; namely,
his feelings, and his freedom of thought. I consider that
the feelings are a more vital part of the man than the
intellect, and provided they are in a healthy and natural
state, anything which hurts or presses upon them unduly
is to be avoided. Such an effect, during all the time of
my residence under your roof, was produced upon me by
the opinions and so-called facts which then came under
my attention. If I tried to accept them implicitly, I found
I could not do so without either outraging some feeling,
or offending my freedom of judgment. I do not think
such facts, or conjectures, as I think they ought to be
called, are a necessary part of the education of a human
being. To prove this, I think we have only to look at the
impression they make upon us at first. On first hearing
them, we are so surprised that we stand aghast, and con¬
sequently our receptive faculty is so paralysed that it
loses the power of adopting them in such a way as to
veconcile them with thought and feeling. This of itself,
I think, proves that they are alien to our nature; to me
it is sufficient proof that they are false. It seems to me
that every thinking man will of himself, in course of time,
discover and accept those truths which are really in har¬
mony with his nature. He will thus avoid enslaving his
thoughts to the opinions of others, and by preserving
harmony between all the parts of his mental constitution,
will have some prospect of becoming a freely and naturally
developed human being. It is a result somewhat like this
that I am now striving after. Pardon me, sir, if I venture
to say, that, while with you, such a result appeared to me
impossible. I feel that science is not my vocation; and I
am now entering on anotht^.r sphere of thought, where
truths as important and as real as those which it teaches
are arrived at by a route which, it seems to me, is a far
pleasanter and more beautiful one; namely. Art in its
poetical development. Art teaches us the nature of man
in its possible state of perfection; Science teaches it only
in its precedents. Art embraces all the future, the infinite
possible; Science only the formal and finished past. I
have therefore closed that part of my life which wore the
shackles of those strict researches, and am now beginning
to breathe what for me is a purer, because it is a native
air. Wishing you, in your future studies, that pleasure
and profit which I found they could not afford me, I again
beg that you will tolerate, if you do not applaud, my
conduct, and remain, yours truly,       Eandall HuLME."
No. 8.—August 1875. 2 K
254 The Ladies' Edirihurgh Magazine.
When Trevor had read this letter, he said, " Poor fellow
It is a fine manly nature. I daresay he is right in giving
me up; but why run away so suddenly ? After all, he looks
on science with the prejudiced eye of ignorance : possibly
the grand vocation he has chosen may open his eyes
somewhat."
But it required another eye than that of Trevor to see
that it was the false side of science with which Eandall
had become acquainted by his means, and that the aversion
which this had inspired in him might possibly close his
mind against its true side also, at least for years—perhaps
for ever. Procla.
(To be continued.)
Sweet, have the years been long to thee,
As they to me have been.
Since thou didst close thy gracious eyes
On this earth, warm and green ?
And have the hours been heavy, sweet,
As they to me are long.
Since thou didst tread the heavenly street,
And learn the heavenly song f
For since they laid the lily flowers
Upon thy quiet breast.
To me the heavy-footed hours
Have brought nor mu-th, nor rest.
And since they hid thy placid face
In yonder churchyard still.
The world has been an empty place,
Which no one else can fill.
I would not make thee mournful, love,
If happy souls can mourn ;
I would not draw thee from above.
If happy souls return;
I would not cast across thy joy
One shadow of a tear,
If angel bliss can know alloy
From sorrows—darkening here.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 255
So dream I, sweet; and yet if one |
Should say that unawares i
My love and grief had drawn thy feet j
Adown the golden stairs, j
\
And even in one little hour <
This lonely room should be :
Transformed to an heavenly bower, ]
A heaven of heavens to me ; '
If shortly through that open door :
Thy shining robes should pass, |
Thy feet, as light upon the floor i
As dew upon the grass ; i
Thy little hands, like birds that are, |
Should both in mine alight;
And thine old smile, so slow, so fair,
Should deepen with delight;
And if the ruby blush should glow ;
Thy tender cheek upon, j
From whence death kissed it, years ago, i
Oh ! many years agone;— i
Sweet, if my love could call thee here
How coidd I bid thee stay %
For it is many a weary year
That thou hast been away.
R.
i
i^k dihristiatt Roman's IStorh in Jndia.
Part I.
The subject before us is one of ever-widening extent, and
ever-deepening interest: to enter into it fully in the space
of some three or four short chapters is imposssible; it is
therefore my purpose to give my readers such informa¬
tion on the leading features of the work, as will, I hope,
incline them to seek further details from other and better
sources. India has peculiar claims upon England; it is a
possession of the British Crown, and after the Mutiny,
our Queen, having been proclaimed " Empress of India,"
declared herself to be as responsible for tlie welfare of
256 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
her Indian subjects as for that of the inhabitants of the
British Isles. God has given that vast empire to us, and
He will certainly one day require an account of the man¬
ner in which we have fulfilled our sacred trust.
Thank God there has been for many years a great and
good work carried on in India by European Christians.
Moved by the Holy Spirit, and filled with love to the dear
Redeemer and the souls for whom He died, men have given
their lives to the work, and toiled earnestly, prayerfully,
devotedly, in the noble enterprise. The Church Mission¬
ary and other kindred societies can point to years of
unflagging zeal and untiring labour, ay, and to hun¬
dreds of jewels for the Redeemers crown, graciously
given them for their hire. The hands stretched out in
mute appeal have not been unseen; the cry which has
echoed from shore to shore all over the world, " Come
over and help us !" has not been unheard. The ignorance
and misery of thousands of perishing souls in all lands
have not been unheeded: the servants of God have loved,
and do love, to obey their Master's command, " Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature." But there has been a stifled cry, which is
only now being recognised; there have been prisoners
groaning in cruel bondage, whose wrongs are only now
being understood ; there have been millions of souls shut
up in densest darkness, whom the light already spread,
and the efforts aheady made, have of necessity failed to
reach; we stand upon the threshold of a work hitherto
untried, as we begin to understand the wants, and strive
to alleviate the sorrows, of India t Women.
Let it be realised that in seeking " to make known the
Gospel of Christ to the women of India " we are attempt¬
ing that for which missionaries in years gone by have
sighed and prayed, because they have felt that the
deplorable state of wives, mothers, and sisters, was a
mighty stumbling-block in the way of the conversion of
husbands, sons, and brothers; a work too which could
never be accomplished by men, as none but women
would be admitted into the Zenanas; and we have a
reason, cogent beyond the possibility of doubt, for crying
Avith all the earnestness of which we are possessed,
" Christian women to the rescue! "
In this first paper I shall try to show my readers the
crying need of India's women, leaving for future pages
the interesting and encouraging account of how that need
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 257
is being supplied; and also the discussion of the impor¬
tant question, " What is oiir share in this great work, and
how are we taking it up % ''
There are in India one hundred millions of women ; of
these, fifty millions are of low caste; the remaining fifty
millions are ladies, the wives of the nobility and gentry
of the country. A Hindu gentleman has been known to
say, " The ignorance and seclusion of the ladies of my
house are essential to the honour of my family." This
degrading seclusion may be considered the key-note to
their whole history, the successive notes in the chord (to
pursue the simile) being these—" Unwelcomed at birtli,
untaught in childhood, enslaved when married, accursed
as widows, unlamented at death." Few histories can be
summed up in words so brief yet full of terrible meaning:
" prisoners for life " is practically their doom ; prisoners
too with no bright memories of the past to solace them
in their desolation ; with no employment to enable them
to forget their surroundings; with no hope, however
faint, to gild the future with its cheering ray. The first
few years of the life of a Hindu lady pass by in compara¬
tive ease ; for, as a child, she is allowed to go out of doors
at will, and to find amusement with her doll or other toy.
Her greatest delight is to dress and undress her doll, and
prepare it for a mock marriage ceremony, marriage being
the predominant idea of her life; but she is not per¬
mitted to have any of the benefits of education, and at
an early age (eight being prescribed in the Shastras, or
Holy Books) she is married.
In the choice of a husband her will is not consulted ;
but to her father this is a business of the utmost impor¬
tance, involving as it does fiimily interests of the highest
order. A ghutaka (or person employed to arrange all
such matters) is sent for ; he proposes some youth whom
he considers suited in all respects to be the bridegroom
of the young lady in question ; and after some interviews
between the fathers of the children, and some prelimin¬
ary arrangements, such as writing the marriage-con¬
tract, a day is fixed for the wedding ceremony, and when
all prescribed forms have been gone through, the little
bride is taken to her new home. Strange and sad must
the child feel as she finds herself among strangers, and
learns that she can see her own mother no more. Her
new companions are the wives of her husband's brothers
and uncles, and perhaps great uncles;   also her husband's
2-38     . The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazi
inc.
mother, grandmother, and possibly great-grandmother,
for every gentleman in a family of any position in India
brings home his wife.
Once within the walls of the Zenana (or apartment for
women) in her husband's house, the lady may be con¬
sidered a prisoner; she must never again leave jmrdak
(the   close   confinement   considered   essential  to   family
honour, purdah being " a screen "), unless closely veiled,
and conveyed in a carriage from which she can see no
One, and into which no one can by any possibility look.
Every imaginable restraint is imposed on her; she must
always be veiled in the presence of her husband's male
relatives, she has no occupation, her life is simply one of
thorough inanition.    A Mahommedan lady being asked
wha,t   she   and  her   companions   did  to  pass  the  time,
answered, " We sit here till we are tired, and then we sit
there."   The Hindu ladies, who are a trifle less apathetic,
take pleasure in dressing their hair and changing their
apparel; they also cook their husband's food ; the rest of
their time passes drearily by in smoking or sleeping, or
simple  idleness.    The sufferings of these poor unhappy
inmates of the Zenana are very great, and   many lives
are lost in consequence of the damp or   otherwise un¬
healthy condition of their apartments, and the ignorance
and prejudice manifested in the treatment they receive
when ill.    One Zenana is thus described by Miss Miiller,
(missionary):    " A low narrow entrance, through which I
had to walk in a most lowly attitude, led into a square
court, through which we loaded to a brick staircase about
a foot and a half wide.    The court was the only recep¬
tacle for all thrown-away Avater from the kitchen.    Three
pupils appeared, one by one, in the little prison-like bed¬
room, with its walls which age and dirt had made of all
shades from brown to black, and which some pictures and
would-be decorations tried in vain to adorn.     I sat in
state on the solitary chair, the others on the bed. . . . The
only aperture through which any light could come was a
narrow black wooden shutter."    To sum up all, woman is
downtrodden and degraded to the utmost extent of man's
power, tyrannised over and crushed till her life is wretched
beyond all power of tongue to tell.    But the darkest part
of the story has yet to be told; when a lady in India
becomes a widow, her woes culminate, and are almost too
fearful to contemplate.     It is very evident how all is
ti-aceable to sad and utter ignorance of God and His ways.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 259
Many and touching are the references in the Bible to
God's loving tender care for the widow; and how beautiful
is the example of Jesus! In every Christian land, as by
intuition, men treat with reverence and sympathy those
from whom God has removed earthly support and joy,
and how deeply we feel the sacredness of the claims
which that sorrow has upon all!
When we turn to India, how dark, how terrible the
contrast! To be a widow is to be accused; and not
long since. Suttee (or burning the widow alive on her
husband's funeral pile) was the awful custom. Happily,
our government has abolished this, and also (^more
recently) the obligation to perpetual widowhood, but
the sentence of death is only changed; the weight
of the sorrows heaped upon the widow presses on her
throughout her wretched life, till she sinks under it
broken-hearted; and so strong is the prejudice against
new customs, that very few can be persuaded to avail
themselves of re-marriage. We look forward to seeing
this prejudice overcome, but in the meantime what is
the condition of the widow ? She wears the coarsest
kind of garments, eats only the poorest food, and that
but once in the day; twice in the month she must keep
a strict fast, no bit or drop entering her lips for twenty-
four hours. One of our missionaries, teaching recently
in a Zenana, where there was a widow fifteen years
of age, tells of one occasion on which the poor cliild
had to be excused from lessons from sheer exhaustion
and consequent inability to attend; her mother, who
was present, not daring even to moisten the parched
lips. Another heart-rending story is told of a poor
young woman, who, because her husband had become a
Christian, was considered a widow, and for five weary
years subsisted on one meal of rice a-day; at the end
of that time, we rejoice to add, she herself was converted
and rejoined her husband.
With one startling fact in connection with this sad
subject of widowhood, we close the present paper;
there are in India eighty thousand widows under sixteen
years of age ! I    Christian women, to the rescue!
" Jesus signals still ;
Wave the answer back to heaven,
By Thy grace— We will."
(To he continued.)
S. S. II.
260 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
^hadoic and punslunc.
Creepeth a heavy mist over the sea,
Waileth the leaden wave crested with snow.
Lapping the dark dripping rocks drearily—
Dead seems all joy here below !
Breaketh from heart of the gloom swift a beam,
Singeth the azure wave softly and low,
Shineth the brown cliff with diamond-like gleam—
Bright seems all joy here below!
Cometh a dimness slow over thine eye,
Woe-born and quivering, ready to flow
In silver tears to the sound of a sigh—
Gone seems my joy here below !
Flasheth a smile from thy dark tender glance.
Lighting my life with its love-kindling glow,
Swaying my soul with its sweet puissance—
Full seems my joy here below!
Melensa.
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Afagazine. 261
Cj]iJ   ^ragon   of the   |lorifj.
CHAPTER    IX.
" To the dim light and the large circle of shade
I have clomb, and to the whitening of the hills
There where we see no colour in the grass.
Natheless my longing loses not its green,
It has so taken root in the hard stone,
Which talks and hears as though it were a lady.
Utterly frozen is this youthful lady." —Dante.
Those only who have loved as I have can imagine the
trembling rapture with which I beheld my long-lost
lady, who looked as though she were a Christmas angel
who had lingered behind on earth when the rest had
sped heavenwards. Thorstein was between us, and so
near me that I could hear all he said, and understand
most, from my diligent study of the language with
Kolbiorn. While I hesitated for a moment whether to
show myself or not, their talk began, and I could not
but listen.
" And how was it, Thorstein, that you found the truth
at last ? " began Hertha.
" It was Rainulf who made it clear to me," he answered;
" Avari'iors imderstand each other. I feel as if I had dis¬
covered a fair new land, with new noble friends and
hopes that will not die. And now all surely is clear
between us, Hertha ; let me take joii away from here as
my wife; we have had enough of victory for me to bring
you in safety to the fair castle near Aversa which the
emperor has given me; and he has also promised me the
command of all the Norman allies when he goes home.
'No small thing, my Hertha, as these brave warriors have
accepted me with all kindness as their chief Come and
be my princess and theirs."
Hertha drooped her head, and became crimson.
" Oh, Thorstein, my own brother, I thought you knew
—that was all tliat stood between us two years ago,—
but now—now "
" Now what? " he said quickly.
She whispered something so low I could not hear a
word, but he turned his face aside towards me, and I saw
a quick spasm pass over it.
No. 9. - SEPTE-MBER 1875. 2 L
2G2 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
'•' Of course I saw it in him ; but you—no, I did not
know, I did not think you cared."
Again Hertha's answer was inaudible, and he went on.
" Yes, a good choice; there is nothing against it, and
T am ready to help you;" then after a pause, " you
know, Hertlia, it is only as it was before. I am your
brother still, or better suited to be your father perhaps—
youth to youth. I will'manage all for you. But yet—
it does seem strange—I, whom you have known your
whole life, think it wonderful you should so trust yourself
to a stranger of yesterday."
" My best of kinsmen," said Hertha now, " it is strange;
a maiden knows not of it, perhaps is willing to marry, as
I would have married you once had you been a Christian,
but something in her waits for more. Then suddenly one
day the lord of her heart comes all unexpected, and to
each it seems as if for the sake of Avhat now had come
this life had been unfilled, and their hearts waiting. But
oh, Thorstein, care for me still; without your good-will I
Avoiild not marry : you are my true brother, and soon you
will think of your little girl again as in the old blithe
days in Norway."
" Perhaps—at least it seems easier now to give up.
Then as he is so near, I may arrange all as soon as
possible; it shall not be baulked like the last wedding;"
and they both smiled.
" Shall you go now to Asile ? " she asked,
" Yes, and to-morrow, or at latest on the day after. I
shall expect to be here again, and bring him. Now I have
told Kolbiorn to meet me on the rocks under Asile, and I
shall walk there by the shore. My horse is tired out, for
I galloped on alone."
" You are sure, dear Thorstein, that yon will be Avell
received at Asile."
" Oh, I sliall see Kolbiorn first; no feai' of Lorenzo, but .
he ought to get rid of Syades."
" Yes, and do you beware of him," she said, drawing on
her veil again ;  and they rose and left the chapel.
I followed as soon as I could without being observed,
and saw the gleam of Thorstein's armour already some
way off in the crowd ; but when I got near him, I found
to my great vexation he was alone. How recognise
Hertha among the many veiled women who passed to
and fro '? Awhile I strove to do so, but only lost sight of
Thorstein also; and at last I left the Cathedral, though
The Ladies' Jidinhurgh Magazine. 263
disappointed for the moment, yet full of tumultuous joy.
Kolbiorn then was right, it Avas only the insulting form of
the marriage that had offended her; ours was but a lovers'
quarrel. I felt a true compassion for Thorstein when I
thought of the message he had to give me, and I resolved
to go home also by the sea-shore, so as to meet and talk
with him there. It was still black night in the streets ; the
stars were gone, and it was too dark to set ofi"; so I was
lingering under the lamp which burned before a shrine of
Our Lady in the market-place, when, to my surprise,
8yades almost ran up against me.
" Well met. Marquis ! " he exclaimed; •' I was looking for
you, and thought you might be here; I have great news
for you.    Thorstein is in this city."
" Indeed ! and why is this such great news ? "
'• Do you not see?—we may get him to Asile, and there
he might be brought to a useful end. At least "—seeing
my angry gesture—" we may find out from him where
Hertha is. One of my spies has seen her not far from
here."
" I will have no one lured into my castle to be murdered."
" That, if you call it so, is not needed. There is more
news yet; you had not been gone half an hour before
Swend, in his Dragon ship, came round the point, and he
is now in his old moorings beneath Asile. Let him but
take Thorstein, and he is on the watch for him, and he
will clear him out of your way with Hertha ; and no fear
but Swend Avill find out from him where she is. Swend's
humour is no better than when you last saw him. \Vill
you ride, and then Ave can talk by the \A'ay ? "
" No," I ansAvered ; " there is no huny ; nothing Avill
happen till morning, and I Avill Avalk back by the shore.
But do you go on, and get out food, and, above all, wine,
for SAvend and his men, or they may be troublesome; but
above all, do not let them into the castle to terrify
Valeria and Damasus."
" I go, my lord," said Syados. " Noav mind hoAv you
play your game; your lady is within reach again, and,
if you are careful, may be yours to-morroAv."
So Ave parted, and I turned shorewards, determined to
warn Thorstein of his danger and hear his message.
When the grey dawn began to brighten, I had already
passed the toAvn and shipping; and further along the
lonely coast I saAv a man sitting motionless on a rock;
and draAving softly near, I perceived it was Thorstein.    I
264 The Ladies'' Ed'mburgli Magazine.
stole close up to him on the noiseless sand, and saw how
he sat like an old Greek statue of IMars I had seen, quite
still, with his hands clasped round one knee, looking
fixedly out to seaward. His helmet lay at his feet, and
his eyes, gazing on the dim horizon, were full of tears.
A deep compassion moved me, and I came round the rock
as from further away, letting my steps sound. He
picked up his helmet, dashing away the tears as he did
so, and turned to me with his usual manner.
" You here, and so early. Marquis d'Asile % "
" Yes, I come from midnight mass at St. Agata, and I
wish you all joy of the Feast of the Nativity."
" Thank you. Marquis, I come from mass too, at the
Cathedral, for I am a Christian now," and he clasped ray
hand warmly—" and I must ask you to forgive me for
being a little rough Avhen last we met. It was Swend's
fault, and Syades'—not ours, Lorenzo. Now I have broken
Avith Swend, do you break with Syades, and we shall
always be the best of friends. May I come with you to
Asile?"
" Willingly, as far as I am concerned ; but there are
dangers there for you."
" How ! dangers ? "
" Yes—only to-day, I trust: to-morrow we will arrange
all for you to come; and bring Hertha, will you not ? "
" Hertha! I do not understand you. Surely you
must feel that Asile is just now the last place Hertha
would choose to visit."
By this time we were walking rapidly side by side along
the sands, and again and again I alluded to Hertha, but
Thorstein Avould not speak of her; and with growing
Avrath I perceived he avoided her name. At last I said,
" Herser Thorstein, it is not well that you should fence
Avith me about this matter; you knoAV where my bride is
hidden; you know that although her brother's rough
folly angered her for the moment, that she is my Avilliug
bride; you are keeping us apart, but it is useless. AVhy
have you changed to me ? you approved of our marriage
before."
" Yes, I tried to think it for the best once," ansAvered
Thorstein ; " but uoav I tell you—Hertha is not for you."
" I see you Avill tell her I am fixlse, or perhaps that I
am the slave of Syades, and keep her from knowing the
truth."
" Speak no more of her," he said, sternly.   " Hertha and
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 265
her afi'airs are not to be talked over between you and me.
You may perhaps see her soon; but others will be present
who will not allow her to be disturbed."
" Allow is no word to be used to me."
" One would think this convent-bred youth wished to
provoke me to fight him," said Thorstein, half to himself;
" you know 1 cannot fight you, we are no match, so let us
end this foolish talk and not scold on like women. Take
the upper road, Marquis, for I have to meet Kolbiorn on
the rocks below, and so a good farewell to you."
The traitor, I thought, betraying Hertha's confidence
in him. Should I tell him what I had overheard in the
Cathedral ? No, he might turn on me then in fury ; life
was very precious to me now, and he seemed already
irritated. Round the next point lay the Dragon of the
North, and all trouble from him would soon be off my
hands. Should he go on without warning'? To deliver
my conscience, I called out as I loitered behind him, "As
I told you, there is danger in front;" but he took no
notice, and I thought his blood might now be on his OAvn
head. I followed, as he went swiftly over the sands for
more than an hour, and then clambered lightly up the
point from which the creek below Asile and the ship
would become visible. I saw his figure for a moment
against the sky-line, then came a clashing of weapons
and wild shouts. No doubt, a look-out had been kept on
the headland, and I hurried thither myself, too eager to
know what was passing to remember that it Avould have
been wise for me to have returned in safety to my castle.
AVhen I mounted it, I could see, moored so close inshore
tliat the gangway rested on the rocks, the Dragon ship :
the narrow strip of sand between it and the fishing
village was thronged by figures coming and going: some
drove cattle; some brought other goods; fires were blaz¬
ing ; stir of all sorts went on ; and I could see a party of
armed men leading Thorstein in their midst as a prisoner.
I descended myself and then paused, uncertain whether
to turn back or go on, when Swend's rough voice hailed
me and bade me come near.
" Good morrow to the mighty champion," he said.
" Well, we might have our wedding feast now; we have
caught the mischief-maker. No time for that, though.
"What we want now is plenty of stores on board, wine and
meat, and gold from the castle. Give your orders, Mar¬
quis ; Ave must put out to sea almost directly again."
2G6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" Ay, ay, captain, but we must have our Yule feast
ashore as you promised," said a grim old Viking,
Swerfur by name, as he staggared past under an ox
carcase. We were near the mouth of a great cave, and I
was now surrounded by the crew, and could see how
much it was changed. For one Northman there were
two dark Africans or evil-looking Greek pirates. Swend
too seemed rougher and wilder even than of old, and no
doubt his prompt fierceness awed a little the scum of
nations he now commanded, though he never had full
authority over the Northmen.
" Yes, my men, we sail this evening with all we can
carry inside and outside," he shouted—" make way there
—I am going to speak ;" and he sprang on a rock and
said—
" Besides our own feast, I shall propose that as we
have been most unlu^cky of late, which looks as if the gods
were offended, that A^e should, as is usual at Yule, make
a feast for them—give some of the booty in sacrifice."
" Yes, yes—a sacrifice—horses—goats for Thor," was
shouted from below.
" Ay, my lads, and more than that; I should offer a
better gift to Thor, our own battle-god—who thinks, no
doubt, we have forgotten him, I shall give what he loves
best—a Avarrior in his prime. I have the traitor Herser
Thorsteiu a prisoner there in the cave."
There was a yell of delight; but I could see many of
the real Northmen glanced at each other displeased and
silent, and Swend went on.
" Do you consider that he has deserted the ship, and
slain our messmate Hacon for obeying orders ? He left
me his captain tied up like a wolf in a trap; he has stolen
away my sister, and Avill not say where she is ; and more
tlian all, he who sailed with us to avoid King Olaf's
tyranny, has insulted the great Thor, under whose name
lie was protected: he has become Christ's man and Olaf s
man, and is no more fit to be with free sea rovers. Show
him tliat Thor has power to avenge himself, mark him on
the shoulder w4th his hammer, and send him to the god
Avith a message that Av^e are true to the old faith still,"
This time the response was deep and fierce, and fcAV
seemed to dissent, and I trembled, Avhile I listened, from
a strange mixture of feelings. Now Kolbiorn came hastily
out of the crowd toAvards me ; his eyes were troubled, his
fair face pale as death.    Swend turned round as he ad-
The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 267
vanced. " Mind," he said, " yon two are prisoners. One
cannot tell friend from foe in this land of traitors. Disarm
them, and don't let them away, but meddle with them no
further," he said to the men about, who accordingly dis¬
armed and watched us, but left us freedom of movement.
" Swend is in an evil humour," said Kolbiorn in Italian.
"I could generally do something with him before, but
now he will not hear a word. For Heaven's sake, send for
the strongest wine, Lorenzo : the chance is making him
very drunk, or it will go ill for poor Thorstein. AVas ever
such luck ? Oh, had you but heard in time to warn him !
I knew he was coming, but was stopped before I could
save him from walking into the Dragon's mouth. How¬
ever, I don't think Swend means harm to you or me ; let
us go into the cave and hear what counsel Thorsteiu has
to give."
Two men guarded the high archway of the cave, who
let us pass to where, in a narrower part, others guarded
Thorstein. He sat on the rocks, close to where they
dipped into the narrow inlet of brightest green water,
which wound far up the cavern. They had taken off his
helmet and mail coat, and his hands were far too tightly
bound, but otherwise he was uninjured and undisturbed,
greeting us pleasantly as we entered. Before him stood
Syades, talking eagerly; and his presence seemed, as usual,
to take all power from me, so that, as I dreamily watched
the little flashing fish turning among the coral branches
under the green water, I hardly knew what I willed and
what passed.
" As I was saying," continued Syades, " only give us
your promise you will tell us how to find Hertha when
you are safe in Asile, and I will yet bring you there.
Why keep my lord from his bride ? Why throw the last
chance of your own life away ? "
" I have never thought enough about my life," answered
Thorstein, "to change my mind when I have settled thuigs,
for fear of losing it. I think it not well to tell you Avhere
Hertha is, so that matter is done with. Why, Lorenzo,"
turning to me, with a little laugh, " always slow ! Surely
you had time when you saw I had run on the reef to
change your course.    Has Swend taken you too ? "
" Why use friendly words to one you have forced to
become your foe ? " said Syades. " This Marquis knew
before that Swend was here ; I told him."
" And he  never warned me! " exclaimed Thorstein;
268 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" the treachery of these Italians !'' He added in an altered
voice, " As I am a man with but a short time to live, per¬
haps you will leave me to talk in peace to my friend
Kolbiorn."
Kolbiorn, too, was looking at me Avith utter scorn
expressed on his handsome face ; but e'er 1 had time to
speak, Swend had dashed into the cavern among us.
" What, the wise Syades here!" he called out; " even
the fox will sleep : here I have the lord, and as good as
the garrison of Asile, safe together. Now, my Lord Mar¬
quis, order your people to set open the gates that we
may help ourselves, or it will be the worse for you and
Master Syades here. Out with you ; I will send you with
a guard to your gates: let them open on your peril, and
be quick, for I leave this cursed land to-night for ever."
" Sweud Hrolfson," said Syades, " it needs but a touch
from me, and you would never leave this land or this cave
alive. Are you drunk already, that you know not friend
from foe? Even now, food and rich wines come to you
from Asile. If you want more, harry the country round ;
send Eric in command, or he may chance to try and
rescue Thorstein. Watch the paths from Naples; the
Normans are on their way here. For the Marquis, if, to
my regret, any evil befal him, it matters little. I hold
the castle, then, for his heiress Valeria. Me you cannot
harm."
Swend looked awed, but, conquering himself, shouted
to his men to seize the Saracen; and several advanced.
Out flashed the sword of Syades—flashed indeed, for in
the twiHght cave all could see it was not of cold steel,
but of glowing fire. The men bore back from the fiery
circle, as slowly he retreated into the darker recesses of
the cavern ; and the weird bhie sword-light was lost to
view round a point of blackest rock. Men followed, but
not very speedily, and no doubt some branch of the secret
passages opened into the far windings of the cave, for
they found nothing; and Syades, as I afterwards heard,
soon reappeared at Asilc. But Swend gave orders that
Thorstein should be removed from the cave, as some
mystery haimted it; so all chance of rescue thence was
removed, and he was led out to where a great stone had
fallen on the sand from the top of the mighty jagged cliff
which almost overhung the sea.
" Thor has no sacred stone here," said Swend, with his
savage laugh;  "but care noi thou for  that, Thorstein.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 2 09
When your back is broken over this one, it will be Thor's
stone for ever. Meanwhile you must wait a bit till the
meat is cooked, and horseflesh ready, for the vows and
the drinking. How do you like the feel of your hands ?
are the knots tied v^^ell enough to please you ? "
Thorstein made no answer ; indeed, he seemed to heed
Hwend as little as he did the screaming gulls who wheeled
about, dipping their wings in the smooth lead-like sea;
for the day was very still, gloomy, and mild, not like
Christmas Day ; a weight seemed to stand over earth and
sea; and amid all the wild clamour of the crew now and
then came a silence, in which the far-away chimes of the
cathedral in the distant city were heard; and the shrieks
and shouts where some Northmen were plundering an
inland village, whence clouds of smoke and spires of flame
began to rise. I never knew how much time had passed,
but now, the Northmen, aided by some terrified inhabit¬
ants, were spreading their feast on the near rocks and
sand; they were broaching Avine-casks from Asile, roasting
and boiling huge masses of meat, taking more on ship-
l)oard, a bustling crowd surrounding on all sides tlie little
knot of dark-hued Saracens Avho guarded Thorstein. Kol-
biorn, Avith uuAvonted sadness on his lace, sat close beside
him, and they talked on together in a Ioav voice, neither
of them noticing me Avhen once or twice 1 addressed a
Avord to them.
Then there Avas a movement in the croAvd above, a
sound as of horses' feet; and looking into the wild throng,
I could see my lady riding through them, folIoAved by
some one on horseback. The mob surged round her horse;
evidently she could ride no further; but she sprang doAvn
.among them, and passed through; for it was as if her
aAvful quiet beauty clove a way for her, and as if it forced
all men to do her homage. She came up to where Thor-
stein sat, Avho rose as she drew near. She leant her hands
on his shoulders, and kissed his forehead gently and
slowly, and then turned round and faced her brother.
When I had seen her in the upland cliapel, Avhei'e all
concerned herself, she had seemed confused, and almost
frightened; now there Avas not in her fair face a trace of
bewilderment or fear. I saw how SAvend dared not meet
her eye, for he had turned towards her horse, calling men
to slaughter it, as a beast noble enough for a sacrifice.
'• Our sister has brought it for the horse-broth she will
No. 9.—SEPTEMEEr. 1875. 2 M
270 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
not taste," he said ; and in another minute the horse was
felled, and cut up like a bullock.
" Hertha," said Thorstein—but in spite of his words his
face was bright with joy—" this should not be."
" Some of the men may yet listen to Rolf's daughter,"
she answered.
" The men are not here; there are not thirty Northmen;
they are a rabble of strangers."
" That is bad, dear kinsman, but I have done something;
I have sent messages to hasten Rainulf; 1 have roused
them in Asile—Lorenzo !"—she turned to me as I ventured
nearer; "can you do nothing?   You have a garrison."
" Alas, dear lady," I began, when Kolbiorn interrupted
— "He! he knew, the trap was set, and never warned
Thorsteiu."
" Lorenzo!" said Hertha.
" Oh, my bride, my queen," I exclaimed; " I knew not
all the danger, and 1 let him go on because he would not
give your message to me. I was in the cathedral, and
heard you tell him to summon me." I stopped, for I saw
Hertha did not listen; but Thorstein said, " You were in
the cathedral, and overheai'd, I begin to understand;
you must tell them all afterwards, Marqiiis—not now—
the time draws near."
The men were now flinging themselves down by the
masses of roast and sodden meat, and quaffing huge
draughts of wine; and the hoi'se-broth, the great sign or
sacrament of Odin-worship, was being served. Yet an
uneasy silence, or wild shouts, replaced the usual gay talk
of Norse revellers. Suddenly Swerker, an oldish man,
spoke on high.
" Herser Thorstein, you were our best man; we of the
old crew are loath to throw your life away. Yovi came
with us to avoid the new faith—taste the horse-flesh, join
us again, and let us all pledge Thor together."
" That cannot be noAv, Swerker," he answered. " I am
Christ's man; besides, it was freedom of choice I fought
for; all men who served me should be free to choose
their faith also."
" Join us again is my rede, if we leave the gods to mind
their OAvn business. What say you, Eric ? must we all
lose Thorstein because he has quarrelled with Swend 1"
" I say, let Swend and Thorstein fight it out," said Eric.
"Glorious," said another; "let them fight."
" I would fight any one here gladly," said Thorstein;
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 271
and for the first time a little eager hope came into his
voice.
" No, no, they are no match; it would only be killing
Swend instead of Thorstein," came in another voice;
" but let Thorstein come on board again as before,"
" And commandr' shouted Swend; "and for whom?
why he fights for the Lombards, and against the emperor
at Mickelgarth."
" Yes," said Thorstein; " I have taken service with the
Emperor Henry, and can fight no more on board the ship;
but I will pay a man's atonement for Hacon, and then
Avhat more do you want with me? If no one will fight
me, let us shake hands for old comrades' sake, and part
in peace."
" What boots it altering and changing our course like
this?" shouted an old rover. " Thorstein's life is not so
much better than other people's, nor, by all the gods, is
he so much fonder of it that we should think so much
about giving him to Thor. That he was our friend,
makes it all the worse that he is our worst foe. Go on,
Swend, and we will help you, and let us be done with
the business."
With sick terror I beheld now a rush of men to where
Thorstein and Hertha stood. Headed by Swend, with
uplifted axes, they dashed past the dark grinning Africans,
and were on him. Hertha had thrown her arms round
him, and stood now clinging to him, facing the men, tall,
beautiful, and tranquil, while the axes were glittering in
the air all round her. Thorstein looked not at them, but
down on her, with a bright glow of pleasure illuminating
his face, while she said to them—
" Traitors that you are to the old days and the old land
of Norway, strike if you will; it shall not be Thorstein
only, but your great leader Rolf's daughter. My true
kinsman and I—both, both together!" All the men but
Swend drew somewhat back, and there was a pause,
broken at last by a new and strange interruption.
E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
272 Tlie Ladies Edinhurgli Magazine.
HI.—Engravixg ox Wood.
In the many discussions of the present day, of which
women and their employments are made the subject, any
occupation in the line of Art is at once conceded to them
by the popular voice as eminently fitting. This chiefly
perhaps from two reasons:—because the work is, gene¬
rally speaking, carried on at home, and because the
labour is looked upon as " light." The reasons are valid
ones, and yet they may be dAvelt upon too strongly, for
those who would be successful in art must pursue it Avith
a devotion which the home life hinders as often as fosters,
and must recognise that it is labour to which they are
called, persevering and arduous, though the labour itself
may become a delight. Is it not the ignoring of tliis, the
regarding of art in the light of a recreation rather than
a study, that accounts for so few women reaching the
highest rank among artists, while the majority do just
so well as to show they could have done a groat deal
better ? A writer in the Art Journal says, " Women can
attain a certain level ' so easily' that they are tempted to
refrain from scaling the heights beyond. AVe submit
that what woman most lacks in art, is the power to labour
quietly, unassumingly, unremittingly."
The recently published Life of Mrs. Gilbert (perhaps
better knoAvn in literature as Ann Taylor) has called
attention to an early example of engraving being adopted
as a profession by women. She and her sister Jane,
before becoming known in tlie literary Avorld as the gifted
authors of so many well-known hymns and other pro¬
ductions, were taught by their father, Isaac Taylor, his
own art of engraving on steel, and followed it so
thoroughly that with a working day of more than nine
hours they continued the pursuit from twelve to fourteen
years. Mrs. Gilbert in her Autobiography recalls those
days with pleasure and pride, saying, " We had, I might
almost say, the honour of stepping first on a line iioav
regarded as nearly the one thing to be accomplished,
the respectable, remunerative, appropriate employment of
young women."
The line thus stepped upon has been more frequently
trodden since, the necessity for it, in this country at all
Tlie Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 273
events, being made plain by the inexorable logic of facts.
The public mind has thus got familiarised with the idea,
but where " appropriate employments " are to be found
is often still the subject of discussion. The solution of
the problem must eventually lie in individual experience,
as it ends in failure or achieves success. Some light may,
however, be thrown upon it by more accurate knowledge
of employments suggested, the very A^aguest notions as
to the possibilities or requirements of such being often
entertained by those who either recommend or condemn.
The occupation of which this paper is to speak is one
very familiar to us, for we can scarcely handle a book
without seeing some fruits of its skill, and yet how few
who admire the picture have any knowledge of the
process !
The art of engraving on wood is of very ancient origin.
The invention has been claimed for the Chinese, whoso
books have been printed from wood-blocks for centuries.
It is not however, till the beginning of the fifteenth
century that there is evidence of the existence of the art
as we now understand it, at which time it was used in
Germany for printing playing-cards and figures of
saints. It was when the art of printing had become
known that the publication of illustrated books be¬
came general in Germany, reaching England in 1476.
After this the practice of engraving steadily increased,
but declined in the seventeenth century, till it fell into
a state of great neglect, from which it was revived mainly
by the genius of Thomas Bewick about the year 1790.
His works, as with an inspiration of fresh life, more than
raised it to its former importance, from which time it has
continued to flourish till it has reached the high place it
now holds both in England and on the Continent.
An engraving on wood is produced by leaving in relief
all the parts intended to be printed, the light portions
being hollowed or cut away. The picture is drawn or
painted upon Ihe smooth surface of a block of wood, and
the engraver renders this into a type, producing his
effects by the arrangement of his lines, the lights which
he takes out and the darkened masses which he leaves,
form, colour, and texture being alike the object of his
study. The graver is his pencil, only every line he
makes is a light, and it is what he leaves that prints as
black. Engraving on wood thus differs from that upon
copper or steel, in which the portions to be printed are
274 The Tjadies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
sunk below the surface ; and it is this fact of the drawing
being made into a type, capable of being printed along
with the letter-press, which gives the peculiar fitness it
possesses for the illustration of books. The wood used is
boxwood, which is specially suitable for the purpose, from
its closeness of texture and beautiful light colour. It is
chiefly imported from Turkey, and is cut in slices across
the grain of the exact depth of type for convenience in
printing. For a large drawing several pieces of wood
must be joined together, as not more than five or six
inches square of sound quality can be got in one slice.
The different pieces are fastened by bolts, and can be
joined or separated at will. The tools used are of three
kinds, and of each there are various sizes. A glass of
slightly magnifying power is commonly placed over the
work to prevent any strain upon the eyesight, though
some engravers dispense with tliis, finding it unnecessary.
AVhen the engraving is finished, a proof is taken by inking
the surface with the finest printer's ink, laying upon it a
sheet of India paper, and pressing upon this with an
instrument called a burnisher. This allows the engraver
to judge of the effect, and he can then lighten some
portions and soften others, so as to tone and harmonise
the whole.
Such is a description of the merely outward process ;
the whole value of the work must depend on the manner
of its execution. With a good engraver it is far from
mechanical labour. He must study and sympathise with
the artist's ideas, endeavouring to render them faithfully ;
aud yet, while seeking to give expression to the work of
another, will at the same time express himself. In order,
then, to acquire the art of engraving on wood, the first
essential is a taste for drawing. Without this as a
foundation, efforts will be fruitless; with this, study,
practice, and patience may accomplish the rest. The
power over the graver as a tool, and the knowledge
that directs its use, will grow together, until all the
varied eff"ects Avhich the art can render are eventually
mastered. This, it may easily be believed, will not be
a speedy process. In some of the novels of late years,
in which a heroine is suddenly thrown on her own
resources for maintenance, she at once becomes an en¬
graver on wood, the profession being invariably acquired
in the course of a year ! Accuracy had to be sacrificed
to the exigencies of the tale, and anything can be ac-
Tlie Ladies Edinhurgk Magazine. 275
complished on paper; but in real life several years of
daily work will pass before proficiency is acquired. This
does not mean to say that a proficiency very pleasing to
the amateur may not be reached at a much earlier period,
and pictures for admiring friends to praise grow under
her hands, but the amateur standard and the professional
one are widely apart. It is only the latter that is being-
treated of here. Engraving is applied to many subjects,
and undoubtedly there is a class of work which shorter
practice would master; but to be able for the lower work
only is surely no worthy object of ambition, besides Avhich
the range of employment would thus be so limited as to
lessen the chance of there being any at all. Partial train¬
ing has been the ruin of many attempts to gain new
employment for women. It is often spoken ot as desir¬
able that they should be able to do " a little" work,
and the " little " which is meant to apply to the matter
of quantity is easily transferred to that of quality, and
this effectually bars the Avay to success. It is very un¬
desirable to see a lowered standard for women's work, and
yet what reason is there to expect the attainment of the
higher one in any way but with the same amount of time
and labour given by young men ? No one asks for more.
It is sometimes said that girls " take up tilings " more
(juickly than boys; but even where this is the case, the
intuitive quickness of perception which rapidly obtains
some knowledge of the art, will not do away with the
need for that time and experience which alone will give
the power to practise it.
Wood-engraving as a profession yields more than much
of the teaching so often resorted to in the present day for
a maintenance. The return for acquired knowledge may
be quoted at from £1 to £3 a-week, whilst a higher scale
of remuneration is reached by those who attain superior
skill. In the comparatively few cases where an en¬
graver, having also original talent as an artist, makes the
designs for what he intends to cut, the return is of course
larger.
The constantly increasing use of illustration in the
literature of the present day seems to give the assurance
of there being work for those who can prove themselves
proficient. The occupation is open to all alike, and if
prejudice should stand in the way of women being em¬
ployed as assistants by engravers, it does not seem likely
to act in the case of publishers who are ready to employ
276 Tlie Ladies'' Edinlurgh Magazine.
any one who can do the work well. In this word " well "
must be understood to be included not only skill in the
execution, but that thorough punctuality and attention to
all business details, in which many women, from want of
early training in such habits, are apt to fail.
There haye been many examples of women adopting en¬
graving on wood as a profession, instruction being obtamed,
as it was in the case of Mrs. Gilbert, from some relative
engaged in the art. In late years more systematic attempts
liave been made in this direction, classes for teaching
Avomeii having been opened at the Cooper Institute, New
York; the Queen's Institute, Dublin; and the Schools of
Art at Kensington and Queen's Square, London. Those
in London were afterwards discontinued, but the one at
(Queen's Square has at present been resumed, while a class
is now conducted in Edinburgh by an able and faithful
teacher,* one of the best engravers on wood in the city.
With the op2:)ortunities of instruction thus gained, there
ought to have been more seen in the way of result. But
instruction alone will not suffice. It merely opens the
door of entrance to a course which the student must
earnestly pursue with no laggard steps. Miss Nightin¬
gale says, " Three-fourths of the mischief in Avomen's
lives arises from their excepting themselves from the
rules of training considered needful for men." Until this
exception is no longer made, and there is more of a
deliberate determination to succeed, we cannot wonder
at not hearing more frequently of success.
The education of women has till lately been so deficient
in thoroughness, that the idea of persevering in any one
pursuit rarely occurs to them. A study of Hebrew, just
sufticient to fit for reading a few verses in Genesis, is
succeeded by " twelve lessons in Italian," and the poAver
to draw a landscape tolerably is thought to point to the
propriety of a few lessons in singing! The fault often
lies less with the pupil than with friends, who are unwilling
to see many consecutive hours given to any one thing,
and feel certain, contrary to all the lessons of experience,
that " health must suffer." In reality, daily em2;)loyment
is most healthful, and those with whom it is not a neces¬
sity may avcII seek it from choice. But are there many
women in this country who feel secure against all
change of circumstances, and that the question will never
* Mr. K,  Paterson, 3 East Kegister Street.
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 211
in their case be raised, " What can she do ? " Various
means of employment are now being suggested to such
as seek to render themselves independent of adverse
fortune, or to those who have ceased to believe in the
false but too prevalent notion, that no women should
use their powers in the direction of remunerative work
but those who absolutely require to maintain themselves.
The employment referred to in this paper has its own
advantages, and cannot be objected to on the grounds
that some others are. The fact that delicacy of touch
rather than strength of hand is required, seems to point
it out as specially suited to women; and it is also capable
of being carried on at home, though it had always best bo
borne in mind that a " home occupation " does not mean
an occupation which one can leave at any moment in order
to do something else.
Ruskin speaks of "the vast industries of modern en-
gi-aving" as being " one of the most poAverful existing
influences of education and sources of pleasure among
civilised people." It is siu'ely no unenviable distinction to
have a share, however humble, in such work; and though
the labour be arduous, often calling for self-denial, a
pleasurable healthy atmosphere is breathed, and the mind
is quickened and enlarged, for, to quote from a late address
by Fronde, " Every productive occupation followed
assiduously with a desire to understand everything con¬
nected with it, is an ascending stair whose summit is no¬
where, and from the successive steps of which the horizon
of knowledge perpetually enlarges."
B. B. M'Laren.
©he Shield flf JithilUfl.
In ancient Roman court, on airy wing
A humming-bird I spied, flitting one day
'Mid creepered trellises that shed their gay
Luxuriance on the marble floor, and bring.
On noiseless wings of perfume, thoughts of home :
Drowsily on the air the humming sound
Of its small wings mixed with the silence round,
And lulled me, half-asleep, to dreams that roam
Further than Thought: Soon sudden fiutttrings
No. 9.—SEf TEMBEE 1S76. 2 N
278 ■    The Ladies Edinburgh Alagazine.
Beside mine ear sent all my dreams to rout,
And lo a hawk, darkening the air without.
And my poor bird dashing its pretty wings
In terror 'gainst the glass that fenced it in
Safe from its foe.    I turned and dreamed once more,
And this time, in my dream, came o'er and o'er,
The hawk without, my humming-bird within,
And mingling with it strange, a story old,
Of warrior with a magic shield which hid
Its wearer's life from harm ; anon, amid
My dream I woke, and musing strove to unfold
Its mystic sense.    Would / had shield, methought.
So tempered!—would / had fence betwixt
My foes and me !    Then with my murmurings mixt
Strange thought!—The fence was there my bu'dling
sought.
And yet she knew not, and her foolish wings
Bruised  'gainst   the   pane  that  saved!   Mayhap
concealed
A symbol lies.    Was it a fabled shield,
That of Achiltes, which the poet sings,
Or a deep truth divine in fable told ?
Truth of " Life hid" no enemy may see,
Of fence I see not 'twixt all ill and me"?
Oh blinded eyes, oh fluttering heart, behold I
Jeanie Morison.
i Christian Moauan's Morh in Jnttia.
Part II.
What is being done for the women of India? The
question must suggest itself to every one who truly
appreciates their sad state of degradation and misery.
We cannot help being almost appalled as we contemplate
their helplessness, their cruel bondage, their lifelong
sufferings, their dark and degrading ignorance. We look
almost in despair at the strong bars of superstition and
prejudice which seem to hinder the spread of the Gospel
among those unhappy millions; and we turn in vain to
any arm of flesh if we seek to have difficulties removed,
mountains made plains, clouds rolled away, the AYord of
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 279
God having free course and being glorified; but " the
things which are impossible with men are possible with
God." Jesus is mighty to save; " His name, through
faith in His name," is as powerful now as in the days of
St. Peter and St. John. We rest in quiet confidence on the
promise given of old to Cyrus, and given undoubtedly to
every faithful labourer in the Lord's vineyard, " I will go
before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will
break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the
bars of iron." In the name of Jesus, and in humble
dependence upon His Spirit for all needed grace and
strength, a great Avork is being carried on among our
heathen sisters. It is deeply interesting to trace its origin
and progress. In 1821, Miss Cooke landed in Calcutta,
resolved to devote herself to native female education.
She was moved by God to begin a work beset on every
hand with innumerable difficulties, and Avith (humanly
speaking) veiy slight prospect of success, but she did not
hesitate to obey the monition. God called, she obeyed;
would that the same could be said of all His people!
How many a door which might be opened by prayer and
effort, is more hopelessly barred by the want, on the part
of His children, of prompt, ready, unquestioning obedience 1
Christian reader, be ready at all times to do something for
Jesus; never neglect even a small opportunity of speaking
for your Master. Remember the Society whose work God
is now so abundantly blessing in India, and how its first
operations were carried on by one woman; see how in
this instance the small seed of a good resolution has
grown into the noble tree of an accomplished purpose, and
" Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it." " Whatsoever
thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might."
Miss Cooke was received into the family of Archdeacon
Corrie, the Secretary of the Church Missionary Society in
Calcutta; there she learned the language, and by patient,
unflagging zeal and effort, established twenty-four schools
in and around Calcutta, and had 400 girls in regular
attendance at the end of her first year.^
In 1823 she Avas married to the Rev. J. Wilson, and
went to live in the Church Missionary House; but soon her
health began to fail, and it was suggested that, in order to
help her in her arduous labours, a committee of ladies
should be formed.    A meeting for the consideration of
' Vide Report of Normal School, 1859.
280 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
this proposal was held in the library at the Church
Mission House in Calcutta, and it was agreed to try the
plan, an arrangement being made that in case the ladies
wished to discontinue their work, the management should
be given again to the Church Missionary Society, At a
second meeting, the schools, and a balance in the Trea¬
surer's hands (6736 rupees), were transferred to the new
Society.
The work soon increased; the Church Missionary Society
gave up the entire management of all its girls' schools in
and around Calcutta; and although from time to time
it assisted the new committee with funds, it has never
again undertaken female education in Bengal.
But only the lower classes were reached by these
efforts, and our missionaries increasingly felt the impor¬
tance of seeking to introduce the light of the Gospel into
the long closed Zenanas. In order to be ready for any
opening which might present itself, a Normal School (in
which European girls were trained for Zenana-teaching)
was opened; in Calcutta and in 1855 the opportunity, so
long and so ardently desired, of gaining admittance to the
prison-like homes of the ladies of India, occurred. Some
educated native gentlemen became willing to engage
European teachers for their families. In 1857, the Com¬
mittees of the schools for the lower classes, and the
Normal School for trainiag teachers for the upper classes,
were united, and it was afterwards resolved that, instead
of confining their efforts to Calcutta and its neighbour¬
hood, they should work with the Church Missionary
Society throughout India, and be henceforth called "The
Indian Female Normal School and Instruction Society."
There are now twenty-eight English ladies at work in
India under the direction of this Society; eight native
Christian ladies are also employed in the Zenanas ; and we
have sixty native and Eurasian teachers, and a staff of
Bible women, numbering thirty-five. The statistics of
April last report 622 Zenanas visited; and we constantly
hear of more being thrown open, the difficulty now being
to meet the great and increasing demand for teachers.
Tlie Society is sending out eight ladies this autumn, and
others who offer might be accepted for this important
work, but for the want of funds.
In Zenana visitation, the missionary takes books, writ¬
ing materials, and needlework of various kinds, and in¬
structs her pupils in reading and -writing, arithmetic and
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 281
other branches of knowledge. Until she has thoroughly
mastered the language she is accompanied by a native
teacher, who acts as interpreter. The Bible is always
read and explained—" Admit us and our Bibles together,"
being a rule firmly adhered to by our missionaries. It
may not be uninteresting to the reader to see in the
words of one of the devoted labourers in this mightj'-
harvest fiekP a little of what Zenana-visiting is. She
writes—" When I rode to the door, the Babu came out to
meet me, and lifting up the chik (a kind of screen used
to keep out the glare and flies), he handed me in with
respectful ceremony to the door of his wife's apartments.
She was waiting to receive me, and taking my hand,
pressed it, and led me to a chair with such a timid gentle
grace, and so much pleasure beaming in her face, as made
me quite love her. She was young, probably about
seventeen, and exceedingly pretty and sweet-looking, her
soft dark eyes lighting up with intelligence and happiness
as she examined the books and work I had brought for
to begin with. She told me that her Babu had taught
her to read and write in Bengali, and now she wanted
very much to learn English, because he knew it so well.
She went on to tell me that she often helped her husband,
when he had a great deal to do, by copying things out
for him in Bengali, and she thought she could help him
still more if she knew English. I then asked her to read
a little for me in a Bengali book I had brought with me,
which she did with much intelligence. The book was
the New Testament, and she seemed both interested
and struck with the verses she read. She said she had
often heard of that book, and that her husband had read
it, and she was sure would not in the least object to her
reading it also.
"After a little more talk about the precious words she
had just been reading, we proceeded to study the English
alphabet, and after that we had a little work, and so
ended my first lesson to this very interesting young
Bow."
The missionary to the Zenana seeks to win the affec¬
tion and confidence of her pupils, and bring them to
consider her their true fi-iend: she teaches them all they
need to know to make them useful and intelligent mem¬
bers of society, and, above all, she tells them " the old
' Miss Hamilton of Lucknow.
282 llie iMdies Edinburgh Magazine.
old story of Jesus and His love." In a subsequent paper
I hope to bring before my readers some interesting facts
in connection with these imprisoned pupils, to prove that
the labours of love undertaken on their behalf are not in
vain.
The Bible Woman occupies no mean place in the noble
army of workers in India; it has been well remarked that
" none can be so fitted to cope with the superstitions and
prejiidices enveloping heathendom, as those who have
themselves emerged from its darkness into the glorious
light and liberty of the Gospel of Christ." The Bible
Woman carries on her work among her heathen sisters in
the bazaars, in the streets, and in the homes of the poor;
and a very important work it is, embracing spheres of
usefulness which are beyond the reach of European ladies.
The subject of medical missions is large, and demands a
paper to itself; the few points already touched upon are
enoiigh to show that this work claims our most heartfelt,
loving sympathy, our most earnest prayers, our most
devoted effort. God grant that the ranks of workers may
be s^^'elled by some who read these words, and that many
to whom the Lord has given the silver and the gold may
give abundantly to aid a work so noble, so great, so im¬
portant as this of the Indian Female Normal School and
Instruction Society. S. S. Hewlett.
{To he continued.)
*'4rom   I tall)/'
THE PARNESINA.
By Mrs. Brewster Macpherson.
The story of Cupid and Psyche is well known. It may
be read in every guide-book to Kome how the jealous
Venus urged Cupid to work the ruin of the lovely Psyche
by inflaming her soul with love for some unworthy object;
how Cupid saAv the girl himself and loved her ; how
Venus, enraged, persecuted her; and how Psyche, helped
by the loves, triumphed over all. The fable is generally
said to represent the purification of the human soul
through love. This explanation is not satisfactory, for
though indeed a simile should not run on too many legs ,
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 283
no explanation of a fable satisfies, which does not account
for the presence of all the principal actors in the tale.
What are we to make of Venus the Goddess of Beauty
in such a reading of the fable % I have wasted much
time, which might have been better employed, in weaving
various theories as to the meaning of this and other
legendary lore: but as these cogitations are not likely
to profit or even to amuse the reader, I shall do, what I
advise every visitor to the Farnesina to do also, take the
story as simple fact; as a history, veracious, and guiltless
of theory or moral as Bluebeard, or Hop o' my Thumb,
or any other delicious wonder, and, flinging aside all
philosophy, abandon the mind to the magic revelations of
life in high Olympus.
That priceless friend of all who like to walk in Rome,
Augustus C. Hare, tells us that the hall of the Farnesina
was once surrounded by open arches, where are now
fourteen closed windows. It was built as a garden lodge
for the rich banker Agostino Chigi by Baldassare Peruzzi,
and was adorned with paintings from the histor}^ of
Cupid and Psyche, by Raphael and his pupils.
The heavy wreaths of flowers and fruits which border
the ceiling, seem to be the continuation of stiffly bound
luxuriant growths, which, springing upwards from the
intervening spaces, are trained over the archways on
either side until they meet in an acute angle, thus forming,
as it were, a succession of Gothic arches of flowers and
fruit over round arches of the same. The point of junction
of the angle of the Gothic arches with the wreath bor¬
dering the ceiling is marked by a large gourd in thirteen
of the arches, and by a full-blown rose in one of them.
In the lunettes under these fourteen arches are represented
Amorini bearing away the spoils of the gods. In the
ten triangular spaces between the arches is given a series
of subjects taken from the myth of Cupid and Psyche.
In the first picture the jealous goddess sits while Cupid
stands beside her. She points downwards to where
Psyche, unseen by us, is wandering in maiden meditation,
" fancy free ;" and Cupid looks, and looking loves.
In the second picture we see Cupid, on his downward
flight to Psyche's home, pausing on his way to bid the
Graces rejoice in her. He floats in the air, with outspread
wings. His hands, both extended, point dowuAvards.
His head is turned with the most exquisite youthful
artlessness of poise and motion towards a Grace to whom
284 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
he speaks. One of the three sits, looking down at the
still unconscious and, to us, invisible Psyche. This
beautiful figure Raphael is said to have painted with his
own hand. I fancy I can trace a likeness in the Grace
Avhom Cupid especially addresses to the Barberini For-
narina and the Munich Madonna della Tenda.
In the third picture, Venus stands with a most rueful
face before Juno and Ceres. Little sympathy she gets
from either. Juno breaks out into mirthful mocking, and
(ycres teases her with quiet wit. In the fourth scene,
Venus, panting with indignation, guides her dove-drawn
car through the air, to seek sympathy where she is more
likely to get it than from her sister goddesses. Of all
the pictured dreams here, this one, to my mind, is the
most lovely. Next to it we find Venus, with uplifted face
and hands oiitspread downwards in a helpless appeal,
imploring before Jupiter. Compare this with Venus
before Juno and Ceres, and I think it must be confessed
that the dreamers were pretty shrewd observers !
Before the goddesses, Venus is passionate, given up to
her vexation, reproachful for her sisters' mockery, but
quite careless of any art to win them. Here she gazes
into the thunderer's eyes, as if at sight of him admiration
and affectionate trust must needs be first. She allows
no sign of vexation, no trace of anger, to pass over her
child-like, pleading face, but steeps her whole person in
the mild spirit of injured innocence ; and the eyes and
lips of Jupiter show that, for all the size of that mighty
foot which he has thrown over the eagle's back, and for
all the thunderbolts he holds, he is no match for female
wiles; and thus it proves, for a step further on. Mercury
cleaves the air, swiftly rushing to give poor Psyche into
the power of Venus. I feel that he must pass over my
head, and perhaps his mantle's splendid flow may touch
me a moment before he vanishes from my sight.
It is singular that the most picturesque incident in the
whole story is not given in the series. Cupid forbade
Psyche ever to seek to see him, and he came to her
always in the darkness. Urged by her sister's taunts,
who declared that she was beloved by some nameless
monster. Psyche disobeyed the god, lighted her lamp,
and gazed upon him Avhile he slept. From the lamj) in
her trembling hand there fell a drop of burning oil,
which woke the sleeper, and he in anger looked on her,
and  in   silence  left  her;   and   Psyche mourned with a
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 285
imurning so ennobling, that Venus knew that her love
had been placed as high as love could be, and that Cupid
had indeed inspired her with love for himself. How
exquisitely Raphael would have designed the sleeping
god and the gazing Psyche! but there is no picture given
of Psyche's fault.
Am 1 fanciful in thinking this may have been of set
purpose, and that, prophetic of the marriage feast, the
mind of Raphael wilhngly passed over Psyche's fault to
dwell upon Psyche's ennobling griefs ?
Any way Psyche rises first upon our sight, not as
doubting and disobedient, but as triumphant through
love over danger and difficulty, bearing aloft the prize
she has fetched from the depths of Hades.
I confess I am disappointed in my first sight of her;
but others praise this fresco as among the finest, so I am
in a minority. Certainly her air of modest satisfaction is
delightful, as she rises bearing aloft the vase of ointment
which Venus bid her bring from hell. Lovely, too, is the
child that nestles under her right arm, and looks adoringly
up in her face.
There is no triumph, but an earnest hope of having
won regard from a worshipped mistress in Psyche's look
in the next picture, as kneeling before Venus she gives
her the unexpected treasure. Venus, with her arms
thrown up in astonishment, at first enchanted me; and
enchant me still she does, though I cannot but wonder
how her left foot and leg can keep so still and unmoved
while her whole body otherwise is starting up amazccL
Cupid in the meantime himself appeals to Jupiter, and
the father of the gods takes him by the shoulder with
one hand, and by the chin with the other, and gives him
a loud resounding smack of a kiss. The eagle holding
the bolts in his beak looks on with grim approval. Once
more the messenger of the gods is seen fulfilling Jupiter's
commands. He brings Psyche to appear before the
assembled gods. Juno's peacock flies before her to do
her honour, sent doubtless by the " ox-eyed " queen. Here
again Psyche does disappoint me. Her arms, crossed
over her bosom, have in the course of her labours
developed such redundant muscle! Her sweet face,
however, is lovely with the " pride of sinless years."
I have now gone quite round the Magic Hall. The
stoiy is ended in two large frescoes on the ceiling; on
the  right  hand  Jupiter   sits in   solemn   council,   while
No. 9.—September 1875. 2 0
286 Ihe Ladles Edinburgh Magazine.
Venus and Cupid plead their cause the one against the
otlier before him. On the left is the marriage feast of
Cupid and Psyche.
In the first Cupid pleads with ardour; Venus has not
much to say. She is subdued, and in truth far from
beaiitiful. At the Thunderer's right hand sit Neptune
and Pluto, Juno at his left; Diana, crescent-crowned, and
Minerv^a, bend forward behind him. Before him are
grouped Mars, Apollo, Bacchus, Hercules, Vulcan, Janus,
and two river gods, and behind these Mercury gives the
immortality-coijferring ambrosia into the hands of Psyche,
round whose knees an Amor throws his little arms. The
gravity and brooding solemnity of this council chamber
in the cloiids is strongly contrasted with the jollity and
mirth, the flash of wit, and the throb of song of the
marriage feast, where Psyche sits encircled by Cupid's
arm, gazing into his gazing eyes, and anointed by the
Graces. The kindly gods and goddesses round the table
make jovial mirth among themselves, and do not annoy
the lovers with their eyes (though Jupiter does look as
if he had sometliing to do to keep away his !) Pan and
the IMuses sing and dance, and the butterfly (or, if I must
speak the truth, battledore) winged sylphs scatter flowers
upon the festive board. One of these is an old friend,
though he is better off for wings when he waits upon Mary
of the Flowers.^
And now we will turn to the Amorini, which are
seen under the Gothic arches of floAvers above the
windows. The exulting boys revel in their heaven
of blue. Here, disdaining the enraged eagle, one flies
off Avith Jupiter's thunderbolts; Avdiile there, another,
pursued by sea-gulls and stormy petrels, absconds Avith
Neptune's trident. Mocking the bats' flapping resistance,
two torment the dog of hell, stick Pluto's prong into the
surly guardian's jaAvs, and leave Cerberus Avith poAver of
bark in only one of his triple heads. There, folloAved by
liaAvks, one goes Avith the shield and SAvord of Mars ;
and the griifin dismays not another as he robs Diana of
her bow and quiver. Self-important, as if bent on high
behest, one bears aAvay the Avinged cap and caduceus of
the messenger of the Highest: and regardless of the
leopard's spring, another boasts of the grapes of Bacchus.
The  gem of the whole   is the rogue who  races aAvay
'   The angel in tlic Madonna dei Fiori Louvre.
The Tjadies' Edinhnrgh Magazine. 287
with Pan's pipes. I can give you little idea of the
fascination of that darling little rascal, as he laughs and
scampers through the skies, unabashed by the still hour of
" Clouds in moonlight widely spread."
A cloud of little birds have been awakened by his
laughter, and thinking it must be day, are audaciously
assaulting an owl, who is too much astonished to resist.
Further on, one Amor bears aloft j\Iinerva's Medusa-
crowned shield in gravest triumph ; and the salamander
-wriggles in vain to try and save from another the tools
of Vulcan. Right under the eyes of Venus and Cupid,
two carry away the cestus and bow.
Three of Amor's feats I failed to decipher. In one ho
bears a shield and winged helmet, which may be of Perseus.
In another two boys carry a heavy log of wood, and are
opposed by a harpy ; and in the third, one guides a lion
and a webbed horse. Perhaps my reader's knowledge of
mythology may be better than mine, and he may re¬
cognise the symbols.
I have never seen anything more fascinating than the
play of fancy in these audacious boys.
There are sportive loves by Giovanni da IT dine in the
deserted Villa Madama which are quite exquisite in their
delicate beauty. It was a briUiant day in April, and the
fresh air, and the silence, and the heaps of wild flowers,
and the glorious views, had soothed and invigorated my
spirits, or else that melancholy ruin would have been too
saddening to look back on with any pleasure. We had
spent some hours upon the short climb up the Monte
Mario, rejoicing in the beauty, when we came upon this
ruin. We walked round to the back of it, where near a
stagnant pond, upon Avhich some ducks were swimming,
we met a weird-looking old man, who courteously escorted
us up a broken flight of steps and through ruined pass¬
ages into a lofty'hall, now open to the air and filled with
dirt and rubbish, on the once magnificent roof of which
were the remains of lovely frescoes. It may be that ruin
lends a charm, but these did seem to me more " moving
delicate " than any I had ever seen, and it was grievous
that they should be all fading out of sight.
Those "joyous angel children" which the Improvisatore
felt to be as creations of his own dreams, in Francesco
Albano's pictures of the Four Seasons in the Borghese
Palace,   are  delicious,  whether they are busied in the
288 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
quick employs of spring or summer or autumn, or wrapt
ill their winter slumbers. Titian gives us a lovely winged
darling tottering with dimpled feet over two sleeping
babies in his " Three Ages of Man." It is in the Doria
Palace, and a copy of it by Sassoferrato in the Borghese.
Correggio's boys are fair to see through the pictured
windows of the dome of the Abbess Giovanna da
Piacenza's room in Parma. They wrestle, they play with
dogs, with bows, with horns; they swiftly glance across
the casements and hide among the foliage. One of them
wears a crown and carries a heavy stone upon his head,
" early with his blessedness at strife." Their "vocation is
endless imitation," and in a sense that Wordsworth never
meant, for they look as if they were playing at playing.
There is something unsubstantial about them. Though
they are large and chubby, it is with an ethereal chubbi-
ness. Their movements have just that indefinable differ¬
ence from living movement which one feels in figures Avhose
motions are reflected on a glass. They are harmless boys,
good as the proverbial old maids' bairns; and this is no
draAvback to their charm, for they haunt the room of a
woman who had resigned a mother's joy.
Rubens in the Munich Gallery has seven rosy boys,
carrying a monster wreath of fruit. Two of them have
rolled over under the weight of it; one bends his back
beneath it, and marches foremost bravely; lovely little
curly heads one longs to kiss, cluster above the glowing
burden.
All these and many more I delight in, but above them
all, I love that roguish little tormentor of Pan Avhicli
frolicked forth from Raphael's fancy.
Language could not express his magic. Nothing but
the "melodious madness" which Mendelssohn in his
sportive mood sometimes loosens on the air, could make
the spirit laugh and dance as does his wanton play.
These frescoes, all designed by Raphael, were painted;
the Avreaths by Giovanni da Udiue, the pictures by
Rajihael's favourite pupils, Guilio Romano and Francesco
Penni.
A fcAV lines upon the other works of these artists to be
found in Rome may not be unacceptable.
Giovanni da Udine painted a room in the Vatican, in
which he represented the courses of the planets. This
room last year was not accessible to the public. The
"Victory of Leo IV. over the Saracens at   Ostia" was
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 289
painted by him from Raphael's design. Of his work in
the Villa Madama I have already spoken. His tomb is
in the Pantheon.
Francesco Penni painted from Raphael's design two of
the arcades in the Loggia of the Vatican, among them
the well-known group of Abraham and the three
Angels, which one meets in pictorial Bibles; also the
"Baptism of Constantine," in the Hall of Constantine
in the Vatican, Mrs. Jameson in her L^egends of the
Madonna says that Francesco Penni and Guilio Romano
painted the " Coronation of the Virgin" in the Vatican,
attributed to Raphael ; and the delightful old Scotch¬
man who sold Macpherson's photographs, with mild
pertinacity waived aside as untenable any doubt upon
the point. I cannot take upon myself to have any
opinion in such a matter; but I never can help feeling,
when I look at that picture, that I am loving Raphael
in his first, and what Ruskin calls his best, manner. The
ineffable purity and quaint grace of the angels on either
hand, with tambourine and viol, are so entirely Perugin-
esque in their attitudes and feeling, that it is almost
impossible for me to believe that any but the youthful
Raphael himself could have designed or painted them.
The lower part of the figure of the angel with the violin
is as nearly as possible a reminiscence of Perugino's
foremost sybil in the Sala del Cambio at Perugia. I do
not know any of Penni's other works, or where they are.
He is said to have assisted Raphael in his Cartoons. He
was, with Guilio Romano, appointed by Raphael executor
of his will.
The works of Giulio Romano are numerous in Rome.
To him are attributed several of the inevitable copies of
Raphael's Julius II. which appear in so many galleries.
The copies of the " Barberini Fornarina " in the Borghese
and Sciarra Palaces, a " Holy Family " in the Doria after
Raphael, and the very inferior copy in the Sciarra
Palace of Sebastian del Piombo's^ so called " Fornarina "
of the Tribuna in Florence, are by him. In the Sacristy
of Sta Prassede is a fine picture by him of the " Scourging
of Christ," but a service was going on in the church each
time I attempted to see it, and I find it quite impossible
to  look at pictures while others kneel and pray.    He
' Generally attributed to Raphael; but Crowe and Cavalcaselle consider it
a settled question that SebaBtian del Piombo was the painter.
290 The Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine.
has a great cartoon of the " Stoning of Stephen," in the
Picture Gallery of the Lateran, and over the high altar
of Sta Maria dell' Anima, a damaged picture of the
" Holy Family with Saints." Five of the arcades in
the Loggia of the Vatican are by him; amongst them
the well-known groups of " Joseph Telling his Dream,"
and " The Last Supper;" also his work is the group of
fugitives in the foreground of the " Incendio del Borgo."
The Villa Lante, near the Porta S. Pancrazio, was built
by him, and contained the frescoes which are now in the
ninth room of the Borghese Palace. His principal work
in Rome is the Sala di Constantino, where he painted the
wall of the Fiery Cross, the Battle of Pontemolle, and
the scenes from the life of Constantine, on the wall of the
Baptism. These are all I know of in Rome, though
doubtless there are many more. The city of Mantua is
his chief glorj^, both as architect and painter ; and there
he is buried. The extent and magnificence of his under¬
takings at Mantua alarmed the people for the great
expenses involved, and nearly produced a revolt. On
the other hand, they so delighted Charles V. that he
made a duke of the Marquis of Mantua on account of his
having so beautified his capital.
But to resume my account of the Farnesina. Two
rooms in an upper storey were not open to the public,
and, on account of repairs going on, had not been so, I
believe, for two years; so I could not see Baldassare
Peruzzi's architectural paintings, or Sodoma's " Marriage
of Alexander and Roxana."
Liasmuch as Sodoma's pictures are few and far between
(at lejist in my experience), and rare in their beauty, I
was grieved; but otherwise it was with a secret feeling
of relief that I found only one room awaited me.
The unity of design in the room I had so long lingered
in was one secret of its charm.
My mind is slow in its movements; and a wall covered
with 10,000 various moods and feelings invariably reduces
me for a while to a condition bordering on idiocy. The
inner room of the Farnesina was not quite so distracting
as a gallery generally is, though it lacked the charm of
unity, and, for me, lacked the charm of intelligibihty
also. The ceiling shows Diana driving her car through a
blue heaven set thick with golden stars. A number of
small pictures round the room by Sebastian del Piombo
bafiled all attempt at connecting them one with another
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 291
even by as loose a tie as links together ■' orient pearls at
random strung;" and I speedily gave up the effort, and
contented myself with admiring Raphael's " Triumph of
Galatea."
The sea-nymph, standing in a shell drawn by dolphins,
handles the reins of her steeds with deft and delicate
fingers, turning the Avhile a radiant face to some sunny
height behind her, where it may be Acis lingers. A sister
nymph beside her playfully struggles in the embrace of
an enamoured triton. Other tritons play around ; Amor-
ini, on mischief bent, hover overhead, with arrows fitted
into twanging bows aimed at the joyous group; and one
of the winged loves floats upon the water at Galatea's
feet, holding on to the bridle of her curved-necked dolphin
steeds.
It v/as radiantly lovely; but I was by this time verging
on that state when the fundamental note of such delight
required to pass away info its harmonics (whatever these
might be!) It may be, therefore, on account of its
violent contrast, as well as on account of its interest, that
I tm-ned with delight to a colossal head, which from the
height of the ceiling looks down with a magnificent scorn
straight at poor Galatea's eliort-lived joy. Michael
Angelo left this young giant as a witness that he had
been there, one day when he called upon Sebastian del
Piombo and found him absent. Guide-books refer the
visit to Danieli da Volterra; but the modern " Vasari,"
Cavalcaselle, in the life of Sebastian del Piombo, con¬
clusively proves that he was most likely to have been
the honoured.
Sebastian del Piombo, first a disciple of Giovanni
Bellini's in Venice, then an assistant and friend of Gior-
gione's, came to Rome from Venice, on the invitation of
Agostino Chigi; and his work in the Farnesina was his
first work in Rome. A great fresco, near the Galatea, of
" Polyphemus Playing on the Pipes," is his principal
fresco there. In Rome, Sebastian formed a great friend¬
ship with Michael Angelo ; and Michael Angelo's influence
upon his style was very great. He also absorbed much
from Raphael. The chapel of the Borgherini in S. Pietro
in Montario, the first chapel to the right as one enters the
church, is the work of Sebastian. The upper part, repre¬
senting the Transfiguration, is in fresco; the lower part,
a fearfully realistic giving of the scourging of our
Redeemer, is in oils.    A replica of this is in the Boi'ghese
292 Tlie Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine.
Palace.^ After twenty years' residence in Rome, Sebas¬
tian returned to Venice in consequence of the state of
Home after the sacking of the city by Bourbon's soldiers.
In Venice he painted the magnificent portrait of the
Admiral, Andrea Dt)ria, which hangs in the cabinet-room
of the Doria Palace. He returned to Rome after the
re-establishment of papal power; and Clement VII. gave
him the office of the Piombo,—whence his name, " del
Piombo." A full-length portrait of St. Bernard in the
Quirinal belongs to this period of his life. He died in
Rome, and is buried in Sta Maria del Popolo.
The Corsini palace is just opposite the Farnesina, and
visitors to the one generally pass on to the other.
I, however, had found the Farnesina quite enough for one
day's work, and did not join the throng. The Corsini
contains one relic of interest in connection with the
Farnesina—a silver vase which was fished up out of the
mud of the Tiber, and which is supposed to have been
part of the silver-plate which, in a superb version of
Highland honours, after it had been used in an entertain¬
ment given by him in the Farnesina to Pope Leo X.,
Agostino Chigi threw into the river. This magnificent
banker, Agostino Chigi, commissioned from Raphael not
only the lovely adornments of this garden lodge, but
also the sibyls of Sta Maria della Pace, and the chapel of
the Chigi in Sta Maria del Popolo, where are Raphael's
Jonah and the Angels of the Planets
The Farnesiua has also a melancholy interest in con¬
nection witli the history of Raphael, for it is said that he was
superintending the adornments there, when a message
from the Pope summoned him, and the chill from which he
died was caught through his having been overheated in
his hurried passage from the Farnesina to the Vatican.
N^.B.—The Editors regret they have to suspend " Wer-
burga of Chester" for one month, owing to the writer
being unexpectedly detained in Iceland.
Erratum.—August No., page 242, line 15, omit "I."
' Room 3, No. 48.
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, 293
oD Ij ^   g r a g 0 n   a i 1 Ij c   IJ n r i Ij.
CHAPTER   X.
"There is a tnle of Odin, sitting in Vallinll,
Who to a banquet summons those in strife who fall,
To drink and to be drunken, then to rise and figlit,
To wound and to be wounded, be smitten and to smite.
But when a man is drawing to the close of life,
He yearns for something other than etenml strife ;
And it is slender comfort, when he craveth peace,
To hear of war and bloodshed that shall never cease."
—Thorkell Mani: Babing Gould.
While we were all occupied with the events which
passed immediately about us, a confused troop of horse¬
men had descended the steep hill little observed by us ;
but now they were pressing so forward that the men
crowded back upon us, while a clear voice shouted,
"Make way there! where is Sea-king Swend ? there is
great news for him." I think Swend was glad he had
to pause and turn, and he moved towards tlie rising
clamour, while a Northman came quietly behind Thorstein
and cut his hands free. He threw one arm round Ilertha,
while he clasped with his other hand that of the liberator,
who was, I saw, Eric my fellow-captive. But now I too
Avith the others was attracted towards him who had been
calling Swend, and who now spoke loudly and earnestly
to him. Could I mistake the light figure and gay face,
though his hair now stood out thick and black from under
his red cap % it was my old fellow-novice Astolfo, and as
gay a cavalier as could be seen, though he wore no
defensive armour, and his rich dress was travel-stained.
He was on foot, and held a weary mule by the reins, on
which sat an old man stooping forward from fotigiie—
evidently an ecclesiastic, and of no mean rank, for though
a dark cloak hid much of his dress, the gleam of his
jewelled gloves and the rich clasps of his hood showed
what splendour he could bring into our own Benedictine
habit. But his face was ashen pale and terror-stricken,
a sharp, cunning, hasty gleam ever and anon passing over
it as Astolfo harangued Swend and the listening crowd
around him.
" Yes," he said, " here is the great Lord and mighty
Prince, Atenolf, Abbot of Monte Cassino, Superior of the
No. 10.—October 1875. 2 P
294: The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
whole Benedictine order. His enemies are in hot pursuit;
thank Heaven, Northmen, that you are ready for sea.
Take him on board and he is safe, and I am ready
to offer to you treasure that will make the meanest sailor
rich."
" And where is this treasure," said Swend, " and
where does the old man wish to go ? "
" Much treasure is here, and will go on board with him :
niore he will give his bond for, if you will carry him
if it may be to Constantinople, if not, to Otranto, or at
least to Sicily. Northmen ! save him, and you will make
your fortunes ; but now, at once, we must start, for Sir
Rainulf and a thousand lances are on our track."
"Ay, " said an old sea-rover, " we are all bound, but be
sure this man is all he says, Swend, before you under¬
take the business.'"
Some twenty mounted people had followed the abbot,
some monks, others armed servants. Clearly enough
I saw from their dress and aspect that they were Church
dignitaries, and among them I, and not I only, but
several Northmen who had been with Thorstein to
Caserta, recognised one prior; and these assured Swend
all must be as Astolfo said ; also the treasurer was already
displaying to Swend's greedy eyes some of the treasure
the flying abbot had contrived to carry off with him.
When I remembered the treacherous betrayal of Dato the
Lombard, and his cruel death, I did not wonder that
Atenolf trembled before the vengeance of the Northmen
and Lombards on his track. Swend shouted out so that
all could hear : " Sea-rovers, are you agreed to take this
lord, if not to Mickelgarth, at least to some safe haven'?
he offers much treasure for the voj^age, and he is a friend
of the emperor's and a foe to the Lombards ; will you
take him? "
"Ay, ay, we will! " came the loud answer rolling
back.
" Then make ready, my lads," said Swend ; " all aboard
as fast as possible, no time to lose. The old man is hotly
pursued, but once off to sea, all is safe."
Now began a greater bustle than before, yet there was
order in it. Rapidly they shipped treasure, meat, and
men. I lingered yet, not fiir from Hertha, when I was
accosted by one in the crowd, whom I saw to be Ivar,
Rainulf's old squire. " Oh, my lord," he said anxiously,
'• do you think she runs much peril'?   She would come ;
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 295
Bergliot and I could not keep her back when she heard
her cousin was a prisoner."
" Where has she been ?" I said ; " do not keep her truest
friends from knowing."
" Staying at a little mountain-fastness with an old
knight, attended by Bergliot and me ; he arranged it
so. Ah, when I saw her attended by my knight and
the gallant Norseman her kinsman, so bravely telling
them to leave her and go on to the wars whither they
were bound, I was glad my old arm had some strength
left to shield her. But now when she ordered me to ride
after her here, as she would share the peril of Thorstein,
I thought. Yes, she is worthy even of iiim. But I wish
I could get her safe back. " My lady, will you ride V
he said to her. " I have horses safe round the point;
let us try to slip throiigh the crowd."
" No, good Ivar," said Hertha : " where Thorstein is
I must be now."
The abbot and his train were now on board, and
Swend was hurrying down to us. At his order the
men guarding Thorstein moved forward with him across
the gangway, and Hertha walked alongside on board.
I was about to withdraw quietly, when I found myself
also hurried on board, Swend saying, "Nay, we must
have our bridegroom; our first feast shall be the wed¬
ding feast; at any rate it is good to have a great lord
of the land with us—so in with you, marquis, and cheer
up your old commander the monk."
I felt I was a prisoner, and Kolbiorn also, who made
a useless effort to slip away through the crowd. All were
now in the vessel, a pressing, swaying throng, shoved
by the rowers out of the waist, and crowded on poop or
forecastle. I, still keeping near Hertha, found myselt
standing in the press on the poop. The anchor was
weighed, the long oars came flashing out on each side,
and the great ship began slowly to mov6 through the glassy
sea. The sky seemed lead above, and the sea shone with a
dull reflected light, smooth as the calmest inland lake, and
lead-coloured also. But as soon as the rocks were
cleared, and the great oars could have full swing, a white
foam-line formed all round our Dragon, who, breasting it
proudly, swept forth as stately and steady as a swan
on the water. And then, as she gathered way, there was
a glitter on the hill-path behind us, and again a dashing
descent to the shore ; and it was Eainulf who had urged
296 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
his horse to the edge of the sea, and into it, and stood
there in shining mail, his arms stretched out towards the
ship. After him were thronging a multitude of mounted
spearmen; more and more they crowded down on the
shore, till it was covered with armed men. Then I looked
at Hertha; her lips were parted, her soft blue eyes were
wide, her face seemed one eager longing—the whole
slender form looked as though the soul within were strong
enough to wing it over the space between us and the
shore, and I read her secret for the first time; it was
Rainulf the Norman who had won that noble heart.
Why had I never thought of him—bravest of heroes,
brightest of comrades, peerless warrior ! Young, fair of
face, and gracious, was he not in truth just such a
cavalier as might love my lady not in vain! Now, as
she stood and waved her veil towards him, while the
colour faded from cheek and lip as the water widened
between us and the shore, Thorstein said to her, "He
will follow, Hertha; no fear but he will follow, and find
you too.    Trust Rainulf, and fear nothing for the future."
" No," said Hertha, " I trust him, even if in this world
our morning should not brighten. I know it will come
at last.    But to see him there now—too late, yet there."
" Ay," said Eric; " and as in all the coast there is not
a ship bound, there he must remain for many hours before
he can follow our long-ship out to sea."
Hertha stood still as a carved image till Rainulf was
but a glittering speck on the shore, when she turned to
Thorstein Avith a sort of gasp, and said,
" How to rescue you comes first, dear cousin."
" Never fear," said Eric ; " yon affair lasted too long;
the Northmen have had time to come to their senses.
Many of us have sworn to stand by Thorstein, and we
only bide our time."
" And now," said Thorstein, " that you need think no
more of dangers, I wish to tell you that Marquis Lorenzo
here overheard some speech in the church between us
two which made him think you meant to accept him as
your lord. So forgive him, Hertha, as I do—it was a
mistake; and he is not the only one who has dreamed
too much of your sweet face."
Hertha gave me her hand with silent graciousness,
while Thorstein went on: " When Hertha quitted the
chapel in the wood. Marquis, she had not gone far before
she met Rainulf, who sought her; and he took her to the
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 297
city, where her old Bergliot and Ivar were staying before
starting on their pilgrimage. And then I followed, after
I had made you all fast in the chapel. And so we found
for her an old knightly guardian in a mountain fortress,
and there with Bergliot and Ivar she has lived ever since ;
but I knew no more than you, Lorenzo, that she and
Rainulf were betrothed."
But now matters on board drew our attention from our
talk. The abbot had been led by Astolfo into Hertha's
little chamber under the poop, and he was ranging and
cheering the other monks, who looked scared and jostled
enough among the sea-rovers. All but our prior, who,
straight and rigid, seemed to defy all round to change
his mood, though I laughed to see how Astolfo ordered
about and patronised his old tyrant. The men were
setting sails, which however hung idly flapping against
the masts, for scarce a breath of wind was abroad; and
now Swend blew the horn, and shouted, "A song, men!
a song to cheer this dull evening. Kolbiorn, stand forth
and strike up something in which the men can join—the
song of departure."
Kolbiorn stood on the forecastle, facing towards the
ship, harp in hand; he swept the chords strongly, and
his rich voice pealed into words like those which follow.
Some the men knew and joined in, others were new, and
held them listening; for Kolbiorn was wont to pour his
mood of the moment into the songs which ever rolled
fresh from his heart.
Let us be gone, for the time is come
Over the seas again to roam ;
To fiercer lieat and to sunnier shine,
Further away from our forests of pine ;
From far-off misty foam-swept isles,
From blazing lieavths and maidens' smiles ;
Dearer to us than ever were these,
The low black keels in the rippling seas.
Where green sea-water encircles all,
And whitens beneath the driving squall—
Where waves of the west rise blue and high,
And shadow the ship from the wind-swept sky ;
Where race the tides past Scotland's hill,
And winds pipe shrill in sea-caves chill,—
There we have sailed and sailed alone;
The wastes of the sea are all our own.
298 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Where ocean tlie English pasture laveF,
And golden corn iu Valliind waves;
And where in sunny Spain the vine
Prepares for us the glorious wine ;
Where giant ruins of days gone by
Moulder in beautiful Italy,—
All must under our prowess quail,
And greet with dread the northern sail.
Shake it out to the gatlieriug breeze.
And turn the helm to other seas ;
Greece is before us, and Mikelgarth to .in,
Peril and booty and glancing renown ;
Thither we hasten, for we are their lords.
We who have nothing but ships and swords.
Joyously now we are sailing forth.
Power belongs to the twilight north.
Black-bued raven and yellow-beaked kite,
Eagle, and wolf of the wild we invite,
Hover above us in feast and fray,
Share what the dragon has left of prey ;
Waves leap high, for we send to Ean
Many a vigorous fighting man.
Fill up the cups in Odin's hall,
Rocm for the heroes who soon will fall.
And here he changed the music to a sadder strain, and
the men ceased to cliime in, but half-hung on the oars to
listen.
Could we know, ah, could we know,
Whither e'er set of sun we go—
Over whose head on his sea-weed bed
Next tide's waves shall calmly spread ;
Who shall pass in the battle's roll
To the unknown, tlie certain goal ?
Could we taste of the joys of life ?
No, let the Valkyr guide the strife.
Hear us, choosers of the slain ;
Let not our life nor our death be in vain ;
Northmen must be kings of the sea,
As long as the winds of the north blow free ;
Ready to welcome death as life,
Grimmest of foes in the deadly strife,
Stanchest of friends to brothers sworn—
Shout for the rowers, and blow the horn,
Haul on the rojies and leave the bay ;
Hither, ye winds, and speed our way.
Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 290
No, I cannot tell how wild was the excitement of this
song: the rowers chimed in, and the men at the ropes or
standing unoccupied echoed it again; and it was indeed
with shouting and singing that the Dragon sped on her
way, while ever and anon her harsh horns were echoed
back to us more  softly  from  the   rocky   shore.    After
a while Astolfo came to us and kissed me Avarmly, and
told Hertha how one of her messengers had reached him
on his way to Asile.    " I had ridden on alone, so what
could I do ?   I sent back to hasten Rainulf, who came Avith
the men.    Well! I was hard on the traces of the flying
abbot, but meant, as I had been a Benedictine, to interfere
in no way with him.   Now, I thought I might save his
life by guiding him to the Dragon ship, and his treasures
might buy Thorstein's life, for Swend loves gold perhaps
more than revenge.   At least here Avas a chance.    So I
disarmed, as this was being on the enemy's side—over¬
took the abbot, told him 1 was an ex-novice, and of his
chance to escape with the Northmen.   Right glad was he
to fly for refuge anywhere, and so I led him hither; and
seeing how far matters had gone,  I called off Swend's
thoughts to the treasure without making any bargain.
It was the best chance."
" It Avas well done," said Thorstein, " and now I think
things Avill come right if Ave are Avary. There Avill soon
be a great change in the Aveather, and in more than that,
it is likely."
There was as yet no change in the Aveather and no
Avind, but the evening gloomed early, and the night was
a very dark one. Still Avith a lamp gleaming on her prow,
the Dragon, urged by her oars, forged on through the
smooth Avater. 1 Avas in a manner happy as Ave sat togetJier
on the poop—Hertha, Thorstein, Astolfo, and I. Hertha
was not to be mine, but still she was there; she Avas
sweet and ' kind, and Ave talked much together. The
night was old now, and a fcAV stars gleamed out, and
Thorstein knew by them that Swend was holding a
straight course for Sicily. " He is Avrong," he said,
" especially Avith so crowded a ship ; he should make
for the nearest port, to lie safe through the weather that
is coming."
As he spoke Ave heard SAvend hailing Kolbiom, who sat
by the lantern on the prow. We could hear his clear
voice in reply. " No, Swend, I Avill not come; the Scald's
mouth must ever be ready for the inspiration of the gods,
300 The Ijadies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and should never be defiled by the words of traitors." The
yellow lamplight fell full on his defiant beautiful face,
and we rejoiced to see by this hoAv Swend's influence
must be waning with the men. But now Swend Avas
beside us : " Marquis," he said, " the old man down yonder,
once your chief, wishes to speak with me. You can best
interpret between us, as Kolbiorn refuses; will you
come ? " " Go, by all means," said Astolfo quickly; " find
out what they plan together." So I followed Swend, who
went down hastily, never glancing at Hertha or Thorstein.
Below, in Hertha's little cabin, a lamp was swinging
which showed me Abbot Atenolf and one prior together,
the abbot pale and restless, with the look of a fox in a
trap, the prior just as usual.
" There, my lord," he said, " is our other ex-novice,
Lorenzo, now the head of one of the most powerful houses
of Magna Grecia."
" And still a true son of the house, I trust," said Atenolf
eagerly, "ready to stand by his abbot as a secular, though
not as a monk."
" Pardon me, my lord," I said; " my part is taken on the
side of the Lombards; but I trust that peace may soon
put an end to our divisions, and that you may escape from
the foes you have so deeply offended."
The prior rose to leave the cabin, and, grasping my
shoulder, whispered as he passed, " Remember you are
still a Benedictine of the third order, and let those whose
hearts are pure from all double-dealing, all treachery, cast
the first stone here. Lorenzo, since you have been in the
world, doubtless you have borne yourself as a man of
faith and honour; no hidden plots or hatreds have
darkened your soul." And he sw^ept out with a meaning
glance, making room for Swend, who now, through my
interpretation, spoke with Atenolf.
This was to the effect that he would carrj' the abbot to
Mickelgarth, but would touch some land as soon as
possible to put ashore Thorstein, formerly second in com¬
mand, now a dangerous foe to Atenolf, and too much liked
by the men to be safe as a prisoner on board. Atenolf
gave many thanks, and promised rich treasure in return ;
and then said musingly, "Thorstein, you say; that is
surely not he we call Thurstan, a Norman knight who
commands the others on land?"
" May be you call him Thurstan, certainly he led the
others, the Valland Normans; he is my cousin, and has
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 301
just lately deserted us   and Odin's  faith   for   this  new-
foreign service."
" But if he is Thurstan, you must not let him go," said
Atenolf eagerly; "the emperor would count bim a rich
prize, and greatly reward you."
" I dare hardly keep him," said Swend.
" Why not kill him then? said Atenolf; " or if you must
land him alive, at least put out his eyes and thus disable
him;" and as even Swend started, he added, " So our late
emperor would have served him—not Basil; but it is a
good way of crippling a foe you do not wish to kill. Some
of my knaves would do it if you wished."
'• That is not Northland vogue, and he is my kinsman,"
said SAvend; " but I will arrange somehow," and he left
us, fastening the door so that we could not leave the little
cabin, though we could see through a window in the door
the waist of the ship and the forecastle, where a light
still bm-ned. The abbot sank back on the couch and
spoke to me, but I turned from him with a feeling of
horror, and lay down on the floor utterly wearied out, but
with a new feeling in my heart about Thorstein. He
against whom my envy had burned so fiercely, he too had
lost all that I had lost, but how differently ! caring for
Hertha rather than for himself, and so ready to forgive me
all I had done against him. For it was through me,
through my wild love and ungoverned heart, that he and
Hertha were now in the power of Swend. Alas ! what was
the end to be? Stern as was our prior, I longed to pour out
my aching heart in confession to him; I longed for the
cloister calm and cloister work to free me from my own
wild thoughts. Above all, I longed to throw myself at
Thorstein's feet and tell him all,—Syades' plots and my
own dreadful vow. But even while I resolved on doing
this, my utter weariness quite overcame me, and sleep,
deep and heavy, wrapped me for long in utter forget-
fulness. E. J. 0.
{To be continued.)
Roman's ^orli.
IV.—NURSING.
There is a constant cry from hospitals for the best sort of
women to undertake the work of nursing; and as there
No.  10.-OCTOBEB 1875. 2 Q
302 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
are many ladies anxious to enter on that important and
valuable work, a few particulars regardhig the different
hospitals may be useful to some of the readers of the
Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. Let me suggest to any lady
thinking of taking up the work not to delay because of
youth. It would bo well if many a young lady would say
to herself, " I am four or five and twenty, and I will give
these next four or five years to the good of others." Let
her take the training while still young, and then, in case of
misfortunes or change of circumstances occurring in any
form, she can say to herself, " There is one thing I know
well, one thing I can really do; I am a trained nurse." Some
ladies are afraid of the isolation they would feel in going
to an hospital, and I would urge it as a great advantage if
a lady could induce one or more of her friends to go with
her. But no one need be afraid of want of suitable com¬
panionship in any of the large hospitals, when so many
ladies, and some of them of rank and high position, are now
learning nursing in them. To obtain the required train¬
ing it has hitherto been found necessary to go to London;
but such changes have taken place within the last few
years in the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, that ladies now
should apply there before going south. The climate of
London is sometimes trying to those, so much of whose
time is spent in the wards ; and in Edinburgh leisure hours
might be passed with a friend, so that the strain in one
way is here not so great. Of course to others the
complete break caused by going to another town is an
important point in favour of London. In the Edinburgh
Infirmary there are already several ladies, and the Lady
Superintendent expresses herself most warmly in their
praise, and is only anxious to obtain more of the same
stamp. In addition to the practical training in the wards,
the probationers, as nurses of the first year are called, are
taught in a class by Miss Williams, the Assistant Lady
Superintendent. They have lectures from different physi¬
cians and surgeons, and once a-week they have the very
great advantage of going round the surgical wards with
Dr. Joseph Bell, who lectures to them over each patient.
The probationers on day duty rise at G A.M., breakfast at
6.30; remain in the wards from 7 to 9.30, when they have
lunch, return to the wards till 3, the dinner hour. Exer¬
cise is taken either from 10 to 11.30 A.M., or 3.30 to 5 P.M.
Tea is at .5 p.m. ; then Avards till 8.30 ; supper at 8.45 ; bed
at 10; and fights out at 10.30 P.M.    Those on night duty
The Ladies EJinhurgh Magazine. 303
rise at 7 P.M.; have tea at 7.30; go to tlie wards at 8.30
P.M., and remain there till 9 A.M.; dinner at 10 A.M.,
exercise 10.30 to 12, and bed at 12 noon. These are the
hours; and now for the work. First of all, the patients'
beds have to be made. The probationer leaves her own
bed to air when she first leaves her room, but the room must
be dusted and the bed made by 10 A.M. Then all wounds
have to be dressed, bandages replaced, medicines given,
and the rooms and patients made fresh and comfortable
for the house surgeon's or physician's morning visit. The
sweeping and scrubbing are done by ward assistants, and
the patients' dinner is brought into the wards and removed
by them ; so that what is considered hard manual labour
is not required from a probationer, but there is constant
occupation for her. One patient requires a fresh poultice,
another fomentations, another some more beef-tea, and so
on; thus there is seldom time to weary. But when all
the patients seem pretty easy and comfortable—and there
are many cases where simply rest and a recumbent posi¬
tion are necessary for recovery—then the weariness and
monotony of a ^vvard can be relieved in many ways by an
educated, cheerful person. Miss Pringle, the L;idy Superin¬
tendent of the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, has been highly
trained herself, and is working on the experience gained
in other hospitals to carry out all the best possible arrange¬
ments in her present sphere. She is ready to give all
further information to any lady applying to her, in the
kindest and fullest manner. The rooms for the nurses are
tiny, and the food plain, but till the new building is ready
these rooms cannot be altered; and it has been already
proved that the most delicately nurtured women can stand
the life without suffering. In Glasgow the infirmaries
are becoming alive to the necessity of training for nurses,
and a small house has been opened in St. George's Road,
not long ago, for this purpose; but as there are only
twelve or twenty beds, I do not think the advantages are
to be compared to those gained by entering a large hos¬
pital. We have Miss Nightingale's authority for saying
that the best training cannot be had otherwise than in an
hospital; and though she herself has probably seen more
of varied hospital life than most women, yet in a letter of
hers to the probationers at St. Thomas's she says there is
nothing she would value so much as to spend another
year in the wards of that hospital. In London there
are   a   number of   hospitals   where   training   is   to   be
304 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
obtained, and, as is to be expected, different religious and
other influences prevail in each, and a lady would do
wisely to choose the one with which she would feel most
in sympathy. At the Home and Sisterhood of St. John
the Evangelist, 8 Norfolk Street, Strand, lady pupils are
received on a different footing from ordinary probationers
on payment of the sum of fourteen guineas quarterly for
board and lodging. This does not include washing, wine,
or medical attendance; so the expense is considerable. The
title will show the religious tendencies of the establish¬
ment, but the sisters do not associate Avith the lady pupils,
and no conversation is allowed in the wards, so that no
undue influence is exerted.
The sisterhood has undertaken the nursing of King's
College Hospital; and some of the pupils »leep in the
Hospital, some in the Home. The bedrooms are beauti¬
fully kept and very comfortable. The rising bell rings
at 6.30 A.M.; prayers at 7, read by one of the sisters;
breakfast at 7.30; wards at 8. Every alternate day the
pupils attend chapel from 9 to 9.20. Limcheon, con¬
sisting of cake and coffee, is prepared at 10.30 for any
who choose to go to it, but only for five minutes. By
12 the wards miist be quite prepared for the doctors and
students. The sister, nurse, and lady pupil of the ward
attend them on their rounds; the lady pupil and undcr-
nru'se and probationer looking on, and helping the dressers
in doing up the wounds, &c. The patients' dinner is
served immediately after all is done and cleared away.
At 1.30 the lady pupils have ten minutes to take their
dinner, and when the wards are all made tidy, have an
hour and a half for recreation—one day from 2 to 3.30,
next day from 7 to 8. Tea is at 4 P.M.; wards again
from 5 to 8; supper at 8.30; prayers at 9 ; bedrooms,
9.30; gas or;t at 11. Lady pupils are not allowed to go
into each other's rooms excejat during recreation hours.
On Sundays they attend chapel in the institution one
morning, and any church they choose in the evening,
and vice versa the next Sunday. There are from eight to
ten lady pupils in the institution; and to each ward there
is a sister, a lady pupil, an upper nurse and an under
one, and generally two probationers. The scrubbing hei-e
also is done by another set of women who have nothing
to do with the nursing. Patients are thoroughly attended
to. and are as happy as the sick can be. Indeed, comparing
it to his  OAvn noisy and probably close and dirty home,
Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgk Magazine. 305
one poor man once said to a friend of mine, "It was like
being in heaven ! " The chaplain goes his rounds every
day, besides which he reads prayers every morning at 10
to the patients, and one of the sisters reads them every
evening at 8 o'clock. On Friday evenings Sister A.
gives the lady pupils a lecture, during recreation hour,
on anatomy ; and they and the nurses go on Wednesday
evenings to hear an address by Dr Beai, one of the phy¬
sicians who attend the hospital. Ladies buy their own
dress, with the exception of caps and aprons; and it
consists of a black alpaca dress quite plainly made, plain
white collar and cuffs. For outdoor wear, a long round
black alpaca or dark grey waterproof cloak; and a close
straw bonnet according to prescribed pattern, is appointed,
and can be obtained from the Superior. The food is very
good and abundant, the lady pupils having their meals
in the same room but at a different table from the under
nurses; the sisters and upper nurses being in the adjoin¬
ing room. The discipline in this hospital is strict; but
here, as in Liverpool and other places, I have heard ladies
say, " Their year of probation was the happiest year of
their lives." The work was interesting, and the respon¬
sibility which breaks down so many in superior positions,
did not Aveigh upon them.
In Middlesex Hospital, London, four ladies arc received
for training. They board and lodge in the home for
nurses attached to the hospital, and are charged one
guinea a-week. The hours here are not so long, and the
training would be specially suited for any lady who
wished to gain some knowledge of nursing, to enable
her to superintend the nursing in her own village or
cottage hospital. A most charming little home for nurses
lias lately been opened in Westminster, in connection with
AVestminster Hospital, under the superintendence of Miss
Merryweather, who, at Hakted in Essex and in Liver¬
pool, has devoted a noble life to the good of her fellow-
creatures in various ways. Some years ago, the idea of
training nurses was started in Liverpool, and a gentle¬
man laid down a sufficient sum to build what 1 think may
be called a Model Nurses' Home. The present one in
Westminster is on a small scale; but there are hopes
that one after the Liverpool model may soon bo begun.
There are vacancies in this Home now, and in the Hospital
for nurses; and any one putting herself under the kindly
rule of Miss Merryweather and her sister, who is the Lady
306 The Ladies' JEdinburgh Magazine.
Superintendent of Westminster Hospital, would assuredly
soon feel that she had done well for herself, and would
have every opportunity of learning. Miss Merryweather's
earnest desire is, that those who go to her should become
good nurses; and if they follow her steps, they will be¬
come high-minded women. Probationers sleep at the
Home, which is only a few yards from the Hospital, and
Miss Merryweather takes her meals with them herself.
Probationers receive for the first year £16, the next £18,
and the third £20. Miss Merryweather values " educated
brains " and strong common-sense, and those possessing
these qualities will be thoroughly appreciated by her.
Almost immediately opposite, on the other side of the
Thames, stands St. Thomas's Hospital, well known, I dare
say,  to  many of the  readers   of the   Ladies' Udinburgh
Magazine.    It consists of, I think, seven large buildings,
quite distinct from   each   other,  and   only united by a
covered way.    The Training School  here was built by
the nation for Florence Nightingale, in token of gratitude
for her services in the Crimea.    It still has the benefit of
her personal interest, though she is disabled, alas! from
active exertion.    In this hospital, all, whatever their birth
or position, are received on exactly similar terms.    Those,
however, Avho are able, are expected to pay £30 for the
year of training.    There seems to be something  of a
hardship here, as the lady does the same work as a pro¬
bationer who receives £13 and clothing.    The lady saves
this sum to the hospital, so it cannot be urged that she
costs the charity anything.    A lady, with say £60 or £70
a-year, is generally less rich than a  girl of the poorer
classes with nothing btit her health and strength.    The
£30, also, does not cover all necessary expenses; and the
the food, though good and wholesome, does not suit all
digestions.    The training and teaching in St. Thomas' is
of course first-rate; but the size of the establishment, by
increasing  the   distances to the   different  departments,
adds greatly to the fatigue of the nurses and probationers'
work.   I am told that when the Lady Superintendent has
gone her rounds in a morning, she has walked nine miles.
A lady would probably have a better chance of obtaining
a  superintendentship from St. Thomas's than from some
of the others, as being the best known and largest; and
other hospitals apply there for matrons and superinten¬
dents, and also for trained nurses when a new hospital is
begun.    But the difficulty is more   often to find duly-
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 307
qualified women, than work for them to do.    In conclu¬
sion, I may say, that though strong health is an advan¬
tage  in  every path  of life, a  lady who  is  " not very
strong" should not at once decide that she is not fitted
for nursing.    Her delicacy may arise from want of exer¬
cise, or want of interest, or unsuitable climate, and the
total change to the active life of a nurse might be most
beneficial.    An incident mentioned in one of Miss Night¬
ingale's works has often struck me very forcibly as bearing
on this point.    She says, a lady had suffered agonies from
neuralgia for eight years, but she had not been working
many hours in an hospital when the pain left her entirely.
Each probationer is engaged only for a month's trial,
and by the end of that time  she  can generally judge
as to whether she is fitted for the work or not.    If all is
satisfiictory,  her year  of training  will then begin; she
will go, as far as possible, through the different wards of
the  hospital—so many months in the medical ward, so
many in the surgical, so many in the accident, and so on.
If the lady is of the right material, she will then have
gained a good knowledge of nursing; and her value will
be increased—as a lady superintendent said to me—not
twofold, but tenfold.    In most hospitals a uniform is worn,
commonly a lilac print, simple white cap and apron; the
head-nurses sometimes have brown or grey alpacas, and
these costumes are de rigeur, and have  a  very pretty
effect.    The head day-nurses in many—indeed,  I   may
say, most—hospitals, are called Sisters, independently of
any religious system.    It was found a pleasant and con¬
venient distinction between day and night nurses, and
among so many with different duties.
Ladies who wish to be trained in Scotland should
apply to Miss Pringle, lady superintendent, Royal Infirm¬
ary, Edinburgh. If in England, to Mrs Wardroper, lady
superintendent, St. Thomas' Hospital, London; Miss
Merryweather, 8 Broad Sanctuary, S.W., London; the
lady superintendent, Middlesex Hospital, London; the
Sister Superior, St. John's Nursing Home, Norfolk Street,
Strand, London; the lady superintendents of Charing
Cross Hospital, King's Cross Hospital, and Children's
Hospital, Great Ormond Street; the Home, 35 Cambridge
Place, Paddington, W.—all in London; the lady super¬
intendent. Royal Infirmary, Liverpool; Royal Southern
Hospital, Liverpool; and Miss Burt, the Infirmary, Lei¬
cester. Probationer.
308 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
a f i £ n r f.
I PICTURE thee a friend, divine and sweet, \
Who leads from noonday glare unto thy quiet retreat, ;
And with soft sway controls ;
Our fever-troubled souls, i
Bringing to greet our sadness :
Thy notes of hallow'd gladness.
Sweet sister thou of Hope, and fair as she;
The Future hers to paint, the Present is for thee ; i
And rich the rainbow's hue ;
Thou bringest to our view, • j
When on the mist of tears "|
Thy rays' reflex appears. |
i
Thy diadem on the thorn-crowned Head was seen ; j
For with the noblest thou hast ever been : \
And nature bears thy seal,
Her joys of Spring reveal :
How she is linked with thee
In sweet affinity.
O be thou with us when we've sown our seed,
In hour of toil be with us, and in need.
In misconception's woe,
When friend oft turneth foe,
Come, in that bitt'rest hour,
Come, with thy healing power.
When Truth illumes us, and our hearts rejoice.
Still in that gladness make us hear thy voice ;
Lest we on closed eyes
Should force the light wo prize,
Help us, in faith sublime.
To wait God's opening time ;
Help us, and make us strong,
—Sometimes the way seems long.
Joan Scott.
The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 309
^\\t (Eliristiatt aotoman'.s tolorli in Jndia.
Part UI.
In considering the subject of Medical Missions, the mind
of the thoughtful Bible student cannot but revert to the
first missionary work undertaken by the disciples of Him
who "went about doing good;" and as we read His words
of divine authority, beautifully combined with human
love and sympathy—" Preach, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is at hand; heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise
the dead, cast out devils"—the thought comes to en¬
courage us, that the loving heart of Jesus is not changed.
He would have us go and do likewise; His arm of power
is not shortened; %ve, as well as His first disciples, may
enter the medical mission field in full assurance of faith,
not doubting that He will graciously own and bless our
efforts for the bodies and the souls of our helpless
and neglected heathen sisters.
It is peculiarly woman s work to care for the sick. It has
pleased the all-wise Creator to endow her with qualities
which render her specially adapted for this work, such as
power of endurance, tenderness of heart, gentleness of
disposition, and quickness of perception. We do not
expect to find these existing to the eame degree in man,
as is sufiiciently proved by the words so often heard
when a good husband or father has lovingly performed
some little office for his suffering dear one—"He was as
tender as a woman." This is one point decidedly in
favour of women undertaking medical missions. But
another, and far more important one, presents itself in
the fact, that the ladies on whose behalf this particular
effort is being made, are placed by their unhappy circum¬
stances entirely beyond the reach of help from any
medical man. They suffer terribly in consequence; scarcely
ever is a European doctor called in to see and prescribe
for an Indian lady; the native doctors, or hakims, are
totally ignorant of Western medicine and surgery, and
have, besides, no knowledge or skill in the treatment of
women and children. Their aid is rarely sought. " When
they are called in," we are told, " it is only to see the
patient die, the time for doing anything hopefully effi¬
cacious having passed." Then there are the native
nurses, who are in fact the doctors of the Zenana, and of
No. 10.—OCIOBEK 1875. R
310 The iMdies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
whom our missionaries write, "They are ignorant, meddle¬
some, and immoral." Numberless mothers and children
fall victims to their neglect or want of skill; yet medical
aid can only be given on any large scale by women, the
customs of society excluding men (except on rare oc¬
casions) from the Zenanas. How large a field of usefulness
is opened by these peculiar circumstances to the Christian
women of our own country !
But a third, and still more important point, remains to
be noticed. The missionary who enters the Zenana
well qualified to give medical and surgical aid to its help¬
less inmates, has a golden opportunity for telling the
good news of salvation,—an opportunity such as has never
before presented itself. We can scarcely overvalue it;
God grant it may not be lost! Hearts which for long
years have been inaccessible to the Gospel may be won
to Jesus by this instrumentality, when perhaps others fail.
Do we not instinctively feel drawn towards the patient
watcher who has gently soothed and skilfully tended
us through hours of weakness and pain? Can we help
loving the one whose efforts have been the means in
God's hands of bringing us back from the brink of the
grave ? Will not the Avords, the wishes, of such an one,
have a weight with us which no others could have?
Must not our tried and trusted helper possess an influence
over us ? In the case of the imprisoned lady of the Zenana
all these feelings are intensified. The self-denying,
patient, skilful friend, who comes to her in her time of
trial, or when her children sicken, is welcomed as an
angel of mercy; tlie heart of the sufferer warms towards
her, and opens to receive her instructions. Yes, there is a
mighty power in this service of love, which the Master
would have us hasten to use for His glory and the untold
good of the suff'ering millions of India's women.
Now, my readers will readily see from these state¬
ments how exactly suited to the present need of India
is such an agency as a female medical mission. The
committee of the Indian Female Normal School and
Instruction Society are looking forward hopefully to the
time when they will have a large and efficient staff" of
medical ladies at work among the inmates of the Zenanas.
Already they have taken steps with a view to this. In
the Report issued by them in 1873, they made an urgent
appeal for help in this very important sphere of labour.
Two ladies responded to that call: both had previously
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 311
liad hospital training, and they went through a further
course of instruction in London during the summer and
autumn of 1873. Miss Leighton was the first to offer
herself. She had given herself heart and life to the great
work of winning souls. She was a truly devoted Chris¬
tian, loving and lovable, yet very firm and decided. She
was also skilled in the discharge of the duties for which
she offered herself, and the Committee looked forward
with bright expectations to her future labours. Several
eminent medical men most Idndly gave both Miss Leigh-
ton and Mrs. Crawford the benefit of their gratuitous
services to qualify them for their undertaking; and
the latter sailed for Bombay in the autumn of 1873.
Miss Leighton only left for Benares on November Gtli,
for while practising among the poor in Drury Lane, in
October, she was taken ill with pleurisy. The attack
passed ofi", and she commenced her voyage; but after
only one week at sea she was again very ill, and it
pleased our Heavenly Father to take her to Himself.
ller loss was deeply felt; and scarcely were the friends
of the Mission recovering this heavy blow, when they
were called upon to meet another sad trial in the deatli
of Mrs. Crawford, who had been assiduously labouring
for a few months in Bombay. Mysterious and painful
were these dealings, and though " blind unbelief" might
lead us to question and wonder and be dismayed, we
must yet seek in faith to rest in the assurance—
" God is His own interpreter,
And He will make it plain."
That the members of the mission are acting in faith, and
submissively seeking to glorify God under this trial, is
sufficiently proved by the fact that they are still " going
forward." Two more ladies have offered themselves,
and been accepted as medical missionaries, and are now
actively preparing. Miss F. J. Butler is in training at
the London School of Medicine for Women; and Miss
Beilby is ready to leave England for Lucknow this
mouth (October).
The objections raised against this enterprise arc not
few. One is, the difficulty for ladies to get, or be willing
to receive, from gentlemen the needful instruction; but
this has never been felt to be a difficulty in the training
of the few lady doctors already practising in America
and in our own country.    The eager desire to cultivate
312 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
talent and win a high position has enabled several to
take up and carry on the most trying studies ; and is it
to be supposed that the love of Christ reigning supreme
in the heart will not accomplish more than a mere
desire for worldly advancement and renown? The sub¬
ject is most admirably discussed in a paper written by
the late Dr. Elmslie, and published in The Indian Female
Evangelist for January 1873. He closes his answer to
this objection in these words:—"True Christian refine¬
ment will enable a lady to do anything that is not sinful
to help and cheer the suffering needy, and thereby pro¬
mote Christ's glorious cause in the world. We are bold
to say that no pure-minded earnest Christian lady would
ever feel the least uncomfortable while receiving surgical
and medical instruction from a refined Christian medical
man It  is   only to  a   cold outsider
who, forgetting the noble object in view in the study of
medicine by a Christian lady animated Avith missionary
impulses, that this objection could occur, or be in any
degree cogent."
Again, it is questioned whether the Society is not over¬
stepping its due bounds, and taking up work to which it
is not called, in seeking to organise medical missions.
To which we answer, that any agency which can lessen
suffering, soothe the sorrowful, save life, and help to bring
light into the dark Zenana, is within the Hmits of this
Society's great work, and ought to be earnestly, prayer¬
fully, untiringly made use of.
And finally (not to mention numerous other objections,
unimportant, and only raised by those who have never
themselves investigated the matter), there are not want¬
ing good people always looking out for trouble, who pro¬
phesy that the comfort of our own homes will be affected
if Ave call upon our ladies to go to minister to the Avants
of their heathen sisters, and especially if Ave enlist them
in such an uufeminine occupation as the study of medi¬
cine. Such fears are groundless, as a moment's thought
will shoAV. Let it be considered that it is only the very few
among our countrywomen Avho liaA'e all the qualifications
required in the medical missionary ; probably it is not too
much to say that scarcely one in a thousand could and
would giA^e herself to this Avork: let it be remembered also
that Ave have many more ladies for AA'hom to find employ¬
ment than the comfort and management of our homes
require, and that A^ery many of good birth and education
The Ladles Eduihurgh Magazine. 313
haye no home except such as they can make for them-
selyes in some of the few ways open to them in this
country. Any one who will fairly admit the ti'uth of
these statements, must admit also that there is little
enough cause for anxiety respecting our homes, although
we call upon all who haye talent, opportunity, and deyo-
tion to the seryice of Christ, to aid the great work of
the Female Medical Mission.
It is strange that the card-table, the theatre, the ball,
and eyen the race-course, should so long haye been attend¬
ed by our countrywomen without our hearing the objec¬
tion of "uufeminine" from those who so readily bring it
forward in this matter !
Let all Christian women come out more resolutely from
the world; let them yield themselycs more heartily to the
service of Him whose they profess to be; let their liyes be
truly consecrated, and our earnest appeal for medical mis¬
sionary help will be largely and loyingly responded to,
while at the same time our quiet British homes will be
more abundantly blessed,—as woman's patient industry
and gentle loying care are not lessened by missionary
zeal, but increased a hundredfold !
S. S. Hewlett.
{To he continued.)
CHAPTER VIII.
It was with a great lightening of heart that Randall
felt that one chapter in his history was closed. He )iow
began to turn his attention earnestly to the new task he
had undertaken. Alas ! poor fellow ! he imagined that
he had discoyered a garden of roses, in which he was to
revel in uninterrupted pleasure. The sky seemed all
sunshine ; and he flattered himself with tlie hope that
things were now about to happen exactly as he wished.
But such hopes, at whatever period of life they are
formed, are almost inevitably doomed to disappointment;
and from such an experience poor Uaudall was not to be
exempted, any more than others.
Full of ardour in his new calling, he was determined to
314 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
dignify it as much as possible, as well as to set to work
in the way which was most congenial to  his own feel¬
ings.    It was thus in the light of a professor rather than
a teacher that he now regarded himself.    A very young
professor,   indeed,   hardly   of  age  yet;   yet  never  did
reverend sire think himself more in earnest than   did
Randall, as he burnt the midnight oil, and puzzled his
brains by day,  to achieve  something   truly worthy of
attention.    True, he was aware that his  teaching was
destined for those who would perhaps fail to grasp its
full   meaning,   not   having   yet   advanced  beyond  the
feebleness of childhood.    Yet,  as he wrote, somehow he
constantly failed to realise this.   He had ever before him,
as a guiding star, the vision of some high-souled genius
for whom these words were to be penned, and whom the
love   of the  beautiful would lead to   a   perfect  under¬
standing of all he had written regarding it.   True to this
ideal listener, he disdained the regular routine of dates
and periods in literary history, and wrote largely instead
on those favourite subjects which seemed more fitted to
kindle enthusiasm.    First in order among these subjects
came the dawn of literature ; how it rises gradually above
the cloud of mythology, of which originally it formed a
part.     He tried to show in poetical language how myth¬
ology is not a thing which a nation sets itself to make,
but a living form which flows naturally out of language,
and is thus endowed with a real and potent life.
While he was still deeply engaged with this part of his
work, he went one day to walk, according to his custom,
round the walls of Chester. It must not be denied that,
while dreaming over his task, he indulged at the same
time in reveries regarding all manner of possible inter¬
views with Werburga. One of these reveries was pro¬
bably going on when he suddenly raised his eyes, and
found himself face to face with the person he had just
seen with almost equal vividness in imagination.
Scarcely seeming to observe his confused, self-conscious
look, Werburga frankly wished him good morning, and
begged him to come with her into her father's house.
" I have nothing interesting to show you," she said,
naively, " except my father, who has always something
to say to students like himself."
Randall followed willingly; but on entering, they
found that the Baron had gone out; so the two were left
to a tete-a-tete.
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 315
" I have heard strange rumours of you, Mr. Holme,"
said Werburga, breaking into the subject at once : " do
not be alarmed, I have not even told my father of your
scheme ; but for myself, I am too near headquarters not to
know everything that concerns the school."
This frank interest nearly restored Randall to his
wonted composure. He longed to know what his com¬
panion thought of the step he had taken, but only said,
" Yes, it may seem strange to others, but I wanted some¬
thing to do."
" And do you really think," said Werburga, looking
fixedly at him, " that you have taken the right coi;rse i
If so, you are certainly not ambitious."
This opinion, though by uo means new to Randall,
came to him from the lips of another as a kind of revela¬
tion ; for the feelings and motives which had impelled
him to the task, had hitherto shed over it a halo of glory
which no calmer speculations could dispel.
"You think not'?" he said; "and you also a teacher!
I have always considered it a noble vocation."
" That depends greatly on the person who enters upon
it. Few, very few, bring to it that devotion which alone
can ennoble any calling. With women it is usually a
pis-aller — a mere shelter from beggary; but with a
yoimg man like you, it seems to me almost throAving
yourself away to choose a position such as this, when a
far more aspiring career is open to you."
Randall's first impulse was to open his heart to Wer¬
burga, and confess the ruling motive of his conduct;
caution and timidity, however, forbade this, and he gave
the weaker motive instead, pleading his natural bent, his
desire for occupation, and his disregard of the opinion
of the world.
"But you forget," said Werburga, "that part of the
world whose opinion you despise, consists of those whom
you will have to teach, as well as of the other teachers
around you. They will soon cease to regard you as
having ever been intended for anything but a teacher,
and you will find a constant demand made upon you for
exertion, without that corresponding degree of deference
which your life hitherto has led you to expect."
•' You are surely too severe," said Randall; he looked
puzzled, however, and somewhat forlorn.
"Forgive me," said Werburga, "if I have discouraged
you.   If you are an independent character, however, and
SIC) TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
feel that this is your true vocation, you will follow it out
in spite of all that can be said against it. But let us talk
of something else. I have a plan to lay before you.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the school is approach¬
ing ; and in honour of this, Miss Langley intends to give
a fete on the opening day. It has been left to me to
arrange some amusement for the occasion, and I have
an idea that we might do honour to our patron saint by
illustrating her life in a series of tableaux. Now, I want
some verses to enliven the performance; and for these,
let me appeal to you."
"I am not sure that I still intend to have anything to
do with the school," said Randall, evidently somewhat
piqued by her previous remarks. Werburga put on her
most charming expression, walked across the room to
where Randall was sitting, and witli a low courtesy
begged him to condescend to assist her.
" Most willingly," said Randall, rising from his seat
and bowing in reply.    " How can I help you ? "
" With your brains," said Werburga; " \vrite some
lovely verses on some of the most touching parts of
AVerburga's history. You do not know it ? Listen wliile
I relate it to you.
" There is nothing very striking in the life of St.
Werburgh, or Wereburge, as she is called in ancient
chronicles. Beyond those struggles of the affections
wliich tinge, if they do not alter, most youthful lives,
there is no stirring interest; nothing but that calmness
of devotion which rises triumphant over the passions in
the case of those who succeed in attaining the saintly
life. Yet such inward struggles are often the most
telling, because they are the most truly human. Princess
Wereburge lived about the close of the seventh century.
Her father, Wulfhere, king of the Mercians, not a zeal¬
ous Christian, early remarked her great sanctity, and not
without anxiety, for he feared that she would thereby
lose the desire to make a brillinnt match, suitable to her
station. Lovel}^ and admired by many suitors, she
turned coldly from them, determined to live a consecrated
life. In vain did the son of the king of the West Saxons
implore her favour ; AVerbode, too, an ambitious courtier
of her father's, was kindly, yet sternly repulsed. Far in
the solitude of the forest dwelt a hermit devoted to
prayer and fasting. The good Saint Chad had by his
pious conversation converted from paganism the sons of
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 317
Wulfhere. The jealous Werbode, suffering from disap¬
pointed ambition, and from the enmity of these princes,
who opposed his suit, took advantage of the favour he
enjoyed with the king, and obtained from the latter an
order for their execution. But the cruel informer was to
suffer for this ; he was poisoned by an evil spirit, and
died raving mad ; while the king, driven by repentance
to Christianity, became renowned for his piety.
" But now came the trial of Chad and of Wereburge.
The princess, thoroughly disgusted with the intrigues
and enmities of the world, determined to become a nun.
It was Chad who was to consecrate her. Yet no sooner
had he beheld her beauty than he felt within him a
passion which he had never felt before ; and the oflt'ering
of such a bride to Heaven was moistened with the tears
of him who offered it. Whether Wereburge felt aught
or not, could not be told: she remained outwardly calm,
and lived one of the noblest lives ever led by mm, so that
her piety was even made the means of Avorking miracles,
while by her wealth many religious houses Avere founded
in the land. Now," said tlie fair narrator, " instead of
agreeing at once what the tableaux are to be, let us each
fix on what seem to us the most striking moments in the
story, and then compare our views on the subject."
Randall agreed to this, and for the next few days the
story of Werburge haunted his brain by day and by night,
to the exclusion of all that had previously appeared to
him in the light either of duty or of pleasure.
The evening of the fete arrived. The large old house
was well lighted, and wore an air of cheerfulness and
of kindly welcome. Miss Langley had donned the pale
grey silk which appeared so seldom and looked so be¬
coming ; and there was a qiiiet dignity in her demeanour
which bore a contrast to the usual forgetfulness of self in
the effort to please others. A stage had been improvised
in one of the large schoolrooms, with the usual accom¬
paniment of folding doors which attends private theatri¬
cals. A piano was placed at right angles with the stage,
and at this the junior music governess sat and played
lively measures while the guests entered and seated
themselves on the rows of seats with which the room was
filled. Miss Ijangley, who occupied, or rather ought to
have occupied, an arm-chair at the further end of the
room, was in reality getting nearer to the door with the
No. 10.—October 1875. 2 S
318 The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine.
arrival of each guest, so great was her empressement to
receive all with due honour and cordiality.
" Good evening, Mr. Wood. So you were able to leave
your sister this evening I pray come further forward;
there, that is a good light. Ah! Mrs. Holme! and'my
dear Malvina ! I am so glad to see you." At last came
Baron de Rehmar, but Miss Langley tried in vain to
persuade him to come forward ; he chose a seat in the
back row, from which he might at any time make a
sudden plunge into the outer air. The seats were at
last filled, mostly by pupils, many by guests ; and now
the music became softei', and of a more solemn character.
Slowly the curtain rose, and disclosed a dim chamber.
A long low table Avith a couch near it occupied the centre
of the room, and beside these was a j;?'ie-A'e(/, with a
prayer-book laid on the reading-desk. Flere a young
girl was kneeling. The dim light gave an unearthly
gleam to her countenance ; her long hair hung down over
her simple robe ; her hands were clasped, and she was
looking up in an attitude of prayer. Then from the back¬
ground a lovely voice rose in a slow chant; it Avas a
clear soprano, like that of a boy-chorister ; the words ran
thus :—
"Souls of new-born infants, fled
To the mansions of the dead,
With your life as pure, as faint
As the breath of praying saint,
As the pearl of morning dew
Melting into heaven's blue,
Ere this careless earth of ours
E'en has marked it 'mid her flowers,—
Souls of children, full of grace,
Greet me from your heavenly place.
Tender gleaming aureoles,
Shining o'er these infant souls,
Making by your star-like gleam
Heav'n's bright day a hallowed dream ;
Happy stars, that shine by day,
Spangling o'er the blessfed way,
Where the saints of great renown
Glide in heaven up and down ;
Infant souls, 3'our voices raise.
Pray aloud for her who prays."
Tlie Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine. 319 '
The curtain had risen and fallen again over several
tableaux, each representing some scene in the life of
Saint Werburga. There was a pause and an expectant
lull among the audience ere the two last, which were
believed to be the finest, should be mis en scene. The
music governess had been called away from the piano to
assist in some extra preparations, and all eyes were
rivetted on the curtain, which was beginning to show
signs of rising, when a gentleman entered the room, and
took possession of almost the only vacant seat, just in
front of de Rehmar. It was Trevor, but, strange to say,
he did not look round to greet any one; his Avonted gay
humour seemed to have forsaken him for the present,
and he sat looking straight before him in moody abstrac¬
tion. The curtain rose, and displayed the interior of a
hermitage in a wilderness. The walls of this abode were
of rough unpolished wood. On one corner of the floor
was a bed of straw; besides this, the room was almost
bare of furniture. Half-turned towards the audience was
a young man kneeling in fi'ont of a crucifix; his dark
hair, which had the tonsure, was cut close around his
noble brow ; the plain black tunic was confined by a rope
round the waist; while in his hand he held what seemed
to be the picture of a young girl, which he was in the
act of dashing to the ground. His dark earnest eyes
remained fixed upon the crucifix, while the choir of youth¬
ful voices behind the scenes chanted these words :—
" Blessed saint, wljo, when on earth,
Fleeing from lier scenes of mirlli,
Scorned'st ev'n lier dearest ties
For coraiiiiiiiion with the skies.
And ill holy pilgrimage
Grewest on to riper age,
Till the deeds which thou hudst done
Thee a saintly name had won ;—
Saint Alexius, he my friend,
Let thy prayers for me ascend."
De Rehmar overheard a lady who gat next to Trevor
explaining to him that this was Saint Chad in his solitary
retreat in the desert; that he was about to consecrate
Werburga as a nun, and was endeavouring beforehand,
by fasting and prayer, to overcome his passionate attach¬
ment to her, and to attain a saintly tranquillity of mind.
320 The Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine.
" St. Chad is Randall Holme, you know," added the lady;
" does not he look handsome 'i "
" Randall Holme, indeed! " muttered Treyor, almost in-
audibly between his teeth ; " how comes he here'? "
After this, he looked eyen more moody and abstracted
than before. Then came the concluding tableau. It re¬
presented the interior of a church, dimly lighted. Without
the altar rails stood a royal personage, King W^ulfhere,
with his two sons; within, in a wide circle round the
altar, nuns were kneeling; while, before the altar, with
her face towards the officiating bishop, knelt a young
girl, dressed in the white garb of one about to take the
veil. Her face was very pale, as, with eyes fixed on the
ground, she appeared to be in the act of taking the
solemn voavs. The priest, the same who had appeared
in the previous scene, stood with one hand uplifted,
looking down upon her with a solemn sweetness. The
whole tableau Avas grave and affecting, and one longed
for some solemn music to give to it that expression for
which words were denied, when the white-robed choir,
standing in the background, gave forth the following
words to a slow and melodious measure:—
" Maiden spirit, onwniil go,
Eartlily smiles mid favours scorning',
Into purest lilv grow.
Fed by dew of lieavenly morning ;
Almost with a tear we yield tliee
To the Power who best can shield thee,
To ihe dim and cold embrace
Of the convent's narrow place ;
There, in holy innocence,
Thou shiilt dwell, nor issue thence.
Till, while we with sorrow name thee,
Heaven shall descend to claim llieo.
Aiigels, guard with sheltering wing
This pure sacrifice we bring."
When this scene disappeared behind the curtain, de
Rehmar heard the communicative lady renewing her ex¬
planations. " That is the consecration of Werburga by
St. Chad," she remarked. "Does not he look noble and
handsome? And the young nun is, I must tell you, a
real namesake of the saint—such an interesting person;
does not fehe look distinguished?"
llie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 321
Trevor, who was writliing imder these commonplace
remarks, and evidently meditating a speedy escape, Avas
detained for a few moments by the rapturous encore,
which was speedily responded to by the repetition of the
tableau. No sooner was this over, than he rose from his
seat and hastily left the room, only bowing slightly to
de Rehmar as he passed. This was a blow to the latter,
who had been watching for a recognition, and, if possible,
a chat with his old friend. He consoled himself by the
reflection that his friend was out of humov;r, but was
quite rmaware that he himself was partly the cause of
this. The fact was, that Trevor had felt no little sur¬
prise and vexation on finding that Randall held such a
prominent place in the performance; and these feelings
were by no means lessened Avhen he reflected on the
degree of intimacy with Werburga which this implied.
He, on the other hand, had been ignored—left out; had
heard of the approaching fete only by formal invitation.
Had he known from what source this neglect arose, his
vexation might possibly have changed into foreboding
for the future. De Rehmar had, in fact, seemed hardly
pleased at Werburga's having requested Randall to
assist in the performance without consulting him; and
on her afterwards siiggesting the idea of Trevor also
being drawn into it, he had abso'^ilely refused his
sanction.
De Rehmar remained seated while the rest of the
audience were leaving the room; he felt sad, and in-
difi^erent to all around him. Mrs Holme and her daughter
passed very near him; Malvina smiled and nodded to her
friend, and would fain have come near enough to speak,
but her mother hurried her away, bowing stiffly to the
baron as she did so. Then Mr. Wood, who was giving his
arm to Mrs Holme, bowed in the same slight and cold
manner. What could be the meaning of all this ? There
was his daughter feted and taken notice of by all; to¬
night she had taken the most prominent part in the per¬
formance ; all eyes were upon her. Why then was he
thus neglected and passed by ? was there some calumny
against him? and if so, who was the author of it? The
feverish excitement brought on by his personal feelings
was aggravated by bodily weakness. Almost madly he
said to himself, " They are trying to get rid of me that
they may have her all to themselves.     Trevor or Holme,
322 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
which is it ? But I shall not trouble them long; no, I am
too ill for that. And Bernard Wood, Avhat does he mean ?
But to end my days here among them! no." He sat for
a few moments moodily in his chair, as if forming a
desperate resolve; then sprang up, and walking forward
towards the stage, drew back the curtain and went in.
All was dark there, but in a little room to the left lights
were burning. He opened the door gently a little way,
and peeped in. AVerburga was there, just finishing the
re-arrangement of her toilet; he beckoned to her. She
ran quickly towards him with some alarm in her face ; she
was used to his fits of depression and his physical ail¬
ments. " What is it'? " she said quickly; " are you ill ? "
He drew her towards him, and gazed long and fondly in
her face: at last he said, " My child, would you think it
hard if I were to take you away now?" She looked
blank for a moment, but consented, only asking if he
Avere ill.
" No, not ill, only anxious," he replied; " but come with
me and 1 Avill explain all to you."
When Randall entered the supper-room and heard that
Werburga had gone, he felt as if the charm of the
evening had gone with her. For the moment he seemed
to himself exiled from a garden of roses, and placed in a
dark and dismal abode, where it seemed a pain to exist.
He soon took leave of Miss Langley, and walked slowly
homewards. To-morrow was-the day on which he w^as
expected to enter on his new duties. Mechanically he
had promised this to Miss Langley as he took leave of her,
hardl}^ knowing what he said. But even while he was
Avalking home, he remembered how Werburga had spoken
of this project of his. It was evident that she did not
think more highly of him for it, and thought he was only
escaping from his true vocation in life by forming tliis
scheme. Was it weakness or infatuation that made him
waver in his purpose when he thought of this ? Possibly
both, and the same causes made him ponder in his mind
what other course was open to him that she would
approve. Surely, he felt, that were the only true course
for him. Like a chained captive now, however, he must
accept his doom. So the morrow found him, as in duty
bound, on the Avay to Miss Langley's. He must needs
call at de Eehmar's house on his way thither, to enquire
whether the baron was really ill, as he had been told.
The Ladles Edinburgh Mn-jazlne. 323
What was his amazement, on arriving there, to see a
carriage at the door with luggage upon it. He rang the
bell, but was refused admittance. Werburga, however,
who happened to be passing through the hall, came
forward and spoke to him. " Papa is really ill," she said,
" and the doctor recommends immediate change of air, so
we leave town to-day." This was said in a rather sad
tone.
" Where are you going 1" asked Randall in dismay.
" That I cannot tell," she said.
"And shall I not see you again? Oh, Werburga!"    It
was the first time he had ventured to call her by her name.
" Oh, yes I I hope we shall meet soon," she answered;
" we are not going to stay away for ever."
" Till you return, I must live on memory," said Randall.
"Will you not tell me where you are to be I"
"No," said Werburga, " I dare not tell that—not even
to my dearest friend."
" Then I am asking more than to be  your  dearest
friend," said Randall; " let me ask that alone."
" That I cannot promise either," she answered, " Let me
tell you frankly," and here she looked at him steadily and
kindly; " I cannot make a dearest friend of one whom I do
not thoroughly respect, and I cannot thoroughly respect
one who is not exerting himself to the utmost to find his
right place in the world. Pardon me for speaking thus ;
I mean well." She said these words so kindly, and with
such a beseeching air of humility, that Randall, instead of
being very much ofi'ended, as he would midoubtedly have
been if thus spoken to by any one else, only said,
" Thank you for telling me what you think." Then he
added, " Some day, perhaps, I may please you better.
May I try?"
" Do not let us speak of the futm-e," said Werburga;
" that is too dim and uncertain; only let me Avish you
success in all that you attempt; and whether we meet
again sooner or later, it will always be as friends."
She held out her hand, he took it, and in a moment was
gone. It was all over with Miss Langley's school now; he
felt that the moment the door was closed. The ruling
motive which had drawn him thither, was now, in an
equally commanding way, pointing away from it. Wliat
he was on the way to do seemed to him now the very last
thing to be chosen ; there were many other paths open to
324 Tlie Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine.
hira, all more worthy of his efforts. This all dawned upon
him in an undefined way, in the alluring colours of a
temptation out of reach. It seemed to him that that
morning the charm had been taken away that bound him
to Chester, and nothing left but a life of cheerless toil
among comparative strangers. " No !" he said to himself
with sudden resolution, "I will not go on with it, I can¬
not." He then began to consider whether he should go
on to Miss Langley's, as he had intended to do on leaving
home. If so, it could only be to make an excuse and
withdraw, thus bringing odium on himself ou account of
the inevitable hitch which such a proceeding would cause
in Miss Langley's school arrangements. To avoid an
awkward interview, Avould it not be better to send a note,
giving some pretext for his conduct 'I So he retraced his
steps to his lodging at the farm.
" Randall Holme has been suddenly recalled to Stretton,
and will not return," said Miss Langley that afternoon to
her head-governess. " I suppose it was imavoidable; but
certainly it is strange conduct. And happening at this
moment, just Avhen Werburga is called away also,—the
circumstance is most disastrous. There is nothing to be
done but to give another fortnight's holidays, that I may
have time to supplement my staff of teachers." Though
Miss Langley and the governess both deplored this un¬
toward commencement of the autunni session, there was
no small joy among the younger ladies, who now looked
forward to unlimited excursions to the country, and walks
along the " rows " of Chester, not to speak of frequent
visits to the confectioner's, which were all to be enjoyed
during the ensuing fortnight.
Procla.
{To he continued.^
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 325
OD^c   ^ragon   of  t^c   |torlb,
CHAPTER   XL
" When the wind bloweth strong, hoist thy sail to the top,
'Tis joyous in storm not to flinch :
Keep her full! keep her full! none but cowards strike sail;
Sooner founder than take in an inch."
—Frithiolf's Saga, Dasent's Translation.
I HAD become aware without waking that the vessel was
pitching and rolling heavily; but now a cry close by
roused me to full consciousness. It was the Abbot
Atenolf, standing, deadly pale, clinging to the ship's side,
and gazing through the square opening in the door. I
too sprang up, and looked out. It was nearly noon, but
the sky was all cloud, and the sea steel-grey, cold, and
foamy. My first thought was we were in it, for all the
waist before us reflected the gleam of water, and heavily
the waves plashed over each bulwark alternately, as the
ship rolled along in the troubled sea. Above the prow
towered a wave, dark, impending, mountainous, over the
golden Dragon's head; anon we had turned it, and though
some water broke on board, the mass of the wave passed
along our quarter. The wind hoAvled drearily ; the oars
were all in; quite a crowd of idle men were huddled
together in the waist; while ever and anon, as the
water dashed over them, a curse in Norse, or Italian, or
Greek, would pierce the clamour of wind and sea. But a
talk was rising among the men, which made me thrill
with alarm as gradually the drift became plain to me.
No wonder they had bad luck, they said; no wonder
they were likely to perish in the storm ; not only had they
cheated Thor of his sacrifice, but now they carried a traitor
with them — the murderer of their kinsmen's friend,
Dato—l)ato, who had surrendered as a prisoner of war.
And such words were echoed in Italian and Greek, for
there were many Greeks on board, commanded by one
Antigonous, a clever but sinister-looking man. Yet
dissentient voices were heard, and by degrees a few
monks, om- prior among them, drew towards our cabin
door, as if to interpose between it and the mob.
"Do   you    understand   what   they   say,   my   son?"
murmured the pale lips of the abbot.
No. 11.—NoVEJiBEK 1875. 2 T
326 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" I doubt there is danger, my lord, both from the sea
and from the hand of man," I answered; " brace yourself
up in case we have to die, as all true monks have died to
the world already."
And then I was silent, and watched while the anxious
minutes went by. I knew there was danger to all if
indeed mutiny and murder should break loose in that
tempest-tossed ship. Where was Hertha? and where
was Thorstein I Cries now arose for Swend, Red Swend,
and after some delay he strode through the crowd in the
waist, and thence climbed on the forecastle and faced the
people. There was silence as if to hear him, but he
hesitated. I could see he was not sober. Then sounded
a clear voice in Italian, Astolfo's, as if speaking from the
poop,—" Swend, you promised to protect him; you pro¬
mised him a passage ; you will bring down the evil fate
if you break your plighted word. And the Norsemen
promised by you."
" No, no, never! " many shouted, and Antigonous called
out, " We Greeks promised nothing. Men, we are the
strongest; have at the monks, and share the treasure. I
know these seas better than any Northman of them all,
and I will pilot you safely." There followed cries of
" Remember Dato!" and an angry Norsemair called
out, " Speak, Swend! are we to protect the monk or
no?"
" As you like," stuttered Swend; " he is no friend of
mine; have it as you will."
And now the mob turned and rushed towards our
cabin. " Stand firm," I heard our prior say ; but what
could the defenceless monks do ? In a moment they were
thrown hither and thither beneath the trampling feet of
the fierce men, who now fell on the door, broke it down
the next instant, and I dare not dwell on the horrors
which followed. The abbot was clinging to me Avith
shrieks of, " Spare me, spare me—I dare not die—I will
resign all—I give all! " He was torn away, and his voice
drowned in wild cries of " Dato, remember Dato ! " He
was hurled through the swaying mass of men in front. I
got out, but soon was wedged in the crowd, and could do
nothing, though 1 saw all. No one interfered—yes, one
light figure sprang down; the crush was too great to press
through, but AstoLfo was running along the heaving
bulwarks aided by the ropes, and jumping on men's
shoulders when the heavy pitching jerked him off.    He
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 327
saw me, and shouted, " He is our abbot after all: to the
rescue, Lorenzo!"
Just under where Swend stood, a dense mass of men
bending inwards and despairing shrieks marked where
the wretched abbot was. "Spare him!" shouted Astolfo,
running forwards. " Overboard with him!" was the cry,
and Swend added, " Overboard with the traitor.'' ^ There
was a heave, a struggle on the bulwark, a splash—and all
the crowd turned to look as the ship swept past some¬
thing writhing in the wild waters. Astolfo with drawn
sword had, however, reached Swend. "Traitorin your
teeth ! " he cried, and there was an instant but very brief
flashing of weapons, and then Swend, who looked far more
than a match for my comrade, rolled heavily off the forecastle
down on the deck. Consternation and silence followed
at first, broken by a voice or two, saying, " He has it"—
" Through the heart," " He is dead,"—and then the
clamour rose again, and methought they would have
turned on Astolfo, when wilder and more terrible than the
wrath of man came the fury of the sea. A squall of
mingled rain and wind struck the long ship fiercely, and
as she heeled over to leeward, the great green waves tore
in over her, burying the forecastle deep in the water,
which rolled like a wide foamy river down the waist,
drenching us all, and sweeping the loose lumber out to
sea. Staggering and trembling in every seam, the half-
foundered ship struggled up again, and her golden head
gleamed once more above the water. And then a voice
sounded above the tempest, clear and strong. It was
Thorstein, who spoke from the rudder, which he now held.
" Silence on board; Swend is helpless or dead, and I
claim my heirship—this vessel. She is in danger, but I
may be able to save her. You Outlanders, know that the
Northmen have asked me to command. Now, instant
obedience from all, on your lives. I send men down
among you below; every Greek, every Italian, every
African, give up at once all your weapons to them, and
work as they show you how for the ship."
" Not so fast," saidAntigonousinsolently. "Greeks! the
' History records that the Abbot Atenolf of Monte Cassino, who a short
time before had sold the fortress of Garigliano to the Emperor Basil for a
large sum, and thrown Dato, whom he had promised to protect, into the sea,
fled before the successful anus of Thurstan and Eainulf, and emljarked for
Constantinople, hoping to find a refuge there. He was certainly lost on the
voyage, being either wi'ecked or thrown overboard.
328 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ship is ours; do not let the Lombards make slaves of us;
we are twice their numbers. Strike for a free life on the
eea." And he sprang on the forecastle, whither the
Greeks crowded after him.
" Antigonous, lay your weapons at your feet at once! "
said Thorstein,—but still he continued addressing the
people. Thorstein hesitated not one minute; he took up
a spear, hardly seemed to poise it ere it flew, swift and
true, and pierced Antigonous through the body. With a
wild cry he fell forward, dead. " Go down," said
Thorstein to a group of Northmen, " spare no one who
keeps a weapon." And they descended among the
multitude, Thorstein himself, with others, watching
their progress from the poop with ready spears. They
met with little resistance; they took the weapons as
they passed from man after man, flinging them mostly
into the sea. One wretch had kept a concealed dagger ;
" Throw him overboard with it," said Thorstein sternly,
and so it was done; and I saw how the Greeks and
Africans needed no more words, but perfect order was
kept. All was quiet save the storm, which seemed
gathering fury; and this Thorstein proceeded to combat.
In the waist the water was swaying mid-leg with every
roll of the ship, but rows of men were soon rapidly
passing it up in buckets, and pouring it out, so that it
gradually diminished. A few oars were thrown out,
and those to leeward were worked strongly as directions
were given.
Kolbiorn came near me, and, holding by a rope, spoke
in gay spirits of his joy that the Dragon had fallen into
good hands again. " Even if this is the last of her, she
will make the fight a good ship should, and not be
swamped in a lubberly fashion. But Thorstein will save
her if any one can ; and I have seen far worse storms.
The bad points are the crowd on board, and the want of
sea-room. This north-wester is driving us on the coast,
but yoii see he is holding off" as much as is safe, in hopes
of gaining, if not a port, at least some place to run
ashore where we may have a chance for our lives. On
the ocean we could ride out this weather well."
The next thing that I remember was that some men
passed us who had orders to bring the body of Swend
into Hertha's cabin, and we waded forward with them.
There lay the Viking on the forecastle, straightened and
stiffened into the statue of himself; his bright red hair
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 329
fell back from the sun-burnt forehead, and from the
features which, in the repose of death, showed something
of the beauty of his sister. "Ah! he never did well
since he got the command," said Kolbiorn sadly ; " under
Kolf or Thorstein it might have gone otlierwise. He
was a foohsh man, but a bold one in a fight, and a merry
fellow over the cups. I hope Odin will give him a bumper
to-night, for thither he must go: he is as much too bad
for your heaven as too good for your hell, whither I
suppose you think Atenolf and Antigonous have found
their way."
" What do yoii believe, Kolbiorn ?—anything at all % "
" I," said Kolbiorn—" I don't know ; " and he sang
" Could we know, ah ! could we know
Whither ere set of sun we go,
Over whose head on his sea-weed bed
Next tide's waves will calmly spread !"
Well! as we are all likely to be in that bed soon, I will
tell you, Renzo : I believe in the All Father, and I may
perhaps take Christianity, for I rather think it is he who
offers it to me ; but as for either your books or your
priests settling wliat becomes of all the people who race
through this wild world—out who knows where—no !
they shall not do that for me." The men had taken up
Swend's body and were moving off with it, when a
tremendous sea struck our quarter, flinging us down,
while those who carried the corpse had to cling for their
lives to the bulwarks. Hut the crushing darkness of the
wave passed off; blinded and drenched, we shook off the
stinging bitter waters, and saw light again ; and out to
leeward I saw the flash of armour on the weaves, as the
body of the Viking Swend was swept away on the sea
that had ever been his home.
Kolbiorn and I scrambled up on the poop, where
Thcirstein stood at the helm, with Hertha by him ; he
looked watchful, but cheery ; the ship still obeyed her
helm, and there was perfect order; but I saw now how
near we had come to the purple hills of the coast all
edged with foam, towards which the huge blue waves
seemed to be sweeping us. But above, the clouds w^ere
breaking; the wind was falling, and fitfid gleams of sun¬
shine lit the sky. Astolfo drew near ; he seemed far more
disturbed than any present as he half whispered to me,
330 The Ladies' Edinburgh Muyaz'me.
" Look at our own dear land, so near, and yet now our
worst danger, edged by this cruel water."
" Nonsense, man," said Thorstein ; " this is only a battle
with many chances for us: if I can run ashore where I
intend, there won't be much loss of life. And if I don't—
well, I expect the next life to be even pleasanter than this
one;  do not you? "
Hertha drew closer to him smiling, then with a sudden
change of countenance she said, " AVas it the corpse that
was swept overboard '?"
" Yes," said Thorstein, " and better so ; better our own
sea, the same here as in Norway, than a cairn they
might not honour in a strange land."
" AA^ell, the sea may soon liave us all," said Hertha.
" I don't believe it will," said Thorstein ; "at least don't
trouble yourselves about it, as it is not your business to
look after the matter, but mine. So, children, throw away
care and keep up your hearts."
The Norsemen must have been used to danger, for
none seemed to mind it much; they were chatting as
usual; and I had been trained in meditations on death, so
that it was to me a familiar thought. Only I longed to
get rid of that weight of evil which I had on my con¬
science. Thorstein was too busy for me to tell him
aught of Syades or of my vow, but I Avent down again
to the waist, and found our prior calmly reciting his
office; him I implored to hear my confession. He
assented, and I followed him into the little cabin whence
Atenolf had been torn, and there, kneeling at his feet, I
began tlie wayward story; when, after a while, there
came a terrible shock, and a cry as from a Inindred
voices soon lost in the roar of waters louder far and
more dreadful than before. The prior hardly looked
round, but said quietly, " Methinks the end has come. I
will give you, my son, the conditional absolution we
give to repentant sinners who have not time to confess—
in extremis.^'
Even as he was pronouncing the solemn words with
his hand on my head, came darkness. The next moment
the waters poured in; high they rose, separating and
overwhelming us, and I knew no more.
When I woke it was with no remembrance of what
had happened. I lay on a pleasant couch in a large
room; a row of round-headed windows let in the daylight,
and all seemed somehow familiar and friendly.    I tried
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 331
to rise, but then became conscioas of pain and great
weakness, while a monk in the Benedictine habit came
forward, saying, "Better'? Signer D'Asile, take this,"
as he put a cordial to my lips. Where was I ? in this
world or another"? and then it all came back to me, the
more as on turning I saw coming towards me Herser
Thorstein in light armour, looking as fresh and bright as
though no evil thing had happened.
" Dear Marquis," he said, " I am truly glad to see you
better, though the leech promised you would come to.
It has been a long swoon ; it lasted all yesterday."
" What has happened, my Thorstein % were we
wrecked % "
" Wrecked % no—though a few lives were lost. I
succeeded in running ashore in the very creek we lay in
under Caserta last summer—the only good opening among
the rocks for many miles."
" Yes, it was a fine bit of seamanship," said Eric, who
came forward with others, " and the Dragon will float
again after repairs; but when she first ran in, a heavy
sea struck her poop—the breaker, you know; and we
lost some overboard, chiefly African trash. I think the
indi'aw of the wave flUed the cabin, for we found there
the prior drowned, and you very nearly gone; and when
you came back to life, still you were delirious."
" Do not talk to him too much, my lords," said the monk,
" and in good time there is the refectory bell for break¬
fast; leave him to me." And they left us alone in what
I now remembered as the guest-room, over the gateway
of our own convent of Caserta. There, where little more
than four months ago—but what a lifetime to me !—As-
tolfo had entertained Thorstein when he came to search
for the heir of Asile. It was Fra Cyril, our infirmerer, who
tended me, and was ready, but with a new respect for the
Marquis in his voice, to answer all questions. How
peaceful all looked after the cruel sea ! The morning sun¬
shine gleamed through the windows which framed a
bright blue sky, and some opal-tinted doves were cooing
and pluming themselves on the ledges. And anon the
abbot Crysolarus himself came to visit me, and far, far
better, my own dear Father Anselmo. I asked if he kncAV
aught of my life at Asile, and spoke of my interrupted
confession to the dead prior, but Anselmo bade me hush.
I had been on the verge of a fever, and must only rest
now.    " So  little  changed  you  are, Lorenzo, from the
332 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
favourite artist-novice, that I think the cloister must be
your true home. We hardly knew our Astolfo again; he
is as changed in a different way as the stern heathen
Northman Thorstein, who came here in August; and who
now proves to be the commander of the Lombards—the
lord of all the land—the gentle knight Thurstan, of whom
we have all heard."
" Yes," I answered, " Thorstein is the gentlest and the
sternest of men, as you happen to see him; and Astolfo,
though he is no monk, is a more loyal Benedictine than
ever I was. Ah, yoxi do not know what I am." "A
monk," smiled Anselmo, " who must have some strong
man to obey, and an artist who must have beautiful
things round him. To-morrow we have our requiem for
Abbot Atenolf and our prior; after that you may be better,
and return to us for a while at least."
So all the day passed in pleasant dreaminess, and at
night came some Northmen t3 sleep; andKolbiorn sat on
my couch awhile, and told me how Astolfo had gone to
Asile to reassure Valeria, and Thorstein was repairing the
Dragon ship, which they triisted would soon float again.
And next day I heard the bells toll all morning for the
requiem mass; heavily they echoed on my sore heart, for
with retiirning strength came the thought of my lost love.
My couch was moved to a window which looked down on
our inner quadrangle and beautiful church; and I watched
the long procession,—cross-bearers, laymen, Hertha in
mourning-robes with Thorstein,—I knew her thoughts
were with the wild Swend,—then serving-brothers, no¬
vices, and choir monks in a long long line, chanting solemn
hymns and prayers, in which the names of the worst and
the best of monks were placed together : Ateuolf, whose
face of horror as they dragged him away, still haunted
me; and our prior, whose last look, which I also saw, was
just what he wore Avhen chanting the Nunc Dimittis at
Compline.
The mass was over when my door opened, and Thorstein
entered, leading Hertha, looking lovelier than ever in her
sweeping black robes,—a few of the Paestum winter roses
out of the Abbot's garden in her hand. Kindly she
greeted me, if somewhat distantly, and then withdrew to
a window, and leaned her face on her fair hand gazing
outwards, while tliQ doves, fearless of her beautiful still¬
ness, circled round or perched beside her.
" You said there was something you wished to tell me,"
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 333
said Thorstein kindly, taking my hand; " speak now; can
I aid you ? "
But when I began to tell of my evil thoughts of him,
and about Syades, he interrupted with—" No more of that,
Lorenzo. I know Syades to be my enemy, and it was
natural you should have been it also; only better for rivals
to be declared foes, and even fight it out, than that they
should brood and plot. That is cloister bondage without
cloister holiness; worst of bad things is a bad monk,—
better be the wild Swend than the false traitor Atenolf."
"It seems to me, Thorstein, as if you, the latest
Christian, were the best among us," I said.
" Now you heel over to the other side," laughed Thor¬
stein ; " but nothing seemed very new to me in the
Christian laws save forgiving one's enemies: and how
easy it seems to forgive poor Swend down below these
southern waters."
"And Atenolf, who wished to put out yoiir eyes'?"
" Miserable wretch, is he not punished! Think no more
of these things; let me tell you how I think the Norman
rule is going to prevail in Italy;" and he went on telling
me much of war and government, till he interrupted
himself by saying—"What is it, my Hertha?"
She now stood upright, gazing down at the window
like some angel of blessedness and joy. She did not hear
Thorstein, but she did hear a light step that sounded on
the stair; another moment and the door flew open, an
armed cavalier came swiftly to her, fell on one knee as
he kissed her hand, rose again, and as her sweet face said
clearly he might, kissed her glowing cheek.
"My Hertha—safe and mine," he was saying inco¬
herently, pouring out his terrors at seeing her carried off
by Swend, and how he had ridden south in the desperate
hope of finding a swift ship, when the storm came, and
the report the Dragon ship was lost. "And then, oh
blessed sight! I met Astolfo riding north, who told me all
was safe, and you were here."
" Yes, my Rainulf, our Thorstein saved all our lives,"
she murmured, clinging to him, and drawing him away.
But Thorstein and he were greeting each other warmly,
even as the breathless porter ran in, saying, "]\Iy lord
Eainulf, this is against all rule: first to the parlour to
salute the abbot before you see our guests."
" To the abbot, indeed! when I saw my lady at the
window," laughed the happy knight, as he moved away
No. 11.—November 1875. 2 U
334 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
with Hertha. She turned and saluted me as she passed
the door, and I saw she wished to hiirry from the presence
of her rejected lover ; but one of the winter roses fell
from her hand, and Thorstein, who was following, picked
it up and brought it to me.
" Roses flourishing twice a-year," he said; but his face
was pale, and his lip drawn with an expression of pain,
which made me think of my old wish to design St.
Sebastian. Ay, I had wished to see him in real life, and
a real St. Dorothea also, bearing roses. Were they not
even now before me—fairer and nobler than my most
impassioned dreams? But I—how changed was I from
the youth whose life was filled and blessed by religion
and art ? Now the arrows were fast in me, and the deep
waters had gone over my soul, and I turned round and
broke into a passion of tears. In vain Thorsteiu said
what he could to soothe me; I could not listen to him;
and presently he went away, and sent to me Fra Anselmo,
in whose kind arms I wept more gently, while I told him
I was weary of my life, and only longed to take the final
vows in the cloister.
" We will consider it all when you are better; much
must come first, my son," was all I could persuade him to
promise.
That night, as I slept, I dreamed once more of the
waste land across which I was riding hard to where
St. Dorothea and St. Sebastian awaited me. But a
shadow darkened over me, and hid more and more the
light, and anon arms and a face seemed above me,—
dim, gigantic, terrible. I started awake in an agony,
and one stood before me, his gleaming eyes fixed on
mine, his hands moving slowly over me—and it was no
dream, it was Syades. All power left me save to obey
him: I rose, he threw round me a fur mantle, and step
by step I followed him. There close beside me Thorstein
slept peacefully; his fair throat and strong arms gleamed
white in the moonlight; all the lines of care and work
were smoothed out of his sun-burnt face, and he looked
young and bright, for he smiled in his sleep as though
his dreams were beautiful. I made a desperate effort
to waken him, to cling to him, but he only murmured
the Norse salutation, " Be thou blessed and happy," and
slept on. It seemed some invisible barrier rose between
us, and noiselessly I followed my hated conductor down
the  staircase,   and,   avoiding  the   great  gates, through
The Ladies   Edinburgh Magazine. 335
one of the long corridors of the dormitory. On each
side monks slept quietly; in the chapel only gleamed
a light where they watched by the altar. But avoid¬
ing the circle of light cast from the window, we now
paced through the cloister, and 1 saw again the Dragon
coiled in the caiwing, and the two marble lions. We
came to the little postern, which, alas! was open. We
went through it, though I clung for a moment to the
jambs of the door, and tried in vain to sign myself
with the cross. When Syades turned and looked at me,
I had no power. Downwards ever, exhausted as I was,
till we reached the sea, so calm now in the moonlight.
I saw the form of the Dragon of the North as we
descended; her masts were shattered, but her hull
seemed entire, and a light glittered on board. Were
we bound thither % no—a little sailing vessel lay near,
and 1 followed on board. Three or four grinning black
Africans manned it; they hoisted sail, and stood out
fi'om the shore, and then I knew no more, for suffering
had reached a point when a merciful unconsciousness
delivered me for a time from my misery. E, J. 0.
{To be continued?)
Wiit (Ettristian ^omanVi ^orli in Jiutia.
CONCLUSION.
What are the results of missionary work abroad ? How
surprisingly little interest is shown as to this important
question; how many who " profess and call themselves
Christians " are letting days, weeks, months, and even
years, slip by while they sit at home unconcerned, not
caring to ask about the success of their brethren and
sisters labouring for Christ in Africa and India, North
America, and the islands of the seas! Oh, shame upon
the apathy and indifference of those who can see the
sowers "goingforth and weeping, bearing precious seed,"
and yet " say not so much as ' The Lord prosper.you.' "
And not a few earnest (Christians, who pray for, and
make efforts to forAvard, missionary enterprise, speak
timidly and hesitatingly about results, as though we were
called to labour on in the Master's service without hope
of His smiling on our efforts and making them fruitful for
336 'llie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
His glory ; treating as almost impious the idea of large
success. "Prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of
hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and
pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room
enough to receive it."
Now if we cautiously say, " We must not expect to see
much result of our work," are we " proving" Him, and
waiting in faith for the fulfilment of His word ? Are we
not rather tempting Him to close the -windows of heaven,
and keep back the blessing He is so graciously ready to
bestoAv ?
Perhaps there are few ways in which in our work we
more dishonour God, than this of acting as if we felt
" we are prayerful, self-sacrificing, energetic, anxious to
bring the heathen to a knowledge of the truth, but it is
too much to expect that God is going to let us succeed."
Banish the unworthy thought! Christian missions are
successful; they are accomplishing their purpose; the
" Name which is above every name" is more Avidely
known and loved than ever, and this directly through the
instrumentality of well-organised missionary effort. But
some will ask, " Is there as much success as there ought
to be ? " No, undoubtedly there is not; but this is owing
to the coldness and half-heartedness of many in our own
land, and not to any failure in work actually done.
Yet we do not labour for results ; we take up this -w^ork
because the Master said, " Go ye into all the world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature ; " and we carry
it on that His will may be done, and that He may be
glorified ; even though we could not point to one con¬
version as the result of many years' effort, even though
our work seemed to our poor understandings an utter
failure, we should still desire above all things to " labour
on, spend and be spent, our joy to do the Master's will."
I now wish to give my readers a few facts to prove that
the work of our devoted missionaries is not in vain in
the Lord.
Normal Schools are established in Calcutta, Benares,
Jullundur, Lahore, Madras, and Umritzur; the school
in Calcutta training European and native Christian girls
to be teachers for high-caste ladies in their Zenanas, or
for Hindu girls' schools ; while at the other five stations
native women are prepared for the same kind of work.
These pupils, numbering seventy in all, are carrying on
their studies under the able supervision of English ladies,
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 337
and they pass exceedingly good examinations ; several
whose course of study in the Normal School was finished
some years since, are assiduously rendering most efficient
help to our Missionaries ; a few short extracts from their
own accounts of their present work will give the best
idea of the value of the schools in which they have been
trained, the satisfactory way in which they have received
instruction, and the heartiness and diligence with which
they are seeking to impart it to others.
Miss Goddard writes thus of the death of a young
wife in one of the Zenanas :—" She was such a dear,
good, gentle, and promising girl, and so particularly
thoughtful and attentive during my Scripture lesson.
One could not help loving her; I do not know what
the dear girl's hope in death may have been, but surely
we may hope that all was well. May He who loves
to comfort those in sorrow comfort her young hus¬
band, and make this solemn event lead him to search
well his own heart, and decide for Jesus." Another
(Miss Thomas) says, " I am thankful to say I have,
amongst my dear pupils in the Zenanas, met with
some encouragement. In a house where two sisters
receive instruction I have every cause to rejoice; they
are getting on very steadily in English, and parti¬
cularly seem to take a delight in reading the Bible." A
third (Miss Hubbard) writes :—" In one house I have a
class of fifteen pupils, six of them girls, the rest women,
young and old. After their lessons are over they draw
close to me, and listen attentively while I read and ex¬
plain some portion of Scripture." Miss David writes :—
" My portion comprises nineteen houses, with forty-three
pupils ; and two scliools, with upwards of fifty-four girls.
The 'Schools I visit once a-week, and I think it a solemn
and responsible work that of bringing little ones to Jesus."
Again, Miss Singh says :—" One of my women, who had
been away on account of ill-health, returned. When
speaking to her of her illness, I said perhaps God had
spared her life that she might know more of Him. She
said she was not afraid to die, but it was after death that
seemed so dark. She said she read the New Testament
when she was able to do so. I showed her the four
Gospels, and told her she would find out all about Christ
in them, and all that He had done for us, to make beyond
the grave a hope of rest and glory to all believers." In
looking over these simple records of work done by those
338 The Ladies'' Ldinburgh Magazine.
who are themselves, be it remembered, fruits of our work,
we cannot but feel that God is greatly prospering the
efforts of Christian women for their heathen sisters in
India.
Turning to Benares, we find five pupils from our
Normal School are now engaged in teaching in Church
Missionary Schools. Everywhere the girls and women
trained in the Normal Schools are making most satis¬
factory progress, both in their own studies and in the
work to which, when prepared, they are appointed.
The Hindu and Mohammedan female schools, of which
forty-three are now established in connection with the
" Indian Female Normal School and Instruction Society,"
have, in all, an attendance of 1437 pupils. By this means
a great woi'k is being carried on amongst the little ones.
In reading the statements of what is being done in these
schools, Ave cannot but be struck with the many tokens of
success. Such remarks as the following are full of en¬
couragement :—" The children are exceedingly fond of
'Art thou weary, art thou languid ?' and ' There is a happy
land.' I wish 1 could give you a picture of these schools,
they are so interesting. It would do you good to see
the rows of bright little beings: they would greet you
with shouts of ' Salaam, salaam !' and would be so happy
to repeat to you their verses and hymns."
" The school was remarkably well taught, the children
were quick and intelligent, and they passed an excellent
examination. They seemed to be of a high class for a
native female school, and their tone and manner were
A'^ery good."
" The other CA^ening we Avent upon the roof to see the
eclipse of the moon, and there doAvn below were the
heathen children, singing, 'There is a happy land.'"
" The number of pupils has been steadily increasing.
We have an average daily attendance of 197. They
receive instruction in the Scriptures, reading, writing,
geography, and arithmetic."
These fcAV Avords are sufficient to shoAv that, in the in¬
struction of the young, missionary effort is prospering.
With one or tAvo examples of results of Avork in the
Zenanas amongst the Avomen, we must close our some¬
what hasty survey of this most interesting and encourag¬
ing subject, hoping that readers Avho Avish to knoAV more
Avill study for themselves the thrilling records sent home
by our missionary sisters.    One writes, " I read from the
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 339
New Testament always, and the women seem so touched
when they hear the sweet story of His love and compas¬
sion, always appearing glad to see me, more for the sake
of hearing of Christ than for anything else."
Another says:—" We have to thank God for two of our
pupils having been gathered into the visible fold of Christ
by baptism, as they had been previously into the invisible
by a living faith. We have to tell also that, by God's
grace, they are walking in the truth and growing in
knowledge." We have the following interesting account
of a widow lady:—" Almost from the first she said she
would like to learn English and needlework, but she
wished principally to learn about Jesus. I gave her
a New Testament, and the first time I called after this
she had some passages marked, which she read and asked
me to explain. Every time I visit her she has some
passage marked, or some question to ask. Pointing to
her sewing, she said, 'I think nothing of this work com¬
pared with hearing about Jesus; and I would like you to
spend an hour every time you come, teaching me about
Him only.' Another time she said, ' I believe that Jesus
is the Son of God, and my brother also believes in and
loves Him very much.' "
And now I desire to bring home to the heart of every
one who has perused these facts, the deeply important
question of our share in this great work. What can we
do, what are we doing, to forward it ?
First on our list of what may be done we place
Prayer. Christian women of Britain, who know what
it is to carry your own sins and sorrows to the Master's
feet; who have proved again and again the " sweet
relief" of pouring out your souls before the prayer-hear¬
ing God, are you praying for those to whom tliis privi¬
lege is as yet unknown ? Are you feeling that their
wants, cares, sorrows, press on your hearts ; and that
one of the greatest blessings God can confer on you,
is to cause the light of the gospel to shine into their souls,
and give theyn joy and peace ? Wrestle, agonise in
prayer for your heathen sisters ; plead for them as you
would for your own life. " Ye that make mention of the
Lord, keep not silence, and give Him no rest" until the
down-trodden and degraded inhabitants of the Zenana
walk in the full light and glorious liberty of the children
of God. Take such precious words of promise as Psalm
Ixxii.  6,  Isaiah xxi. 1-8, xliii. 6, Ixi.  1, and pointing to
340 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
each in beheving prayer, say, "Eemember this word
unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me
to hope." Here is a way in which " all who love the
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and truth" may help
forward Christian missions. Even from the couch of
pain, from the suffering child of God, who is too weak
and weary to do ought else, the fervent prayer of strong
faith will go up acceptably to Him who waits to be
gracious.
And next, Effort. How much might be accomplished
if all who are interested themselves would make efforts
to interest others, remembering this great work in casual
conversation with neighbours and friends, introducing
the subject into their letters, telling facts which have
arrested their own attention to any to whom they may
be new, and (where possible) establishing or joining
a ladies' association for work of various kinds. It would
be no small help if all Christian women would make
earnest efforts to counteract the great mischief done by
some European residents in India, who, never loving and
never investigating missionary work, but giving their
whole thought and time to the follies and vanities of the
world, return to England to misrepresent grossly all that
is being done.
And then. Giving. The work cannot be carried on
without funds; God has entrusted to all of us some¬
thing to lay out for His glory—to some much, to some
but little, perhaps very little: may He grant to us also
a willing mind, cheerfully to give what Ave can, that
" His way may be known upon earth, and His saving
health among all nations."
And lastly. Going. Christian sisters ! here is work which
angels might long to share with you—work so great,
so glorious, so full of blessing, that there is nothing
in the world to compare with it. Will some who have
read this short account of it consecrate their service
at once to the Lord, exclaiming, "Here am I, send
me, send me" ?
" Is it too great a thing ?    Will not one rise and go,
Laying her joys aside, as the Master laid them down.
Seeking His lone and lost in the veiled abodes of woe,
Winning His Indian gems to shine in His glorious crown ?"
—Frances Ridley IIaver gal.
S. S. HE'^VLETT,
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 341
§; £ nt }j t a t i fl 11.
By Mrs. Beewsteb Macpheeson.
The drop uphurl'd with spray on high,
When storm-lash'd ocean mocks the sky,
While instant, radiant hung in air.
Reflected may that instant bear
The impress trac'd, minute but clear, I
Of oceans wild and heavens drear ; |
But downward drawn from heights once more j
With broken billows' breaking roar, i
Though drop it be in drop-form'd deep, ■
Though part it bear in sounds that leap |
From thund'rous sea to thund'ring skies, |
With storm-wind's blended harmonies ; \
Yet, poor drop, drown'd in drop-form'd ocean, ;
O'erwhelmed, borne in rush of motion, ;
'Tis onward urg'd, and onward still, |
AVith impulse none, of conscious will, 1
Till sunk, absorb'd on lonely shore, \
'Tis lost to life for evermore.
E'en thus art thou, oh soul of mine ! j
And even thus is fate of thine ; \
A drop art thou in drop-form'd deep,                                       ^   I
A sound art thou 'mid sounds that leap \
From nature's ocean roused to strife, i
Swift-swept by spirit-blast of life ; {
Upborne on swelling 'wave of thought, ]
In passion's spray-whirls tost and caught; \
A moment free, with impress given ]
Of life-mov'd depths and cloud-veil'd heaven ; j
A moment free, then down once more i
AVith broken billows' breaking roar, \
Art drown'd, poor drop, in drop-form'd ocean, I
O'erwhelmed, borne in rush of motion; '
Borne onward, onward evermore,
Till sunk on death's absorbing shore.
Oh God! not thus !  Behold, I rise.
Indignant spurn these half-truth lies.
O'erwhelm'd in floods a drop may be; ;
Its freedom lost where boundless sea J
Around it presses evermore |
With indistinguishable roar ; I
!
No. 11.—NovEMBEB 1875.                                                                                  2 X "
342 The Ladies* Edinburgh Magazine.
Yet One with loving wisdom guides
Each sphered drop in rushing tides,
Which, onward urged for evermore,
Successive on th' eternal shore
Successive break beneath His rod,
In music at the feet of God ;
Successive, upward drawn by love,
Arise, where, glittering set above.
Shall every drop in radiance glow
In heaven's throne-encircling bow.
We Kentish folk, as we take good care to let other folk
know, pride ourselves specially upon three things. Pass
through our county some May day towards the end of
the month, and note how round about the snug homesteads
acre upon acre of orchard-land is arrayed in the snowy
beauty of pure white cherry blossom; come a few weeks
later, and see this same blossom developed into fruit of
richest ruby hue hanging plentifully upon the trees like
the jewels in Aladdin's garden, and own that our cherry-
orchards are indeed treasures to rejoice in! Wait yet
a few weeks more, and instead of our orchards we can
show you reaches of country all a seeming tangle of
graceful creeper, bearing a fragrant green cone-like flower
goodly to the senses : these are our far-famed hop-gardens.
But come at any time, in any month, to seek our noblest
boast—never out of season—the fair Kentish maidens !
Oh, we have a great deal to be proud of here, in this
bright little corner of England, fringed with its white chalk
cliffs, and washed by the lapping waves! And Kentish
people are, as a rule, proudly patriotic and loyal to the
core. Let one of them do the honours of the county, and
show it to you as it looks in the month of September,
when the country all about is cheerful with the joy of
harvest. The corn fields are bare now, like a deserted
camping-ground after the battalions have struck their
tents and departed, but the sheaves are garnered safely
in the overflowing barns, and the reapers are looking out
for fresh conquests. These are ready to hand. Sun and
rain in due proportion, and tender care on the part of the
growers, have fostered the delicate hop-plants, and now
The Ladies  Edinburgh Magazine. 343
the finely-developed green cones, filled with their clammy
powder, are ripe for the ingathering.
In this part of the country hop-picking is the holiday
of the year. The Kentish peasantry look forward to it
with the same eagerness as that with which those of a
higher grade anticipate their seaside trip or their run on
the Continent. Weather being favourable, they seek in
the hop-fields stores of health and refreshment (and gossip
too, perhaps), against the dull winter days to come. The
fragrant breath of the hops has its healing virtue for
all; and hither come pale faces to grow rosy, and feeble
frames out of the close hot towns to be braced and
strengthened. The labour is light, too, and easy for all,
and tongues can wag as they will meantime. But before
the pickers invade the hop-territory, take a look round
and see it in its perfection. For me it has ever-fresh
beauties. Here are paths where the tendrils on either
side have clasped hands, as it were, and are barring your
progress with a lithe and elegant barrier; a screen of vine-
shapen leaves at your own level shuts out the onward
road from view. And here, to right and left, are avenues
—nature's triumphal arches—which are fit approaches to
a fairy palace! The plants have climbed now to the
top of their poles. Some are overflowing and tumbling
downwards again; some are making advances to their
neigiibours in a certain friendly way peculiar to creepers ;
some are shooting up impertinent little tendrils in
delicate spires as charming as they are wilful. And
the sweet cone-clusters are hanging everywhere—plen¬
tiful, precious pendents! If only their beauty might
last! But, since it may not, quick to gather in this
flower and fruit in one. Senses which are dull now
to its graceful excellence, ■v\dll be alive to its virtues some
day in the pleasant healthy bitter of their favourite
beverage ; and many an invalid too, frail and helpless to
come abroad and revel here as we are doing, Avill lie
down some restless night on his hop pillow, and bless it
for its soothing properties.
I don't know a prettier scene than a Kentish hop¬
garden when it is " a fine hopping." The pickers begin
systematically at the edge of tlie field, making a row of
encampments, each with its own little colony clustering
round the family basket. Two stout bare hop-poles are
placed in the ground, and across them, at nearly half
their own height, is fixed a third.    This serves as a rest
344 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
for the hop-poles, while the cones are stripped from the
vine into the large basket standing beneath. In West
Kent a wooden bin is the usual receptacle. The basket
holds five bushels; an industrious family can manage to
fill it three or four times a-day. Whenever this is
accomplished, and the good woman who owns it (if she
be an experienced hand) has hovered the hops—i.e. lifted
them dexterously to make them seem as many as may be
—the tallyman is summoned to see them emptied into a
huge sack, and to register the basket by a notch cut in
the housewife's ^vooden " tally," also on another corre¬
sponding one which he carries slung over his shoulders
with those of the other pickers. The price paid for each
basket varies "with the quality of the hops, being larger
in amount when they are small and difficult to pick. The
average is about eighteenpence, and even the children
can help to earn it. The elders work away steadily, and
even the little ones have branches in their hands which
they are gravely stripping hop by hop into their own
private baskets. How important they look over their
work, these grave little people, with serious eyes and
chubby, rosy cheeks I And here is another small girl
doing her part too in amusing a smaller than herself, to
keep her froin " hindering mother."
The whole population of the country roimd lives out of
doors in hopping-time, and everything else comes to a
stand-still. The mistress who needs a servant must wait
until hoppiug-season is over; and workers of all kinds
leave their situations for a month of pleasanter employ¬
ment. You tap at a cottage door, and instead of the
pleasant interior usually revealed to you, you are faced
instead by a chalk inscription on the paint, brief but
all-sufficient: " Gone 'oppin'." " Gone 'oppin'," indeed,
from the aged grandmother, past all other work, to the
baby six months old, asleep in its rickety hand-carriage ;
" gone 'oppin'" all available baskets, three-legged stools,
cotton umbrellas, clasp-knives ; " gone 'oppin' " the daily
bread, the can of beer, the milk for the baby, and the
sauce to season the homely fare will be found in the open
air before the morning is half over. Many a dainty lady
might envy the appetite with which these workers sit
down to their well-earned meals; many a sensible lady,
trying it for herself in fun and frolic, has finind hop-pick¬
ing the most novel, delightful picnic imaginable! But let
her take care that something old and unspoilable replace her
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 345
dainty attire, for it is easier to come by hop stains than
to lose them. Properly prepared, however, the risk is
little, and the reward great, I have in my recollection
one or two pleasant days of this sort long ago. We were
children then, and irresistibly charming was the novelty
of a whole day's hard work among the pickers. We
travelled to the scene of our labours in a real wagon
(delightful journey! a coach and six could not have
pleased us better I), and in all respects we behaved for
the day like the hoppers we considered ourselves. Oh,
joy!    For once we Avere really of use in the world!
It is a pity that the rural population does not suffice for
the harvest. The quantity of hops grown in Kent of late
years has so much increased that it is necessary to call in
other help; and now crowds of men and women, chiefly
Irish, outcasts of the London streets, yearly invade our
hop-grounds, and remind us even there of the darker side
of human nature. The accommodation of the various
villages is not sufficient for them: they are housed in
long, low, tarred buildings, provided by the hop-growers;
and here they huddle together, in herds more like cattle
than humankind, in a most deplorable state of discomfort.
Pity that even upon our pleasant, health-giving hop-
fields should fall the shadow of human sin and human
misery !
Hops were introduced into England from the Nether¬
lands in the reign of Henry VIH. Until that time—Pro¬
fessor Johnston tells us in his Chemistry of Common Life—
unhopped malt liquor was called ale; but when hops were
added to it, it became knoAvn as heer, the name used in the
Low Countries. Hop-growing is financially a great specu¬
lation. The risk of failure is great, and the culture of the
plant is an expensive process, more particularly in the
new method of growing now coming into vogue, where
many more poles are required. Fields planted in this
way look in the distance like a regiment of kneeling
soldiers with pointed bayonets. The poles are not placed
together in clumps of threes and fours, but stand singly
in long rows, and a double tier of longer poles, inclined
obliquely, extends from one row to the other. By this
means the hops obtain more light and air, and become
improved in size and quality. If, all things being favour¬
able for your hop-growing, you should win, you win
grandly; a matter of £10,000, perhaps, in a single year.
And when the season is over, its results crop out visibly.
346 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
A, the great hop-grower, who has been content hitherto
with one horse to his carriage, is now drawn by a pair.
The coachman who drives him has a new livery, and the
carriage, mayhap, a new coat of varnish. Their neigh¬
bours hear with surprise that the stay-at-home Hs are
going to travel on the Continent; while the C's are
building a new conservatory, and the Us have sent their
sou to the university. This is the practical side of hopping-
time: I like its pictiiresque one best, and so will you,
dear reader, if you come and pay our county a visit. You
shall be heartily welcome. Kentish welcomes, whether
hostile or friendly, have always been terribly in earnest.
We will make you " pay jonv footing." Directly an in¬
truder sets foot in the hop-fields, one or two shy little
sentinels leave their posts and come running towards
you with a spray of hops in hand. They stoop, and
lightly wipe your shoes with them, then ofier you the
branch to carry away with you; and if you do not offer
in return some trifle of money—why, the little sunburnt
faces will go away disappointed I
The hillocks of hop-poles are diminishing now in the
fields, and one stumbles over coils of the stripped vine at
every footstep. The kilns, too, are alight for the drying ;
the contents of the bags are spread out on the floors of
the different hop-oasts, and a strong sulphiu'ous smell (not
unpleasant) assails the passer by. The hoppers trudge
contentedly home in the sunset from their last day's
work; a hum of tired voices goes with them; a clatter
of cans, a clamour of shouting children. When pay-day
comes, and the tallies are presented, this good dame has
a crisp £5 note to lay aside for winter wants; that tall
lass has earned the new gown she wanted just in time ;
all have gained good store in the pocket, and the needful
change of healthy country air.
In good time the hops dried, and pressed tightly into
the huge " pockets," stamped with the Kentish horse and
its pro ad inotto, are packed away to the breweries of
their different purchasers. The great piled-up wagons
are dragged slowly out of sight; the fragrant scent of
hops throughout the land grows faint and disappears.
There are only the decked churches, and the joyous
strains of harvest hymns falling frequently on the ear, to
tell of what has been. But the bounties of a good Provi¬
dence are stored up in our hearts.
Gratia.
The Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine. 347
teterburp of djhcsler.
CHAPTER     IX.
The same afternoon, Mrs. Holme was sitting in her
drawing-room with a graver face than usual. Her mind
was much occupied with Randall. The angry feeling of
vexation which she had had for some days after his dis¬
appearance, had now given way to anxiety and regret on
account other past conduct towards him. Severity towards
him did not now seem so easy to her as it liad often done,
and she was actually schooling herself into a due display
of sternness when he should return. On seeing him the
evening before in the tableau, she had at first felt angry
at the way in which he had thrown off" all control; yet as
she gazed at him, she could not help feeling proud of her
handsome son, and had rejoiced in the many admiring
remarks which she heard passed on him among the com¬
pany. She had beforehand been tolerably aware of his
whereabouts, but had resisted all Malvina's entreaties that
they should go together and persuade him to come home.
" No," she said; " let him take the consequences of what
he has done, and ere long he will come home of his own
accord." And so she stayed at home, expecting every day
that he would come, and every day resolving anew that
she would be stern and implacable at first. Nothing had
passed between the mother and son on the previous
evening; neither had made any advances to the other.
Malvina, on her part, had spent many sleepless nights
and weary days; she dreamt of Randall by night and
thought of him by day, longing for him to come back, and
feeling very dreary and desolate \vithout him. So when
Randall came home, he was sure of one kind welcome at
least.
And he was coming home that very day. It was his
only resource. His life-dream was broken off, if not
finished; so his thoughts drifted to the reality of home.
And he longed to see Malvina; he had a craving for her
sympathy, which was ever ready, and felt sure that she
would be the means of reconciling him with his mother, if
Buch a reconciliation were necessary. But Mrs. Holme
had an additional reason for wishing Randall to return;
she had that afternoon had a visit of a somewhat strange "
nature from Trevor. Generous as Trevor had always
been in his dealings with her, he had that afternoon sur-
348 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
passed himself, and filled her with both joy and anxiety
by offering to contribute one-half of the sum required for
Randall's clerical education. Mrs. Holme had of course
protested against this generosity; but the Squire, who
knew very well that the whole sum was beyond Mrs.
Holme's slender means, had put her acceptance of his
offer in the light of a favour to be granted to himself, and
had even hinted at the possibility of Randall's being able
to repay him at some future period: this latter induce¬
ment, however, was held out rather to gratify the widow's
pride than from any other cause. So Randall's mother
was really longing for him to come home; that seemed
the last step towards the realisation of her fondest hopes
concerning him. She longed to write and tell him of
Trevor's offer, and beg him to accept it, and return at
once; but then she reflected that were he aware of the
source whence this offer came, he would naturally reject it
at once, as coming from one whom he had chosen to desert
without warning. She determined, therefore, to conceal
the name of this benefactor, and at the same time to make
Randall's acceptance of the benefit a condition of his
peace with her. She even felt that without sacrifice of
dignity she might write to Randall and tell that there
were particular reasons for his coming home at that
moment; and had just seated herself at her davenport to
write the letter, when the door opened and Randall
entered.
He had opened the door gently, and it was with a pale
anxious face that he came in. He hung his head a little,
and walked forward slowly, while his mother sat erect
and immovable in her chair. She took his proffered hand
coldly, and looked at him sadly, and even reproachfully.
Her old habit of reserve had returned with double force,
to aid her in appearing stern, as she had resolved to do.
" I have come back to you," Randall said; "tell me that
you are not angry with me."
" No," she said, looking at him gravely, " I am not
angry; only grieved to think that you have so disregarded
me."
" I have not done so intentionally." he said; " it was
my fate, and I could not act otherwise."
" You talk (jf fate," she replied, " and yet you seem to
be able to act for yourself. Let me tell you then, that it
is your fate now to remain in your own room until you
fihall have made up your mind to respect my wishes a little
llie Ladies  Edinburgh Magazine. 349
more. And one of my most earnest wishes is that you
should take Holy Orders," Here the widow looked kindly
at her son, and held out her hand to him, " I am glad to
be able to tell you that the means of preparing you for
this career are now secured to me; nothing is wanting
but your own consent. Go to your room now, and think
it over; and when your mind is made up, let me know,
that we may again be happy together."
Randall made no answer; he only turned round slowly
and walked out of the room. He went to look for Mal-
vina, and at last found her in a remote corner of the
shrubbery. As soon as she saw her brother, she ran up to
him, and threw her arms round his neck. They had a
long talk together, and Malvina was indignant at the idea
of his being forced into a profession against his will; but
Randall assured her that if he did fix upon this career, it
should certainly not be because he was expected to do so.
Trevor returned from his interview with Mrs. Holme,
feeling somehow less pleased Avitli himself than one who
has performed a generous action ought naturally to be.
Was there some motive which led him to regard the
sacrifice less than the gain which he expected to accrue
from it to himself? There are few motives of greater
power than love and jealousy; and the events of the
previous evening had not failed to suggest to him the
desirability of Randall's being speedily removed from the
society of Werburga. He assured himself, however, that
nothing but a desire that Randall's great talents should
be dedicated to the Church, had prompted him to take
this active means to accomplish it; and now that he had
seen Mrs, Holme's gratification at the generous offer, he
said to himself tliat tlie end to be attained would amply
justify any motive that had prompted the action, whether
good, bad, or indifferent.
He was somewhat surprised the next morning, on stroll¬
ing out into his shrubbery, to meet Randall Holme coming
towards him, looking almost as if he had never been ab¬
sent from these his old haunts. He went up to him, and
shook hands cordially, " So you have come home again?
Has your new mode of life become tiresome already 1 or
are you merely here on a visit ? "
There was a slight tone of banter in Trevor's voice,
which made Randall answer somewhat quickly—" I am
staying at home, which seems to me a not unnatural
proceeding,"
No. 11.—November 1875. 2 Y
350 The Ladles^ Edinburgh Magazine,
" Come, come," said Trevor, patting him on the shoul¬
der, " don't take it so seriously, but tell me what you are
going to do."
" That is a question I cannot answer at present," said
Eandall; "all that I know is, that I have thrown up the
work I meant to do."
Surely there is some mystery here, thought Trevor; I
must try to fathom it. Then he said kindly, " Well, I
hope you may find some better work soon; and allow me
as a friend to tell you, that I feel sure you have far
greater powers within you than you are at present con¬
scious of. By humouring every fancy that enters your
mind, you only narrow your sphere of action, and fail to
bring yourself en rapport with the rest of the world, which
alone can teach you your true standing. Forget yourself
and your own predilections for a time, and try to enter
on some path in life that is worthy of eifort. Believe me^
a really able man, as I believe you to be, may become
what he likes."
Randall looked thoughtful, but brightened up a little.
" Any news from Chester?" asked Trevor, to change
the subject, and save Kandall the evidently unwelcome
task of answering what he had already said.
" Nothing later," said Randall, " than that the de Reh-
mars have suddenly left town, and it is unknown to any
one where they have gone."
"Ah!" thought Trevor; "then this accounts for your
having left it too. I need not have been so hasty in my
arrangements; but I cannot regret that." Then he asked
one or two more indifferent questions, and on the plea of an
appointment at home,bade Randall ahurried adieu, excusing
himself for not asking him to come in. Immediately on
entering his own house he rang the bell, and desired the
servant to tell Jones that he wished the whitechapel to
be brought round directly, as he had some urgent business
to attend to in Chester.
Randall, in the meantime, went home in a more thought¬
ful mood than ever. The three individuals with whose
hves his own had of late been the most closely interwoven,
all seemed to have the same wishes regarding his future;
could this be a sign that this step was the right one for
him to take ? He repeated to himself again and again
the opinion expressed by Trevor, that a man of ability
may be what he likes. In a dreamy way he saw in this
choice the only means of reconciliation with his mother;
The Ladies Edlnhurgli Magazine. 351
but all the time he was going over again in memory the
parting scene with Werburga, viewing it in all its possible
lights of hope, suspense, or disappointment. He knew,
at least, what she would have advised. Trevor's words
had given him courage; his own inclination no longer
struggled against this decision. It was not long now
before he had made up his mind; and on the evening of
that very day the mother, son, and daughter were sitting
together in the drawing-room at the White House, dis¬
cussing cheerfully Randall's future prospects, and when
he should enter on his new life as a student at Oxford.
Nearly a month had elapsed since the events just
narrated, when one afternoon an elderly gentleman and a
young lady were to be seen walking by the romantic
shores of Lake Westmere, about fifty miles from Chester.
It was the hour of sunset, on a clear October day. The
hills on the west side of the lake were bathed in a deep
purple glow, that deepened as the sun sank behind them;
and as it sank, it shot its rays across to the opposite crags,
covering them with such a gleam of brightness, that every
little outline of rock, every cavern and fissure, were defined
with the utmost clearness to the eye. And the lake was
calm and limpid, reflecting faithfully all this splendour of
various tints. "How exquisite!" exclaimed the father and
daughter to each other as they pursued the path that
threaded the copse on the shores of the lake. They walked
slowly, and every now and then paused to look around them.
Turning to the elder figure, we see that age has already
begun to write its characters upon his tall form; for the
sliglit stoop, and the hair sprinkled with grey, tell of the
approaching decline of life. The lady who accompanies
him is in the bloom of youth, and a glance at her beauti¬
ful and thoughtful face is enough to show that mind and
body have together approached as nearly to perfection as
possible. While they were standing together admiring
the scene, the Baron, for he it was, turned from it to gaze
with equal rapture on his daughter's face. By nature,
being a German, he was demonstrative, and physical
weakness had rendered him still more so. It is no
matter of wonder, therefore, that under the influence of
such a magic scene he should speak to his daughter in
the following strain: " It seems to me sometimes,
Werburga, that change of scene has caused a change of
character in you. Now that you are always by my side,
life seems to me far more fraught with kindness than it
352 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
did. Indeed. I fear I am becoming like, a spoiled child.
Do you know that you are making yourself so very
necessary to me, that I do not think I could do without
you for a day. If any one should ask for you in marriage,
I should feel inclined to knock him down. Now tell me
that I am a very selfish old father, and that you intend
to leave me immediately."
" No, indeed, papa," answered his daughter, " I have
no such intention. I enjoy our quiet life so much; our
little cottage is so simple, and then my music and
studies—I feel that I am really learning something, now
that I have time to be taught by you, and wonder how
I could go on teaching others when I knew so little
myself.''
" Then I hope we are really helping each other," said
her father, " for I feel that I too am learning, and I can
remember no period of my life when I enjoyed such
serenity of mind. If only our so-called friends will keep
away, and not try to find out where we are, nor disturb
our retirement with painful remembrances."
They were now walking on again, and had just turned
an abrupt angle in the road, where it began to wind
round a little bay. Here they saw coming towards them,
at a very few yards' distance, one of the very persons of
whom the Baron had just been speaking—namely. Squire
Trevor. He at once quickened his pace, and came up
to them. Both father and daughter hastily suppressed
the slight annoyance and awk^vardness which they felt
in consequence of what the Baron had just been saying,
and at least looked the cordiality which they expressed
towards the new-comer. The face of Trevor was positively
radiant as he shook hands with them ; and Werburga
thought she had never seen him look so handsome.
" Squire Trevor ! you here!" they both exclaimed in
one breath, while at the same moment Trevor pro¬
nounced de Rehmar's name in a tone of equal surprise.
" I have just arrived for a few days' shooting in
this neighbourhood," said Trevor. " I must own I heard
some rumours of your being not far off, but hardly ex-
expected really to meet you."
" Then we are well met," said the Baron ; " pray come
with us to our humble abode ; it is close at hand."
Trevor turned with them, and they all walked together
till they reached a path leading to a thatched cottage at
some distance from the lake.    Its walls were overgrown
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 353
with creeping plants, which disguised the homeliness of
the building and the extreme simplicity of its porch.
The tall figure of the Squire was obliged to bend some¬
what low before he could enter. But within all was
elegance and refinement. It seemed as if a fairy had
waved her wand over the rude interior where they now
found themselves, and conjured out of rough unpolished
walls and uneven floor an abode so elegant, that every
inch of it spoke of exquisite taste and artistic arrange¬
ment. The well-lined book-shelves, the water-colour
drawings, bronzes, the guitar in one corner, near it the
pianoforte, books of engravings on elegant tables,—all
these told of a soul too free to be enchained by poverty,
too noble to pine in solitude.
"Ah!" said Trevor, "what a charming retreat I I feel
that it is almost profanation to intrude upon it, and yet
how grateful I am for the good fortune which has led
me hither I "
" Indeed it is well that you have found us," said the
Baron, blandly; " let us hope that you may not soon
desert us."
" I should be only too glad to linger in your neigh-'
bourhood," said Trevor, "yet I fear two days at the most
are all I can count upon."
Cunningly spoken, Squire Trevor ! Do we not know,
though de Rehmar and his daughter did not, that your
love of shooting is on this occasion nothing but a pre¬
text for finding the abode of Werburga ; that you have
driven all the way hither on purpose to see her, and
have only succeeded in tracking her out by dint of
diligent enquiries made at many houses on the way ?
What was that animal that you drove tandem hither
in front of your own riding-horse % What but a cream-
coloured pony which you intend her to ride by your side,
with a view of afterwards presenting it to her % Surely
with such a gift in your hand your happiness is safe !
To tell the truth, Trevor, since he had guessed that
some degree of intimacy existed between Randall and
Werburga, had been suffering acute pangs of misgiving
and jealousy. He had an intense regard for VVerburga,
but it was a regard which was greatly quickened by the
knowledge that it was shared by another. He had always
had great delight in her society, and had fancied, that
though she amused herself by pretending to differ from him
on many points, she was in reality all the time paying
354 The hadies Edinburgh Magazine.
him that inward and absolute homage without which
he would have regarded any friendship as a dead loss.
In coming now to seek, or rather to claim, the goal
he had set before his heart—namely, the affection of Wer-
burga—it was not without a flattering consciousness of
his own position and advantages. And in this conscious¬
ness, the thought of the gift he had brought with him
to offer her, occupied a very large place. He had thus
placed before his mental vision a thick veil, which, while
it distorted the real character of her he sought to win,
could not fail at the same time to hide fi-om him the true
way to her heart. Indeed, his society was, as he thought,
a great boon to any one on whom he bestoM^ed it, and
this he would fain impress on Werburga.
" You are shooting here ? " she asked ; " have you been
successful ? "
" No ; quite the reverse ; in fact, I am rather disgusted
with the bad sport, and think I shall take to riding.
Do you ride ? "
" Oh, I enjoy it of all things," she said, " but I have
not often had tlie pleasure."
" I have two horses here," said Trevor, blandly ; " one is
quite suitable for a lady not much accustomed to riding;
may I ask you to honour me by using it to-morrow ? "
Werburga looked at her father, who smiled assent;
his distrust of Trevor seemed to have vanished com¬
pletely.    So she accepted the offer with a radiant face.
The next morning, the roan and the cream-colour
were waiting before the Baron's humble abode ; the latter
Avas adorned with a handsome new lady's saddle, and
looked sleek and submissive. Trevor and Werburga
set out in high spirits. They rode at first at a slow
pace, which gradually grew into a canter. For some time
they pursued a bridle-road at the base of a line of tall
cliffs ; then came a break in the cliffs, and a clear water¬
fall was seen pouring itself into the pool below.
" Oh !" said Trevor, " here is a charming spot ; let us
halt for a little to rest our horses; we can hitch them to
the stile ; and now for a pleasant chat."
Selecting a portion of greensward sheltered by the
cliffs from the heat, and not too near the waterfall, tJiey
seated themselves and looked around them.
" What a charming pool for fishing," said Trevor;
" I thought I saw a salmon leap just now ! "
^'Ah!   you   like   fishing,"   said   Werburga;   "it   is   a
The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 355
pleasure for which I am neither intellectual nor patient
enough. I think it requires a mind accustomed to
ruminate on one thought or set of thoughts."
" I fear you are too fond of excitement," said Trevor,
" if you do not enjoy fishing; I say too fond, because
I think there is excitement in it, quite as much as I
desire for myself. What amusements are lively enough
to suit you? You might enjoy shooting, were it a lady¬
like amusement."
"No," said Werburga; " what I should really enjoy is
hunting; but do not make me wish for what I caimot
have."
" Nay," said Trevor, " there is no reason why you
should not have it; a lady may do as she chooses. How
should you like to possess a number of horses, and ride a
different one every day? "
" Only one ? " she said ; " I should like to ride three or
four every day. I should always have a pack of loose
horses with me when I rode out, ready to change when I
wished it."
"You remind me of Enid," said Trevor; "what an
excellent countess you would make I "
" Indeed, I should not wish to be anything of the kind,"
said Werburga. "I should have to be constantly command¬
ing servants, and hiding my real feelings under a mask
of civility. Tell me," she added, looking at him archly,
and with a certain na'ivette of expression, " are not these
things that a countess has to do'? Do not deny it, you
know that it is so; but for me, I had rather walk all my
life than have twenty horses and be obliged to behave in
that way. And I think, too, that I am happier in a posi¬
tion where I can be poor without being ashamed of it."
" Well spoken," said Trevor, with mock humility ; " do
not be offended, however, if I do not believe you; and
now tell me, do these sentiments apply to counts as well
as countesses ? "
" Of them I do not pretend to judge," said Werburga,
" but I rather think they do ; and indeed you may believe
me."
To tell the truth, it must be owned that these opinions
had never before occurred to Werburga, but were only
assumed now to suit the caprice of the moment.
"Could nothing induce you to alter these views'?"
said Trevor. " Were you a great lady, for instance, by
fortune and position, as   I know you to be already by
356 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
birth, could you not adorn the station with the virtues
you commend, and thus wipe away the reproach you
have Liid upon it ? "
"No, I do not give myself credit for such superhuman
virtue," she answered.
" But suppose noAv, for instance, that a count or squire,
rich, yoimg, and not more wicked than the rest, were to
lay his fortune at your feet, and beg you to share it with
him; and suppose he were to add to the fortune a very
great regard for you "—here Trevor actually blushed and
hesitated—" could you not "
"Never!" she answered quickly, without seeming to
find any special meaning in his words. " Why do you ask
me such questions ? But look there ; are not the ponies
getting away? "
They were not; however, this changed the sxibject, and
the two remounted, and rode home somewhat quietly.
The Baron met them at the door; Trevor helped
Werburga to dismount —oh, how carefully!—and as he did
so, said in a low voice, " Do you like this pony % if you
like him, he is yours."
" Oh, that is too much," said Werburga, with a deter¬
mined look,    "I could not accept such a gift."
Trevor had grown pale; he was silent and thoughtful
during the rest of the evening.
He had a short interview with the Baron the next
morning, and then one with Werburga, after which he
was seen driving away at a tearing pace, both the horses
in front of him, and his face like the face of Jehu when
he drove furiouslj^ and vowed vengeance against his
enemies.
After Trevor had gone, the Baron embraced his
daughter, and said, "My dear child, I hardly expected this
decision; I assure you I put no obstacle in his way, but
rather encouraged him. Think what you have thrown
away ; but tell me you have not done it for my sake; if
so, I cannot rest till all is set right."
"No, no!" she exclaimed; "indeed I could not have
done otherwise, had it been for my own sake only. I do
not love him, and never shall; and now let us talk of
something else."
Procla.
{To he continued.)
Hie Ladles Edinhuryh Magazine. 357
^\t   gragon   of i\t  Itorilj,
CHAPTER   XII.
'' Such omens in the place there seemed to be ;
At every crooked turn, or on the landing,
The straining eyeball was prepared to see
Some apparition standing."
—Hood.
I, KoLBlORN ViGVSON, the Scald, have been asked to
write down what followed the disappearance of Lorenzo,
Marquis d'Asile, from the monastery of Caserta, and how
we recovered what had been written by him. I well
remember the morning he was missed from the guest¬
room where many of us slept. I was woke by Thorstein
and the monk Anselmo talking of him in the morning ;
and Thorstein said it was most strange, " for, coming in
late and seeing no other place, I laid down beside him;
and as I am the lightest of sleepers, I do not under¬
stand how he could go without my knowing." Every
part of the monastery had already been searched, and all
that day and the next they sought through the neighbour¬
hood, bat neither trace lior tidings could they find. We
knew he was, for various reasons, unhappy; and some
whispered he must have made away with himself, so that
the abbot caused search to be made in the ponds and
river; but Fra Anselmo, and also Thorstein, were confi¬
dent it was not so, and that Lorenzo, with all his weak¬
ness, was too noble-minded to throw himself away.
We all missed him, for every one liked his gentle
dreamy face and kindly ways. Though he was most
slow in war, and indeed in all active work, never have
I seen any one quicker in learning languages, defter in
carving, or delighting more in songs and Sagas. Our
Dragon's head had by him been made more fierce and
brave; and he had designed hilts and brooches in metal
for many of us. He was like many others at that time,
even Thorstein himself, much in love with our Hertha,
who, with her corn-bright hair and winning face, was, in
my opinion, just the sort of maiden who would bewitch a
whole crew when the weather was fine and there Avas no
fighting. I was glad that she was now to go ashore and
become the wife of Sir Rainulf, the Neustrian Norman,
No. 12.—Decembek 1875. 2 Z
358 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and we were to escort her at once to Castle Asile, to remain
there till her marriage. Eric, meanwhile, was to stay by
the Dragon ship till she was repaired, and he could bring
her round to Thorstein at Gaeta; for now, owing to
Swend's death, she was Thorstein's heritage, as women
do not inherit war-ships. Thorstein himself had to go
back to the Emperor Henry without delay, to receive
from him the government of the province and the person
of the child, nephew of Dato, who was to be placed
during his nonage under the guardianship of the Nor¬
mans ; Pandulf, Prince of Capua and brother of Atenolf,
having been deprived of his principality, was to be sent a
prisoner to Germany, and Dato's nephew was to be made
Prince in his stead. Now Thorstein sought my company
more than of old, and glad was I to be the chosen friend
of so great a man. The morning before we took horse for
Salei'no, being two days after the vanishing of Lorenzo,
he and Raiuulf having heard mass after the custom of the
Neustrians; and I having been also present to hear the
music, he urged me much to take Christianity. But at
that time I would not, and Thorstein said—" I will not
try to convert you with the spear-point, like Olaf Harold-
son. Come with us, hoAvever, to the Emperor's camp at
Monte Casino, for the command of the Normans and the
possessions of Pandulf are there to be made over to me
with much ceremony. It will be no pleasant life, Kol-
biorn. 1 must try to bring order into this distracted land,
and try also to guard this handful of true Northmen
against being betrayed by any party of these Italians who
may no longer want their aid. Every one here has a
price and can be bought, methinks: everything is
treacherous; the very weather, which is so pleasant when
one does nothing, seems to me like a cup of sweetened
poison, taking the fire and heart out of a man."
" That is true," I said, " and I fear fever and ague
have hold of me now since our wet voyage; and who
would care for a dash of sea-water in Norway 1 "
" We shall none of us die of old age here," said Thor¬
stein ; " as for poor Lorenzo, he had fever on him heavily,
and who knows whither he may have wandered? It
irks me to think how I left him to that wizard Syades,
who shall hang on the nearest tree to our next meeting-
place, now I know what I do of him. Astolfo may have
found out something at Asile, where I shall bestow
Ivar  instead  of Syades.    And   Kainulf and  I  purpose
The Ladles' Edlnhircili Magazine. 359
returning to Asile when we have bid farewell to the
Emperor—and then will be the marriage. Astolfo, I
suppose, will then wed Valeria; perhaps he did right
to withdraw at once from our company; though it is
not I who -will take up a blood-feud for Swend, after he
had made me a present to Thor. ' Given away is lost,'
said the dog to his former master."
" No one else will take it up, Thorstein; most men only
endured him for the sake of liolf and Hertha."
" Ah, Hertha," said Thorstein with a deep sigh—" I
hurried to find her last week, the rather as the Emperor
wished me to marry the daughter of Pandulf, and take
thus the principality."
" And she is a most fair lady, as I hear ; and you would
have been Prince indeed, not mere guardian."
" She is the niece of that wretched traitor they flung
into the sea—she is a dark-eyed Grecian girl. No,
I wish for no lady, and expect no good except in guard¬
ing the land like a good Avatch-dog, till they succeed
in killing me—by poison probably. Oh, if it were but
fair fighting."
" Take my council, Hersir Thorstein ; let us sail in the
Dragon ship for dear old Norway. You are a Christian,
and might take up your former position and more. The
king would rejoice in you, and who knows I might turn
Christian too, if I heard the church bells ring at Nideros
among our own true-hearted people ?"
" No, Kolbiorn, that cannot be, for I am the friend of
Erling Skialgson rather than of Olaf Haraldson, and I have
blood-feuds on my hands too in Norway. No, forget this
growl of an old sea-bear who dreams sometimes of the
cool fresh wind and sparkling ice at home, in this wet
soft dull season they call winter. Have we not won
renown and power too—and may I not at the head of
these brave warriors bring law and peace to this troubled
land? It shall be the better of us, my Kolbioru, before we
lay our bones in its beautiful churches. See how fairly
the leaves and dragons and lions are carved here," for
we had all this time been pacing the cloisters, partly
wrought by the lost Lorenzo, and as fair as anything
I have seen in Italy.
Next day we set out with Hertha and Rainulf, and
a guard of Northmen, among them Giver the Smith,
sometimes called the Unwashed, a short, square, ugly
man, but wonderous deft of his hands both in fighting
3(J0 The Ladies^ Edinhurgli Magazine..
and smith-work. So in five days Ave rode easily to
Salerno, and thence to Asile, with Bergliot and Ivar
joined to our party. Here we found that none knew of
the disappearance of Lorenzo—also that Syades had
been absent since the day after the Dragon had sailed,
and Vanno Melzi, an old servant of Valeria's, commanded
the garrison. By this time the fever and ague had so
increased on me that I could hardly sit my horse; so,
much against my will, I was compelled to remain at Asile,
whence Rainulf and Thorstein rode, after their noontide
repast. All the Northmen save Olver the Unwashed
rode with them, as the roads further on were thronged
with flying Greeks, and not safe for Lombard men
of mark. Astolfo that same day set off, at the prayer of
Valeria, to make all enquiries at Salerno and beyond it
for the lost Lorenzo. So Hertha, Valeria, Damasus,
and I were left alone together, I being obliged to spend
most of the day in my bed. The second day Hertlia
came into my room with a cooling di'ink and sent away
the attendant.   Then began between us the following talk.
" Kolbiorn, you are a sick man, but you will soon be
better, and you are so brave you will not let what I tell
you make you worse ; you are my reliance."
" What can be mended need not hurt, Hertha, and
what must be will be, so in the name of all the gods
say on."
" I wish," Hertha continued, " Astolfo had not gone;
he avoids me; but tell him that I had counted poor
Swend's life as forfeit since he meant to have Thorstein
so cruelly slain. Enough of that; it is of the garrison I
Lave to speak, and 1 wish for good council from you.
Valeria is too timid to do aught, though she would allow
me to act in her name; Damasus is even worse, as you
may think—the most cowardly of men. Olver and Ivar
are both low-born men, and, though strong and true,
cannot command. Those that do, were appointed by
Syades, and I believe them to be faithful to him, if to
any one. The men are more than half of them Saracens.
I do not like their looks; also we should be most valu¬
able hostages in the hands of their friends at Agrapoli
or elsewhere. Now, should we at once leave the castle
-—while we can—if we can—for already they do not obey;
or shall I try to get rid of all the Saracens by means of
the Italians, who are jealous of them, and might strike
for Valeria?"
The Jjadles Ediuhurgli Magazine. 361
" I well believe all you say, Hertlia," I answered,
remembering how surprised I used to be when Lorenzo
allowed Syades to put Saracens into the garrison, " but
where could we go if we left the castle? There is no such
stronghold near. If they mean mischief, they could carry
it out without the walls; and our departure would show
suspicion, and might make them act. Whereas they may
think twice about betraying us if they think they are not
suspected—knowing what risks they would run from the
vengeance of Thorstein. But to rid the castle of the
Saracens, now Syades is away, seems quite natural; the
wonder is they were ever there at all."
" So far good, Kolbiorn," said Hertha. "Now comes more.
Do you remember how you told me Syades had vanished
in the cavern below, at the time Thorstein was held there
a prisoner ? I heard here that he appeared again in the
castle after that, and neither gate nor postern was opened.
Wizard he may be, but I rather would believe there is a
passage to the cave than that he has wings. So I have
caused Olver to break the lock of his room, which he had
left shut up; and there we have indeed found a secret
door in the wall, and a long descending stair to another
door we mean to force. Most likely this leads to the
cavern in the rocks. Others besides Syades may know
of it; it is a weak point in our castle, yet it may be useful.
I do not wish it known that I am exploring it, so I have
thought that it would be best to move your bed into the
wizard's room; Ivar could be with yoxi at night, and I
shall only let our own people in."
I was pleased to be of use, ill as I was, so I was moved
into the Saracen's room off the grand staircase, with a
turret whose window looked from a dizzy height down
on the sea. Round the room were strange implements,
and many rolls and books; and at one end, hidden by the
hangings, was a stone which turned on a pivot, and
formed a concealed door to a black winding descent.
The fire burned bright on the hearth of the wizard's
room next evening, and I lay on the couch, feeling well
at ease, as the day-fever had past, and the night one had
not come on. Hertha sat by me, looking also content,
for she had explored the passage. With Olver and Ivar
she had been down for two hours, and had returned to
my room alone. They had forced the doors, of which the
last opened into the cavern; thence she had sent Ivar to
search for Astolfo and what help he could bring, and had
362 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
left Olver, armed and on guard, to open the doors. She
had warned me to let Valeria and Damasus, whose courage
was not to be trusted, know nothing about it. By the
fire now sat Damasus, the flagon and wine-cup before
him, bragging a little, for tliough he was alarmed himself,
his heart was kept up by brave company. Opposite, the
little Valeria nestled in a great chair, starting and quiver¬
ing at every sound. And old Bergliot served us, grum¬
bling as usual, yet well pleased to be again with her lady.
" Ay, I am never to be done with wild work, it
appears," she said as she served the supper; " this is worse
than the ship, for there one could not lose one's way at
least, as in this great hollow mountain of a castle. No
wonder if elves and trolls and even vampires come to
live here, as they say."
"Nay, Bergliot, you who have sailed so far, have seen
many a stone fortress," said Hertha.
" Ah, they are not like the wide cheery wooden halls of
Norway, or the timber cots- of England. Here the folk
dare not let the shield cover the head, but must burrow
in stone dens like foxes, out of the way of their enemies."
" But then, Bergliot, they are not so easily burnt," said
I; " remember how Rolf's hall blazed when King Olaf's
men came down upon him."
" Yes, how the beams crashed down, and the spearmen
waited at the doors for those who ran out! I see it all
yet," said the old woman.
" You ran well, Bergliot," said I.
" We all ran well after Thorstein, who cut a way out
for us, and mounted us in the forest."
" Yes," said Hertha, " he took me on his horse. What
a ride we had through the dark woods, with the fire-glow
for so long behind us ! "
" But that was all natural war," said Bergliot. " Noav
here, what between blue men and Saracen wizards to
guard us, and a fiend monk, Fra Lucio, to haunt the
passages, and a demon below sitting on the treasure, and
a dragon of the pit there in the marshes, one can't call
one's life one's own—one does not know on which side
the gale is coming—one dare hardly look over one's
shoulder for fear of something; and as if that "svas not
enough, now they have insiilted Thor on the sands below,
just showing him a splendid sacrifice like Thorstein, and
then taking him away, as 1 might take a big bone from a
eavage dog."
TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 363
" Now stop," said her mistress, " you know you don't
believe in Thor."
'• Of course I don't, but much he will care whether a
poor old woman like me beheves in him or not. Kolbiorn
there does. Maybe he is a strong fellow for all that; and
best beware, he may be listening."
" Peace, woman, peace !" said Damasus, uneasily; " we
will have a solemn procession at noon to-morroAv, and all
together, and lay the evil spirits with bell, book, and
candle."
"They will all come here to me, a poor outcast
heathen," I said, laugliing at his dismal face.
" And it would be well, craving your pardon. Lady
Hertha, if you would leave the Saracens in the castle alone
for the present," he went on imploringly; " they are
quiet now, and for the love of the saints let us not
provoke them."
"Nay," said Hertha, "they would not let me ride
unescorted this morning; we are in truth their prisoners.
This score of Saracens shall leave the castle, I hope,
to-morrow. Some of the Italians are true, and we have
two Northmen."
" Two ! " repeated Valeria; " ah ! could we but escape
oiirselves! here I live now in terror."
"No wonder, lady, no wonder," said Bergliot in a
cheerful manner ; " and where you consider too that the
demon of the treasure must have his victim ; and perhaps
that is what has befallen the young Marquis, your
brother. If sO; you are safe for a year. It reminds me of
old King Arne of Swithiod. Do you remember, Kolbiorn,
he lived to be a hundred and ninety years old, but every
tenth year he had to send some one to content the pale
goddess Hela, who was waiting for him; and they say in
those days men trembled for fear of that sacrifice when
the tenth year came, and when at any moment the knock
of Arne the old might be heard at the door, coming to
claim his victim."
Bergliot stopped short, for a loud knock sounded in the
room, seeming to come from all sides at once.
Valeria shrieked, and the old woman, saying, " The
worse the way the better the speed should be," went
quickly to the door and flung it open, and there before
us, with an evil smile on his lips, stood Syades the
Saracen. A black man, with rolling eyeballs and glitter¬
ing white teeth, stood armed behind him.    Ilertha rose,
364 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and glancing at Valeria, who was almost fainting, and at
Damasus, who was trembling, said, " The lady of the
castle, in the absence of her brother, has asked me to tell
you and all the Saracens that she will give you pay for
past services and discharge you, as she means henceforth
to have only Christians in the garrison."
" Not so fast, lady. She is in great haste to assume
the death of her brother, the Lord of Asile. I represent
him; he has only been absent a few weeks."
" If you represent him," said Hertha, " you will obey
the Lady Valeria, and also for your own sake it will be
best to keep on good terms with the kinswoman of Thor-
stein, the affianced bride of Rainulf,"
" So well am I aware of your value in their eyes,"
answered the Saracen, " that I could have wished no
better prisoner to fall into my hands to enable me to
make a good peace with them. Ha, lady! do I not give
check at once to queen and castle % In ordinary play, the
queen should be saved; but your knights are so fan¬
tastical that they may think for the Emperor's sake it is
better to save the castle. But first, this is my room, and
I mean to clear it. Fair Chatelaine, let me escort you to
your own-far pleasanter apartment;" and he began to
raise Valeria.
"Do not fear, dear Valeria; go with him. Bergliot,
help her," said Hertha.
"And you too, monk." Damasus sprang up eager to
obey—" and you, fair Northern lady."
" I shall. stay by my sick countryman," said Hertha.
" I must see him moved, but I will go when he does, if
you wish to return for him; meanwhile"—and as Syades
advanced towards her, a dagger glittered in her hand—
" do not touch me, or you will have no means of con¬
ciliating Rainulf;   only a terrible vengeance."
" Yes, I shall come again with men to carry him," said
Syades, half carrying Valeria, and driving the others
before him, and fastening the door outside. How I k)nged
for my former strength, as Hertha took my hand and
leant over me kindly and cheerily, looking like her kins¬
man Thorstein.
" You do not look afraid, fair goldring bearer."
"Nay," she answered, "unless it be of increasing your
fever. Did you not hear? there was a knock at both doors;
but the other is hard to open, so I dared ijot attempt it
with two foemen in the room.    Now I shall."    She went
Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 365
to the concealed stone door, and not without some diflfi-
culty opened it; and the next moment Ivar and Olver
were in the room, and better still, Astolfo, fully armed,
with two Italian men-at-arms behind him. Astolfo took
Hertha's hand, and, falling on one knee, kissed it, saying—
" You forgive me, lady; there is peace between us ? "
" I forgive you truly," she answered. " You were right,
you could not have done otherwise."
" And now," said Astolfo, springing up ; " we must not
be taken here as in a trap, the more as Syades knows our
other way out, and might stop it up. Kolbiorn, I fear we
must take you to the turret, and lay you on the floor.
I shall take your place, and they shall carry out a lively
sick man. Lady Hertha alongside of me; you others
behind the hangings; and the moment we are outside the
door, be ready for a rush. He will bring more men with
him; more certainly will be within call; but I hope we
are ready to fight at long odds with traitors and slaves,
we free Lombards and Sea-rovers of the North."
E. J. 0.
{To he continued.^
dj h a ni c t £ r ?
Whether the character of men can be known from the
features of the face, is a question which so often arises
that I venture to bring forward some arguments bearing
on what I feel to be the unpopular side of the subject;
viz., that the face is not a reliable source of information
as to the character within. Some one has said, " Man's
face is like a turnpike, no trust is indelibly inscribed upon
it." Without going quite so far as that, 1 am still inclined
to put little faith in appearances.
So much has been said and written on the power of
rightly reading the features ; too many people, many of
them by mere force of habit and a tendency to do what
others do, trust to the outward and seeming aspect of
things ; that as nothing, or next to nothing, has been said
on the side of the question which I favour, I can only
adduce a few historical examples, and  speak  more at
No. 12.—Decbmber 1875. 3 A
366 The Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine.
length of those which have come under my own personal
observation. After all, it is a case to be judged almost
entirely from a personal point of view. There are types
of individuals as well as types of race, and much might
be said of the influence of climate, education, culture, or
habit of life in giving the characteristic touches to face
and form; but thi swould lead us into too discursive paths.
There is no mistaking the precocious cunning on the face
of the street arab, or the vacant brutishness written on
the features of the ignorant outcast; but these are the
results of hereditary taint, of moral or physical disease,
not the outcome of the mind or character within—two
things totally opposite, and not to be confounded with
each other. There are two sets of marks on a living
face ; these, faint, shadowy, deceitful, shown at will or
concealed by careful study—those, branded as with a hot
iron by passion, excess, or vice, totally beyond the power
of volition, and incapable of being erased. The first are
an occasional accident, the last an inevitable consequence.
A parent transmits to his child the same feature, gesture,
expression; but while the faces may be almost identical,
the several characters may be as widely apart as the
poles.
I cannot deny that the ingenuous eye and cheek of
childhood will betray the passing thought and feeling
as clearly as if they were told by word of mouth, or that
a life of noble thought and elevating aim, and in exactly
the same manner a course of vile living and evil-doing,
engraves Avith a pen of iron on the lineaments of the
aged, lines which he who runs may read ; but I affirm that
between those two extremes of age, in a mixed multitude
of persons in the social intercourse of every-day existence,
it is both impossible and dangerous to judge men's
characters by their faces. It is most natural to form an
estimate of every one you meet from the appearance,
but it is all but impossible to discover with any degree
of accuracy, (ask yourselves if in attempting it you have
not failed in at least half the cases you have tried)
whether a man be humble or haughty, true or treacherous,
intellectual or ignorant,
I think it is Voltaire who says, ''Speech was given us to
conceal our thoughts." In like manner, it seems to uie the
face was given us to be the mask of the mind. Especially
a Briton's face. Who cares to go wearing his heart on
his sleeve, displaying the emotional side of his nature,
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 367
clasping his cher Alphonse in his arms, as Thackeray
amusingly describes in one of his sketches, did he only
part with him the week before, and flashing forth the
direst vengeance of lip and eye at the most trifling
contradiction? Let any unprejudiced person study the
several faces of an Englishman and Frenchman during
the narration of a tale of sadness. The one, stolid,
concerned, it may be, but concealing all expression of
sentiment,—the other, excited, garrulous, tearful. Of
course the verdict of the onlooker would be to the effect
that the one was a callous man of the world, the other
full of heart and feeling; but let the actions of the two
in the circumstances, not the faces, show the real
character beneath.
Men, as a rule, like to display their best side to all.
The organ of the love of approbation is pretty well de¬
veloped in most. In the sacred precincts of our chambers
we can eat out our own heart in bitterness and dis¬
appointment ; let us show a calm untroubled front to
those busy observers of our actions called the world, who
will soon find out by 'other means than reading the lines
on our faces the motive mainspring of our deeds. But it
will only be by close study of our 'daily life, especially
the life of our own fireside and home, where the best
and worst of a man's disposition are showii, where the
little meannesses and greatest selflessness crop up un¬
wittingly. There only is the mask dropped, and the
real, true character fairly seen.
In the ruddy-faced shepherd lad there was nothing to
give indication, even to the prophet whose divine gift
might, if anything could, have discovered it, of the future
power and warlike genius which made David a name
among nations, and conqueror over all his enemies. Nor
do I think the face of Judas bespoke the fell treachery of
his soul, else had he not been the one of the Twelve
selected to the trusty position of treasurer over their
common goods.
Looking back through the pages of history, what was
there in the lovely face of the famous Marchioness de
Brinvilliers to warn the unconscious victims who fell a
prey, first to her transcendant charms, and then to a cruel
death by poison? Believers in physiognomy must have
existed in those days, l)ut she must have been a puzzle
to them, with the infantile purity of her fair seductive face
and the innocent charm of her guileless manner.
368 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
What was there to mark the undying heroism, or, as his
enemies call it, the cruel bloodthirstiiiess, of (Jlaver-
house's disposition, in " the languishing glance of an eye
like that of a love-sick girl," as one historian has it I
what in the free glance and frank open address of all the
handsome, gallant race, to warn their trusty adherents ot
the existence of that vein of falseness which was the ruin
of the whole Stuart dynasty? Look at all the paintings,
whether on canvas or storied page, of the Pompadours,
Maintenons, Du Barris, Castlemaines,—all those lovely,
fascinating, unprincipled women who ruled kings and
nations, and influenced the fate of continents : is there
one single coarse line to mark the base profligacy which
distinguished their lives on the refined and lovely lips
which smiled at one moment with the tenderest sensibility,
and the next poured forth language which would have
done discredit to an outcast on the street ?
Come down to our own day, and where will you find a
better example of the fldlacy of Lavater's theory than in
the hasty judgment pronounced on the eai-ly manhood of
him who ended so lately among us—and alas ! in exile—a
life which stands almost unrivalled in this century for
greatness ? Looking on his face as seen in his unsuccess¬
ful youth, people said, " He was a fool; he had no
character, no decision; he would never reign." Short¬
sighted beings ! He possessed more than any other man
the wonderful and difficult fticulty of patient waiting.
Projector of magnificent enterprises, a wise general, a
judicious ruler, himself his sole and best councillor, this,
to physiognomists, seeming simpleton, forced a hostile
nation to acknowledge with acclamations his power, and
forget in his greatness, and its consequence, their glory,
the few stains which sullied its primal efforts. To the
very end of his mighty career, worn out by physical
suffering nobly borue, by adverse fate, by the bitter
upbraidings of the very creatures his hand had raised,
wrung as his proud heart must have been looking back,
fearful as it must have been forecasting the future, what
did that keen face show % I have heard many verdicts
pronounced by people looking at Napoleon personally,
and at his photographs which were a living likeness, and
almost every one used the same expression—sinister.
There was nothing sinister about the man. He hid the
motive power of his deeds; he did well, knowing the
garrulous, volatile nature of his people; but his servants,
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine. 369
his personal friends, those nearest him, when to hide his
feelings was impossible, pronounced the term most mis¬
applied, for they found him kindly, thoughtful, gentle.
They may have feared the Emperor, but they loved
the man.
It is the fashion to suppose and maintain that great
criminals, more especially murderers, are distinguished by
the peculiar formation of their brain and the villanous
cast of their countenances. Some certainly are prcjved
to be so to a degree which forces us to believe they are
barely responsible beings; but as a rule, among this class,
there is little to indicate outwardly the low state of the
moral nature within.
Claude Duval, the famous highwayman, who thought
as little of killing a man as of eating his dinner, made
high-born damsels fall in love with his sweet face and
charming address. The great political intriguants, both
male and female, have worn masks so immovable as
to defy the keenest insight of the most practised physi¬
ognomists.
Walk along the street with me. This man with the
grand physique, with high-domed forehead, finely-arched
eye, and all the varous bumps properly developed, I
know to be endowed with the smallest modicum of brains,
and to leave the few talents he has, utterly unemployed.
This little shambling figure, with low brow and small
lack-lustre eye, which meets no neighbour's gaze, whose
lip has a vacillating tremble, belongs to one whose
eloquence has the power to sway a nation, and whose
scientific writings will be handed down to a proud
posterity. I have knoAvn a woman whose sweetness in
society was a byword, who never let a frown disturb the
serenity of her brow, who yet was a constant canker in
her home ; and I have before my mind at this instant two
individuals, whose frank, open, handsome faces, gentle
manner, and chivalric address, were their passport to a
society which welcomed them gladly, who belied their
looks so cruelly that they never entered a house but
they left a bitter blight behind; and their nearest and
dearest were sacrificed in the most heartless manner, did
they stand between them and the passing pleasure of an
hour. What would a believer in physiognomy reply
to that ? No evil passion, no cold heartlessness, no bitter,
biting, malignant sarcasm—and there were plenty—had
during a course of many years written one line to denote
370 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
their presence on the noble features, or stolen one tender
glance from eyes whose every look was false—eyes so
soft and gentle, so trusting and true, that it is difficult
yet to believe in their falseness, and well-nigh impossible
to visit them with righteous anger, as they beguiled you
with the coaxing looks of an artless child.
Do we not all take sudden fancies or dislikes to casual
acquaintances or travelling companions,—prejudice, that
evil "vveed which grows so quickly, and is so difficult to
eradicate, preventing us from giving up first impressions
which often prove'erroneous. A sullen look, a cynical smile,
a compressed lip, will make us sit side by side for hours
nursing a silly dislike to our travelling companion, or the
person seated next to us at some social gathering, when
we might have had a pleasant interchange of thought,
and mayhap laid the foundation of a lasting friendship.
The looks which so prejudiced us may have proceeded
from a shy self-consciousness which some persons can
never overcome, from a passing annoyance or an unpleasing
train of thought; while, on the other hand, the fascinating
smile and radiant insinuating glance may cover the deeply-
laid scheme of a smooth-faced hypocrite.
Beauty has such a universally attractive power, that
few physiognomists, however unprejudiced they may deem
themselves, are entirely impartial. It is so difficult to con¬
nect the idea of vileness of any sort with the perfection
of form and colour, that one lulls the whispers of reason
to rest, while the less-to-be-trusted senses revel in the
fairness of a casket, heedless if the gem within be gold
or tinsel. Ask yourself honestly, do yoxi not unwittingly—
unwillingly, perhaps—in the face of your calmer judgment,
give the palm to beauty ? Must not a fair face and
handsome form go hand-in-hand with virtue and good¬
ness, while those whom God and nature have not so
highly gifted—the plain,the rouglily-hewn,the deformed—
repel us instinctively, whispering that it is not worth the
trouble to dig beneath a surface which promises so little.
Do we not all feel, as George Eliot makes one of her
characters say, " Nature never makes a ferret in the shape
of a mastiff. You'll never persuade me that I can't tell
what men are by their outsides. If I don't like a man's
looks, depend upon it I shall never like him. I don't want
to know people that look ugly and disagreeable, any more
than I want to taste dislies that look disagreeable. If
they make me shudder at the first glance, I say, Take
Tlie Ladies  Edinhur^jJi Magazine. 371
them away.    An ugly, piggish, or fishy eye now, makes
me feel quite ill."
But the same keen observer and analyst of men and
manners says in another place, and this of herself, and
not from the mouth of any of her characters :—
" After all, I believe the wisest of us must be beguiled
in this way sometimes, and must think both better and
worse of people than they deserve. Nature has her
language, and she is not unveracious; but we don't know
all the intricacies of her syntax just yet, and in a hasty
reading we may happen to extract the very opposite of
her real meaning. Long dark eyelashes, now, what can
be more exquisite ? I find it impossible not to expect
some depth of tone behind a deep grey eye with a long-
dark eyelash, in spite of an experience which has shown
me that they may go along with deceit, peculation, and
stupidity. One begins to suspect that there is no direct
correlation between eyelashes and morals, or else that the
eyelashes express the disposition of the fair one's grand¬
mother, which is on the whole less important to us."
How often is the blush of diffidence mistaken for that
of guilt, a bold stare for the frank, free look of conscious
innocence ! I like not the countenance of him who meets
friend and foe with the same bland smile ; far rather
would I trust the stern, morose lines of a face which
seldom relaxes, but when it does, will light up with a
ray whose genuineness there is no mistaking.
Womanish, effeminate features have often been allied
with noble endurance and heroic courage, while a form
and face indicative of manliness and power have fre¬
quently concealed a treacherous coward. A slight and
languid-looking frame has often disguised an iron will, a
soft voice and flexible mouth covered an implacable
temper; nay, do we not know that ■weakness to resist
temptation, and instability of purpose to lead a noble life,
are frequently associated with a splendid physique, f
Another aspect of the question has suggested itself to
me, and one which is in general not duly considered.
The estimate we form of people is as liable to the influence
of time and circumstance as are the things and places we
see,, and which are at the first moment of sight indelibly
photographed on the memory for ever. Few places
convey a similar idea to different people. A scene which
strikes me with awe and admiration, the remembrance of
which is to me a joy for ever, falls flatly on another: while
372 Tlie Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine.
a wide open view, which fills him with delight, I do not
care to look at again.
The conclusion at which we arrive is often measured
by our own mood and surroundings, as they are pleasant
or the reverse. So with people. I am suddenly placed
in the society of one who is to be my companion for hours,
or it may be days. I am in an imhappy mood, at
variance with the world, and more notably with myself.
I have not yet spoken to my neighbour; he is a sealed
book to me. I look at him, I read distrust in his eye,
scorn and ill-temper in his curling nostril, sarcasm and
spite in his down-turned lip. My friend Jones, who is
in the highest spirits at the prospect of his holiday, like
a dog just off the chain, after enthusiastically whispering
to me that " he is sure the stranger is the very best
fellow going," has phmged headlong into a narration of
his most sacred domestic history.
Is Jones right, or am I ? The man cannot have two
characters, both legibly inscribed. Rather, has not each
seen him as he wished to see him, a faint reflex of his
own present mood ?
If a man's face is capable of so many interpretations, it
is not a reliable source of information.
If I am to judge by outward signs, for rather would
I measure the disposition by the action of those members
not so immediately under control as the face. Watch
the formation, the movement of a person's hands; they
are much safer indications of the temperament. The
nerveless look of long thin fingers, which simply touch
yours and fall away; the firm strong grasp of a warm
hand; the nervous playing with trifles ; the manner of
turning the leaves of a book; nay, the very way in which
a needle is put through a woman's work, will satisfy a
keen observer as to the salient characteristics of their
several owners. An unsteady tread, a wandering step,
will sufficiently indicate a vacillating nature incapable of
decision; while a firm gait and upright carriage convey
the impression of a mind full of strong resolve, and
capable of perseverance to the end.
I would ask my readers to pause a moment and look
around the faces of friends and acquaintances ranged in
the cabinets of their memories, and answer truly how
often they have been deceived in the smile or frown, the
eye or the face before them ; how often have they not
formed a wrong estimate, and repented a hasty judgment?
Tlie Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine. 373
They are singular if they have not some time suffered
from following the erroneous guidance of a first pleasing
impression, or been hurriedly betrayed into losing a
possible friend by an uncharitable decision built on the
untrustworthy foundation of an unfortunate expression.
Martyn Hat.
CHAPTER     X.
De Rehmar, in renewing his friendship with Trevor, had
quite banished all suspicion of coldness on the part of the
other. He had even begun to regard him with warmer
feelings than ever, so that he could have given him his
daughter almost ungrudgingly. Yes, to secure the happi¬
ness of others, he could have brought himself to make
such a sacrifice ; but now that the sacrifice was not re¬
quired of him, he felt glad for his own sake; and could he
have felt sure that Werburga had concealed from him
nothing of her own state of mind, he would have felt glad
for her sake also.
" You are too transcendental, Werburga," said the
Baron to his daughter, a day or two after the departure
of Trevor. He had seated himself in an easy-chair, to
peruse a volume of Kant's Philosophy.
" Papa, what do you mean'? " said the person addressed.
" Transcendentalism, my dear, is the name given by
Kant to the class of ideas existing in the human mind
independently of experience. Now you will understand
my meaning when I say that you are too transcendental
in your aff"ections. From what you have admitted to me,
it seems that you have set your heart on some human
being whom you have not seen. You tell me that you
have not yet seen any person whom you can love; and as
the heart cannot possibly exist in a vacuum, I conclude
from this that you have formed for yourself an ideal
object of devotion.    Is not this the case % "
" No, papa, that would be far too troublesome. I should
greatly prefer a vacuum. But indeed I have not given
the subject any serious attention."
"Women are strange beings," said her father; " they
No. 12.-December 1875. 3 B
374 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
believe in the impossible and despise the actual, and
laugh at both."
" Yes, papa, I had rather laugh than weep; rather be
without love than die of a broken heart,"
The Baron leant back in his chair, and looked at his
daughter with vacant eyes, just as if she were some object
for investigation which he had examined thoroughly
both close at hand and at a distance, and still found
incomprehensible.
By no questioning, however, could he gain any further
information; so he soon passed from wonder and curiosity
to his normal state of tranquil pleasure in her society;
and the calm life in the little cottage flowed on as peace¬
fully as ever after the little episode which had disturbed
it, and ruffled its "waters for a brief space. The time
began again to pass so pleasantly and so quickly, that the
father and daughter felt both sorry and surprised as each
day came to a close.
With another, too, whose acquaintance we have
already made in these pages, the winter now setting
in was to pass very agreeably. The regular studies
and congenial companionship which now alternated
in the student life of Randall Holme, were destined to
cause a revolution in his character. He was like some
plant which had hitherto been dragging on a half-exis¬
tence in the depths of a gloomy cavern, and was now for
the first time brought into the sunlight, and suffered to
expand into its true form. It has often been remarked of
thoughtful and noble natures, that in youth they are re¬
served, dull, and sometimes even morose; but that the
better ones among them, as life goes on, find their way
into a garden of roses by means of a key of their own
making, cast in the mould of moral rectitude, and adorned
with the graceful forms of high imagination. Youth is
for them, indeed, a Lenten time, when their path is so
beset with spectres and gloomy forebodings that all joy
seems for ever banished. Yet all the time a joyous
Easter is waiting for them in the future, all the more
joyous that the path towards it has been so sad. And
when that is attained, they seem to be but at the begin¬
ning of a bright and endless youth, that will cast its
fragrance over all their future life. And so it was with
Kandall Holme; the brightness and beauty of his life
were but now beginning to dawn; and it w^as not the
worse for him that they dawned so late.    All his dreams
Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine. 375
of the future, even the dream of love, had till now been
tinged with melancholy;   now there was   nothing  but
bloom and freshness.    Some part of this change was due
to the stimulating influence of the class-room, but by far
the greater part of it was to be attributed to friendship.
Randall was of too retiring a nature ever to mix freely in
the society even of young men of his own age; but there
were a few among his fellow-students whom he instinc¬
tively singled out as friends.    Chief among these was
a youth of French extracticjn, though all his life resident
in England.     Alfred  Chastel was   of the  same age as
Randall, and a thorough contrast to him in character;   he
was gay and genial in manner, and had a greater love
of field-sports than of study.    Yet he was also to some
extent a student,  and that not an idle one.     To him
Randall owed in great measure the preservation of his
health, for Alfred often called him away from his books
to have a walk, or a row on the river.    The two inter¬
changed thoughts unreservedly, till  each knew almost
every  event in the other's life, every opinion   on   men
and things in general, and on his own friends in particular.
Summer had come again, and Randall had completed
his first year at college, with its four terms.    Before re¬
turning home, he and his friend Alfred had planned a
little tour to  the  Harz  Mountains.    They were  to  be
absent oidy three weeks, during which time they hoped
to admire the clouds and spectres,  and to explore the
tree-clad valleys and hills, of that romantic region.    On
their way thither they spent a few days in the town of
Hanover.    Exhausted by the heat of that waterless and
airless capital, they one  day sought  refuge from it in
the shade of the lime-tree avenue that led to the then
still royal abode of Herrenhausen.    Here the fountains,
the palm-house, the stiff French gardens, amused them
for awhile, till, again seeking shelter from the heat, they
seated themselves under the   shadow   of a huge lime-
tree.    Here, as a matter of course, they were speedily
accosted by a fat Kellner, of which beings one meets about
foiir to every mile in Germany.    To eat in the open air
seems to the German mind to be one of the most natnral
combinations   of circumstances ;  indeed, there it would
appear to be, not a matter of free will, but of necessity.
The  theory of the custom  seems  to  be,  that German
scenery, by its peculiar beauty, exhausts the faculty of
admiration so completely that immediate hunger ensues,
376 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and that this famished condition is apt to recur so
frequently, that it is necessary to have the means of
removing it placed at intervals of not more than halt
an hour's walk. So the two friends yielded to the
pressure of circumstances, and ordered coffee. When
they had partaken of it, and were paying the reckoning,
the waiter, with some agitation, said in broken English,
" Ah, gentlemen, you are English; there is a countryman
of yours lying here very much hurt; will you kindly speak
with him ? " Passing into a small inner room in the res¬
taurant, they saw lying extended on a table, for couch there
was none, a middle-aged gentleman. His face was very
pale, his eyes were closed, his lips compressed as if in
pain. Randall bent over him and looked into his face
for a moment, then started back suddenly, exclaiming,
" Mr. Bernard Wood !" The sufferer opened his eyes
a little, looked at Randall, and shuddered slightly. He
opened them again, and made an effort to speak.
Randall came nearer, and heard the words, " Take me
with you; I am dying." Smitten with compassion,
Randall ordered a carriage instantly, and the two lads
conveyed the sufferer most carefully to their own hotel.
They were both too generous to think for a moment of
their own pleasure when their fellow-countryman lay in
such agony before them, and begged them to care for
him. On arriving at the hotel, a doctor was sent for,
who only too clearly confirmed the sufferer's own opinion
that he was dying. From the landlord of the hotel
Randall learned that Mr. Bernard Wood had spent the
night there. He had arrived in Hanover the previous
day, and had gone out early in the morning, after paying
his bill  and   ordering  his  luggage to   be   sent  to   the
station, addressed to the small town of B , where he
had said he had business to transact. A further account
was given by the keeper of the restaurant, who came in
the evening to bring a gold-headed cane with B. W.
marked on it. Mr. Wood, in straying through the
avenues of Herrenhausen, had stopped at this cafe,
where he had expressed himself particularly pleased
with the elegant china in which his coffee was served.
Wishing to buy a specimen of it, he was led to a trap¬
door, whence a wooden stair led to the underground
store-room in which the cups were kept. Here the
luckless traveller had missed his footing, and fallen
headlong a height of about twelve feet.    The medical
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. Zll
man pronounced him to be iu a precarious state ; several
ribs on the left side were broken in such a way as to
impede the action of the heart. Life might linger on
for days or weeks, but could not possibly last long.
The physical prostration which had thus overtaken
Mr. Wood soon led to mental prostration. Kandall,
during the hours which he spent by his bedside, had to
listen to long contidences, such as could only come from
the mouth of a man Avhose end was near, and who could
not possibly live to endure the contempt which they
must draw down upon him. Wliat had been a scarcely
uttered surmise was, then, an acknowledged fact ; Mr.
Wood had really played the treacherous thief towards
de Kehmar; had systematically appropriated his money,
and made flimsy excuses to the unpractical and too con¬
fiding Baron. And now he had been on his way to
examine the Baron's affairs, and to receive his half-
yearly rents, all with a view to his own advantage. All
this he revealed to Randall, generally at dusk, that the
blush, if blush there could l^e, on his pallid cheeks might
be unseen, and that the twitchings of the mouth and
contraction of the brow might be all his own. He would
fain have extracted from Kandall a promise of secrecy;
and Randall gave it with one proviso, that he might con¬
fide all to the Baron, at the same time recommending
Mr. Wood's reputation to his mercy. For days the
sufferer lingered on, and refused to see a clergyman.
Randall, as an intending clergj^man, insisted on taking
the place of an actual one, and never failed to administer
exhortations, prayers, and consolations to the sick man.
And when, iu about a week after the accident, the last
moment came, it was with a look of gratitude to Randall,
and a blessing on his lips, that Mr. Bernard Wood went
where he prayed that his works might not follow him.
Deeply solemnised, and with such feelings as do not
usually fall to the lot of one who is travelling for pleasure,
Randall proceeded to the small town of B. He had with
him a letter written by himself, and signed by Mr. Wood,
which was to ensure his acquisition of the rents due to
the Baron. Mr. Wood had charged him to have no
conversation with the banker, bvit merely to receive the
rents as any messenger woidd have done, and depart.
Randalll complied with these injunctions all the more
easily that his knowledge of German was very imperfect,
and the man   of business did not understand  English.
378 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
When he had obtained his missive and departed, he
began to feel very glad at heart. What joy to be the
bearer of such news ! He was bound to go to the Baron
before he went home, and he was glad in the prospect of
this visit, and of the tidings he had to bring. As soon
as his journey began, he felt that he was going nearer to
his ideal of goodness, truth, brightness; for the belief in
these was for him identical with the belief in Werburga.
Had he been told that Werburga was not that perfect
character he held her to be, that she was subject to out¬
breaks of passion, or that her animated manner concealed
a heart of icy coldness, he would either have indignantly
repelled the assertion, or, if compelled to believe it, would
have felt heartbroken in consequence. He had always,
almost unconsciously, aimed at such a development of
his own character as might please her; while a mysterious
hope hinted at a reward for such attainment far too
glorious to be realised. And no"\v this hope Avas in¬
tensified by the fact that he had received a message to
convey to her, and that of a pleasant nature. Yet mis¬
givings did not fail to check and annoy him. He had
been long absent, and how could he tell what might have
happened? Trevor was near her; he was rich and of
high position; he might have stepped in, and, by some
fascination, made her his. And then came a more subtle
and more depressing thought; Werburga the rich heiress
would be quite a different person from Werburga the
poor teacher. Would she not look down upon him ?
Would not things be henceforth utterly changed between
them ? With tliis thought he embittered many hours as
he proceeded on his journey.
It was indeed true that Werburga, though still uncon¬
scious of her good fortune, had, during the past year, in
many respects become a different character. She had come
down from the heights of contemplation so far as to
dwell more on the level of ordinary life; yet in this she
moved so sweetly and so gracefully, that her life seemed
to have received a new charm, which made it happier.
She was less like a Saint Teresa going out alone into
the desert, and more like a Saint Elizabeth bearing a
sweet load of roses, to strew aroimd her in daily^ kind¬
nesses to both rich and poor.
On a beautiful afternoon towards the end of July,
which the northern nations call the sun-month, a solitary
horseman  was  seen  riding along  the  shores   of Lake
Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. 379
Westmere. Dismounting at the door of a thatched
cottage, he knocked and was admitted. He was greeted
by a soft feminine voice with the salutation, " Randall
Holme! I scai'cely recognised you! " And indeed it was
no ordinary young man whom Werburga now saw before
her. There was the same tall figure, only more erect;
the same raven locks, but the expression how altered and
brightened! The beautifully-formed intellectual forehead
was clear and unwrinkled, save by lines of thought;
beneath it the large dark eye looked forth with a gaze
that seemed to see life for the iirst time, and yet to have
seen it long. When he spoke there was a certain grace
and abandon of manner that seemed to have no con¬
nection whatever with that of the old Randall. Wer¬
burga was astonished, and with reason, and could not
solve the mystery till the Baron said to her afterwards,
" The secret of it is this, he has learned to forget himself
in looking at men and things; for some men such
oblivion might have been fatal, but for him—he has first
looked at himself to sueh purpose that he can now afford
to let himself alone. That is a great test of character;
and see how it marks the nobility of his; what fire, what
candour!—one of nature's noblemen."
Werburga did not echo these sentiments; she did not
feel herself called upon to do so. Something else was
c^ianged in Randall besides manner and character alone;
liis heart seemed to have forgotten its old habits. He
had remained closeted with the Baron, or Avalking with
him, for hours after his arrival; and nothing but the most
ordinary phrases of politeness had he deigned to utter
to Werburga. Yes, men are fickle, she thought, but no
matter; his boyish fancy had never met with the slightest
encouragement from her: of this she assured herself, and
rejoiced that it was so. She betook herself to her books,
but soon tired of reading; then to painting, with the
same result; at last she strolled out alone. It was
getting dark, so she strayed, as she often did in the
twilight, into the chapel near at hand, to dream for a
little over the organ. The dim light within the chapel
received a strange unearthly gleam from the stained
windows; while the ivy that had crept up the outer wall,
till it tapped with the breeze against the window-pane,
seemed to Werburga like some banished spirit knocking
in vain for entrance into the place of souls. She began
to play, and soon, through the solemn chords and majestic
380 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
movements of the passages she pkxyed, there came a
sound as of stealthily advancing footsteps. Glancing
towards the chapel wall on her right hand, she perceived
standing against it the figure of a man. His head was
bent forward, his hands were clasped over his bosom, as
he stood in an attitude of rapt attention, leaning with his
back to the wall. Werburga played on, almost inspired
by the entrance of this listener, though not knowing who
lie was. Suddenly he raised his head and walked slowly
forward, till he remained standing by her side, and gazing
into her face. Then she knew who it was. and she saw
by his gaze that he was looking at something very far
away. As she played on, it seemed as if his spirit were
soaring into that realm where the sky is always blue, the
trees are always in leaf, the dumb creatures are all
beautiful and tame, and even men and women are robed in
a halo of beauty; it was the realm of Love. Could she
follow him there ?
Procla.
(To be continued.)
—~^t fweeiesc o aaia!»»»°" 
Part I.—Past.
A happy world of long to-morrows.
Mountains and birds and sweet fresh rain ;
Tears and lessons and little sorrows—
Soon there cometli sunshine again !
Cold bright day when it has been snowing,
Little red fingers eager for play—
Eager to finish the tiresome sewing,
And join in the gleesome holiday.
Tall fair lilies out on our river,
Sailing away on the happy weeds ;
Ah ! how the waters flash and shiver,
Bow and talk to the solemn reeds!
Joyous holidays out haymaking.
Daisies hiding in meadow sweet;
Some of their petals bruised and breaking
By eager treading of little feet.
Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Mugazine. 381
Cool white violets all for mother,
Dai'k-eyed pmsies and faint harebell,
Sister roses that twine each other
Down to the brook where cresses dwell.
Fruit-trees blooming in rosy laughter,
Shaking loveliness into tune ;
Honey bees wait, and there cometh after
Grey young larks in the broad, white noon.
Walks in the rich, unclouded weather.
When waving corn and flowers stand.
Scarlet and blue and gold together,
Like opal seas within the land.
Long blue days with the goldfinch singing,
Watching rosebuds grow in the lane ;
Tender talk when grey clouds are bringing
Darkness over the land again—
Tender talk all alone with Mother,
When swallows are going to bed.
And stars peep out one after another—
Out of the gloom overhead.
0 stars, and purple hill and streamlet,
Is Heaven fairer out afar %
For we, they say, are in a dream yet
Of glories that there really are :
If so, I do not wish to waken,
The Dream is all so grand and fair;
To me, a Heaven would be forsaken
If Mother was not with me there :
To me each day brings gladder story.
To me there cometh nought of fear.
Oh ! dear Earth-land, I love your glory.
For I have Mother with you here I
Part II.—Passixg.
A fitful world, half light, half shade,
.    With long, dark storms that intervene;
And gleams of lovely light that fade
Before the shadows flit between.
No. 12.—December 1875. 3 C
382 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. j
Low-waiHng breezes in the night, :
Hinting at sorrow yet unheard ; ;
A touch of sadness in the flight ;
And farewell song of forest bird. \
A half-regretful yearning fear ]
(That must be felt ere really kno^\^l) '
To find, when falls each passing year, :
How much more quickly it has flown.
And weight of inward pain that yields j
Great, loving tears, we know not why, :
When, looking over summer fields, l
We watch the pretty shadoAvs die, !
Leaving behind their parent, Night,
W^ith throbbing stars like souls in pain ; j
While, westerly, there falls the Light
That we may never see again.
And young fresh impulse giving place,
As give it must, to graver thought, ;
When outward scorn has checked the grace
Of what our first impressions taught. |
A calmer life, whose separate day j
Is taken up with thankful care, j
As if its hours might end their way ■
Out in the Dark, we know not where.
But trust with Whom, because the worst ,
And weakest too may cling to Him, i
Who chose us all and loved us first, i
When years ago the Land lay dim. j
The same bright world of long ago, j
The same sweet Nature as of yore.
But fer more cherished, for we know— ]
We knoio that it returns no more. i
1
Nor have we " long to-morrows " now,
As once we said in baby glee ;
With busy hands and placid brow,
We only wait what is to be.
We wait, while passing through the crowd,
And watch the multitude unseen,
Hearing its voices, swift and loud,
Clamour of what they do not mean.
Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine. 383
Gathering blossoms while we may,
To give their sweetness now and then,
We walk a quiet, restful way,
Perhaps not known to fellow-men.
Not known %    Ah, no, nor understood.
But often judged ill-timed and odd ;
To careless view, no Avay is good
That leads men, weary, up to God.
So let it be.    And for the rest.
The same Love guides my errant will;
All my babyhood it was best,
In my womanhood it is still.
Naomi S. Smith.
Roman's   ^torli.
V.—Medicine a Profession for Women.
In the present day it is quite possible for a girl of sense,
who can command a small income, to obtain a thorough
medical education. The Universities of Paris and of
Zurich admit women to all their classes without reserve,-
and a school of medicine for women has lately been
established in London. Four to five years are required
to complete the curriculum of study. Four to four and
a-half years suffice to acquire the knowledge necessary
to obtaining a degree, and some six or twelve months
should afterwards be spent in visiting the various schools
of medicine at home and abroad.
The first two years of study are devoted, by common
consent, to the natural sciences, including Anatomy and
Physiology. The student attends lectures on Botany,
Zoology, Comparative Anatomy, Natural Philosophy, and
Chemistry, and is expected to work for some months in a
chemical laboratory. The list of subjects will doubtless
appear formidable to the uninitiated. It would not be
fair to say that only the most superficial knowledge of
the sciences named can be acquired in two years, for with
average ability and common industry it is possible in that
time to learn more than the mere outlines, and at all
events it is possible to know as much as is needful for
384 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
practical purposes, and to satisfy examiners. The more
attention is given to Natural Philosophy and Chemistry,
the more thorough and the easier will be the study of Physi¬
ology ; while the dry facts of Comparative Anatomy gain
much interest when viewed from the standpoint of
Physiology.
The anatomy of the human body is learnt partly from
lectures and books, but chiefly by dissecting; and micro¬
scope anatomy demands dexterity in handling the micro¬
scope, and fine handiwork which need not be here
described. After the student has been introduced to the
natural sciences, and knows the structure of the human
body (Anatomy), as well as the manner in which its
functions are performed in health (Physiology), she is then
fitted to begin the study of Pathology, i.e. the science of
disease, and therapeutics, or the treatment of disease.
General Pathology and special Pathology, or diseases of
special organs, are treated of in lectures and illustrated at
the bedside. The various methods of discovering and
determining diseases are to be carefully acquired from
oral instruction and by constant practice. Medicine is
divided into two branches: Surgery and Internal Medi¬
cine, a division determined by separate modes of treat¬
ment. Neither branch should be neglected for the other.
Diseases of the eye, ear, throat, and skin have recently
developed into separate and large departments, and the
student must not consider her education complete without
a •knowledge of all the departments of disease. When
the last examination is passed and the degree obtained,
the new-made doctor must rely upon her own powers of
observation and her faculty of learning from experience
as well as of making intelligent use of the experience of
others, if she is to be truly successful as a medical
practitioner.
It is possible to board, lodge, dress plainly, pay fees,
and all the expenses of education, for £100 per annum,
in Paris and in Zurich, and I believe in London also.
For examinations and expenses in connection with them,
about £30 extra must be reckoned.
It is very important to acquire the habit of study and
some preliminary knowledge before commencing the
medical curriculum, as it will otherwise present great
difficulties. Besides a good English education, which
shculd be a sine qua non, Mathematics, Latin, German,
and French are especially useful to the medical student.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine. 385
Mathematics trains the mind to habits of accurate thought,
and facihtates the study of Natural Philosophy and
Physiology. A little knowledge of Latin is essential,
and every doctor ought to be able to read French and
German works on medicine. The matriculation examina¬
tions of the London University, and of the Apothecaries'
Hall, are open to w^omen; and every girl Avho intends
to be a doctor should pass one or the other—if possible,
the London University examination, as its requirements
are much higher than that of the Apothecaries' Hall. In¬
formation respecting these examinations may be obtained
from the Registrar of the UniA^ersity, and from the secre¬
tary of the Society of Apothecaries.
The difhculties of the profession of medicine are much
insisted on by those who are anxious to keep women out
of it. There is anxiety and vexation in every vocation
of life, and hard work too, in most cases where bread has
to be earned. Human nature appears to have a certain
capacity for suffering which must be satisfied in some
way; and where no great troubles agitate the life, man¬
kind contrive to extract misery from the most trifling
ills. Small annoyances in the absence of great difficulties
often assume large proportions, and are as hard to
combat, and as exhausting to the system. The profession
of medicine has no doubt its trials. A doctor has to work
in season and out of season, has no time of certain leisure,
is bound to one place from year's end to year's end, and
night and day must be prepared to quit comfort and ease
with promptitude. All this is grievous perhaps, but in
the first years of practice these inconveniences do not
press heavily, especially when necessity supplies a whole¬
some stimulus to exertion. When the demands of practice
are very great, common sense dictates to many men
certain restrictions and hmitations which preserve them
from the fate of the overworked, and there is no reason
why women should not in the same way spare their
health and strength. When practice increases beyond
management it is well to raise the fee, to refuse to go
out after certain hours; and thus room is made for
younger practitioners.
Numberless and incessant worries attend the doctor's
life. But the whole world complains of worry—the
merchant, the lawyer, the statesman, .the teacher, the
housewife. Are the worries of a physician more trying
than those which the principal of a school has to encounter^
386 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
I do not think they are. The grave responsibilities and
anxieties, which no doctor can escape, require to be met
with nerve, patience, self-reliance, and skill. The three
first-named qualities are gifts of nature, possessed often by
women to an eminent degree; skill can happily be
acquired by industry, Avhere there is average ability. The
advantages of the profession of medicine, as affording a
good means of livelihood, and suitable occupation for the
energies of women, are obvious, and need not be enlarged
on here. It may reasonably be hoped that in a few years
it will be possible for women to obtain an English degree,
which will entitle Ihem to be enrolled amongst the
registered doctors of England. At present every woman
who intends to be a medical practitioner must be careful to
get a thorough education, and she can then confide her¬
self to public opinion to stand her in the stead of
registration.
i would now proceed to say, that as far as my oavu
experience goes, and it is some eight years since I
took the first step towards entering the profession, I
can see no reason why it should not be open to women.
It is too common to class all women in one category,
instead of distinguishing the great differences that
exist amongst this half of the human race. A\'hen it is
said women have not the qualities necessary to practise
medicine successfully, that is true enough of many
women, but it is quite untrue as regards a large number.
There are many women who do not shrink from re¬
sponsibility, nor from hard work, who have patience, self-
reliance, and courage, besides good abilities. There are
many women who remain self-possessed in danger, and
who are not the less sympathetic because they do not
faint and tremble at the sight of suffering.
I would neither persuade nor dissuade any girl as to
studying medicine. If she has determined with herself
that she will do so, if she shows that her intention is
deliberate and well considered, I for my part know of
nothing that should deter her. Success will depend
chiefly on perseverance and fair health. The course of
study is so long and so varied, that any girl not pos¬
sessing the requisite qiialities will turn away long before
she can obtain a degree.
There is a certain demand for women-doctors; how
great or how little that demand may prove to be, time
alone will show.    I myself believe that when the public
The TAuVies" Edlnhurgh ^[agazine. 387
becomes familiar with the  notion that doctors are not
necessarily men, a woman will then have much the same
chance as a man of obtaining a practice : that is to say, if
she is clever and capable, and settles in a district not over¬
stocked with doctors, she will get hergood share of patients.
To look at the matter from another aspect—does a
woman lose any good thing by becoming a physician ?
She  must   expect  to  be   considered   a  monstrosity by
persons who do not know her;   but does the study  of
medicine indeed act  deterioratingly on her   character %
In my experience, it affects neither their moral qualities
nor  their manners.    What women are without medical
knowledge,   that  they remain   with it.     It is not true
that a naturally gentle and refined woman is rendered
coarse and  ill-mannered by the study or profession of
medicine.     I   can   give an  instance.     The   epitaph   of
one of the first women-graduates of the University of
Zurich has, it is sad to say, already been written.    In a
notice of the life of Dr Susan Dimock, who perished in
the wreck of the Schiller, there is a passage which con¬
firms what I have just said.    " Her voice was soft and
low,   her   sympathies   large,   her  manners   refined   and
modest in the highest degree."    In speaking of her we
can  reverse  the  riddle   of Samson,   and say,   " Out of
sweetness came forth strength."    These qualities made
her services invaluable to her patients.    In lecturing to
her   students   she  said :   " If   I   were   obliged   in   my
practice to do without sympathy or medicine, I should
say, Do without medicine."    She did not care to have any
woman study medicine who was naturally unsympathetic.
One student having  said, " I have  not  much  pity   for
hysteric  patients,"   Dr   Dimock  remarked,   " If medical
science is not yet so far advanced as to discover any
lesion in what we call ' hysteria,' this is no reason why
we should have no sympathy with those thus afflicted,
for  they   suffer  severely."     It  is   useless   to   say  that
because   a woman  is   a   doctor   she  must  therefore   be
unmannerly, coarse, and wanting in kindliness, for facts
which cannot be gainsaid do not bear out the theory.
Our opponents, it seems to me, often argue as if they
thought that, were the profession of medicine once
opened to women, the whole sex would evince a great
taste for the pursuit, and be all transformed into medical
women, to the great confusion of social and family life,
and the extinction of all that renders life pleasant and
388 TJte Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
delightful.. Now, it is quite impossible that the profession
could support an unliuiited number of women, perhaps not
more than say two to five thousand—a mere fraction of
the number of unemployed women of Great Britain.
Our sex has too much practical sense to study and toil
without prospect of remuneration. And the number of
women-doctors will be limited, sooner or later, by the
demand that they create for themselves.
Eliza W. Duxbar, M.D.
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Augustine's  CJioice ; or, The  Children of Strathdevon.    By
Louisa A. Mono
Macniven.    1876.
Louisa  A.  Moncreiff.     Edinburgh:   Maclaren   &
At this season of the year begins tlie annual influx of
books for the delight of those "little people" whose
claims in this line are now-a-days so fully recognised.
" Augustine's Choice" is a story which we believe will
find much acceptance with a large circle of youthful
readers. The scene is laid in Scotland, partly in the
Highlands, partly in the precincts of " fair Dunedin ;"
and we follow the fortunes of a goodly and diversified
assemblage of youths and maidens through the most
momentous years of their young lives. The incidents of
the story are in many respects distinctively Scotch, and
this circumstance will render them to a certain class of
readers specially attractive. But the vein of earnest
Christian conviction which runs through the book is fitted
to reach all alike; nor can it, we trust, fail to impress the
most superficial reader.
We must allow that the impression we receive from
the conversations and cogitations of the children is, that
they speak and think in a manner implying depth of
reasoning beyond their years. Perhajjs, however, this
arises merely from seeing before us, in the clear and
definite language of the authoress, those emotions and
arguments which undoubtedly would assert themselves
in the young minds, if in reality in a less distinct and
concise manner.
We must refer to the little allegory of Nithon and
Idyl as a graceful and suggestive episode.
I
^i"-.
: :«^.
.i,i-i>     **jfi
