i!3P»s
m
t
IT
R
i
!!Sl5l5lSlHl5l5l5l&151fiilBlSi5l5l!5^^
^■^K^^^^^^Vt^
w:.i
.) ♦
■:.'.     ■/ fit ,
THE ATTEMPT
A
LITERARY   MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE
EDINBURGH   ESSAY   SOCIETY.
VOLUME    III.
"AUSPIGIUM   MELIORIS   uEVI."
PRINTED   FOR   THE   EDINBURGH   ESSAY   SOCIETY.
COLSTON & SON, EDINBURGH.
MDCCCLXVII.
[^ 19   NO-'^
CONTENTS.
On Italian Literature ; its Neglect, by Dido,
What the Dying Year said to Winter, by J. A. J. A.,
The Reign of Smoke, by M. L.,
The Erl-King's Daughter: A Scandinavian Ballad, by Veronica,
How we Stormed my Uncle's Citadel, and Cured him of a Bad Habit: by Clarence
The Amateur Concert at Morningside Asylum, by L. O. T. A.,
The Past Year, by Alma,       .....
On Italian Literature; Dante—The Inferno, by Dido,
How we Enjoyed a Musical Teaparty, by Clarence,
Something about Everything (about Women), by Elsie Strivelyne,
The Wayfarers, by J. I. L.,
Thoughts on Pastors, by des Eaux,        ....
Praise, by Kathleen, .....
Friendship, by Minnehaha,     .....
Relationship in Language (No. 1), by Lutea Reseda,
On Italian Literature ; Torquato Tasso—La Gerusalemme Liberata, by Dido,
The Covenant Martyr, by Meigeag Bheag
Tolerance, by Kathleen,
Baby Charms, by Astelbe,
On Novels : " Played Out," by Alma,
" Come Home to Die," by Mas Alta,
Columbus, by Lutea Reseda, .
PAGE
1
4
7
11
12
15
17
25
29
32
36
37
41
44
44
49
53
55
57
58
63
66
11 CONTENTS.
Half-Hours in a Picture Gallery, by Mas Alta,      . . . .
On Italian Literature ; Francesco Petrarca—His Sonnets and Canzoni, by Dido,
The Frog's Story of the Palace of Attemptation, by Frucara,
The Bridal Wreath, by Echo,
An Invitation to Edinburgh, by Lutea Reseda,
A Stroll through the Royal Scottish Academy, by M. E. T.
Forward, by Mas Alta,
Double Acrostic, by K. H. D.,
On Italian Literature ; Lodovico Ariosto.—Vincenzo Monti, by Dido,
Gauffre Rudel: An Old Story, by Elsie Strivelyne,
On B6ok-Marks, by Clarence,
Lines on Domenichino's Sybil, by E. H. S.,
Hubert's Letters; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published.-
Introduction, by Mas Alta,
Perilous Castle, by Meigeag Bheag,
York, by Esther,     ....
The Spirit of Poetry, by Lutea Reseda,
The Life-Boat, by Nan,
Fair Margaret, by Veronica,   .
Answer to Double Acrostic, by K. H. D.,
On Italian Literature ; The Minor Poets of Italy, by Dido,
The Maiden Martyr, by J. B. C,
Hubert's Letters ; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now Fu'st Published, by
Mas Alta,     ....
A Few Remarks on George M'Donald's Poems, by Enai,
On Sentimental People, by Veronica,     .
Croquet Rules,        ....
Thoughts on Women, by M. L.,
Stanzas from the French of Victor Hugo, by Dido,
" Our Little Sister," by Clarence,
" Ben servire e non gradire,' by Frances Anne Kemble,
PAGE
71
73
77
83
85
90
96
96
97
101
104
106
107
111
112
114
117
120
120
121
126
129
135
141
142
145
161
161
162
CONTENTS. Ill
PAGE
Hubert's Letters; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published, by
Mas Alta,     .....•• 163
Brutus, by des Eaux,               .                .                .                ... 169
Lord Kennabie's Vengeance, by Mas Alta, . . ,172
Croquet Extraordinary ; or, How not to do it, by Dido,      .                .                • 175
Stanzas " from a Strange Land," by Echo,             .... 179
Society.—In Three Papers—Paper I., by Kathleen,              .                .                . 180
Stained Windows of Our Souls, by Lutea Reseda,                  .                .                . 183
The Art of Enjoyment, by Alma,                            .                .                •                .184
Hubert's Letters ; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published, by
Mas Alta,     ....... 187
The Third of September, by Lutea Reseda,            .... 193
Swimming as a Branch of Female Education, by Eta,           .                .                . 200
A Remembrance of Loch Katrine, by E. H. S.,    .                .                .                . 203
First Impressions, by Dido,    ...... 204
Notes on Norway, by Alma,   ...... 207
Lines on one lately dead, by Echo,         ..... 212
Hubert's Letters; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published, by
Mas Alta,      ....... 213
Miss Thackeray's Works : The Story of Elizabeth, by Enai,                .                . 217
A Little Learning: Part L—What is it? by M. L.,             .                                .227
To Her Hand, from the German of Julius Sturm, by Dido,                  .                . 222
The Power of Work, by Alma,                ..... 228
Autumn Leaves, by E. H. S.,                  .                .                .                .                . 233
Society: Paper II., by Kathleen,            ..... 234
Hubert's Letters ; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published, by
Mas Alta,     ....... 237
Miss Thackeray's Works : The Village on the Cliff, by Enai,                .                . 241
The Weather, by Dido,           ...... 245
The Singer to his Wife, by O.M.,          ..... 249
A Little Learning; Part II.—Its Dangers, by M. L.,          .                .                . 250
IV CONTENTS.
On Tact, by des Eaux, ....
Romance, from the German of Stollberg, by Meigeag Bheag,
Hubert's Letters ; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published, by
Mas Alta,
Plum, or no Plum, by Clarence,
Double Acrostic,     . . .
Christmas Pleasures, by Alma,
A Little Learning : Part III.—Its Uses, by M. L
The Song of the Christmas Bells, by Nan,
Rings, by Dido,
Society : Paper III., by Kathleen,
Hubert's Letters; b^ing MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now
Mas Alta,
Answer to Double Acrostic, by K. H. D.,
First Published, by
PAGE
254
256
258
264
264
265
269
274
276
279
282
286
THE ATTEMPT
ERRATA.
Page   G9, line 32, for " Guaualiani," nqd " Guanahani."
Page   84, line 22, for " unveiled," read " enveiled."
Page 145, line 20, for " way," read " wrong."
Page 148, line 24,/or " more," read'' not more."
Page 151, line 17,/or " names," read " frames."
Page 156, line 28,/or " even," read " were."
Page 157, line   9, for " bearing," read " learning."
Page 158, line 14,/or " soil," read " evil."
Page 179, line 18,/or " lingering," read "and lingering."
Page 219, line 21,/or "rushing," read "rustling."
. Page 238, line 14, for " its," read " his."
Page 241, Une 33, for » in love," read " lone."
wno read and appreciate translations of the Italian classics, are yet utterly un¬
acquainted with the beauty and grandeur of the original works. Yes, strange
though it must appear to any one familiar with the power, the melody, the wonder¬
fully plastic and expressive character of the Italian language, it is almost entirely
neglected and unnoticed, while French is universally studied, and German very
nearly so. I do not hesitate to admit that a knowledge of French is an essential
element of a really good education, and that the study of German will richly reward
any one who has sufficient perseverance to surmount the difficulties of the declensions,
and to unravel the mysteries of the passive verb ; but no one well acquainted with
• . CONTENTS.
1 V
On Tact, by des Eaux, .••••■
Romance, from the German of Stollberg, by Meigeag Bheag,
Hubert's Letters ; being MSS. Tempore Caroli Primi, now First Published, by
Mas Alta,     .•••■''
PAGE
254
256
258
264
THE ATTEMPT.
ITS   NEGLECT.
I SCARCELY know whether astonishment or indignation is the feeling upper¬
most in my mind when I think of the neglect with which the glorious language and
literature of Italy are treated at the present day. Many well-educated persons are
content to pass their lives in utter ignorance of either the one or the other ; they
have heard the names of Dante and Tasso, and believe that they were " Italian Poets,
who lived a long time ago," but with regard to the works, the dates, the lives of
these great men, their impressions are of the very vaguest description. Others are
not ashamed to confess that their knowledge of Italian goes no further than the
pronunciation, and that their only object in acqiiiring that knowledge is to enable
them to sing Italian songs, the words of which they do not understand ! and others
who read and appreciate translations of the Italian classics, are yet utterly un¬
acquainted with the beauty and grandeur of the original works. Yes, strange
though it must appear to any one familiar with the power, the melody, the wonder¬
fully plastic and expressive character of the Italian language, it is almost entirely
neglected and unnoticed, while French is universally studied, and German very
nearly so. I do not hesitate to admit that a knowledge of French is an essential
element of a really good education, and that the study of German will richly reward
any one who has sufficient perseverance to surmount the difficiilties of the declensions,
and to unravel the mysteries of the passive verb ; but no one well acquainted with
Z THE  ATTEMPT.
the subject will deny that the Italian language and literature are incontestably far
superior to those of France, and very nearly, if not quite, equal to those of Germany.
I think it is impossible to give any reason, save the caprice of fashion, for the uni¬
versal preference accorded to these latter languages. Some people try to account for
their neglect of Italian by pronouncing it to be a soft, effeminate language, incapable
of expressing adequately strong passions, or grand ideas; but this only proves their
utter ignorance of the true character of the language, which adapts itself, with equal
beauty and fitness, to the softest accents of love, and to the most exalted and im¬
passioned utterances of terror and despair.
Let those who consider Italian weak and effeminate hear a native of Italy, or
indeed any one who thoroughly understands and appreciates the language, read those
glorious lines of Tasso, beginning:—
" Chiama gli abitator delle ombre eterne
II ranco suon della Tartarea tromba."
or that sublime canto of the Inferno, in which Dante describes the starvation of
Ugolino and his sons; let them hear these read, having beside them, at the same time,
a word-for-word translation of the passages, and they cannot fail to be convinced of
the amazing force and expression of the Italian tongue. Some other people regard,
or affect to regard, Italian as a branch of knowledge which may be acquired at any
' moment, and without any trouble; they talk of turning their attention to it some
day " when they have nothing better to do," but scorn the idea of making it the
subject of serious study, and express their conviction that they could give a very
cori'ect translation of an Italian work without any study whatever ! With regard to
these talented individuals, I can only say I should like to hear some of them asked,
after three weeks' grinding at the Italian gi-ammar, to construe and parse a dozen
lines from the Divina Commedia, or to give a plain and unvarnished translation of a
page of Manzoni. I suspect the task would, in most cases, be " declined with thanks,"
or, if attem^Jted, would be executed in a manner affording most satisfactory jn-oof
that the study of Italian is not a mere tiifle to amuse an idle hour. On the other
hand, the difficulties presented by this language are neither many nor great; and
those who are not naturally gifted with linguistic talent, but are anxious to make
themselves acquainted with the principal works of one or two foreign languages, will
find a much speedier and more satisfactory reward for their labours by devoting
their spare time to the study of Italian, than by puzzling over the intricacies of the
German language, which exacts from all its students a tolerably large amount of
THE   ATTEMPT. 6
vigorous application and steady perseverance ere they can appreciate, in any proper
degree, the beauties of its literature.
The t^yo great difficulties of Italian are, first in the poetical works, the construc¬
tion, the inversions of which, especially in Dante, closely resemble the Latin; and
secondly in the modern prose works, and in all Italian books where there is much
dialogue and conversation, the rapid and elliptical style, together with the numerous
idiomatic expressions, proverbs and familiar sayings, which characterise Italian
conversation. The first of these difficulties gives no trouble to classical scholars, or
indeed to any one at all acquainted with the Latin construction; for it is impossible
to read Dante without being struck by the great resemblance between his style and
that of Virgil. Dante avowedly chose Virgil for his model, and addresses him, when
he meets him in the beginning of his vision of the lower world, as follows :—
"Tu se' lo mio maestro e' 1 mio autore ;
Tu se' solo colui da cu' io tolsi
Lo bello stile che m' ha fatto onore."
Those who do not understand the Latin inversions will find, that in Italian, as in all
other languages, the time way to acquii-e facility of translation, is to obtain a correct
and thorough knowledge of the grammar, which, with a little practice in parsing,
will speedily enable students of the most moderate abilities, to enjoy the beauties of
the Italian classics, and also to master the peculiar rapidity of style, which I have
mentioned as the second great difficulty of the language. With regard to the idioms
so frequent in Italian dialogue, long practice and a good dictionary are necessary
for their proper comprehension; but I doubt very much whether anything but
residence in Italy, or frequent conversation with Italians, could ever enable a
foreigner to make use of them himself with any degree of facility. However, this
is, after all, a matter of little importance, and for any one well acquainted with the
Italian grammar, and possessed of a tolerably quick ear, a short stay in Italy would
doubtless remove the difficulty.
There is another inducement to the study of Italian which I would hold out,
especially to those who may not happen to be of a literary turn of mind—namely,
that from its innate harmony, it accommodates itself to music with greater ease and
melody than any other language in the world. I hold it degrading to reasonable
creatures to acquire merely a correct pronunciation of the language, and to sing,
parrot-fashion, the beautiful words which are beautiful still, though rendered with¬
out a particle of feeling or expression; for, how can we express what we do not
4 THE   ATTEMPT.
understand 1 Surely those who have taken the trouble to learn the pronunciation of
Italian, might go a little fui-ther, and, without attempting any study of the literature,
might at least learn enough of the language to comjirehend the songs, which will
appear to them doubly charming, when their meaning is no longer a sealed book.
As I hope on some future occasion to have an opportunity of saying something
more particular on the subject of the Italian poets, I shall not at present enlarge
any fxirther upon Italian literature in general. One concluding remark, however, I
feel constrained to make, and that is, that one of the most annoying features of the
existing neglect of Italian literature, is the apparent inability of printers, to put
correctly into type, the very shortest Italian sentence. It is impossible to take up a
musical programme, in which the Italian names of songs and operas occur, without
groaning over some barbarous perversion of sense and sound. Even "Tlie Attemiit"
wliich, as everybody knows, is the best edited and printed magazine of the day, failed
entirely in attempting to print an Italian title which I ventured to prefix, some
numbers back, to a translation from Tasso. The title consisted but of four words
and one was misprinted! the French preposition "de" being substituted for the
Italian " di." I confess that I tremble for the fate of the Italian lines which I have
quoted in the course of this Essay; and I can only hope that an increased interest
in this noble language may soon begin to manifest itself, and that a marked improve¬
ment may be visible in the printing of Italian quotations, which is at present a real
source of anguish to those acquainted with the original passages.
Dido.
tfj{ ^mviQ gntr saib to Minter,
Stretch'd on a bank of wither'd leaves
Lay the old year dying;
Around him swept the wintry wind,
Howling, wailing, sighing.
'Twas in a forest, dark and drear,
Midst sleet and falling snows,
O'er head in mornful strains there creaked
The oak with naked boughs.
THE   ATTEMPT.
The sun, thi-ough a shower of tears,
Gaz'd on the solemn sight;
Then in a snowy veil of cloiids,
¥or grief, withdrew his light.
Old father year, he raised himself.
Life's sands were nearly run.
And to his last surviving child
Thus he in sighs begun :
" Alas !  my child, of four fair buds
But thou art here to-day,
The other three so fair and bright
Have bloom'd and pass'd awaj^
When last year died, he left a child,
Just such a one as thee.
And with his dying breath consign'd
The little one to me.
With tender care I cherish'd him
Through cold and stormy blast.
But weak and sickly soon he grew.
And pass'd away at last.
Then bright and lively Spring was born,
My first, my well lov'd flow'r,
She bloom'd and blossom'd for a while.
But faded in the hour.
My next was Summer, flush'd with light,
Summer sung in story.
My hope was centred in this child ;
In her joyful glory.
THE  ATTEMPT.
Her dewy freshness soon was spent;
Weary she sunk lowly.
Her crown of roses scatter'd round
Bent her lilies holy.
Then came my third, a noble boy.
Golden and crisp his locks,
All ruddy, rich his charm he threw
O'er vale and heath clad rocks.
But oh ! alake for earthly hopes,
Soon they fade and wither.
Amid the shouts of harvest home,
Fled the youth for ever.
And now but thou of all art left,
To tend my dying bed,
Younger and weaker than the rest,
Who lie so cold and dead.
Oh Winter, boy, my blessing take,
Let kindness be your law.
The flower roots cover, snowdrops watch.
In frost, in storm, and thaw.
So when the primrose gazes forth,
And violets quietly bloom.
They may think gently of thy reign
Thy temper'd storm and gloom."
Thus spake the old expiring year,
Then laid him down to die;
The wind wail'd through the forest drear
That wept leaves sere and dry.
J. A. J. A.
i
THE  ATTEMPT. /
^6^  3^W ^f Smoke.
My present habitation is a large manufactory town, whether it be in England
or Scotland, what is its name, or what its aspect, needs not to be told, for all that
might remiud one of these particulars is invisible this morning. I have only a
heavy grey fog, richly laden with smoke, to direct the current of my thoughts, so
if you are afraid that you too may be transported into a land of mist and darkness,
you had better not venture to follow me further. But if you are yourself a town
bii'd, you cannot surely object to linger under the shade of that same smoke, which
forms part of your daily portion, to be breathed or swallowed, as the case may be.
But, I forget. You are in all likelihood an inhabitant of a very different sort of
city. I think I hear you ask indignantly, what has a native of Edinburgh to do
with smoke ? Do I not know the calm freshness of the air on just such a morning
of late Autumn as this ; when a tender haze softens the outlines of street and monu¬
ment, and interweaves rosy sunshine with the mellow gray and brown tints of the
Castle Rock ? Have I never looked on the dreamy stillness of the Forth, or the
majestic rejjose of the mountain lion, couching ever silent, ever watchful over the
city 1 You must confess, however, that you do not expect those bright pictures to
hang sunlit in your gallery always. Days will soon come when they will be
blotted out as completely as though they had never been, blotted out by no white
watery mist, but by dense folds of real city fog, made up of imprisoned smoke. You
will long for air even in your airy terrace or crescent, and the thick bank of cloud
over the old town will be but a faint emblem of the darkness that broods over its
deep narrow closes.
Sometimes Auld Reekie does justify her name, but only sometimes, for her pros¬
perity does not depend on tall chimneys. Some say she is an idle city, and wOl not put
her hands to work ; some say she is a vain city, afraid to spoil her fair face. "We
know she is both busy and earnest, carrying on with head and heart, the noblest of
all labours. Thus she brings her contribution to the national well being. Other
cities have their ways of working, different, but not less honourable. See them, high
red chimneys and factories, with their deafening roar of machinery, are innumerable.
There is much in them that is true, earnest and manly; little that is fair, fresh and
sweet. There is much keen thought, yet little time for reflection. Men must live
for some definite object,  or they would not live there at all.    Some purpose,  some
8 THE   ATTEMPT.
hope must allure them on, surely not in all cases a mere dream of gold and silver.
I suppose it is from want of any such object that, to a visitor fi-om the country, the
town air feels so oppressive, and we wonder how men can live here, where the day is
all gloaming, and the year a perpetual November. Sometimes in the suburbs here,
we get a glimpse of something like light and air, ivhen the wind is in the right direc¬
tion. Then the sky is faintly blue, and we take what passes for a country walk.
We return to find our garments greviously fallen off in purity of appearance, while,
in our absence, flecks of soot have drifted through the open window, and lit on the
white toilet cover, and whatever happens to be there. We might, to be sure, dispense
with white covers, white collars, light gloves, etc. and adopt a uniform smoke tint
instead. But to a. face of that colour, how could we ever reconcile ourselves ; and
yet a peep in the mirror makes it appear we have little choice in the matter. We
have been brought up not only to think of cleanliness as next to godliness, but also
to consider it a virtue, not ditficult, far less impossible of attainment. Now we find
we are all mistaken, and whether we will or not, we mvist wear the badge of this
kingdom of smoke. I am ashamed to dwell much longer on trials like these, keen as
they are to an unsophisticated countiy mind, for it is certain many people do live
through them, and come out of them too, with tempers as serene and bright, and
tastes as refined and pure as ever. Do these happy ones, those that carry their sun¬
shine with them everywhere,—do they live for ten months of the year on images of
loveliness and purity, or do their smiles gtish out from some perennial spring of
home happiness, or of inward joy ?
Thank God that the last named sources send out ever the sweetest and clearest
waters. If it were not so, there could be no brightness for the poor, who, year after
year have no change in their town life, and no peep of the country. How can the
man who toils day after day shut out from gi-een fields and hills, and even from the
brightness of that sky which is said to be free to all—how can he join the psalmist
in some of his most glorious bursts of praise 1 He may perhaps have scented the
new cut grass, or watched the soft falling rain in days long gone by, but it needs the
strong vision of a poet to realize the picture amid the dry, dusty, monotonous round
of such a life as his. I hope I do not speak or think hardly of this life. Truly and
earnestly lived, it may turn out to be the noblest of all, a real though not a romantic
idyll, claiming our deepest sympathy, but far too high for such a thing as pity.
There is another sight in this city which moves me, though it it is not so sad,
by many degrees, as the pale faces of children.    I can see the factory works opposite,
THE   ATTEMPT. 9
with their cluster of chimneys, and the intervening piece of waste land cut up for
building, but not yet built upon, where are two or three large elms, not quite bare,
but utterly colourless. The leaves have not fallen, for the young brown buds are not
ready to push them from their places, and give through all the long winter a bold
assurance that spring must come. They only hang crumpled up like burnt paper,
and as ashy. Poor city trees ! They have struggled up till they are tall, and knotty,
and strong-limbed, yet their whole strength has been expended in the mere effort to
live. They have no redundance of life to spend, as other trees do, in garlands of
leafage innumerable, thrown about in careless grace, as if no colour could be rich
enough, and no mass of shade deep enough, to express the exhuberance of their joy.
They only put forth, spring after spring, the scanty leaves they need to breathe by;
summer after summer those precious leaves are encrusted, choked with smoke in
every pore. They have no autumn, for their winter comes first; by and by, every
particle of life will be pressed out of them, and they will stand, as many others do
now, fit only for firewood—dead—without ever having claimed their birthright of
glory and delight. I cannot help hating the cmel destroyer of so much that is fair;
this smoke. I know there are more deadly enemies still to the healthy bloom of
human beings in a town; and yet I cannot help thinking that smoke is more to
blame for this also than is generally considered. One source of mischief is usually
spoken of as utterly beyond remedy, I mean the foul air generated by the millions of
human beings themselves. Now, breath from the lungs of men and animals has
been poured into the air of our world ever since the creation, in such volumes, that,
were it all floating there still, the earth would be one great poison valley. If I
speak unscientifically, I stand to correction ; but I cannot think that even the vast
expanse of forty miles of atmosphere could have furnished oxygen enough for such a
consumption. Yet, for this supposed danger, nature has a perfect remedy. The
provision, or to speak more truly, the divine arrangement, is, that the vegetable
should form a counteractive power to the animal kingdom. We breathe out carbonic
acid; plants imbibe this very carbon into their substance, leaving us the oxygen,
which is our life. This great interchange of obligation might have gone on in un¬
wearied harmony till now, if we had not ruthlessly broken in upon the natural order.
We have crowded masses of men together in a narrow space where there is no room
for vegetable life. The supply of fresh air must come from far, and it must take a
long sweep through rising clouds of imj^urity before it can reach the heart of the
city, especially, if, as is the case here, there is nothing but black country for miles
I!
10 THE   ATTEMPT.
around, and manufacturing towns stretch their broad wings of smoke to touch each
other.    If, by some brownie's wand, this smoke torrent could be suddenly stopped,
without extinguishing commerce, what a changod town this might be.    I think I
see the blue sky over head, fresh foliage in parks and gardens, where labouring men
may enjoy themselves, and, amid bright summer flowers and fruit, the faces of laugh¬
ing rosy children.    It is a dream, not very likely ever to become a reality, and yet,
why not?    Might  it not be realized in a very simple way, if our manufacturers
would only bind themselves together, to do what the law nominally bids them do,
namely, to consume their own smoke.    All allow that this is possible ; all confess it
is desirable; but, it won't pay, and there is an end of it.    Twenty millions could
our country give to end the wrongs of Jamaica.     We do not expect it to make any
such enormous sacrifice for the toiling thousands of  Glasgow, or Manchester, or
Birmingham.    It is plain that cities must grow blacker, and fouler, and more desert
by far, before any price will be paid to mend them.     We point to a present need,
and ask for the remedy now, but in vain.    Trade would suffer, is the only reply,
and we dare not press our appeal further.    For this monster trade keeps us all in
awe; this strange huge automaton that grinds food or famine, blessings or curses for
millions.    The thunder cloud may be black and terrible, the swollen torrent and
the rushing wind may leave devastation behind them ; yet they play their own part
in the economy of nature, and have their own peculiar charm for us.    Railways may
cut up meadows, and blast mountains, but we are too much indebted to them to
complain.    The breath of the iron furnace may be intolerably hot, yet we never
think of raising a clamour against the back-bone of our commercial activity.    But
smoke has no redeeming feature; it is sheer, unreasonable, hopeless waste.    It is
more completely useless than anything I know, except that most mournful of all, a
wasted human life—a life which lends no fire to the great factory of the world,
which gives no wai-mth to the homes of men,  whose energies, whose influences,
whose talents are recklessly flung away, drifting on, careless and unfettered it may
be, but at the same time fruitless, unloved, unblessed.    But my reverie has become
too gloomy.    There are brighter things than smoke in this town, there are men and
women, many of whose lives are not spent without an aim, and without an active
influence for good.    And so it comes to pass, that, in spite of its dark dingy outside,
this town is to me a very bright spot.    People have more power over our aflections
than places.    Nature and solitude speak much to us, but human nature has a nearer
claim, and human voices tell us more—far more. M. L.
THE   ATTEMPT. - 11
A   SCANDINAVIAN   BALLAD.
Late at night, Herr Oluf rides away
To bid the guests for his wedding-day;
On the sward were dancing the fairy band.
And the Erl-King's daughter reached him her hand.
" Welcome ! Herr Oluf.    WTiither away 1
Stay here and dance with me, I pray."
" I must not dance; I dare not stay ;
To-morrow is my wedding-day."
" Herr Oluf, if thou wilt dance with me,
Two spurs of gold I will give to thee,
And a silken robe of purest white,
Bleach'd by my mother in the moonlight."
" I must not dance ; I dare not stay,
To-morrow is my wedding-day."
" Herr Oluf, if thou wilt dance with me,
A pile of gold I'll give to thee."
" To a pile of gold I would not say nay.
But I must not dance ; I dare not staj^
" Then if thou wilt not dance with me.
Sickness and trouble shall fall on thee."
And she struck a blow upon his heart.
Never before had he felt such smart.
She lifted him on to his horse and cried,
" Now ride away to your lovely bride."
He rode away on his palfrey good,
At his gate, his mother trembling stood,
" Tell me, my son, what has happened to-night,
How is it j'ou look so deadly white 1"
" No wonder that I look deadly white,
I have been in the Erl-King's land to-night."
12 THE   ATTEMPT.
" But tell me, my son, the mother cried,
What I shall say to yoiir bonny bride 1"
" Tell her, I'm hunting the forest round.
That I may try my horse and my hound."
Next morning, almost at break of day.
The bride appeared with her maidens gay.
The banquet was spread in the festal room,
" But where is Herr Oluf, my brave bridegroom 1"
" Herr Oluf is hunting the forest round.
He wishes to try his horse and hound."
She drew back a curtain that hung outspread.
There lay Herr Oluf, and he was dead !
Veronica.
AND CURED HIM OF A BAD HABIT !
Few houses' in A—shire were more pleasant to visit than my uncle Ralph's.
With its sunny morning room, which would have been small, but for the large oriel
window in which we generally wiled away the forenoon. Its well-appointed bil¬
liard-room, where we spent many a wet afternoon, and not least of all, the old oak
panelled library, with its deep recesses, and well-filled shelves. Here, when we were
children,we had many a game of hide-and-seek; but, as we grew older, we learned to
reverence the old tomes, and one of our greatest pleasiires was to mount the ladder,
and, searching among the higher shelves, bear down with triiimph any book of which
the pictures betokened perilous adventures, or hairbreath escapes.
But, if the interior of the house shewed signs of a refined taste and a bounteous
purse, outside these tokens were no less plainly visible. Its spacious pleasure
grounds, and richly-stocked gardens, we only considered of secondary importance to
the level and extensive croquet ground, which was the pride and delight of our
hearts.
THE   ATTEMPT. 13
And the OAVTier of this beautiful place was jovial, honest, hospitable Squire
Ralph. For by this name he was known and called by every man, woman, and child
for miles around. "We even sometimes alleged that the very dogs and hoi'ses tried
to make a sound like his name. At his approach, the dogs barked and bounded, and
by running round him, mumbling at his trousers, and thiiisting themselves between
his legs, did all they could to impede his progress. The horses pawed the ground,
whinneyed, shook their pretty manes, and in every artful way tried to attract his
attention. The squire had a pleasant word and a kindly glance for every man and
animal, on the place, but his kindest smiles and most endearing expressions were
reserved for his bright-eyed daughter Lilly, through whose eyes alone he saw day¬
light.
Only less beloved than the Squire was his wife. She was one of those people
to whom the very sun seemed partial, and the gloomier the day, her face seemed the
brighter. A little golden-hau-ed boy laughingly called her Aunt Sunnie, and the
name clung to her ever afterwards.
Almost every one has some cause of irritation, however small; and insignificant
though it may appear, my uncle's custom of reading the daily paper during breakfast
was every morning a source of annoyance to my aunt. She, like many old ladies,
was a little bit of a doctor, and professed to disapprove of the habit on sanitary
principles. She said she considered reading during meals interfered with digestion ;
but I and my cousins, some of whom were generally to be found in my uncle's hos¬
pitable mansion, insisted that my aunt looked upon a perusal of the papers as want¬
ing in respect and attention to herself and the hissing urn over which she presided.
One morning we were assembled in the oriel window, arranging the sides of a
croquet match, when Aunt Sunnie entered the room, looking rather disturbed.
" Auntie dear ! " cried my lively cousin Hetty, " there is but one cloud to be seen this
morning, and that is on your face, what can have caused anything so unusual?"
" Well Hetty, the older I grow, the more I dislike, for various reasons, this habit of
your uncle's, of reading during breakfast; I have just been wondering if the post¬
man's appearance could not be delayed for half an hour. Perhaps he might be in¬
duced to come by the high, instead of the low road, and thus he would not arrive
till after breakfast."
" Oh, aunt Sunnie, I am afraid that would not do. We should be prosecuted for
interfering with her Majesty's mail, and besides," added Hetty, looking slyly round,
" some other people would be disappointed as well as uncle, but I have an idea.
14
THE   ATTEMPT.
Suppose we try to take uncle's citadel by stratagem !    What do you all say ■?    Will
you all help?"
" Agreed !" and " What fun ! " cried a chorus of voices.
Thereupon, we sat down to mature our plans, and finally arranged that every
one at breakfast should be supplied with a newspaper.
The following morning, when uncle Ralph appeared, instead of being met by
the usual merry " Good mornings ! " a mumbled sound of greeting was all that was
heard from behind the circle of open newspapers. He appeared mystified at the
aspect of affairs, but sat down saying nothing.
Aunt Sunnie seemed bewildered, and uncertain whether to laugh or cry, but
nobly acted her part, keeping her eyes fixed upon the leading article, turned upside
down.
Now, this new turn of affairs did not at all suit my uncle, as he liked us to share
his feelings of joy or soitow as to the ups and downs of the money market; and to
share in his amusement, at the idea of its being interesting to the inhabitants of
Great Britain in general, to know that one of the Royal Princes walked, another
rode, and another did something of equal national importance.
Uncle Ralph continued reading the paper diligently during the consumption of
one cup of tea, but when he asked for a second, he threw the paper to one side,
clearly shewing that the assault had begun to take effect. The hopes of the besieging
party were fast rising, and Aunt Sunnie was looking radiant.
After breakfast, we held a council of war, and considered the aspect of affairs so
hopeful, that Hetty, as commander-in-chief, advised the continuance of the siege.
This we determined to do, and next morning we commenced the attack by thi'owing
a shower of grape and cannister into the enemy's stronghold.
Hetty opened fire by reading aloud the latest telegi'ams, and almost simultane¬
ously every piece of news of any importance was proclaimed, amid such a hubbub as
rendered comprehension impossible.
My poor uncle could stand this no longer, but waving his handkerchief above
his head as a token of capitulation, doubled iip his paper, and laughingly threw it at
Hetty, who passed it on to Aunt Sunnie. We then all joined in the feu de joie of
laughter which succeeded the surrender; and now, whenever we see uncle Ralph
cast a longing glance towards the newspaper, we remind him of our stratagem, which
never fails to have the proper effect on our good-natured uncle.
Clarekce.
THE  ATTEMPT. 15
In giving a short account of this admirable concert, we feel it to be our pleas¬
ing duty, in the first place, to congratulate the members of this Society on the
success which attended their first efforts. The applause with which every piece was
received, clearly shewed how the audience appreciated the philanthropic endeavours
of the Society for their benefit.
The programme announced that the concert was to commence precisely at
seven o'clock, and by that hour the ball-room of the Asylum was completely filled.
Punctuality did not seem to be impressed on the artistes, for quarter of an hour
passed without any signs of their appearance, and they in turn were anxiously
awaiting the arrival of their conductor, each one asking the other,  " Where could
Mr be 1"    " What kept him so late 1"    " What was to be done ? "    Fruitless
questions, for who could answer them 1 After a little more suspense, it was deemed
advisable to proceed, and in a few minutes the Society made its first appearance in
public.
The concert opened with a duet for piano and coi-net, which, though admirably
played, we think was misplaced; it should have followed the " Gipsy Chorus," the
next in order, which, being lively and spirited, would have made a better beginning.
The cornet accompaniment was better than we expected it to have been. We must
confess we were much pleased with it. It comprised selections from " The Dawn of
Love " waltzes, and " Mabel," and went well from beginning to end. The performers
seemed satisfied with themselves, which perhaps was as well. To have been nervous
would have marred the effect of the piece. " Du Schones Fischermadchen" was
sweetly rendered by a tenor, whose ability is well known. The gem of the first
part was the exquisite air from Haydn's " Creation," " With verdure clad." The
simplicity with which it was given, the charming sweetness of the tones as they rose
and fell, produced an effect seldom to be found even in public singers, for we have
heard many on the stage, whose voices were like broken glass, and yet they think
themselves perfection.    Would that we oftener heard such singing as Miss 's, and
were less grieved by the pieces of broken glass ! Rossini's magnificent chorus, " Dal
tuo Stellato," deserves high praise. It was sung as such music ought to be, con amove.
When such fine music as this is accessible to all, the wonder is that so much trash
16 THE   ATTEMPT.
still continues to be sung. Songs of the calibre of " Janet's Choice," " Maggie's
Secret," and others of a like standard, greet us constantly at musical parties, but we
fear, if we only enquired, we should iind there were those who preferred the " Christy
Minstrel" choruses to many of Handel's or Mendelssohn's. There are those indeed
who do not even know who Haudel is, and tell us they prefer the ivorks of
Don Giovanni! We can only pity their ignorance. The programme announced
the " Stirrup Cup" as the next, for which, however, was substituted " When
sorrow sleepeth, wake it not." A lovely song—one that haunts one, and lingers in one's
memory like a beautiful dream, a song that one could hear again and again, and each
time like it better, for the words are so true and beautiful, and the music not less so.
It was well sung by a bass, who possesses a fine voice, and evidently great musical
talent, though we believe he does not know one note from another, either on the
score or the piano, so that all the more credit is due to him for the way in which it
was sung. The first part closed with a chorus, " The Blue Bells," which created
no small stir among the audience. The words, we think, might be better ; the singers
seemed to ask each other over and over again, " Oh ! where, and oh where, does
your Highland laddie dwell 1" Finally, they asked, " siip2)ose and suppose that your
Highland lad should die."    Not a pleasant siipposition for any lover's mind.
The second part commenced with a glee of Horsley's, " See the Chariot at hand ;"
of this we need not say much, except that the alti were inclined to throw too much
pathos into the " wool of the beaver," in other respects there was nothing parti¬
cular about it. Handel's charming aria next followed, "Angels ever bright and
fair." Can any thing be more beautiful than the appeal, "Take, oh! take me to your
care 1" The words are nothing without the music, and as we cannot adequately
convey the idea here, we advise all who are not acquainted -wdth it, to lose no time
about it.    It will fully repay the trouble.
We now come to Beethoven's glorious " Adelaida," sung by the tenor to whom
we have already alluded. It was indeed a pleasure to hear it rendered as was our
privilege on this occasion. The duet for tenor and bass, " Liberi Siete," went well,
though in some parts a little imsteady. In the trio, " Ye shepherds tell me," we
could not help being amused by the touching tones of the second tenor, who would
ask us if we hadn't " Seen bis love, with a rose in her hair," and this not once in a
way, but for the space of several bars, till we felt inclined to say, that as almost
every young lady wears a " Rose in her hair," who could single out his particular
love 1    " Kathleen Mavourneen " was the only piece which elicited an encore,—and
THE   ATTEMPT. 17
richly it deserved it. The other pieces we can only slightly mention, such as " The
Fisher Maiden's Prayer," "Sir Bertram's Dirge," "L' Usato Ardir," &c., which
evidently were not known to the generality of the audience, who consequently did
not sufficiently appreciate them. The National Anthem concluded the concert,
during which much enthusiasm was displayed, waving of caps and handkerchiefs,
shewing how thoroughly it was understood and enjoyed. And so ended this
delightful entertainment.
The people retired in a most orderly manner. Some of the criticisms over¬
heard were most amusing; one man was heard to say to his neighbour, during a
song, " That was surely the song the auld sou died o'." While another wisely sug¬
gested, " He hoped they wadna hear that again." Tastes differ, and it is well for the
world they do. One person asked his companion, " who the dark-haired female was,
for she had very good features 1" While, in reality, the features alluded to, were not
worth mentioning.
We have already congi'atiilated the Society on the success of its concert. We
feel that we must, before closing, in the name of the audience, thank the kind phy¬
sician and friend of the people for the great pleasure he afforded all, in so generously
providing this means of amusement. Let us hope that, this being the first, it may
not be the last of the kind to take place; but that it may prosper in unity and
peace.
May every success attend so deserving an object, as helping to alleviate, by a
little recreation, the monotony of the lives of our suffering brothers and sisters.
L. O. T. A.
^lt fast §m.
The year 1866, so remarkable in the history of the world, ought not to be
allowed to sink into the past, without some record in our Magazine of events both
foreign and domestic. Strange convulsions have taken place in Europe, and the
powers of the nations have been severely tested. The States of Germany have, after
a short and terrible struggle, awakened to find they have changed masters, and
Prussia has at once fixed her place in the foremost rank of European Powers, if in¬
deed she be not at the very head.    A series of bold strokes has achieved this great
C
18 THE   ATTEMPT.
result, and yet it is now clearly seen that these measures were not brilliant random
shots, but had been long and carefully calculated.    All this is acknowledged by
Bismarck, and whatever our opinion of the man may be, we cannot refuse our meed
of admiration to the genius that conceived and carried into execution such well-laid
plans.    Poor Austria has received a heavy blow, and will take some time to rally
from the effects of it; bvit there is one lesson we hope she will learn from her dis¬
comfiture, viz., the extreme folly of appointing old worn-out generals to conduct her
campaigns.    The experience of ages has proved this; many a battle has been lost by
the sluggishness and incapacity of its leaders ; the fire of youth has died out, and the
cool judgment of middle age has given place to the hesitation and bewilderment,
often experienced by the old when called on by circumstances to exert themselves to
an unusual degree.    In the south, Venice has thrown off her shackles, and eagerly
proclaimed Victor Emanviel King.    She will take some time to understand her new
position, and to learn to spread out her wings, so long confined in iron bands ; but the
blessings of liberty will make themselves apparent year by year, till the land of
25oetry and song shall forget that the dark shadow of the Inqiiisition ever rested on it.
Much yet remains to be done, and the Italians need hardly expect a golden age, but
true patriotism ought to triiimph over feelings of petty inconvenience, engendered by
the changes entailed by the new order of things, and only the general prosperity be
regarded.    Commerce will, of course, be much extended, at least, this certainly is the
expectation, though whether founded on sufficient gi'ounds is not clearly seen at
present.    Byron, in his 4th canto of Childe Harold, traces the glory and decay of
Venice in sad, yet powerful, language; and surely he must have pierced through the
veil of the future with a prophetic eye when he penned the following lines :—
" Yet, Italy ! through every other land
Thy wrongs should ring, and shall from side to side ;
Mother of Arts ! as once of Arms ; thy hand
Was then our guardian, and is still our guide ;
Parent of our religion ! whom the wide
Nations have knelt to for the keys of Heaven !
Europe, repentant of her parricide,
Shall yet redeem thee, and all backward driven,
Roll the barbarian tide, and sue to be forgiven."
Poor ill-used Denmark has seciired for herself a powerful ally, through the
marriage of the Princess Dagmar to the Czarowitch of Russia.    As a political move
I
THE   ATTEMPT. 19
it is excellent, and will probably protect Scandinavia from being swallowed up by
any of her powerful neighbours, who glare hungrily upon her, like wolves round
a lamb. Marriages with England and Pussia are the best securities against such a
catastrophe, though we regret to say, the Northerns now rate our protecting agency
very low, since we sat by so tamely, and allowed Schleswig and Holstein to be
annexed by their all devouring neighbour, Prussia. We cannot help a sigh of com¬
passion for the young Princess herself, whose romance, so bright and hopeful, was so
soon and rudely broken by the death of her betrothed. Prmces must pay the penalty
of their station, and the heart must become a secondary consideration, so we must
hope the fail* young bride has become oblivious of the past, or else has nobly obeyed
the earnestly expressed and unselfish wish of her dying lover, the late Czarowitch,
that she should be the bride of his brother. The mairiage of our own. Princess
Helena caused much astonishment, and all sorts of rumours about Prince Christian
were raised; but, as usual, they seemed much exaggerated, and the royal pair have
as much chance of happiness as falls to the lot of most people. They will have
their home in this country, which will be a consolation to the Queen, who is gradually
parting with her family, and will be glad to have one daughter permanently near
her.
Although we inhabitants of Auld Peekie are flattered by the Duke of Edinburgh
receiving his title from our city, we still feel a little unwilling to loose the familiar
ajjpellation of Prince Alfred, and it will take some time before we are thoroughly
reconciled to the change. His Royal Highness is a great favourite amongst us, and
wins golden opinions at each visit. We shall watch his progress with all the more
mterest that his name is now so identified with us, and a warm welcome awaits him
as often as he puts foot in the Scottish capital.
A marvellous undertaking has been successfully accomplished during the past
year, viz.—the laying of the Atlantic Telegraph. The time, talents, and money ex¬
pended on this have been great, and at last, after much disajipointment and a vast
outlay, the object is attaiued. It is hardly possible for us as yet to estimate all the
benefits that will accrue, though to a great extent we can do so, but time will shew
the many advantages of our new position, and the enormous impetus that will be
given to our commercial relations with America. In political affairs, of course, such
speedy information as can now be furnished is of the highest imjjortance, and we can
but sigh over the recollection of the immense boon the telegraph would have been
during the late war.      In private life, also,  deep satisfaction must be experienced
20 THE   ATTEMPT.
from the sensation of being able to hear of friends and relatives within so short a
time ; the sickening suspense in a period of anxiety, caused by a long delay, is now
no longer necessary, and words of comfort, joy, or sorrow, can flash from one con¬
tinent to another with the speed of thought. What a -marvellous invention must
this be which has achieved such results, which annUiilates time and distance, and
makes an iron rope, at the botton of the ocean, the connecting link between the old
and new worlds ! All honour to those who have conceived and carried out this
stupendous work.
Mr Bright and the Hyde Park riots seem to be rousing up the country to assert
its independence to a most uncomfortable degree. Here, in Edinburgh, the fever has
spread rapidly, and the result was a wonderful demonstration lately, through our
streets, of 30,000 excited jjersons, belonging to the principal trades. As a spectacle
it really was very fine; great care, expense, and ingenuity having been expended on
the construction of the various devices, especially on those of the upholsterers and
glassmakers. Furious denunciations were heaped upon Messrs Lowe, Black, and
Moncreiff, whilst John Bright was exalted to the skies ; all this effected by the aid
of gay flags and other decorations. We wonder if Mr Bright would have been much
gratified by the appearance of some of his ardent admii-ers, who, even as early as
eleven o'clock, were reeling along the streets, scarce able to get on with the aid of
their comrades, whilst at night, the miserable scenes of drunkenness that abounded
suffffested urgent need of reform amongst ourselves. Till the lower classes shew
themselves better fitted by their conduct to judge of the requisites for taking a share
in the government, we must be very chary of admitting them to such privileges.
The fact is, they are abusing theu- best friends, men who would do and have done
far more for their real benefit than these so called ujjholders of their rights, but
who reap the reward too often bestowed on trae benefactors. No city perhaps calls
for reform in such an urgent manner as our own in certain ways. In point of
wretchedness, poverty, vice and uncleanliness it has few equals. The disclosures
now being made of the state of the Old Town, confirm the truth of this statement,
and the only marvel is, that the lecent outbreak of cholera has not committed fear-
fid ravages amongst these dens of misery and ciime, where the thin roofs are in¬
sufficient to shelter the inhabitants from the elements, whilst the broken-down doors
and rickety walls conduce neither to comfort nor privacy. In spite of all this, our
city has been most mercifully dealt with, the number of victims to this fell disease
being comparatively  few.     When  we think of the  frightful  destruction amongst
THE   ATTEMPT. 21
small villages in Fife and other places, by which whole families have been swept
away, and entire hamlets have become a scene of universal mourning, we may indeed
give thanks for our merciful preservation. The good old proverb, that " Cleanliness
is next to godliness," has been amply proved within these few months, and a bitter
lesson taught on the fact of our health being, to a great extent, dependent on our
efforts to attend to its laws. Whether this lesson will be an abiding one, it is diffi¬
cult to say ; we are too apt to resemble the Egyptians of old, who forgot the plagues
with which they had been visited as soon as they were removed from them, or the
Irish peasants, whose only answer to earnest appeals for gi-eater cleanliness is, " Sure
it was always so."
To turn to what ought to be a pleasanter theme, the intellectual improvements
and amusements of the city, we find at the outset a fruitful source of discontent in
the unfortunate chair of music. It gives us no small delight to find that Mr Oakley
is coming forward at last, and means to make the chair a reality. We began to fear
we should find him aj" will o' the wisp " after all that had been said, and after our
expectations had been raised, and hopes were entertained that at last the wishes of
the founder were to be carried into execution. It is no wonder that a fierce outcry
was heard, and the lectures by the professor or a substitute loudly demanded.
Every one is on the qui vive, and if the result be satisfactory, the triumph achieved
will be all the greater from the previous discontent, and the astonishment and dis¬
satisfaction caused to many by the appointment. Edinburgh was, in former years,
noted as a centre of music, and after a period of declension, when taste seemed to
have fallen to a low ebb, the Christy Minstrels were most in vogue, and music of a
higher class was listened to with yawns, or performed to empty benches. An im¬
proved state of things is beginning to appeal-. This is shewn, not only by the frequent
concei-ts of sacred and secular pieces, but by the formation of private societies, where
the art is studied, and the ear accustomed to the finest harmonies and grandest con¬
ceptions of the old masters. With all this, the students are naturally anxious to
keep pace with the tide of musical feeling which is moving us so powerfully, and
as the lectures will be one great means of carrying this into effect, their delivery is
most heartily welcomed.
A source of inexhaustible delight and instruction has been caused by the open¬
ing of the Industrial Museum by the Duke of Edinburgh in the Spring. Two or
three evening exhibitions have given the inhabitants opportunities of seeing the
building and its contents to the greatest advantage, and in the interested earnest
22 THE  ATTEMPT.
countenances of the crowds that flocked together on these occasions, the success of
this great undertaking was abundantly evident. Here we see gathered together,
under one roof, the bones and fossil remains of animals long since extinct, as well as
those of a more recent time ; minerals and treasures of the earth from every clime ;
curiosities of all sorts from the countries least known to our own j bii'ds of every hue
and shape under heaven; and, to sum up all, an inexhaustible mine of study for enter¬
prising students in every department of science and art. Our thanks are due to Pro¬
fessor A.rcher for his unwearied exertions in arranging and classifying the countless
specimens that have passed through his hands.
The first year of the New Theatre or Theatre Royal has been a decided success,
indeed, as long as Mr and Mrs Wyndham can bring forward such a succession of
stars as they have already done, no fears need be entertained. Talbot, Toole, Miss
Siddons and Mr Sothern are names that speak for themselves, and full houses have
been the result of their engagement. Esjjecially must we make mention of Miss
Siddons who has taken all our hearts by storm. Such elegance, vivacity, and deli¬
cate appreciation of her parts has seldom been seen ; such winning grace and force of
expression. Whatever character she enacts, is done to the life; indeed, it is her ex¬
treme " naturalness," so to speak, that wins its way, and forces admiration from us.
Old and young alike find her power to charm, men and women equally acknowledge
it, whether in her wisdom as Portia, her playfulness as Rosalind, or her tender soft¬
ness as Juliet. The mantle of her great ancestress' power has descended on her, as
well as the glory of her beauty, which she inherits to a great degree, though she
wants the majestic figure of Mrs Siddons to give efiect to her grandest conceptions.
" Lord Dundreary " is an old favourite here, and shews himself a true actor by win¬
ning laurels in everything he undertakes, however widely the parts may differ. He
is a true gentleman ; there is no striving for effecb, no ranting or tremendous action ;
when passion is required, it comes naturally, and is often better conveyed by the
modulations of the voice and simplest gestures, than by the overstrained acting
which is too general. Sothern's reputation as " Lord Dundreary " is too world-re¬
nowned to need a word of comment, but we have great pleasure in giving our testimony
to his perfect success in the new lines he has entered ujwn. Altogether, the pro¬
spects of the Theatre are very fair, and we trust Mr and Mrs Wyndham may at last
reap the benefit of their strenuous exertions.
The additions to literature for the year have been varied and extensive as usual.
In the clerical world, " Ecce Homo " has created no small stir, and opinions seem to
THE   ATTEMPT. 23
differ widely as to the soundness of its views. That it is a clever and extraordinary
book, is undoubted; it opens up new views and ideas, and compares the teaching of
Christ with that of the philosopher Socrates, as regards their effect on mankind in
general. The difference is shewn between the effect produced on the head and on
the heart; Socrates strove to convince the understanding, Christ to win the affection.
The result is, that whilst the former is a name, the latter has become a living
principle ; the one commands cold respect, the other fervent personal devotion.
This is well elucidated, but in some of the chapters there is a striving after origin¬
ality, that makes us admire the ingenuity of the idea more than the attempt to come
at the strict ti-uth. Amongst travels, probably the most interesting is Baker's
Discovery of one of the sources of the Nile. It is a chronicle of hardships and
difficulties almost incredible, and what makes the wonder the greater, is, that these
wanderings were shared by a woman, Mrs Baker having accompanied her husband
wherever he went, and shown energy and devotion in the scheme quite equal to
his own. Constantly oppressed by fever and ague, without quinine as an antidote,
often ch-enched to the skin, and snatching uneasy sleep in this condition, harassed
by the natives, and even by the Turks who sometimes were of theii* party, obliged by
the death of all their horses to undertake long marches, and often without sufficient
food, they struggled on, with the one glorious end before them, that of reaching the
great Albert N'yanza Lake, the second great source of the Nile. The annoyances
they met with from the rapacity of the native chiefs, and especially the powerful
King Kamrasi, were excessive ; gratitude and love ai-e unknown qualities amongst
these savages, and cruelty and greed their strongest passions. The state of these
unfortunate creatures suggests the darkest pictures to our minds, for religion can
take no hold over them, they seem incapable of understanding its simplest elements,
unless they could be made to think some present reward would be theirs by adopting
a belief, the idea of suffering in the cause seems to them simply ludicrous. We
advise all our readers who have not yet seen this work to get it as soon as they
can ; it cannot fail to interest, as giving a simple, ixnvarnished account of a noble
undertaking, amply rewarded by the triumj^hant discovery of the large lake, which,
together with the great Victoria, form the sources of that magnificent river, the Nile,
renowned from the earliest ages, whose origin has, till now, been a hidden mystery.
We shall only notice one other book at this time, a new work, supposed to be from
the pen of Mrs Oliphant, " Miss Marjoribanks." As usual, there are parties in favor
of,  and parties against it, but for our own part we can safely say, that we have
24 THE   ATTEMPT.
seldom read a more amusing novel. The delightful self-sufficiency of the heroine,
and the calm way in which she settles her own and other people's affairs, is charming.
One relishes the position so thoroughly; one can see her ousting her father, the doctor,
from his seat at the head of the breakfast table, and quietly tailing the reins of
government out of the cook's hands, whose sole standing point is an unlimited
supply of " gravy beef." After arranging domestic affairs according to her mind,
and refurnishing the drawing-room with a due regard to her complexion, she next
proceeds to the management of her neighbours, and the establishing of social reimions,
or as she calls them, " evenings," where the ladies are advised to appear in " white
frocks high." The young lady's love affairs are not very prosperous, but she always
manages to conceal her disappointments very well, and generally makes the consoling
reflection, " If I had been thinking of that, I need never have come home." The
object of her life is " to be a comfort to dear Papa," and for an account of her way
of effecting this great end, as well as the final denouement, we refer our readers
to the pages of this very amusing book.
In concluding this notice of the events of the year, we have a word to say re¬
garding the prospects of this Magazine. It has now completed its second year, and
we trust is gaining ground. Amidst many difficulties it has stiixggled on, and has
kept its position. The third year opens fairly, and if some new elements to be
introduced into the working of it are as successful as is anticipated, we may
confidently look for higher results. The pleasure and advantage derived by the
members themselves is imdoubted, as the study and labour necessaiy in the
production of their articles is of immense service to them ; and if they can com¬
municate but a small portion of this pleasure to their indulgent readers, they will feel
themselves amply repaid for their exertions. Alma.
THE ATTEMPT. 25
DANTE. THE INFEENO.
It is with reverent admii-ation that I write the name of Dante, the king of
Italian poets—of modern poets, I had almost said; for none but Shakspeare and
Milton can bear comparison with the wondrous Florentine, whose name would lend
undying gloiy to Italian literature, even though he were its sole representative. His
pages now glow with the lurid fires of Inferno, now reflect the softened radiance shed
over the mystic mount of Purgatorio, and now shine with all the lustre of the starry
worlds, where lay the Paradiso of Dante's imagination. Passionate love, and hate as
passionate, calm philosophical reflections, and bitter words of scorn, appear by tvirns
in his writings; but the stamp of genius is impressed on every page, on every line of
his immortal works.
As it is my intention, in these Essays, to speak rather of Italian literature
than of the men by whom that literature was created, I shall mention only a very
few facts with regard to Dante's personal history. He was a Florentine by birth
and education ; he svas born in 1265 ; he took a very prominent part in the political
affairs of his time, and was treated with great severity and signal ingratitude by his
fellow-citizens; he died in exile at Ravenna, in 1321, being at that time under the
protection of Guido da Polenta, father of the beautiftil Francesca da Rimini, whose
name Dante has immortalized. Dante's love for Beatrice Portinari was the ruling
passion of his life. Beginning when he was a child of nine years old, it grew with
his growth, and strengthened with his strength, until it pervaded every faculty of his
being, and left its trace upon every one of his works. Persuaded by his parents to
marry Gemma de Donati, a year after Beatrice's death, his married life in no way
tended to efface from his mind the memory of his lost love; for we are told by all
historians that Gemma proved a perfect Xantippe, and embittered the poet's life by
her ungovernable temper. His only daughter, who entered a cloister of Ravenna
upon her father's death, received the name of Beatrice—a touching proof of Dante's
constant remembrance of the saintly maiden whose name is inseparably associated
with his own.
To the misfortunes of Dante, and the base ingratitude of his fellow-citizens, we
owe, in a great measure, the poet's masterpiece—the Divina Commedia. Had the
world smiled on his forttines—had he lived in prosperity and died in peace at Flo¬
rence—he would still have been a great poet, for no circumstances could have sup-
26 THE   ATTEMPT.
pressed genius such as his, but he would have been merely the lover of Beatrice^
merely the refined and elegant scholar and poet—and not the passionate, exalted,
sublime bard of Heaven and Hell. The pages of the Divina Commedia shew us
Dante's genius purified and intensified by the fires of afiiiction in which it was tried;
they betray, not only the subtle imaginings and poetic ideas of his astute and culti¬
vated Italian mind, bvit the fierce convulsive throbbings of his wounded, crushed,
passionate Italian heart. Let no one wonder at the fierceness of his invectives, the bit¬
terness of the reproaches hurled at his unworthy persecutors. Think of the poet, half
broken-hearted by the death of Beatrice, his home made miserable by the woman
whose duty it was to lighten his griefs and dispel his cares—himself slandered, de¬
famed, sentenced to death by fire, and driven from his native city by the ungrateful
Florentines—closing his weary exile of eighteen years in a strange city, far from the
banks of his beloved Arno, and wonder rather at the power and grandeur of the
intellect which, instead of sinking beneath these accumulated strokes, rose sublime
above them all. How little did the small-minded and spiteful rulers of Florence
imagine that the only enduring record of their names would be found by posterity in
the writings of the insulted and exiled Dante ! and that a place in his Inferno would
lend to them an immortality which they could never have obtained from the highest
honours which Florence could bestow upon her statesmen and her warriors !
The Divina Commedia is divided into three pai'ts—Inferno, Purgatorio, and
Paradiso, the first of which is generally acknowledged to excel in sublimity and
power, the second in poetic beauty and elegance of style, and the third in close and
subtle reasoning on various philosophical and metaphysical subjects. Dante, as I have
already mentioned, chose Virgil for his model in style, and his authority on all dis¬
puted points in classical lore; and as Virgil tells us how ^neas descended to the
realms of Pluto, accompanied by the Cumsen Sibyl, so Dante ventures within the
gates of Inferno, under the guidance of Virgil himself Dante is at first terrified by
the awful words inscribed above the gloomy portal; but he is reassured by Virgil,
and, passing onwards, they reach the shores of Acheron, and are ferried across by
Charon. The celebrated inscription above the gate is so fine a specimen of the power
and the harmony of the Italian language,  that I may be excused for quoting it
in full:—
Per me si va nella citta dolente ;
Per me si va nell' eterno dolore ;
Per me si va tra la perduta gente.
Giustizia mosse '1 mio alto Fattore ;
Fecemi la divina Potestate,
THE  ATTEMPT. 27
La somma Sapienza, e'l primo Aniore.
Dinanzi a me non fur 'cose create,
Se non eterne, ed io eterno duro ;
Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch' entrate.
Arrived on the further side of Acheron, the poet finds himself in the first circle
of Inferno, set apart for the souls of those who, though free from crime, were igno¬
rant of the Christian religion; also those who die unbaptised. In this circle stands
a palace, where dwell the most illustrious heathen poets, philosophers, and warriors,
Virgil, of course, among the rest; and as he advances with Dante, his return is hailed
by a great voice commanding the others to do him honour. Here Dante sees and
converses with Homer, Horace, Ovid, Socrates, Plato, Lucretia, Cornelia, and many
others, who live here " without torment, but without hope."
Dante is warned by Virgil not to delay, and they descend together into the
second circle, " luogo d'ogni luce muto," where shrieks, lamentations, blasphemies
resound eternally through the darkness. The whole of the fifth canto, where this
circle is described, is in the highest degree sublime and affecting; the despair and
anguish depicted in the first part of the canto, and, in the last, the touching
pathos of Dante's interview with Francesca da Rimini and her lover must produce
the deepest impression of terror and pity on the mind of every reader. And, indeed,
the thoiight of Francesca and Paolo, so young, so beautiful, so unfortunate in life and
in death, carried hither and thither by the tempests of Inferno, now dashed headlong
against the rocks, now whirled aloft through the murky air, each doomed eternally
to behold the anguish of the other, without a hope of rescue or relief, is in itself
pathetic enough to soften the hardest heart, even without the mournful and despair¬
ing words in which Francesca answers Dante, or the bitter weeping with which Paolo
interrupts her tale.
Leaving these unfortunates, the poets continue their journey through ever-
changing scenes of torment and despair, frequently stopping to converse with the
spirits of those whom Dante had known in the upper world, or of the illustrious
ancients whose crimes yet made them unworthy to occupy a place among the
virtuous men and women of the first circle. Prominent among these vexed spirits
are Diomedes and Ulysses, who are tormented within the same fii-e ; while the most
remarkable of Dante's contemporaries is the shade of the haughty and disdainful
Farinata Uberti, whose interview with the poet reveals, in the most striking manner,
both Farinata's fierce and indomitable character, and the bitter feelings of Dante
towards his Florentine persecutors.    I may mention, as a fact likely to interest
28 THE   ATTEMPT.
Scotch readers, that in the place set apart for the punishment of magicians, Dante
encounters the wizard, Michael Scott. In the lowest circle of Inferno, the poets find
the Conte TJgolino, who was starved to death, with his sons, by the Archbishop
Ruggieri. Ugolino's narrative, given in the thirty-third canto of Inferno, is gene¬
rally considered Dante's masterpiece. I, for myself, must confess that, in spite of
the matchless force and eloquence of the language, and the pathos of Ugolino's heart¬
rending tale, the impression produced on my mind upon first reading this canto was
one of horror so profound that the remembrance of it haunted me, waking and
sleeping, for days afterwards ; and it was long ere I could summon courage to read it
over a second time, and form a more coiTect estimate of its wonderful power and
beauty. The terrible scene in the dungeon, as XJgolino sees his sons expire one by
one amidst the slow tortures of starvation, and hears them utter the cry wrung from
them, by their agony, " Padre mio, che non m'ajuti?" his own misery during the two
awful days for which he survived his sons; and his implacable thirst for revenge,
unquenched by the eternal ice with which he is surrounded in Inferno, and leading
him tore2>eat his hoiTible tale to Dante, although the recital causes him unutterable
woe, " that it may bring forth infimy to the traitor" Ruggieri—all this, described
by the genius of Dante, forms a picture of gloom and terror utterly unsuqaassed or
even equalled.
In the last canto of Inferno, we have the famous description of Satan, " the
emperor of the sorrowful kingdom ;" a curious specimen of Dante's minuteness of
detail, as noticed by Lord Macaulay. Satan's height is described as follows :—" I am
nearer in size to the giants (mentioned in a former canto) than the giants are to his
arms." He has three faces, and from each of his mouths hangs a sinner, whom he
lacerates with his teeth ; in the first two are Brutus and Cassius, hanging head
downwards ; and in the third, and distinguished from the other two by having his
head within the mouth of Satan, is Judas Iscariot, who thus occupies the lowest
place in hell. The descrii^tion of Satan occupies more than fifty lines of the canto;
but, I think, I need not say more upon a subject so far from attractive. Dante, at the
frightful spectacle, is utterly overcome with terror, and is unable to proceed ; Virgil
therefore carries him out of sight of his Infernal Majesty, and then giiides him by a
steep and difficult ascent up from the lower world. Dante, encouraged by the hope
of returning to the abodes of living men, cheerfully follows his guide up the toilsome
pathway; and safely past the dangers of Inferno, the poets at last emerge from the
shades,
" And issuing forth, again behold the stars." DiDO.
THE   ATTEMPT. 29
Every one who has ever accepted an invitation to "tea, and a little music," will
understand that it was only a true British sense of duty, and subservience to Mrs
Grundy, that would induce any sensible person to accept, " with much pleasure," an
invitation couched in the above terms.
Notwithstanding former experiences, such was the reply that we sent to a similar
invitation, contained in a small, engraved, embossed, cream laid, crested, scented, pink
missive.
Whatever our feelings may have been, when we accej)ted the invitation, they
certainly fell to zero v/hen the day arxived, and with it a heavy fall of snow. Leaving ,
our comfortable fireside, amusing novel and engrossing fancy work, we donned thin
dresses, and sallied forth in the pursuit of pleasure. Although it would have seemed
an acknowledgment of error to have pitied ourselves, we could not but compassionate
the poor man and horse, who, with no alluring prospect of " tea and music " before
them, could not remain at home, but because we would not, must weather the storm
to minister to our pleasure. Arrived at our destination, we with regret bade adieu
to the comfortable wraps which we committed to the care of an attendant damsel.
Suppressing a slight shiver, we ascended the staircase, and confided our names to a
person whose description merits a single line. In the days when we studied deport¬
ment under the able tuition of M. Balance, the principal rules to be attended to,
if we would attain a good carriage, were thus laid down to us : The head must be
held back, the shoulders down, the chest out, the waist in, the knees straight and
the toes out. Now, if the reader wUl kindly invert all these arrangements, he will
have a very tolerable idea of the individual who boldly threw open the drawing-room
door, and announced the Misses Tregander.
A slight movement of the left hand in the direction of his mouth, induced the
idea that the announcement of names was not his only occupation, and that he might
even be a man, who, " in his time played many parts." As the last syllable of our
names died away, we felt our hands grasped by those of Miss Fitzsimmons, who was
so delighted to see us, so glad we were quite well, and so sorry it was such a cold
evening ; in proof of which she found us a comfoi'table seat, exactly at the fiu-thest
corner of the room from the fire. Before leaving us to receive other guests, Miss
Fitzsimmons introduced us to Miss Angelina Si^iiiks on the one hand, and her cousin.
30 THE   ATTEMPT.
Captain Boodle, on the other. Miss Angelina opened the conversation, by remarking,
that it was " very cold—very," which novel remark led the way to the consolatory
one, " But it is not nearly so cold as it was in the year eighteen-sixty." To the first
proposition we had just accorded an entire approval, when Captain Boodle struck in,
that " It was fine weather—splendid weather for curlers." Had we been any reason¬
able distance from the fire, we might have had some sympathy with those who could
enjoy the pleasures provided by John Frost, but as it was, our feelings were much
more consonant with the sentiments of Miss Angelina than with those of the
last speaker.
Presently, the first inducement held out to us in coming, made its appeai-ance,
and after partaking of it, we began to feel more charitable, and even to hail with
pleasure the proposition which Miss Fitzsimmons now made, of -"having a little
music." A young lady was led up to the piano, and we heard it whispered that she
was going to play " The River," with variations. Having placed her handkerchief
and fan on one side of the piano, her bracelets on the other, and looked under the
piano to see if the pedals were in the usual place, she boldly struck a few chords. As
if the sluices were now opened, the river gushed forth. At first, her hands remained
near each other, as if the river were flowing steadily on. But, ere long, it became
turbulent, and the hands of the performer were now at the one extremity of the keys,
and now at the other, till we dreaded lest the river should overflow its banks. Truly
a mighty river it was ! and while the bass hand, with mighty chords and powerful
octaves, depicted its full strength, a tiny tremolo, executed with the right hand,
described the small tributaries which it now and then received. Some of the listeners,
being by this time accustomed to the noise of the river, ventured to make a few-
remarks ; but one unlucky speaker, having raised his voice in order to be heaid above
the roar of waters, was brought into uncomfortable notoriety by the recurrence of
the tiny tremulous motion, as another tributary came to swell the parent stream.
Fortunately, we were not asked to follow the course of the river much further,
for ere long, to use a Hibernianism, it was drowned in the applause which accom¬
panied the final rush of the river into the waters of Lethe. The performer, having
smiled to one person, who remarked that it was " a very pretty piece," disclaimed
the " great execution" which another awarded her, and having resumed her bracelets,
jjassed a minute in the arrangement of her handkerchief, by finding the exact centre
of it, and with an agitated movement of her fan, sat down !
Her place was then taken by a young man, who, in imploring accents and with
his eyes fixed upon the ceiling, invited his " Pretty Jane to meet him in the Rye."
THE   ATTEMPT. 31
A slight huskiness of tone, suggestive of catarrh, must have caused the spirit of his
" Pretty Jane," which he seemed to be apostrophising (if it were at all a sensible
spirit), to reply by a decided negative. After this, a young lady, having already
twice refused, was prevailed upon to sing, and seeming to find the incense of applause
grateful to her ears, she became so enamoured of the music stool, that we could have
wished less persuasion had been used.
Once or twice during the evening we changed our seats, and by the time the
room had become uncomfortably warm, we found ourselves seated exactly in front of
the fire. Each time, we began a conversation with the person next us, but generally
had just settled the weather to our mutual satisfaction, when some one warbled forth
a lamentation over some piece of furniture, which had yielded to decay, or a shrill
soprano, or sepulchral bass, in agonising terms, besought the assembled company to
bring back his or her lost love.
One lady sung, in feeling terms, " The Irish Mother's Lament," and I felt
inclined to join in the howl to which she gives way, as at that moment, an old gentle¬
man standing behind me, became so afiected as to allow a spoonful of strawberry ice
to fall on my unprotected shoulders.
The man of many parts, having, in a stage whisper informed us that " our
carriage" was waiting, we, under the plea of compassion for the man and horse,
bade adieu to the Misses Fitzsimmons.
But, dear reader, do not imagine for a moment that we (aware of the beauty
of truth and honesty) departed without thanking our hostess for the " charming
evening we had spent," " such delightful music," " quite a private concert." Oh, no !
we knew our duty far too well, and what Mrs Grundy expects of her votaries. If
we had by this time discovered that an evening can be spent more profitably than by
listening to tea-party music and conversation, still, we had determined to throw our¬
selves under the Juggernaut car of fashion, and not a single limb must escape.
The cold drive, the sense of home comfort on our return, the familiar covers of
Handel, Mendelssohn and Mozart on the music stand, all seemed to say to us, that
we could, if we would, be happy with them; that we would, if we could, dare to
despise the world ; and that we should, if we would, never again make ourselves
" martyrs to circumstances."
Clarence.
32
THE  ATTEMPT.
^om^ffjmg uhont dEtogf^mg.
ABOUT  WOMEN.
£'rLiie,'£'ffiL-,.>ui..
It seems, at first sight, both natural and easy for a woman to be able to say
something about women, but, on second thoughts, we perceive that the subject is sur¬
rounded with difficvdties, upon many of which she is peculiarly unfitted to form an
equitable opinion. We therefore repudiate entii-ely any intention of grappling wdth
the vexed qtiestions which we confess ourselves unable rightly to estimate, but we
would fain, along with other scattered remarks, make an attack on one evil fi'om
which much of this acknowledged unfitness arises—we mean, the want of justness and
balance in the ordinary training of a woman's mind.
It was with great pleasure that we lately saw this very point advocated by a
leading review ; for, if those who write and speak in woman's interests would fiilly
understand where the shoe pinches, there would be more chance of her being really
benefited by their good wishes. It is not by giving us votes at an election, or en¬
deavouring to make us share in work that belongs naturally to man that we shall
be made happier; such siiggestions, in reality, injure those whom they seem to as¬
sist : what we need is " greater width of idea," greater thoroughness, more complete
self-control. It may be objected that the usefulness of these qualities is already fully
acknowledged, but if so, the acknowledgment is theoretic, and bears very little jirac-
tical fruit; the following brief exti-act from the " Port Royal Logic" shows how much
more earnestly the matter ought to be treated. " There is nothing more desirable
than good sense and justness oj" mind,—all other qualities of mind are of limited use,
but exactness of judgment is of general utility in every part and in all employments
of life. We are too apt to emj)loy reason merely as an instrument for acquiring the
sciences, whereas we ought to avail ourselves of the sciences as an instrument for
perfecting our reason ; justness of mind being infinitely more important than all
the speculative knowledge which we can obtain by means of sciences the most solid.
This ought to lead wise men to make their sciences the exercise and not the occupation
of their mental powers, they are born to be just, equitable, and
prudent in all their thoughts, their actions, their business; to these things they ought
especially to train and discipline themselves."
If all this can be said of the mind of man, how much more should it apply to that
of woman, which, by its natural defects, is in more urgent need of such training ?
How many women do we know who can argue a matter without straying from the
i
THE  ATTEMPT. 33
point ? how many, alas that we must confess it, who can keep their temper under
defeat, or, amid opposing opinions, how many who can compare such opinions,
and draw from them unbiassed and complete results ] It is not for debating
societies or public speaking that we would fit her,—such training is fully required
in the scope of her own home. Granting this universal need, the question
next is, how to supply the want; and the usual hiadrances beset us here which
necessarily impede all efforts in a new direction. The habit of free discussion with
abler minds, which at once suggests itself as the simplest method, is frequently
rendered by circumstances impossible or undesirable for a young gii'l. This de¬
fect will only remedy itself if the day should ever come when other work than gover-
nessing is found for our surplus women, and when, with the diminution of competi¬
tors, female teachers may find themselves, both socially and mentally, more on a
level with private tutors,—till then, we must look to literature for assistance. A
girl with average abilities, is, we allow, taught much more now than was the fashion
formerly,—she works hard at school, and is supposed to come home an educated
being ; it is true she has " got up" a great many subjects, some of them sufiiciently
abstruse ; she has probably liked many of her lessons and striven to make the most
of them, and her brain resembles a cabinet, full of nicely ticketed parcels of know¬
ledge, well arranged and closely packed, but each so shut into its special niche, that
for general purposes the whole is rendered nearly useless. Men, accustomed to
teaching, sometimes wi-ite with wonder and admiration of the incisiveness and quick¬
ness of a woman's intellect, yet this is all that can be shown for it, in most cases.
Does the girl who appears to know three languages, half the sciences, and all possible
accomplishments, know how to make these " the exercise, not the occupation" of her
mind;—is she a whit less unoccupied, more interested in important things than if
her schooling had been less ? In many instances we fear not; and yet we cannot but
believe, that if she had been taught with discrimination something of logic and mathe¬
matics ; if she had been led to appreciate something of philosophy ; led to read, but
always with some liberty of choice, what is great and noble, in fact, if her mind had
been helped to train itself, instead of being drilled in the everlasting routine of
fashionable schools, she would have been able to answer in the aflirmative the qiies-
tions asked at the commencement of this paper. A sensitive brain, working accord¬
ing to line and rule, will never develop itself fully; six weeks' freedom in a well
chosen library, would, to such, be worth months of work which is apportioned with¬
out any regard to individual capacity : some of us will always remember with delight
the burst of new life revealed to us by the opening of a new phase of reading or
34 THE  ATTEMPT.
teaching, the sort of leap our mental growth made after the perusal of some new vol¬
ume ; and yet, how few of us are so favoured ! We hear much of the influence of
women in their homes ; can any one suppose that the male members of the household
will acknowledge that influence less, because sister, wife, or mother can share their
interests readily, and convei'se intelligently on other things than housekeeping; or,
will the lady who visits in school or parish settle diflSculties there with less or more
ease if she has justness of mind to aid her 1 We appeal to any who have been con¬
demned to the miserable entanglements of a ladies' committee, to say if such an
addition would not be a thing for which gods and men might well be thankful.
All this being trvie of the happy women who " sit at home at ease," it must
apply still more fully to the rapidly increasing number of those who have to be
" breadwinners" for themselves, and perhaps for others; and though to most of those
Plato and his compeers may be vmattainable, moral earnestness, self-reliance and self-
control are mercifully within reach of all, while the influence of the more fortunate
should and must permeate in time to the lower strata of society; it is the old simile
of the stone dropped in water, and stirring ever wider and wider ripples on the sur¬
face : the just and considerate mistress will as surely influence her servants for good,
as the flighty girl, addicted to dress and gossip, will influence her handmaiden for evil,
and assuredly each will receive her reward.
In the review to which we have already alluded, it is alleged that no woman
can set aside the idea of marriage sufficiently to bind herself seriously to any
apprenticeship or work requiring time. Much of this feeling proceeds from the fear
with which hundreds regai-d a life of solitude; and this fear again proceeds from a
consciousness of their own want of resources and need of external support. Many a
one would, if she felt that her whole powers were rightly and fully developed, be able
to devote herself steadily and energetically to labour which would ensure her the
means of subsistence in her old age ; and, were the dread of ultimate poverty removed,
there would be fewer of those marriages which are certainly not made in heaven, but
for the mere sake of safety and shelter. It requires no small moral courage, in the
existing state of society, for one who is forced to maintain herself to choose jiist the
work she can do best, without yielding to the mistaken ambition which makes so
many select duties for which they are totally unfitted, in order to rise, as they think,
a grade higher in the social scale. Half the women who are third-rate governesses
would probably make first-rate nurses; and much lower work would be suitable for
numbers who now fill that most arduous profession. Perhaps we may hope that the
new institutions for training nurses are a step in the right direction.
THE   ATTEMPT. 35
That good material is there to work on, in the feminine character, none can
doubt; the greater is the cause for regret when we see fine qualities either mis¬
directed or allowed to lie dormant. Even with all their present disadvantages, it is
marvellous what some can achieve in steady self-denial, or endurance that becomes
heroic in its unwavering strength. "We know one, whose history, truly written,
might put many a man to shame. A quiet, unobtrusive little woman, seldom
noticed, and only appreciated by those who knew her intimately; none could be a
truer friend than she, none could give more cheerful or unfailing sympathy, none
enter more readily into another's joys, though her own rough path seemed darker for
the contrast; and yet below that calm surface were sorrows under which stronger
natures might have been pardoned for flinching.
Probably we can all find some such brave souls among our friends, and when we
think how much comfoi-t they might draw from books now sealed to them, how
much additional strength they might derive from wise thoughts which have proved
the daily safeguards of thousands of earnest, questioning minds, we can but join with
the laureate who makes his soldier-prince plead, that
" They need
More breadth of culture, is not Ida right ?
They worth it ?    Truer to the law within,
Severer in the logic of a life,
Twice as magnetic to sweet influences
Of earth or heaven ?"
More breadth and higher training, indeed, they require; and surely when the
world forces suflering on those who ought to see only the kindliest side of life, it is
hard that they should not also be provided with all possible modes of self-protection.
Once more we assert that this finer and more thorough teaching will only fit
them more completely for all positions they may be called on to fill; they need
never step into man's province, their own is wide enough; but at least they should
be taught to do justice to their natural work and to themselves, for, as one of them
has said, " Education is, after all, only what its etymology implies—the educing,
the drawing out of the powers of the individual. If we then draw out a woman's
power, we only educe her womanliness; we cannot give her a man's powers any more
than we can give a man a woman's brilliancy of intuition, or any other gift. We can
only educe her God-given woman's nature, and so make her a more perfect woman."
_ ,,_^Elsie Strivelyne.
36 THE  ATTEMPT.
"Weaby and travel-stained,
Their parched feet failing from the stony track,
On the dim path no lingering look thrown back.
From the gi-een rest, whereto they have attained,
Where cooling shades and fragrant airs beguile
The pale lips to a smile.
The worn frame lies at ease
In the mossed hollows of the fair green earth ;
On each faint brow, the summer breeze in mirth,
Showers dewy blossoms from the flowering trees;
And laughing brooks teach, with their happy voice.
The tii'ed heart to rejoice.
Oh ! lowly sons of toil,
And ye, oh ! little ones, from whose wan eyes,
And patient lips, youth smiles in altered guise ;
The frail wild flowers of life's untended soil,
Shake off" its dust from your wayfaring feet,
In this green hushed retreat.
The wild breeze notes that stir.
The leaves and grasses, with their low refrain,
Shall, with sweet echoes, through your lives of pain.
An influence all holy minister:
While memories of glad founts and summer skies.
As at a spell, arise.
And have we not to bless
The toilsome pathway by life's travellers traced,
Some fair oasis in the desert placed,
A shady lodge set in the wilderness,
Where we may lay earth's weary cares aside.
And for a space abide 1
THE  ATTEMPT. 37
While the bright realm of dreams
Unfolds itself in hues of paradise.
And the heart, thralled in. that sweet idlesse, sighs
No more, but from the taste of its clear streams,
Refreshed and lightened, after brief delay.
Goes singing on its way.
J. I. L.
^^0ttg]^fs  on '^nniaxB,
As seated in a railway carriage, you are borne swiftly through new scenes,
passing now the busy bustling town, now the quiet village slumbering in the sunny
plain, now the scattered Highland parish, have you not marked one resemblance in
all 1 Does not the parish church everywhere raise its spire above the common
habitations of men, pointing, as some one has well said, the way to heaven 1 Just
think how you would miss the well-known buildings, were you passing parish after
parish, without resting your eyes on their peaceful forms. Close by, you may often
mark the rectory, retired a little from the public road, and shaded by spreading trees ;
or, it may be, the manse lying amidst our mountains, reflecting its white walls in the
deep blue waters of a Highland loch.
Such scenes often raise in our minds half-languid musings as to the occtipants
of these apparently happy dwellings. Does the Pastor feed his flock with care 1
Is he to be seen in the houses of his poor parishioners, leaving behind him comfort,
both spiritual and bodily 1 Does he seek to open their hearts and minds by the
goodness and purity of his own life 1 Has he a wife or sister helping him to relieve
the distress, and soothe the heart-burnings around them ? Or, is he vain and sen¬
tentious, ■ much given to forms and ceremonies, greeting the afilicted Avith cant,
and the erring with harshness 1 Thoughts like these and many more of the kind,
may course through our minds as we lean back in our cushioned seats, and are
whirled through changing scenes, but they go dreamily as they came uncalled. But
let us see what chai-acters we can draw from the records of our poets with which
to people these many dwellings.
No one can read the description of the nine-and-twenty pilgrims met together at
Tabart Inn, without being specially stmck by the beauty and simplicity of the
38 THE   ATTEMPT.
parson there pictured, to which the purity and quaintness of our great Chaucer's
language gives additional freshness and earnestness. This " good man of religion,"
though poor in worldly substance, was rich in " holy thought and work," and of great
scholarship. We are not given a learned disquisition upon his ecclesiastical views,
nor his political opinions, but we are shown that love and kindness were the source
of his actions. In a few words the poet puts before us a man whom we immediately
love as a friend—a man in whom, as in Nathaniel of old, there is " no guile."
" Wide was his parish, houses fer asonder.
But he ne left nought fer no rain ne thonder,
In sikenesse, and in mischief to visite
The ferrest in his parish, moohe and lite.
Upon his fete, and in his hand a staf,
This noble ensample to his shepe he yaf,
That first he wrought, and afterward he taught.
Out of the gospel, he the wordes caught,
And this figure, he added yet thereto,
That if gold ruste, what should iron do ?
For if a preest be foule, on whom we trust,
No wonder is a lewed man to rust."
Would that this were the reasoning of all pastors; much more gentle would
be their denunciations on the heads of their wandering flocks ! His whole business
is summed up as being " To drawen folk to heaven with faireness." Much he
taught of the law of love, but mark the last line of the description, in which lies the
success of his teaching, the clue to his whole character.
" He taught, but first he followed it himselve."
Naturally our thoughts turn from this picture to, or rather unite it with, that
pleasing description of clerical life, given by Goldsmith, of which we need scarcely
remind our readers. All must be familiar with the good man, whose open-handed
and open-hearted charity made him to appear " passing rich with forty pounds a
year," What a perfect reflection of what the house of a Christian minister should
be, is given us in the following few lines :—
" His house was known to all the vagrant train,
He chid their wanderings, but relieved their pain ;
The long remember'd beggar was his guest,
Whose beard descending, swept his aged breast:
The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,
Claim'd kindred there, and had his claims aJlow'd ;
THE   ATTEMPT. 39
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,
Sat by the fire, and talked the night away ;
Wept o'er his wounds, or tales of sorrow done,
Shoulder'd his crutch, and show'd how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learn'd to glow,
And quite forgot their vices in their woe ;
Careless their merits or their faults to scan.
His pity gave ere charity began."
Coming out of church, we see him surrounded by the little ones of his flock,
all eager " to share the good man's smile,"
" To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given,
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven."
From the same pen we have that most sweet, interesting, and amusing work,
" The Vicar of Wakefield," in which the good simple vicar describes his life as a
country clergyman. " As we lived," says he, " near the road, we often had the
traveller or stranger visit us, to taste our gooseberry wine, for which we had great
reputation; and I profess, with the veracity of an historian, that I never knew one
of them find fault with it. Our cousins too, even to the fortieth remove, all re¬
membered their affinity, without any help from the herald's office, and came very
frequently to see us." And mark the innocent little ruse by which he managed
that his house should not be overrun by disreputable claimants. " When any one
of our relations was found to be a person of very bad character, a troublesome guest,
or one we desired to get rid of, upon his leaving my house, I ever took care to lend
him a riding-coat, or a pair of boots, or sometimes a horse of small value, and I
always had the satisfaction of finding he never came back to return them."
Thus much for the characters we can draw from Goldsmith with which to
people our rectories, vicarages, and manses.
Let us now see what Cowper says of the sacred order. All the satii-e wliich
lay hid in his usually soft and charitable nature seems to have been aroused by
the empty-headed vanity displayed by some of the preachers of his, as of every day.
He speaks of them as,
" The things that mount the rostrum with a skip,
And then skip down again—pronounce a text;
Cry—hem ! and reading what they never wrote.
Just fifteen minutes, huddle up their work
And with a well-bred whisper close the scene !"
Surely that sweet tidy-looking village, which we have rushed past on our journey.
40 THE  ATTEMPT.
with its humble little church, cannot be under the charge of such a one as here
described. Perhaps its pastor is of the easy going, good-natured, imenergetic kind,
such as we have pictured so truthfully by Crabbe. Unmoved by strong passions,
or by any deep yearnings after truth, such as lead many men to enter fields termed
dangerous and unorthodox by the lazy and the stupid, he led an unobtrusive every¬
day sort of a life.
" Simple he was, and loved the simple truth.
Yet had some useM cmming from his youth ;
A cunning never to dishonor lent.
And rather for defence than conquest meant;
'Twas fear of power, with some desire to rise,
But not enough to make him enemies;
He never aim'd to please ; and to offend
Was ever cautious, for he sought a friend ;
Yet for the friendship never much would pay,
Content to bow, be silent and obey.
And by a soothing sufferance find his way."
Just such a man as this it is easy to imagine as the centre of village tea-parties,
indulging in quiet gossip, scarcely deserving the harsher name of scandal. His
doctiines were of the mildest description ever delivered to village congregation, and
we have the comforting assurance that each discourse " gained in softness what it lost
in force." Such are the men who slip through life alike iincensured and unpraised.
Very severe lashes are bestowed by the pen of the great MUton on those
" hirelings " who enter the Church from motives of greed and avarice, who, regardless
of their sacred duties, seek only their personal aggrandisement. Lamenting over
the loss of Lycidas, we hear " the Pilot of the Galilean lake," as he raises up his
voice, declaring how many others he could have spared to save him, over whose
head the waters had just closed. One line cannot fail to suggest itself frequently to
the minds of those who may at times feel a longing for more solid food than is
usually offered for their digestion, in which we are told how
" The hungry sheep look up and are not fed."
However, dwelling upon what we have not is biit a profitless task, so let us turn
our consideration to the great helps which are afforded us by the thoughtful, truth-
searching men who fill many of our churches and chapels. We Scotch are said to
love long sermons. This may or may not be a national characteristic; but certainly,
as a rule, we all enjoy a good thoughtful sermon, or " discourse " as some prefer to
THE   ATTEMPT. 41
call it. Listen to two old men or women as they wend their way home from church
over the long country road, and you will hear warm discussions and profound re¬
marks on the numerous heads of the sermon—whoever may have slept during its de¬
livery, they have not.
In sermons as in books distinct taste must show itself; and, if in one church
or sect we cannot hear what we feel to be for our good, are we to blame if we seek
for it in another? " Have you heard so and so preach 1" we ask a friend, " Oh !
no, we never wander," is the reply, in tones strangely self-righteous. Because we
happen to belong to one branch in particular of the wide-spreading tree of Chris¬
tianity, are we to taste of the fruit of no other 1 But happily such questions are
less needed in our day than formerly. Most persons, at least in theory, now admit
our right to draw what we will from all sources, be they High, Low or Broad
Church, Established, Free or Independent. We can all remember for ourselves
men, whose very names seem linked in our minds with ideas of liberality and
freedom of thought, and who are throwing open the Church for the receiving of new
truths, or rather of new lights cast upon the old truth, which is in itself ever
the same.
Wlien we can fancy with some sure foundation that all the churches we pass
on our journies are filled with pastors who are spreading abroad truth in all its
asjjects, then truly will those many unpretending buildings, with their grey walls
and peaceful churchyards, become pleasant resting-places for the eyes of weary
travellers. " des Eaux."
raise.
"The praise of man is not the test of our praise wort Wess ; nor is their censure ;
but either should set us upon testmg ourselves."
As a shower in spring to the young and tender blade, so is timely and well-
directed praise to the first efforts of a young aspirant. When seed has been committed
to the soil, it appears in due time, modestly raising its head above ground, as if ner¬
vously anxious about its reception. Should it be greeted by cruel winds and biting
frosts, its efforts will quickly be relaxed, and the young shoot will gradually droop
and die. If, on the contrary, it be encouraged by the genial and cheering rays of the
sun, it will gradually expand, stand erect, and come to maturity.
42 THE   ATTEMPT.
Not otherwise do we find it with the gro-\vth of human efforts. There are few
among us, if any, totally indifferent to kindly praise, or who have the heart to per¬
severe without encouragement in some form or other. Nothing can be more dis¬
heartening than constant dissatisfaction with one's self or one's work. It may not
be that the work itself has really been so very remiss after all, only that a naturally
anxious nature, suspicious of its own powers, judges too harshly, and perhaps imagines
that the results 7nust be poor because its own capacities are limited. A little incite¬
ment held out to such an one will work worlds of good—we had almost said, may be
the means of developing some talent, hitherto allowed to remain dormant, but the
awakening of which will bring pleasure and pi-ofit in its train. A mere not
(discouraging is insufficient, there must be something positive—something more real.
And this after which we seek is not blind flattery, that were indeed easily bestowed,
and is at all times too apt to twine itself cunningly and insidiously about us. What
we want to see given is, honest, well-timed and well-directed commendation, of which
there is far more likelihood to be too little than too much. Those who are truly
worthy of it will readily distinguish praise from flattery, and knowing how much they
really deserve, will not be injured by its bestowal.
But while exhorting one party to bestow what praise they honestly can on their
deserving brethren, we would counsel the other against courting praise for its own
sake. " There be many false points of praise," so says Bacon, and nothing perhaps
is easier than to provoke the admiration of the vulgar. The most minor vii-tues are
sufficient for that, nay, sometimes they will even be deluded by what are only vices
in disguise. An action may in itself be good and praiseworthy, but unless the doer
of it be prompted by a pure disinterested motive, the goodness goes not to his account,
e.g., a person may be tolerant of another's weakness, which forbearance may result
either from indifference, or from the nobler motive of Christian love. Another person
may refuse to subscribe to some charity ; this may proceed either from heartlessness
and selfishness, or from a conviction that the object is a mistaken one. In either
case, our conduct will be construed differently by different parts of the community;
those who cannot understand the higher motive will attribute the baser. Many of
the nobler virtues, such as self-sacrifice, patient endurance, disregard for public opinion
when we have right on our own side, are quite overlooked, or, if noticed at all, are
so only to be misunderstood.
"With regard to the last named virtue, it would be as useless to urge, as it is
impossible to expect, total eradication of regard for the oj)inion of the world. Such
a quality, we think, is only found in the less worthy and more reckless of our race,
THE   ATTEMPT. 43
and is much more apt to lead to bad than to good actions. But there is a very mce
distinction between the love of commendation for its own sake and the desire to do a
thing worthy of commendation. The reward of well-doing to a right-minded person
is far more in the peaceful approval of his own conscience than in anything his
fellow-men can say ; but he would be more than mortal who could honestly deny the
extra gratification felt by a verbal expression of approbation by a friend. We believe
there is many a humble devoted one who may have gone on for years with no other
encouragement than the knowledge that duty has been done in the sight of God,
whose merit having at last been discovered by his too slowly discerning fellows, has
been brought to light, and with the discovery, a gleam of sunshine has been thrown
into that unselfish life. Such a one will not be jniffed up by praise, for the very
reason that he has not worked for it.
One who can live independent of, though not indifferent to, the world's opinon,
knows himself too well not to be humble ; consequently, praise will drop into his soul
only as a gentle stimulant to further exertion. He will not begin to think that now,
when at last his efforts for good have been recognised, he may relax his energies, and, as
it were, " rest on his laurels." Nay, self-knowledge and humility being inseparable,
he only accepts what of praise he knows to be just; the surplus goes to show him what
he ought further to aim at, that in the end he may deserve it all. And here we may
be allowed to digress so far from our subject as to say, that by humility we do not
mean to imply self-depreciation, but only a just, well-balanced estimate. It were
but a poor, one-sided view were we only in our secret souls to see our weak points; nay,
we would almost call it an insult to our Maker, who has created us " after His own
image," and who, we know, has bestowed some talent on each. We are to think
" soberly," and for any good we may discover, our feeling will be that of thankfulness.
Then we can honestly allow ourselves to feel gratified when friends discern and tell us of
our success. Carlyle has somewhere said, " If a man have any precious thing in him
at all, certainly the most precious of the gifts he can offer is his approbation, his rever¬
ence to another man;    .    .    .    not lightly will a man give this if he is still a man."
On the other hand, flattery or undeserved praise from a would-be friend, however
distasteful, is not without its use; it is censure in disguise. An enemy's reproaches,
as if meant to counterbalance the praises of a friend, show us the' worst side of
ourselves, and should tend to open our eyes to some of our defects. It behooves us to
think well over such accusations, for it is not sufficient that we ourselves know our
conduct to be upright in purpose; we must so order it, that no breath of suspicion
can be raised; and if we have done anything which may be wrongly construed, we
44
THE   ATTEMPT.
must endeavour so to rearrange our actions that a good cause may not suffer from our
clumsy performance.    If we find that the desire of praise has been our object, we
will exert ourselves, not to stop the works, but to regulate the mainspring and
investigate the motive power.
For a summary of what praise we may give, and what take, we would turn once
more to Carlyle, and say with him, " Give every man the me^ of honour he has
merited ;" for, as another writer remarks—" Certainly moderate praise, used with
opportunity, and not vulgar, is that which doeth the good."
Kathleen.
JfrhnlJs^tp.
What is that strange mysterious chain,
That thus binds man to man,
It joins their pleasures, sorrows, pain,
And makes their souls as one 'I
'Tis friendship,—It can smooth oxxr path.
However rough it seems,
And cheer us all our journey through.
By its celestial beams.
That man, indeed, may pitied be,
Who is without a friend ;
Has none to give him sympathy,
Or trust in, till life's end.
True friendship will endure for aye,
Though earth and seas be gone,
It will endure so sure and fast,
When heaven itself is won.
Friendship that only seems to be.
Erelong must fade away.
Though for a time it may seem bright,
'Tis but a fleeting ray.
And though our friends may distant be,
Friendship is still the same,
And wings of love will bring them near,
And carry us to them.
Minneuaha.
gilationsljrp   in ITanguHgc.
No. I.
Language has been called " fossil poetry," but how much more is it than that ?
Fossil history, fossil thought, living light and logic. As if one should name compre.
hensively coal as " fossil ferns," forgetting how much more do these dark-browed
seams contain : the history of past ages when man was not, and when gigantic
THE  ATTEMPT. 45
saurians slept by slow river brinks, beneath the fringing shadows of mighty forests
of fronde-crowned trees, never now known to man. And through these fossil tokens
of that luxuriant vegetable life exists—not fossilised, not embalmed; perhaps asleep,
but awaiting its resurrection—so much sunshine ! Just so much light and heat as
our life-giving sun poured forth to vivify and to expand the rich gi-een ferns, so
much light and heat leaps back to us in flame from the fossil ferns blackened into
coal. Thus in language we find more than fossils; there is spirit, a stored up life, ready
to be expended on the service, and for the pleasure, of those who know how to
awake it. Too few spend time enough in making themselves acquainted with a
theme so rich ; and, till they are acquainted with it, how can they realise the vast
store-house of knowledge that lies in the mere structure of language, which is not
built of the dry dead forms that many fancy? How the whole course of the world
would have differed from its present ways if all its inhabitants had been left to
speak the one universal language, first spoken in the garden of Eden, or in the Ark,
is a consideration most wide-spreading and all-overturning in its novelty, but not
one which we have either time or purpose to enter on at present. But that this
confounding of tongues was not so complete as has been suj^posed, and that it arises
from simple causes, most natural, reasonable and right, we must believe : for the
great increase of any family leads to the breaking-up, disj^ersion and diversity of the
members, and of all their accompanying circumstances. At the same time, there are
some leading features, some family likeness and habit, that endure in words, as they
do in men, through the gi-eatest seeming dissimilarity to a casual glance.
We feel, also, that no random agglomeration of syllables thrown together, to ex¬
press the ideas of many minds, could have formed any known language and grammar,
and it seems as if necessary that one great mind had formed the plan, and created
the power of speech that might serve a nation. Was it not one of the " good gifts "
that God gave Adam, when He walked and conversed with him as with a friend in
the garden of Eden. But broken-up families, in their necessary dispersion, bore
with them their memory full of the common language, alike at first—until the lapse
of time permitted peculiarities of accent, or errors of speech, to become customs—slips
of traditional recollections to be repaired—novelties to be introduced by need—while
change-producing change wrought such metamorphoses, that one must needs dig deep
and wisely before the original forms be found. We cannot fancy that we have im¬
proved upon language, any more than we can believe the original man was less
perfect than the present man. Certainly, man has now more faults and failings,
more exceptions to rules, more slurring thereof; and so has his speech ; while, at the
46
THE   ATTEMPT.
same time,  his wardrobe  and larder, his library and his clubs are fuller, so must
therefore be his dictionary of names for these, and attributes thereto.
If we dive amidst modern languages, the great radical similarity of the six
Romance dialects of the south of Europe would lead us to suppose that there must
have been some one father tongue, more powerful and earlier-born than they, from
whom they, as children, had caught the roots of speech, and had rendered it various
by local peculiarities, phonetic coiTuptions, and differences of pronunciation. History
certifies this supposition, and points to the conquering Roman people, and the
powerful Latin tongue, as the source of the Italian, Wallachian, Rhsetian, Spanish,
Portuguese and French. The words in which they most differ are those relative to
discoveries in thought or fact made since this separation. But this Latin was itself
only one brother of an older generation, amongst whom the relationship was
as near as amongst these,—Sanscrit, Zend, Greek, Latin, Gothic, Celtic. The
similarity between the languages of the Veda and the Modern Lithuanian is far
stronger than between the French and the Italian; and yet, amid all these
brother-tongues, no one may justly be called the I'oot, not even the Sanscrit, as
so many hold, since it is clear that Greek often retains a more primitive form of
words; some earlier tongue must, therefore, have given roots to all.    Let me quote
Father
Mother
Queen
Brother
Sister
Daughter
Sanscrit.
pitar
matar
gani
bhratar
svasar
duhitar
Zend.
patar
matar
brata
khanha      
dughdhar hydrr/P
Greek.
Tar rip
MfnP
yvvri
(pparrjp
Latin,
pater
mater
frater
soror
Gothic,
fadar
qino
bropar
svistar
Slav.
mati
zena
brat
sestra
Irish.
athair.
mathair.
brathair.
siur.
dauhtar    (Lith.) dukte dear.
The l^attr, pwtkr, ^rubfr, Bchktstn, Cotljter, of the modern German are very
distinct echoes of this older race, as well as are the names in the derivative Romance
tongues. In all the examples given here, the word father is derived from a general
root " Pa," to nourish and protect; and mother, from " Ma," to fashion or form ;
brother, is he who carries or assists; sister, she who pleases or consoles. Duhitar,
from " Dull," to milk, as in these old pastoral times the daughter of the house was
the milkmaid, the duhitar. The "Ukshan" and "Go," the ox and cow, and the
" Pasu," cattle, of the Sanscrit, run through all these languages until they fall into our
own. The old original root for plough is " Ar," which modifies throughout all these,
until it reaches us in our Saxon "ear," which means to  plough,  and the   "earth,"
THE   ATTEMPT. . 47
that which is ploughed. The minerals, too, are strikiiigly similar; but we cannot
now multiply examples. Surely, if these older tongues were children to that one older,
and if these languages of southern Eiu-ope are lineal descendants of Latin, then is
our English tongue related to all these, and indebted to them all. No original tongue
is ours, no unvarying form once fixed; nay, rather it is a many coloured web,
woven of threads of varied texture, which has formed a most interesting and
beautiful piece of tapestry. Because it is so fragmentary, it is more wide in its con¬
nections. Because it is so self-imperfect and dependent on others, it seems more widely
human, and the study of the English tongue can be made a subject of surpassing
interest. It acknowledges its debts to evexy tongue that we have named, and other
less note-worthy relations. The old British or Celtic, the Saxon, the Latin through
the Romans, and the Latin through the Fi-ench, have formed the gi'eat central gx'ound-
work of the pattei-n, the warp and woof of the web ; hence the myths and fables,
the thoughts and belief, the histoiy or logic of all these nations are embalmed for
us in the words they have given us, along with many that our own " makex-s " have
ci-eated. Too little do we attend to the power and beauty of the words we daily
use, as if they were watex'-worn pebbles that we cannot faxxcy may be cut and polished
into precious gems. Many have a whole x-omaxice, a little poem buxied within them,
or bear the brunt of a life-battle on tlxeii- brows. Maixy have risen, and many Jxave
fallen in meaning, as families may do, when greater wealth or adverse circumstances
influence them. There is a poem written upon the word " Tribulation," the bui'den
of which lies opexxly in its face, which has been x'aised from the service of Romaix
hixsbandxy to the high xxse of px-eparing for " God's Garner"—" Tribvxlxim." As the
flail dx'iveth the chaflT from the cox-n, so do the heavy chastisements of God purify
His much valued grain. But other wox-ds were x-aised, too, at the same time—when
a new thing appeared uxider the sun, and an unheard of novelty upturned the earth ;
when the religion of Christ came down unto mexx with His goodwill, and found the
heax-ts of men hardly prepared to receive it. Neither were men's words, for there is
no utterance ready for thoughts that do not yet exist; and when the " good news "
came unto us, new words must needs be coined as vehicles for the ixew thoughts, or
old words be raised to meet the high xxecessities, as many were.
Still, sadly telling their ovm story, we fixxd how often words have been also
degraded.
In many words, filso, we retain the double meaning, and use it as we will;
simple, " sine plico," without a fold, as it is sometime used still, while often applied
to men, it signifies a want of capacity ; so did the Greek " Idiotes," which originally
48 . THE   ATTEMPT.
meant only a private person, in opposition to a public character, till their con"VT.ction
that a public life was necessary to the perfection of the mental abilities was shown
and retained in the later acceptation of the word. Even so words once in use are
now obsolete, or exist only to be termed vulgar. Yet, indeed, what is " vulgar,"
but belonging to the common people, implying nothing really mean or low. I
have always fancied that words, like people, could prove theii" I'ank by tracing
their pedigree, and that really low words, like slang, have no pedigree, but have
risen mushroom-like, or have incurred the disgrace of having been expelled from
the stock by taking a meaning and a power totally alien to the rest of the fixmily.
Therein find I a plea for the Scottish language, too often pronounced by ignorant
people " vulgar," in the naiTOw use of the word : " vulg.ir," indeed, it is, insomuch as
it i^ or was the language of the common people ; but mean or low, as the secondary
use of that word is, it cannot be. The Scotch is a language akin to the old English,
but varying in its place of birth and manner of education ; it received more from
the French and Danish, and less from the Saxon ; but its words have as long an
ancestry, and are possessed of as fair faces and sweet expressions, and as deep souls.
What English woi-d can even translate the power and beauty of the gloaming that
ended the " days o' auld lang syne," when men wandered hame from the trysting-
place in the birken sliaw, with their bonny douce lassies by their side ; or con¬
voyed them across the burn in the mii'k when they left the canty ingle to attend
the evening kirk ?
I still remember the intense pleasure with which I first realized the distinct
individuality of the Scotch language, that has borne so many unjust sneers ; the pride
with which its own private words were traced to noble roots. When " I canna be
fashed " claimed i-espectable relationship with its French friend " facher ;" when the
request to " redd up " the house became foreshadowed by the Latin " reddere ;" when
a " grosert fool" was translated by " Une foule de groseOles;" and so on with a
hundred other examples that remind us of our old intimacy with France. It is well
that one language should be used in one nation, and Scotch, therefore, be laid aside,
smiling a pleasant good-bye, as to an old friend. But there are other forms of speech
to which we are, alas! becoming too well accustomed, which well deserve the title
of " vulgar," or any stronger exjiression of dislike we can use. " Slang " is, indeed,
low and lowering. It defiles the well, not only of English, but of all language; it
vitiates the taste of the user, and makes false the ear of the hearer. Let us avoid
slang ; let us keep to all pure language, as we would cling to all good gifts given to
us from on high. Lutea Reseda.
THE  ATTEMPT. 49
#n  Italtmt  fiterates;
TORQUATO   TASSO. LA   GERUSALEMME   LIBERATA.
" Que Ton soit homme ou Dieu, tout genie est martyre,"
So says Lamartine, speaking of the poet who is the subject of this essay; and truly
the annals of Italian literature would seem to prove his words, misanthropical and
ill-founded though they be. "We have already glanced at the sorrows and misfortunes
of Dante ; those of Tasso were equally numerous and bitter, indeed more so ; while
his tender and chivalrous soul was utterly incapable of the insatiable thirst for revenge,
of the bitter and implacable hatred which supported Dante amidst his adversity.
Dante owes much of his greatness to his misfortunes; Tasso was crushed, mind and
body, by his.
He was born at Sorrento, in 1544, and at a very early age, showed signs of
wonderful genius. In 1565, his talents obtained for him the notice and patronage
of Alfonso d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, and of another nobleman, the Duke of TJrbino,
who proved a true and valuable friend to the poet to the last day of his life. Would
that as much could be said for the Duke of Eerrara! But his conduct towards
Tasso, once marked by flattering courtesy and extreme liberality, became at last such
as to cover his name with merited ignominy. Coldness and estrangement began to
manifest themselves ia his manner towards his former favourite; and, in 1578, when
Tasso returned to Fen-ara, after two years' absence, he was, by order of the Duke,
shut u]) in a madhouse ! Surely, death in its most awful form would have been more
merciful than such a fate ! Imagine the delicate, sensitive, high-souled Torquato
Tasso condemned to pass his life among raving maniacs—and this, too, in days when
cruelty was regarded as the only means of controlling these unfortunate creatures !
Tasso has left us an accoimt of the miseries endured by him in this horrible prison;
but it is enough to say here, that blows, starvation, and mental misery at last brought
on a brain fever, which threatened to reduce him to the condition of the unhappy
men by whom he was surrounded. His fevered brain peopled his cell with terrible
phantoms, with ghastly dreams; and soon, very soon, would it have been too late to
save him, when, tln-ough the instmmentality of the Duke of TJrbino and others of his
friends, he was released, after seven years' captivity in the madhouse of Ferrara.
It has been said that the principal reason for this barbarity on the part of
50 THE  ATTEMPT.
Alfonso was the romantic attachment of Tasso to his sister, the beautiful Leonora
d'Este. This appears highly probable; although doubtless some unguarded expressions
of Torquato's, with regard to political affairs, were in some degree the cause of his
patron's cruelty. But the love of Tasso for Leonora is sxifficiently evident from
some of his own writings, as is also Alfonso's disapprobation of what he considered
the poet's presumption; and Lord Byron has adopted this view of the case in his
beautiful poem, " The Lament of Tasso "—
They call'd me mad, and why ?
O Leonora ! wilt not thou reply ?
That thou were beautiful, and I not blind,
Has been the sm which shuts me from manltind ;
No power in death can tear our names apart.
As none in life could rend thee from my heart.
Yes, Leonora ! it shall be our fate.
To be entwined for ever—but too late !
Tasso, on regaining his liberty, wandered from place to place, in hopes that
change of scene might have a beneficial effect, both on his bodily and mental health;
but to the wild excitement of his fevered imaginings had succeeded a profoimd and
lasting state of melancholy and depression, which he found it impossible to shake off,
and for which he had, alas ! only too good cause, in the pangs of despised and hope¬
less love, the ingratitude and cruelty of Alfonso, the state of miserable poverty to
which he was reduced, and the precarious condition of his health. His spirit was
broken ; his gentle nature was weary of struggling against the hardshij^s, the cold¬
ness, the cruelty of the world; and although Italy, roused by the Gerusalemme
Liberata to a sense of the merits of its author, decreed to him the honours of a
triumphal procession at Rome, and a public coronation with the laurel wreath, this
recognition came too late for Tasso. The laurel crown, indeed, adorned his brow,
but not till that brow was cold in death—for he expired before the day fixed for the
triumph, and honours of the most splendid description were paid to the corpse of him
whose life had been embittered, whose splendid talents had been destroyed, whose
death had been hastened by the malignity of his fellow-countrjinen. He died in
April 1595, nearly ten years after his release from pi'ison, during the greater part of
which he was in a condition of absolute beggary. Shattered as was his intellect by
grief and illness, he wrote during these years a poem entitled. La Gerusalemme
Ccnquistata, extremely admii-ed at the time, and bearing the marks of unmistakable
genius, although much inferior to most of his other works.
THE   ATTEMPT. 51
His principal poems are, La Gerusalemme Liberata, II Monte Oliveto, L'Aminta,
and some very beautiful canzoni and sonnets. It is scarcely possible to say too much in
praise of the first of these poems. In design and execution, in the great and
powerfully sustained interest of the plot, in the skilful introduction of the supernatural
element, the vivid and life-like portrayal of character, and the extreme purity,
elegance and beauty of language and style, it is unrivalled—it is perfect. Without
ever attaining the grandeur and sublimity, the impassioned language and marvel¬
lous force of expression possessed by Dante, there is a charm in the poetry of Tasso
which rivets our attention, enchains our interest and compels our sympathy. The
pathos of Dante chills our blood—horror is ever mingled with our gi'ief, except per¬
haps in the description of Francesca da Rimini, and even there, so teiTible is her woe,
so black and hopeless her despair", that something akin to horror creeps upon us as we
read her mournful words; but the pathos of Tasso commands our tears from its sim¬
plicity, its sweetness, its inexpressibly soft and tender accents. I can scarcely imagine
an Italian, or any one well acquainted with the language, reading that canto of the
Gerusalemme Liberata, in which the death of Clorinda is described, without a tear.
Yet is there no lack in the poetry of Tasso of grandeur, of passion, and of power,
inferior though he be in these particulars to the mighty Florentine bard. Read the
convocation and speech of Pluto, the incantation performed by Ismeno, the combats
and battles scattered through the whole poem, and you cannot fail to be convinced
that the lyre of Tasso possessed strength as well as sweetness, sublimity and passion
as well as purity and grace. But the latter qualities are those which are pre¬
eminently remarkable in the works of Tasso ; the death of Clorinda, the flight of
Erminia, and her life among the shepherds, the enchanted garden of Armida, and more
particularly the wonderful stanza in which the poet describes her magic girdle—
" quel si mirabil cinto
Di ch 'ella aveva 11 bel fiauco sucointo,"
are masterpieces of poetical beauty and harmony. Nor do we find in them any of
the affected elegance, the laboured refinement and euphuism which is the fault of
too many Italian poets, and which has drawn down upon this glorious language the
undeserved reproach of effeminacy,—the verses of Tasso are as simple as they are sweet,
as flowing and natural as they are soft and tender. The mind of Tasso was too
exalted, his sentiments were too noble, ever to permit a straining after effect or an
attempt at display.
It has often been remarked, that of the charactera in the Gerusalemme Liberata,
52 THE  ATTEMPT.
Goffredo (Godfrey de Bouillon) is the hero of the poem, Einaldo of the author, and
Tancredi of the reader ; and I think this will be admitted by all who read the poem
attentively. Goffredo constantly occupies the prominent position; his divine call and
election to the supreme command of the Crusaders, his saintly character, and his final
complete and glorious triumph over both earthly and infernal foes, mark him
out unmistakeably as the hero of the poem—that is the character whom Tasso intended
for the hero. But how evident is the partiality of the poet for the young Binaldo !
With what glowing colours does he describe his deeds of valour, his many high and
generous qualities ! With what tenderness does he excuse his fault ! With what ardour
does he predict the glories of his descendants ! Nothing can be plainer than Tasso's
partiality for this brilliant, engaging and generous character of his own creation.
Then, with regard to Tixncredi, I question if one in a hundred of the readers of the
Gerusalemme Liherata would hesitate to avow an unqualified preference for this
magnanimous Crusader. In no work of fiction do we find so complete an example
of the true and perfect knight, the " chevalier sans peur et sans reproche," except
Tennyson's King Arthur, and Tancredi need not fear comparison even with him. He
is ever foremost in battle, fiercest in fight, but also most merciful in victory, most
magnanimous and courteous to his fallen foes. He alone of all the Christian knights
(Goffredo, of course, excepted) resists the blandishments of the sorceress Armida;
" He loved one lady, and he clave to her."
And although it was the decree of fate that the lady of his love was to receive
her death from his hand, yet his poignant anguish was tempered by the belief, accord¬
ing to the articles of the Catholic faith, that in sprinkling her before her death with
the water of baptism, he had also bestowed upon her eternal life ; and the night after
her burial, Clorinda, more beautiful than the stars, appears to him in a dream, to
assure him of her perfect happiness, and comfort him with hopes of an eternal
reunion.
Of the female characters in the poem I have not space here to speak ; I can only
say, that the magnanimous self-devotion of Sofronia, the exalted, fearless character of
Clorinda, and the gentle, timid Erminia, cannot fail, from their variety, to be attrac¬
tive to every taste; while the description of the sorceress, first in the pride of power
and beauty, and then in all the abandonment of despair, contain some of the most
beautiful passages to be found in the whole poem. Let those who would know more,
read the poem themselves—and own themselves captives to the spell of Torquato
Tasso. Dido.
THE  ATTEMPT,
53
%^t ^Dhmmxi P^rfjir.
The summer sky is blue o'erhead,
And sweet the summer air;
Oh ! who would deem a world so bright
Could harbour aught of care 1
But through Edina's grey old streets
There streams a mighty throng,
Who have no heart for nature's joy,
As swift they haste along.
Is it to dance or festive show
They wend their eager way 1
Or doth some king, with regal crown.
First wreathe his brows to-day 1
Ay ! 'tis a crown is donned to-day,
But not of this world's mould ;
It is not decked with earthly gems.
Nor wrought of earthly gold.
No crimson canopy of state,
Is o'er the honoured head,
And on no path with flowers bestarred,
His feet are bade to tread.
But o'er his head there spreads afar
The fair blue summer sky,
And on a scaffold gaunt and grim.
He stands alone—to die.
And some are come to curse and taunt,
And some to mock and jeer.
And some to pour their anguish forth
In many a bitter tear.
But few with glad or thankful hearts
Now tread the grey, old town ;
For few there be that know the worth
Of martyr's palm and crown.
For few can pierce the gloomy veil
Of clouds that lie between,
And gaze upon the heaven beyond.
All joyful and serene.
But one there is, whose dauntless heart.
Upborne by faith and love,
Can scorn the bloody cross below,
To grasp the crown above.
'Tis he, the martyr—calm he stands
'Mid that excited throng;
And with rapt face and heaven-tuned voice.
Pours forth his dying song.
" Now, blessed be God's holy name,
My crown shall soon be won ;
Soon shall my warfare's weary course,
Its grief, and pains, be done.
54 THE   ATTEMPT.
" O ! bless the Lord, who by His grace.
Hath brought me to this hour;
And over devils, men and sin.
Hath given me mighty power.
" All who have wronged me, I forgive.
As I have been forgiv'n;
For who could harbour thought of ill.
So near the gate of heav'n 1
" And you, dear children in the faith.
Who, dwelling 'neath the cross.
From cruel hands of godless foes,
Must suffer pain and loss.
" God grant that pure and free from sin.
Your life's full stream may flow,
That still your feet, by grace upheld.
In duty's path may go !"
The triumph-song of faith hath ceased,
The guilty deed is o'er;
The holy martyr's clarion voice
On earth shall sound no more.
No more on earth, but evermore,
'Mid seraph-throngs above,
His lips, from every sin-taint free,
Shall sing the Saviour's love.
And even, amid that curious crowd,
Who here are met to see
A good man meet a fearful death,
With calm tranquillity—
Hath crept a strange and solemn awe.
That checks rude mirth and jest;
For, who unmoved could hear the Lord
In cruel death confessed 1
But mark among the gathered throng,
Yon fail' and slender youth,
Whose very soul seems wrapt around
This witness for the truth !
From eyes that flash with righteous wrath.
Rains sorrow's sacred flood;
As with sad breast, and darkened brow,
He views the scene of blood.
Mourn on, mourn on, thou tender heart !
Not many years shall flee,
Ere many a heart and many an eye
Shall mourn and weep for thee.
The foeman's vengeance is not slaked.
The cross awaits thee too;
A cruel pathway thou must tread,
Ei"e heav'n's gates meet thy view.
Meigeag Bheag.
The martyr, whose death is described in these verses, was Donald Cargill. The
youth who beheld with such emotion the death of his revered friend, was James
Renwick, who himself suffered martyrdom some years after.
THE   ATTEMPT. 55
The doctrine of tolerance does seem to be better understood now-a-days than formerly,
but we think we may be excused for advocating its further cultivation. Doubtless,
in the great questions of politics, there is not now the same fiery animosity—almost
hatred—betwixt opposing parties, which we read of in days gone by. Thanks to
British freedom, and liberty of speech and conscience, men are beginning to see that,
however they may difier in opinion, each is entitled to hold his own; and the most
intolerant ventures not, for very shame, to give free vent to his one-sided zeal.
In religion, too, we rejoice to see the same growing spirit of "live and let live."
Presbyterians; Koman Catholics; Episcopalians, high church and low; all, not
only tolerant of each other's very difierent views, but, to a great extent, working
hand in hand for good. We have even seen (and although we cannot sympathize
with the fact, can yet admire the abstract principle) a sober-minded Presbyterian
married to a Koman Catholic. How such a combination would startle the covenan¬
ters of old could they but look up from their rest!
But it is not of religion or of politics we would write; that had best be left to
church and statesmen. We need not search beyond our own social circle, or (must
it be confessed ?) often our own domestic hearth, for instances of illiberality. Now,
in order to cure, the physician must first ascertain the cause of disease. It is not
enough to know where the disease lies, what its symptoms are, or even what may
alleviate the pain. He must investigate the symptoms, and find out, if possible, the
cause. When that has been worked upon and removed, then, in the ordinary course
of events, the eff"ects will disappear.
So, irr order to banish intolerance, we must apply the same principle.
As we take it, surely the primary cause of intolerance must be the want of
a knowledge of our friend's character. A person of quiet, active habits is naturally
fretted by having to work with another of demure, imperturbable temperament. He
feels such a nature a kind of drag upon him, so that he has not only his own weight
to carry, but must bear another's also ; he finds, that if he would prosecute his pur¬
pose, he must throw out energy enough for both. Now, of course, this is trouble—
we. are not prepared to deny it—but, let our busy little friend rest, if he can, for one
moment, and reflect that it may be, and, if he cannot settle so long as to think it out
for himself, let him take it from us on trust, that it must be quite as annoying for
our shoi-t-windcd, slow-moving friend,  to be forced at an unwontedly fast pace up
56 THE  ATTEMPT.
hill, or even on level ground, as for the other to walk slowly, with measured, unen-
thusiastic tread. At a glance, an unprejudiced third party must see that each nature
is necessary to the other. The world would be even more backward in the race with
time than it is, if there were no busy, noisy people; but then, these would race on far
too fast were they not weighted and counterbalanced by steadier, slower, heavier
natures. Cleverness, then, there may be in both, and we may well be tolerant, and
ought to be thankful for both.
Just the same is it in the family circle. There, where one would naturally
expect to find fullest knowledge of each individual character, one finds the very
reverse; or, what is worse, if such knowledge does exist, it is often abused; and home,
in the ideas of some, seems to be a i^lace for the outlet of petty tempers and want of
forbearance—feelings which would at once be detected and decried in society. How
far otherwise ought it to be ! Dear home is undoubtedly a place of freedom; a place
where all constraint and conventionality should be laid aside, but not a place for
rudeness and selfishness. If there is a lamentable sight on earth, it is to see one, be
it man or woman, who can be all smiles, all politeness in society, and to his self-
elected friends, but who, the moment he enters his own home, sits down sullenly,
answers curtly, and seems to think it not in the least incumbent on him to exert
himself to cheerfulness there. Making allowances for, and tolerating a brother's or
sister's failings, seems to be a thing never once thought of. Each one thinks, not
only that he is right, but, for that reason, each and all his relations must bo wrong;—
never considering that in a family there must be difi'erence of temperament, which
frequently is quite sufficient in itself to account for diversities of tastes and opinions.
Do not let it be imagined here that we are asserting that bonds of afiection and con¬
fidence must be strongest among relations. However beautiful this may be when it
does happen, it is vain to expect it in every instance.
Instinct is at first sufficient to bind parents and children, brothers and sisters;
but, as they grow up, individual characters develop themselves, and what is wanting
in one member, he may not be able to find in the formation of another. As he goes
into the world, however, he will be unfortunate indeed, if, in that vast arena, he does
not succeed in finding one to fill up the void in his heart.
Closely allied to tolerating character is the toleration of opinion. Anyone who
has really formed an opinion in the only legitimate way, viz., by weighing all the
opposing arguments, is naturally and justly desirous that his honest conviction should
be propagated. But, if because his own mind is convinced, he expects to bring all
others to be like minded, he will be sadly disappointed; he yet lacks one element of
THE   ATTEMPT.
57
social happiness. He has claimed freedom of thought for himself, let him allow the
same in others, and if he cannot agree in opposing judgment, let him respect it. A
beautiful definition of tolerance was lately given in a speech, reported by one of our
national journals,—it was as follows :—" The true spirit of toleration is this, that all
honest conviction ought to be respected, not that the thing of which a man is con¬
vinced, not that the opinion is to be respected, but that the conviction is to be
respected ; that is to say, a man's honest belief is to be respected, whatever you may
think of the opinion which he believes, .... and you are entitled to expect
the same measure in return." We cannot but respect free, unbiassed judgment—
that which has been formed after hearing all that could be said for, and more espe¬
cially against the argument. The mind must be kept open to criticism of opinion,
and, when a person is fully convinced, and can bring forward reasons and arguments
in support of his ideas, he may then truly be said to have an opinion. " A man
that can render a reason, is a man worthy of an answer."
Respect for conviction will generate tolerance. The strong will not despise the
weak. " There is a beauty and a use in strength, there is a beauty and a use in
feebleness. All are not made alike. God, who cuts no two leaves upon a tree after
the same invariable model, shapes also His soul-work after His own will, variously."
Kathleen.
§aljn Cbarms.
Starry eyes of blue,
Fairy locks of gold,
WeaAdng round the heart
/Ties of love untold.
Parted lips so red.
Tiny pearls between,
Vieing with the gems
Of some elfin queen.
Rounded rosy cheeks.
Dimpled by a smile.
Angel-like and pure.
Free from shade of guile.
Eager little hands.
Soft plump lily arms ;
Who can tell the sum
Of those baby charms ?
Busy little tongue.
Prattling loving words.
Dearer to the heart
Than all wealth afibrds.
ASTELBE.
H
58 THE   ATTEMPT.
" PLATED OUT."
The multitude of novels written in the present day is something quite appall¬
ing, and we wonder if any one person could be found with the superhuman patience
to read them all as they come out. It might be done, perhaps, by rising early and
going late to rest, bringing your novel with you to the breakfast or dinner table,
and giving up every requirement of duty, or even pleasure. But this not being
attainable even to the most idle and frivolous, the question comes to be, which to
choose out of the vast array, and which will afford the highest kind of gratification
to the reader. Of course this must to a great extent be regulated by the peculiar
taste of the individual; and no fact is more patent than that tastes do differ very
widely; and this is no doubt a great blessing, else what would become of the hetero¬
geneous mass we find in the circulating libraries 1 Some people prefer the senti¬
mental style, where the heroes with any character at all are all dai-k, and have a
mystery, and the heroine goes from one fearful trouble into another in such rapid
succession, that one would almost be made to believe the normal state of young girls
is intense misery. Others, again, prefer the dashing style, and give you Amazons
warranted to go over hedges and ditches like experienced huntsmen ; and gentlemen,
whose habit of using slang, and even stronger language, would almost lead us to
doubt their right to the title. Others have a morbid taste for " battle, murder and
sudden death," of which the supply is always quite equal to the demand ; and lastly,
there are some who look out for common sense, and an air of probability, to enable
them to digest their novel, and who consequently do not deal largely in the article
at all. The truth is, let who will deny it, much novel reading has a deleterious
effect; it should be read as we eat sugar plums, not as an article of staple food, but
as a slight zest when the meal is over; it should constitute our recreation, not the
business of our lives.
There are a few, a very few novel writers, whose works improve the more they
are read; who teach the most useful lessons in the most attractive form, whose fun
really makes us laugh, whose pathos brings tears to our eyes, and from the perusal
of whose works we rise with the earnest wish in our hearts to live good and useful
lives.
The great difficulty with authors is, to portray female character truly; with
authoresses to give us men, not lay figures.    Authors are too apt to make their
THE  ATTEMPT. 59
heroines either angels, or the opposite extreme, without paying attention to the
countless shades of character that range between. The consequence is, they pall on
the taste, for we neither believe iti the entirely angelic, nor the wholly diabolic.
We know that the best of women have always a few foibles, if not actual faults, to
witness that they are genuine daughters of Eve; and amongst the most hardened,
some redeeming point will almost always be found, if trouble is taken to find it.
We do not imagine it can ever be productive of any great good to trace the dark
and subtle workings of a scheming woman's brain, and to the majority it is almost
pernicious ; to the young and inexperienced, it opens up depths of evil such as should
not enter into their hearts to conceive ; to the morbid, it can but increase the un¬
healthy condition they are in ; and to those whose passions have not been checked,
and who only want brains to cause trouble to themselves and others, it suggests
ways and means that would not have occurred to them otherwise. What a miser¬
able tale of great talent bestowed on most unworthy ends is that of Miss Gwilt, in
" Allan Armjdale," a story of crimej treachery and gloom almost unparalleled. We
leave the perusal of such a book as we should some den, full of noxious insects and
bad air.
Then, on the other hand, there are the portraits of women, whose goodness and
beauty remove them immeasurably above the common run of their sisters; we say
that this is also calculated to do a great deal of harm, as giving an untrue view of
life, and dissatisfying those who hope to find their ideals in the world, and who may
always expect to find some dross mixed with the pure gold. Let us have reality,
human nature, however far short of the heroic we may come. Authoresses have
quite as much, if not more to answer for in their almost total inability to make their
heroes life-like. We do not find men, but stiff awkward creations, who neither speak
nor act in the way we are accustomed to see them do .every day. They are aristo¬
cratic and haughty, or weak and maudlin, or pompous and sententious, but seldom
like our fathers and brothers, and familiar friends. The only writer almost that we
know of, who is equally successful with both sexes, is Anthony Trollope, who has a
wonderful faculty for portraying real ladies and gentlemen. Dickens is inimitable
in his power of depicting men and women of the lower classes, but he seldom attempts
anything higher, and when he does, is not always successful; but Trollope can take
us with him into a lady's boudoir, a bishop's palace, west-end drawing rooms, and the
dwellings of reduced clergymen with equal certainty of finding ourselves at home,
and bringing out the characters to the greatest advantage.
His conversations are the most delightfid things,—.so natural and yet so clever ;
//
60
THE   ATTEMPT.
we get at last to consider the people as personal friends ;  we are anxious to serve
them in their troubles, and to share their joys.
There is one great comfort in reading TroUope ; he always takes his readers into
his confidence, he never bottles up a mystery, tantalizing us and fretting us all through,
and frequently getting us into such mazes of bewilderment that we never do get clear,
not even at the end of the third volume : we see all along what he means, and realize
the position fully. It is the most annoying thing to be told, as we constantly are,
" If only he knew the dagger that was suspended over his head, ready to fall at any
moment," and yet not to have a notion what the dagger is ourselves, unless we look
I'pilA-t td-O'Ti, as we generally do, in such aggravating circumstances : or to read " Take care,
Aclelina ! if yoti knew what was before you, would you not pause in yoiir course %"
which, of course, we might all do if we saw what was before us, and is a manifest
absurdity. Authors are very fond of apostrophising their characters, just as if they
were children playing with dolls, delivering them warnings from the heights of their
superior wisdom.
We shall only take up one novel just now, which, though clever, is not at all to
our taste, and has sevei'al of the faults alluded to. It is Miss Annie Tliomas' last
work, " Played Out," and gives us the history of a certain Roydon Fleming, who is
presumptive heir to his uncle's property, and who, in the endeavour to learn some¬
thing of farming, goes to board at the farm of a Mr Lethbridge, who has a pretty,
kindhearted, middle-aged wife, and a vain, bright, clever little daughter, Kate, whose
liistory is by far the most interesting in the book. The Lethbridges' nearest neigh¬
bours are the rector's family, where there are six girls, one of whom has made a very
good matcb) and as Mrs Petherton is very anxious to get into the county society.
To efiect this end, she induces her husband to take her to London, where he makes
acquaintances, who promise to come down to his place in the shooting season, which
they accordingly do, and among them, the famous traveller and author, Mr Maurice
Bryne. This wonderful man has been everyrv^here under the sun, and does not bear
the very best of private characters, but he is, no doubt, the real hero of the book.
There is a handsome haughty widow over whom he has had great influence at a
former time, and who pays a Adsit to the Pethertons, for the purpose of finding out
if she is now indifferent to him, a sort of playing with tigers to see if they will scratch.
Kate Lethbridge and Roydon Fleming fall in love at a very early period of the
story; but the gentleman informs the lady, that though firmly attached to her himself,
he wishes no avowal from her, as she has seen too little of life to understand her real
feelings for himself.    This is very romantic and beaiitifully unselfish, but unfortun-
THE  ATTEMPT. 61
ately is no bar to jealousy when rivals really appear. Maurice Bryiie soon makes
a wonderful impression on the enthusiastic hero-loving Kate,—on her imagination,
not her heart; and then a third candidate appears, a young London equery, all smiles
and fascinations, but with no serious intentions, who brings out the flirting propen¬
sities of the young lady, hitherto undeveloped, so that a decided complication is the
result. Maurice, with a fierce determination to win Mrs Darrock, who persists in
her resolve to reject a man who has no religious feeling, shows attention to Kate,
who is charmed to receive his homage, and rather neglects Roydon. There is small
blame to her for this, in our opinion, as she is bound to him by no promise, and he does
not try to win her, although there is no reason whatever to prevent him. In fact, he
virtually waits for her to propose to him, which, indeed, she, goaded by his ridiculous
manner, almost does, and they become engaged ; and we can only say, that we wonder at
her taste. We are constantly told that he is perfect, and was worthy of any woman's
afiection, and yet, with the exception of his Quixotic resolve not to bind Kate till she saw
some one she might like better, he scarcely does a single thing to merit our admiration.
He is not particularly well-bred, and often is positively rude, and his conduct at
the end is utterly incomprehensible. He is summoned to his xmcle's house, after
taking a most affectionate farewell of Kate, and on his arrival there, finds the old
man has married again, depriving him of his likelihood of succession, and taking ad¬
vantage of the absence of his daughters, the Mrs Darrock before mentioned, and her
pretty charming sister, Georgie Fleming. He certainly bears his disappointment
very well, and sets himself to consider what he will do in the future, with the pro¬
spect of a wife to support.
In the meantime, Maurice Bryne leaves the Pethertons one evening after
a thrilling interview with Mrs Darrock, who resigns him for ever, and is moodily
walking along to the station when he meets Kate, who, being a veritable child
of nature, had gone out for a stroll in the moonlight, and asks her to walk with
him to the station. On reaching it, they find the train already arrived, and
in a thoughtless moment they enter a first-class carriage to wait for the time of
starting, keeping the door open that Kate may alight when necessary. Most un¬
fortunately the guard is to quick for them, locks the door, and the ti-ain, an express
one, is off in a moment. Maurice at once realijses the position, and is overwhelmed
by it; but Kate, with very little knowledge of the world, and no notion that she
will not be able to get out at the next station, only troubles herself with the thought
that her parents will be wondering what is keeping her, and impatiently looks out for
the moment of her release.    At last, her companion tells her the truth, that they will
62 THE   ATTEMPT.
not stop till they reach London; and he endeavours gently and sadly to show her the full
extent of the misfortune. She is overwhelmed by it, and sinks into a sort of stupor,
whilst Bryne racks his brains to determine what course will be best to pursue. At
last he resolves that the only honourable plan is to marry her, and take her with him
to the distant land whither he was going; and, on propounding this plan, Kate, too
utterly exhausted to make objections, agrees, and he leaves her at an hotel, whilst he
goes to acquaint his brother and sister-in-law, who are in London at the time, with
his intended marriage, and to make preparations for his hasty wedding. On his
return to the hotel, however, after a most exciting interview, Kate determines to
take her chance, and return to her home, leaving Mr Bryne to depart alone for
foreign climes, feeling he has tried to act honourably. The poor girl returns to find
her father dying of the shock caused by her supposed elopement, and he just opens
his eyes to look at her, and bless her, before death claims him. His afiairs are found
to be in a desperate state, and his widow and daughter are obliged to leave the farm,
and go to live with some relations.
Before this, however, Koydon Fleming returns, and hears from the foolish
mischief-making clergyman a distoi-ted account of Kate's conduct, and not knowing
what to think, goes to see her and learn the truth, at the same time longing
to hear the effect on her mind of his probable change of fortune. She has nobly
determined to give him up, as she is afraid of bringing disgrace on him through
her involuntary escapade ; so, of course, when she declares her intention of breaking
off the engagement, he imagines it is because she does not choose to run the risk
of poverty, and takes little pains to discover the truth. And this is where we
blame him so severely; when he hears of the changed fortunes of her family, and
that she nobly resolves to become a governess in order not to be a burden, he never makes
the slightest endeavour to see her again, or to ascertain the truth in any way, but
glides into love with his cousin Georgie in the easiest manner possible. She is a fine
true-hearted girl, and does her utmost to bring the quasi lovers to an understanding,
but fails, through the obstinacy or lack of feeling of the man. There is not a single
man in the book that is a comfortable character, or worth the trouble of cultivating,
unless it be the very questionable one, Maurice Bryne, who certainly acts with more
honourable feeling than any of the others; and we are at a loss to see why poor Kate
has Nemesis presented to her in the awful form of the loss of her father, fortune,
lover and good name all at once, because she indulges in a mild flirtation—not being
an engaged girl—and takes an involuntary journey to London, which comes to be
acknowledged as such by everyone.
THE   ATTEMPT. 63
There are two or three well-drawn and natural characters in the book, of whom
Kate herself is one ; but the men are quite the reverse, and only prove what we
have said before, that authoresses almost always fail in their attempts to portray
them. They should study nature, human nature more, and their own fancy less,
before they can hope to give an air of reality to the creations of their minds. We
might be just as hard on authors for their treatment of our sex, but we have already
allowed this paper to exceed its proper limits, and close our remarks on novels, in
the hope of continuing them in a future number.
Alma.
"Come feme to ^u."
Long he had tossed on the surging ocean,
Wearied and v/orn with its ceaseless motion,
Restlessly heaving by day and night
Its dark blue waves, and its foam-wreaths white,
Dashing its surf on the echoing shore,
As it carried him home to depart no more.
Long he had fought in the foeman's land,
At the head of his true-hearted, gallant band ;
His voice ever loudest to cheer on his men,
To charge those grey-coated squares again ;
His words ever hopeful, his face ever bright,
In victory's sunshine, defeat's gloomy night;
The foremost in battle, the last one to fly—
And iww he had come to his home but to die !
He was home at last.    Oh many a day,
While wounded, and helpless, and lonely he lay,
How sadly he longed for the dear old place,
Each loving voice and familiar face ;
How he wanted his mother's soft hand then.
64 THE   ATTEMPT.
To rest on his soft brow, racked with pain ;
How he wished he could hear his sister sing,
With voice so gentle and murmuring,
Like bells of silver, sweet and low,
The songs he had loved so long ago.
How many a weary and wakeful night,
While he longed for the day and its welcome light,
And sleeplessly tossed on his couch of pain,
He had pictured his home again and again,
As he heard the i-ush of the cold night breeze
Sweep past through the boughs of the sycamore trees.
He tries to think it was shaking the leaves,
That at home drooped low from his casement eaves,
Wliile, 'tween the dark and quivering sprays.
The quiet stars glimmered through night's blue haze.
When the Sabbath morn dawned bright and clear,
How he longed and listened in vain to hear
The soft glad bells, from the gi-ey church fane,
Sing God's rest given to earth again.
Was that their chime 1 with a weary sigh.
He but heard from the mosque the muezzin's cry.
But now it was over,—all of it past,
That weary time, he was home at last !
He could clasp his hand in his mother's now,
He could feel her kiss on his fevered brow.
He could lay his head on her breast once more.
And whisper, " Mother," as once of yore.
He could gaze again on the breezy woods.
And the sunlit breaks in their solitudes ;
He could see on the hillside the dear old church.
Shadowed by yew, and elm, and birch.
Its ivied tower and gravestones white.
And its vane in the sunshine gleaming bright.
THE   ATTEMPT. Go
As the soft wind, sweet with the breath of the flowers.
Stole lazily up from the garden bowers,
It bore on its light wings the voices gay
Of his merry young brothers, laughing at play;
And oh ! how sweet was their childish glee,
Their innocent mirth unchecked and free,
To the ear that had only heard so long
The din of a mighty battle throng,
The bugle blast, and the charger's tramp,
And the thousand sounds of a warrior camp.
Ended for ever the toil and the strife.
The terrible conflict of life for life,
The rush, the clamour, the clash, the roar,
Never to break on his quiet more,
That blessed calm, which at last had come.
With the peace, and the rest, and the love of home.
Alas ! alas ! that the noble head.
Must lie so soon with the household's dead !
That the pleasant voice must be stilled and hushed.
And the life from out of the brave heart crushed.
And his home's bi-ight simlight be dimmed so soon.
By his grave's broad shadow athwart it thrown.
Yet so it must be;—the death waiTant has sped
That shall number his name with the glorious dead;
That shall snatch from his brow the laurels just won.
In the dust of death to trample them down;
That shall sheathe for ever the sword that had flashed
Like a torrent down from a mountain dashed.
Whose glorious strength to the noonday light.
Leaps madly forth, and then falls in night.
There is no fame in the silent tomb,
No gleam of arms 'mid its solemn gloom ;
All the haughty splendour of war is past.
GG THE   ATTEMPT.
And nought but its memory left at last;
The echo alone of the trumpet's breath
Floats faint through the still abode of death.
Say, will the glory the lad has won
Dry his mother's tears for her fallen son ?
Will she breathe with less angiiish his well-loved name,
Because it is linked with a soldier's fame ?
Will the floVrs in the churchyard seem e'er as fair
To her, than once in the days that were.
Because she will see them bend and wave.
In the gi'ass that covers a hero's gi-ave ?
No ; ask her now as she clasps the hand,
That shall never again wield its glorious brand,
As she looks on the face so thin and pale,
So soon to be hidden by death's dim veil,—
Ask if the glory that round his brow
The laurel has wreathed, can comfort her now ?
All her soul's great grief in her eye you may see—
" Oh my son ! my son ! what is/imie to me V
Mas Alta.
€olvimhnB,
Brightly the warm August sun laughs on the waters that lave round the port
of Palos ; but his beams light not the gloom in many a heart, nor roll away the
misty forebodings that settle there. For in those three small ships, that fill their
white sails with the eastern breeze, are one hundred and twenty beings, leaving the
warm light of their pleasant home, to sail with one called Christopher Columbus
over the trackless surf, dark with the mist of ages, to the shore he hoped to find
beyond. But who can tempt the dangers of that mighty vast that circles round our
globe unscathed ? Who dare the terrors of the bounding chaos in the west, and live 1
What wonder then, that within and around these little barks rise many a bitter and
most hopeless thought; for who can enter into, now, and share the visions of this
THE  ATTEMPT. 67
vain dreamer 1 Yet dreams seem a substantial staff unto himself Behold him now,
so bold, so bright, so hopeful, so sunshine lit ! Think ye that we should trust the
man 1 We shall wait yet awhile. A month hath passed. Onward, onward, and
the vessels' keels still plough the pathless deep. The " Islands of the Blest" have
risen on them, and have faded in eastward mist, and onward, stUl onward, to the
west they sailed. Still, each night sinks the sun 'mid air-wrouglit gold, into the
shoreless sea of the far, far west. The sailors gather in small groups upon the decks
and whisper in mysterious words, "where more is meant than meets the ear." Each
day new wonders appal them; and they fearfully recall the tales that they have
heard of danger and of death amid the western surf; of the unknown fate that
ever overtook the enthusiastic searchers of the cloud-built Atlantis, or the mirage¬
like islet of St Brandon, or the dreamt-of Island of the Seven Cities of the sea that
never found a shore, but stretched on, on into space; and of the chaos beyond " the
treasury for lost and missing things."
In the cabin beneath, Columbus paces with a hasty step, enchained in thought,
now linked fast with doubt. He completes his nightly task of lessening the public
reckoning of the distance they have sailed, that the sailors might not needlessly fear.
He can cheer them ; but who is there to hold up his hands 1 He places in his
private book the true number of the leagues, and strengthens himself to his task.
But there, before him, on that rough-hewn table, lies his compass,—the needle no
longer pointing with a stedfast finger ever to the pole, but trembling and veering, it
seems itself in doubt. Has the last material thing he trusted in thus failed him
at last 1 Will the spiritual help fail him also ? Is he then, after all, as he has been
styled, a vain dreamer 1
Day after day does that eastern breeze still blow steadfastly on, and before it
these three small ships ride, through calm and storm, through ocean current, or
tangled sea-meadow of weeds, on to the west; eve after eve the western sun sinks
westward, and casts up no land-shadow from its beams ; night after night does the
longing seaman wish for the morning light, but the morning brings naught but
sorrow. Desolation and loneliness long endured—a fearful novelty in all sights and
sounds—and the unsustained spirits of the timid seamen had been, by slow degi-ees,
worked into "resolution by despair." They will, they must return ! And threaten¬
ingly they gather round the man who brought them hither, and bid him take them
back, or weigh his own life in the balance with their many wills. Oft has he
curbed the mutterings of such gathering storms before; but his wonted accents of firm
command fall unheeded now.    Wliat will he now do 1    Ah ! magic signs have been
68 THE   ATTEMPT.
revealed unto Ms eyes that others may not read; he knows what he once hoped I
Strange, though, he yields; he agrees to return, and in three days' time,—if, in that
space, they should not find the land. As if an enchanter, comes now proof of his own
thought,—green herbs and earth-grown weeds, a crimson-berried branch, and carving
wrought by hands, float past upon the shoreless sea; strange-feathered birds pour
new notes in new languages to them, in attestation of the leader's words, and then
fly ofl", homeward, westward, tempting them to follow. Doggedly, and with resolu¬
tion henceforth to believe naught less than sight, the sailors frowning yield. The
master leaves them to calm his beating heart. When great men have the gift of
greatness, they must content themselves, while others, not so gi-eat, call them in
ignorance, vain dreamers.
And two days passed. Bright hope had risen in many a heart,—for the coming
land sends shadows bright before. Flocks of bright birds, fresh fruits and flowers ;
whence do they come ? The zephyrs came to them, perfumed as the breezes of
Seville ; have they reached now, by some magic route 1 nay, this is some new home
they near. Brightly the evening falls; boldly the vespers rise; their voices have
grown stronger with their hearts ! What if the morrow lead them to the kingdoms
of Cipango and Cathay,—the long-fabled, ocean-guarded source of all jewels, and all
gold 1 What if this brightness lures them to deceive ? Many a dream of many a
time visit the troubled heads on the hard couches of that night. But the master's
heart seeketh no rest. He gazeth forward from the nishing prow, on to the nearing
west. Has his life then run thus far ? He casts his vision back, and sees himself a
boy in his Genoese home, leaning over lettered pages that told him of bold sailors'
deeds and hopes; or of " the perfect sciences," that guide men to all othei-s; he
cruises again 'mid the blue waters of the Mediterranean's tideless sea, and stands in
the command then thrown upon him, so nobly filled. The first dawnings of that
glorious hope again fill his soul, and he remembers how he wrought it forth as clear
as day. He passes once more through the repulses and the scorn that he received
from every monarch to whom he brought his scheme, and the long weary years of
helpless poverty and misery, which ate the life out from his burning heart. Was it
only visions that sustained him then ! or angels from another watching world ? But
one on this earth even was found ; and he smiles to think that the royal Isabel, his
generous patroness, his noble friend, shoidd not have sold her princely jewels all in
vain, when her selfish, narrow-minded consort, Ferdinand, had refused " to build
aught solid on a dream." He recalls his arrangements, and his departure, and all
these weary weeks at sea with his troublesome mariners,—and his promise too !     A
THE  ATTEMPT. 69
sharp sting pierces his inmost soul;—he will not fear—he will not misbelieve his
dreams; but what, if the very morrow should not lead them to the land 1 He looks
up in speechless prayer unto the stars—they are all new, unknown; but all stars are
his friends. He looks down from them forward once more, vainly striving to pierce
the darkness. He starts ! Does he dream now ] Do his eyes deceive him, and
transplant the stars 1 He closes them ; he opens them ; it still is there, and redder
and more eai-th-like than any heaven-lit star. It moves along, it must be on some
shore. No phosphorescent gleam or spirit-lamp was this, but a torch thrust in the
hand of his marble statue, Hope—the Pharos-light of a new world. His Utopia then
is found ! His ambition no longer a chimera, altogether vain and impossible. He is
no "vain dreamer" of the night; what will the morning prove?
Faintly the daylight dawns o'er the waters, slowly the mist cloud rolls soft away,
with the speed of the tropics up rushes the sun, and bears across his glowing brow a
pale blue crowning band, and shouts rise out to greet the land, the long-sought, long-
expected land!
And humbled now in joy, many a proud spirit bows, and many a knee bends
low, craving forgiveness, with mutterings of praise and gratitude, before their great
commander, who heeds them not, nor moves his proud eye from the nearing shore.
For the rushing prows haste eagerly on, yet seeming slow to those they bear, to
whose longing eyes are disclosed palm trees, waving their feathery frondes along
the western shore, and other trees, with clustering fruits of brilliant hue; while
beneath them stretched rich verdure to the very shore, on which stood dark browed
men, in savage robes, with golden ornaments most plentifully decked. No murmurs
now, no vain repinings to return, but a glad haste to reach this new found land.
Oh, hope of rest for the weaiy mariners ! Hope of cool springs, and luscious fruit, and
leafy shade ! Hope of a free expanse for voyage-weakened limbs ! Hope of a future,
where immediate happiness and comfort is crowned with a sure prospect of riclies,
and gems, and fame to come ! Upon the unaccustomed air spontaneously there rose a
hymn, a song of praise—and clear, and full, and firm the notes of the " Gloria in
Excelsis" peal over the dancing waters, and die away amid the half circling water
there before. They land; the standard of Spain is placed upon the soil, and the 12th
of October, in that famed year of 1492, changes the heathen Guaualiani into the
Catholic St Salvador; and proves to all men, and all times in the earth, that this proud
glowing enthusiast, this learning-darkened student, was indeed "no vain dreamer."
Let him beware of further dreams, he has won his hope, but his future is very black.
Years, centuries have passed since Christopher Columbus first set his foot upon
70 THE   ATTEMPT.
the new continent, and still his tale of life thrills many a heart. Born at a period
when most of the states of Europe, just emerging from the barbarism and ignorance
of the dark ages, threw most of their energies into the pursuit of navigation and com¬
merce ; and in a town, whose trade was its life, he had every inducement to take to the
sea. He studied deeply those sciences connected with navigation, geography, mathe¬
matics, astronomy ; and a thoughtful use of that knowledge by his ever-active and
observing mind first formed his noble theory, and then enabled him to persevere in
pursuit of it, and surmount every difficulty thrown in his way. His idea was
deeply rooted in his impulsive and visionary mind; and he believed himself under
the special direction of the Lord Himself, who sent angels with him; while he read
forth some of the prophecies to foretell his discoveiy. Had these fancies been all his
foundation, he would have been a " vain dreamer" indeed, as ckeamer he was, though
a wise prophetic one, whose truths are foretold by common sense and study. We
are too apt now to under-value his tremendous difficulties. The wisest and most
learned men in Europe mocked him ; and they led the kings, who alone in such days
had wealth to assist such princely men in such royal schemes. We all know how
Isabella of Spain saved her time and nation from disgrace and loss; and the land
was found. But the great, poor, burning heart knew not all he found; he believed it
to be only a western route to India, and that he had circumnavigated the globe ; he
believed that he had won for himself fame and wealth, and all that mortals prizj on
earth, with the blessing from on high. He knew not that enemies, more powerful
than he, would tear him from his dear bought station of Admiral of the Indies;
would send him home in chains after a third voyage, in which he discovered South
America; would keep from him even the hard-won glory of giving to his discovery
his name ; would hunt him even to his lonely death, in a poor hovel in Valladolid.
Other and more interested governors usurped his place, who ground down the gentle
dark-browed inhabitants to a sad slave-life in the silver mines, instead of raising
them to their own level, as they boasted they would do, through their Catholic
religion. The glory had departed from amid the Spaniards when Columbus passed
away, but his spirit rested on the land he discovered, and though she bears not his
name on her forehead, she finds a shrine for it in all her children's hearts, more
precious and more lasting than that massive tablet, which tells us that—
" To Castile and Leon,
Columbus hatt discovered a New World."
LuTEA Reseda.
THE   ATTEMPT. 71
While noticing Leslie's larger and better known works, we would not omit to
mention some of his small pictvires, less known, perhaps, but not less meritorious or
worthy of the great hand that produced them. Two or three of his single heads are
excellent, intensely characteristic, most delicately handled, and capitally painted.
Take, for example, the head " Portia ■" a most beautiful face, with deep, intelligent
eyes, and lustroiis black hair,—artistically simple, in a pure white robe, with an
emerald clasp on the shoulder. Or the small study, called "The Toilet; lady
examining a necklace." A charming girl, in morning deshabille, her elbows resting
on her toilet-table, her eyes lingering over the jewelled necklace she holds, with a
look that indicates a peculiar interest attachable to the jewels, which the artist meant
to suggest when he put this pretty little episode upon the canvas.
We must not linger longer over our friend Leslie, although we have not
nearly exhausted his works; but I fear I should be accused of great forgetfulness
were I to ignore the existence at South Kensington of his fine scene from
Don Quixote—" Sancho Panza and the Duchess." The gallant Sancho has been
ushered into the august presence;—there he sits, as demure as he can make him¬
self, but still with a sly twinkle in his merry eye, on a low seat, before the great
lady; she, however, right bravely attired, in jewels and satins, lounging on her
great chair on the raised dais; much amused, too, does she look, as she questions
the shoi-t, dumpy, comfortable little squire about his noble master,—the renowned
Don Qiiixote de la Mancha! At her right, in sober black robes, and snowy cap,
with folded hands, stands her old nurse, or duenna,—her smooth grey hair, and
faded, wrinkled face, contrasting strongly with the blooming cheeks and dark curling
locks of her young mistress; no breach of decorum or strict propriety could possibly
occui" in her presence, you may be sure ; yet, did she look round, and catch the broad
grin on the face of the merry mulatto girl leaning against the pillar yonder, I very
much fear she would be greatly scandalized thereby. With this final glance at this
set of pictures we must take our leave of our entertaining and clever artist.
Tliere are some few stray works, so to speak, at South Kensington, which are
well worth examining—some perfect gems of their kind, known all over England
as landmarks of art; such are Kosa Bonheur's " Horse Fair," Frith's " Derby Day,"
and Dyckman's " Blind Beggar." I suppose nearly everybody must have seen a print
of some sort of Frith's celebrated work; and all of us, as soon as we catch a glimpse
72 THE  ATTEMPT.
of his intensely natural characters, must recognise them at once as so many people
that we have all seen before, somewhere or other, in the streets, squares, or parks of
the great cities in which we respectively live. Don't we all know the tall sergeant,
with the short, over-dressed, vulgar-looking wife 1 Haven't we seen, scores of times,
that simple-looking plough boy, and red-faced policeman, and company of acrobats 1
Axe we not every day seeing carriages dash by us with the same fair occujjants that
look so pretty and graceful on the artist's canvas 1 And do not Princes Street and
Rotten How abound equally with just the same young exquisites, who lounge and
smoke and quiz on the great race-course before us 1 And haven't we all been pestered
times out of number by just the same ragged little beings who roll on the short
sward of the Derby, and steal morsels of pie and scraps of sandwiches under the very
eyes of the spruce groom in the foreground 1 Which of us does not remember well
the wizened, black-eyed old gipsy, who crones out, " Tell your fortune, my pretty
lady, shall I ?" with the same importunity that she is now exercising towards the
young girl in the carriage beside her, on whose fair face a wonderful look of insouci¬
ance and coldness has been pictured. There, in the corner yonder, is the group of
thimble-riggers, pursuing their nefarious occupation; the shooting-range, the booths
and stalls, all to the very life. It is almost overpowering to think of the bare amount
of work that must have been expended on that picture—the drawing alone is
something wonderful; and the careful, painstaking nicety with which even the most
trivial details have been put, is not to be too much admired.
To those readers who love horses, in whose minds the hat and habit are asso¬
ciated with more real physical and healthful enjoyment than the most elegant ball-
dress they ever wore, to them there could, we suppose, be hardly a greater treat
than a sight of Rosa Bonheur's " Horse Fair." There is such a fresh breezy
look about the picture—a sort of feeling that instinctively carries you away—far, far
from the gallery itself, with its cane-bottomed chairs, and vigilant policemen—out
into the pure blytlie country air, to the green banks and fields, and surging boughs
of the great elms, and bright blue sky, flecked with its soft white clouds, so that
you fancy you can hear the shouts of the men, and the trampling of the great hoofs
as they thunder along on the dusty road, and the busy hum of the fair at a distance,
as well as you can see the sunshine smiting the bright smooth coat of the splendid
white horse in the foreground, falling on the men's backs, and glowing on their brown
faces,—and you can feel the dust rising, as the measured tramp, tramp of the heavy
feet sends it up in blinding clouds, as to make you instinctively draw back out of the
way of the crowd, and view it all from a safe distance. Mas Alta.
THE   ATTEMPT. 73
#it  Jlalhrn  '§xitXRtmt;
FRANCESCO   PETRAECA HIS   SONNETS   AND   CANZONI.
Pillar'd in their sarcophagus, repose
The bones of Laura's lover.
" Laura's lover." Not a very dignified way, this, of designating any man,
much less a man of such great and undoubted genius as Petrarca; yet it tells us
exactly what he was, and he himself would have been perfectly satisfied with the
description. It is true that he was also a great poet; but it is utterly impossible to
consider the poet apart from the lover; for, with the exception of his Latin compo¬
sitions, which are but little read, he scarcely wrote a line which did not refer,
directly or indirectly, to Laura. One feels inclined to wonder, while reading his
poetry, whether, supposing he had not had the good fortune to fall in love with
Laura, the world would ever have heard of him'/ (I say " good fortune," solely with
respect to his renoAvn as a poet; for, during all the one-and-twenty years which
elapsed between the day on which he first saw Laura and the day of her death, not
the smallest encouragement, not the faintest hope of reciprocal affection, ever glad¬
dened the unfortunate Petrarca.) But Petrarca not in love, is not Petrarca; it is
utterly impossible to imagine him free from the tender passion; and, doubtless, if he
had never seen Laura, he would have found some one else to ins2:)ire him with an
affection equally ardent, and whose name would have obtained renown equally wide¬
spread and lasting.
He was born at Arezzo in 1304, and was educated with a view to the legal
profession, greatly against his own inclination; he therefore paid but little attention
to his studies, devoting most of his time to literature, which pleased him better than
books of law. In 1327 that event occurred which, as regarded his mental history
and his future renown, was certainly the most important of his whole life. At
six o'clock in the morning of the 6th April, in the church of Santa Chiara, at
Avignone, Petrarca first saw Laura de' Sade, dressed (he himself has preserved the
particulars—the feminine mind may be excused for retaining and repeating them)
in a green velvet dress, sprinkled with violets, and covered with her long golden hair.
She was the wife of Ugo de' Sade, with whom she lived happily untU the day of her
death, and at the time when Petrarca first saw her, was exceedingly beautiful; but
apparently, her beauty was not the only cause of his most romantic attachment, for
K
74 THE  ATTEMPT.
Laura at forty, the mother of eleven children, is the subject of panegyrics just as
glowing, of protestations just as fervent, as the graceful, golden-haired girl whom he
first beheld in the church of Santa Chiara.
But Petrarca could find room in his heart for a friend besides his Laura. This
was Giacomo Colonna, Bishop of Lombez, in Gascony, in whose society Petrarca
passed the happiest and most profitable hours of his life; for the young prelate was
at once learned and virtuous, liberal and judicious, and proved himself on aU occasions
the warm and faithful friend of Petrarca. For some years the poet led a wandering
life, endeavouring—or pretending to endeavour, or imagining that he endeavoured—
(I think the last statement is the most correct), to shake ofi" his violent and hopeless
passion for Laura; but findiug this impossible, he established himself amidst the
lovely shades of Valchiusa, and occupied himself with literary pursuits, more especially
with the sonnets which have made his name and Laura's famous throughout the
world. More fortunate than his compatriots, whose sufferings I have remarked upon
in former essays, his disappointed love was the only burden which Petrarca was
called upon to bear. The enthusiasm and delight caused by his writings were un¬
exampled ; the laurel crown was offered him, both by the University of Paris, and
the Senate of Rome (he eventually accepted it from the latter body, and was crowned
in the Capitol in April 1341); he was the honovired guest of cardinals and princes;
the King of Naples solicited the honour of having one of Petrarca's poems dedicated
to him; and, amidst the crowd of his admirers and flatterers, he could count at least
three tried and trusty friends ; so that, for many years, the love of Laura was but the
one thing wanting to make his life one of perfect happiness. At last, in 1348, this
lady, whose virtue and intellect were as remarkable as her beauty (this statement
rests on other authority than that of her romantic lover), died at Avignone, of the
plague, which in that year was raging with great violence in Europe. Petrarca's
grief at this event, is utterly indescribable ; and nothing can be more touching than
the strains in which he bewails the death of Laura. For some time afterwards, he
could not compose his mind for any sort of occupation, but roamed restlessly from
place to place ; the violence of his grief was, however, abated by time, and he began
to take an active part in public affairs, being first Papal Secretary, and afterwards
Ambassador from the court of Milan to the courts of Venice and Paris, besides filling
other pviblic offices of less importance. But the image of Laura remained eternally
fresh in his memory through the whole of his busy career, and from time to time
appeared some poem bearing new testimony alike to his genius and fidelity, until, on
the 19th of July 1374, Petrarca breathed his last, at the age of seventy, having.
THE  ATTEMPT. 75
for some years, ceased to occupy himself with politics, but engaged with literary
pursuits until the very day, nay, the very hour of his death ; for he was found dead in
his library, where he had been employed in writing the biography of some of his
illustrious compatriots.
I hold in my hand a book entitled " Rime del Petrarca," which contains two
hundred and ninety-seven sonnets addressed to Laura, or dedicated to her memory ;
seventeen canzoni on the same subject, written during Laura's life, and eight more,
after her death ; two very long poems, the " Triumphs of Love and of Death," both in
honour of Laura ; and twenty short poems of various kinds, all addressed to Laura ;
making up the astonishing total of three hundred and forty-four poems written by
one man in honour of one woman !
" AM tanto amo la non amante amata ! "
It is pei'haps right to add that I have only read one edition of Petrarca's poems ;
and it is quite possible that it may not be a complete one ; so that I may have under¬
stated the numbers in the list given above. However, as it stands, it appears to me
quite sufficient to take any ordinary mortal's breath away, for at least a minute after
reading it. Doubtless some of these sonnets are spoilt by an over-refinement of
style and language, some are so fantastic as to border on absurdity, and in others
the poet, in his rapturous eulogy of his lady, passes all bounds of moderation, and
even of poetical licence ; but the very great majority are exceedingly beautiful; the
ideas are those of a true poet; the descriptions are those of an artist; the language
is tender, impassioned and mournful to a degree which no other modem poet has
ever attained; and the style, generally speaking, is of extreme elegance and good
taste, although here and there spoilt by mannerism or clogged with superfluities.
But, in considering the enormous number of poems written by Petrarca on the
same subject, instead of exclaiming against a few bad verses, we should rather wonder
that they are so few, and that the real beauties to be found in his works are so many
and so gx-eat. Those who wish to enjoy the sonnets of Petrarca should not read too
many at a time; it is like dining on barley-sugar, and will infallibly produce a
loathing of the diet. Read three, or four at most, at one reading, and you cannot
fail to be struck with their tender melancholy, their melodious cadence, and the grace¬
ful fancies which abound through all Petrarca's works. But a knowledge of Italian
is utterly indispensable to the enjoyment of these poems; I know nothing more
thoroughly untranslatable than a sonnet of Petrarca's. To begin with, no language
but the original possesses the exquisite harmony, the musical softness, which may be
76 THE   ATTEMPT.
considered as the most striking features of the sonnets; then the ideas, the sentiments,
the whole spirit of the poetry are so completely Italian, that the most literal transla¬
tion fails to convey any adequate idea of the origiaal; while, in many of the sonnets,
a literal translation is rendered impossible by the play upon different words, which
Petrarca has very skilfully introduced into his poetry. Lauro, the laurel-tree differs
but in one letter from the name of his lady ; and he has made use of this coincidence
in several sonnets with' great beauty and effect. Then, by inserting an apostrophe
between the first two letters of the name, we have Laura, the air, the breath; and
this has also been employed by Petrarca, in a very beautiful sonnet, where he speaks
of Laura mia vital, " my vital breath;" and in another, Quand'io movo i sospiri a
chiamiar voi, he finds in her very name new and certainly most ingenious reasons for
doing her honour.
But by far the most beautiful sonnets are written after the death of his love—
In morte di Madonna Laura; and, though Petrarca can scarcely be said in any
part of his poetry to have achieved the sublime, yet in some of these sonnets, and in
the Trionfo della Morte, he certainly is not far short of it; while their simple pathos,
and the deep grief evident in every line, place beyond a doubt the reality and
sincerity of Petrarca's affection for Laura, which the exaggerated and finical style
of some of the poems written during her life make us inclined to suspect. But when
the great sorrow of Laura's death fell upon Petrarca, he forgot the rules of style and
the demands of fashion and custom ; he broke loose from these restraints, and wrote
from his heart; while the natural elegance of his mind preserved, in the midst of his
gi'ief, the refinement and the exquisite finish which distinguish all his poems. Of
all these sonnets, none, to my thinking, is more beautiful than the second. In Morte
di Madonna Laura, the honours of which she shares with Giacomo Colonna, the
poet's dearest friend.
" Rotta e I'alta Colonna, e'l vertle Lauro,
Che facean ombra al mio stance pensiero."
I am sorely tempted to write it down in full, and let it stand for the conclusion
of this essay; but alas! I feel but too sure, that in the present neglected state of
Italian literature, out of ten who may read this paper, five would fail to understand it,
and two more to appreciate it; while the remaining three have probably their own
copies of Petrarca to refer to ; and for them the lines I have quoted will probably
be sufficient to remind them of this exquisite sonnet, and send them to enjoy the
pleasures of a second perusal. Dido.
THE  ATTEMPT. 77
C^i Jfr00*s ^iot^ oi llj^ Jalaa of ^ihm^himn.
Yes, it was a Frog, neither more nor less than a Frog, that told me this
marvellous tale. " A repulsive animal," do you say, reader i Form a milder opinion,
and say "uninteresting," milder still, "innocent and harmless." Undoubtedly it
was harmless, therefore I encouraged it to come near me. It looked wistfully at me,
and there we sat for some time contemplating each other, with, I presume, equal
satisfaction.
It was a balmy summer day, and I was seated on a mossy bank, 'neath the
shade of a favourite tree, listening to the sweet music of the stream at my feet. It
may be supposed that, under the influence of such a combination of charms, I fell
asleep, and in such a situation, what more probable than that I should dream about
Frogs t Well, all I can say on this point is, that I have no recollection of having
received attentions from Somnus, and that several times, while the Frog was speaking,
I tried the infallible method of finding out whether I dreamt or not, for which I
paid the penalty of a black and blue arm for the next four days.
But, to return to my little friend. After regarding me, as I said before, for a
short time, it began, " Have you ever heard of the Palace of Attemptation ?"
Of course I was not a little startled. However, I only pinched my arm, and
then answered, " No."
" Then," said the Frog, " if you will but do me the honour to listen, I will tell
you all about it." To such a kind offer what could I answer, but that I should be
delighted, and so forth ?
" Thank you," said the Frog (how polite it was to be sure), and without even a
preparatory little croak, it began its stoiy.
" I was born in a beautiful meadow not very far from here. It is called the
' Meadow of Edina.' In the river that waters it, there are several fair islands, but
it will not be necessary for me to speak of more than one or two of them."
" I thought you were going to tell me about a Palace," said I.
" All in good time," replied the Frog, with a peculiar little croak. (Was it laugh¬
ing at me ?) " The Island of Literature is the one to which I wish in particular to
direct your attention. It is studded all over with buildings, more or less beautiful.
Fair flowers cluster around the walls of these edifices, some yielding the sweetest
perfumes, whilst others exhale deadly poisons."   The Frog ceased, and heaved a deep
78 THE  ATTEMPT.
sigh.    (Pray don't laugh, reader, do you not think Frogs have their troubles in this
■world 1)    I enquired the reason of the sigh.
"It grieves me to think," replied the Frog, "how little I am acquainted with
the beauties of this Island of Literature."
" Surely you are not to blame for that," said I, " the Island is, I presume, very
large, and you are such a little creature, it must take you a very long time to traverse
even a small portion of it."
" True," said the Frog, " but if I had not been so indolent, I might have known
much more about it than I do."
" But the poisons."
" Oh ! it only requires a little caution to keep out of harm's way; but, to be
sure, there is another danger which I might have encountered." And here the Frog
croaked again in that peculiar manner I have before alluded to; undoubtedly it was
meant for laughter, for the small creature had a very roguish look.
"And what was that?" I asked, when the mirth had subsided.
" Nay, I am not going to tell you what tJiai danger was ; you will discover it
for yourself in the course of my story."
" I will try, pray go on Froggie" (we were getting familiar), and the Frog went on.
" You must know that those mansions, of which I have been speaking, were
built, at least for the most part, by the 'Lords of' Creation.' I say, for the most part,
because, no doubt, though you may think it strange, animals inferior have rendered
great assistance in the erection of these edifices.
" Stay," I interrupted, for I was not sure in what sense the Frog used the term
"Lords of Creation" " by ' animals inferior' you mean beasts, do you ? "
" Yes," said the Frog, " but I wUl call them animals, if you please."
I could not see the reason of this nice distinction, but I did not say so, and the
Frog continued. " One day, the astonishing news reached my ears, that the animals
had concerted together to build a Palace on the Island of Literature, which was to be
entii-ely of their own erection." The Frog laid a strong emphasis on its three last
words, and then paused for a moment or two, to let me recover from the effect of
such a stupendous announcement.
" A bold plan," said I.
" Yes," rejoined the Frog, " and yet it was executed. When I first heard about
it, the work had been begiin, and was going on favourably."
" And with which of the animals did this plan origiuate ?" I asked.
" With one who has superintended the work since its commencement, and will,
THE  ATTEMPT. 79
I suppose, continiie to do so. I speak of the Stag; and I thiak, amongst all the
animals, there was not one calculated to fill the office of leader in the enterprise
better than he has done. Is not the Stag a courageous animal 1 Has it not wisdom
and strength ?"    And the Frog looked at me enquiringly.
" Undoubtedly so," I answered (though I felt compunction of conscience at
making such a confident answer, because my information with regard to natural
history is not great); " and those qualities you have mentioned," I added, " are the
best that a leader can have."
" Yes," said the Frog, " courage to meet difficulties, wisdom to overcome them,
strength for everything." The little creature said these words in a very low voice,
as if speaking to itself, and seemed inclined to muse upon the attributes of the Stag.
1 roused it from its reverie by asking about the other animals.
" Oh, to be sure," said the Frog, " I had almost forgotten the Horse, it has been
a sharer of the Stag's labours from the beginning, I believe; and the services of an
animal possessing so much intellect, strength, and activity, are, as you may well
suppose, very acceptable. As for the rest," continued the Frog, " I can only make
special mention of one;" here the Frog paused, and then indulged in its croaking
laughter for some time. " Pray excuse me," it said at last, " well, I am going to tell
you about the one who first acquainted me with the fact that there was such a
palace as the Palace of Attemptation; I allude to my friend the Bull-dog."
" Your friend !" I exclaimed, " why Froggie, I should suppose your nature and
that of the bull-dog's to be very dissimilar."
" I am not surprised that you should think so," said the Frog, " and no doubt,
as regards some things, we are dissimilar; yet, whether it is that I am very unlike
other Frogs, or that the Bull-dog does not resemble other bull-dogs, I know not,
but this is a fact, and one which I wish to imj^ress on your mind, I love the Bull-dog,
and the Bull-dog loves me. One day this friend came to me, and described in glowing
language the Palace of Attemptation; and then he actually asked me—poor little
me !—to assist the noble cause with my labours; but I refused."
" You refused ! indeed, Froggie ; you ought to have felt much flattered by such
a proposal."
" Perhaps, I did," said the Frog;—" but I shrank from the toil it would entail.
I had other reasons also, and therefore, as I said before, I refused. The Bull-dog,
however, would not accept my answer. As regards determination, he certainly re¬
sembles the rest of his species. He coaxed, entreated and commanded (for sometimes
he is very tyrannical) to such a degree that he almost won from me a reluctant con-
80 THE   ATTEMPT.
sent. However, we parted without having the affair settled. Sometime afterwards,
the Bull-dog again spoke to me on the subject, and asked me to go with him to see
the animals meet, and discuss affairs concerning the Palace. I consented; and we
went. When we came to the appointed place of meeting, I hid myself behind the
long grass, where I could notice unobserved all that took place. Soon the animals
assembled, and formed a circle, which the Bull-dog joined. You would have been
amused by the variety of animals thus brought together ; one in particular attracted
my attention."
" "Which was that 1" I asked,
" Pardon me," replied the Frog, " I may not tell you. Don't you hear the bii-ds
twittering in the trees above us ? and don't you know what they are said to do 1 If
you do not believe it, I do."
" But, at least, you will favour me with a general description of them," I said,
laughing.
" Certainly," said the Frog, " I will mention all those I can remember. The
principal ones, of course, were the stag and the horse. Close by the stag, I saw a
hare. It spoke in very soft, low tones. On the stag's other side, there sat a very
intelligent and interesting looking spaniel. There was a fox, which never spoke, and
did not seem to take a particular interest in what was going on. But it was not the
only one that kept silence. I was surprised to see that several of them never made
their voices heard.    Amongst these was my own friend, and also the Peacock."
" Probably it was thinking most of its fine plumage," said I.
" Nay, it is uncharitable to suppose so," returned the Frog. " Now let me re¬
member who else was there. Oh, yes ! There was a merry little squirrel, one or two
comfortable looking cats, a bat, and a fine Newfoundland dog. I can't recollect the
rest. During part of the time they discussed the affaii"s of the Palace, and then
they began to play at a game—in which, I have heard, the Lords of Creation often
indulge."
" What is the name of it ? " I asked.
" I think they called it debating ; have you ever heard of it before ? "
" I think I have ; but I don't know much about it."
" Then I shall describe it to you as well as I can. The animals had a large ball,
which they called their subject. They tossed it about to each other, and any one
who liked could take it up and draw a circle round it either black or white, as he
thought proper ; some made their circles very decidedly—that is to say, all of one
colour;—others again, marked them half black and half white.
THE   ATTEMPT. 81
" Then, I suppose, the game consisted in determining what colour predominated
in the ball 1"
" Yes," replied the Frog, " but I don't think it was determined."
" And did they all mark it ?" I asked.
" Oh ! no ;  several of them let it pass without touching it."
" How were the circles made 1"
"By means of little markers, which they called their ' opinions.'"
" Then probably those who did not touch the ball, had no markers."
" Perhaps so," said the Frog, " or if they had, they kept them concealed. But
I must tell you that the ball had another name, for you must know this game can
be played with various other things, and they are all called ' subjects.' I saw a ticket
attached to the ball, and on it I read those words, ' The character of O—v—r
C—m—1 !' "
" Pray Froggie," I said, suddenly, " What was the original colour of this strange
ball?"
How the small creature laughed ! as it replied, "I don't know ; dubious, I
should think, dubious all along ! And now," it continued, sinking its voice to a
mysterious whisper (for which I could see no reason), " I am about to tell you an
extraordinary fact (as if my poor head had not received enough for one day), whether
it was fancy or not I cannot say, but from my hiding-place I distinctly saw a vapour of
a bluish colour wreathing about in fantastical forms like smoke. Now it was above,
now it was around, now it was between the animals. How it encircled the horns
of the noble stag, how it played about the mane of the horse ! And I beheld all this
with wonder and trembling." Evidently the Frog expected me to tremble at the recital,
or at least, my hair to stand on end; but alas ! for my insensibility, I was laughing !
" At last the meeting broke up," continued my small companion, resuming its
usual tone, " and, accompanied by the Bull-dog, I returned home."
" Was your resolution not to join the noble company, unshaken by all you
had witnessed?" I inquired.
" Not a bit," replied the Frog. " What am I but a Frog ? How absurd to
put me on a par with these great animals !    Besides, the vapour ! "
" I fancy this is the danger to which you before alluded 1" said I.
" Yes," replied the Frog, " I knew it was somehow or other connected with
the Island of Literature. With fancy's eye I saw it surrounding the Palace of
Attemptation, suiTounding each builder as he progressed with his work, and im¬
parting its strange hue to all.
82 THE   ATTEMPT.
" But," I asked, " could it really harm them 1"
" It might, and it might not; I, at least, would have been safe, for it does not
injure those who dislike it as much as I do, but I dreaded coming in contact with it,
or being in any way associated with it."
" Well ! if you had really nothing to be afraid of, do you not think it was
foolish ]"
" I never said I was wise," interupted the Frog.
" No, to be sure ; and after all you are but a Frog," I said smiling; " and now
pray tell me how came the Bull-dog to think of asking you to join in that work,
surely he could not expect such as you to do much ?"
" It will take me a little time to explain that," said the Frog; " but if you have
patience to hear it, I will tell you."
" Certainly, I am all attention, Froggie."
" I said at the commencement of my story that there were two islands in the
Meadow of Edina to which I would direct your attention. I have spoken of one,
and now I am going to tell you about the other, namely, the Island of Thought.
It is impossible for me to describe it to you, the subject is much too vast for my
comprehension, but I may mention one or two facts concerning it. There is found
growing there, in great abundance, a small blue flower, very pretty, and smelling
sweet; but I have heard that there is thorn sometimes found on the stem."
" What is the name of it?"
" Remembrance," said the Frog. " There is also in this Island a certain bird
(called Reverie, I think), whose notes possess a peculiar charm. I am inclined to
think it is enchanted; at least, it has the power of enchanting those who hear it."
" I think its music could not be sweeter than this brook's," said I, pointing to
the stream at my feet.
" It may resemble it," said the Frog, musingly ; " why do you love the brook 1
Is it simply because of its sound, or because of a strain it calls forth, a strain of
chords distinct in themselves, but which, blending rapidly together, form a melody,
sometimes low, soft and pleasing, at others stirring and tumultuous, sometimes
joyful, sometimes mournful 1    Such is the music of the enchanter."
Now, not being over credulous, I could not believe that the Frog could appre¬
ciate music, either of the sensible kind, or of the—what shall I call it?—mysterious ?
No, nonsensical kind, of which it spoke. I hinted the same, upon which my friend
replied, with its croaking laugh, that, "of course he knew nothing about the matter;
1 ut he had picked up his information from the whispoi-s of the fairies, which Frogs
THE  ATTKMPT. 83
were privileged sometimes to hear. And now," he added, " let me hasten to the
conclusion of my tale. In this Island of Thought many precious stones are gathered,
which, when washed in the Fountain of Composition, assume a certain shape and
brilliancy. Now and then, chiefly for amusement's sake, I had gathered a pebble or
two from the shore, and put them in the Fountain. The Bull-dog soon discovered
this. ' Ho ! ho ! Froggie,' said he, ' the Palace is built of stones like these ; come
along and help in tlie work.' I have already told you," continued the Frog,
" how I replied to his entreaties and commands ; but now I am going to tell you
something which I thought fit to j-eserve till the end of my tale, I have consented."
The Frog drew a long breath, and looked at me very hard with its small eyes.
" Impossible," cried I, " what powerful arguments overcame your objections?"
" No argument at all, I was just led to do it, by my own weakness, or good
nature, if you will giA^e me credit for it. And now my tale is done, I shall bid you
adieu."
" One moment," I cried, " you have not told me much about the Palace itself."
" Why, I suppose it is just like other buildings of the kind. It has its solid,
plain parts, and its ornamented ones; but I cannot say much on the subject, as I am
not a connoisseur in architecture."
" But doubtless," said I, " you now take a great interest in the whole proceed¬
ing?"
" Great interest," cried the Frog, half scornfully, " what! did you never hear
that Frogs were cold-blooded animals ? Such creatures can take great interest in
nothing.    But see ! the sun is almost set; adieu, adieu," and the Frog was gone.
Feucara.
FROM THE GERMAN OF GUSTAV. JAHN.
Farewell, ye sisters ! take from me this morning,
My parting thanks for this—your parting care;
The myrtle wreath, even now my brows adorning
Parts us, and bids me for my course prepare.
84 THE  ATTEMPT.
Farewell! remember in thy prayer commending
The maiden who will be a wife to-day.
And ere before God's holy altar bending
Alone, but for one moment let me stay.
Alone, yet though no mortal can descry me,
I know that on me rests one watchful eye,—
My Lord ! my God ! I feel that Thou art nigh me.
And fViin my winged soul to Thee would fly.
My head, whereon the myrtle wreath is blooming,
Behold I rev'rently before Thee bow ;
But once in life that fairest crown assuming.
With beating heart, the maiden wreathes her brow.
Oft hast Thou seen my joyous eyes glance brightly ;
All prospered with me 'neath Thy sovereign care.
And crowns of fairest blossoms wearing lightly.
Sweet maiden symbols ! I have decked my hair.
Throughout my life Thou hast been ever strewing
Bright flowers of joy upon my onward way ;
Hear me, 0 God ! my song of praise renewing
Take once again a maiden's thanks to-day.
No blooming flowers to-day may deck my tresses,
Wliile yet unveiled my new life lies unseen;
Pure spotless white the bride most fitly dresses
With coronal of myrtle evergreen.
Here, oh my God ! I am content to sever
From girlhood's happy life, but ne'er from Thee ;
In white rob'd innocence array me ever.
And green for ever let this myrtle be ! Echo.
THE   ATTEMPT. 85
%n ^nbxhtion ia ^bmbwrgl^.
Reader, whoever you are, I give you a cordial invitation to come and see
Edinburgh ; even although you should already live in it. It isn't large—gems never
are. I am sure almost every one could find something to please himself or herself
in it.
Tell me your taste in particular. Do you like quiet, correct streets, with high-
sounding names ? Where then can you find anything more satisfactory than the new
quarters of our city? As to names, for instance. Were you never told how we
embalmed King George's memory in George Street 1 laying on his right hand the
shadowy Queen (Street), separated from him by our prickly Thistle (Street) ; and
left the joyous Prince (Street), on the other side, sunning himself in the southern
light of youth and beauty in nature; while but a Rose (Street) conies between him
and the royal George. Charlotte (Square) lies at his feet; and at his head St
Andrew's, the patron saint of Scotland. A right royal crown does the protective
Saint weave for the King, with statuesque chasings, and banks for jewels. There
are many other such bright ideas fossilized in our city, that might not yet be worth
the trouble of disinterring for you.
Or, do you enjoy the crooked by-ways and intricate lanes in life 1 What place can
then compare to our Old Town 1 Are bustle and active life attractive ? Were you
ever in the Cowgate, the Canongate, the markets, or Leith Street at their peculiar
hours 1
Or do you seek " blest retirement " and silence 1 Then we have squares enough
and streets, where " silence itself were pleased," and whose retirement is so complete,
that gi-ass enough grows on the causeway to feed a donkey. Is Architecture your
hobby 1 We have tolerably good specimens in our Modern Athens. From the National
Monument on the Calton Hill, left by necessity unfinished (but her daughter inven¬
tion has made the best of it, and found in it a decidedly strong likeness to some of the
ruins of Ancient Athens), to Donaldson's princely hospital, and its many smaller
brethren; from the high-leaping Dean Bridge to Morningside and Newington,
throughout the length and breadth of the town you will find a rich harvest. Look at
the buildings on the line of Princes Street itself, so heterogeneous that one would think
there must be some style there to suit every varied taste,—that proud Scott Monu¬
ment—the finest of its kind in the world,—Nelson's, and all the other monuments
seen from thence, the high-reared Castle, the Galleries on the Mound, with all the
86 THE   ATTEMPT.
surrounding churches, offices and shops. One country couple, in their admiring
tour through Edinburgh, stood in open-mouthed and silent wonder before that florid
and torch-crowned edifice at the foot of the Mound. With a sturdy thump on the
ground of her family umbrella, the woman exclaimed, " Eh, mon ! isna that graund 1"
" Ay ! 'tis that, and a braw herbur for the spawries !"
" To what base uses may we come, Horatio ! "
Or, perhaps, the hard lines wrought in stone please you less than the artistic effects
combined from high and low, from light and shade.    Then what other city has
chosen for itself such a lovely site ?   Where can you find green hills amid the stoney
streets, and upraised terraces, and towers showing most nobly 1    Look either way
from the North Bridge, eastward by the Calton Hill, and Arthur Seat, down to the sea,
or westward through the North Loch valley, now a railroad, through pleasant gardens,
with a new view of the Castle, the High Street, the Monument.    Or take a morning
walk on Salisbury Crags, to look down and see the light white smoke transformed
into a bridal veil over Scotia's Queen.    Or to the Corstorphine Hills, to look afar off
to see the sun rise behind it, and throw it into bright relief; or to dart your eyes
through the arrow-like streets, why, it would make you an artist.    There are two
Picture Galleries,—a modern one, of which you must judge for yourself, and an
ancient one, of which you must allow others to judge for you,-—besides other more
private collections of statues and paintings, and everywhere you wander you have a
chance to find (sub rosa),
"Lovely faces
Lighting up the pleasant places."
Are you rather deep in the learned professions ] Divinity, for instance ? The
General Assemblies, and the ministers and professors here, will surely suffice; for the
Colleges, the press, and the people dote on divinity.
Or rather Law ? Whose wigs are so big as ours 1 The courts and the lawyers will
serve even for you.
Or Medicine ? Have we not the most famous doctors and most submissive
patients ? boldest experiments and discoveries, clever professors, and a fine infirmary !
with an accompanying badly-ventilated and case-producing district in our old town
closes and lanes; with strong eastern sea-breezes, blowing coughs and colds through
our rather well-ventilated hilly new streets.
Philosophy ? Our deductive philosophy and metaphysics would puzzle any ordinary
brain,—if you are extraordinary, you are beyond us. The learned " Ologies " find
also a place with us, in the shrine of Technology.    Are you interested in Geology 1
THE  ATTEMPT. 87
We have some good localities about, not forgetting the volcanic formation of Arthur
Seat, the mountain limestone, and fossil ferns of Bordeaux House ; the fine white
building sandstone of Craigleith, and its gigantic tree ; that is to say, if you are able
to leave the labelled specimens in the College Museum.
Are you a Botanist 1 Then there are many plants, whose only habitat lies near
us,—rare specimens being found on Arthur Seat, Blackford Hill, Craig Crook and
the Hermitage of Braid, besides many others too long to name. Then our Botanic
Gardens, with their professors, might even supply you with some ideas.
You may say. What do I care for all these modem things? I am an antiquarian!
Then that decides it; you must come to Edinburgh, for we are just floating in a sea
of antiquities. Come to the High Street, the noblest in the world, in that it has
what no other claims,—a Castle at the one end, and a Palace at the other,—laden
with stories of bye-gone years ; its haunted oaken rooms, and carved scrolls, telling that
princes' dwellings are shared by meaner men; its Churches, its Parliament Square,
its Moray House, its Nether Bow, its Cross, and the spot where was the heart of
Mid-Lothian ; why, if but half the tales of interest were told that you would delight
in, " the Traditions and Antiquities of Edinburgh" would swell to many more
volumes than they at present boast. Beneath your feet, as you gaze, runs an under¬
ground communication between Castle and Palace, now unused. It is said that in
the last century a bold piper tried to pass that way, and played his pipes loudly
until he came as far as the Cross, when they were silenced, and what became of him
then and there is left for you, bold antiquarian, to discover. Almost every grim
high-storeyed house that frowns above you has been the platform of scenes as wild
as Holyrood itself, whose true romances no one ever can forget. Here once lived a
man called John Knox,—yonder, in a small summerhouse in the Moray House Gar¬
dens, the Articles of the Union were signed, in the same domain that once echoed
to the tramp of Cromwell's men, or the trip of the Regent Moray's fair sister Mary.
The College now stands on the site of the once lonely Kirk-o'-field ; the bones of the
Scottish Martyrs lie in Greyfriars Churchyard ; and Captain Porteous sadly remem¬
bered the West Port, through which passed so proudly the bold Claverhouse. There
is enough in old Edinburgh to fire your dusty, musty, antiquarian old soul into a very
flame ; especially if you brood awhile in the National Gallery, where all the " periods"
are laid before you, from the " Bronze period " to the present. Besides these, you will
find here mummies and bones, and chips of old blocks, John Knox's pulpit, and
that fierce " Maiden," at whose feet flowed humbly so much proud red noble blood
of old.
88 THE   ATTEMPT.
Are you a merchant ? We can spare you Leith. A fishmonger 1 "We shall
send you to Newhaven. Do you rejoice in the dark side of nature; the murder and
house-breaking corner of the papers 1 Then " Mr M'Levy " will show you many curi¬
osities in his line ; the Dean Bridge has been the last leap of many a suicide ; and
Burke and Hare had a once well-known haunt here. You will still see the mark
of Rizzio's very blood on the floor of Queen Mary's Room ; or you might prefer a
peep at our jail, which is the most picturesque and airy little thing in turrets that
ever clung to the side of a hill.    And for a climax you might spend a day at Court.
You like exercise? "We can provide you with skating and curling upon
Duddingstone and other lochs in frosty weather, and good dancing in our Assembly
Rooms. Summer days can be spent in cricketing and athletic games, in archery, or
rifle practice ; a swiming match in the morning at the Chain-Pier; or a good day's
rowing in our noble Frith, past Cramond, to the ruined Castle of Bambogle ; or more
northerly, in the direction where—
" Inch Colm and Keith bring up the rear,
With scanty herbage bleak and bare;
On this an ancient Castle stands,
The sea-beat forts of GalHc bands.
In papal Mary's troublous days,
On that a Scottish King did raise
A votive Abbey, on the rock,
His refuge from the tempest's shock."
Or you may walk enough to please the peripatetics " from noon to dewy eve,"
" Over hill, over dale,
Over park, over pale,
Th'rough bush, th'rough briar,"
to the top of the hills; or the far away end of the long pier of Leith; or, as a dernier
resort—a sweet thing in exercise—you might mount the donkeys on Portobello Sands.
Or, perhaps, you are nothing in particular, and care for nothing at all ? Still,
come here, for there are many varieties of nonentities in Edinburgh. They are as
thick as mushrooms in Princes Street on a sunshiny afternoon ; and succeed tolerably
in the gardens and promenades, or ball-rooms and galleries in their seasons.
Surely I have not forgot you, oh, poet! in whom only a special interest has
caused this delay in my in-vdtation, for I was meditating how most to do you honour,
and lo ! you are left last, not least! Yet, is it not well; for is not a poet somewhat
of all other men,—doth he not share all taste, feel all sjonpathy ?    So then, revising
THE   ATTEMPT. 89
for you all aforesaid, I may say, what place for you like Edinburgh? What roman¬
tic associations matching its scenery ! has she not to form for you a warp and woof
of the many-coloured web you weave into a poem ? Dreams will come to you in our
environs; Roslin can send you back to many a knightly tale, and can bring the past
worship of another age to you, encased in the chapel. Hawthornden's haunted
beauty recalls a poet, insjiired before you were.    In Holyrood
" The ghosts of the departed enter at the open door."
You see its fair-faced, hapless Queen ; or farther back, through other lives, you are
led to that of its founder, who planted, by a heavenly vision led, this Chapel of the
Holy Cross, amid his favourite hunting-ground.
" The sair Saunt for the croon " has raised unto himself many fine monuments
" In memoriam." Thence you may ascend the jaggy peak on which stands ruined St
Anthony's Chapel, with its cool clear well; or climb by the shoulder of the noble
Arthur Seat, up to its rock-crowned crest; and from its hard-won peak you may
gaze down upon green vales, that seem as still and artless as if no city's heart beat
near; and sunlit lakes, as pure as if no human hand had ever banked them up. And
further off, you gaze at the "mountain nymph," that clings so fondly round the
grassy skirts—the Una city, sheltering herself beside the mountain lion. If you can
trace her form, her features, her expression, her instinct personality through that
faint white veil that hangs around her like a bride's veil, to conceal, yet to enhance
her charms—a veil of reality in the present, of ideality in the romantic past,—and if
she does not thrill you with the deej) notes of a poetic concord, then believe that you
must be mistaken, and that you are no poet.
" Father!" said a child, to her poet father, amid the fairy tints of a glorious
summer evening, "is 'Edenborough' called so because it is like Paradise 1"
But why should I speak ? If you accept my invitation, you will all see for
yourselves, and I will sing lowly and slowly, sadly in farewell,—
Fare-thee-weel, Edinburgh, Caledonia's Queen,
Fare-thee-weel, Edinburgh, where happy I hae been,
Fare-thee-weel, Auld Reekie, and Reekie New beside,
Ye're like a chieftain, auld and grey, wi' a young and bonny bride.
Fare-thee-weel, Edinburgh, your sons and daughters fair;
Your Palace in the shady glen, your Castle in the air.
Your Calton HiU, your Arthur's Seat, your mountains grey and bauld:
But should I aim at a' your tale, that tale could ne'er be tauld.
LUTEA  EeSEDA.
M
90 THE  ATTEMPT.
|i Stroll tljrcitiglj tlj£ '§o^nl ^coiib^ ^fabcmn.
We may as well confess at once our ignorance of the technicalities of art, and that
our only aim in this paper is to point out some particular beauties in some particular
pictures, and so convey to our readers some of the delight and pleasure which we our¬
selves derived from our stroll through the Exhibition Rooms. This year's Exhibi¬
tion is very rich in fine pictures. Many of our own Scottish Artists have outshone
all former efforts; and there are several splendid specimens of the style of both
English and foreign painters. We shall begin with a picture, which, we think, all
will agree, is, in both conception and execution, faultless—612, South Otagon, F.
Portael's Young Girl of the Environs of Trieste. She tells her own tale, although
her lips are silent, and her eyes lifted up to the Unseen, engaged in her devotions,
her rosary in hand. The fervent prayer still lingering on her lips, her pure and
gentle spirit finds expression in the perfect beauty of both face and form—what
nun-like, calm and unsullied thought is portrayed in this charming face—the
exquisite purity of expression and attitude is rightly clothed in perfection of form
and feature; and, as we gaze, we thmk " angelic " not too strong a term to apply to
so fair a face. On looking at this charming picture, we are struck by its utter
simplicity of detail, and at so fine a result being brought out without the slightest
straining after effect.
Of a difierent type of girlhood is No. 557, in South Octagon, Everett MUlais'
Young Jacobite. This young girl is more in accordance with present ideas and
progress, although a dashing beauty of some 150 years ago. She is standing upon a
horse-step, in riding hat and habit, ready to mount, in the act of drawing on her
glove. The clear bright eyes, the defiant air, and somewhat sensuous lip, tell us
plainly what spirit she is of; and it is well that the firm pose and proud bearing
indicate a noble character, or we should fear that the ardent Young Jacobite might
suffer in her devoted sympathy with the adverse fate of him who reigned over many
hearts, "as Charlie is my darling, the Young Cavalier." The accessories are painted
in with all Millais' wonderful power of detail. The glove is a real glove,—one could
lay hold of it; as also the riding whip ; and every little minutia of a fine lady's dress
in that age of fine and splendid dressing, is painted in to life, and with sj^lendid effect.
But the life-warm face carries all before it, and these details are only looked at as an
after thought.
It is amusing now to turn to Keeley Halswelle's picture of a yoimg fisher girl.
THE  ATTEMPT. 91
No. 288 North Octagon,—what a different class of sentiments, of ideas, of up-bring¬
ing does she portray, this wild, untavight fisher girl, with the wide open sea laving her
strong bare feet, as she stands, her sturdy form pressing up against the wall behind her,
her laughing face, turned well over her shoulder, all alive with fun and mischief,
waiting for some one who is evidently just round the corner ! This is a wonderfully
clever picture; the effect produced is capital; the face stands out with so much life
and vigour, and with such a merry look of fun. It seems to follow you about with
so arch a look. " "Whistle and I'll come to you my lad " is certainly the most telling
picture of this clever artist in the Exhibition, although not the most ambitious.
We shall now look at still another woman—one of a different kind altogether—
No. 405, in the Great Room, Graham Gilbert's Bandit's Bride. She is truly a lovely
type of womanhood, as she stands leaning on a rock, serene and pensive, with nature
all calm and silent about her. The graceful attitude, the thoughtful look, the soft
and womanly form are charming, and conveyed with all the artist's grace and delicacy
of feeling. But how comes so sweet a woman to be a Bandit's bride 1 Where is
the red-handed robber who has won her 1 How can she consort Avith a desperate
oiitlaw 1 He must be a sort of Italianised Paul Clifford, an idealised murderer, to
obtain her wifely sympathy. Who can now explain this mystery ? This beautiful
picture, we are glad to learn, is to remain in the possession of the Academy, and to
find a place in the National Gallery.
We must now pass on to a different class of pictures,—pictures that portray
to us a page of history, or some pleasant scene of domestic life. No. 343, in the
North Octagon, Leonax-do da Vinci at the Court of the Duke of Milan, by
Annibale Gatti. This fine painting represents Leonardo da Vinci seated, playing
on a musical instrument, and groups of great men standing around; the Duke
and Duchess on their chairs of state to the left. The merits of this picture have
been amply discussed. It is not a very interesting subject; and although the
artificial light thrown upon the different faces has a fine and brilliant effect, one
cannot help considering it an effect without a cause, as the few candles visible
to the spectator are quite insufficient to produce this brilliant illumination;
and we ask, where can it come from 1 without finding any satisfactory solution of
the question. The massive form and features of the Duke are perhaps less obnoxious
to the modern eye than the large proportions of his Royal Duchess, who, however
much in unison with the large and heavy* women portrayed by the old masters, is,
to modern notions of how a royal lady should look, somewhat coarse and over-grown;
her features are nevertheless handsome, and her expression lively and intelligent.
92 THE  ATTEMPT.
We shall now pass on to a scene of modern times, a splendid painting, a work
of time and labour, with as much incident in it as would make ten ordinary pictures
—The Wapjjenschaw, by John Faed, No. 431, in the Great Room. All who are
acquainted with Faed's masterpieces (and who is not 1) will at once recognise this
painting as inferior to none. The immense labour implied may be understood when
we enumerate upwards of fifty figures, all painted in with Faed's accustomed delicacy
of touch and finish, and elaborateness of detail. Each group contains a history of
sentiment and feeling in itself, and confines all in one harmonious whole, of which
the composition is excellent. To begin to describe the incidents in so large a picture
would take more time and space than we have at our command, the title explains
the subject; sufiice it to say, that it is worthy of the artist's fame. Faed's Avomen
are never idealised, they are always fair, pleasant, wholesome and genuine, and
painted with great delicacy. As for the men, we can only say, they are fit to be the
husbands or brothers of such women, be they Scotch or English born. There is a
fine young gentleman in red velvet, cousin, brother, or lover to the fair young girl,
who stands up with her cloak around her, both in fine contrast to the stalwart
groups around ; but not so intensely alive as is that speaking face looking forward
to the bonny lassie cutting up the beef and bread, and with laughing eye calling her
attention both to his presence and to his wants ; her look of sudden recognition is also
excellent; but we forget. We must not stay to exemplify, or we might go on for
another hour.
No. 629, South Octagon, is another scene of favourite sport in Scottish life
—The Curlers, by Charles Lees. This is a very spirited picture. The group in the
foreground watching the approaching stone is life-like, and full of eager interest,—
the onward movement of the two skaters, half turning to watch the game, is well
managed, and the pale frosty atmosphere and snowy slope bring the scene in all its
severity of winter before us, requiring all the animal exhiliration which this national
sport calls forth to overcome.
581, South Octagon, by E.. T. Ross, is a pleasing picture of a Highland Fireside.
The yoiing mother nursing her baby by the hearth, turning half round to watch the
entrance of the shepherd dog, who is cannily on the alert for whatever's " going," is
natural and easy. The shepherd on the threshold is, however, stifl" and uninterest¬
ing.    This picture is pleasant, both in its subject and treatment.
Gil, South Octagon, Lady Jane Grey and John de Fecknaam, by J. T. Napier.
Saint and sinner seems to have been the dominant idea in the artist's mind. Lady
Jane makes, however, in spite of red velvet, rather a sickly and uninteresting saint,
THE   ATTEMPT. 93
while the discomfited priest, huiTying from her presence, has too much the look of
Satan vanquished. We must protest against the feeling which would put so vile an
expression on, no doubt, an excellent and devoted minister of the creed he professes.
It may be good to be a Protestant, but, nevertheless, too much opprobrium has been
flung upon our Catholic forefathers.
624, South Octagon, by W. Nicol, a spirited picture of three brave iisher-
women. One is on the look out, with her baby in her arms. The other two are
sitting down, engaged, as the song tells us, in " trimming their lamp as the sun goes
down" in setting radiance over the dark green sea.
No. 647, South Octagon, The Forager's Bivouac—Prince Rupert's Lambs : very
peaceful lambs they are at the present time, preparing for their evening meal, for
which they seem to have been catering to some purpose, to judge by the slaughtered
fowl lying at their feet. The trooper holding up the splendid bird for the admiration
of his superior officer, although boon companion ; the fellow blowing up the embers;
the total disregard and indifference to the burning homesteads in the distance, with
the unhappy inhabitants flying before the swords of the troopers, which, however,
seems to have attracted the half melancholy regard of one of the officers. All this is
told excellently well, while in tone, colouring, and landscape there is nothing left to
be desired.
496, in Great Room, " Waiting for a last Interview," by W. Douglas. This
is an affecting incident of the Civil Wars. The unhappy victim in the cell, con¬
soled and supported in his last moments by his only friend, the Priest at his side,
is endeavouring to lend attention to his religious exhortations, but the din of the
crowd outside, visible through the grated window, waiting in noisy impatience to see
liim " done to death," distract his attention, and pale his cheek. The attitude of
utter despair in which the girl is waiting to " catch the last glimpse, and say the last
word," with the indifference of the jailor used to such scenes, and smoking his pipe,
is in capital contrast.    This is a finely painted picture.
396, Great Room, The Eve of the Deluge, by W. B. Scott, is a very striking
picture. The gorgeous colouring and eastern sky, the flapping large winged birds,
the majestic tiger sitting close beside in calm majesty, with the two panthers growl¬
ing in playful sport, with the singular vegetation in fiery bloom, all symbolise a
state of existence that may have been, but certainly is not now, even in the land of
the palm tree and eastern sky where the scene is laid. In one corner of the picture
is the Ark of Salvation, a dark erection, out of the window of which an elephant's
unwieldy trunk is protruding.    Noah and his descendants are slowly entering the
94 THE  ATTEMPT.
Ark. In the foreground sits an eastern Potentate, in luxurious ease, with his
women around him, pointing, with amused scorn, at Noah and his sons; we wonder,
as we look at these strange eastern figures, with their appliances for ease and self-
indulgence, their strange insti-uments and utensils, the unearthly-looking musical in¬
strument in the hand of one of these eastern beauties, adorned in ornaments not so
unlike some that are to be seen on the heads of western beauties of the present time.
Everything that surrounds them looks so utterly unlike, and yet what might be reality,
that one wonders at the imagination of the artist, who could not only conceive, but
portray. W. B. Scott, like his lamented brother, revels in such scenes of wild and
startling imagination.
No. 871, South Koom, by John Michie. " The Breton Tailor's Wedding Gift,"
is a very successful picture, and, in its conception, reminds one of some of Wilkie's
scenes of Scottish life. The bridal is over, and the feast at an end. The Bridegroom
and Bride are standing in the middle of the room. The tailor, who, by his dress and
demeanour, is evidently the great man and spokesman of the festival, is in the act of
presenting a distaff to the Bride, the sign of her future life of labour. The honest, open,
encouraging look upon the young husband's face is well contrasted with the forced
simper upon that of the Bride, who, half unwillingly, is about to stretch out her hand
to the satirical, yet courteous tailor bowing before her. Half the guests, with charac¬
teristic expression on their faces, are slyly watching the ceremony ; others are dancing
in and out; and two quaint looking girls, one dancing to her older partners, the other
arrested in her mazy footsteps by the interest she takes in the reception of the
distaff, add to the life of the scene,—while the patriarchal sentiment of universal
brotherhood, in seasons of rejoicing, is symbolised by the beggars crowding in and
receiving, with satisfied looks, huge lumps of bread, which a fair and stolid dame is
dealing out to them. Another is handing a " merry thought" to her neighbour,
showing, that " though seas divide, yet customs are akin ! "
In the same room, No. 852, is a clever picture by W. E. Lockhart, " Auld Eobin
Gray." The out-look of sorrow upon the girl's face, with the unshed tears and pale
cheeks, excites our sympathy, and one is glad that the old song tells us that " Auld
Robin Gray is a kind gudeman to me," which is the only consolation the gii-1 can
look for in this painful crisis of her life, where duties seem to clash, and affection to
war, one with another.
In leaving the Rooms, which we are now about.to do, we must stop a moment
to examine, in North Octagon, No. 237, Keeley Halswelle's Jack Cade's Rabble-
ment.    This is rather a sensational picture; the crowd of ruffians pressing forward
THE  ATTEMPT. 95
against the two foremost, who carry on spikes the ghastly heads aloft, has each
his individual ferocity vigorously brought out. The colouring is bright, but
in good keeping ; and the subject, however unpleasant, is well treated, each figure
has its appropriate place ; and although a crowd, it is not an undistinguishable one.
We must now conclude our remarks upon the many interesting pictures which
this Exhibition affords us, lest we weary our readers, who, for the most part, may
themselves visit them, and then judge whether or no we have spoken too warmly of
their merits. M. E. T.
Oh, weary heart, and weeping eyes,
Up from the dust of sorrow rise;
Cast off these weeds of doubt and fear,
Dash from thine eye the bitter tear,
Shake off the deadly grasp of woe,
Draw breath once more—and forward go!
Rise, and go forward ! lie not there,
A prey to grief and black despair;
Thy load is heavy; God has strength
To bear it all thy journey's length ;
He bids thee not to wander on
Disheartened, weaiy and alone ;
Give it to Him, nor strive in vain
That weight unaided to sustain.
^£5^
Rise, and go forward ! for thy I'oad,
Though dark and drear, is marked by God ;
His watchful eye sees well each stone,
O'er which thou think'st to be o'erthrown;
And in the bare and barren waste,
His hand each thorny briar has placed.
96 THE  ATTEMPT.
Else, and go forward ! Thou, a man
Form'd after God's own wondrous plan ;
Thou, with thy mind, thy powers, thy will.
Content to live all iiseless still—
A kiggard in the race of life,
Because thou dread'st the toil and strife !
Thoii must arise ! brace every nerve :
Would from the conflict shrink and swerve ;
Thou must away with all thy fears.
Thine anguish'd sighs, thy foolish tears ;
• Thou must awake to work and life.
Nor seek to shun the general strife.
Rise, then, go forward !—turn thine eyes,
In prayerful sorrow, to the skies ;
Tell out thy grief, thy sin, thy fear,
To Him who bends from heaven to hear ;
Believing, take the offered grace—
Shall guide thee to thy destined place;
And then, with dauntless heart, and ti"ue.
Thy heavenward pilgrimage pursue.
Mas Alta.
I.
1. A law still prevailing in France.
2. A county in Ireland.
3. A German author.
4. A Turkish dignitary.
5. A kingly domain.
The initials, if rightly divined, will show a substance bright and sparkling ; the
finals, one which, to be good, must be rich and thick.
K. H. D.
THE   ATTEMPT. 97
§n  Italian  ptcraiitrc;
LODOVICO   AEIOSTO. VINCEKZO   MONTI.
I HAVE chosen to divide this essay between Lodovico Ariosto and Vincenzo
Monti—a strangely assorted couple if we consider their respective dates, and perhaps
even more so, if we call to mind their respective works, because, firstly, I am not
sufficiently acquainted with the writings of Ariosto to be able to speak of them at
much length ; and secondly, because of all the minor Italian poets whose works I
have read, Monti ajipears to me to approach the nearest to his glorious predecessors.
Lodovico Ariosto, the " Bard of Chivalry,"
" The southern Scott, the Minstrel who called forth
A new creation with his magic line,"
was a native of Reggio in Lombardy, and was born in 1474. Soon after he attained
his twentieth year, he entered the service of the Cardinal Ippolito d'Este, with whom
he remained for three-and-twenty years, sometimes in a military capacity, but more
frequently employed on diplomatic services, among others two embassies from the
Cardinal to Pope Julian II. During these years, he wrote his great poem, L'Orlando
Furioso, which elicited the enthusiastic approbation of the literary world. His other
poems are but little known; and Carlo Beolchi, the Italian biographer to whom
I have referred for the dates given in these essays, merely remarks of the minor
poems " non sono senza pregi," " they are not without merit;" and as Beolchi in¬
variably expresses the warmest admiration of Ariosto's genius, I infer from his cool¬
ness on this point, that the minor poems are comparatively worthless. In 1517,
having lost the favour of the Cardinal, Ariosto was discharged from his service;
but some years afterwards he was appointed Governor of the Province of Garfagnana,
where his administration was less distinguished for sagacity than for clemency. On
his way to Garfagnana, he fell into the hands of some bi-igands, who, instantly upon
hearing his name, released him with every demonstration of respect, and escorted him
past the dangerous part of his journey; so great were the respect and affection with
which his genius had inspired his countrymen. The latter years of his life were
spent at Ferrara, and were quiet and uneventful; but, although Ariosto's life was
exempt from overwhelming misfortunes or sorrows, the best part of his days was
embittered by miserable poverty, and harassed by the uncongenial duties of his
dependent situation. He died at Ferrara in 1533, and was buried, as he himself had
directed, " at dead of night," and in the most private and unostentatious manner.
98 THE   ATTEMPT.
His great poem, the " Orlando Furioso," consists of forty-six cantos, each con¬
taining from eighty to a hiindred and thirty stanzas; it was at first intended for a
continuation of Boiardo's " Orlando Inamorato," but Ariosto, although he preserved
the original name, considerably extended and improved the original plan of the jioem,
which treats less of the nominal hero Orlando, than of the adventures of Euggiero
and Bradamante, the ancestors (according to tradition) of the house of Este. It is
equally difficult to accord sufficient praise to the poetry, and sufficient censure to the
morality (or rather I'mmorality) of the " Orlando Furioso ;" and, although detached
cantos and " select extracts" are all that I have perused of Ariosto's works, they
have been more than enough to convince me of the thoroughly corrupt and immoral
tone pervading the poem. What a ten-ible falling off is evident when we come from
Tasso's high-minded, honourable, true-hearted Criisaders, nay, even from his fierce
and revengeful, but brave and generous Sara,cen warriors, to the dissolute, pleasure-
loving, faithless knights of Ariosto ! What would Goffredo and Tancredi have said
or thought of the very loose and elastic code of faith, honoiir and morality obtaining
among these gay cavaliers ? They are no doubt very brave, and very athletic and
musciilar, and some of them arc very tall and handsome, and they mow down whole
squadrons of foes, and slay the most horrible sea-monsters, and occasionally thrash
each other in the most thorough and satisfactory manner ; but fighting was not the
" wliole duty of man," even in the days of Charlemagne ; and, after all, even at fight¬
ing, " the best man among them" was a woman—the Amazonian Bradamante—who'
so far as my limited knowledge of the poem permits me to judge, is by fai" the most
attractive—I may say the most gentlemanly—character in the whole book. As to
the other knights, they ride on and conqiier,—imtil they meet some one stronger than
themselves; they follow the path of duty implicitly,—until they encounter a strong
temptation; and they keep their faith to their respective ladies,—until they find some
one whom they like better; for they have all learnt to perfection how, " when far
from the lips that they love, to make love to the lips they are near." Truly, they
are a pitiful set, the very best of them ; and as for the villains of the poem, it would
be difficult to imagine anything more thoroughly rascally than their conduct upon all
occasions ; but they at least are consistent, which the others are not.
Then, as to the female chai-acters, with the exception of Bradamante, who is
virtiious, faithful, and brave, they go far to justify the celebrated but most calum¬
nious line,
" Most women have no characters at all."
They are uttei' nonentities, possessing but one fully developed mental quality
THE   ATTEMPT, 99
—namely, selfishness ; they are exceedingly beautiful, and they give an enormous
deal of trouble to the aforesaid knights, by constantly getting involved in dangers,
from which they have to be extricated by some means—and, I think, that is about
all that can be said of them. As an example of their general conduct, let us take one
of the adventures of the fair Angelica, who has thought proper to run off into a
forest, and, as a natural consequence, has lost her way therein. Enter a distracted
knight, roaming wildly through the world in search of this very Angelica. He in¬
dulges in a soliloquy upon his love for Angelica, and his mental misery at not being
able to find her; and to do him justice, he expresses himself in very beautiful and
poetical language. Angelica, behind a bush, hears him out, and then steps forward,
and requests him to guide her to a place of safety. The knight consents to do so—
and what think you, is the emotion caused by this conduct in the mind of this
interesting damsel 1 Love for her champion ? jjity for his hopeless passion ? grati¬
tude for his protection 1 0 dear no I nothing so romantic.
" Subito in lei s'avviv la speranza
Di tosto riveder sua ricca stanza."
" The hope quickly revives in her of again beholding her sjjlendid apartment'."
But to come to the poetry of the " Orlando Furioso," so magnificent was the
genius of Ariosto, so stately is the march, so spirit-stirring the ring of the lines where
he speaks of martial ardour, of deeds of prowess, of tilts and toiu'iieys, that our minds
cannot resist the magic of the poet, and we read on entranced and delighted. The
softer parts of the poem bear the marks of genius in an equally great degree. How
exquisite is the description of Angelica's flight, the House of Sleep, the Palace of
Alcina ! how pathetic the lamentations of Olimpia ! Little as I know of the 2>oem,
that little is sufficient to enable me to form an idea of the wonderful genius of its
author, and to comprehend the enthusiastic admiration of it expressed by all Italian
critics and biographers ; and all readers of Ariosto must be constrained to admit that
he was a true, a talented, and a most fascinating poet, in spite of the utter disregard
of morality pervading his works.
Viiicenzo Monti, born in 1754, appears to me, as I have already said, most
worthy among all minor Italian poets to claim our attention, after the four great men
who form the front rank in the annals of Italian poetry—Dante, Tasso, Petrarca,
and Ariosto. The Cardinal Borghese, Pontifical Legate at Ferrara at the time
when Monti was attending the University there, having discovered the germs of
future greatness in some of Monti's improvisations and Latin compositions, took the
young man with him to Rome, and treated him with great kiudnoss and liberality.
100 THE  ATTEMPT.
In Rome, Monti's talents soon procured him distinction; and one cantica in particu¬
lar was received with such enthusiasm, that its author was hailed by the title of
Dantie Eedivivo,—a higher it would have been impossible to bestow. This cantica
was written during the French Revolution, and contains a most vivid and powerful
picture of the horrors of the time; it was never completed, but, a,s it stands, it is a
glorious monument to the genius of its author. Monti obtained, somewhat late in
life, the chair of belles-lettres in the University of Pavia, an appointment most con¬
genial to his tastes, and most favourable for the full development of his talents.
He died in 1828, occupied to the last with his professorial duties and his literary
pursuits. " Monti marito amorevolissimo," says Carlo Beolchi, but he has not pre¬
served the descrijjtion or the name of the Signora Monti.
Monti has left a mass of works in prose and verse ; among others a translation
of the Iliad, which, at the time of its publication, was considered the best that had
appeared in any language ; I do not. know whether it still preserves its reputation.
But his minor poems are the most generally and warmly admired of his woi-ks ; his
elegies and canzoni are exceedingly graceful and melodious, but, at the same time,
full of power and expression. His sonnets have all the finish of Petrarca's, and
rise to a power and grandeur which Petrarca could never attain ; two of them, in
particular, are positively sublime, one upon the bii-th of the Saviour—
" Sei tu quel Dio, che in suo furor cammina ?"
and the other upon Death.
Another very beautiful little poem of Monti's is the first canzonetta, a love poem
written with exquisite grace and playfulness. In it occur the lines so often quoted
by Italians in regard to the colour of the eyes. The same idea is to be found in the
works of a contemporary of Monti's, Aurelio Bertola; and, as he expresses it more
concisely than Monti, I may quote it here in his words,
'' I'l primato in questi o in quelli
Non dipende dal colore ;
Ma quegli occhi son piubelli
Che respondono piu al core.
Not the least valuable of Monti's works was his Proposta per la Riforma del Dizion-
ario della Crusca, in which he laid the foundation, and prepared a gi-eat part of the
work of composing a new Italian Dictionary, the want of which was beginning to make
itself seriously felt; so that, besides being a brilliant and lasting ornament to the
literature of his coimtry, Monti rendered a most important service to all future stu¬
dents of the Italian tongue. Dido.
THE  ATTEMPT. 101
AN   OLD   STORY.
Within his ivied home, where golden suns
Mellow the grapes that cluster in Provence,
Sat Gauffre Rudel, high Prince and Troubadour,
Listening, as if in magic trance involved.
While sang a stranger minstrel passing well :
Sang of the Countess fair, of Tripoli;
Until Rudel in that strange trance perceived
Her face'gleam shadowy from the arras'd wall;
And rising, stretched his arms and cried aloud,
And loved her, there, and thenceforth evermore.
So when the morning woke, and early winds
Swept lightly o'er the bloom enamelled plain.
He wandered forth, giving his soul to thoughts
Of unblest love, but ere the desert day
Had reached its height, grew weary of his doom.
And when the evening came, with quiet breath
And tears of dew to cool the parched flowers.
He hushed his plaint, and prayed that there might float
Dear visions of her face across his sleep
Yielding the peace by glaring noon denied.
Thus lived he, till his wonted warlike toil
Grew hateful,—till with passionate desire
His spirit failed within him, and he seemed
To wander in a shadowy dream forlorn.
Ghost-like he glided by the yellow shore.
Ghost-like he gazed upon the restless seas,
That hid her realm from his imploring eyes,
Till longing unfulfilled grew calm, and formed
A stedfast purpose :—to behold her face
To bless her once and die.    Tliis strong resolve
Within the throbbing silence of his heart
 ^'-  '~ -^        _ 
/ ;,  %
i>   '^^ I)
102 ■ THE   ATTEMPT.
Renewed his ancient vigour ;—as a lamp
Burns clearer for a moment ere it sink
In utter darkness.
Then the Prince took ship.
And o'er the silver windy ocean sailed
To seek his love.    Long days upon the side
He leant and watched the vessel cleave the waves.
The keen salt spray blown sharply on his cheek.
The rough breeze dallying with his drooping haii-.
Long nights he watched the crimson sun sink low,
And starlight beam o'er all the rounded shield
And purple surface of the glimmering sea.
In vain the lover's haste essayed to urge
To greater speed his seamen's heedful way ;
Relentless buffets of the changeful wind.
Baffled the struggling sails, and mocked his sighs.
Until inaction bore her fatal fruit.
And retrospect, dire sister of despair.
Revenged his glaive unused, his lute unstrung.
The past seemed desolate, the present drear,
The future to as baleful wreck foredoomed.
And this harsh sense of failure in his life
Withered his might; impatient sorrow drew
An added sadness from the monotone
Of ceaseless washing waters ; he became
A wasted shadow of his stalwart youth.
That love alone bade linger, till at length
Beyond the upspringing brilliance of the dawn
He saw the land arise, the gleaming beach.
The palace walls, the multitiidinous trees,
The fretted towers of stately Tripoli.
Then spake they to the countess, high enthroned
'Neath silken dais, and told her of the knight,
THE   ATTEMPT. 103
His faith and love ; and how he lay aboard
Waiting for death; and how she wrought his doom.
^Whereat she rose, and mutely, with grave mien
Down gliding, made a gesture with her hand,
And all her maidens came and followed slow
Towards the ship wherein the minstrel lay.
His face was pale, his rich hair tossed and flung
About his head, his war-bronzed hands were grown
With anguish quick and thin; his eyes were worn
With that fierce hungering after rest, that preys
On one whose years are full of silent pain.
Thus lying, wearily he turned and saw,—
Unwarned by aught, for such was her command,—
The Countess; fairer far than any dream ;
Her pure heart touched, and all a woman's ruth
Awake afc sight of this his yearning woe.
Then his tired soul leapt up, and seemed to shine
Through every quivering feature in a blaze
Of sudden light; in hers she took his hand.
Bent down and kissed his brow.
One long wild look
He gave, that strove to stamp iipon his brain
And bear away, through death's fast opening gates,
Each tender grace that made her presence sweet.
At last, in broken, low, and passionate tones
He told her of his life : his fiery youth.
His manhood's knightly deeds, his anguished prayers
And mighty love ;—all only hers,—all made
Complete by her dear eyes and lips.    This said.
He blessed her, and fell back ; but ere he died.
Ere yet the solemn light within had fled.
She bent,—she knelt beside him,—and on his.
Pressed her warm lips.
104 THE  ATTEMPT.
She knew not when he grew
Unconscious, for her own soul almost failed
For love and wonder.    After strange, hushed pause
Of passion crowned and quenched, she rose and turned
With such new bearing that her courtiers feared
And bowed before her.    So she went to land.
And sought to give high burial to Rudel,
But his proud followers bare him back to France;
Whereat she smiled a sad, slow, tearful smile,
And never spake his name on earth again ;
But laid aside her pur})le robes of state,
And humbly clad in holy sister's weeds
Passed to a convent, there to bide and pray.
Elsie Strivelyne.
®n l00h Itarhs.
Various people have various fancies and likings. Some devote themselves to
the cause of philanthropy; others sacrifice themselves at the shrine of fashion ; some
love living animals, others dead insects. Some show their attachment to those who
are destined to stand on the pedestals of the world, by cherishing their autographs,
monograms, crests, or what is to them still more precious, their reputed locks of hair,
walking sticks, or other personalities. But of all the collections that people's diffei'ent
idiosyncracies lead them to make, only to be surpassed by the miser's love of gold, is
the feeling entertained by him who has unsparingly amassed a noble library. Hav¬
ing amassed a library, some only value it for the sake of possession, others for the
intrinsic worth of the contents. Some show their veneration by the careful manner
in which they mark the place they have been reading, others carelessly turn up or
down a corner of the page.
I am not aware that any detailed account of book marks has ever been made ;
but any one who reads books issued by a circulating library, must have been struck
with the odd book marks now and then inadvertantly left in them.
Perhaps, in some highly sentimental mood, one comes suddenly upon a memento
of every day life, in the shape of a grocer's or a baker's bill, showing how some
anxious housekeeper had varied her solid reading of debit and credit, income and
THE   ATTEMPT. 105
outlay, and had found her difficulties seem light when compared with the trials of an
Algernon, or a Juliet.
Once, reading East Lynne in the most exciting part of the book, where Lady
Isabel's green spectacles fall off, I came upon a piece of whalebone. What a train of
thought did it engender ! Perhaps some worn-out dressmaker, after a hard day's
labour, was refreshing herself with something that had nothing to do with needle,
thread or thimble, when some one enters, an order is given that must be instantly
executed. The piece of whalebone is put in to mark the place. Lady Isabel must
sink into oblivion, the hand that held the book resumes the thimble, reality asserts
its sway, and all that is left to imagination is to wonder—what could have hap¬
pened when the green spectacles fell off. That conjecture might furnish endless
reasons for the presence of the whalebone; and perliaps, after all, some young lady,
who does not need our pity, was reading the book; a visitor was announced, her
work-box was beside her, in it a piece of whalebone, looking just as if it had been
made for a book-mark, and it was popped into the place. Excuse me, dear reader ;
but, as a faithful historian, we must offer the suggestion, however prosaic.
We have already alluded to the persons who turn up or down the corners of
pages—those are the people who must always mark their favourite passages, who read
a book with a pencil in one hand, as a forester uses a knife when blazing trees.
Like blackbirds, they pick out the finest of the fruit, and leaving the tokens of their
visits behind them, seem to have deprived the fruit of half its flavour.
The universality of perforated card-marks is only surpassed by the originality of
the phrases embroidered on them. The changes are rung upon the sentiment of con¬
stancy. If on one you find " Forget-me-not," on the next you will meet " Dinna
forget," or the still more trite " Remember me." They vary in size and appearance
from the gorgeously embroidered one to the strictly clerical and high church one of
plain ribbon, white crosses and fringed ends.
But, if I may be allowed to take the word book-mark in a wider sense, I would
speak of the pleasure of reading a book void of all marks. Indeed, I am not sure if
the pleasure be not greater when, ensconced in a comfortable arm chair, armed with
an ivory paper cutter, you give yourself up to the pleasure of exploring a new
country, and feel, that if not " Monarch of all you survey," still, it is a kingdom
which no eye but that of the printer has yet overlooked.
Much as one must value large inexpensive subscription libraries, still, finding
your favourite author, and perhaps connecting him ever after, with an odour of stale
tobacco, is far from pleasant.    To know, that on turning over a leaf you will come
106 THE   ATTEMPT.
upon some favourite passage, and to find in close proximity to that passage the mark of
a large black thumb, if it excite less fear, causes little less discomfort than the finding
of the print of a large black foot occasioned a well-known colonist. I have seldom
met anything more affecting than the sight of a page of Dr Marigold blotted with
tears. Perhaps the father or mother of some little dumb girl -saw in these printed
words the histoiy of their own little one's privation, or, perhaps it was the little one
herself; but if books are dead things, and can be torn, marked and defaced, let us
at least be thankful that to those who are deaf to all other words—they are living, and
speak to the heart. Clarence.
Inspired and beautiful! what magic lies
In the dark lustre of those glorious eyes :
They are too sad to deem that hope is there,
Too rich in their rapt beauty for despair;
They beam not with the calm and tender light
Of woman's love—they are too proudly bright;
They flash not with ambition's jealous rage.
Nor show the fire of youth, nor chill of age ;
Surely the light of that uplifted gaze
Shines with prophetic fire, and future days
Unfold their wonders to thy anxious sight.
Their clouds of darkness and their specks of light.
Who would desire thy power, thou desolate
Though gifted one 1 thine is a mournful fate ;
Far happier those who only must deplore
Days that are past and can return no more,
But to whose sight no future griefs arise.
The light of hope still gleaming in their skies,
Tranquil and bright as when we see afar
On the dark brow of night some guiding star
To which, though distant, we direct the sight,
And though we ne'er may reach it, bless the light.
E. H. S.
THE  ATTEMPT. 107
iukrfs lottos;
BEING   MSS.   TEMPO RE   CAROLI   PRIMl. NOW   FIRST   PUBLISHED.
INTRODUCTION.
It was a very warm morning—a great deal too hot for walking, or riding or
rowing; we could do nothing but lounge about on the beach, and try to read the last
new tale, and eat peaches and grapes, and wish it were cooler. We girls had settled
ourselves in a shady nook with our tatting and wool-work. The needles soon went
down, however, for we felt too lazy to do anything. Lucy began reading the mom-
ins letters over again, and somehow the conversation turned on old letters : and we
were still speaking of them when my cousin Frank came up to us. " Well," said he,
" / think it a great piece of folly to keep old letters and papers at all, it only accumu¬
lates useless lumber, and sometimes they fall into the hands and under the eyes of
those for whom they were not intended." "All!" said Bell, "Go into your office,
and see the bundles and boxes of old yellow and blue worm-eaten papers, and the
dusty cobwebby trash all about, it is enough to disgust one with writing for ever and a
day." Frank was a lawyer, and of course he could not help it—it was part of his
profession ; but, for myself, I am rather fond of old papers and letters, so I could not
side with Bell, but took up arms in defence of Frank.
" I like old letters very much, Frank," I said, " I think they are very interesting,
I do not wonder you keep them." " You don't mean to say you believe I ever read
them ]" This in so astonished and horrified a tone that we all laughed, even Bell
herself. " Of course, why not ?" " Why not % Why, do you think I have nothing
to do but to pore over old wills and deeds and marriage settlements of a lot of
Marchmounts, and Willoughbys, and Vyvyans, and Rabys % Well, its little you know
of business—I can barely do what I have to do, and keep my clerks properly at work,
and my clients in a good temper—if I wasted my time over such rubbish, I should
soon be in either the Bankruptcy Court or Hanwell Asylum. You talk like a girl,
Marie; what should you know about it ?" "I only wish I knew more, Frank; if I
had such an opportunity as yuu seem to despise, I should be only too glad to take
advantage of it; I dearly love all old things, but I see them so seldom, that it would
be quite a treat if I could only get hold of a packet of your old worm-eaten parch¬
ments." "Would it? Well, I think if you were to see them, you could make
nothing of them, for the writing of some of the oldest of them is so strange, that it
108 THE   ATTEMPT.
would puzzle even a clerk of the Dead Letter Office." I began to think that there
might really be some chance of my getting possession of what I had so long craved
for; and, seeing Frank disposed to continue the conversation, I determined to follow
up my advantage.
I was just about to prefer an urgent request that he would make over to me
some of his very oldest MSS., when a diversion was caused by the arrival of more
of our party, and the conversation that ensued made both Frank and myself forget
all about the old papers; and the subject was somehow never resumed during the
remainder of our stay in the country.
My object being, not to chronicle our adventures at a watering-place, but to tell
you how I became possessed of the letters which I am about to transcribe, I shall be
very brief, and pass over the months before last Christmas. Of course, we had
returned home long since, and were comfortably settled at our usual avocations;
whilst I supposed that my cousin had quite forgotten all about our conversation, and
had never given it a second thought.
But when the Christmas guests had gone away, and the dull cold weather com¬
bined, with a feeling of regret for past pleasures, to make me uncomfortable and
mopish,—then I did begin to long that Frank would remember my wish. I
made up my mind to renew my solicitations with greater vigour than ever the next
time I saw him, but my wishes were happily gi-atilied most unexpectedly,—and I will
tell you how.
One evening, about three weeks or a month after New Year's Day, my brother
came in rather earlier than usual, and with him was Frank. As soon as the latter
saw me, he drew a good sized package from his pocket, and put it into my hands,
" There, madam, now you can't say that I have forgotten you—there's a fine lot of
old yellow papers for you ; and much good may they do you ! " I had torn off the
covering eagerly ; and there, sure enough, was a bundle of very old letters, folded up
into all sorts of queer shapes, and faded and ancient enough to please any antiquary.
" What are they 1 Whom are they from ? What date ? Where did you get
them ?"
" Stop, stop ! not so fast; I can never answer so many questions all at once.
In the first place, they are old letters; most of them, I believe, written by, and
bearing the signature of one Hubert Willoughby ; a few, I believe, from Eliot
Warner—a friend, I should imagine, of the other's; they are over two hundred
years old ; and as to how I got them—well, I don't see that's much business of yours,
Marie—but some years since, I had some business affairs with a Mr Lacey, who was
THE  ATTEMPT.
109
some descendant, or collateral branch, of the same Willoiighbys that this Hubert be¬
longed to, and these papers, he thought, had something to do with his title to some
property, the possession of which was a disputed point between himself and a distant
relation. He thought that possibly one or two rather undecided questions of births,
deaths, maiTiages, and so forth, might be cleared up by finding corroborative evi¬
dence, mentioned in a casual manner, in some of these ancient epistles."
" And did he find it 1" asked my brother.
" One or two facts of slight importance," Frank said ; " but nothing very par¬
ticular ; but it was not of much use to him, poor fellow; he gained the law-suit,
certainly ; but lost his life in the hunting field in little more than a month;—put
his horse at a high fence—the animal was tired, and could not do it properly, and
spoiled the leap quite, pitched off Lacey head foremost, and fractured his skull against
a confounded gi-eat stone, right in the way. He only lived about an hour, died be¬
fore they could get a surgeon, for they had had a good mn, and were some distance
from any doctor's house ; and the one they went to first was out."
Frank sighed, and was silent for a few minutes, until my brother asked him how
it was he kept the papers after his client's death.
" Oh, he was unmarried, and his nephew was heir-at-law ; so, when he came to
square up accounts with me on behalf of his late uncle, he told me not to bother
about any worthless old documents, he did not want the trouble of them—any that
were really useless might go into the fire, for his uncle's old rubbish had no interest
for him. That I could well believe, for he was a Lieutenant in a brilliant cavalry
regiment, and just such a young fellow as most of his sort are—hated bother, bills,
whigs, and heavy reading ] went out to India, married a baronet's daughter, and got
liver complaint—that's the last I heard of him."
I laughed at this succinct description of the nature, tastes and doings of the
former possessor of my precious antiquities; but I knew that I must vigorously
crush Frank's evident leaning to old reminiscences, if I wished to get any more
practical information on one or two points; for I well foresaw what a long disqui¬
sition would inevitably follow, if he saw us disposed to listen and encourage.
" I cannot make out the writing quite," I said; " some of the letters are so strange;
cannot you explain them 1"
" With all my heart, if you will show me. Oh, that! that's an s ; its long, you
see, and rather curiously twisted. That peculiar sign is and ; and that abbreviation
ye- is meant for the—as you ought to have known long ago; excuse me. Ah ! you're
looking at that, that's d; rather an odd affair, isn't it?"
110 THE   ATTEMPT.
" Thank you, Frank; I begin to understand better now ; as you seem to under¬
stand so well, would you mind hearing me read a few lines, to see if I can really
make it out 1"
" With pleasure ; really I am surprised to think of your being so charmed with
these old musty things; if a contented mind is a continual feast, it strikes me, that
according to the mind you are in at present, you wont require any solid creature
comforts in the way of food until you have waded through that bundle."
" Don't talk nonsense, pray; now listen, do; I am going to begin."
I managed to make out a good half-page very fairly, with occasional aid from
Frank; and, before he departed, I was further initiated into the mysteries of the
caligraphy of the seventeenth century. On further examination, I was very sorry
to find that parts of some of the letters were either torn or worn off, and that in some
passages the ink had become obliterated, and the woi-ds so indistinct as to be inca¬
pable of being i-ead. These omissions I shall not attempt to replace, as I think that
would quite spoil the character of the whole series of papers; but I shall intimate
where parts are wanting ; and the imagination of the reader may make itself as busy
as it likes, if it pleases.
Just a word or two further. It may seem strange that so many consecutive
letters, occuj^ying a considerable peiiod of time, should have been written by one
person, in an age when correspondence was so rare, and postage such a vastly different
thing from what it is now; and that that person, too, should have been a soldier,—
not a trim, spruce, gold-laced Guardsman of the present, but one of those Ironsides
of the Iron time, who made the fate of a nation and a king, and the echo of whose
war cry is still dear to all those who love truth, right and freedom.
The conclusion to which I have come, and to which I feel justified in coming, is
this,—these letters were written at intervals of rest and quiet, and sent whenever,
and by whatever, chance offered, to the recipient; sometimes, I imagine, good Eliot
Warner must have had some half-dozen or more of these interesting and welcome
epistles brought to him at once by carrier, or courier, or some maimed and dis¬
charged soldier, who, returning to his native village to die, had the precious missives
entrusted to him to deliver on his way home.
I have no doubt that Eliot Warner must have corresponded with his friend
Willoughby (or, as I find it signed, Willoughhie), quite as frequently, if not more so,
than Hubert did with him ; but I think the fact of so few of his letters being forth¬
coming may be accounted for readily in this way :—amid the rough and arduous
duties of a soldier, camping out, baggage falling into the enemy's hands, and the
THE   ATTEMPT.
Ill
thousand other chances of war, his share of the epistolary friendliness must frequently
have been lost almost as soon as read; -and only one or two seem to have survived
the fate of their brethren.
Warner, on the contrary, being a quiet, peaceable, stay-at-home citizen, kept his
friend's communications much in the same way, I suppose, that we English folks
treasured so carefully the brave, honest-hearted, graphic scraps from fathers, brothers
and husbands, fighting for England at Inkermann and Balaklava ; giiai'ded them so
jealously, read them so often, over and over again, long after the great war was all
past, and their writers were safe at home, in England or Heaven.
I need say no more; my tran scriptions will explain themselves. "When a
word is needed, I may just give it, and pass on; but no more. I have preserved
much of the ancient orthography and mode of speech; would that I could likewise
give you the writing as well!
If you are half as much interested in reading the forthcoming MSS. as I have
been in deciphering and transcribing them for you, dear readers, my work will not
have been in vain.
Next month, I hope to introduce to you my chief hero, Hubert Willoughbie ;
until then, fare-ye-well. Mas A,lta.
'§ntlann   (Sastlc.
There dwelt a ladie in merrie England,
0 she was fair as fail* could be;
An' mony a knight an' baron bold.
Sighed for the love o' that ladie.
She made a feast within her bow'r.
An' mony a knight frae far an' wide,
Has come to taste the ladle's cheer,
Wi' hope to win her for his bride.
But when the feast an' mirth were ower,
Up rose the haughty fair ladie.
Says, " Sirs, I trow you lo'e me weel,
1 thank ye for your courtesie.
But he would win me for his bi-ide
Maun be a knight iinknown to fear;
Fair words will never win my love,
But valiant deeds my heart holds dear.
Weel ken ye Perilous Castle a',
What knight in England knows it not 1
Let him who'd win me, guard its wa's,
A year an' day against the Scot."
Then dark grew mony a knightly brow,
An' gloomy silence filled the ha';
It was as though a warlock's wand,
Had cast a glamour ower them a'.
112
THE   ATTEMPT.
Till up an' spak' a brave young knight,
Wi' mickle wrath an' scorn spak' he,
" Foul shame befa' ye, craven loons,
Fause knights an' coward knaves ye be.
Come weal, come woe, I'll do the deed,
Nae man shall gar me flinch or flee;
For weal I trow my ladle's love
Is dearer than my life to me."
The knight has ower the border gane,
Wi' sword an' plume, an' mailed men;
O, when the year an' day are bye,
Will he come back as braw again ?
An' when he reached the Castle wa',
Wi' plume an' banner waving bright.
To Douglas an' his Scottish men,
I trow it was nae welcome sight.
O weel the knight has kept his vow,
Nae man could gar him flinch or flee;
For mony a brave knight England holds,
But none, I wot, mair brave than he.
But ere the year an' day were gane.
The Douglas' cam' wi' craft an' wile,
An' wi' a fause tale fairly tauld.
Did from his watch the knight beguile.
Cauld on the grass lie side by side.
The knight an' half his warriors slain,
An' they that fell not in the fray.
Were by the Douglas captive ta'en.
Lang may the ladie watch her lane,
Lang look out ower her Castle wa'.
Ere that she see her knight come back.
That left her side sae proud an' braw.
Lang may the bonnie ladie weep.
An' waefu' wring her lilie hand.
The truest knight that England held
Lies sleeping cauld on Scottish land.
Meigeag Bheag.
§0rh.
The city of York is situated near the centre of the shire of the same name,
where the three ridings meet, on the river Ouse. The country around is exceedingly
flat, which Scotch eyes rarely find tolei'able, even though, as is the case round York,
the soil is very rich and fertile. But though one cannot admire the surrounding
scenery, in the city itself no one can be disappointed. In this age of novelty, when
large towns spring up in a few years from the smallest hamlets, their flaring red
brick houses looking so very new, the busy hum of their machinery, the constant
whistle of their trains, all speaking of restless activity, and pushing prosperity, it is
most delightful to visit an ancient city, where the monuments of its age draw the
THE   ATTEMPT. 113
miud backward to think of the jjast rather than of the present and future, and where
one feels that it is possible to stop and take breath.
Such a city is York ; yet I do not think it would be a very pleasant place to
pass one's life in ; for, under the shadow of cathedral towers, life becomes monotonous
and dull, and the range of one's ideas is apt to grow limited.
Of course the Minster is the chief object of interest in York, and as such de¬
mands our first attention. It is the finest gotliic edifice in England, and is situated
on the north side of the city, rather hemmed in by other buildings; it was probably
built about the year 1400 ; it is cruciform, consisting of north and south transepts,
nave and choir; it is adorned by three magnificent towers, in one of which hangs the
the largest bell in England. The choir is divided from the rest of the church by a
beautiful stone screen, in which are placed statues of the kings of England, from
WUliam the Conqueror downwards.
It is quite impossible, by description, to do anything like justice to the Minster ;
one must see it, and hear the grand tones of its splendid organ dying away in a thou¬
sand echoes from the massive arches, before it is possible to enter into the enthusiastic
admii-ation, almost amounting to reverence, with which the people of York i-egard
their Minster.
"When one thinks of this cathedral in its perfect preservation, and its matchless
beauty, presenting such a contrast to the cathedrals and abbeys of our own land,—
how beautiful, alas ! only in their ruins, desti'oyed by a mistaken zeal for a good cause,
—one wishes that there had been some one to preserve what was really good and
beautiful in itself, waging war unflinchingly with the evil of the system, but not con¬
demning everything indiscriminately that was connected with it. No doubt, by these
means our country has been saved from many dangers, but has it not also lost much t
The walls of York are in a state of almost complete preservation. Chester is, I
believe, the only other English town which one can walk I'ound on its walls. Now,
however, a large part of the town of York lies outside the walls. From the walls
there is a veiy fine view of the surrounding country. Though I always have a sen¬
sation of being shut in when living on a plain, yet, if one can get above it, and over¬
look it from an elevation, the effect is very striking. At York, one can see from
the walls, if it is a clear day, miles and miles on every side without any obstruction,
and at an immense distance earth and sky seem almost to melt into one in a dim
haze.
The streets of York are narrow ; the principal one—Coney Street—is not half the
width of George Street in Edinburgh.    The houses on each side are old and curiously
114 THE   ATTEMPT.
built, the buildings often contrasting strangely with the goods displayed in the win¬
dows, for in Coney Street are all the fashionable shops.
In going through the city, one often comes upon an old church,—for York, being
an ecclesiastical town, abounds in churches, some of which are of older date than the
Minster.
The Castle is also an historical edifice, but has rather lost its romance, being
now used as a prison.
York has passed the height of its fame and importance, and now takes only a
secondary place among our towns, stepping back, like some grey veteran who has
had his share in the fight and won his laurels, to let the young and strong take the
place he once occupied, and win laurels for themselves : it is to be hoped, not like
York, in scenes of siege and battle, but in the better rivalry of art and commerce.
ESTUEK.
CIj^ Sjp^irit of ipo^inr.
A YOUTH stood pleading, with an inturned eye,
In very young petitions for great gifts.
" Oh, give me now some message ! let mo forth
And ring it bravely in the ears of men ;
Oh, surely all is not already said,—
Although it seems at times as if it were.
Thence, give me from thyself a mission clear,
Thou, higher than the muse—thou Spirit-King ! "
The Spirit's eye upturned, his brow sun-gilt.
His hands clasped meekly on his patient breast;
His chastened lips slow moving, uttered low,
Speaking through other worlds, " Ev'n as Thou wilt."
He heard not; till he could not aught but hear
The querulous young voice, distractingly.
Still crying, " Hear me, for I come to thee,
I trust for inspiration—poetry !
Is nothing new ever beneath the sun ? "
The Sjjirit moved not, either limb or look.
THE  ATTEMPT. 115
And answered veiy calmly, " Whoso speaks
Must, for himself, find what he seeks through me."
And still the Spirit fiixed his eagle-glance,
As if to pierce the realms alove the sun,—
Where new things are—unknown to heart of man.
Like a spoiled cliild the youth whined on below;
" I wish, then, I had lived in the young world.
When poets could find poems fresh and new,
And wreathe them round upon the hands of Fame,
To be replaced as crowns upon their brows ;
Before a Homer had absorbed one half,—
And clouded the remainder of our land
Of bright ideas—we poetic souls.
Then could no critic blast our budding hopes
With thiiist of pen, gall-tipped with plagiary.
Or say, ' as tales that hath been often told,
And better told,' is all you have to say !
Oh ! in these golden days of yore, I might
Have fanned my slumbering fires into clear flame,
And lit the world.    I can find no rest!
Fame, love, and heaven only taunt me now,
Give me some message ! "
But the Spirit spoke
More calm and coldly, " Go, and live awhile.
And wait in silence till the message come !"
The youth flashed ujiward with a wounded start,
Rebellious, angry,        *        *        *        *
Till the very power
Of looking upwards changed his wrath to peace,
His peace to awe, his awe to voiceless prayer;
And he knelt down to worship where he stood.
^ ^ ■5K' lie ■5)f
" Great Sj^irit !  oh, forgive my pride !    I lay
The head upon the dust I would have raised
To flaunt above my fellow-men be-crowned.
How dared I dare 1   "Behold me humbled low ;
116 THE  ATTEMPT.
Grant me thy pardon and thy blessing still,
If thou wilt deign so much !    What could / say
To any fellow-man he doth not know ?
For every being is a little world
Complete within itself, and knows its own,
And therefore knows the new thoughts of my soul,—
My shame, my emptiness, my vanity.
How dare I ask to be thy courier hence 1
And bear thy message far, and never deem
That so unworthy medium were unfit
To spread thy slightest word; and might destroy
The seal of kingship through so rough a post.
What right had I to ask or to expect t
I thought but of myself.    I beg thee now
To bless the mighty world of human hearts,
And for my blessing, grant humility !"
Then eagle eyes downbent became like doves.
The cold clear accents warmed to golden tones,
As softly down the vast the Spirit breathed
" Go on, and prosper !    Sound the very depths
Of thine own heart, which now thou first hast seen ;
There, many a message shalt thou find to thee,
There, many a new thought winged with fire may rise.
The effluence of thine actions.    Work and live.
Facing that curse, a blessing springs to thee.
And be thou sure that sometime thy desire
Sliall come upon thee, but so richly robed
And purely fair, thou mayst not recognise
The features thou hast longed-for many days.
Beyond the sun there is a realm where spring
New thoughts and things.    Thither I go !    Come thou !''
And then he vanished.
And the youth went off
To find that labour is incarnate thought,
Action the voice of will; to find new things.
New thouglits, new combinations, in old life.
THE  ATTEMPT. 117
And he could trace the message out of all;
But set it in no poem for the world,
Save in the golden framework of his life.
He never sought applause.    He never spoke,
And never will.    The silent land is his.
Where, self-content, souls can be self-sustained,
Fed by the noiseless dew-drops from the sky,
Not by the brattliag streamlets pouring forth
From many broken cisterns.    Strong in strength
He gives to those that need, and, looking up,
He gaineth more by what he gives away.
LuTEA Reseda.
C§^ l^ifie-§0at.
Some little time since, hearing that the working-men of Edinbiirgh, by subscrip¬
tion among themselves, had collected sufficient to present a fine life-boat to the people
of one of the villages on the north-western coast of our island, and that on a certain
day this said boat was to be launched on the little Loch of St Margaret's, we, among
many others, went to witness the sight.
It was a frosty day, bright and sunny; a winter's day, but winter was wearing
one of her brightest smiles. The deep blue of the heavens was mirrored back again
from the clear waters of the Loch, while little rays of sunlight danced and sparkled
in the tiny ripples that chased each other over the siirface. Lonely, stood the old
ruined chapel of St Anthony, keeping its solitary vigil, and gazing as if in mournful
sadness at its own crumbling stones reflected in the waters beneath.
Hundreds of men, women and children crowded the hill-side, the whole town
seemed to have turned out to see the sight. There was the honest working-man
climbing the rocky brae (with his laughing babe held gently in his strong arms),
wearing a proud contented smile, as he gazed down on the beautiful boat his toil-
earned money had helped to purchase, his smiling wife trudging along by his side,
with her " Sabbath gown " kilted, and her red petticoat lending colour to the grey
stones and wintry grass over which she trod, while toddling children gamboled and
played about them both. And many a carriage and pawing steed was drawn up by
the margin of the Loch, and men and women of all degrees crowded together to see
118 THE  ATTEMPT.
the launching of the boat. It was painted the colours of the nation—red, white, and
blue; bright and fairy-like it looked as it shot lightly into the water, amid a
prolonged cheer from the assembled throng, which was answered by its brave crew,
and echoed and re-echoed from the old grey rocks; at the same time rose the stirring
strains of " God save the Queen," played by a band of volunteers stationed on the
other side of the Loch; and, as the mingled sounds floated on the clear air, now
swelling nearer, now dying in the far distance, my thoughts seemed to interweave
themselves with the sounds, and go hither and thither unfettered.
Methought it was the joyful summer time once more; with a rich glow the
evening sun was lighting up the little white-washed cottages of a fishing village; it
tipped the foamy crests of the dancing waves as they drew to the shore, and lightly
touching the yellow sands as it passed, transformed them into burnished gold. It
peeped in at the cottage casement to bid a last good night to the busy house-wife, as
she stood over the little fire prejiaring the evening meal; pleased and contented was
her face as she gave another turn to the food, and then gazed from the door over
those blue waters; was it not the end of the weary working week, when the father,
the husband and son never failed to return ! Brightly smiled the sun-light on the
ruddy laitghing children, as noisily they threw down slate and satchel at mother's
feet, and bounded off to meet their father as liis boat would near the pier. One
moment longer the sunbeams lingered, gently they stole to the corner where the babe
slept peacefully in his crib; a beautiful smile was on the rosy lips, and the sunbeam
stooped and kissed them, and played for awhile among his golden curls, as if loath to
leave the sleeping boy 
The last sun-ray departed; cold look the sands in the grey twilight, darkly swell
the waves as they restlessly beat against the high rugged rocks, moaning and sad
comes the wind across the dreary waste of waters. Again my thoughts float onward,
tossed in those fitful gusts, away from that sleeping village, out, out, over those wild
waters. Higher and higher rise the mountain waves, heaving their snowy crests in
sullen defiance, darkly lower the heavens. A frail barque rocks and sways amid the
contest of the angry elements; shattered and broken is the strong mast, the white
sail in tattered ribbons flaps and trembles in the fierce wind. One by one the brave
crew has been swept from the little deck; hard they struggled for life, and now
only two remain,—a father and his young son,—slowly had the hours gone by as
they wearily clung to the trembling sjiars.
A calm sadness rested on the weather-beaten brow of the fisher, as the earnest
blue eyes of his boy were turned' towards him, and the soft childish accents fell on
THE  ATTEMPT. 119
liis ear,—" Ah ! faither, what for do they no send out a boat to fetch us hame ; its
cauld an' fearsome being here our lane; see, mither has put the lamp in our wee
window; 0 1 cannie she send a boat for us,-—O ! mamie, maniie ! why winna ye
send for your Johnnie ?"
But no fisher-boat could live on these tempest-tossed waters, and life-boat there
was none The day broke; once more the sunbeams sparkled on the
waves, and gilded the shining sands, but mirth and gladness had passed from those
cottage homes, a bitter wail rose on the morning breeze. Mothers—sisters—wives
'—with Avhite despairing faces, were hurrying over the soft sands, and climbing the
dark slippery rocks, straining their eager eyes to catch a distant sail, hoping against
hope that the tidings were not true—or wringing their poor trembling hands, while
in the utter misery of their grief they wail foi-th the piteous cry of breaking hearts.
 The summer's day drew to a close ; the fair evening sunlight streamed
in at the cottage window. Changed was the look of that little home ; no busy hands
prepared the evening meal, only a few red sparks among the grey ashes showed a fire
had once been kindled in the small grate. In her desolate loneliness sat the widowed
wife, the sorrowing mother; tearless was her dark eye, for sorrow had frozen the
fountain of her tears, they would not flow. On her lap was her little babe, who
looked up wistfully into that dear face, and patted the pale, pale cheek with his
tiny dimpled hand. The other children in a corner, huddled together like frightened
lambs, gazed timidly at their mother, and whispered the oft repeated question, " Will
father and Johnnie no come hame again 1" 
Never—never.
As the last joyous cheer rose over St Margaret's Loch, and was tossed from
rock to rock, now through the old walls of St Anthony's, now higher, higher up the
rugged hill side, till it carried in soft echo the proud tidings to the guardian Lion of
our city, my wandering thoughts returned, and I awoke to join a hearty Amen to
to that clear ringing cheer, and a prayer that God would bless those brave working-
men, who have heart and generosity to look beyond their own homes and hearths,
and open their hand to help their brethren of mankind. " Nan."
120
THE  ATTEMPT.
Jfair Purganl.
Fair Margaret, fair Margaret
The wistful look, and tender.
Beneath the oak tree lies.
Has fled from her dark eyes.
A world of dreaming fancies
Within her wistful eyes.
No more by summer breezesHer brow is softly fann'd.
The ancient book of poems
No longer lies she dreaming
Has fallen from her hand;
Of the far-off heavenly land.
Sweet Margaret is dreaming
Of the fair and heavenly land.
For all her earnest longingsAre changed to perfect sight.
And the soft winds sigh
Within the glorious city.
In the branches high,
The home of life and light.
And the brooklet sings its song
And the shadows pass
And the soft winds sigh
O'er the waving grass,
In the branches high.
And Margaret dreameth on.
And the brooklet sings its song,
Sweet Margaret, sweet Margaret,
Beneath the yew tree lies.
And the shadows pass
O'er the waving grass,
And Margaret is gone.
Veronica.
^nslncr fo goitbk |.trcstic.
1. Salic.
2. XJlstcj-
3. Goethe.
4. Aya.
5. Healm.
Sugar and Cream.
THE   ATTEMPT. 121
#n  Italian  fiteruluR;
THE   MINOR   POETS   OF   ITALY.
Numberless as the stars that illumine the azure darkness of an Italian night,
are the poets whose names adorn Italian Literature, whose works abound in fancies
brilliant and glowing as the flowers of their luxuriant land, in passages fierce and
fiery as its burning sun, in sentiments soft and tender as the melodious accents of
their mother-tongue. It would of course be impossible, in the limits of this essay,
to give anything like a complete list of the minor Italian poets; I shall therefore con¬
fine myself to saying a few words about some of the more celebrated among them, and
about those with whose works I am best acquainted.
Glancing over a list of the minor Italian poets, the first names which arrest the
eye are those of Jacopo Sanazzaro and Giambatista Guarini. Sanazzaro flourished in
the fifteenth, Guarini in the sixteenth century. Pastoral poetry was the style of com¬
position in which they both excelled ; and this, together with the very considerable
similarity in their works, leads me to class them together, although separated in
point of time by a full century. The similarity in their writings always makes me
think of the somewhat stale joke concerning the two " niggers," Csesar and Pompey,
who were both " so vexy like each other,—but specially Pompey;" for while
Sanazzaro but very seldom reminds me of Guarini, Guarini is constantly reminding
me of Sanazzaro. One reason for this is, that Sanazzaro's genius, and the vigorous
and attractive style of his works interest and occupy, for their own sake, the mind
of the reader ; wlide Guarini's comparatively weak and languid poetry soon fatigues
us, and grows nauseous from its efieminacy and monotony, so that the only parts
which strike our attention, and remain impressed on our memory, are those which
remind us of Sanazzaro's more manly strain. I fear it is high treason to use such
words as " nauseous, efleminate, and monotonous," in speaking of Guarini's much
renowned " Pastor Fido," which Beolchi calls " una delle piu leggiadre produjioni, che
in tal genere," only in tal genere, observe " vanti la poesia Italiana;" but never shall
I forget the feeling of weariness and loathing that settled down upon my spirit after
reading half-a-dozen pages of the " Pastor Fido," nor the relief with which I turned
from it to the " Arcadia " of Sanazzaro.
Gabriello  Chiabrera, one of the most graceful and successful of Italian lyric
Q
122 THE  ATTEMPT.
poets, was a contemporary of Guarini's, and was born  in Savona in 1552.    He
wrote in every variety of style—epic, dramatic, lyric, operatic, besides several prose
works; but his lyric poems are those which won for him fame, great even during his
life, and undiminished by the hand of time.     May I be allowed one more quotation
from Beolchi 1    I must premise that I cannot pretend to judge of its truth, but shall
subjoin a translation for the benefit of Greek scholars who may not understand
Italian.    " Fu Chiabrera il primo che sul Pamaso Italiano accoppiasse il fuoco di
Pindaro alle grazie d'Anacreonte."    (Chiabrera was the first who, on the Italian
Parnassus, joined the fire of Pindar to the grace of Anacreon.)   Vigour and harmony
are indeed united in Chiabrera's verses to a veiy high and unusual degree.    His
erotic poetry, in particular, is remarkable for the skilful blending of the strong with
the sweet, and is characterized throughout by glowing imagination and sparkling
fancies.    I  do not think there is in all Italian lyric poetry anything more elegant
and playful than Chiabrera's Canzonetta, " Belle rose porporine."    But his poetry is
far surpassed in grandeur of conception and severe simplicity of style by Vincenzioda
Filicaja, a Florentine senator, who flourished in the latter half of the seventeenth
century.    A majestic melancholy, a calm and dignified serenity, are the most promi¬
nent characteristics of his poetry, although, in his patriotic poems, the fiery Italian
spirit is constantly breaking forth in fierce,  impetuous, passionate strophes and
stanzas which reveal the genius of Filicaja in a more striking light than even his
exquisite sonnets.    His love-poems are very few in number; and in some of the
sonnets addressed to private individuals, he somewhat neglects the elegant simplicity
so noticeable in most of his works, and his style becomes " un po' troppo froudoso."
It is upon his religious and patriotic poems that his fame most surely rests—and
the name of Filicaja must be dear to the heart of every Italian for whom religion
and patriotism  are anything more than mere names.    His numerous sonnets upon
the death and passion of Our Lord, with those addressed to the Crucifix, and the
Vii'gin Mary, are written in a spirit of reverent adoration, of j^rofound humility,
which lends a deeper interest and attraction to the beauty and power of the sonnets
themselves.    The sonnets to Fortune, to Providence and to Death, are especially
deserving  of remark, and although it is evident from all Filicaja's  works that
" melancholy marked him for her own," yet we nowhere find the slightest approach
to misanthropy  or   murmuring.    But the  most famous of all his sonnets is the
sublime one, " All' Italia"—
" Italia, Italia, otu, cui feo la sorte
Dono infelice di belezza "
THE   ATTEMPT. 123
It has been well translated or paraphrased by Lord Byron in Childe Harold—
" Italia ! 0 Italia ! thou who hast
The fatal gift of beauty, which became
A funeral dower of present woes and past,
On thy sweet brow is sorrow plough'd by shame,
And amials graved in characters ef flame.
O God ! that thou wert in thy nakedness
Less lovely or more powerful, and could'st claim
Thy right, and awe the robbers back, who press
To shed thy blood, and drink the tears of thy distress;
Then might thou more appal; or, less desired.
Be homely and be peaceful, undeplored
For thy destructive charms ; then, still untired,
Would not be seen the armed torrents poured
Down the deep Alps ; nor would the hostile horde
Of many-nationed spoilers from the Po
Quaff blood and water ; nor the stranger's sword
Be thy sad weapon of defence, and so
Victor or vanquished, thou the slave of friend or foe."
Pietro Metastasio, the great Improvisatore, deserves a few lines of special
mention. His real name was Trapassi; but Gravina, the celebrated judge who
adopted him, changed his name to Metastasio, which is (I am told), the Greek word
for " trapasso," a decease. Wlien Gravina first saw Metastasio earning a few pence
in the streets of Rome by extempore verses on the subjects suggested by the passers-
by, he was struck by the remarkable ease, fluency and beauty of the boy's improvi¬
sations, for Metastasio was at this time only ten years old. Gravina adopted and
educated him, and made him sole heir to his large fortune.
Metastasio has been called the Sophocles of Italy ; his works are of the most
varied and voluminous description, and have always been admired for their great
originality, and their elevated and heroic sentiments. His wonderful facility of
expression and of rhyme must be evident to the most superficial reader of his
Canzonette and sonnets; as examples of this, I would particularly mention his
Hymn to Venus, and a Canzonetta beginning—
" Grazie agl 'ingarmi tuoi
Alfin respiro, o Nice."
But if I go on at this rate, I shall never have done ; for the names of these bards of
124 THE  ATTEMPT.
Italy come flocking thick and rapid to my memory. Bemi's caustic, mirthful rhymes,
and Guidi's fiery odes, and Yittorelli, " Anacreonte Italiano;" Vittoria Colonna, the
gifted Italian poetess; Bertola, semplice ma grazioso; Zappi, adored by sentimental
Italian maidens ; " Oh cari que' stioi masculinati sonneti, pargoletti, piccinini, molle-
mente femminini, tutti pieni d'Amorini," as they have been characterised by an
acrimonious compatriot; Silvio Pellico, who, however, owes his reputation less to his
poetry than to that terrible record of his sufierings, "Le mie Prigioni;" Alfieri, Foscolo,
Manzoni—-but I must have mercy on my readers, and besides, I wish, before conclud¬
ing, to say a few words with respect to an opinion I expressed in my fii-st essay on
Italian Literature. I therein stated my deliberate conviction of the great superiority
of the literature of Italy to that of France. I had no hesitation in doing so; for I
fancied my words were neither more nor less than a truism, and it is with great
astonishment that I have since learnt that any doubt whatever existed as to their
correctness. The scientific literature of France is doubtless both more voluminous
and more valuable than that of Italy; but then, scientific works are not literature
properly so called, and they must therefore be set aside in judging between the litera¬
ture of the two nations. Then, if we compare the poetry of France and Italy—surely
the very boldest of Frenchmen would never dare to place in competition with the
immortal works of the mighty Italian poets, the strains of
" His country's creaking Ijre—
That whetstone of the teeth—monotony in wire."
The very noblest and sweetest of French poetry cannot aspire to comparison
with anjrfching higher than the works of Petrarca and Filicaja—and even then, I
think, few would hesitate to accord the palm to the Italian poets. Or, if quantity,
not quality, is to be the test of superiority, the French are swamped at once, both by
the number of Italian poets, and the voluminous nature of their works. Then take
the drama. Surely the " Francesca da Kimini," the " Iginia d'Asti," the " Ester
d'Engaddi" of Silvio Pellico, the " Aristodemo" of Monti, are at least equal to the
masterpieces of Corneille and Racine. Moliere, cei-tainly, is not approached by any
Italian comedian—except perhaps Goldoni—but it will scarcely do to make Moliere
the leader of a French crusade against Italian Literature. Take fiction,—can all
the novelists of France united—Madame de Stael not excepted— show a tithe of the
genius of Boccaccio ?
" The Bard of Prose ! creative spirit! he
Of the Hundred Tales of Love."
THE  ATTEMPT. 125
Boccaccio, from whom Chaucer, and Shakspeare himself, have borrowed so many of
theii- plots; or, to come to modern novelists, Italy can bring two valiant champions
to defend her cause against M. M. Victor Hugo and Edmond About,—Manzoni,
author of / Promessi Sposi, and his admirer and imitator, Tommaso Grossi. As to
religious works, those of Bossuet, and the famous " Imitation de Jesus Christ," must
be acknowledged superior to all existing Italian religious books; but had the sermons
of the Florentine reformer Grrolamo Savonarola been preserved, there is little doubt
that they would have far surpassed the effusions of Bossuet, Mascaron or Bourdaloue ;
nor would he stand alone, for many excellent religious works have been written by
Italian churchmen, though none have gained such popularity as those of Bossuet.
I had almost forgotten history and philosophy; with regard to the first, I shall
mention but one name, although many more might be brought forward—that of
Guicciardini, which is synonymous with industry, exactitude, and the most laborious
fidelity and minuteness of detail; and, although I cannot believe that any mortal
man ever read through his works from beginning to end, yet few students of Italian
have not had occasion to thank the extraordinary minuteness of detail, and the perse¬
verance of this most conscientious historian. As to philosophy, the names of Dante
and Lorenzo de' Medici, with the magnificent, though perverted intellectual powers
of Niccolo Macchiavelli, followed up by Cino da Pistoia, Varchi, and countless
lesser luminaries, must surely be sufficient to crush the swarm of French philosophers,
with Descartes and "Voltaire at their head. But, after all, the contest is scarcely an
equitable one. The competitors don't " start fair ;" for no reasonable being could
ever expect to compete in the language of France, with a rival who used the grand
Italian tongue. Conjure up a personification of the two languages, and what do
they recall to your mind 1 The French is like a very neat, smart, well-dressed,
active, amusing little Harlequin; the Italian like the majestic statue of a goddess—
"A form divine,
With lion-port, and awe commanding face,
Attemper'd sweet to virgin grace."
If these Essays should be the means of persuading but one of my readers to
make the acquamtance of this glorious being—the Genius of the Italian language—
I shall be amply rewarded for my trouble; and so will the reader aforesaid.
Dido.
126 THE  ATTEMPT.
Swift and chilly sweeps the night wind
O'er the midnight sky,
Now among the tree-tops moaning.
Now amid the old cliffs groaning
As it flieth by.
Dashing, foaming, breaks the wild sea.
On that bold and rocky shore.
Waves the silver moonlight cresting—
Ever rolling, never resting
From their sullen roar.
Murmuring in their low deep voices
Many stories of the past.
As with light and airy motion.
Countless treasures of the ocean.
All around they cast.
Telling of their giaiit fury
In the gloomy winter's night.
And their soft and gentle swaying.
With the little pebbles playing
Through the summer bright.
How they woo the rolling thunder.
And the lightening flashes keen.
And the glistening white sails gliding
In their care, with trust confiding.
Of some ocean queen.
How they watch the laughing sun ray.
And the gentle moonbeam bright.
Calmly on their waters gazing.
Little silver ripples i-aising.
In the silent night !
While they talk, the mermaids listen,
Sea green tresses float around,
THE   ATTEMPT. ' 127
Listen, till some tale of wonder
Makes the waves break forth and thunder
With a solemn sound ;
Then the timid sea nymphs frighten'd.
Plunge beneath the dark blue sea.
Fearing some concealed malice.
Quick they seek their ocean palace,
Happy, wild and free.
Most of all they love to hearken
To one tale of long ago.
Which, when twilight calm is gleaming.
Wild waves' voices sadly dreaming.
Whisper soft and low.
'Tis about some lovely maiden.
One of earth's most bright and bless'd,
Who beneath the surging billow.
With the cold rock for a pillow,
Peacefully doth rest.
When the waves begin the story.
Mermaids, mermen, young and old,
Gliding from theii" dwelling-places,
List with eager upturned faces,
To the tale oft told.
" Many years have since departed,
Many seasons come and flown
Since' that night, the chill mist creeping,
And the autumn wild wind sweeping.
With its dreary moan,
Sent us leaping, rolling, dashing.
On the cold black rocks around.
Pouring from their tops in fountains,
Rising high like dark blue mountains.
With a rushing sound.
'Mid the darkness, came the tramping
Of some distant footsteps slow,
Step by step the tall cliffs nearing,
128 ' THE  ATTEMPT.
Neither wind nor waters fearing—
Be it friend or foe ?
High we rais'd our thunder voices,
Did our best in time to warn.
Told them of the fierce storm brooding.
Bade them go, and cease intruding.
Till to-morrow's dawn.
And the moon, she tried to help us,
Shining down, with pale cold light,
Show'd them where their steps were leading,
But they tramp'd on never heeding
Through the stormy night.
We could see their dark forms gliding.
Up and down the pathway steep.
And a something, white and airy—
"Was it mermaid, man or fairy ?
Gazing on the deep.
List! a still, calm voice is rising
On the chilly midnight air,
And we all, intently listening,
Watch'd the pale cold moonlight glistening,
On the white form there.
' Father,' it said, ' to Thee I come.
Oh take me safely to my home,
Forgive these foes who have oppress'd.
Receive my ransom'd spirit bless'd :
'Tis for thy Truth I dare to die.
Beneath the cold dark waves to lie.
Send now thine angels from above
To bear me swift where all is love.'
In the air we heard a fluttering,
And a voice for mercy crave,
Then we moan'd in tones of grieving.
Sadly the white form receiving.
To its martyr grave.
Bore it up upon our bosoms.
THE   ATTEMPT.
Rock'd it to and fro with care,
Now upon the sweet face gazing,
Now with gentle ripple raising,
Locks of golden hair.
And there fell upon our waters.
Such a strange and mystic light,
Not the silver moon ray streaming.
Or the flash of lightening gleaming.
Could be half as bright.
'Twas the beaming of the angels.
Sent to bear the spirit high,
Far from earth's most bitter malice.
To the king, her Father's palace,
Up beyond the sky."
Maiden mai-tyr ! sleep on gently
In thy lowly ocean bed.
Soon shall break the promised dawning
Of the resurrection morning
For the holy dead.
Then the truth thou lov'dst and diedst for,
Perfect victory shall gain.
And the king himself descending,    '  - .,«
Conflict, toU, forever ending.
Gloriously shall reign ! J. B. C,
129
BEING MSS.  TEMPORE CAROLI PRIMI. NOW FIRST PUBLISHED.
I SHALL begin transcribing my ancient epistles, by giving you the one that appears
to be the first of the series. A part of it is torn off, it seems to me about half a page,
but I think the remainder will explain itself well enough ; so I shall say no more
by way of introduction, but leave Master Hubert Willoughbie to speak for himself.
Imagine yourself to be Eliot Warner, of the city of Chester, Esquire; but lately parted
130 THE  ATTEMPT,
from your chief college friend, and returned from Oxford; you have just received a
little square letter, many times folded, and carefully addressed as follows :—
Master Eliot Warner,
At his father's house, in the Watergate Street,
Over againste ye signe of ye Talbot's Head,
In ye citye of Chester.
Let us see how runs this curious document.
And soe  now  all  those   happie days of ye  past are  over,—those  pleasant
times at Oxforde ; and you are at youre father's house, and I at that place that I call
my home.    Nay, but I woulde not be angry at it, ye place itselfe, for I like it well;
but my hearte is not here, and I have nothing here I love much.    Say not, my
goode friende, that my hearte is left at Oxforde, with prettie Nell, ye landlorde's
daughter of ye Duke's Delight, or with Mistress Jane, our chaplaine's little niece, nay,
nor with ye blithe merrie lass that sold posies and ribbon-knots at ye market-place.
Never woman found my heart yet, and fewe men, except you and   Bertram, my
cousin ; but many a one hath found out what meaneth ye Willoughbie anger,—and
short time as I have been here, already hath mine uncle roused that fierce rage
within me ; and, trust me, many times yet to come will he soe doe, untill one day
I shall do something dreadfull, when that passion is upon me.    I pray God to keep
me from it; for, Eliot, it is an awfull thing to feel yourselfe almost madde with an
anger that is like a fierce burning fyer within you,—your master, sometimes.    It is
my fate—it was my father's before me, and his father's before him ; and soe backe for
generations, ages agoe, that anger has been a marke of our race.    Marry ! but I feel
my soul growing bitter as I thinke, and as I put down my thoughts to you ; as I long
that I, too, had a father and mother, and a home where dwelleth blessed peace, instead
of one that is ye abode  of eternal discord, and rating and quarrelling.    But not
long will I stay here ; I saw my lord Saxford at a hawking   party that Sir Harry
Lambert had on Monday was a sennight; and my lord will try his influence with
my lord Strafibrd, to get me a secretaryship at Whitehall, or some other coxirt ofiice,
—something to take me away from this miserable life I lead.
Tell me, is it my fault that my father became a poore man instead of a riche one ?
That he spent his money in dreams about gold-mines in ye far land of ye western
seas, that all came to nought, and only brought unto him shame and poverty that
brake his noble heart 1 Can / helpe it, that Edgar and I were throwne upon our
uncle's bountye, to keepe and maintaine us ? And wherefore shoulde it be ever throwne
in my teethe that I live upon my uncle's charitie—that of that charitie alone am I
THE   ATTEMPT. 131
housed and kept, and am not a wanderer on ye face of ye earthe 1 Call me not un¬
grateful, my friende—I am sometimes thankfull for all these things—thankfull
that John Willoughbie's pride made him sende his nephew to Oxforde, because he
sent his sonne too, and soe coulde not he welle keepe me at home ; for at Oxford did
I first see you, my deare Eliot, my best and truest friende.
But how coulde you, an it were yourselfe were in my place—how coulde you
brooke to be reproached day after day for that you live in a house, and eat bread
that are not youre owne—that you are dependent on ye bountye of another ? Trust
me, you woulde finde it an harde thing—and soe doe I.
But my lord Saxford is going up to London on Tuesday next; and he is sure
to see my Lord StrafTord soone; and soe shall I scone heare if there be a chance of
escape for me—an opportunitie for me to goe and try my fortunes in London.
Bertram is away—at Winchester, where he hath beene these four months and
more ; were he here, there woulde be some pleasure for me, for I doe love him dearlie,
as mine owne brother—nay, more than mine owne brother. Dost say it is wrong,
sinfull, of me to say such thing 1 Eliot, you knowe not Edgar—nor would you gain
by ye knowing—I have tried, I can say it trulie fi'om my hearte, I have tried
to love him as brother shoulde love his brother; but he will not let me love
him, nor will he love me himselfe; soe have I given it up, and now do I scarce
love him at all. Were he not my brother, my father's sonne, I coulde give
you a long blacke liste of reasons wherefore he is no friende to me, or of mine ;
but I wish not to speak of him unto others as doth he deserve. He is colde
and stately, and verie proude—as Lucifer himselfe ; and he loveth me not; for that I
will not be a soldier of ye King—whose extortionate deedes doe I hate; and for
that I say I doe not hate those Nonconformists whom he (and, as he saith, all those
who trulie belong to ye church as established by ye la we for all ye countrie) doe hold
as believing most damnable and sinfull doctrines. And as he esteemeth ye King
Charles as if he were an angel of God, and coulde doe nought that is badde or wronge,
soe doth he thinke me a great sinner and high traitor for not loving ye King soe welle
as he doth himselfe. Mine uncle loveth Edgar, for he, too, is verrie loyal; soe doth
he not cast it on him as reproach that he eateth his bread, as he doth on me; for he
saith ever " Edgar is a king's man,—and I hold it an honour to house any one who
woulde, and who yet will, draw sworde for our good Charles; but for Hubert there
—traitor loon, he careth more for that knave Hampden and his partie, than for all
ye court put together; he is no honour, but a shame, to Willoughbie Manor." A
shame to Willoughbie Manor !
132 THE  ATTEMPT.
Ay, Eliot, if shame it be to hate a narrowe mind, and a bigoted hearte, and not
to side always with ye partie that is ye strongest, albeit it may not be in ye right—
if dishonour there be in not bowing downe before a King who vexeth sorely his people
by his tyrannous acts and lawes—then will I be a shame unto Willoughbie Manor
all ye days of my life !
But this is wilde and idle talking—my bitterness of soule getteth ye better of
me oftentimes—and I must, for mine owne sake, curb and rein that fiery passion,
leste by it I some day happe upon grevious mischance to ye hurt of others, and ye
losing of all peace and happinesse for me. Ah, Eliot, Eliot—kindest, best of friendes
to me hast thou ever beene ; would that now I coulde grasp thy hand, and looke into
thy face, and hear those gracious words from thy lips that so oft have calmed and
soothed my angry soul! But it cannot be—thou art very fir away, and I sit moody
and lonely, writing to thee these words that perchance may never reach thee—but it
is to me muche comforte even to fancie that I am talking to thee, or to hope that
some happie daye will come when we shall again beholde each other face to face.
At eventyde last Sabbath, I went to ye church where sleepe my forefathers for
generations past—those of earlier tymes, cladde in coat of mayle, with two-handed
sworde by their syde, and hound couchant at their feete, and clasped handes on their
breast, folded for prayer; and those of later yeares, with ruff and trunk hosen, and
broidered baldrie; but oh ! far more to me than all these ancient Willoughbies, of
noble memories and knightly deedes, was one lowlie tomb, with no fretted sculpture
nor lofty epitaph to mark it as belonging to our goodlie house—at sighte of which
my hearte did melt within me, and my eyes, that for many a day had not been
dimme with tears, filled as I looked on ye place where rests that father, whom even
nowe in mine owne hearte, I do love and honour still ye more, as I see how different
from him are all his race.
Ye moonbeames shone downe thi'ough ye crimson and azure robes of ye saints,
on ye gorgeous windowes—fell softlie and silentlie on ye white slab that lieth above
his head—with nought but his name and his age, and ye time of his death, to telle
who resteth so peacefuUie belowe ; for mine uncle woulde not soe foolishlie spende
his golde, as to raise above his onlie brother such memorial as lacked scarce one of
all the Willoughbies gone before, for hundreds of yeares gone by. But nevertheless
doe I love that poor plain tomb, with a calm desj^airing love that dieth never; it is
my greatest pleasure to goe to that lonelie place, and sit beside my fither's grave,
and in spirit seeme almost to holde commimion with ye dead. Said I not that I
went last Sabbath at evening?    Oh, my friend, my heai-te was bitter, full of wi-atli
THE   ATTEMPT. 133
and passion, and deadlie hate, when I left ye greate hall, and ye partie there sitting
over their wine cuppes, and tooke my way to ye olde graye churche; but when I
reached that hallowed place, and sate me downe by my fathei-'s resting-place, all my
anger melted away, and my teares fell fast upon ye carven letters of his loved name.
I thought me of all his wise and goode counsels—of his great gentlenesse and forbear¬
ance, and of his love, to even his brother,—and then all my soule smote me for ye
wicked passions that did so beset me, and move me to such evile thoughts against
those of mine owne name and bloode. And I rose uppe and went forthe with my'wild
spirit calmed and soothed by ye memorie of him whom I once loved beyonde all
others.
Often doe I wish that I had a mother—ah, soe muche,—but vainlie; I never knew
her—never saw her grave ; for she lies far off in ye deepe stillnesse of solemn forests,
in that strange lande beyonde ye Spanish Main; ah, sadde lande to me, to my deare
father; for there did he leave his golde, his healthe, his hopes and ye wyfe of his
youthe.
Eliot, Eliot, forgive me if I burthen you with these fitfull, moodie words; it is
more like a copie of my thoughts, than a friendlie letter to one whom doe I soe dear-
lie love; but there are none here to whom I coulde unveil my thoughts and my
heai-te, as to you ; for now that I am againe at ye Manor, I am no more ye same
Hubert that was at Oxforde ; my darker and gloomier nature sheweth itselfe anewe
here, where all ye light of friendship hath gone out, and my passionate soule is left
to grope in ye darknesse alone.
But courage—there is yet my lord Saxford to fall back upon; and shoulde I goe to
London,  I promise thee to write thee more joy full   epistles  than hath this one
been.    In ye meantime, thou must for me hope 
tymes  will  come , uncle Edgar   hath  not  said 
Here a portion of the letter is so obliterated, that it is impossible to make it out; and
a little farther on, it is torn off. This is not so very much to be regretted, if it goes
on in the same wild passionate style ; let us hope that we shall see some improvement
in the succeeding ones ; should our friend obtain his appointment at Whitehall, and
remove to some more congenial atmosphere, we should hope it would exercise a
better influence over him, and give him a more cheerful view of things in general.
Ah ! here is another scrap—a little piece torn off, lying folded between the
creases of the one we have just been reading ; I imagine it must be something par
ticular, for it has evidently been taken some care of
134 THE  ATTEMPT.
My lord Saxford hath been gone a fulle month; and I verily thought I
shoulde heare no more from him; but yesternoon a mounted courier brought me a
letter from his lordship, telling me that my lord Stafford woulde give me some place
at Whitehall, if I came uppe to London soone. Soe, Eliot, I shall leave this hatefuU
place in a few days—and goe uppe to ye greate citie, there to try to make my
fortunes ; and it shall not be from idlesse or carelessnesse that I fail, if fail I doe,
trust me; but hard will I worke, and welle, and try to do my dutie to God and man
in all things.
I may perchance be able to sende this by my lord Saxford's servant, for he
hath letters from his master, and messages to do, at Warwick and Shrewsberrie, and
I think Chester. Goode friende, dearest Eliot, fare-thee-well; God's blessing be
upon thee, ever prays thy friend through life, and tUl death,
Hubert Willoughbie.
Ye eighteenth day of February 1639. a.d.
By this, we may suppose that Hubert went to London, as proposed by his
friend Lord Saxford ; and, in spite of his decidedly anti-royalist opinions (which very
likely he kept pretty much to himself), obtained some post at Whitehall, but of this
I cannot speak positively, until I have made out his next letter. The next in order
of time, is one from Eliot Warner, probably written on the receipt of Hubert's, and
despatched by the same messenger that brought Lord Saxford's letters to Warwick,
Shrewsbury and Chester. We must not wonder at seeing the date of it some time
later, for locomotion ia general, and that of correspondence in particular, was some¬
what different in the time of our two fi'iends from what it is at present. I fear we
should not readily like to go back to the old post bags and couriers of King Charles'
days.
But as Eliot's letter is somewhat lengthy, we had better reserve it for our next,
leaving Hubert on his way to, or in London, to push his fortunes, and make himself
a name. Mas Alta.
THE  ATTEMPT. 135
I WOULD not attempt to take upon myself the responsible office of a critic ; I would
merely wish, at this time, to draw attention to some passages in the poems of George
M'Donald, to point out some hidden beauties which may have escaped a casual
reader. George M'Donald's poems are not of a stamp ever to become popular ; they
want fire, energy and passion, and many will lay them aside after a cursory glance,
and pronounce them tame and prosaic ; but to such as love depth, as well a,s bril¬
liancy, simple language as well as fervent eloquence, I would say persevere, you will
find gems of thought and feeling almost hid to the eye, by the very simplicity of the
language in which they are expressed.
He seldom ventures out of the most ordinary rhythm, and there may even be a
slight irregularity detected in some of his verses, but there is a musical softness and
cadence in the metre that is very pleasant to the ear.
His love of nature is intense, and he uses it often as a mirror in which to reflect
the human heart. His language is rich, perhaps too rich in imagery; for though his
pictures are simple and unstudied, and seem to come more from an overfertility of
imagination than a desire for effect, yet the too frequent metaphorical use of nature
has been made an objection to his writings, as occasioning a strained, over-burdened
style. It has also been objected, that there occur here and there throughout his
poems, expressions regarding holy things, startling in their familiarity, but they do
not proceed from irreverence, but rather from a mind, which, like a simple child's,
does not see clearly as others the barrier between earth and heaven.
His works bear the impress of a i)ure and noble mind, one who looks on nature
with the eye of an artist, and on his fellow-creatures with the eye of a Christian.
He is almost too good, if one may be pardoned the expression, too pure and simple-
minded, to be a great poet, that is, to be a poet to our strongest minds.
The workers of the world will not feel that he sympathises with them, he has
attained to a trusting peace, and he does not come down the hill to toil up with the
toilers, he sits on the firm rock and calls, " Come up, it is blessed here," but he does
not think, that to the world-tossed wayfarer the way is darker, rougher, harder to find
than to one who sits apart from the world, and gazes on all the earth as the reflection
of his Maker's eyes. He believes in, and speaks lovingly of, all mankind. He has
no great wrong to revenge, he cherishes no anger or envy towards his brother man
to give passion to his songs.    He does not deseend into the depths of the human
136 THE   ATTEMPT.
heart to paint its darker passions, its rage, jealousy, remorse or despair ; he tunes his
harp to the everlasting song of love.
The nearest approach to remorse, in any of his poems, is a passionate longing
regret, which diffuses a wild melancholy pathos, as in the tale of the young man
who allowed the pale vision to pass away, and was evermore haunted by the memory
of " the Homeless Ghost," whom he had refused to shelter. Jealousy could not enter
into such an atmosphere of love, as he says,
" If a nobler wait for thee,
I will weep aside.
It is well that thou should'st be
Of the nobler bride.
* » * *
One must suffer ; I for her
Yield in her my part ;
Take her—thou art worthier ;
Still, be still my heart.
Gift ungotten! largess high,
Of a frustrate will ;
But to yield it lovingly,
Is a something stUl."
He is essentially a poet of love and trust;—trust so firm, so complete, as not
to be able to picture a hopeless despair. How many a weary soul would envy the
rest of that perfect trust which he shows in the closing sentences of that exquisite
little fairy tale, " Phantastes." " Yet I know that good is coming to me, that good
is always coming, though few have at times the simplicity and the courage to believe
it. What we call evil, is the only and best shape which, for the person and his con¬
dition at the time, could be assumed by the best good." But this tale would take a
chapter for itself, and although a poem, in the true sense of the word, I must confine
myself at present to the volume of metrical poems. They seem to diffuse around
them a breath of the purest, holiest love, the self-abnegating love. He feels with
Carlyle, " that there is in man a higher than love of happiness, he can do without
happiness, and instead thereof find blessedness." The mere blessedness of loving he
counts enough, apaijt from all selfish need of being loved in return. So constant and
pervading is this sentiment throughout all his works, that one would almost dread
him carrying it from the human to the divine love, and forcing on our acceptance
that painfully sublime doctrine of Spinosa's, that if we love God enough, we shall
THE  ATTEMPT. 137
not require that He should love us in return. He urges on man to believe that
blessedness is easier to attain than he imagines; that the mere capability of loving is
a blessing more ennobling and purifying than the being beloved,—
" Better to sit at the water's birth,
Than a sea of waveis to win ;
To live in the love that floweth forth,
Than the love that cometh in.
Be thy heart a weU of love, my child,
Flowing, and free, and sure ;
For a fountain of love, though nndefiled,
Keeps not the spu-it pure."
In a little scrap entitled " Better Things," he repeats the same sentiment in very
similar language,—
" Better to love than be beloved.
Though lonely all the day ;
Better tl\e fountain in the heart,
Than the fountain by the way."
There are some beautiful passages in the short tale called " Tlie Hidden Life."
A tale it cannot rightly be called; there are no sensational incidents, no striking co¬
incidences ; it is a history of the inner rather than the outer man,—of the hidden
life of the spirit.
The hero is a youth, " by manhood sudden crowned," who, for the first tune,
guides his father's horses in the plough ; a true son of the soil, rejoicing in his labour,
singing, " as sing the birds,"—
" From gladness simply—or he knew not why ;
The earth was fair,—he knew not it was fair ;
And he so glad,—he knew not he was glad."
His mind was as yet unopened to the cause of joy, the beauty of nature was veiled
to his eyes, or, as it is beautifully expressed—" he walked as in a twilight of the
sense." But that day a vision flashed before him, a lovely girl rode past where he
worked, his aid was required to adjust her saddle, which had become loosened, and
as she thanked him, she smiled, then rode away, passing like some bright angel visi¬
tant ; but this smile lived on.    As he afterwards remarks :—
a
" A smile once smiled, is to eternity a smile."
And this smile had unlocked the gates of his soul, had drawn the veil from his,
till now, darkened eyes, and he looked around and " found the earth more beautiful."
138 THE   ATTEMPT.
Here the romance may be said to end, they meet no more—
" Her chanceful life,
Where part the waters on the mountain ridge,
,   Flowed down the other side, apart from his."
But the inner, " the hidden life," only now began.
Beautifully and simply is the dawn of the spirit described; the seed that lay
dormant in his heart was awakened by that smile, and gradually the soul's doors
opened wide, and the bright sunshine, the gay flowers and the whole rich luxiiriance
of nature burst on his astonished gaze.
With the love of beauty came a thirst for knowledge ; eagerly he studied, and
with the help of the village schoolmaster made such progress, that his good old father
vowed he would send him to college, and let him have his "fill" "of that same
learning." He went to college, won honours and a name, but, ever simple as before,
he returned in summer to work as a labourer on his father's fai'm, while in all his
mingling with the world the image of that lady preserved him pure and noble.
He went deep into all studies, but chose no profession, and when he had finished
his course, lie retired "and sought for life, the old ancestral fiirm."    He says,
" Why should I thmk primeval, godlike work, too low to need
Tor its perfection manhood's noblest powers,
And deepest knowledge, far beyond my gifts ?"
And so he tilled the ground and reaped the harvest, dividing his time between
study and labour, the work of the head and the hand.
He and the lady did not meet again, she lived in her world, far apart from her
ploughman lover, a harder world in wliich to walk straight and ujiright.
But still the old sweet vision lived with him, by night it blended with his
dreams, and each day he blessed the smile "that smiled him into what he was."
But death broke in on this peaceful life; not suddenly, but slowly, the strong man
wore away. Cold and fatigue while at work in the field brought on a fever, from
which he recovered only to fall a victim to consumption.
At first, the cutting off from the outer sphere of life, the being laid aside as a
broken vessel, depressed him, and bodily weakness brought 'wdth it fears, doubts, new
necessities and longings for something more satisfying, but patient faith sustained
him, and after long struggles, " God shone within him, and the light arose." But I
have lingered for too long a time on this poem, and will only give one brief extract
from a letter which he wrote to the lady before his death.
THE  ATTEMPT. 139
It reminds me much of those lines of Mrs Browning's—
" I charge thee, by the living's prayer,
By the dead's sUentness,
To wring from out thy soiil a cry
That God may hear and bless,
Lest Heaven's own palm fade in my hand,
And pale amongst the saints I stand
A saint companionless."
And, although George M'Donald lacks the fire and sublime energy of this
greatest of poetesses, yet few lines can be more full of simple pathos than those in
which he concludes his farewell to her who has been his guardian angel—
" I have a prayer to make thee hear the dead,
Lady, for God's sake, be as beautiful
As that white form that dvvelleth in my heart ;
Yea, better, still, a.s that ideal—Pure,
That waketh in thee when thou prayest God,
Or helpest thy poor neighbour.    For myself
1 pray.    For, if I die, and find that she,
My woman beauty lives in common air,
Is not so very radiant after all.
My sad face will afflict the calm-eyed ghosts.
Not used to see such rooted sadness there.
* * * Upon my knees
I could implore thee—justify my faith
In womanhood's white-handed nobleness.
And thee its revelation unto me."
At the end of this volume there are a number of Scriptural poems, entitled
" Gospel Women," recording the scenes in the life of our Lord in which women
acted a part. Some of them are simple and touching, but, as a general rule, they
are too much in the style of paraphrased Scripture, and the pictures want individu¬
ality.
Amongst the shorter poems, the old legend is recorded of the Monk who, while
praying in his cell, received a vision of the Lord, but, even as he became aware of it,
the convent bell sounded on his ear, summoning him away to give the poor their
alms. He went, and left the blessed vision, but, on his return, as a reward for the
performance of his duty, he found the Lord still waiting for him. The legend is
told, simply as it is, with its own   moral, but, at the end, showing how false this is
140 THE  ATTEMPT.
to true Christianity, we are reminded of those words spoken by our Lord himself,
" The poor have ye always with you, but me have ye not always."
The " Book of Dreams " contains many beautiful thoughts, all breathing the
same fragrance of love and trust. I cannot now enter on them, or on the shorter
poems, but they are worth the reading, apart from their thought and beauty of
language, for the peaceful soothing influence they exercise on the mind.
One of the most beautiful of the longer poems is " The Story of the Sea-shore."
It is the sad, though common tale, of a maiden waiting and watching for her sailor
lover; ever straining her eyes from the high cliffs across those billowy waves, which
will waft him back no more, till the wide warring ocean, ever whispering in her ear
that hope was dead, shook the citadel of her reason, and she went mad. With
tender pity does he speak of the poor raving woman, and, like an inspiration from
on high, to those who gi"oan in anguish over this fate,—the only one so dark, no ray
can pierce it,—he gives forth those blessed words of consolation :—
" O surely madness hidetli not from Him ;
Nor doth a soul cease to be beautiful
In his sight, when its beauty is withdrawn,
And hid by pale eclipse from human eyes.
Surely, as snow is friendly to the spring,
A madness may be friendly to the soul,
And shield it from a more enduring loss,
From the ice-spears of a heart-reaching frost."
And, with almost a touch of passion, does he exclaim—
" Better to die, better to rave for love,
Than to recover with sick sneering heart."
Those last few pages are so beautiful, I would fain have given them all, but
space does not allow it. This is but a short and imperfect glance at this volume, in
the humble hojie of di-awmg a few more minds to study for themselves George
M'Donald's poems. As I before said, they do not seem of a stamp ever to be popu
lar. They have neither the brilliancy, powerful language, nor speculative philo¬
sophy to attract or win attention, but they are full of a simple pathos, and pervaded
by a true Christian philosophy. The men and women of the world, surrounded by
doubts, fears, trials and temptations, may find little help therein to guide them out
of the labyi-inth ; but the mourners in Zion will love them ; and to the young who
have not yet lost their early fiiith, or to the weary wayfiirer striving to regain it,
they will be ever dear. Enai.
THE  ATTEMPT. 141
0n Sentimental H^opU.
Sentimental people are perhaps, on the whole, the most difficult to get on with—
as they are certainly the most difficult to please.
If you are a practical kind of person, they call you " prosaic " and " matter of
fact;" if you are amusing, they say you have " no feelings ;" if you are grave and
sensible, they say you are "uninteresting." In fact, unless you bear some stiiking
resemblance to their favourite hero or heroine, or have something poetical about
you, there is but little hope of your winning their approbation.
There are none more to be pitied than sentimental people (we must carefully
distinguish true feeling from sentimentalism), they have generally the best inten¬
tions, and but little strength of mind. They admire what is good and beautiful, but
their imagination is stronger than their good sense, and so they despise ordinary
duties and ordinary persons, they form unreasonable expectations, and viewing
everything in the false mirror of their own imagination, they become weary, useless
and disappointed.
Our friend Laura was sentimental. She shed torrents of tears over the woes of
fictitious heroines. Lord Byron was her poet; she herself aspired to the poetic
art, and wrote weak little elegies on dead canary birds, withered leaves and faded
flowers.
She was naturally warm-hearted and affijctionate, but, having wasted her
sympathy on imaginary and unworthy objects, she had but little to bestow on those
who had a real claim to it.
Her ideas on the subject of friendship were noble and beautiful, as to its dis¬
interestedness, its fidelity, its tenderness ; but her friends found her capricious and
exacting; morbidly sensitive to the change in tone and manner, and for ever
fancying herself misunderstood and unappreciated. She believed that she would
have gone through fire and water, or done anything else grand and heroic for those
she loved; but she would not bear the least neglect, or the slightest impatience, her
" sensibilities " were constantly being i^ounded, her " feelings " hurt; and, as alas !
there are but few opportunities of proving o\ir friendship by gi'and and heroic deeds,
poor La\ira did not receive any credit for the depth of affection which she really
possessed. Her parents were wealthy, educated and refined. Laura wished that
they were poor, that she might prove her devotion. Then she would teach, she
wo\ild sew, she woiild work, she would sacrifice herself in any way; but, as it was.
142 THE  ATTEMPT.
she would not take the least trouble to perfect herself in those accomplishments in
which she knew they desired her to excel, or to cultivate her mind sufficiently to
make herself an agreeable and intelligent companion.
She preferred to spend her time OAer exciting novels and morbid jjoetry, or in
weaving impossible romances, of which she herself was invariably the heroine.
And so poor Laura grew up with the most distorted views of herself, of life, of
everything—wasting her mental powers, sacrificing her duty, and the respect and aflPec-
tion of her friends, and allowing that strong love of the beautiful, which God had
given her, to degenerate into a weak and hazy sentimentalism, which unfitted her
for all practical duty, and all rational enjoyment.
But we are getting prosy ; and, after all, sentimentalism is not the most pro¬
fitable subject for reflection, as we trust that none of our readers are like our poor
friend Laura; and, as we know, that if they are, not volumes wi'itten on the evils of
sentimeutalism will make them less sentimental. Veronica.
(Eroi^uet |lulcs.
I. The starting place shall be at a distance of two mallets' lengths from the first hoop,
measured in a straight line between the post and that hoop, or at any distance
perpendicular to that point.
II. The ball shall be struck through the first hoop in one shot from the starting place;
and any player failing to make the first hoop must at once remove his ball,
and commence anew next turn.
III. A ball shall be held as not through a hoop, if it can be moved by a mallet ap¬
plied to the hoop on that side from which it was struck.
IV. Each player shall continue to play so long as he strikes his ball through a hoop,
or against the turning post, in order ; or strikes a ball which he may lawfully
croquet.
V. A ball, after striking another ball which it may lawfully croquet, shall be counted
as dead till it has croqueted that ball; and, whilst  dead, nothing that   it
does shall count to it, and any balls moved liy it shall be replaced.
i
THE   ATTEMPT. 143
VI. In croqueting, the player's own ball may, or may not, be moved—whether his
foot be on it or not; but, unless the ball croqueted be so moved from its place
as not to return, he shall forfeit the rest of his turn, and his ball shall remain
in the place to which he has struck it.
VII. It shall be lawful for a player to croquet a ball only once during each turn,
unless he has struck his ball through a hooji, or against the turning post, in
order; or, unless he is a rover, and has struck the ball through a hoop, or
against the turning post, in order.
VIII. A ball put through a hoop, or struck against the turning post, in order, either
by a friend or an enemy, shall be held to have made that hoop or struck
the post; but shall not be therefore played till it is the player's turn.
IX. A ball shall not be held to have made a hoop, if it pass through the hoop and
then roll back from any cause.
X. If a ball under, but not through, a hoop, be struck by another ball, the ball strik¬
ing shall be held to have stinick the other on that side of the hoop on which
the ball so struck was (by Law III.) ruled to be.
XI. If the player's ball strike a friend's ball against the winning post, in order, and
thus put it out of the game, the player shall not be entitled to any further
play for striking it.
XII. The hoops and posts shall not be moved from an upright position ; and if a
player, in striking his ball, with his mallet move a hoop before the ball be
struck, he shall forfeit the rest of his turn.
XIII. Each player shall, on bemg asked by the person playing, say which is his
next hoop ; and any player, if erroneously informed on any point by an ad¬
versary, shall be entitled to have the shot over.
XIV. If a ball struck or croqueted be stopped by a player, or through his fault, it
shall be in the option of the side on which that player is not—to have the
shot played over, or the ball advanced as far as it would probably have gone,
or left where it has thus ended.
144 THE  ATTEMPT.
XV. A shot played out of turn shall be played over, and any balls moved by it shall
be replaced.
XVI. A ball struck off the ci'oquet ground shall be bi'ought on opposite the spot to
which it has rolled,
XVII. The side of the mallet's head shall not be used in striking the ball.
XVIII. Shoving, pushing and spooning, shall not be allowed : such' shots shall be
played over, and any balls moved shall be replaced.
XIX. Counter crocpiets shall not be allowed.
XX. Killing shall not be allowed.
INTERPKETATION OF TERMS USED IN THE ABOVE RULES.
Dead Ball.—A ball is said to be dead after it has 'struck a ball and before it has
croqueted it.
In Order.—In order signifies the rotation of the hoops and posts.
Counter Croquets.—A counter croquet is when one ball strikes another against a
third, and this second ball takes a croquet off the third ball,—whilst the first
ball's tui'n is internipted till this be done.
Rover.—A ball is a rover which has made all the hoops, and struck the turning post,
in order.
Killing.—Killing is a player's striking against the -winning post an enemy's ball
that is a rover.
THE   ATTEMPT. 145
We of the female sex ought to be pretty well tired of talking about ourselves,
and hearing ourselves discussed. Our talents, whether peculiar to ourselves or
common to mankind, the way in which we ought to have been educated, the par¬
ticular mode in which we may be allowed to move and think and speak,—the sphere
in which we may act, whether it be limited or unlimited ;—these are themes most
fruitful in different opinions and arguments without end. It is often difficult to
see how any solid results are to spring from all this talk. Men can never be in a
position to decide such questions impartially ; and as for ourselves, we must indeed
find our true place and keep it; but if we cannot do this by our actions, words will
never help us to it.
There are many who look back upon the whole page of woman's history as the
record of one gigantic mistake and crime, and who believe that we only require to
be roused up from the lethargy into which ages of oppression have crushed our
spirits, in order to take the place of equality beside our former tyrants. With those
views, it is hardly possible for them to repress the shout of indignation for the past
and present, and exultation for prospective triumph. But if we do not agree
with these ; if we believe that the page of the past, though blotted, is not all falsely
written ; if we feel, that whatever may have been, and whatever is in other lands,
still, in our own free country we are as free as any to be what we ought, if we would ;
and that, if there be a way, it is to be sought for, not in our position, but in our
characters and conduct; it may seem inconsistent to some that we should join the
wordy war at all. If we are satisfied with the existing order of things, what more
is there to be said 1 If we have no grievance to state, why should we raise our
voice at all ? And if we have confidence in actions alone, why not leave talk to
others, and busy ourselves only with the simpler concerns that lie nearest to us all.
This is exactly the way in which most of the contented order of womankind
think and act. Satisfied themselves, it is not worth while to vindicate their line of
conduct to others. They give no reasons, and are, therefore, wrongly supposed to
have none, or only such flimsy ones, that they are afraid to examine them, lest they
should fall to pieces; and hints are thrown out that they hold fast to the old moor¬
ings, only because they dare not cut the cable and go free. Now, it is not fair that
the  enthusiastic voices of a handful should be mistaken for tlie united cry of all
146 THE   ATTEMPT.
thinking women. Many of those who keep most quiet, have the very best reasons
for the position they have taken up, and we ought to welcome discussion, not dread
it, because it will force us to try our ground, and to take our stand more and more
on principles, not on prejudices.
It is natural, we must confess, to suspect prejudice in ourselves when dealing
with this subject, because it is one which the whole world seems never to have been
able to look at without the aid of some strangely distorting lens or other.    Indeed, it
was only quite lately that the world took the trouble to think steadily upon the
matter at all.    It was far too easily settled to be worthy of deep consideration.    Old
use and wont were always at hand to decide the most knotty points, and when they
had spoken, no further question coiild be raised.    Even in England, though high-
minded women might often ask themselves what was the sphere meant for them,
and how they  might fill it most worthily, they never thought of an answer which
would shock the j)rejudices of their day.    They found their places prepared, and fell
naturally into them.    They had less choice than we have; their path in life was
more simjile, more  silent, more secret; but oh ! shall we say it was less noble, less
filled with good influence, if they walked in it rightly 1    I cannot regi-et the place
which the loving daughters, and wives and mothers of three centuries ago occupied.
If it did not draw out all their faculties, it gave full exercise to the very highest of
all; and if we think we have reached a higher ground, we should remember, with
gi-atitude, that it was won, not by noise, by struggles, by revolutions, but by these
modest, patient, thoughtful lives, which, all unconsciously, could not help gaining for
their whole sex a tribiite of honour.    We generally associate the elevation of women
with a period earlier than this, and speak of the days of chivalry with enthusiasm.
No doubt the movement had its beginning then, but the great height to which
women were raised then, was too unnatural to be altogether genuine.     Honour was
done to ladies, not so much because they were honourable in themselves, as because the
romance of the age required some object for its reverence,—its worship, I had almost
said.      To the knight, his lady-love was scarcely herself.     She was the embodiment
of his ideal, the representative of all beauty and purity and honour to him.     In the
hour of victory, her approving smile was to him what  the olive-wreath had been to
the Greek of old; and in the hour of danger or death, her name was his watch-word,
linked with  the ideal of honour for which he had spent his life.      We cannot quite
believe with the poets, that all knights were such fervent lovers or such romantic
dreamers—probably some of them were quite as incapable of kindling into cntliTi-
siasm, either for an idea or for a lady, as some men are now.      But putting romance
THE  ATTEMPT. 147
aside, it is sober fact, that ho who did most reverence to woman was accounted the
best knight, and that few would have hazarded their fair fame by refusing to fulfil the
most perilous undertaking which the caprice of a vain woman might require of them.
There was much in all this which was very beautiful, and much calculated to
elevate and soften the rugged warriors of the time. But, however good for the men
it may have been, it cannot fail to strike us that the objects of such adulation must
have suffered from it. In some cases, respect from others might teach self-respect,
and women become great and good in reaching up to the lofty ideal held before
them. But the majority of them, half-educated and often half-occupied, were far
more likely to take the admiration they met with, as a right, than to try to be
worthy of it, and thus they would fall more easily into all the follies and crimes to
which proud, petted, passionate creatures could be tempted. But this is a side of
the picture not pleasant to dwell on; we would rather pass from it, and treasure up
such royal names as those of Queen Philippa and Queen Eleanor of Castille as
memorials of those days of chivalry so long gone by, that we can hardly even
understand them now.
If we go back to ancient days for women worthy of honour, we find them in
Greece and Home. It was such mothers as Cornelia, that were the very source
and spring of the glory of the great republic; for what son could flinch from battle
and danger when his mother stayed her tears to bid him go and die for his country 1
So much for Europe. Chequered and often stained with tears, as has been the
lot of woman there, we shrink from crossing the boundary, and glancing at those
Eastern lands where liberty in any form is a thing hardly yet discovered. Ask
some poor wandering Pariah what he thinks of his wife, and he will tell you she
is but a more intelligent kind of pack-horse. She was made to do all his bidding,
to bear all his burdens, to sti-uggle through all the hard, wearing work which he can
possibly escape from, by fastening it on her. Ask the polished, high-caste Hindu the
same question, and his reply reveals no more cheering lot. His wife does not work,
it is true. She enjoys the luxury of perfect idleness of body, and perfect vacuity of
mind. She lives in a gilded prison, guarded from all eyes but his own—kept from
treading the common ground, or from breaUiing the common air, if that were pos¬
sible. She is watched with the jealous care, not of tenderness, but of distrust—for
along with the utmost contempt for her powers, her lord has a strong dread of her
cunning, and she is valued, like a horse, only for the silkiness of her hair and the
slenderness of her shape. There is one blessing the poor captive may possess. Her
sons reflect honour on her.    In their growing beauty and intelligence she feels her-
148 THE   ATTEMPT.
self raised above her own condition, and from their love she gets the respect which
is denied her everywhere else. But if a son brings gladness, the birth of a daugh¬
ter is too often the cause of weeping. She fears she has offended the gods, and to
propitiate their anger, it may be that she sacrifices the trembling little life which she
is taught to esteem so worthless, and yet so fain would keep.
As far back as we can trace the history of Asia's great empires—Persia, or Ba¬
bylon, or Assyria, the story is the same. Tliese empires had not in them a spark of
liberty, and that despotism which pressed on all beneath the highest potentate,
crushed the woman, lowest of all, down to the very dust.
One race there was, even in the East, which produced a Deborah, a Hannah,
and an Esther. We sometimes, thoughtfully, feel inclined to wonder at the low
state of women represented in the Old Testament; but did we compare their standing
with that of women of the surrounding nations, we should rather wonder at the power
which lay in their divine religion, and in the holy hope which every Jewish mother
cherished, that perhaps her child might be the long promised One, to raise them
above others to honour and nobility.
It would be hardly worth while to look thus back upon the history of past ages,
were the effect of such a survey merely to excite our anger against the treatment
which our sex has experienced at the hands of men. But in the saddest pages of
the story, a far sadder truth lies hid, and one full of lessons for ourselves. We pity
the poor enslaved ones, whether now or in other days. But we cannot say that
they are worthy of much respect or confidence. We cannot deny that the judgment of
men regarding them, however harsh, is but what might be expected from men who have
never come into contact with a higher race of women. It is more man's oppression
than woman's own degradation which keeps her low. It is useless to try to deter¬
mine which is cause, which effect, their action and reaction are so mingled. They
are two great roots of evil, and it is useless to cry out against the first, if we are not
using all our efforts to remove the one which we have most in our own power.
That man's estimation is a very exact measure of woman's character, holds true
now no less than formerly, and is proved in individual cases as well as in the aggre¬
gate of public opinion. From a gentleman's bearing to a lady, you can tell almost
with certainty the sort of women with whom he is accustomed to associate. If the
contemptuous " blue-stocking " rises to his lips whenever he sees or suspects a book
in her hands, you may be sure his mother and sisters are not literary. If he dis¬
likes the sight of useful occupation, you may be sure that fancy work was their chief
employment.    If he stands amazed at seeing her get into a carriage without terror
THE  ATTEMPT. 149
lest the horses should run off, or taking a walk in the country without suffering tor¬
tures at the sight or imagination of toads ; and if, for these little peculiarities, he sets
her down as strong-minded, it is not difficult to guess the timidity, real or affected,
of the weak ones whom it has been his lot to defend. If he is one of those ridiculous
beings who fancy the whole female world engaged to coquette with him, and who
cannot address a straight-forward sentence to a lady, much less comprehend the pos¬
sibility of such a sentence proceeding from her lips, then I shall not dwell on the
kind of society which is his peculiar element; I only know that he has never yet
known the friendship of a true, earnest, pure-hearted woman. It is, no doubt, very
foolish for men to set up for themselves one type of woman to the ignoring of every
other, yet it is only the most large-hearted who are not liable to fall into this mis¬
take. And if we do meet a man who knows how to respect our various characters
and tastes, who speaks to all women with a truthful manliness which makes the bad
feel abashed and the good strengthened, we may be almost sure that he has learned
to love and honour and trust all through one—that mother who first showed him
how noble a woman's life might be.
" Happy he
With such a mother ! faith in woman-kind
Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high
Comes easy to him."
What woman would willingly be guilty of keeping such a confidence from taking
root, or of withering it up after it had sprung 1 She who has done so, has not only
irreparably injured the man himself; she has sent him forth to be a fountain of de¬
basing influence to all women who may come within his range without possessing an
adequate power of resistance.
We have a double charge laid on us ; to use our own influence rightly, and to
resist being moulded by what is evil in others. We are often required to give up
our own inclinations, but never to yield what is a true and right part of our nature
for the sake of pleasing the society in which we move. Yet many of the girls, from
whose lips little but unmeaning nonsense ever flows, would talk in a very different
strain if they did not fancy that men dislike anything like seriousness in women.
They might enjoy some hearty, healthful employment, but they cast it all aside, be¬
cause they think it more fashionable to do nothing. They have heard that learned
women do not please; and though they were fond of several branches of study in
their school days, all are neglected, or if pursued in secret, are belied by a strain of
affected childishness and ignorance.    Or, perhaps, they imagine that fast girls attract
150
THE  ATTEMPT.
most notice, and therefore they exert themselves to become bold and forward, to
hazard opinions on all subjects, known or unknown, and to express them in terms
which hardly belong to the English language. Does the untruth of such lines of
conduct never occur to those who pursue them 1 To pretend to be something better
than oneself is commonly called by an ugly name, yet one which has been defined
as the homage which vice pays to virtue. To pretend to be something lower than
oneself, with the certainty of becoming, day by day, more like the hateful ideal,
by what name shall we call that, or what palliation can we offer for it? And is
the object for which women are thus wasting their god-given powers, and harden¬
ing their better feelings, worthy of the fearful sacrifice ? What can they hope to gain
by it ? Only a few complaisant words, some smiles of amusement, of pleasure, of ad¬
miration, if you will, from those of all mankind whose admiration is least worth
having ; possibly, in the event of comj)lete success, the companionship of one of those
for life.    Surely this is the life of a slave, if ever there was slavery in this world !
Ask one of those gentlemen, whose entertainment is of such pressing importance,
what he thinks of women, and if he were in the palace of truth, which unfortunately
he is not, his reply would be something like this :—They are the gayest butterflies,
the most charming spoilt children of creation ; the most gracious receptacles for all
sorts of folly and polite lies; as frolicsome and as silly as kittens, who will never
tire of playing with a cork at the end of a silken string, though they have found out,
a dozen times over, that it is not a mouse. Ask him what he supposes to be the end
of woman's creation. He knows of his own gratification and diversion, but that is
all. It is very agreeable to him, no doubt, aftei- the labour of restraining some part
of his folly for a whole long day, to find at last a subject on which he may pour out
all, with the certainty of animated response and encouragement—but surely, surely,
it is the lowest of all vocations for a woman with an immortal soul.
The picture I have drawn is an extreme one. It is not all at once that frivolity
takes possession of the whole nature. There are many steps down the slippery road.
The first step is a very easy one. It is the listening with pleasure to words which
you feel sure are spoken for efiect, not for truth. The second step is to speak the
hollow words yourself. And other steps will lead you, by slow degrees, to love the
falsehood and the empty glare.
There are many who indulge in a little occasional flirtation, who are at other
times modest and guileless. They get on the first step now and then, but would not
for worlds go farther. But even if they should be able to keep their stand on that
very first step, some pure feeling must be trodden down, some delicate perception
THE   ATTEMPT. 151
given us to distinguish the true from the false is sure to be blunted. Oh, when will
all women learn to reject at once admiration which is untinged with respect; when
will they turn away from words that would never have been spoken had the speaker
dreamt that their lives were meant to be true and earnest, that high and holy duties
lie around them to be performed, and that they have souls belonging to God and to
themselves alone 1
" To thine own seK be true,—
And it doth follow as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man."
But, believing a woman's life to be a noble thing, and that it must in many
cases be utterly independent of man's opinion, yet it does not by any means follow
that her line of life ought to be the same as man's. We sometimes hear our powers
spoken of, as if there were masculine talents sleeping in us, which only wanted develop¬
ment, in order to fit us to fill every situation which men occupy. Those who speak
thus would be the last to agree with Pojje's scornful sentiment, that woman is
only the softer man; yet they are, in reality, saying the same thing. If such were
the case, it would be only rational to endeavour to rise out of this uncomfortable, im¬
perfect state of half-manhood. But we cannot subscribe to any such sentiment as that.
Physically, it is untrue. Inferior or superior strength is not the chief distinction
between the names of man and woman. Why should we suppose, ia the face of
strong evidence to the contrary, that it is the chief mental and moral distinction 1
There is a strange connection between the body and the miad, close enough in
many cases, though in others capriciously broken and indistinct, to justify us in con¬
cluding, that in a perfect human nature the form would be a complete counterpart to
the soul. We have no such perfect specimen; the links on both sides are all dis¬
joined and distorted ; and the wonder only is, that so much truth is discoverable from
such imperfect means. I am not going to enter on any one of the ologies, which my
readers may be dreading. I shall only just ask the most unbelieving, whether they
do not often, unintentionally, use the same general terms to describe a man's charac¬
ter as in describing his form. A very striking examjjle of this occurs in the life of
Dr. Chalmers. Mr Joseph Gumey, speaking of a forenoon spent in the company of
Chalmers and Wilberforce, says, " Our morning passed delightfully ; Chalmers was
indeed comparatively silent, as he often is when many persons are collected, and the
stream of conversation flowed between ourselves and the ever lively Wilberforce. I
have seldom observed a more amusing and pleasing contrast between two great men,
than between Wilbcrforce and Chalmers.    Chalmers is stout and erect, with a broad
152
THE   ATTEMPT.
countenance ; Wilberforce minute, and singularly twisted.    Chalmers, both in body
and miad, moves with a deliberate step;  Wilberforce, iufirm as he is, in his ad¬
vanced years, flies about with astonishing activity, and while, with nimble finger, he
seizes on everything that adorns or diversifies his path, his mind flits from object to
object with unceasing versatility.    I often think that particular men bear about with
them an analogy to particular animals.     Chalmers is like a good-tempered lion ;
Wilberforce is like a bee.    Chalmers can say a pleasant thing now and then, and
laugh when he has said it, and he has a strong touch of humour in his countenance,
but in general he is grave, his thoughts grow to a great size before they are uttered ;
Wilberforce sparkles with life and wit, and the characteristic of his mind is rapid
productiveness."    Even had we not seen this fact illustrated, we might & priori have
supposed it to be the case, that as man makes his machines to suit the power that
wields them, as God makes his plants to agree with the soil in which they spring,
so He would mould the body to give free play to the faculties that are meant to
work through it.    And if we find woman's physical frame peculiarly suited to one
set of duties for which man is unsuited, shall we not infer that her mind is specially
fitted for the same set of duties ?     Were it not so, she would be the most unhappy
and most inconsistent of creatures.    The very mother-bird, sitting day after day on
her quiet nest, has a stock of patience and love which belong not to her mate, and
without which her task would be one dreary period of captivity.     Shall it be said
that a human mother has the suffering and the self-denial a thousand fold, with no
patience and no love specially provided to strengthen her 1    And if, in this peculiar
case, we see the physical and moral qualities so strongly corresponding, we may ex¬
pect to trace the resemblance also in other cases not quite so obvious.    We find her
nervous system more finely strung, her frame more elastic, her fingers more quick
and ready for delicate offices, may we not then conclude that her miud is equally
agile, and lightly turned from one task to another, especially" when we see how
greatly most women have need of all this in their daily life ?     For, whatever the
claimants of equal rights may say, as long as there are cluldi-en in the world, as long as
those children have need of aunties and nurses as well as mothers, and as long as we
cannot bring ourselves to imagine men taking our place in any of these capacities, so
long our work must be various  and perpetually changing.    Were it not for the
greater versatility of our natui-es, we could not find ourselves at home amid the
constant interruptions of such work.
On the contrary, we find our bodies less strong to bear a heavy load or resist a
long strain than those of men.    Is it any slander to suppose that our intellects are
THE   ATTEMPT. 153
also less hard, and give way more easily under severe pressure ? And I think that in
this lies the true explanation of the peculiar constitution of our reasoning powers,
which has been for so long a time a broad mark for all the random shots which
men choose to fire at us. They will admit that we are very sharp in detecting the fal¬
lacies of others, and that we frequently jump at right conclusions by accident or in¬
tuitive perception, they are pleased to affirm ! Now, most right conclusions are
reached, not simply by perceiving facts, but by comparing the relations existing
between one fact and another.    And this is reasoning.
We have, then, reasoning powers as accurate as those of men, and commonly
more alert. They move lightly, as our fingers do, but like our limbs, they cannot
bear too long a strain. We must sit down and rest, and unfortunately, an argument
cannot always be resumed at the point where we stopped, as easily as an interrupted
walk can be pursued when energy comes back again. In a certain degree, perhaps,
this is a weakness resulting from our education and circumstances, and as such we
are bound to make vigorous efforts to overcome it. We may go on improving inde¬
finitely. There is no fixed limit; yet our reason will never be fashioned after the
model of man's. It could not attain the persevering strength of his, and yet
keep the easy rapidity in little things which is far more necessary to us. It is not
a disgrace to us that no female Newton has ever arisen, nor is likely to arise; but it
is a disgi-ace when, in matters that we reason about quickly and without effort, we
reason wrongly for want of a little painstaking with ourselves.
The face and form of a beautiful woman affect our preceptions of beauty in a
very different way from those of a finely moulded man. Yet we cannot decide which
have power to satisfy our ideal in the highest degree. Both are complete in them¬
selves.
Mub-t we then chai'ge our mental constitution with defect, because it obstinately
refuses to be cast after the model of man. But the analogy which we have been
pursuing between body and mind deserts us at a certain point. It will not carry
us into eveiy corner of our nature. There is no physical quality which resembles
modesty, or love of retirement, or quick, easily touched sympathy ; yet, after having
proved tliat we possess some qualities in a peculiar degree, we may safely accept the
evidence of experience, and class these among them.
I would not be supposed to have any desire of unduly glorifying our sex, by re¬
presenting only the brighter side of a woman's character. Yet I cannot help dwell¬
ing most on that, for the sake of argument. Were I to communicate all the faults
to which we are peculiarly exposed, I should be met with a cry of scorn from many
154 THE  ATTEMPT.
sides. But I do not think the most ambitious woman in the world would wish to
disown the modesty, the patience, the helpful sympathy which we may charitably
hope she possesses in a peculiar degree, in common with all her sex. She will, at
least, be sure to assert that women far excel men in quickness and readiness.
Now, if she uphold the woman's superiority in such things as these, she cannot
deny to man the possession of another set of qualities, in which he, in his turn, is
superior, without claiming, not equality, but a most undue and unreasonable share of
all the virtues for one half of the human family.
There are few who do not feel the distinction between the male and female
characters,—and yet, no one has ever yet given, or can give, a complete description of
wherein the difference consists. To attempt even a very general account of it, is
specially difficult, because thei-e is no neuter gender in the human race. Each one
must be either man or woman, and consequently, none can reach a stand-point from
which to review both sexes with equal fairness. Another great source of difficulty
lies in the circumstance, that the two characters touch and intersect one another at
every point. You cannot separate them by any fixed boundary line, so as to say,
this property belongs exclusively to the male, that to the female.
If we could say any such thing, the gi-ound of mutual help and sympathy, which
is mutual understanding, would be sapped under our feet. We cannot forbid a man
to weep when some great sorrow shakes his whole soul : no more dare we repress
the indomitable courage which rises in a woman's heart when some difficulty stops
up her way, or some danger threatens one she loves. The tears and the courage are
both native to woman, and both native to man : the utmost that we can say of them
is, that with her the tears rise more easily ; with him the boldness is in the ascen¬
dant. Man and woman were made one flesh, yet that flesh is diflerently moulded.
They are of one nature, only it is diflerently proportioned. But to tell how it is so,
to detect all the subtle varieties which make the two
" Xot like in like, but like in difFerance,"
is a task which defies the nicest discrimination. A child can feel that the melody
of a flute is not like that of a violoncello, but the most experienced musician cannot
explain accurately how it is that their tones affect us differently. Still, so sure are
we of the reality of our sensations, that were any one to tell us that the one instni-
ment was merely louder and stronger than the other, we should have a poor opinion
of his ear for music, while none but a deaf man could affirm that there is no
difference except in outward shape.    Just so we believe in the distinctive natures of
THE   ATTEMPT. 155
man and woman. We feel the diiference, even though we have only untuned
instruments to judge from, and can only faintly guess what would be the full harmony,
the glorious concord in contrast, which would flow from the perfection of both.
But, though a full definition is beyond our power, and though it is time that no
two women are alike, still there are certain features, more or less marked in every
woman's character, from which we may gather what the general purpose of her life
is meant to be.
We may say that a life of self-seeking is more intolerable in a woman than in a
man, for she is less capable of solitary, self-contained enjoyment, but much more free
to make another's joy her own, as she is more ready to enter into another's sorrow.
If it is not good for a man to be alone, utter loneliness is all but impossible for
a woman. I do not mean to say that she must always be dependent on somethhig
stronger than herself. If she has no one to cling to, she will seek some one to lean
on her, and the interchange of sympathy, were it even with a little child, the feeling
of being helpful to some poor creature, struggling, as perhaps she herself is, in deep
waters, is sufficient to keep her from withering up. A man is bound to stretch out
his hand when he sees his fellow in trouble, but it is a womanly office to see always.
There are sorrows which cry out openly, and wMch any man with a kind heart, be
his hand ever so clumsy, can relieve. But there are other burdens which men sel¬
dom notice, griefs that will not speak, there are little fretting cares which seem not
worth sj^eaking about, and yet which form no small portion of life's load, and which,
but for the readier and more delicate sympathy of woman, would, we fear, go on un¬
observed and unsoothed to the end. Thus our life may be more retired than man's,
but not less actively useful. Our work attracts less observation, but is not less
important. Our powers are not so much drawn out in one fixed direction ; indeed,
to confine them in the groove of a profession would, generally speaking, be only
to cramp them. For if, in one aspect, it is the little things of life that cliiefly
claim our care, in another, we have far more opportunity than most men have for
attending to the greatest. The man who has to spend his day in a round of manual
labour, in casting up accounts, or even in perfecting some great mechanical discovery,
has his opportunities of usefulness more fettered than the woman who lives to watch
over the interests, bodily and spiritual, of the inmates of her house; who finds, every
hour, some new point of contact with her fellow-creatures, some joy which she may
double by sharing, some vexation which she can remove, some perplexity out of
which her good sense can point a way. If self-control and an equal balance of mtud
are needed anywhere, it is in those delicate relations which we have with other minds.
156 THE  ATTEMPT.
Affection, and a certain tact to j)lease, may come naturally ; but the clear judgment,
which will quickly find, not the nearest turning, but the right one, the love which is
too wise to flatter or spoil those dearest, are not the results of unreflecting impulsive¬
ness. The most cultivated woman need never feel her talents wasted in such a sphere
as this, for all that makes her more complete in herself, increases her ability to
discharge her varied duties well, and adds immeasurably to her influence. Therefore,
we do not ask timidly, "what talents may a woman safely be allowed to cultivate 1"
We ask rather, " is there any right tendency of her nature which she may not follow
out 1" There is no such thing, provided only the tendency be a genuine part of her
own nature, and not the artificial product of self-willed ambition, and provided the
work into which it leads her be not pursued at the expense of some better feeling or
some higher duty.
I have only spoken of the individuality of the two characters; whether, as a
whole, the one is superior to the other, is a question which we are hardly in a position
to determine. But, even if we are, in some things, obliged to take the lowest place, it
ought not much to hurt us, while we know that, in the highest things, we may all
run the same race, and win the same prize. And I cannot help thinking that, though
the possibilities of our nature may be as great as those of man's, yet, as a consequence
of the fall, our place now is one of comparative lowliness. To man the word was
spoken—" In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread ;" and the burden of hard
toil still presses on him ; labour, not for the high ends which might be worthy of the
glad energies of a sinless being, but for the mere means of animal existence, which in
Eden were scattered freely as the dew. The sentence would appear a very humbling
one if we were not so used to it, and yet it acts as a guard against that self-indulgent
idleness which is far more terrible. To the woman, another word of punishment
was spoken ! " Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee."
Her original clinging love had a drop of wormwood mingled in it, suffering, unsatis¬
fied desire even to be its accompaniments, more or less, because there is nothing
earthly worthy of the perfect reliance which alone it could satisfy her heart to bestow.
But if, instead of vainly struggling against all that would remind us of our posi¬
tion, we quietly take our places assigned us by God, not man, we may perhaps find
in the core of the curse the sweetest of earthly joys, or, missing these, we may be led
by it to the best of heavenly blessings. Perhaps we shall one day discover that our
primeval sentence is as mercifully suited to the present needs of our nature as man's
is to his. But we must never forget that, though our subjection dates from the Fall,
our individual nature is no part of its results.    Eve was not Adam, she was not like
THE   ATTEMPT. 157
Adam even in Eden, she was a more genuine woman than any of her daughters,
and perhaps on that account only more thoroughly distinct from man. And in re¬
calling the names of those who have done most honour to our sex by their abilities,
their courage, or their true-hearted fidelity,—Olympia Morata, Lady Jane Grey,
Margaret Roper, or Lady Rachel Russell,—we cannot find anything but what was
truly womanly; and did ever woman's heart beat like that of the poetess of our cen¬
tury, Elizabeth Barrett Browning 1 Her images are bathed in the light of old Greece;
her grand thoughts are struck out with force, as the sparks fly off from the anvil;
but her bearing never interferes with her womanhood: her strength is the strength
of love, the strength of longing, and, alas ! for her, the strength of sorrow. Ah !
do any of us expect to inherit a nobler genius, or reach a higher point of culture than
she did ; and, if that were possible, did we imagine that our gifts would be of any
service to ourselves or to the world if they had made us other than more perfect
women 1 Let us fight against our sins, but never against the womanhood; against
our little-mindedness, but never against our Yocntion oi mindmg little things ; against
the weakness that cannot stand alone when duty calls, but never against the desire
of clinging to that which is worthy of our trust; against the idolatry that would lead
us to forget God for a fellow creature, but never against the love that prompts us to
forget self for others.
The relations between the sexes are in some respects changed from what they
were in the days when an unwedded woman was so rare a phenomenon as to be a
creature without an acknowledged place in the world at all. Now, the difficulty is
to discover how the world did without its maiden sisters. They have no need, cer¬
tainly, to live for themselves, or pine away for lack of occupation. Women have
greatly gained in independence and vigour, but the necessity to exert these qualities
grows much more rapidly. With many, the question is not how to spend life, but
how to find the means of maintaining it. The lonely winning of bread for herself is
not a woman's natural element, still, it is intinitively less unnatural and unhappy
than the sort of marriages often forced upon women formerly, and accepted by too
many now, merely for the sake of a settlement. And, while we cannot regard the
necessity for a woman to maintain herself as a thing to glory in, we rejoice that, as
it is so often a necessity, so many new fields are being opened up in directions un-
thought of before, iu which her efibrts may prosper. There are some callings only
now beginning to be taken up by women, which seem so suited to them that we
wonder they have ever been followed by any others. There are others not so appro¬
priate, which are charged with making women hard and unfeminine.    There may be
158 THE  ATTEMPT.
such anomalies in the world as masculine women, but they are not very common,
and we have no reason to think they are more common now than they used to be.
Semiramis and Agrippina were more than a match for the hardest of our day. Most
of those who are called masculine are not really so. They are only a little too bracing
for our weak nerves. Their energetic usefulness puts our lassitude to shame, and
we find it easier to reproach them than to blame ourselves. We ought to be very
careful how we prepare a Procrustian bed for our sister according to our own measure,
cutting down every one who is too tall for us, lest their stature should prove to be the
very beauty of their womanhood.
Though it be hard, very hard, for a woman to become unsexed, there is one
passion by which I can conceive of the thing being accomplished, and that one, allowed
to sway, has slain its thousands. It has various forms ; the love of power, the de¬
sire to excel, the straining after eclat or notoriety ; but its one name is ambition. It
so often nearly i-esembles what is good, that it is difficult to detect its soil. It is the
excelsior-cry, only sounded to exalt self. It is the ardent pressing onward; but not
because of any light of duty beckoning, and not because of any irrepressible fountain
of energy that will find an outlet. The light that leads astray, is the prospect of
being something that we are not, and never were intended to be ; something which,
to attain, w^ill cost us the most precious treasures of our nature. When a woman
sets out on the career of ambition, her mind is not cultivated but strained ; her hand
grasps all the harder, because her effort is unnatural; self-love asserts its own most
jealously, because it is a usurper. And yet, even in the most extreme cases, no
woman is truly unsexed. She has, indeed, missed her aim most thoroughly. She has
lost her woman's virtues. She has retained her woman's faults. An Eliaibeth may
have strength to inspire a whole people with courage to repel the invader from their
shores ; she may have ability enough to rule the greatest men of a great age ; but
unless she strive with other weapons than those of boldness and love of power, she
will never be able to cope with her own miserable vanity and coquetry. On the
other hand, many a humble, gentle woman, never dreaming of greatness, but only
conscientiously anxious to do what is right, has, in the hour of trial and danger, found
courage and power which she knew not she possessed, springing up out of the depths
of her womanly nature.
It is not so much what a woman does, as the spirit in which she does it, that does
her honour. If the most tender might plunge her hand in blood to save her child,
and yet not be defiled,—much more may the most retiring come forward in
the most prominent part at the call of duty.     But to most it would be a terrible
THE   ATTEMPT. 159
sacrifice to be obliged to come thus forward ; and those who feel it easy for them¬
selves to do so, should think twice before they attempt to drag along with them
thousands of their sisters into public places, where they would be utterly out of theii-
element.
Tliere is no injustice in thus limiting woman's work chiefly to the quieter walks
of life. Even supposing she might be able to shine in other regions, she is not the
only being wliose orbit is circumsciibed. No man's sphere can be exactly commen¬
surate with his capacity. A clever man has perhaps ten times the amount of ability
that he will ever be able to call into exercise. He might be a physician, a" school
master, an author, or a man of business; he might be able to learn printing, or
weaving, or gardening, or a thousand other trades. One or more of these may allure
him with the fullest prospect of success ; in others he could only excel by a painful
effort. But it is certain he cannot follow them all at once, and if he be a wise man,
he will not mourn long over that hardship, but devote himself to that which he will
be sure to do best. If that is open to him, it would be a waste of talent to apply
himself to any other. This is the true principle of division of labour, and ought to
be applied Ln the case before us. We do not doubt that some women could fill
public offices with more ability than some men. But it is not less true that there
are men who fill them Ijetter than the best of us could do, and that, as women, we
have work to do, which no man can do for us. A woman may, at some future day,
for aught I know, win fame as a barrister; but if she does, it will not be the best
way in which she could have used her talents, unless, like Portia, some sudden
impulse drive her to fulfil some special errand of mercy. If her intellect be clear
and vigorous enough to make her a valuable speaker or politician, what a wife or
mother she might have been, what a wise counsellor, what a considerate helper,
what a powerful centre of good influence to the large circle which must naturally
rally round her !
I can imagine a woman feeling herself called on by duty to adopt a particular
profession—that of medicine, for instance. If the preliminary ordeal were less
terrible, there need be nothing of unfeminine piiblicity in the practice afterwards.
The result would be simply to change a tender nurse into a highly wise and intelligent
one, as we ought all, in our measure, to be.
If those who desire to come forward in public, do so because they believe they
have a work to do which they could not do so well in any other way, we have no
right to hold them back. But, if they are urged on only by a longing after personal
advancement, or by the mistaken belief that they will thus promote the elevation of
160 THE   ATTEMPT.
their sisters    ...    I cannot help feeling that the greater their success, the gi-eater
will be the injury inflicted on themselves, and on their whole sex.
I can hardly conclude my essay without mentioning the subject of education ;
but it is far too wide to be more than touched on just now. I believe that girls are
more influenced by the kind of life they expect to lead when they leave school, than
by any amount of work exacted from them there. Thousands of mistakes are
possible on this score. Those who trifle through their childhood, with the sole
desire of gi-owing tip and entering into society as soon as possible, might almost as
well have no education at all. Those who imagine that accomplishments are to be
their chief ornaments through life, will hardly succeed in. anything else. One who
values more solid acquirements, is apt to fall into the error of imagining the
attainment of knowledge to be the chief end of life, instead of valuing it only as a
means to higher ends. For years nothing occurs to shake that belief—she enters
with full zest into every branch of study, fully persuaded that the intellectual culture,
which constitutes one of her greatest enjoyments is also her highest duty, and ex¬
pecting to find life only a gi'eater school-room, where she may cany on her favourite
pursuits with more freedom. They do find life truly a school-room, but its lessons
are not all received from books; and many of them, which ought to have been familiar
as A B C, have to be learnt at length, at much unnecessary expense of time, thought
and temper.
Perhaps experience alone could have entirely undeceived such. It may be vain
to try to convince the child who "hates sewing," how important it is that she should
learn to mend her gloves, and keep her drawers tidy, but it is quite possible to make
her do the things themselves. The learning of household concerns will not fret her
spirit half so much in childhood as if deferred till later years ; and the habit of
attending to little duties, with the still more valuable habits of general observation
and helpfulness, will soon become a second nature. These essential matters ought
to be classed with the very foundations of learning, and taught at the same age
as the reading, writing and arithmetic, which I never imagine would present
fewer difficulties if omitted till a later period.
I dare not launch out upon the ocean of fui'ther pursuits, they depend so much
on individual tastes, abilities and prospects.
To a thoughtful girl, whose helpful kindness and efforts after moral goodness
keep pace with her intellectual advancement, no acquirement can be valueless; for
each will furnish a new 2>oint of contact with her fellow-creatures, and will, through
life, widen immeasurably the range of her sympathies. M. L.
THE   ATTEMPT. -     IGl
Stanzas from t^t Jfrmc^ oi Wittot Juga.
To-night the sun went down 'midst banks of cloud,
To-morrow storm will come—then eve—then night—
Then dawn, its glories veil'd in vap'rous shroud—
New days, new nights, the step of time's swift flight.
And all these days shall paiss, and thousands more,
Pass from the mountain's brow, the ocean's breast,
The silver streams, the woods whose hollow roar
Sounds like a dirge for lov'd ones now at rest.
But still the ocean's breast, the mountain's brow.
Though wrinkled, grow not old ; the fair green trees
Tarn ever young again ; the streams still flow.
Still drain the mountains, and still feed the seas.
But I, my head bowed lower every day,
Fade slowly, chill'd beneath the sun's glad beam; \
Soon must I die, while all around is gay—
Die !—and unchang'd the great bright world will seem.
Dido.
"#«r g'xitk Sister."
There seemed to be quantities of us, rough, good-natured boys, and merry romping
girls, so many, indeed, that when we were asked how many brothers and sisters we
had, and what their names were, we used laughingly to feign forgetfulness—to offer
to send a list—but, at last, with a seemingly great effort of memory, we managed to
enumerate them on our fingers. There were eleven of um, and each one had his or
her appropriate finger, all but the eleventh, and when we came to her, the hands
went down, and the enquirrug visitor could not but notice the altei'ed tone which the
mention of this little one caused. Number ten was a rough happy girl, decidedly ad¬
dicted to boyish piirsuits, and with a strong liking for climbing trees and running on
the tops of walls—a liking which met with every encouragement from her particular
chums, Tom and Harry, who came next her in age, and who made no secret of their
admiration of what they called " her plnck." It was perhaps the strong contrast of
disposition, added to a disparity of several years, which caiised our feeling of reverence
for " our little sister."    Her own name was Elizabeth, but, except by our grand-aunt,
X
162   • THE  ATTEMPT.
who resided with us, it was never used. No pet name was considered too dainty for
her. She was called Daisy, because of her large truthful grey eyes. Lilly followed
naturally on a sight of her little, delicate, pale face, and the halo of golden hair fall¬
ing, not in curls, but ripples, to her waist, procured for this—our little household
divinity—the title of " our little Madonna." She was a delicate little thing, too
much so to be able to do many of the kind actions her loving, unselfish heart prompted.
Truly she was our " little Benjamin." Our love for her made her rule as despotic as
if she had ever used some mightier sceptre than a movement of her small white hand,
or a reproving glance from her clear grey eyes. The girls learned from her example
to be kind and unselfish, and the boys could not choose but be gentle in the presence
of the little sister, whom, it seemed, a rough breath would scare away. We had loved
her for seven summers, when we began first to think, and then to whisper among our¬
selves, that the large eyes had become larger, and the little pale face still paler. We
eased the head of its golden burden, knowing that a -more angelic halo would soon
surround it. We felt that with the summer flowers our little Daisy too would fade,
and now, in the twilight, we boys and girls talk of her, and tell each other that she
still is, and ever will be, "our little sister." Clarence.
" ^cn  unb'ixt t non grabrrc."
To one I love, for whom I can do nothing.
I CANNOT sleep for thinking of thy face,
Wliich thrusts itself between the dark and me,
Scaring my rest: oh ! for heaven's gentle grace.
Haunt me not with this speechless misery !
What could I do, that I have left undone
That to thy life might bring content or peace '?
Have I not made my days to hang upon
Thy will and wish, and every hour to beat
Only one patient, longing, waiting measure,
To thy departing and returning feet;
Counting as my great joy thy lightest pleasure;
And now, I would I could but pour the treasure
Of my heart's life blood out before it breaks.
To put a warmer colour in thy cheeks !
Frances Anne Kemble.
THE  ATTEMPT. 163
'§\xhtxi'B filters;
BEING MSS. TEMPORE CAROLI PRIMI. NOW FIRST PUBLISHED.
Deare and Goode Friende Hubert,—Right gladde was I to receive youre
letter, once more to gayne tydyngs of you, albeit they were not so cheerefull and
happie as I had hoped to hear ; my hearte did leape for joy to see your writing, and
your owne goode name withal signed at ye bottom, to confirme it still more. And
verilie I was most gladde to heare that you were going up to Whitehall,—to leave
your uncle's house, and beginne a better, truer, happier lyfe, than ye one you have been
leading at ye Manor House. For believe me, friende, it is better by far to sette
one's mind to ye conquering of difficulties, to ye overcoming of bad and evill thoughts,
by ye ayde of God, than to broode gloomilie and sorrowfuUie over those things that
we cannot mende, save by rising and lustilie gi'appling with them as with mortal
foes. Yet do I knowe well that you will say, " It is easie for Eliot to talke to me,—
hath he not a goode home, a loving father and mother, faire and deare sisters, and
brave brothers 1" Aye, and I thanke God that He hath given me all these, and pray
Him that He will long preserve them unto me; yet, in ye midst of my lyfe of joy-
aunce, do I not forget that my friende hath none of these ; and I do try to thynke
of myselfe as being Hubert Willoughbie, alone, uncared for, unloved—and methinks
I can almost feel it myselfe.
But nowe that yon are in London at last, Hubert, right sure am I that happie
days are before you; with ye powers of minde and graces of person that you possess,
you must, and will too, marke me ! aye, will make your fortune ! There may be
many a brave young gallant in London towne, but to my thynkynge, none lyke my
Hubert; nay, I flatter thee not, for a true friende doth flatter never ; I but say ye
truthe, as I believe it in mine owne mind. Ah ! it is verrie well for thee to say
that never maiden yet hath found thy hearte ; but were I maiden, instead of man, I
could love Hubert Willoughbie as never maiden loved before. But I must cry
' Halt,' or my pen woulde rimne on for ever in ye praises of ye man I love, even
an it be onlie to himselfe, that of himselfe I do discourse. You have never been to
oure faire citie of Chester, so can you not picture to yourselfe how faire she looketh
in her spring garments—for tnilie, a lovelie citie is ours—I thynke better than all
ye townes of Englande and Scotlande put together. Even Oxforde itself is nothing
compared to mine owne deare home, every stone of our goode walls is precious to me
164
THE   ATTEMPT.
as mine own hearth-stone, every one of her citizens seemeth to me as well nigh a
brother; and ye rippling musicke of our owne silver Dee is to me ye best musicke
that I can heare. And what if our Cathedral be not so large as great Winchester, nor
so grand as Norwich 1 I do love it dearlie, every stone of it, every windowe, every
pillar; for have I not knowne it from a chUde 1 Oh, it is verrie, verrie pleasant for
me to come backe to mine owne home, to walke once more through ye familiar
streets, to strolle by ye gi-eene banks of Dee, to see old friendlie faces once againe.
God is goode to me—verrie goode, more than do I desei-ve; for oft do I forget
that from His hand cometh all my happinesse, and oft, alas, doe I murmur sore at
small trifles, that vex and annoy me more than they should. 'Tis not ye miride of a
man, friend Hubert, a man in ye fiille meaninge of ye worde, that can be perturbed
and disquieted by suche small e things as do often anger me ; for a man shoulde be
above all these littel trifles of time, shoulde knowe how to cast them from him as
unworthie of his troubling himselfe, and shoulde bende his soule to higher and better
objects. And verily it seemeth to me, that we may all soone have some object to
care for—some cause to espouse, some aim to attain unto; for our lot is cast in
troublous dayes,—or rather, ye dayes will be yet more troublous than they are nowe ;
and it behoveth everie true Englishman to cast well aboute him, and to weigh well
ye rights of both sides, and soe to join in his lot with those who seeme to him to
have righteousnesse, and truth, and English libertie with them.
As you knowe well, our house hath ever been loyal, true to ye kinge to ye
uttermoste ; and never hath there yet been a tyme when a Warner's blade hath rusted
in his scabbard when ye kinge's war-crye hath echoed through ye lande, and reached
ye walls and towers of Chester; and manye a time hath our store of plate—our
tankards and goblets, salvers and salt-bowls, every piece belonging to ye Warners—
manye a tyme hath it been pawned for a goode rounde sum of gold to put into ye
kinge's cofiers when he wanted money or men. And such deedes have we it still in
our heartes to doe, shoulde need be, and right require it; but, Hubert, my father of
late hath come to thynk somewhat difierentlie of ye kinge's practices than did he here¬
tofore. He no longer proclaimeth Charles to be as goode a sovereign as hath ever
sat on our throne ; he saith no more that a kinge hath divine authoritie from God,
to doe as he will; nor doth he everie day fiUe his cuppe to " ye kinge and his gentle¬
men," as did he in past years. I have once or twice heard him give it as his minde,
that a kinge's royal oathe should be kept most sacredlie, and that under no pretence
whatsoever ought it to be broken ; and then he doth add—" Our Charles hath not
kept his royal promise as he shoulde have done in ye sighte of God ; and surelie that
THE  ATTEMPT. 1G5
ship-monie was a shameful! tax, and I cannot blame Master Hampden for refusing
to pay it."
Greatlie have I marvelled at hearing my father thus speake; he, Clarence
Warner, a true krng's-man, condemn thus ye doings of our prince ! But I feared to
saye much to him about what I myselfe thought, or to ask him wherefore he had
thus changed his mind that was formerlie soe stedfastlie set towards ye king and his
partie. But a fewe dayes agone, it soe came about that we spoke together of these
things; and it was on this wise.
It was getting towards ye duske ; I had been reading over your letter, my
friende, until ye lighte failed me, and I laid downe ye paper, and began for to thynk.
Our house, as you knowe, is in ye Watergate Streete, which leadeth unto that part of
ye citie walls whereon standeth ye water tower; soe is ye Watergate Streete oft trodden
by many folk, of all sorts and degrees, those of ye citie, and ye countrie folk also,
going and returning.
I sate me down on ye windowe seat, and gazed out on to ye streete belowe, and
so felle a-thynkynge, about you, and your cousin Bertram, and of Oxforde, and ye
happie days now gone by for ever ; and from those things passed my thoughts unto
other and more weightie matters, for I saw riding along a partie of armed men—
whether of some free companie, or belonging to ye armie ye kinge is now raysynge,
I wot not; but as I saw their helmets and scabbards gleaming as they passed on their
way, and heard ye tramplynge of their horses' feet, I wondered greatlie if our faire
Englande would ever agaiiie be red with ye bloode of her owne children, and if ye
yellowe stares that were just peepynge out, would looke downe soone againe on dead
Englishmen slayne by Englishe handes and Englishe blades. And scarce knowynge
what I said, my lips framed ye words " Will it ever be—"will it soone be 1" And
then I marvelled to hear my father's voice say, " Will what ever be, or soon be ? "
I turned me round about, and as I did soe, ye letter dropped upon ye floore; and my
father stooped and picked it up.
" What have we here ]" he said, as he turned it over, and read ye name at ye
foote. " Hubert Willoughbie ! by my troth, but it is a good name ; and prithee, who
is this Willoughbie who inditeth to my son Eliot such brave pages as these 1"
I tolde him that it was my friende whom I had at Oxforde; and I tolde him
alsoe somewhat of yourselfe, friende Hubert; and I saw his brows knit somewhat
closer as I said that you had gone uppe to Whitehall, and that my Lord Strafford had
promised to make you secretarie thei-e ; and then he said in a shai-p tone, " And soe
he too is one of these foolish young gallants who worship that Charles, because his court
166 THE   ATTEMPT.
is gay and bright, and ye Popish queene, for that she hath manye faire maydens about
her 1"
I said nought to him of my muche surprise at hearing him soe speake; but I
onlie said " Goode father, an you will read his letter, or let me reade you some parte
of it, then will you see that he is better than you take him for ; " and I shewed him
that part where you say soe muche about riding always with ye strong partie, and
hating ye extortionate deedes of ye kinge.
With that, my father clapped his hande upon my shoulder; " He is true
metal, Eliot; you are right, and I was wronge; he will come out brighte in
ye ende; and he speaketh but what is just and righte." He sate him downe
by my side, and was silent and thoughtfuU for a littel space, then suddenlie to
me—" What didst say a while since, my sonne 1 something about somewhat being
soone or ever ?" He spoke no more sharplie now, but kindlie and softlie; so
takinge courage, I tolde him what had been my thoughts just before he came in—
whether we shoulde ever have ye tymes of ye roses back againe, and if it woulde be in
our day. He heard me quietlie, and then said in a lower tone, and with a glance
round to ye doores to see if perchance they might be partlie open—" I am trulie
gladde, my sonne, to have heard what thy thoughts are about tliis matter; I have been
greatlie troubled in my minde of late dayes, and perchance as muche by ye thought
that I knewe not what you woulde saye when we came to talk it over betweene our¬
selves. For thou, Eliot, art my oldest living sonne; therefore with thee doe I wish to
take counsel in this matter. Thou must have taken notice that I am no more soe fond
of ye kinge and ye courte and ye cavaliers as I used to be : that I no more defend all
ye kinge's doings, nor pay cheerfuUie ye taxes that he imposeth; and wherefore is all
this change, thinkest thou 1"
" I suppose it is because his Majesty findeth no more favour in thine eyes, goode
my father," I answered.
" Right, ladde, right; my hearte is no longer in ye cause, as of yore : I have
striven hard to keepe my hearte loyal and true, but no longer can I soe doe. An
ye worste come to ye worste, if I did not positivelie fighte againste ye kinge, yet
coulde I not fight for him; for he hath no longer truth and lighte on his syde. I
know fulle well that it would be a newe and strange thing for a Warner to desert his
sovereign in tyme of neede, and woulde drawe downe upon my head all ye bitter-
nesse and hatred of ye royal partie ; but I must fain take my chance of that. But
still, ladde, let us hope that we may not come to such tymes yet, that ye parliament
will get what they most want, and will leave yc countrie in peace.    And nowe.
THE   ATTEMPT. 167
Eliot, tell me—what thinkest thou upon this matter ? I do even thiiike that we
are lyke-minded touching this thing. "
Soe, Hubert, I told him all that I have soe oft told you—all that I thought con¬
cerning ye king and ye courte, and ye state of affaii-s in general; and at last, when
we rose uppe to goe downe unto ye others, my father stretched out his hande and
grasped mine warmlie. " I thanke God, my sonne, that I have found an helper in
you; if badde days doe come indeede, yet shall I knowe that I am uphelde by my
Eliot; for it hath been great griefe to me to thynk that perchance I should find thee
hot for ye kinge and his men, and readie almost to kill thy father with thine owne
hands, because that he dared to be a rebel in his hearte."
" Father!" I sayd, and I well nigh choked as I sayd it, for ye bare thought
that he coulde have beleeved me so utterlie base at hearte smote me lyke a great
sworde-blow. " Father ! I, your owne sonne, your Eliot, readie to stayne my
handes and my hearte with suche fearfuU sinne ! Dost thinke that I love thee so
verrie littel 1"
I sank downe againe on ye windowe-ledge, and hidde my face atweene my
palms; then I felt my father's hand upon my shoulder. " I did thee foule wronge,
but to harbour such thinge in my minde, sonne Eliot," he sayd gravelie, and some¬
what sadlie ; " but nowe-a-dayes, such wicked actes are but too common, I fear me ;
it is because I have heard soe muche of late of ye badde and undutifull conduct of
sonnes unto their parents, that I coulde not but thinke—what if my ladde should
turn againste me 1 But I did sorelie wi-onge thee ; for I knowe that thy hearte is
true as golde, and that thou lovest me with a love that woulde beare thee even to
deathe itselfe for me ; is it not soe ?" Then I knewe that all was righte againe ; yet
coulde I not helpe being something grieved that he shoulde have doubted me, even
for one moment. We were just going down ye stairs, when my father stojiped sud-
denlie. " Eliot, thou knowest Sir William Shaw 1 Welle, he told me but yester-
morn that he, too, is dead sette againste Charles ; but he alsoe tolde me that he had
sayd ye same unto his sonne Hugh ; and nowe, what thinkest thou that Hugh an¬
swered him i" " Verilie I knowe not," I sayd, somewhat marvelling. " He sayd,
that Hugh's eyes flashed like burning coales, and he turned on his father, and sayd
righte bitterlie, that he was a true kinge's-man, and for his parte woulde never, no,
never, passe one more night under ye roofe of a traitor ; ' thou are no father of mine,'
he added, ' neither am I any longer sonne of thine—fare thee welle.' So he hath
gathered together all his substance, and hath gone away, his father knoweth not
whither; and moreover, he cannot tell but that he may goe uppe to London, and betraye
168 - THE   ATTEMPT.
him unto ye Courte of Star Chamber; and then what shall happe unto him, thou
knowest verrie well." " Hugh Shaw !" I could hardlie beleeve it; for I had knowne
ye ladde well, and knewe that he lyked ye kinge; but he had ever seemed to me a
duteous sonne enow; but moreover, Hubert, one thing troubled me more than I
coulde saye ; and this is it. We have been friendes from our youthe uppe, and well
did knowe eache other • but ye one of us who cared most of all for Hugh was my
sister, Lilian—and methinks that Hugh did love her too somewhat; but Lilian is
verrie shy and quiet, so will she not saye much; but I have seene her prettie eyes
brighten, and her cheeke flush, whenever Shaw came nigh; and I thinke he was
pleased to see that she lyked him. But certes, she is but a childe yet—scarce seven-
teene; and he is twenty-two; yet 1 cannot but thynke—what will she doe ? For he
hath left no message, and it will well-nigh breake her hearte. My father read my
thoughtes, for he said—"Poor Lilian, what shall we say to her? He did not de¬
serve ye damsell's love—but that is but sorrie comforte. But he may come backe ;
so let us not say aught concerning him to her for some tyme. Deare childe ! and
she so happie and gaye ; hark, she is even nowe singing—coming uppe for us, I sup¬
pose, Eliot; let us goe." So we went downe, and supped ; and I dreamed that night
of Hubert Willoughbie fighting Hugh Shaw ; and then marrying Lilian ! Foolishe,
my friende ; but dreames are strange thinges. I can write no more ; for my paper is
filled with these littel conceits of mine. Soe must I bid thee farewell. When tliis
letter will goe, I cannot saye ;   perchance by Lord  Saxford's courier, and he will
carrie it.
Ever thy true friende.
Eliot Warner.
Ye 14th daye of Aprill, 1639.
To Master Hubert Willoughbie,
At his lodging at one George Wright's,
At ye signe of ye Silver Spur,
In ye Straude,
Neare unto London.
Uaste, post, haste, and do quicklie thy diligence.
Mas Alta.
THE   ATTEMPT.
169
kulus.
To those of our readers who are accustomed to make Shakespeare their standard
of all that is high and noble, who take his ideals of honour, purity, and beauty as
their ideals, any vindication of the character of Brutus may seem an impertinence.
But as there are others who, though admiring the character of the man as drawn by
Shakespeare, deny that the poet's eye saw more clearly into the working of the old
Roman's heart than they themselves can do, perhaps the disciples of the great poet
and philosopher, will not object to our bringing up a few historical proofs testifying
to the greatness of his character.
The early youth of Marcus Brutus was spent in earnest study, such as should fit him
to be a just and wise leader of men, and all his inclinations were trained towards the
path of virtue—virtue as it was understood by the Romans during the century pre¬
ceding the Christian era.
The first instance which we have of Brutus sacrificing all private feelings for
the sake of following what he considered the right cause, occurred in 49 B.C., when
Caesar and Pompey were opposed to each other in the civil war. It was generally
thought that Bnitus would espouse the cause of the former, who was his friend,
but, on the side of Pompey, Brutus thought he saw the " better reason," and to his
party, therefore, he attached himself. Now, when we remember that Brutus, at
the age of eight years, was made fatherless through the perfidy of Pompey, we may
understand what feelings of hatred and aversion would promjrt him to oppose any
cause of which this general was the leader ; but, to the calm reflecting mind of Brutus,
no private feelings of revenge could interfere with his duty towards his country.
In the history of Brutus, there is one event which is either the great blot or
the great honour in his life. We need hardly, say, that we refer to the putting of Csesar
to death. If it was done from jealousy, or from any personal dislike, then, indeed, it
was a murder of the blackest dye ; but if it was from a desire to rid Rome of a man
who was doing harm to the republic, then it was a noble sacrifice.
Before considering the merits of the case, let us call to mind the times in which
the event took place, and the feelings with which the Romans looked upon death.
With them, to take the life of a man who was obnoxious to the state, was merely to
remove an obstacle from the path. No commandment of " Thou shalt not kill" was
ringing in their ears with solemn warning.
170 THE  ATTEMPT.
The greatest proof of the purity of intention on the part of Brutus in this mat¬
ter, is the fact of the friendship which existed between him and Caesar. It was no
unusual thing to find a man ready, nay, even eager, to take the life of an enemy, of
one to whom he owed a grudge ; but to kill a friend, one to whom he was bound by
tics of gi-atitude and aifection, required the powers of a large mind.
Bitter and conflicting thoughts must have agitated the breast of Biiitus as he
thought of his friendship for the man, and his duty to the Republic. To judge
rightly, not of the action itself, but of the motives which prompted Brutus to it, we
must make his standpoint our standpoint, or, enlightened though we may consider
ourselves to be, we shall be blindly prejudiced in passing judgment on his character.
From this standpoint, then, he saw, or thought he saw, in the life of Cfesar, tyranny
and ruin to the republic; but, in his death, liberty, freedom, and glory for his
countrymen. In the eyes of Brutus, Csesar was a tyrant—a tyrant who iniled cer¬
tainly with love and generosity, but nevertheless one who was swallowing up all other
names in the great name of Csesar, and whose head, he feared, only remained un¬
crowned, through dread of the uproar of the people. Though of a more gentle temper
than was his great ancestor, Junius Brutus, still, with the blood flowing through his
veins of him " who did from the streets of Rome, the Tarquin drive, when he was
call'd a king," Marcus Brutus could not hold aloof when called on to save his
countrymen from approaching bondage.
But it is much to be feared that the rest of the conspirators were actuated by
very different motives from those which induced the gi-eat Brutus to lead the con¬
spiracy. This is clearly shown by the steady refusal he returned to them, when they
urged upon him the necessity of killing Mark Antony, as being too intimate a friend
of Cajsar's to be allowed to live with impunity after the death of the latter. But
Brutus was no lover of bloodshed, and not a single man was to suffer but Cresar
alone. We refrain from here making use of the beautiful language of Shakespeare,
wishing that our hero should be judged strictly by history, without the aid of him
who has made the name of Brutus honoured, throughout all lands, and for all time.
Some endeavour to cast blame on Brutus for the secret manner in which the
death of Csesar was effected. They speak of the meanness of attacking a man as he
stood, all unarmed, in the Senate House. But, as the great object of Biiitus was to
remove the man whom he considered hurtful to the State, it would have been simple
madness to have made an open attack, or in any way to have warned CiBsar that he
considered him to be engrossing too much jjower in his own person. The result of
such a line of conduct would, undoubtedly, have been to banish Brutus from Rome,
I
THE  ATTEMPT.
171
or, perhaps, even to put him to immediate death. We need scarcely say that no
l^ersonal dread of this result would have prevented Brutus from so acting, had he
thought it the better way, but, of course, had Brutus been lost, with him would have
been lost all chance of success for the cause. No, in spite of all the misconstruction,
the danger, and the wounding of private affection, which he knew well he must en¬
dure if he persevered in what he considered to be his duty, the ides of March found
him at his post, calm and resolved. "With his countenance he ruled his party, though
with an anxious heart beating within him, he controlled with a look, his less steady
companions, and timed the attack with perfect precision.
Very sadly must CaBsar's " Et tu Brute " have fallen on the ears of his friend,
as, with his dagger, he stabbed the great Cffisar. But he who had not failed in the
enactment of the dread scene, was not now to be overcome by sorrow. Liberty and
freedom were proclaimed from the pulpits. But the people of Rome were not un¬
grateful to the memoiy of the gentle Csesar, who had ruled them mildly, though his
right to rule at all, might by some be doubted. However, even while lamenting the
death of Csesar, they were inspired with reverence for the man who had, at all hazards
to himself, freed them from the dominion of a tyrant. Prudence woidd have required
that the funeral of Csesar should be conducted privately, and that no speeches should
be made in the hearing of the people, by the friends of Csesar, siich as should stir up
their feelings against Bnitus. But, with the strict justice and perfect confidence
which characterised the dealings of Biaitus, he would not permit the body of his dead
friend to be laid iu the earth, without the usual accompaniments of a great man's funeral.
The mass of people being then, as now, ever ready to be swayed by the last speaker,
and to fire up vnth his eloquence, was thrown into confusion by the speech of Mark
Antony, and by his holding up before their eyes the bloody garment of Csesar. Thus
it was that Brutus was compelled to leave Rome; he could not diflTuse his calm, ear¬
nest sjiirit into the breasts of the excited mob, which now cried for vengeance on the
murderers of Csesar.
After this, the life of Brutus is one of continued battle—here siiccessful, there
defeated, but everywhere brave and noble—the first in battle, the last in flight.
Such a man could not fail to have ardent, devoted friends and followers, especi¬
ally among those who had shared his studies and pursuits. His last night was spent
in a cave overshadowed by trees, in company with a few of his most affectionate
friends ; all hope of victory was lost. There being nothing now left for him to do
for the republic ; his army defeated, and some of his men deserting to the enemy, he
requested his friend Strato to hold his sword that he might run on it, so that the
172 THE   ATTEMPT.
living Brutus might never fall into the hands of the enemy.     His friends mourned
his loss, and his foes felt that a great man was gone from the world.
Many people, after studying the life of Brutus, will still assert that he did wrong
in the killing of Csesar ; but that he acted as he thought right, few will deny : and as
we think of the sacrifices he made to duty, of his firm yet gentle leading of men, of
his afiection as a husband, of his single-minded serving uf the State, and of his valour
as a warrior, we can but say from the heaii;—" This was a man !" des Eaux.
Sweet Maud stands alone on the rampai-t high,
Maud watches the daylight slowly die,
Maud gazes dreamily over the sea,
And wonders—where can her true love be 1
Roland, that ever as eve doth fall,
Opens the postern-gate in the wall.
And bounds to the battlement up the stair,
For he knows his darling is watching there.
Evening is falling,
The nightingale calling.
The white moon is rising overhead :
Where can Sir Roland be 1 where, oh, wliei'e ?
And Lord Kennabie's vengeance is dark and dread.
o^
Roland is pricking, fearless and fast,
With the deepening shadows about him cast,
On through the forest, merry and gay,
And trilling a song to cheer his way.
He spurs his steed, for the hour grows late,
And he longs to be at the postern-gate :
Oh ! the sweet blue eyes that are gazing over
The greenwood path, for the gallant lover !
THE  ATTEMPT.
Ha ! what was that quiver 1
The dark leaves shiver,
That rustle under his charger's tread.
Or the swaying chestnut boughs that cover.
And Lord Kennabie's vengance is dark and di'ead.
The heavens are dark, and the stars are out.
And the lady weeps with fear and doubt.
The night wind moans over meadow and dale.
The dew is cold on her cheek so pale;
But she moves not yet from the lonely si^ot,
For still Sir Roland cometh not.
She listens in vain for the step so light.
And the ringing voice of her own true knight;
The hot tears fall
On the rampart wall,
As she droops in sorrow her golden head.
And sad at heart is that lady bright.
And Lord Kennabie's vengeance is dark and dread.
The stars are out in the darkened skies,
And under the chestnuts Roland lies.
The glad song hushed, and the red lips pale.
And the warm blood wet on the shining mail,
The dark eyes staring and glassy now.
And an awful gash on the fair white brow ;
And fast through the wood, on his fleet black steed.
Flies the wicked rival has wrought the deed.
And Lord Kennabie's word,
As he wipes his sword
From the heavy gore-drops trickling red.
Is, " At last, mine enemy hath his meed ! "
And Lord Kennabie's vengeance is dark and dread.
173
The morning is bright, the breeze blows free.
And the birds are carolling joyously ;
174 THE   ATTEMPT.
And high on her turret sweet Maud doth stand,
Shading her eyes with her lily hand,
For Sir Roland will surely come to-day,
She shall see him ride forth from the forest way :
Alas ! sweet lady, for never more,
Thy love may stand at the postern door.
Never his face
Shall gladden thy gaze.
He is lying still, and cold, and dead.
And thy life's dear dream is past and o'er.
And Lord Kennabie's vengeance is dark and dread.
The sun is low, and the shadows fall
Heavily from the castle wall;
Tliere echoes the wail of a requiem's strain.
As passes sadly a funeral train,
TJie tapers are lit, and the monks they sing.
For the burthen of love and of woe they bring.
But oh ! not alone they bear to the gi-ave,
The dead Sir Roland, so fair, so brave :
Sweet Maud lies there
On her true knight's bier,
Her hand in his, on his breast her head.
No other rest could her poor heart crave.
And Lord Kennabie's vengeance is dark and dread.
Mas Alta.
THE   ATTEMPT. « 175
Croquet €ftra0rbmav]T.
OR, HOW NOT TO DO IT.
I ADDRESS this paper to Croquet players—to hona fide players, who know the game
thoroughly, and practise it enthusiastically, who are aware what an amount of skill,
of science, of judgment, and of patience is requisite to the attainment of real pro¬
ficiency—and not to those deluded—or, shall I say, obstinate individuals, who stigma¬
tise this delightful game as childish, trifling, and uninteresting : let us hope that the
day may come when the scales of prejudice shall fall from their eyes ; in the mean¬
time,
" Non ragioniam di lor, ma guarda e passa."
To Croquet players, in the highest sense of the term, I address myself; and
feel confident that they will not refuse me their sympathy when they have heard
my woful tale.
One beautiful day, during the summer of 1867, it was my fortune to be present
at a Croquet party—never mind where. The ground was all that could be desired ;
the balls were neither too light nor too heavy ; the mallets were constructed on the
most approved princijiles ; and all promised well until the game began. We were
fourteen in number, and divided into two parties, one of six, and one of eight.
The six best players were cax-efiilly selected, and went off to begin a game at one end
of the Croquet ground ; I was left at the other, in command of the awkward squad,
and was requested to arrange the sides, which I did nearly at random, as I was
almost entirely ignorant of the merits of the players; but a very few moments showed
me that they were all equally bad, about as bad as bad could be ; in fact, I was my¬
self (for the first time in my life), very decidedly superior to any other jjlayer on the
ground.
Our party consisted of four ladies including myself, three gentlemen, and a
little boy of ten or eleven, the only one, besides myself, who had the slighest pre¬
tension to any knowledge of the game; so I made him captain of the light side,
giving him the red ball, and taking the green one myself, as captain of the dwrk side.
Blue ball was played by a young lady, who goaded me nearly to madness before she had
played half a dozen turns.    She wore a long sweeping dress, which she positively
17G * THE   ATTEMPT.
declined to tuck up, and which trailed the balls out of their positions in the most
disgraceful manner. She played with one hand (with a tight glove upon it), and
held up a pai-asol with the other. Her style of play was feeble to imbecility, indeed,
I don't think she could have sent a ball ten yards to save her life ; and she never, by
any chance, remembered when it was her turn to i^lay, a peculiarity shared by all
the other players, except myself and little Red, who ran about till we were utterly
exhausted, and shouted till we were hoai-se, in trying to bring our partners up to
time. Pink was Blue's sister, and played much in the same style; she had also a
curious habit of pushing about her ball when nobody was looking, which, on some
Croquet grounds, would have been called cheating, but which we politely attributed
to forgetfulness. Black was owned by a gentleman who had never had a mallet in
his hands before, but who showed an amount of intelligence and interest in the
game, which made up for his shortcomings in the way of play; and, although, like
the others, he never could remember his turn, yet he was always at his post, and al¬
ways knew what hoop he was going to. Yellow was a gentleman said to be very
learned: he had long hair, was dressed like an old clothesman, and remained during
nearly the whole game in a state of profound mental abstraction, leaning against a
tree ; and when, by dint of shouting, and even shaking, he was made aware that it
was his turn to play, he would rush at his ball, and play on till he was stopped,
quite regardless whether he hit or missed. Brown was a thing to whom I may
apply Portia's criticism upon one of her suitors—" God made him, and therefore let
him pass for a man." He was the most execrable player I ever saw ; he shoved, he
spooned, he cheated ; he was constantly getting in the way, and stopping balls ; he
committed every possible enormity, and, worst of all, he didn't care. Orange was a
young lady, of whom I need only say, that she was the most inveterate shover I ever
beheld; I, myself, was green, and the little boy was red.
The progress of the game was considerably retarded by the extraordinary diffi¬
culty which several of the players experienced in effecting a start; but this was at
last overcome, and all eight balls launched on their perilous voyage. I soon found,
that however aggravating Blue might be, Brown was infinitely worse, indeed, at a
very early stage in the game, I felt inclined to give him up as hopeless ; besides, he
coidd not, like Black and Yellow, plead the excuse of total inexperience, nor did he
once in the whole game show the slightest particle of contrition for his faults, or of
a desire to do better. I tried every means I could think of to rouse him to a sense
of his deficiencies; I stamjjed my feet at him; I shook my mallet at him ; I held
him up to  the derision of the company under the sobriquet of " That wretched
THE   ATTEMPT.
177
Brown ;" 1 exposed his cheating without mercy—all to no purpose. I tried another
tack ; I appealed to his better feelings, and remonstrated with him upon the absur¬
dity of his behaviour—he only laughed. I endeavoured to converse with him, in
the hope of discovering and awakening some dormant energy; but I couldn't find
anything to talk about; he was neither a reading man, nor a business man, nor a
riding man, nor a dancing man; he could not shoot, or fish, or row, or play cricket;
and, at last, I gave up the attempt in despair.
In the meantime, Green and Red had made considerable progress in the game,
and Black and Yellow were advancing slowly, but steadily; while Blue and Brown
acted as drags upon one side, and Pink and Orange upon the other. One very
considerable advantage, however, was possessed by the dark side ; my authority
as captain was distinctly recognised and submitted to, so that I was able to
arrange a clear and consistent plan of operations; while, on the light side, Pink
and Orange would not submit to so juvenile a captain as Red, and Yellow would
not submit to anybody, so that they all played exactly as the spirit moved them,
and poor little Red found it utterly impossible to exercise any diplomacy whatever.
And I feel sure all experienced Croquet players will agree with me in saying,
that each side should have an acknowledged captain, even though there be no very
special superiority in his or her play; there is an immense advantage in a consistent
plan of tactics, and our game that day was a striking exemplification of this
general rule,—for all Red's good play was neutralised by the folly and obstinacy
of his partners, who never thought of calculating upon the result of a shot, who
played with equal force at friends and foes, and by whom the useful accom¬
plishment of lying for a friend's ball was utterly ignored. On the other hand,
I had brought the dark side completely under control, and wretched as was
their play, they were prevented from imitating the egregious blunders of
the other side. Brown was at first inclined to be contumacious, but, after
a few turns, I succeeded in terrifying him into submission, and although,
from beginning to end, he continued worse than useless, he did not attempt to play
without my direction. Blue's play I have already characterised as imbecile, and im¬
becile it continued from first to last. The same remark might be applied to Pink, but
for a certain degree of astuteness displayed in the surreptitious moving of her ball.
Black, as the game approached a termination, worked himself up to a fearful pitch of
excitement, under the influence of which he adopted a tremoloso style of playing very
injurious to his hopes; but it was impossible to be angry with Black, he was so
thoroughly interested in the game.    Yellow continued moody and abstracted, with
178 THE  ATTEMPT.
intervals during which he rushed after the balls like one possessed. Orange's shoving
became at last so palpable as to call for remonstrance, which was, however, ineffectual,
as she positively refused to alter her style of play.
After an hour and a-half the state of the game was as follows:—on the dark side.
Blue, Black, and Green were rovers ; Blue and Black lay together near the winning-
post. Green at the further end of the ground. Brown was in position for his hoop (the
second last). On the light side, Red and Yellow were rovers ; Pink and Orange were
both for the third last hoop ; all four were pretty well scattered. It was Yellow's turn
to play. He was requested by the captain to try Brown hard, that he might come to
Orange in case of a miss. He tried it sq/t—missed it—and lay just beyond Brown's
hoop, a little to one side. Brown missed his hoop, at the distance of about a foot, and
hit Yellow by a disgi-aceful fluke. He si^lit into jjosition off Yellow, and mirabile
dictu—got through his hoop and took Yellow again; then, to my unspeakable astonish¬
ment, succeeding in driving Yellow beyond the last hoop, and getting through it him¬
self.
This series of fortunate casualties (for I can call it nothing else), having placed
Brown in the proud position of a rover, I began to think about winning, and seeing
that Orange was pretty certain to join Red, I felt that I (Green) must have a ball beside
me; so I bade Brown take Yellow once, which he did, and croquet it to Green which
he didn't. The next expedient was to make him take Black, split off it to Pink
(who lay a little beyond the stick), and send Pink to Green. He took Black—and,
judge of my feelings, when, at this critical moment, as I was kneeling on the ground
arranging the balls for a split. Black bending over us, speechless with excitement, and
Blue actually looking interested. Brown languidly inquired " if I was going to the
flower-show next week ?" My only answer was to point to Pink's ball with all the
dignity which live feet four is capable of assuming, and the split and croquet were
both tolerably well accomplished, after which Brown played back to the post. Orange
joined Red, as I had foreseen. Green succeeded in hitting Pink, split to Orange and
Red, croqueted the latter, split off the former to the three dark balls at the winning
post, put them all out, went out itself, thus winning the game ; and I sat down
on the ground, utterly exhausted in mind and body, while Brown exclaimed in the
distance, " Is it my turn to play now 1" Dido.
THE   ATTEMPT.
179
Stanzas " gxam a Strange f anb."
FEOM  THE  GEKMAN   OF  GEORGE   HEEWEGH.
I WOULD go hence—as fades the evening sky.And, like the dying glow of closing day.By such calm gently gliding Death, would IPa.ss to Eternity's dark lap away.
1 would go hence—like yon effulgent star.
In fullest radiance, with unwearied glow ;
Thus silently and painlessly afar,
I down 'mid heav'ns blue glorious depths would go.
I would go hence—as from its calix fair.Each joyous flower a fragrant perfume lends.And on the wing of blossom-laden air,Odours as sweet as altar incense sends.
I would go hence—as morning's thirsty rays,Down 'mid the dew drops in the valley dart.Would God that thus the sun, with scorching blaze.Might drink the springs of my life-weary heart.
I would go hence—like that low solemn tone,Wak'd from the harp, lingering midst its wires,Yet hardly from the sordid metal flown,The sweet sound in its master's bi-east expires !
Thou may'st not fade as doth the evening sky;Not like the stars in silent stillness sink ;A flow'ret's gentle death thou may'st not die ;No morning ray thy spirit's springs may di-ink..
Yet—sux-ely shalt thou leave no sign.
But first stern misery thy strength must bend ;
Nature alone may gently life resign,
The Man's poor heart must first in pieces rend !
Echo.
180 the attempt.
In Three Papers.
PAPER I.
Society may be defined as the sphere of thought and action in which we move ;
a community, as it were, united by some common interest, and drawn together by
mutual admiration and unity of feeling. It is the vast school into which generation
after generation is drifted, each striving to improve upon the former, and each doomed
after all, to sink to the grave long before its cherished schemes are accomplished.
How wonderful the movements of the world's long battle appear ! its soldiers—our
forefathers, endowed with the same talents as ourselves, yet unable fully to develop
them from want of previously prepared gi-ound. We are too apt to forget this when
we ascribe all the merit of some great invention to one man : his glory is great, but
still it must be acknowledged that to a certain extent his mental materials had
been maturing themselves for ages, and that for him had been reserved the pleasure
of gathering, little by little, the hitherto scattered grains of information, and conden¬
sing them into one grand result.
However, in the ordinary signification of the word, Society means something
much more personal and more limited than " The World." Each one has his or her
little sphere, and this speck we are pi'epared to call our world or society.
Many and varied are the uses to which this side of our life may be put. One
great end, when properly sought after, is the enlargement and improvement of our
understandings, and it is with a view to this, that all companionship and conversation
should be engaged in, if we would make it profitable or agreeable to both parties.
By friction with other minds, and by coming in contact with opinions difiering from
our own, we come to be more able to see things as they ought to be seen from all
points of view. This is the only method by which opinions—worthy of the name, can
be formed. One who merely quotes from what he has heard in his own home circle,
or from what he may have read in the works of an author, however eminent,
cannot be said to have an opinion. What he says, even although he may be right,
is not his own ; he has not yet heard the opposite side, and thought over and argued
it for himself. There can be no rest for a mind until it has undergone this thorough
training, for no sooner has it fancied itself secure, than its imaginaiy faith will be
shaken by hearing a good reasoner of a contrary persuasion.    Our one-sided friend will
THE   ATTEMPT. 181
then be easily turned round to his companion's views, whether right or wrong, be¬
cause he cannot bring forward arguments of his own, and possibly, the next time the
same topic is mooted, he will either advance the last heard of opinions, or he will have
become so confounded as to be compelled to sit dumb in silent confusion.
Of course, it must not be inferred from this, that a man should " stick by" his
opinion, because he has once said so and so : an enlightened person will ever be will¬
ing, nay, anxious to hear all opposing arguments, and feel liberally towards those
who have an honest though opposing conviction.
In choosing our society, which every one, to some extent, may, it is well rather
to aspire, than to rest contented with our equals; for it is only by association with
higher intellects that we can hope for the improvement of our own. We are not
at liberty to thrust ourselves upon any society; but we may, at least, by rendering
ourselves inoffensive, associate with superiors, and thereby have our own minds ele¬
vated. Anyone who has had the good fortune to be thrown into the society of really
great men, cannot have failed to observe that they are almost invariably the most
agreeable companions. It is not because they ostentatiously show off their own
acquirements : it is rather that they are so fully capable of turning the conversation
into any topic, however apparently insignificant, which may suit the tastes of the
company, but, at the same time, without showing that most offensive disposition—
condescension. A good maxim to start with is, that your neighbour, however inferior
to you in most things, is pretty certain to be able to impart information on some point
on which you may be ignorant, and which, however wide of one's own tastes, need
never come amiss, indeed, one would almost think, the more welcome, as being new.
If only we can find out our companion's strong point, it is the surest way to render
small talk less irksome than it usually is—indeed, this is the very germ and secret of
society, selfishly speaking; and not altogether selfish either, for, I suppose, few people
object to being drawn out on their own hobby. It is just this mutual interchange of
ideas which constitutes all the pleasures of social intercourse, and teaches us our in¬
terdependence.
Real strength and decision of character is perhaps rarely to be met with—
originality, still less frequently; yet, what an intense pleasure there is in meeting with
real genius. Everything seems so fresh and free from the hackneyed trammels of
ordinary conversation. There is no assumption of character, no patch-work or com¬
bination of two or three persons in one. No man can systematically clothe himself
in the mind and manner of another without being detected : the wolf in sheep's
clothing, or vice versa, must still retain its nature.    Any such attempt at imitation
182 THE   ATTEMPT.
must engender a most unpleasant amount of self-consciovisness, than which nothing
can be more painful, both to the victim and his associates.
" Nobody with a mind habitually fixed on self can help playing a part. Self-consciousness in¬
stantly makes a man feel that he is in front of the foot-hghts, with paint on his face, and clad in cos¬
tume which is not that of his ordinary lite."
The true means by which to enjoy society, and profit by it, is to forget self
The time and place for thinking over and forming our own characters is in solitude
—there, let us, as far as we can, look at ourselves " as others see us; " eradicate
faults, and cherish virtues—then let us go into the world feeling that we are our¬
selves, and trusting to Providence that we shall find our own level, and form our own
friendships. Universal admiration and ajiproval is not to be expected, and, indeed,
is not desirable. A person with anything like individual character must have detrac¬
tors as well as admirers; popularity is biit a poor test of real worth. -Differently
constituted minds will draw to quite diSerent qualities, and so we need find no fault
with ourselves if by one section of the community we are viewed with indifference.
There is an vinfortunate tendency in some to shim society ; the luxury of retirement
and quiet is to them a too great temj^tation. Very estimable private characters
such may be, but, in many cases, simply " human vegetables," and, as such, very apt
to degenerate into narrow-mindedness and obstinate self opinionativeness, not to
speak of the waste of many of their faculties. Such recluses do not live—they eat,
and sleep, and die, leaving no impressions on the world, and having done little or
nothing for its advancement. And are we not placed here, to use to the full, all our
talents ?    To realise the poet's beautiful lines—
" How beautiful it is to be alive !
To wake each morn as if the Maker's grace
Did us afresh from nothingness derive."
Look at life in a busy, active town; people ai'e alive there, full of interest in each
other, and in questions of the day. Then retire to some remote country \'illage—very
sweet and romantic for a time, and where its inhabitants may be happy enough, in
their own stale, meaningless way, for there they and their forefathers have dwelt
for generations, and have never known better—the same routine of work, day after
day—no variety, and little or no improvement—nay, often opposed to any advance
advocated from elsewhere. Look at the question at present being agitated among
Presbyterians ;   some few of those who have thought for themselves see how and
THE   ATTEMPT. 183
to what extent their form of worship might be improved ; but let the slightest alter¬
ation be so much as proposed, to a country congregation, and they are up in arms !
They have been born and brought up to certain forms ; have never come in contact
with others, and yet, not in the least accustomed to think for themselves, they look
upon any so-called innovations as something very like an approach to heresy ! All
the difference between country boors and intelligent thinkers is, that the latter have
come in contact with more advanced views—have thought them out for themselves ;
and on whichever side they enlist, it is, we will trust, the result of their honest
conviction, not of stubborn and bigotted thick-headedness. "We are all placed here
to cultivate ourselves, and in doing so to raise the general tone of society, and this
we cannot do but by associating with our fellow-creatures, taking men for what they
are, and making the best of them, while in turn we are vnlling to allow them to
make the most of us. Kathleen.
We kneel within the chapel of our soul
In prayer, or in praise, as it may be ;
But heaven's white light we let not on us roll;
We break, refract it into colours three ;
We trace a pattern unto our desire ;
We form designs we deem most fairly bright,
We tinge them with self-suiting hues of fire ;
Half-conquered, through stained glass, comes heavenly light,
Transparent it should be, and purely clear.
To let heaven's pure things freely come and go ;
To let our souls be known—to let them know;
To let us fear the far, and love the near !
Unlovely and opaque, without must rise
Stained windows that so charm our inward eyes.
LuTEA Reseda.
184 THE   ATTEMPT.
There is pei-haps nothing people aim at so sedulously, and yet understand so
imperfectly, as the Art of Enjoyment. Happiness is a very subtle thing, not always
depending on what is outward, and so capricious, that when all seems smiling on us,
we are often surprised to find that the fickle goddess brings us no content, while, under
apparently adverse circumstances, a lightness of heart and capability of receiving
pleasure is sometimes recognised, that is apt to puzzle the superficial observer. It
has been often said that when things are at the worst, they are sure to mend, so that
when matters look darkest, the feeling that a change must come is awakened, and a
reaction takes place. It is just because the reverse has been strongly and deeply felt,
that happiness, when it does come, is truly appreciated.
There are many who are, or ought to have been happy all their lives, who yet are
discontented, and think themselves much to be pitied, all for the want of a few real
troubles. Of course, disposition has a good deal to do with it: some are naturally in¬
clined to take a cheerful view of life, while others are ajjt to let the evil outweigh the
good, and become depressed when the least shadow falls on them. Happiness and con¬
tentment are nearly allied ; without the latter, happiness will be short-lived, for it will
depend merely on outward circumstances. It is a great matter to be ready to receive
favourable impressions, to have, in fact, the heart open to the reception of whatever
should gladden and cheer, and to be desirous of imparting these feelings to all around.
We are very chary of allowing ourselves to be amused, and seldom can say with
truth, that we are enjoying ourselves at the present moment; there is always an idea
that we have experienced enjoyment in the past, and shall in the future.
Our own nation is perhaps the one least capable of achieAang the art of happi¬
ness, and probably it proceeds from the efforts we make to attain it, being too cum¬
brous,—we are essentially heavy in our amusements. All we do partakes too much
of the beef and pudding which is supposed to constitute the Englishman's piece de
resistance, and we go gravely into everything with a feeling of the duty we owe to
society. Our French neighbours understand things better; they manage to enjoy
themselves without any elaborate preparation for it,—their nature, on the other hand,
resembling their " cuisine," light and elegant. Give a Frenchman his cigar, his cup
of coflTee, and a chair in the open air, and you behold him gay and happy, without a
THE   ATTEMPT. 185
thought of the troubles of life, or how he is to meet the year's expenses. He lives
in the present, which is what we seldom do; and in this way we miss a great deal.
I have heard of a foreigner who laughed at our heavy manner of entertaining, and
described his own countrymen's humbler, but more successful attempts in the
following manner :—" We have one candle, one glass water, open de door, and be
happy." This, really, is the secret of the whole matter. We make troublesome,
expensive affairs of our entertainments,—a grand supper, a staff of waiters, rich
dresses, and other dear items, which make the giving of a party a serious con¬
sideration. We hesitate extremely about asking a few people to " come in a quiet
way," afraid that they will think it a bore, and not know what to do, while the truth
of the matter is, they will probably enjoy themselves much more than they do at
large, stiff parties, where it is hard to be natural, and care for one's dress interferes
with one's comfort.
A gi-eat deal depends on the tact of the hosts; they will find it better to leave
their guests a good deal to themselves, introduce those who are unacquainted,
and try as much as possible to 2)ut everyone at his ease. They should never force
anything; if music is wished, by all means have it, but if not, never try to make
it imperative, as people are not always in the humour for the same thing. Ladies
are too much inclined to fix a jolan of what they will do beforehand, and this,
like the laws of the Modes and Persians, must not be changed on any consideration.
If the young people wish dancing, and there is no reasonable objection,—no, it
cannot be done, because they did not mean to have dancing ; or, if conversation is
preferred, perhaps the intention was music, and therefore must be adhered to. It is
an immense matter to set others at their ease, and we do that best when we do not
worry them; but there is a knack in these things, and no lectures on the subject
will ever teach it,—it is inborn. Certainly, foreigners must possess a much larger
share of it than we do, for I never yet found a social evening abroad, slow. There is
an ease and freedom that soon makes itself felt, and, in fact, one enjoys oneself with¬
out knowing one is doing so.
I must not forget that climate has, no doubt, a good deal to answer for : in this
country there are few days when open-air enjoyments are possible ; the fireside is,
during three parts of the year, the pleasantest sight that can be seen, and no doubt
sunshine and bright clear skies have something to do with the buoyancy and elasti¬
city of the spirits.
An Englishman does not enjoy leaving his comfortable home, putting on a great¬
coat, and wading through snow, or splashing thi-ough rain, with the object of sitting
2 A
18G THE   ATTEMPT.
an hour or two in a friend's house ; and there are few ladies who like the " dropping
in " system, taking them at unawares, which is so much the custom on the continent,
where, somehow, people always are prepared for chance visitors, and have a welcome
for them. I have known such a thing happen in another country, as the members of
a household sitting down to a quiet afternoon of work, and roused by the chance
arrival of some friends from a distance, making arrangements for them to spend the
evening, while, in the course of an hour, two or three other parties, also unexpected,
have dropped in, perhaps raising the number to fifteen or twenty, and, of course, com¬
pelling an impromptu tea and supper. Yet, the whole thing has been easily man¬
aged ; ham has been fried, eggs boiled, cakes baked, and salads prepared, and over a
hearty meal, the merry party have congratulated each other on being "well met."
How would one of our housewives look if such an invasion took place in her quiet
home 1 So black, I should say, that not the most hardy individual would be so
rash as to repeat the experiment ! And yet these little free and easy arrangements
are so thoroughly enjoyable, promote such good companionship, cement friendships,
and give a personal interest in the every-day affairs of our neighbours ! If this
should lead to gossip, as, no doubt, it does, to some extent, I cannot say that I have
heard more ill-natured remarks, and inclination to pick holes in the doings of others,
abroad, than in my own country, and there is the advantage of greater probability in
what is said, from the very fact of closer intimacy; whilst we, who know little, are
ready to guess the more, and a small amount of ti-uth becomes the basis of a good
deal of fiction. This, however, is a dangerous topic, and may lead me into the very
e-vil I am deprecating.
It would be very amusing to get the opinions of people on what their ideas of
thorough enjoyment are. I have two pictures of this state in my own mind, which I
will present to my readers, and then they can question their own sensations, and see
if they agree with me.
Picture first.—Driving in a comfortable open caniage, in a clear sunny day,
with just enough breeze to temper the air, through a lovely country, with perhaps
one companion, who must be intimate enough to understand that true friendship can
be silent ; talking in a carriage takes away half the charm.
Picture second.—Lying on the sofa in the evening, with an agreeable book, and
some one at the piano playiag soft, soothing melodies, which you hear through the
interest of your book, so as to heighten the charm, without distracting the atten¬
tion. If this is not the height of enjoyment, I don't know what is, though I fear it
sounds dreadfully lazy !
THE   ATTEMPT. 187
There is no need for me to say that those who work the hardest, value and
enjoy recreation the most, or ought to do so; the world must have strangely har¬
dened that man who is insensible to the innocent pleasures open to all, whose brow
does not relax at sight of the joyous sports of his children, and whose heart does not
rejoice in the beauties of creation. The world is so fair and beautiful, that one is
apt to fancy we were all born to be happy, and I cannot quite agree to endorse
Robert Burns' sad words,
" Man was made to mourn."
Let this be as it may, I am quite sure we err in rejecting happiness when it falls in
our way, and that success, more or less, awaits those who cultivate, in a right spirit,
" The Art of Enjoyment." Alma.
BEING   MSS.   TEMPORE   CAROLI   PRIMI. NOW   FIRST   PUBLISHED.
I BECAME somewhat interested in the state of domestic affairs at Chester, as dis¬
closed in Eliot Warner's epistle to his friend in London ; and I eagerly turned over
the old faded documents in search of a continuation of the adventures of young
Shaw; but without success. I only found a portion of a letter from Hubert Wil-
loughbie (I should say the greater portion), which I judge to have been wi'itten about
the end of June, from one or two expressions which occur therein. I daresay, after
you have read what I have, you will be ready to exclaim, " Oh, the foolishness of
girls !" and really, the fair sex is sometimes guilty of acting far more from impulse,
than is at all compatible with common sense. The following pages will give us a case
in point, and, side as we may with our own sex, I fear we should hardly feel disposed
to follow the example of the fair Lilian, or to defend her conduct altogether ; for
really, I must say I think she was very foolish and romantic. But you shall judge
for yourselves ; only, don't be influenced by young Willoughbie's ideas on the subject.
So now for our letter.
I should say, first of all, that both the beginning and the end of this letter are toi'n
off, or, perhaps, have fallen victims to the devouring teeth of mice ; which is to be re-
188 THE   ATTEMPT.
gretted, as we can find no more letters from either of the young men, to fill up a'
blank of two years, which intervenes between this fragment and the next letter of
Hubert to his cousin Bertram.    But of this anon.
" An all Englishemen were as loyal as my brother, ye kinge woulde not have
verrie much to disquiet him. Let His Majestic but whisper that he wanteth men or
money,—and lo ! Master Edgar Willoughbie must needes fly to lay himself at his
royal feet, and to drawe his sworde for suche goode and righteous cause. He woulde
faine fighte lj"ke a goode knighte, and doe righte worshipfuUe service, and it were
onlie acrosse ye Border. And who can telle, friende Eliot 1 It might chance that
he shoulde one day heare those pleasant wordes "Rise uppe, Sir Edgar Willoughbie!"
Aye, woulde it not be whereon to pride myselfe, that my brother was made a
knight at ye kinge's handes 1
Out \ipon it all, say I, out upon it all ; why needeth he to goe a-fighting over ye
Border, but that he may gaine unto himselfe some sorte of renowne, or mayke him
riclie with other men's golde 1 And as for ye kinge—he will one daye rue ye parte
he playeth with these Scottes ; for he keepeth'no faith with them, and he will force
vipon them that which they doe hate, and that which they will not receive—no, not
though it cost them maine harde blows, and more goode bloode than, I fear me, some
of us Englishemen woulde lyke to spill for oure goode religion. Patch it uppe as
they may now, yet will there be open war soone, and our goode kinge will find that
ye " Solemn League and Covenant " is somewhat more than a name. Eliot, goode
fellowe, calle me traitor an ye will, disloyal, pestilent, riotous—-yet must I, and will
I, too, say what I doe thinke in mine owne mynde; nor, by my halidome, will I alter
for kinge, lords, or commons—nay, nor for all ye whole courte of Star-chamber to boot.
And as for my valiant brother, I will never say aughte difierent concerning
him,—no, an he were a knighte doubly dubbed, instead of plaine Edgar Willoughbie.
I know well that, were he a steppe higher uppe than his brother, he would have
littel dealing with him—there is no love lost between us no we, by my faith, as I
have aforetyme told you; and were he made kynge himselfe, I woulde not come
crawling to his feete, but holde me all ye farther off.
Eliot, Eliot, ladde, all my hearte boileth uppe with anger when I doe ponder
these things ; righte it may not be to holde suche thoughtes within my brain—righte
it is not, and of Edgar my onlie brother; but it is ye Willoughbie anger that will not
be quelled. That my father's sonne shoulde cleave unto a kynge who careth no more
for his solemn worde than if it were a catch of Bhein wine, or Moll and Gillian—
THE   ATTEMPT. 189
that he shoulde take partie against ye people, and curse them for a set of pestilent
knaves, whom nothing will cure but hempen pliysicke—is it much wonder that I,
who doe love ye people, should be wroth at these things ?    I tell thee, Eliot, "
Whatever Hubert was about to confide to his friend must remain unknown; for
here this portion ends abruptly. Some interruption must have occurred, which di¬
verted the current of his thoughts, for the remainder of this peculiar epistle is in
quite a diiferent strain, and on quite another subject. And, to tell the tinith, I do
not think that the interruption is much to be regretted ; for I cannot say who would
be the gainer by another page of such ill-natured and spiteful correspondence. I
imagine that Master Warner must have had a great deal more patience than you or
I, good reader, can honestly lay claim to, if he conscientiously mastered the contents
of every such letter as this ; for I shall almost repent having undertaken such a
task as the transcription of these letters, if I find many more like this last. But
I think the end of this epistle is somewhat more promising ; so, with your kind permis¬
sion I will lay it before you.
" What strange and wonderful thing dost thynke hath happed, friende Eliot ?
Aye, and it concerneth thee, too,—thee and thine, and, methinks, when thou readest
this letter, that thou wilt feel somewhat more happie than thou mayest have done
for some while. Yea, verilie, it is somewhat regarding that fair mayden, thy sister.
Mistress Lilian Warner.
In these merrie June dayes, I do oft mounte my nagge, and ride forth on my
pleasure some miles out of this gaye town of London. One day I will goe towards
Rumforde, and disport me by ye river there, or else I will goe uppe to Islingione,
with some right jollie fellowes that I knowe; and there doe we feaste and play
merrilie, as well beseemeth us ; an I will be quiet, and have a goode long ride beside,
I turne Dragon's head unto ye northe, and then—ho for blithe Barnet, and prettie
Hadlie Woodes !
It was but yestermorne, ye day being fayre and brighte, that I mounted me on
my goode steede Dragon, and sette forth for Barnet. I felt much dolour and un-
happinesse within me—my minde was ill at ease, and I had greate longing to get
forth from ye noyse of this London, and to be in ye calme shade, and among ye
sweete flowers in ye woodes of Hadlie, that I mighte gayne somewhat of quietnesse
and peace within me—for marvellous power hath ye cool, deepe, shade of a greene
woode to dispel dark and evil feelings ; so it seemeth unto me, friende Eliot.    Even
190 THE   ATTEMPT.
more than ye pleasant broad meadowes, and brave river at Oxforde—though I love
those fields and that stream welle, for did I not there first see my friende 1
Welle, but all this is noughte of what I woulde say to thee; neither will I dis¬
course of my journey at greate lengthe, save that I buckled on my rapier, mounted
me on my goode Dragon, and sette forthe—through ye Temple Bar, and so into ye
citie, through Aldergate and Cheapside, and so on to Islingtone, and then forthe into
ye open countrie. As I gallof>ped along, and felt mine own goode steede bounding
beneath me, and ye fresh cleare air of ye morning blowing fulle and free upon my
face—marrie, friende Eliot, but I did feele myselfe twice ye man I was before ; I
founde ye cloude of drearie imaginings rolling ofl^ from my minde like unto mists
driving from off a hille-toppe ; and then did I marvelle greatlie, that I coulde, and
did, soe vexe and distresse myselfe for noughte. It is but a matter of twelve or
fifteen miles to Barnet, and that, Dragon, being fresh e and fleete, did mayke but
shorte worke of. It was but ten o' ye clock when I drew rein at ye " Forester's For¬
tune," where I doe always stable my horse, and drinke mine own flagon when I doe
come to Barnet. And being somewhat thirstie after a dustie gallop, I quafied, with
righte goode wille, a tankard of ale as goode's'I e'er would sette \rpi>e to. Mine
hoste, honest Dickon Sutcliflfe, promised me he would looke welle unto my nagge ;
and we had a littel talk of divers small matters, and of how went aflPairs in London,
and concerning ye King's Majestic, and my Lord Strafibrd, and of other things. I
tolde Dickon howe that I was a-going out to ye woodes ; and he verie properlie
asked me woulde I lyke to tayke a long-bowe with me, and so disporte myselfe with
that goode weapon 1 He lent to me, therefore, his owne bowe, with a quiver of
brave arrowes, and whistled to his dog JoU to come ; for, sayd he, " He will welle finde
for you, anything you may chance to slioote."
I thanked him for his kindnesse, and patted ye dogge's head—and a goode one
he seemed too ; and I was just turning me away, when Dickon asked me if I woulde
not leave my rapier behind me ; he thoughte that I would surelie finde it somewhat
cumbersome. But I laughed, and sayd hime nay, for that I doe always carrie it
with me, and love it welle ; so I turned me towards Hadlie, with ye dogge Joll fol¬
lowing me. As I wente by ye churche, I did see a marriage partie a-comiiig forthe
of ye porche ; and as I marked the cheerfulle and hap])ie faces of ye bryde and her
husbande, I coulde not but ponder within myselfe, if ye tyme would ever be that I
woulde have a wyfe and a home of mine owne; and soe I felle a thinkynge, not
taking heede to where I was going, untille I founde myselfe over my spurs in mudde,
having suddenlie sunke into a bogge.     Truste me, this did drive from  my mvnde
THE   ATTEMPT. 191
verrie soone, all thoughts of love and ladies, of brighte smiles and softe lippes, and
forced me to dragge myselfe from this unseemlie plighte, and to puUe long handfulles
of grass and dockes to cleanse myselfe withalle. I had sate myselfe downe on a
greene knolle, and was wiping ye blacke clirte from off my bootes, when I hearde a
sounde of horses trampling, and then a greate laughing ; and when I looked—lo ! a
hawking partie a-riding past, and all makyng verrie meme at my mishappe. I
laughed lykewyse, for, wherefore should I have been angrie 1 So one gentleman,
verrie welle attired, rode uppe to me, and asked me an he coulde do me any sei-vice 1
I did thanke him, and sayd no; whereupon he told me that ye grounde of these
woodes is verrie wette and softe in some places ; and after bidding me take heede
where I stepped, and Avishing me good sporte, he rode away.
I will not telle thee of all that I did that day ; I had good sporte, and found
that I could pulle a long bow as welle now, as when we two did shoote together in
ye fieldes, by ye river, at Oxforde. I had broughte with me a beefe pastie, of goode
dame Sutcliffe's, and so made prettie goode cheere ; and it must have beene four or
five hours after noone that I turned me to goe backe, and founde me some seven
miles, from ye " Forester's Fortune." I did fasten my game together, and slung it over
my long bow, and so sette forthe for Barnet.
I had walked well nigh five miles on ye roade homewards; ye sun was getting
low, and I hastened my steps somewhat, for I woulde fain gette into London before
late at night. I had lefte ye woodes, and followed ye high roade. Suddenlie, as I
turned a corner of ye roade, I hearde loude voices, and much laughing, and then ye
weeping of a woman. I hasted forwarde, and sawe, sitting on a fallen tree, a fayre
damsel of some eighteene yeares, weeping most pitiefullie ; and, standing before her,
were three gallant younge gentlemen, who were makying verrie merrie at her, and
another who would fayne kiss her againste her will, whom she did most bravelie re¬
pulse. So, like true knighte, strode I uppe to these younge gallants, and asked them
wherefore they did behave themselves so discourteouslie to that fayre damsel 1 and
laying holde of that one who woulde embrace her, I did pushe him backwards, and
cause him to stumble, so that he fell to ye grounde. Then one of them, who did
seeme ye chiefe of them, asked me, with a greate oath, how I did dare to speake so
unto an officer of the kinge's guarde? and woulde have drawne his sworde, but
another bade him forbear. Then he asked me wlio I was, that woulde meddle with
their harmlesse playe ? To whom I answered—my name was Hubert Willoughbie,
and it was no harmlesse playe to terrific gentlewomen as they did ; which, when ye
may den hearde, she sudden lie did starte ixppe.
192 THE   ATTEMPT.
" Sayd you }our name i« Hubert Willoiighbie, goode sir ?" she asked in a
trembling voice.
" Verilie, it is, fayre ladie, and a righte lioneste name it is, too."
" Knowe you one Eliot Warner, nowe of Chester, aforetyme of ye citie and
college of Oxforde ?"
" I do, indeede, knowe him welle, he is my friende," I answered, greatlie mar¬
velling.
" I am Lilian Warner, his sister; for love of Heaven, sir, have pittie on me,
and keepe me from these fellowes ; and bring me safelie to London."
" Gentlemen of ye King's guarde," say'd I, drawing my rapier, and holding
it forthe in my righte hande, " gette you hence, and laye not one finger on this
damsel; and whoever will saye me nay, by'r ladie, I will crosse swordes with him
to-morrow morn; and he mighte verilie finde that he had better have kept his
valour to himselfe. Do you knowe my Lord Saxby ?" I asked of the man I had
throwne down, who looked all ye more meeke for his falle.
" I knowe him," he replied, in verrie sulkie sorte.
" And so do I; an ye go not hence, he shall knowe more of you to-morrow than
you woulde care for."
Thus admonished, these brave gentlemen did swagger off, though not, indeede,
without cursing me moste plentifuUie and heartilie; and I saw them no more, for
that night, at leaste.
« Mas Alta.
(To be Continued.)
THE   ATTEMPT. 193
t C^irb oi ^t^kmhtx.
Come back with me some two centuries into the past of time, and watch the
tracing of the die that is being stamped on the Third of September,—the features
of the man Cromwell, traced in more sharply cut, more enduring lines by far, than
on that medal which the grateful Commonwealth proposed should be struck in com¬
memoration thereof.
Who was this Cromwell 1    What did he do 1
History tells us he was a true man, an English gentleman, a dauntless patriot,
with single eye looking ever to the right of things : a Christian soul, all permeated
with the Divine; or, as Carlyle says—
" An armed soldier, solemnly conscious to himself that he is the soldier of God the Just,—
a consciousness which it well beseems all soldiers and all men to have always; armed soldier, terrible
as death, relentless as doom; doing God's judgments on the enemies of God ! It is a phenomenon
not of joyful nature; no, but of awful, to be looked at with pious terror and awe."
And through all this there shone as great a heart, as deep in that charity without
which good works can profit nothing, as in that sweet home love which is the light
of life. An enthusiast, if you will (so much the better); a hypocrite, never—igno¬
rance alone dare say that now ! Whatever Cromwell says or does must be believed!
His judgment might be led astray, but not his conscience.    But what did he do ?
From th^ time that Mr Oliver Cromwell, rising up from his quiet farming
occupations at St Ives, bestirred himself in the service of his country and his par¬
liament, success crowned his every undertaking. In fact, every contest in which
he was personally engaged, he won—Grantham, Gainsborough, Winceby Fight,
Marston Moor, Naseby; the storming of Bristol, Winchester, Pembroke ; the battle
of Preston ; the campaign in Ireland. The great element in his success was his
thoroughness. His wise sayings resolved themselves into wiser doings. As in his
fifth speech, he says—
" Rhetoricians, whom I do not pretend to much concern with ; neither with them, nor with
what they use to deal in, Words ! Truly, our business is to speak Things ! The dispensations of God
that are upon us do require it! "
And only watch how he, in his own simple and unstudied language, traces his
rise.    It is in his tenth speech we find—
" If you do not all of you, I am sure some of you do, and it behoves me to say that I do,
' know my calling from the first unto this day.'    I was a person who, from my first employment, was
2  B
194 THE  ATTEMPT.
suddenly preferred, and lifted up from lesser trusts to greater; from my first being a captain of a
troop of horse; and did labour as well as I could to discharge my trust; and God blessed me therein
as it pleased Him. And I did truly and plainly (and in a way of foolish simplicity, as it was judged
by very great and wise men, and good men too), desire to make my instruments help me in that work.
And I win deal plainly with you : I had a very worthy friend then, and he was a very noble person,
and I know his memory is very grateful to all—Mr Jolin Hampden. At my first going out into this
engagement, I saw our men were beaten at every hand ; I did indeed ; and desired him that he would
make some additions to my Lord Essex's army of some new regiments ; and I told him I would be
serviceable to him in bringing such men in as I thought had a spirit that would do something in
the work. This is very true that I tell you ; God knows I lie not. ' Your troops,' said I, ' are
most of them old decayed serving-men, and tapsters, and such kind of feUows ; and,' said I, 'then-
troops are gentlemen's sons, younger sons and persons of quality ; do you think that the spirits of
such base and mean fellows will ever be able to encounter gentlemen tiat have honour, and courage,
and resolution in them?' Truly, I did represent to him in this manner conscientiously ; and truly I
did tell him, ' You must get men of a spirit; and take it not iU what I say,—I know you will not,—
of a spirit that is likely to go on as far as gentlemen will go ; or else you will be beaten stUl.' I told
him so ; I did truly. He was a wise and worthy person; and he did thmk that I talked a good notion,
but an impracticable one. Truly, I told him I could do somewhat in it. I did so ; and truly I must
needs say this to you, impute it to what you please, I raised such men as had the fear of God before
them, as made some conscience of what they did ; and from that day forward, I must say to you,
they were never beaten, and wherever they were engaged against the enemy, they beat continually.
And truly this is matter of praise to God ; and it hath some instruction in it—to own men who are
religious and godly."
So much for the Ironsides.
As Lord General of all the forces of the Commonwealth, after The retirement
of Lord Fairfax, he entered Scotland in 1650. Unfortunately for her, at that time
she had had no like-hearted man to trust to, to be guided by. After so many years
of blood and conflict, the nation had waxed sick and nerveless; and in its feverish
meanings or its drowning struggles, seeking some head and some support, it grasped
even at the hand of the young Stiiart king, a very straw. " On the word of a king,"
— we know what that means in his father's dialect and his. Oliver Cromwell came,
first with words and then with deeds, to oppose this step. Two years ago, when last
he was in Scotland, he was feasted, and received with all honour and affection; now,
the whole nation, with more or less of determination, was ranked against him.
Yet the Scots did not seem willing to come to a decisive engagement. For
more than three months the Parliamentary forces had been waiting and hovering
from Musselburgh, round by the south of Edinburgh to the Pentlands, and back
again; but the Scotch commander Lesley would not step oixt to a fair field and meet
them.    He was too comfortable and secure where he was, protected by Edinburgh
THE   ATTEMPT. 195
Castle, a battery on Arthur's seat and a communication with Leith. So Cromwell
had to wait. The weather was wet; sickness was spreading through his army, un¬
protected as it was; provisions were failing, and no new supplies to be had; so
leaving altogether the camp he had set up on the Pentland Hills, he betook himself
to Dunbar, that he might, at least, be near his ships. Thereupon Lesley rushed out
of Edinburgh, dogged his steps, and hemmed him in there.
Cromwell's fortune was forsaking him. Lesley was in good spirits; he had
everything his own way; his army of three-and-twenty thousand fresh men, twice
as many as Cromwell's; his position was perfect, stretched along the mile and a-half
that forms the opening into the mainland of the promontory of Dunbar, upon which
Cromwell was imprisoned. He kejDt the hills right in front of it, and the pass of
Cockbui'nspath, the only available way of return into England. Thus it was on the
second of September 1650, so that Cromwell was even forced to write to Sir Arthur
Haselrig, at Berwick, to come and attack the rear and fi'ee the Cockburnspath, to
make way for sujiplies.
" He lieth so upon the hills that we know not how to come that way without great difficulty ;
and our lying here daily consumeth our men, who fall sick beyond imagination But the
only wise God knoweth what is best."
The hills alluded to are the Lammermuirs, through whose boggy passes, in such
a boggy season, his army could not have marched, even had he been able to elude
Lesley's troops. From the Doon Hill, the outmost slope of the Lammermuirs, the
Brocksburn runs down to the sea, and then formed the southern boundary of Crom¬
well's position. Whoever should begin the attack, would have to cross the ravine
of this deep-scooped bum in the face of manifold disadvantages. A shepherd's hoiise
stood at one spot where the banks became lower, and were passable even for carts.
Pride and Lambert had taken possession of it; but Lesley's horse drove them out,
to be repulsed in their turn. Only one other pass was there, a mile east from the
former one, and situated just at the place where the London Road now crosses the
burn. Near it lay Brocksmouth House, the family mansion of the Earl of Roxburgh,
which was occupied by Cromwell's soldiers as their extreme post to the left.
Lesley's plan was to take this pass and house, and he would be free to attack
and annihilate Cromwell at will. For this purpose, on the evening of this second
day of September, he moved his forces downward from the Doon Hill. Oliver's
eagle eye and active mind immediately took in every movement, and every cause and
effect thereof.    He, too, had laid a plan.    He saw the advantage now lay with tlie
196 THE  ATTEMPT.
side that commenced the attack. The Scottish right wing was already stretched
along the open space south of the Brocksburn to the sea, while the main body, as
yet, was still hampered in the sloping grounds above, and had not room to act.
Cromwell therefore proposed to attack this right wing; his officers gladly assented ;
they would commence before next dawn; and all that night they lay prepared, and
commenced operations before the morning light. The Scots of the right wing were
awake, as they had also meditated a surjjrise ; and a stiff, hot contest ensued. At last
the right wing was broken, and driven back confusedly upon their main body.
There the soldiers, scarce yet awake from their short night's shelterless sleep,
stiffened with the damp, with matches out, and spirits black as they, were ill able
to sustain the desperate charge of Cromwell's victorious troops. A helpless panic
among them, the horse of the right wing trampling down their own foot, a great
slaughter, a wild flight, and the Thii'd of September was—a memory. Ten thousand
prisoners, many of them men of note ; three thousand slain j " and I do not believe
we have lost twenty men."
Sir Arthur Haselrig received, along with that dispirited letter of the second,
another, containing the great news of Cromwell's victoiy—a victory which yielded
him all Scotland. About a year he sjjent in that country, reduced the city and
castle of Edinburgh, strengthened himself in every quarter in the hearts of men as
in cities, so that the new Covenanted King Charles found the land too hot for him.
By a sudden stroke, dexterous enough, he collected all the forces still adhering to
him, and marched quickly into the heart of England, hoping for a junction with
English Royalists or disaffected Republicans ; but not one joined his standard. The
dis])iritcd king marched as far as Worcester, where he at last found a loyal mayor
and a show of friendship, and there they took up their quarters.
Meanwhile Cromwell was not idle. He had been taken iinawares, it is true,
but he soon arranged everything, and marched speedily and steadily in their rear.
At last he comes before the walls of Worcester with thirty thousand men, while the
king within has only fourteen thousand. The Third of September dawns again, and
ere it is set it has seen another victory, more complete and decisive even than the
last. The battle was fought on both sides of the Severn, a division of the army
under Fleetwood having crossed it the night previous. There was still the river
Teme between this body and the enemy's outposts, and it was late in the afternoon
before Fleetwood managed to pass over it, and get a bridge of boats built over the
Severn to communicate with the main army. Cromwell co-operated with him from
the south-east, and the Scots were attacked at once on all sides, repulsed and driven
THE   ATTEMPT.
197
backwards inch by inch, still bravely fighting, but overpowered by the strength of
numbers and of skill. Four or five hours of desperate conflict, and the struggle
ceased in the streets of Worcester. The king escaped almost miraculously, his cause
was crushed, the land at peace, Oliver Cromwell had received his " crowning mercy."
Truly a crown was it to all his victories—the most decisive and the last great battle
he was ever personally engaged in.
Three years more, and the Third of September saw the opening of the first
regular Parliament summoned by the Lord Protector of the realm—Oliver Crom¬
well. What had he done in the interval ? How had he aspired so high 1 Nay, he
had not aspired, nor sought that position; the path of his duty led him through it.
We have it in his own words—and his word was more than " that of a king"—in
his eleventh speech—
" I have taken my oath to govern according to the laws that are now made ; and I trust I
shall fully answer it. And know, I sought not this place. I speak it before God, and angels, and
men ; / did not.    You sought me for it ; you brought me to it."
He was one of the few that can set a true value upon things. He did not care
for power. " I would rather keep a flock of sheep than have the ruling of this
people."    He did not care for popularity.
" What a crowd came out to see your Lordship's triumph !" exclaimed a flat¬
terer.
" Yesj but if it were to see me hanged, bow many more would there be !"
But he did care for the right of things, and when no other hand would or could
bring peace to the country, his would, because it should, and he proved it could.
Met with all due honours on his victorious return to London from Worcestei',
lie requested a conference of divers members of the Parliament and the chief oflicers
of the army, to make some arrangement as to the settlement of the nation. The
lawyers, on account of the existing constitution, were all for a mixed government,
with something of monarchy in it, proposing even to call in one of the late king's
sons. The soldiers, on the other hand, desired a republic, thinking they had had
quite enough of the king and his sous. So the meeting left everything undecided,
while the government sailed on under the auspices of the Parliament, or what re¬
mained thereof after Pride's Purge. This remnant was anxious to constitute itself
a continual Parliament, having its vacant places refilled by the choice of its own
members. The ai-my and Cromwell did not fully enter into their views, and wished
a new, free, full representative.    Conferences again took place between the opposing
198 THE   ATTEMPT.
parties, and some things were partially agreed upon; but one morning the Lord
General and his officers waited in vain for the members in the Reception Room.
The members were otherwise engaged in the House, hurrying through their own
bill in a manner without precedent, and of a tenor against all justice and all agree¬
ment. Cromwell rose, and, followed by a body of musketeers to the door, entered
the House, and quietly sat down for some time. Then he rose and spoke—was
interrupted—hastily and hotly dissolved the Parliament—called in his soldiers—
took away the mace—saw every member out—and locked the door, exclaiming,
" It's you that have forced me to this. I have sought the Lord night and day that
He would rather slay me than put me upon the doing of this work." But there
was no other to take his place, and he had to do it alone. So the Long Parliament
vanished, very quietly. It was remorsefully silent itself j the world looked on
stolidly; no disturbance was raised ; the judges and all authorities, after a little
talking, went on as they had done before.
Thus Cromwell was unexpectedly left alone at the head of affairs—un¬
expectedly, we must believe, as he said himself, in his first speech to his Little
Parliament, or the Assembly of Puritan Notables, that he had summoned to yield up
that power to.
" I say, own your call, for it is of God. Indeed, it is marvellous, and it hath been unpro-
jected. It's not long since either you or we came to know of it. And, indeed, this has been the way
God dealt with us all along, to keep things from our eyes aU along, so that we have seen nothing, in
aU His dispensations, long beforehand ; which is also a witness, in some measure, to our integrity."
But this Assembly was helpless, and after a short session disappeared, resigning
their powers into the hand they had received them from. And Cromwell was
responsible for all this, and stood solitary, a king in his own right, without title, or
crown, or heirship! But he did not forget himself He called a " council of
officers and other persons of uiterest in the nation," who, after much prayer and
meditation, put the reins of Government into the hand of him who had proved him¬
self able to wield them, under the title of " Lord Pi-otector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland."
Tlien he summoned, and on this Third of September 1G54 saw, his firet free
representative Parliament of four hundred members. It was not successful, like the
other great memories of the day. It did nothing and was soon dissolved; but the
Lord Protector did not sink with it. He ruled well the nation that had chosen
him; and raised the prestige of its name both at home and abroad; both by land
THE  ATTEMPT.
199
and sea. Never was the wrath of Britain so feared, nor its alliance so coni"ted.
Never were rebellion and discontent kept in such firm control; nor religion kept
more pure and free, with all charity, with all tolerance, except for evil;—as he
exclaims in his fifth speech :—
" Whoever hath this faith, let his form be what it wiU ; he walking peaceably, without preju¬
dice to others, under other forms ; it is a debt due to God and Christ ; and he wiU require it, if that
Christian may not enjoy his liberty."
A second Parliament, assembled in September 1657, proved more zealous and
energetic than this last; and withal, offered Cromwell the title of " King," upon the
plea that, accordiag to the present constitution, there were certain bounds to the
power of a King; whereas the new name of Protector had no marked limits. After
much discussion, deep thought and, we may believe, earnest prayer, Cromwell de¬
cided—" I cannot undertake this Government with the title of King ; and that is
mine answer to this great and weighty business."
The next Parliament, meeting in January 1658, did not seem to do its duty, and
Cromwell put an end to it.—" I do dissolve this Parliament; and God be judge
between you and me !" Striking words, to prove the last this great man ever
uttered in public !
Tlie summer of 1658 passed on, and its Third day of September came. It had
been kept a day of public thanksgiving ever since the great victories of Dunbar and
Worcester; and was considered as peculiarly Oliver's day. Fifty and nine times
had he watched its cycle, but this time it has dawned, and it will never set on him.
Throughout all the land there was mourning, and anxiety, and earnest prayer for the
sparing of this mighty life. In his own heart there was submission and a willingness
either to go or to stay. Ere this he had said, when he lost one of his dear friends in
the Irish campaign,— "We live in His sight; and shall work the time that is appointed
us, and shall rest after that in peace." The "time" was over; the "rest" had come;
and the man Cromwell entered into it between three and four o'clock in the after¬
noon.    Not a month later than that much loved daughter, Elizabeth Claypole !
It has been observed, " that as the Ides of March were equally fortunate and
fatal to Julius Csesar, so was the Third of September to Cromwell; for on that day
he won his two great victories of Dunbar 1650, and of Worcester 1651, and on that
day 1658, he died." Why such an antithesis? To such a man as he, was it not
truly and altogether a fortunate day 1 Through all the troubles of his public life,
and the struggles of his inner man, dost thou think he looked forward to the end
200 THE   ATTEMPT.
with dread 1 Was his religion no more a reality for him than that ? Dost think he
found the power and splendour of an earthly crown fit for a moment to be compared
with a heavenly one 1 A modern commentator has it—" Beautiful gi-eat soul; to
whom the temporal is all irradiated with the eternal, and God is everywhere divinely
visible in the affairs of men, and man himself has, as it were, become divine !" That
" great soul " could feel and say, " How great is it to be the Lord's servant in any
drudgery ;" as it could likewise feel that " to depart and be with Him is far better ;"
to be a friend, and no more a servant.
And the world knew him no more. The reins fell loose over the necks of the
unbridled chargers; let us see what they will do with their liberty. Now a-days,
we can but dimly imagine the awe and consternation ; the grief and joy ; the clash
of surging feelings that rose round the electric news. Honest grief from private
friends, and from friends of the nation; as honest joy in the staunch royalists ; and
a loud resounding shout from the many time-servers. He found panegyrists in
Milton, Dryden and Waller; he found censors and calumniators not a few, when
the sunshine of royalty made such plants blossom and bear fiiiit.
But the Third of September had passed meanwhile, and we shall not follow his
fame into other days. Let some mind, powerful in tracing out causes and effects,
suppose that Third of September had borne other impress than it did; and seek a
result in our history now. Long lost lineaments are apt to become confused in our
memory; let us recall as much of him as we may, in the deeds he did, and the words
he spoke, embalmed in his letters and speeches ; and then, looking on the noble fea¬
tures, let us judge them charitably, as we would have others judge ourselves :
" So may he rest, his faults lie gently on him !"
LUTEA EeSEDA.
Stoxmmmg as a §ranf^ 0f Jf^mak ^btttation.
Much has been said and written on the vexed question of female education, great
difference of opinion existing as to what should, and what should not be taught.
There is one branch which has hitherto been almost entirely neglected, and for which
I claim a place amongst desirable acquirements,—I refer to swimming. Doubtless
there are more important accomplishments, but learning this in no way interferes
with any other.    Easy and inexpensive to acquire, healthful and agreeable when
THE  ATTEMPT. 201
practised in moderation, I am convinced that, on the slightest consideration, its im¬
portance would be evident to every mind.
There are three purposes for which a knowledge of the art of swimming is de¬
sirable. The first of these is as a valuable means of developing the physical system
and strengthening the chest. In this opinion our most eminent physicians concur,
and pronounce it to be a very important addition to the physical exercises permitted
to our sex.
The second is, as a healthful recreation. It certainly is a great increase to the
pleasure of a bathe to be able to move about rapidly in the water. How many
miserable-looking bathers do we see standing shivering and unable to summon cour¬
age to make the decisive plunge, which a gi'eater familiarity with aquatic exercises
would render only the beginning of real enjoyment^ instead of the dreaded accomplish¬
ment of an enforced duty. Many, too, whose defective circulation obliges them
entii-ely to give up bathing, might, by the judicious practice of swimming, keep up
the degree of heat necessary to health, and so be enabled to resume bathing.
My third, and strongest argument, in favour of this art, consists in the power it
would confer ujion females of doing something at least towards saving their lives in
circumstances in which they may possibly be placed. I do not argue that proficiency
in swimming would enable women who are laden with cumbersome garments to
swim any distance to shore, but the presence of mind which conscious 2>ower bestows
would often enable them, by a few strokes, to reach some temporary support, or even
to lie passive till assistance reaches them.
This power may be acquired in a few lessons ; and once acquired, is never lost
from want of practice.
Scotland is essentially a marine country.    Intersected as it is by rivers, lakes
and arms of the sea, and possessing so many favourite watering places, we ought, in
availing ourselves of such advantages, to be provided against the attendant risks.    In
other countries, less sea-loving and sea-faring than our own, girls as well as boys are,
as a matter of course, taught to swim ; and it is passing strange that in Scotland,
where bathing and boating form so important a part of our sea-side amusements, it is
not considered essential that all should be prepared for every possible emergency.   It
has often surprised me, that in the frequent cases of drowning which occur, parents do
not more seriously blame themselves as almost the direct  cause of their children's
untimely end, inasmuch as they have failed to instruct them in the necessary means
of preservation.    How often do we hear of pleasure boats being upset, and most, if
not all, of their occupants drowned.     Perhaps one or two, being expert swimmers,
2 c
202 THE   ATTEMPT.
may escape, but it frequently happens that even those who are themselves indepen¬
dent, perish in the vain attempt to succour their helpless companions.
Now, in this as in other things, the demand would produce the supply ; and as
soon as the want is appreciated, the remedy will be at hand. A beginning has been
made in Edinburgh, by the proprietor of the Pitt Street Swimming Bath devoting
it for part of two days a week to the iise and tuition of ladies. The success which
has attended this, induces me to think that an extended and improved scheme would
prove still more successful. Of course, the mode of carrying out any plan of the
kind would depend upon the pecuniary resources and enterprising character of the
inhabitants and frequenters of our bathing places. What I propose, is a covered
raft (such as is used for the purpose on the Seine and other rivers), moored during
the bathing season at the place of greatest resort, with dressing boxes surroimding
the bath, which is made of open wire work to allow the water to circulate freely.
Such an establishment, conducted by well qualified women, would surely be its o\^ti
recommendation, and repay any pubUc spirited individuals who would incixr the
first outlay. The proper dress is simple, being composed of jacket, tunic and trow-
sers, made either in one or in two pieces. In passing, let me earnestly recommend
its adoption for ordinary batliing, in j)lace of that in present use, which is neither
conducive to comfort nor elegance.
Would it not be worthy the consideration of the ladies who take a practical in¬
terest in the employment of women, to select some who are fitted for the ofiice of
teaching swimming, that, by taking advantage this autumn of the tuition to be ob¬
tained at the Pitt Street Bath, they might be fitted next summer to disseminate
the knowledge of this useful art 1 Even if the raft I propose were impracticable,
they might give lessons to ladies while bathing ; but this is apt to lead to the whole
thing becoming an exhibition, and a source of idle amusement to passers by, which
would be all avoided by the privacy the covered raft ensures. Many may not be
aware of the fact that the Queen, who has been thoroughly practical in the educa¬
tion of her family, has had all her daughters taught to swim, and various branches
of the royal family have followed her example.
In conclusion, I would beg our readers not onfy to say, " That is doubtless all
very true," and then drop the matter. But let each of us remember the influence
of individual efibrt, that by united interest and exertion we may establish, as a re¬
gular branch of education, the art of swimming, which would prove the preservation
of many, and a safe-guard to all. Eta.
I
THE   ATTEMPT. 203
Art thou the same sweet lake that peaceful shineth,
Clasped by thy many green and glowing hills 1
On thy fair banks, where the wild ash entwineth
Still blooms the heather, gleam the diamond rills 1
On thy proud rocks, does evening sunset playing
Gild their high summits with its parting beams ?
Is the wild eagle, still his course delaying ?
Rushes the mountain music of the streams ]
Thou art the same ! as beautiful, as free
From taint of sorrow or from shade of care.
Storms may have passed, but have not injured thee.
Darkened a while to leave thee still more fair.
And those who wandered by thy peaceful shore,
The human hearts that felt thy loveliness.
Will they be still the same if ever more
Thy leafy glens their straying footsteps press ?
Will the dark storms that o'er their course are driven
Pass on their way and leave no trace behind,
Clear from their path, and leave the summer heaven
Of peace and hope to beam upon the mind 1
Yet e'en if chance and change should in their might
Dispel the dreams of youth and summer's prime,
Surely to gaze on thy unchanging light
May fill the soul with hope and peace sublime.
Thou art the same ! and He whose high command
Bids thee remain bright record of His power.
Points to a happier scene, a lovelier land.
Where sorrow is not, tempests  never lower.
E. H. S.
204 THE  ATTEMPT.
Jirst Impressions.
I HAVE not the very slightest degree of faith in first impressions, properly so
called. I have invariably found that the friends whom I like most heartily and
trust most comjiletely, are those whom I disliked upon first sight or first acquaint¬
ance,—in fact, I agi-ee with Mrs Malaprop, " that it is safest to begin with a little
aversion,"—and confess myself very sceptical with regard to the statements we find
so frequently in books, and occasionally hear in real life, such as—" I liked her from
the first moment I saw her," " I knew that we should be friends the instant I heard
her speak ;" for I think a friendship built upon a casual first impression is scarcely
worthy the name of a friendship at all, and is much more likely to owe its origin to
a jiretty face, a sweet voice, or an engaging manner, than to any of the qualities of
the head and heart requisite in a real friend.    I fancy I hear my critical readers
exclaiming—
" Whoever loved that loved not at first sight ?"
but let them ask the question honestly of themselves, and I think they are pretty
sure to remember a good many instances of warm love and faithful friendship
between people whose first impressions of each other were anything but favourable.
Still more ridiculous than these mushroom friendships are the sudden and
violent aversions which some people allow themselves to entertain against those of
whose real character and disposition they know little or nothing. I say " alloiv
themselves to entertain," for I tliink a little effort of judgment and self-conti-ol
would generally convince us of the folly of condemning any one merely because our
first impression happens to be unfavourable : and yet, how often do we hear peo])]e
express, in the very strongest terms, their dislike of some one whom they hardly
know; while, if you ask them for the reason of their violent aversion, they will say,
" Oh, I have no reason whatever for disliking her, only my first impression was un-
fixvourable !" and then proceed to pull to pieces (figuratively sj^eaking) the face, the
figure, the voice, the dress, the manner of the unhappy subject of discussion.
However, it was not of first impressions in general, but in particular, that I
intended to speak in this essay, and it is high time that I should stojo moralising on
the faults of my neighbours, and address myself to the subject proj^er. No one can
deny that there is a mysterious and delicious charm about " the first" of anything,
which we can experience but once in connection with that particular thing—the
inexplicable charm which novelty possesses for all mortals, and which is the secret
THE   ATTEMPT. 205
of the great " sensation " mania that characterises our times. Think of your " first
novel," my reader—your very first—and you will confess that I am right. Mine
was " Guy Mannering ;" and the blessed day when that never-to-be-forgotten volume
was placed in my hands, remains marked with the whitest of crosses in my memory.
How I adored Harry Bertram ! and sympathised with Lucy ! and detested Glossin !
and with what a mixture of awe and admiration did my youthful mind regard the
majestic figure of Meg Merrilees ! I must confess to a sneaking kindness for Dirk
Hatteraick, for which I could never exactly account, but which has not yet lost its
hold upon my mind. Oh, would that all our novels could be " first" ones ! We
may find many heroes and heroines more attractive, and many plots more skilfxdly
laid, and many villains of deeper dye than those which figured in the pages of our
first novel, but we don't follow then- fortunes, and watch their development, and
shudder at their crimes, with the same eager anxiety and intense enjoyment with
which we devoured that wonderful book—our "first novel."
" Guy Mannering " reminds me of Dominie Sampson, and Dominie Sampson re¬
minds me of another " first experience " still earlier in date than the first novel—the
first lesson. I don't mean the very first lessons of all, which we pick up unconsciously
and without any regular method of instruction, but the first beginning of systematic
work—the first day at school—the first governess or tutor—the first regularly allotted
task. What a dreadful reminiscence this must be for some! for the little, timid, deli¬
cate boy or girl who leaves the quiet home circle to phmge at once into all the noise
and bustle, hard work and rough play of a school life ; or, for the unfortunate dunce,
for whom that day was the beginning of a long and weary series of doubts and difii-
culties, hard labour and disgrace; for the country girl who has been allowed to run
wild, and who is siiddenly brought under the jurisdiction of a stiff", unbending, irre¬
proachable duenna of a governess; but a very pleasant reminiscence for many others,
whose bodies and minds are sufficiently strong and active for a school life, and who
are fortunate in finding teachers qualified, both in head and heart, for the duties of
their position. My first regular lesson was received, I well remember, at the age
of six, from a country dominie, who, in erudition and gentleness, was not behind
Dominie Sampson himself, while in his manner he had considerably the advantage
of Harry Bertram's worthy preceptor. He was a very yoixng man, pale and sickly
looking, and very lame. I looked up to him as the best and wisest of human beings;
I sat on his knee at lesson time; I learnt double lessons when I thought it would
please him; and I shall never forget my agonies of contrition and remorse, when
one morning I couldn't do my sums, and he put me in the corner !
206 THE   ATTEMPT.
What a glorious reminiscence is that of our " first play !" The eager anticipa¬
tions for weeks before, the careful studying of the play itself, the frantic efforts to
repress a cough lest maternal anxiety should forbid our exposure to the draughts of
a theatre; the countless fears, when the great night at length arrives, lest the cab
should be too late, lest our places should be taken by some unauthorised individuals,
lest some sudden illness should seize xipon the principal performers, or any other
untoward accident should dash the cup of joy from our lips: all these, or something
akin to these, I daresay, most of us have experienced. And, when at last fairly
seated in the theatre, our eyes riveted upon the green curtain, our ears drinking in
the strains of the orchestra, what moments of bliss were ours ! And then the music
ceases—the curtain rises, and there are palaces, and canals, and gondolas, and three
Venetians in the foreground, and one of them begins—
" In sooth, I know not why I am so sacl."
for I cannot keep to generalities, do what I will; but before I know what I am
about, I have wandered off to my own " first impressions," my own " first play"—
" The Merchant of Venice; " and I remember the breathless interest with which I
listened to every word, not only of Shylock and Portia, Antonio and Kerissa, but
of the rejected suitors, of Launcelot Gobbo, of every personage, great or small,
who played a part in that wonderful pageant.
My lady reader, do you remember your first long dress ? Not the long white
robes in which you passed the earliest stage of your existence—I don't demand
quite such an effort of memory as that would require—but the garment correspond¬
ing to the " toga virilis " of the sterner sex in ancient days, and to their " first tail¬
coat " of modern times. Don't you remember the feeling of sober exultation with
which you put it on, and the consciousness of increasing cares and responsibilities
which settled down upon your spirits ? And don't you remember how you put the
looking-glass down on the floor, and went through a series of indescribable contor¬
tions to try and find out how the dress looked upon a back view, and whether the
skii-t really did trail on the ground behind 1 And how, as you went downstairs, it
tripped you up, and caught on the bannisters, and was trodden on by your brothers,
and made you feel awkward and uncomfortable in the highest degree 1 And was there
not lurking in your mind a feeling of regret, most improper and unladylike, but,
alas ! not unnatural regret, at the thought that many of your cherished amusements
had now become not only indecorous, but absolutely impracticable 1 that hide-and-
seek was utterly out of the question, and " French and English" a thing of the
I
THE   ATTEMPT. 207
past 1   And yet the glory and dignity of the " first long dress " supported you through
it all, and you were contented, nay, happy in your chains !
A beatific vision presents itself to my recollection at the magic words, "the
first ball;" but I feel myself growing incoherent and confused at the thought, for,
" blinded by excess of light," my first impressions were of the most indistinct and
bewildering nature, and I can think of no better way of describing them than in
the words of dear, excellent Mrs Lirriper, when her grandson asked her what she
thought of Paris—" Jemmy, I feel as if it were beautiful fire-works being let off in
my head." A blaze of light, a crowd of people, a roar of talking and laughing, and
music, a vague idea that somebody was speaking to me, and that I was answering
without knowing what I was saying, a sudden consciousness that I was being rapidly
whii-led round the room and gradually recovering a portion of my scattered intel¬
lects—such were my first impressions of my first ball. Then the " talking it over "
afterwards—but I need not attempt to describe that. I can only assure my readers,
that if they have never listened to a knot of girls talking over a ball, and more
especially a first ball, they have very little idea of the extraordinary volubility, the
untiring energy, and—must I confess it 1—the criticising sharpness of the feminine
tongue.
But I hear the critical readers, already referred to, remarking, that this essay
affords proof sufficient, and more than sufficient, of the possibility of talking a
great deal, and yet saying very little. Let me hasten, then, to forestall their
reproaches, and conclude with an apology for having detained them so long.
Dido.
People will soon be as tired of reading books on Norway as they already are
of accounts of Switzerland, Italy, or Germany ; but there is still a call for infor¬
mation about the ways and customs of a country so interesting, as well as about its
scenery, so that a few odds and ends picked up during a visit of three months may
not be unacceptable.
I do not offer these in any very connected form, as they are for the most part
gathered from a diary, where I marked down whatever struck me at the moment.
"Writers generally commence with some account of the voyage, but as my
recollections of that time are the reverse of agreeable, it will be better to imagine
208 THE   ATTEMPT.
ourselves at the end of the journey, and landed safely on the quay at Christiania. A
great deal has been said about the beauty of the Fiord, and certainly, for about two
hours sail before yo\i anive, the scenery is very lovely. Those who have seen
Naples say that Christiania resembles it when approached from the Fiord. The
first thing that strikes one on landing, is the Babel of tongues shouting out a
language one has never heard before, and feels as if one could never underetand.
I had received many warnings about the great cold in Norway, and was strongly
advised to take furs with me; however, I determined to omit these comforts, and
content myself with one or two warm shawls, it being then the month of June. My
astonishment was great, therefore, to find intense heat, doors and windows wide open,
and uhe nights suffocating. As might be expected, there was a great deal of thunder
in the air, and I remember one or two terrific thunder-storms, surpassing anything I
had witnessed at home. One night, when we had gone up the country about forty
miles from the capital, a terrible storm came on about twelve o'clock, the thunder
never ceased, but gi-owled and inimbled between the claps, whilst the lightening
came every few seconds, and showers of hailstones rattled over our heads, almost
tb'owning the thunder. This lasted four hours, and we were in a little wooden house,
quite exposed to the fury that raged outside. The hailstones were of an enormous
size, many as large or larger than full-sized gooseberries, as was proved some hours
later, when one of our party brought to our room a plateful heaped in the foi-m of a
pyramid, with a single i-ipe strawberry on the top ! Sevei'al of the neighbours were
struck by the lightening whilst lying in theii- beds ; one poor old man was killed.
These storms occur very frequently in the district surrounding the Miosen Lake,
in the neighbourhood of which we were staying ; in the north they are almost
unknown.
The houses in Chi'istiania are almost entirely composed of brick, white-washed,
which presents rather a dazzling appearance. Some of the streets have a handsome
aspect, especially the one leading to the Palace. At one end of it is the Storthings-
hall, and the fine open space in front of this building makes a charming promenade,
with the King's gardens adjoining. There are many beautiful villas in the suburbs,
commanding an extensive view over the Fiord, with its countless islands, dotted
with graceful trees and houses. One of these islands, and perhaps the most beauti¬
ful of them, I visited several times ; it is called Sjursoen, and is the property of Herr
M., a well-known and universally popular gentleman, to whose genuine hospitality I
would desire to offer my humble tribute. To this, as well as to several of the other
islands, the passenger is conveyed in very small steam-boats about twice the size of
THE   ATTEMPT. 209
an ordinary i-owing boat, with an awning at one end, and worked by a small hand-
engine, easily managed by two men.
To this delightful place we went on the " Eve of St John, " a great festival in
Norway, and one which, I observe, is likewise kept in some parts of Germany, and in
Shetland ; in the latter place it is attended by many curious customs, which, how¬
ever, are gradually falling into disuetude, being " more honoured in the breach than
the observance." All 1 remarked to distinguish the day from any other was the
burning of bonfires, which appeared on all the surrounding heights, as well as on many
of the islands. It was quite early when we arrived, too soon for illuminating, so we
rambled about this picturesque spot till it was time for supper, which consisted of
smoked salmon, smoked ham, mackeral, stewed beef, radishes and cheese, the excel¬
lent ale of the country, and tea, if preferred. From expeiience, I decidedly advise
strangers to choose the ale.
We all rose from this meal to look at the sunset, which was glorious. The water
was as calm as a lake, the sky glowing witli the deepest colours, which were reflected
in the glas.sy sea, with the neighbouring islands and the fair city looking exquisite
in the evening light. Then came out all the bonfires, and as we steamed away,
Ave saw from every point the scene illuminated, till the whole brought up one's child-
isli visions of the enchanted regions in the " Arabian Kights."
Oscarshall, the king's summer palace, is only about two mili^s distant from the
city. It is a handsome building, pure white, and surrounded by fine shrubs and
trees. The view from the tower is magnificent in all directions, wooded hills, the
Fiord with, its lovely islands, picturesque houses, and all so gi-een and fresh. Inside
the palace the rooms are spacious, and the walls adorned by fine paintings in the
pannels. There are several by Tidemann, the great painter, representing the
Norwegian peasant's life from the cradle to the grave. These are exquisite produc¬
tions, reminding one of the style of our own artist, Faed. There is a series of bas-
reliefs by Borch, which tells the stoiy of Frithjof and Ingeboi-g, a favourite Norse
saga, concerning the loves and troubles of a young couple who lived on opposite sides
of a romantic Fiord in Bergenstift.
The king very seldom comes to Norway, so that both his fine palaces are likely
to go to decay for want of being inhabited. There are many delightful excursions
from Christiania, and amongst the short ones perhaps Eingerike is the most at¬
tractive. It is about twenty-eight English miles distant from the capital, and there
is a good carriage road all the way.
The  Storthing, to which I have alluded before, is the Norwegian Parliament.
2  D
210 THE   ATTEMPT.
The room where the debates are held is very fine; the pillars are all gilded, and the
roof a mixture of gilding and bright colours done in a sort of scroll-work. There is
a President, who takes part in the debates, unlike the Speaker of the House of
Commons. The day I was there, I heard several men of note, one of them sjioke
for an hour and a half. There are reporters, both for ordinary papers, and a par¬
ticular paper for the Storthing itself. The whole reminded me a good deal of our
General Assembly.
There is a curious old house a few miles from Edisvold, once the residence of a
nobleman, which served, in 1814, as the place of assembly for the extraordinary
Storthing, which arranged the constitution now in use. A poet calls this building
the cradle where the liberty of Norway was born.
The Crown Prince, afterwards King Christian the 8th of Denmark, was pre¬
sent at that meeting. The Government has bought the building, to be kept in
memory of the joyful event. The portraits of King Christian and his son are pre¬
served here. In the same room are the portraits of many of the members for that
year, most of whom are now dead, but, curiously enough, we were shown over the
building by one of the survivors, whose likeness figured among the rest. He was of
the peasant class, which contributes a fair proportion of members towards the rej)re-
sentation of its countiy.
Most peojile are aware that there is now no nobilty in Norway, and even those
who once bore titles, have, for the most part, sunk_theni in plain Herr and Fru.
Still, I have found that the old respect for I'ank yet lingers, and the request of an
ex-count oi- countess carries weight, even among the proud peasantry. This seems
to be human nature all over the world, for, was not the Prince of Wales almost
worshipped as a god in free and independent America 1 There is, perhaps, more of
pride and etiquette in the peasant class than in a higher one, and a greater idea of good
birth, by which term T mean, when the land has remained in the same family for
generations. In England we should probably consider them as well-to-do farmei-s,
not tenants, but landlords, only that in manners and appearance they resemble oui-
yeomen.
The feelings I have alluded to often have weight with them in affairs of mar¬
riage. In an ordinary way, young people are left pretty free to aii-ange these mat¬
ters for themselves, money having very little to do with it—be it known that L.300
a year is considered a handsome income in Norway—but there are cases where the
parents interfere, and this is principally in the peasant's class. Those who are
wealthy, and have a " lang pedigree," though they may allow their children to mix
THE   ATTEMPT. 211
with those of the Husmand's or tenant's class, to dance with them, and to dress in a
similar manner, will yet make objections to marriages between them, on the scoi'e of
a want of good blood in their veins, or want of money.
Accredited persons go, previous to the wedding, to certify the clergyman that the
contracting parties have not been married before, but no "marriage lines " are neces¬
sary, only an entry in the register. Much of the ceremony resembles our own: when the
bride enters, a psalm is sung, then the clergyman makes a speech to the young couple
standing before him, explaining their duties to thejn ; this is followed by the reading
of the service, then they kneel, and hold each other's hands, while the priest, laying
his hands on their heads, blesses them; then comes another psalm, and all is over.
I attended the wedding of a young lady in Christiania, which was conducted in
this manner, and afterwards we all drove off from the church to the house of the
bride's father. Then followed the standing dinner, which is the most uncomfortable
way of taking a meal that can be imagined. Fancy a large party of guests all
crowded into a moderate-sized room, with a table in the middle, covered with good
things, but not a chair or a stool to sit down upon ! Of course every one cannot
stand at the table, many must be content to keep their plates in their hands, and
under these circumstances where is the iise of chicken, or any other delicacy requiring a
knife and fork 1 Besides, one never enjoys anything so much when one is standing ;
one gets tired and cross; and it is provoking to see plenty before one, and, like
Tantalus, have no means of getting at it. From this room we passed into an ad¬
joining one (rooms are generally en atdle in Norway), where wo found all the pre¬
sents laid out, consisting mostly of silver for the table, and articles of furniture.
These are generally given in preference to jewels, as being more useful. After look¬
ing at these, we passed into the sitting-room, where we found the table in the centre
covered with jellies and creams, also wine glasses, which were soon filled with cham¬
pagne, and we commenced drinking healths to such an extent, that I became anxious
as to the consequences. About this time telegrams l^egan to arrive, and, to my
utter astonishment, no fewer than twenty made their appearance from all parts of the
country. This seems to be quite the custom, indeed, the bride would be much sur¬
prised if these expressions of goodwill were awanting.
I had intended giving sojne account of that important ejiocli in the Nol•^veglan's
life, confirmation, as well as of other matters, but I foresee it would occupj^ too much
space, and must be left for another occasion.
In concluding, I may remark, that nowhere have I met people moi-e unaffect¬
edly kind and hospitable, or more ready to welcome the foreigner, and make him
212 THE   ATTEMPT.
feel at home in a strange land. Very, very happy are some of my recollections of
the time I spent there, and though I may never again visit those beautiful scenes, the
memory of them ■will never pass from my mind. To see Norway once, is to long to
revisit its shores; and to be received on an intimate footing among its people, is to
carry away a never-fading impression of the charms of a truly sociable society. As,
however, I believe I am slightly prejudiced in this matter, and hardly capable of
fomiing an unbiassed judgment, I shall put a constraint on my inclination to ramble
off into panegyrics, and close with a sincere wish that all my readers may some day
see and experience for themselves the pleasures of which I speak. Alma.
f ims ia one latelu b^ab-
FROM   THE   GERMAN   OF   THEODOF   STORM.
Tnou thought'st not then of glad days yet to be,
Unmeet for conflict—with past anguish weary ;
Too great the might of mother's joy for thee,
And all too hard Life's thorny path and dreary.
Night found him at thy side with loving care.
Again night comes, o'er all its mantle flinging,
It also passed—then dawned the morning fair:
" Ah ! dearest, how this heart to life is clinging."
Silent he listens, while these accents mild
Break ou his ear in solemn faltering number.
" I die, beloved one, protect my child,"
Then in a scarce heard whisper " Let me slumber."
No more—no waking from that long, last sleep.
Dark grew the world whereon thine eyes were closing,
God's Spirit wafted through the silence deep.
Thine infant wailed—thou wei-t in heaven reposing.
Echo.
THE  ATTEMPT. 213
BEING  MSS.   TEMPORE   CAROLI   PRIMI. NOW   FIRST   PUBLISHED.
Then I turned me to ye fayi-e Lilian—greatlie wondering to see her in siiche
guise; for nowe I coxilde see that she was sorely tired, and that her garments were
rent and stained with duste and mudde, and she looked like unto one who had
voyaged long waye.
" Art of a tinith Lilian Warner, ye sister of Eliot Warner, living in ye Water¬
gate Street at Chester ?" I asked.
" Of a suretie I am, sir ; as soone as I did heare youre name, I minded me of
my brother's friende at Oxforde; and I knewe that I coulde gette helpe frome you."
" But is not thy brother here, or thy father, or some of thy friendes ]"
" Nay, sir, I am alone, all alone; but I cannot tell you wherefore."
" Aye, but Mistress Lilian, I cannot help thee, an I knowe not wherefore thou
art here, but we muste goe on; can'st walk two or three miles to Barnet ?"
" I am sorelie spent, yet will I doe my best."
" Then, when we reache Barnet, can'st ride a-horseback twelve miles unto
London ?    I cannot leave thee here."
" Let us reache Barnet firste. Master Willoughbie ; then I can tell you better
than I can nowe."
We did walke on in silence for some waye ; and I cudgelled my brains to finde
oiit what chance had thus brought fayre Lilian to Barnet. I felle a thynkynge
aboute your laste letter, friende Eliot; and suddenlie I minded me of one Hugh
Shaw, that you had writ aboute—howe that he had left his father's home in anger;
and of his father's griefe ; and of ye love that you thoughte youre sister bare to him.
And soe the thoughte did arise—hath she privilie left Chester, to foUowe and finde
oute this madde-cappe Hugh, hearing it rumoured that he was a-going unto London 1
I pondered awhile concerning these things ; at last I spoke : " Mistress Lilian,
hast often heard thy brother Eliot speake of me 'i"
" In goode soothe, sir, manie a tyme; youre name is welle nigh as oft on his
lippes as any othei-."
" And he is deare to me as though he were my brother; and he hath told me
muche concerning all of his familie at home; and of others beside. He hath oft
spoken of one Hugh Shaw, ye sonne of Sir William Shaw, and a goode-for-noughte
214 THE   ATTEMPT.
sorte of a young fellowe he seemeth tome." I sayd this, that I miglite try her; and
as I did looke on her slylie, I sawe ye redde bloode mounte uppe into her white
cheekes; and she answered nie fulle soone.
Nay, but you doe, liim foule wrong-^he is a moste gallant young gentleman,
and loveth well ye king; hot and hastie he is, I will welle allowe, but oh, sir, we
doe all love him welle."
Soe I sayd presentlie, " And soe he hath left Chester, and parted in gi'eate anger
from his father, and gone none knoweth whither; and, I warrant, perchance lione
careth."
But I cannot, nor verilie, neede I, telle you of all our discourse ; I did speake
for some tyme of this Hugh, but coulde not make your sister to saye oughte of what
I wished. But at laste, drawing near unto ye " Forester's Fortune," I did gi'owe
impatient; soo I sayd gravelie and kindlie, " Mistress Lilian, I doe knowe and love
youre brother welle, and you for his sayke ; and nowe I would fayne acte as youre
brother, even as Eliot himselfe, an he were here, so lette me saye one thing. You
did leeve Chester, to come uppe to London, thynkynge to tind oute Hugh Shaw, and
to prevayle on him to goe back agayne \uito his home with yoii.    Is it not so el
She looked iippe in haste into my face, and then downe on to ye grounde; but
she did perceive that I knewe welle all of it; and she answered slowlie and in a
verrie low voice, "It is even soe."
" Poore childe ! you will never fiude him here—but see, we are nigh to ye inn ;
3''ou must come with me to London, and my hostess. Mistress Wright, will finde you
a lodging; and then I muste tayke you home agayne, or Eliot himselfe muste come and
Carrie you backe."
She onlie sayd, " I thank you, sir," and we entered ye inn.
Goode Dickon did looke somewhat amazed when he perceived Mistress Lilian,
and raysed his browes as he looked at me, thynkynge, perchance, that I had fallen in
with strange companie ; but I merelie told him that ye ladie was sister to a friende,
and she woulde fayne gette to London that eve, and as I chanced to meete her, I
had promised to escoit her thither.    All of ye which was verilie true, friende Eliot.
Soe after we had had somewhat to eat and to drinke, I did paye Dickon his
reckoning, and asked him to saddle a palfrey for ye damsel; an he woulde trust me, I
woulde sende it back ye next morn. So we started, jiist at sette of sunne, for
London.
And on ye wave, youre sister did give me some accounte of her journie ; to
wit:—
THE   ATTEMPT. 215
She had lefte Chester when she hearde that Hugh Shaw had gone to London,
thynkynge that she miglite finde him, and bring him backe. She knewe noughte of
London, nor howe far it is frome her owne home. But one earlie morning, she crept
forth of ye house, saddled her own palfrey, and sette foi-the. She had not muche
monie with her; but she thoughte she shoulde soone reache London, finde out ye
truant, and returne triumphantlie unto her home. For a fewe dayes all did goo
welle; then, her money failed her ; soe she was constrayned to sell her palfrey for a
ven-R smalle summe. Footsore and wearie, she did press onwards, still sure of find¬
ing Hugh ; until at last, nearlie spent, she, lyke ye bayliife's daughter of Islington,
rested her on a mossie banke ; and not her love, but I, did come walking by. She
did see those three gentlemen of ye king's guarde come a-strolling along, who, seeiiig
a fayre mayden sitting alone, most discourteouslie did speake unto her, and one woulde
fayne have saluted her, when I came past.
" Poore cliilde !" I sayd, when she had ended her speeche, " Poore childe 1 you
will never finde Hugh Shaw in London nowe ; nay, I thinke not that even I myselfe
coulde doe soe, tried I ever soe wiselie. Pardon me, fayre damsel, but you have of a
suretie done foolishlie and wronglie in this thing; partlie through ignoi'ance, and
through over-muche love, but wi'onglie still. I know Eliot, and I can thynke what
griefe hath filled his hearte all this while at losse of his sister in suche strange fashion ;
and he wille be seeking you high and lowe; and youre father and mother—oh,
Mistress Lilian, you coulde not have thoughte of all these things when you sette
fortlic on suche a hazardous joui'nie."
At length, we did reache ye " Silver Spur." I dismounted my fayre companion,
and ledde her within; then, after seeing to ye stabling of ye steedes, I went in
searche of Mistress Wright. I tolde her that I had brought home ye sister of a
friende, who woulde staye in London a little while, before she departed for ye noiihe;
and I begged her to finde her a lodging in some quiet and kindlie familie wliere she
mighte reste herselfe; I also gave her some gold 2)ieces, and bade her to provide her
with suche garments as she most needed, saying that she had not thoughte to be on
so long a journie, and therefore stoode muche in neede of better apparel. Mistress
Wright has a sister who liveth nigh ye river, and who is an honeste and proper
woman : to her, therefore, she did tayke youre sister, charging Mistress Ellis to
keepe her in care and comforte ; and so lefte her.
This morning I walked over to Mistress Ellis' house, and a verrie cleaue, welle-
looking house it is, of a suretie ; and I did speake unto Lilian. She did begge of
me that I woulde try to finde out somewhat conceniing Hugh Shaw; and she greatlie
216 THE  ATTEMPT.
desired, if any one of my acquaintance were going towards Chester or Wales, that I
woulde by them sende worde unto her father at home. Therefore, I doe sende this by
an especial messenger, who goeth to carry despatches and letters frome my lord Straf-
ford, and ye recorder of London, unto ye governor of Chester Castle ; for, as I am at
Whitehall, I do sometymes have small favours .shewed unto me in these small
matters.
And nowe, friende Eliot, which shall it be ? Wilt thou leave thy sister in my
care, and depute me to carrie her to Chester 1 or wilt thou come unto ye Silver Spur,
and fetch her home thyself ? Trust me, she shall be as safe under my overlooking as,
God ay ding me, I can mayke her ; let Him be praised that I did falle in with: her,
and soe be helped to preserve her frome ye manie and crying evills that mighte have
swallowed her iippe. True, I may have to crosse swordes with that brave king's
guarde ; but for that, beshrew me, I care but little.
Ah, Eliot, she is verilie a verie fayre maydeii to looke to, youre sister Lilian—
very fayre; yet she is but a childe, as hath becne before sayd. As for Hugh Shaw,
I fear me I shall not be able to finde aughte of him; for Lilian's sayke I am verilie
sorrie, but for mine owne sayke "
Here the rest of the manuscript is wanting, in the same way as the beginning ; I
doubt not that, had it been complete, we might have had one or two more interesting
particulars given us. As the matter stands at present, we are left quite in the dark
as to Hubert's movements ; and it must be left to mere conjecture whether he or Eliot
conducted the fair wanderer back to old Cestria's ancient walls. Possibly, we may
find some passing allusion to a visit to Chester in a letter of more recent date, but I
almost forget if I have noticed any mention of it or not. As to the duel, that might
or might not have taken place : but, as hostile encounters were such common occur¬
rences in the i^eriod under our notice, a scar more or k ss on a brown, hardy face
would not have been of very much moment. Of Hugh Shaw we hear nothing ; that
redoubted young cavalier not a]>peariug again for some time. As so very little of
his private character has yet come out, we can hardly judge whether or not he was
worthy of so much of the love of Lilian as he possessed.
Here then, for the present, our history stops, there being a space of about two
years between this letter and the next one, which is addressed by Hubert Willough-
bie to his friend and cousin, Bertram.    This epistle we reserve for the next number.
Mas Alta.
THE   ATTEMPT. 217
(the   story   of  ELIZABETH.)
A GREAT name is a great heritage; but the name of a gi-eat genius is, to a young
author, a heavy glory. The world expects too much, or it takes the common notion
that the son of a genius must be a fool, and is prepared to under-rate everything.
Of the first class, that is, of those who have charity enough to believe that one great
head does not necessarily swamp the brains of its descendants, there will be some that
will read Miss Thackeray's writings for her father's sake, and, perhaps, for his sake,
speak gently of them; but others (perhaps the greater part) will have a standard for
their favourite author's child to which she must attain, and will feel disappointed
if she has not the gifts they expected, and thus will lose the beauties that are there, in
searching for others which they hope to find; forgetting, that however by nature
alike, there must ever be a great difference in width and experience between the
mind of a young girl fresh in life and hoiDe, and that of a man who has lived through
life's dry withered days, and seen more, it may be, than most men, of the variety and
vexation of the world.
But to read rightly, we must not hold always in our hand the narrow measuring
line of comparison ; and, though hailing with pleasure any point of similarity, should
not on that account neglect to appreciate the separate merits of the writer. This
seems but the commencement of Miss Thackei-ay's career, from which no one can as
yet predict what of her father's talents she may have inherited ; and though detect¬
ing, as yet but rarely, any glimpses of that keen, pointed sarcasm and wit which
glanced behind the curtain and pierced the masks of the world, yet there is the same
large-hearted nobleness which has endeared that name to all, and the same just
appreciation of worth and truth under whatever outer aspect.
Miss Thackeray's genius lies in her painting.   With a talent for effective grouping
rarely to be met with, she does not seek fine colours, but the mixing of them is done
with an artist's hand ; the most ordinary subjects, which a less skilful painter would
pass by as ineffective, sufficing her ; a little patch of neglected garden, at the side of a
long, low, stiff house, a few desolate trees throwing their weird shadows across it
into the grass-grown court beyond ; a wilful girl, not very wise, not very noble, only
very loveable, in a blue cotton gown,  with her head resting on the wall, and the
2  E
218 THE   ATTEMPT.
western sun gleaming over the masses of tangled yellow hair—very ordinary mate¬
rials those, but in her hands they are quickly touched into a charming picture.
In spite of this charm, however, there is a want in Miss Thackeray's stories.
It is not that they lack interest, though the interest is more loving than sensational,
more of sympathy than excitement,—but they want the chaia of small connecting liaks,
without which no story can be told smoothly. The scenes, especially in " Elizabeth,"
are too detached, too straggling; it seems as though the thread, instead of winding
itself finely through, were constantly snapped and picked up at random.
" The story of Elizabeth " is written very much in the style of a series of ani¬
mated sketches, with a pause between each for the imagination to fill up. The scenes
are depicted so real and life-like, that each act seems to assume an individuality, and
stand out distinct on the canvass. This is the same with regard to the characters.
As a rule. Miss Thackeray does not introduce many, and thus, keeping the scenes
from being scattered, not only makes them simple, but preserves better their pictorial
character.
There is little or nothing of a plot in " Elizabeth." The whole intricacies of the
story arise from the weak, uncertain mind of the hero, and the evil passions of
Elizabeth's mother, Mrs Gilmour, or, later in the story, Madame Tourneur, who is the
most thoroughly unpleasant person introduced into either of her stories. Cold, worldly,
and ambitious, yet hoarding deep in her heart a despairing love for her daughter's
lover, and therefore jealous of Elizabeth, she determines that she shall not win the prize
either, and accordingly places obstacles in the way of their meeting, so that the hero,
being of weak purpose, instead of braving circumstances, suffers himself to be con¬
strained by them. A very poor prize it seems, not worth the contending for. One
sometimes feels tempted to cry, " If only for the sake of change, let us have some of
the old heroes of romance back again, with their chivalry and high-flown devotion ;"
in coming nearer truth, we have not in all things come nearer beauty. Are those
vacillating, kind-hearted, vain, worldly young men, whom one meets in the pages of
novels of the present day, really representatives of the most ordinary type of modern
heroes ;—and if so, might it not be as well to throw a veil over the cool calculations of
their prudent minds, and thus let them be encircled with the least faint halo in
which one might fancy a shred of romance or chivalry ?
Sir John Dampier is one of the least bearable of this class ; he stands calmly
calculating between love and money, and at last, finding circumstances against his love,
he accejDts the money, i.e., he leaves Elizabeth to her fate, and engages himself to his
rich cousin Letitia.    This is, however, not decisive, he again meets Elizabeth, and, not
THE   ATTEMPT. 219
to enter into the details of the story, he so long hesitates between the two, tossed
to and fro by every wind of opinion, that we could not help grudging him the happy
solving of his difficulty, if it were not for Elizabeth, whom every one (both readers
and fellow-actors) cannot help loving in spite of her faults and her follies. Very
beautiful and very charming is Elizabeth, but wilful, wayward, and impetuous ; hers
is a thoroughly ill-balanced character, with much good, but not enough of ballast to
make it overcome the e-vol—loving guidance might have turned the scale, but with no
one near her but an unloving mother, circumstances took the rule of her character
and made her their slave.
The scenes are almost all laid in Paris, and being under the same clear sky, the
change is all the more striking from the gay pleasurable life, in which we first meet
our heroine, to the dull monotonous house of the French pasteur, where she next
appears, after her mother's ill-assorted marriage. Very vividly is this strange incon¬
gruous household brought before us. The sincerely pious M. Tourneur, with his
narrow views, and active self-sacriiicing life, and his cold, unsympathetic wife, out¬
wardly working with him, but inwardly separated by a great gtdf, which is only
gradually becoming visible to him. Then the five young Christians, and little Lou-
lou and Tou-tou, and Madame Jacob, M. Tourneur's sister, strict, austere, and severe,
especially to poor Elizabeth, who, indeed, is the sort of black sheep of the family, looked
upon as such by all except Anton, M. Tourneur's son, who has loved her from the
first night he met her, when " his head seemed to be mshingwith pink silk, or dizzy
with the downcast, bright, bewildering blue eyes." His was a very modest unpre-
suming love, but strong and unselfish, believing in her, as it were, in spite of herself,
for he had never seen her as she would have been in a more congenial atmosphere.
We feel sorry for poor Anton, for Elizabeth does not use him well. What a
strangely piquant scene is their first meeting, when Mrs Gilmour was standing on
the balcony with M. Tourneur, and saying—
" ' The woman was never yet born who could stand alone, who did not look for some earthly
counsellor and friend,' &c.
And Elizabeth was yawning and wondering when they would go.
' You are sleepy, Miss,' said young Toumeur, in his French-English.
Elly yawned in a very unmistakeable language, and shewed all her even white teeth. ' I always
get sleepy when I have been cross, Mr Anthony ; I have been cross ever since three o'clock to-day,
and now it is long past ten, and time for us all to go to bed ; don't you think so ?'
' I am waiting for my father,' said the -young man ; ' He watches late at night, but we are all sent
off at ten.'
' We 1 you and old Franjoise.'
220 THE   ATTEMPT.
' I and the young Christiana who live in our houae, and atudy with my father, and read under his
direction.    There are five, all from the south, who are, like me, preparing to be ministers of the gospel.'
Another wide yawn from Elly. ' Do you think your father will stay much longer, if so, I shall go
to bed ? ' "
And then Elizabeth half goes to sleep, and dreams, and wakes up suddenly, with a
vague fear that they are plotting something at the window, and that it is about her.
" 'What is it, Mr Anthony?' said she, very fierce. 'Is it—they do not think that I would
ever—ever dream—or think of marrying you ?' "
One should scarcely recognise the same wayward, proud beauty, some months
after, in the quiet, broken-spirited girl, who listens calmly to the proposal, the idea
of which she so scorned that day, and merely asks time to think of it. By that time
her life seemed to her a burden, though it was no hard life, only a little dull and
wearisome; but, instead of trying to make her path as bearable as possible, she
kicked against every obstacle she encountered, and so became bruised and miserable.
Any change seems to her then a desirable one, and so she says, she will think of it;
but before she has time to think, a glimpse of her old love comes to her, and poor
Anthony is forever thrown overboard.
I must not, however, linger over this early part of the story; over Elly's folly,
and Sir John's selfishness. Then comes the illness, the touching, seemingly death¬
bed scene, and Madame Tourneur's silent repentance; and here. Miss Thackeray says,
her story should have stopped, and so, from an artistic point of view, it might have
been well, but as a view of human nature it would have failed. We have yet to see
Elizabeth come forth from suffering, ennobled and purified, and revive and expand
under the genial influence of kind Miss Dampier.
Next follow some bright, bracing scenes in England, the most hearty and spirited
in the book, with clever, kind-hearted, would-be cynical Will Dampier laughing at
his cousin's silly love affair, and his aunt's romance, though finally becoming a victim
to the siren himself ; and Miss Dampier feeding the romance with sentiment, and
petting Elly, and Elly herself getting the better of her past life, sending her vacil¬
lating lover back to his betrothed, refusing Will Damf)ier, and returning to her Paris
home, as the saying goes, a wiser and a better girl than she was before; and then,
after a while, comes the denoument, where all is explained, and all are made happy—
dear, romantic Aunt Jean (Miss Dampier) hardly less so than the principal
parties.
It is a pleasant story, and pleasantly written ; simple and unaffected in style,
with here and there an under-cuirent of humour—as, for example, in that last scene.
THE  ATTEMPT. 221
with the two kind old women, where the humour seems to make the 2)atlios doubly
pathetic.
One great charm of this story is, that the characters are all distinct identities,
painted with large-hearted justice,—not one shewn off to the disadvantage of another,
—but each alone, with its share of good, however small, brought out clear and impar¬
tially. Nowhere is this more clearly seen than in the description of the two charac¬
ters—M. Tourneui- and Will Dampier—both honest-hearted ministers of the Gospel,
but each serving in a different manner. " Tourneur's," she says, " was the loftier
spirit;" but Dampier's she seems to consider the more working creed, especially for
such as her heroine. But yet, as if fearing that her readers, comparing him with
Dampier, will judge too harshly his one fault, of slight narrowness of vision, she ex¬
cuses him, saying, " Dampier, who felt less keenly, might well be more liberal, more
forbearing." As George Eliot says, in the " Mill on the Floss"—" Remember that the
responsibility of tolerance lies with those who have the wider vision."
We trace one noble point of similiarity between Miss Thackeray and her father,
in the large-minded leniency which would wish to show the picture from every point
of view; the tender dread of severity, of which only a large heart is capable, which
would hoard up one generous deed of a cold self-worshipper, one repentant tear of a
Magdalene of the world. With Madame Tourneur we find this. Miss Thackeray
has too much tact and delicacy to drag in any striking conversion in the end of her
story ; but a hint suffices us, to see her looking into the past with a sad dissatisfac¬
tion, and on into the future with a weary longing, yet of thankfulness.
There is a certain class of readers who will find Miss Thackeray too discursive,—
those who like figures drawn in hard, distinct outlines ; who will see and judge the
cliaracters solely through their words and actions, without any shading of sentiment
or reflection, forgetting that we have not all one back-ground of circumstance, and,
consequently, that we must be allowed to have different degrees of light and shade ;
and also, that if no kind thoughts or willing hearts, and, on the other side, inward
doubts, fears, hidden anguish and disappointment, were ever put into the balance, we
would be weighed but unfairly by our fellow-men.
Enai.
[To be continued.]
222 the attempt.
Part i.—What is it 1
" A little learning is a dangerous thing ;
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring :
There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again."
Had the poet, as he penned these lines, been gifted with a fore-shadowing of
coming events, he might well have paused in astonishment to see the little learning
gradually making its progress downward thi'ough society, till at last it has become an
almost universal possession. How he would have stai-ted to see the spring of the
Muses leave its mountain fastnesses, and trickle down in innumerable rills, to refresh
every meadow, and make music by every cottage door ! It would have been sti-ange
to him to see the working-man lay down his tools for an hour or two, and stoop to
lap the bright waters from his hard palm, while his little ones, turning over the
leaves of some picture-book by his side, catch the tiny drops of knowledge amidtheii"
glee. He would, it is to be hoped, have found nothing biit delight in such a scene
as that; though his satirical lip would certainly not have lacked occasion to curl at
other samples of the altered state of things.
For education has now become so necessary, both as a gold-winner and as a
passport into society, that it is valued by many who would never have sought it on
its own account, and is brought to some uses which are base enough. One some¬
times fancies that the Pierian Spring has spread out into a vast pool, such as travel¬
lers in Africa have discovered,—the resort of all animals for mdes around,—so that
one may observe, at once, the habits and characters of all the motley crowd which
come to di'ink. Some we see approach with sober tread, and draw each day just so
much as they require for business purposes ; others wander from bank to bank, sip¬
ping, now here, now there, pressing eagerly forward to reach some shady Paradise of
delight, which loses its charm as soon as they draw near. A few believe the waters will
strengthen their mental constitution, and come down on principle to take their daily
draught, like any other medicine. Others, who have still less desire to taste of the
spring, find its brink rather a fashionable resort, so they pretend to sip, wetting
their lips and hands, dallying with the transparent water, and admiring the rainbow-
sj)ray which they dash around them.    But many of the same class seldom think of
THE   ATTEMPT. 223
coming down to drink at all. If they can manage to catch the overflowings of some
neighbour's pitcher, they hope they are not more ignorant than other people, and are
content. And there are some, very different from all these, who, though they may
not be able to visit the spring often, or for any length of time, yet find each hour
spent there full of the most intense enjoyment, and who go away, when go they
must, with limbs invigorated and spirits refreshed, though with the thirst that brought
them thither all unquenched. A few only, very few compared with the multitudes
left behind, make theii- way upwards from the pool, and climbing by the rivulet's bed
to some high, pure source, sit down reverently, to be not daily visitants, but dwellers
there.
Time, which has wrought such a change in the restless crowds below, has left
the character and aims of those bold climbers nearly unaltered, so that they may well
claim brotherhood with the learned and great of old. Yet even they have felt the
rapid impulse which, driving us all onward at railway speed, tends to sharjien our
vision and extend its range by the multitude of objects which whirl past us in quick
succession, while it renders quiet reflection daily more diflicult.
Not even philosophers are allowed cloisters to meditate in now. They must
bring out their discoveries in popular lectures, they must be lionized for the plea¬
sure of society, they must travel over the. fairest and most famous spots of earth for
their own pleasure and profit; and to know what other people are doing and think¬
ing, they must read through a mass of ephemeral literature, enough to fill an ordi¬
nary man's head entirely. How philosojihy can co-exist with all this is difiicult to
understand. It is hardly possible for either book-wiiters or book-readers to go
through the same amount of patient labour as their forefathers, not because they
have grown indolent, but because their energy is used up in other ways. We can¬
not read the kind of books which our grandmothers plodded through. We want
sterling thought as much as ever, but we do not care for a grandly built-up style, and
call many things "dry" which would once have been esteemed precious monuments
of learning. History must forget her dignity, and science come down to play with
children. Is this a virtue or a vice 1 It looks like both ; and we know not what
to say. We think of thethorough training, and steady perseverance, and quiet
thoughtfulness of the literary men and women of the olden time with just envy.
But we must look at the other side of the picture as well. The proportion of
intellectual people, and of those whose callings left them time for laborious study, was
not larger then than it is now. The rest of mankind found nothing to suit their
leisure or capacity in the ponderous folios of their day.     Authors had higher aims
224 THE  ATTEMPT.
in those days than to make their books interesting to school-boys and mechanics.
The beginner found hard words and classical forms of expression to repel him at
every turn, if, indeed, he could be said to begin at all, without learning Latin as a
preliminary steji. We think with pain of the poor little prodigies among the higher
classes, who were turned into learned men when they had scarcely reached the years
of boyhood ; and of the still more miserable little dunces, who, though at the expense
of many tears, failed altogether to imbibe a due amount of wisdom. But our chief
regret is for the masses of our land—parents who never cared that their childi-en
should learn what they never knew themselves, children who grew up, generation
after generation, into steady yeomen, and shrewd merchants and artizaus, with no
education but such as their own practical sense, and necessity, the mother of inven¬
tion, could give them.
To point out the evil of such a state of things as this, is, I know,' no argument
against the dangers of an opposite extreme. It was wrong to keep knowledge thus
pent up in a stagnant lake, however beautiful; yet the present thoughtless prodi¬
gality of books may bring other evils in its train. Still, the earlier mistake was surely
the worse of the two, as destitution in a time of dearth is more painful than waste of
bread in a time of plenty. We dare not keep ourselves or others back from know¬
ledge, because we can attain to but a little.
At least, we ought first to ask of those who would frame a law so stringent,
" How much knowledge do you call a ' little' V How much of the charmed draught
must we quaff before the intoxicating fumes roll away, and leave our intellect more
unclouded than before 1 You count it frivolous and superficial to commence any
study whifch you are not prepared to master; and as the word " mastery" slij)s easily
from your tongue, and sounds proudly, you never think what a gigantic meaning it
contains. To me, such words sound like the mocking demand of tlie old Norse giant,
when he offered the god Thor a tankard of foaming mead, and bade him finish it at
a di-aught, as the giants were used to do. Long and fiercely Thor di-ew, panted for
breath, and drank again, and a third time strained every nerve to accomplish the
feat, but still the beaker was full to the brim as before. Then the giant laughed, and
said, " That tankard is the exhaustless bed of the ocean, and what fool could think
to drain it!"
If any of us have still hope to succeed in such an attempt, the trial is worth
making, and our first essay may be, if we will, in imagination only. We shall choose
an easy subject, and see how far we can follow it out. Shall it be history 1 And
first, that of our own little island.    It will be a labour of love to look close and long
THE   ATTEMPT. 225
till the past stands before us like the present, and we can follow our coixntry from
its dim twilight into the ever-increasing day of liberty and greatness. We do not
aim at compiling a mental dictionary of names and dates, biit at gaining a true
knowledge of men who have breathed our native air, and whose influence has gone
out to tell on the destinies of our native land. We endeavour to drink in the spirit
of the different ages. We want to live with the old Druids and find out their mys¬
teries, to learn when they first landed on our shores, and how long they had lived
in their sea-girt seclusion before ever Koman descried the white cliffs of Albion.
But all this we cannot know, so we pass on, sympathizing with the home-loving,
home-defending Saxon, and marking how the sweep of the Norman chivalry rushed
like a springtide up every creek and inlet, bringing with it a fresher sea-breeze, and
new motion and sparkle on its foam-crested waves, yet leaving the deep ocean still
the same that we knew before. We half admire, half hate the fiery Plantagenet
kings ; but oar eye is drawn off from them to watch the slow rivetting of the chains
of superstition on the conscience of our country, and our ear is strained to catch the
few clear voices that still dare to speak of liberty. And then we hail the dawn of
truth—veiy fail", and though often rising into mists and clouds, emerging ever
stainless.
More fair, because more fearless, was the day spring in the land of Knox, where
light and darkness were more desperately contrasted,—whose sun, both in its feeble
dawning, and in the glory of its noon, seemed often about to be quenched in blood,
yet shone out again triumphantly. We know that all this happened ; but can we
tell Iwiv, out of the clash of party, and the turmoil of war and persecution, the
glorious Reformation arose ! Do we see clearly how a Divinity shaped those ends,
all rough-hewn as they were by the hands of men ! If every detail of those stirring
times had been written fully and truly, ilie task of reading, remembering, and
viewing them as a complete whole, might well dishearten us. But we feel still more
discouraged, because we often cannot get at the truth at all. We try to understand
the character of some noted man, when a hue and ciy rises from a hundred voices at
once, and exaggerated epithets of praise and blame fill the air, till the grave pages of
history seem as wild as a Parisian mob shouting " a la lanteme," and the man we
seek to know seems to vanish from the region of realities into that of myths. Now
and then we find an author whose every page strikes us as a photograph, and whom
we follow, in thankfulness, over the little space which he has made clear. It is per¬
haps only a reign or two, or it may be a centurj^, yet the historian has spent the
best part of his life in disinterring this precious fragment of truth.    And as for the
2 P
226 THE  ATTEMPT.
unknown lying on each side of this period, we have no lifetime to spare in which
to search it out. The greater part of it must remain for ever unknown to us ; and
without thinking of the whole wide globe, and the six thousand years of human
history which are all unexplored, we acknowledge ourselves completely baffled.
"We may try once again. To learn a language thoroughly is no uncommon at¬
tainment, and we may succeed iu that. We work steadily till the words and gram¬
mar are fixed in our memory, and the idiom flows from our tongue like native speech.
But, after all, we have barely skimmed the surface of the language ; if we have, even
casually, glanced into its depths, we have found embedded in it roots which strike
down into the very beginnings of things, words that lay before us whole pages of
history in a half intelligible cypher, mementoes of individual and national character,
snatches of old wisdom and old song ; and we feel that its fibres stretch out far be¬
yond our ken, knitting it, by a net-work of a thousand threads, to every language on
earth, and forming a labyrinth in which we stand utterly bewildered.
If we have failed to reach the end of subjects which relate chiefly to man, it
would be worse than foolish to dream of fathoming those which tell more directly of
God and his works. Besides, no branch of knowledge stands isolated, but each is
subtly interwoven with every other in the universe, so that each one of them has no
end, but in infinity.
The thought of this vastness has often well-nigh overwhelmed us. Sometimes,
as we have surmounted some rugged bit of cliif, and gaze on an immensity we had
not imagined before, we seem to hear a voice like thunder calling to us—back, you
who presume to tread the slopes of mountaius whose summits you can never gain,
back into your native ignorance and littleness. Faint and trembling we prepare to
submit to the mandate. But as we glance to our fellow-clamberers, we see that they
too have heard the cry, and that we do not shrink and falter alone. There are
millions on the same road, and these are not all like us—beginners and children in
knowledge. The scholar closes his book and weeps, the ardent discoverer stops in
mid-ocean, the astronomer dares not raise his dim eye to his telescope, for they all
know that the summit is as inaccessible to them as to the youngest child in the val¬
ley below.
We shout up the mountain-side, to some who have almost vanished on the far
height, " Do j^ou see the summit ?" and the voice floats down to us, " Each step
reveals to us peaks and ridges that we saw not before, and they are without number,
but the top reaches to heaven."
We discern grand figures far along the shores of time, and we say, surely they
THE   ATTEMPT. 227
have cast a line into the depths of that sea, but from them the answer comes, " We
are but children gathering pebbles out of the shallows, the unfathomable ocean is far
beyond us."
Pythagoras of old might look up to the nightly skies, and think, a little clearer
vision and I could number those stars. At length the telescope'was pointed thither,
and it unveiled secrets which the wildest dreams of the ancients could never have
imagined ;—but new stars arise, more countless than before. A stronger glass confers
a yet more distant view, and far, far beyond these appear new galaxies, mists of stars,
garnishing whole sky-tracts with their whiteness.
We began by asking, what is a little learning 1 and we must answer, all is little.
One step on a path as long as the universe is but small progress, yet he who has
taken ten feels himself no nearer to the end.
But though we can never hope to look down in self-congi*atulation from heights
we have reached, we rejoice that we are not forbidden to seek the treasures by the
way ; and smile to tread at eveiy step upon some flower of beauty, and to find fresh
springs of life welling up to cool our thirsty lips. M. L.
FROM THE GERMAN OF JULIUS STURM.
Thou faithful hand ! which, full of trust.
Was laid in mine in bygone days.
To hope and beauty from the dust
My fallen life thou'st help'd to raise.
Thou gentle hand ! that nursed me oft
Through days of trouble hard to bear.
That made my pillow smooth and soft.
And soothed me with thy loving care.
Thou skilful hand ! at close of day,
When rosy lips melodious sing.
With music thou dost guide the lay,
And through my heart the echoes ring.
Thou pious hand ! in solemn hours
How gently hast thou claspJd mine,
As we have felt the quick'ning powers
Of God's own word, His Book divine.
Thou busy hand ! that workest aye.
From mom till eve, at doing good.
In thee the symbol I descry
Of noble German womanhood.
Thus roam myrestless thoughts for hours.
Dear wife, round thy beloved hand,
Like butterflies, whom perfum'd flowers
Keep prison'd in their fairy land.
Dido.
228 THE  ATTEMPT.
The necessity for active employment, and the feeling of satisfaction, even happi¬
ness, derived from the proper discharge of our duties, is known and recognised by
almost all of us. I say almost all, because there is a certain class who seefti to
imagine they best fulfil their mission by taking as little trouble as possible, and con¬
sider it rather vulgar to have anything to do. They were not sent into the world
to be of use, but the world was intended to be of use to them, to minister to their
enjoyment, and to enable them to kill the time that rolls on all too slowly for them.
To these drones in the hive nothing is a jileasvire, scarcely anything a sorrow, unless
it be the loss of the means that enable them to live an idle existence.
What a wi-etched fate must that be, where all the nobler emotions of the heart
have died out, where every thing is a weariness, and the vacxiity of the countenance
is only an index of the vacuity of the mind. What a blessing would a little active
work be to such persons as these : if there was a law compelling them to break stones
on the highroad, or dig, or do something energetic for an hour- before breakfast, what
a fine healthy appetite they would have, what a real enjoyment woiild a httle rest be,
what a sense of power and strength would animate them for the rest of the day.
It is a law of nature that every one should do something, it may be bodily or it may
be mental; each one has his or her vocation, talents to exercise or improve, a little
niche in the world's temple to fiJl. From the little child labouring at his lessons,
to the old man looking back on his fourscore years of toil, all must tacitly acknow¬
ledge the power of work. By the power of work, I mean the help it is to us at all
times, the urgent need for it both in body and mind, the solace it is in affliction, the
reward it brings with it, the sense of satisfaction in having done our best, the proper
appreciation of rest afterwards.
There are many ways of performing our work, and it needs an earnest mind and
a strong sense of dvity to enable men to act up to a high standard. The present age is
one of luxury, and, as our elders tell us, very different from what it was in their
young days. Fifty years ago, young men were sent out into the world to seek their
fortune, often with a very imperfect education, and as often obliged to trust to their
own wits for subsistence. Broiight up in habits of much stricter obedience, and mth
much fewer of the comforts and elegancies of life, they were never allowed to lose
sight of the fact that they had their own way to make in the world, and that it
rested with themselves whether they should sink or swim.    The old system may not
THE  ATTEMPT. 229
have been the best, for a great deal of the brightness of youth was apt to be knocked
out in the struggle, and the progress of ai-t and science could hardly be so rapid as it
is now, when it was more difScult to obtain the requisite preparatory knowledge, but
it served to bring out the right stuff; the school of adversity taught bitter but whole¬
some lessons, and many a man looked back on the way he had come, and saw himself
the architect of his own foi-tune. The danger now is, that young people are brought
up to expect too miich ; they live in all particulars as well as their parents, except that
they have more amusement, and less work and anxiety j and when they are of an age
to do something for themselves, the parents have to consult them on their inclinations,
which inclinations are apt to change half a dozen times in as many months ; and when
they have finally fixed, it generally takes a round sum to educate and set them afloat
in the particalar branch they have adopted. All this is very well, but at this point
the difficulties begin, and instead of a path strewn with roses, it is often found veiy
uphill work indeed. The previous easy life has, perhaps, engendered habits of indul¬
gence, which are difficult to break, a routine of duties commences, irksome, perhaps, to
perform ; endurance, patience, and energy are probably requisite, and the mind is very
likely not sufficiently well balanced to stand the pressure. The want of the custom¬
ary amusements is felt as a hardship, activity is considered a bore, and a disposition
to grumble at their hard lot is easily fostered. The fact is, there are only two ways,
either to take matters quietly, glide on in indolence, letting others pass us by,
depressed by trifles, allowing the faculties we possess to stagnate, and giving no place
to honourable ambition, or, on the other hand, to realize what we were sent into the
world for, how we shall be called to accoiant for talents wasted, time frittered, and,
feeling our responsibilities, determine to do our best, undaunted by obstacles in the
outset, nor disheartened by finding the world a sterner place than we imagined. If
we adopt the latter course, it is safe to prophesy that we shall be forced, sooner or
later, to acknowledge the power of work.
"What I have said seems certainly to apply more especially to men, but the
principle is just as important for women, and comes even more home to them. A
man must work to a certain extent, unless he is infirm or imbecile, for the highest
rank brings with it greater responsibilities and cares ; and even the lowest and most
degraded must work, even if it be only in the service of the evil one. With women,
however, there is a large proportion who are not called on by necessity to do any¬
thing in particular, whose lives seem utterly vain and valueless. Wives and mothers
seldom have to complain of want of occupation, but there are thousands of young
women in the world who feel the want of some specific aim, something to occupy
230 THE   ATTEMPT.
their heads and hands, to give them a real interest in life.    I do not speak of listless,
fine ladies, who consider any useful employment a bore, and only study how to pass
their time in a manner most conducive to their selfish interests, but of those who,
when they have discharged all the household duties that may fall to their share (and
these are, in many cases, very small), have a large proportion of time at their own
disposal, and seriously wish to lay it out in a sensible way.    There is an idea very
common, and constantly brought forward in religious works, that every woman has
a wide field for usefulness in visiting the poor, and teacliing their children, as well as
in other details of parish work.    But it is positively certain that many are totally
unfitted for this, and their well-meant efforts often do more harm than good; they
are willing enough, but have not the peculiar gifts necessary to win their way with
those whom they are desirous to benefit, so, after a trial, they give it up with a sigh,
and fancy it is all their own fault that they do not succeed, and get depressed and
low in consequence.    Then comes the danger that they will get into the destructive
habit of doing nothing, because they have failed in one way.      They think it is
really no use only cultivating their talents, as that is doing no good in the world,
and perhaps they do not excel in anything.    There is just where we err, because we
never can tell what unexpected call  may be made on our energies,  or in what
direction we may be obliged to turn them.    How many women have been thankful
for their early application to music, when reverses have obliged them to earn their
bread by teaching it; the same may be said of languages, drawing, needlework, and
other accomplishments.    And even if no such misfortune should overtake them, the
pleasure imparted to others by the exercise of these talents is surely not to be
despised, whilst they can be turned to account in a hundred ways.      The  well-
informed woman will find herself useful at every turn; she is perhaps able to trans¬
late some passage from a foreign author for a friend; she is competent to settle
some difficulty for a literary acquaintance, from her knowledge of books ; she can
soothe some of the weary hours of an invalid from her skill in music ; she can amuse
them at other times by her agreeable reading; her application to her needle may save
the time of others who have not so much to spare,—and for all these things, and many
more, patience and determination to conquer difficulties are necessary.    For all this
is work, though it may not be hard work ; and if these ways and means of improving
herself and filling up her time are neglected, it is not surprising that she should
bewail her wasted life.   Above all, there is notliing so wholesome and bracing as a
course of instinictive reading, not keeping to one theme, but varying the studies,
as we vary our diet, for we require variety, both mentally and bodily.
THE  ATTEMPT. 231
There is a real hearty work to be done in this way, for we ought to strive to
read for a purpose, not for mere amusement, but from a sincere desire for infor¬
mation, and we shall be sure to find the power it will give us,—the power to exer¬
cise our own judgment, the power to judge more impartially and weigh both sides of
a question, which the searcher after truth acquires ; the power to take part in literary
conversation, and the power to be a help to all and sundry. We need not sigh for
a more extended sphere if we can do even a little in this way.
But, either for a man or woman, an idle life is dangerous, and generally brings
ill health and low spirits along with it. When we feel the latter coming on, by
all means let us rouse ourselves and work hard, even if it be to dig the garden,
or dust the furniture, for I solemnly affirm I never saw any one look very un¬
happy, incurably so, who had his hands full of work; and I have seen moping
persons, who seemed incapable of exertion, rouse up when the occasion came, and
come out in a new light altogether, their spirits rising as the work grew heavier,
their eyes brightening, and their whole manner bearing witness to the truth of my
assertion of the wonderful "power of work."
We often consider it a great hardship when we have to exert ourselves dur¬
ing a time of affliction, and yet, in reality, the necessity for rousing ourselves is most
useful and beneficial. Brooding over a calamity is very injurious ; we cannot, of course,
help grieving over the losses and trials that come in our way, but we may be thank¬
ful when action is demanded from us, when the brain is diverted for awhile from the
sorrow that perhaps threatens the reason, and when the effort of thought for others
prevents our weakly yielding to despair. Harsh as it may appear to say so, there is
no doubt that active work is never more needed than when we feel most disposed
to pray to be let alone to indulge our sorrow undisturbed ; it has the effect of a
wholesome tonic, and tends to soothe though it cannot lessen our grief.
Before concluding this subject, it may be worth whUe to bring before the notice
of my readers the remarkable number of eminent men of the present century who
have risen to their elevation, not from advantages of birth or education, but by the
power derived from steadily working their own way, undeterred by what miglit
daunt less aspiring natures. A noble example of this is furnished by the life of George
Stephenson, the celebrated engineer. In speaking of the effect of his character on
his son's mind, the biographer says :—" The daily and unceasing example of industry
and application, working on before the boy's eyes in the person of a loving and be¬
loved father, imprinted itself deeply upon his heart in characters never to be effiiced.
A spirit of self-improvement was thus early and carefully planted and fostered in
232 THE  ATTEMPT.
Robert's mind, which continued to influence him through life ; and to the close of
his career, he was proud to confess, that if his professional success had been great, it
was mainly to the example and training of his father that he owed it." No worldly
honour George Stephenson woii could be half so dear as such testimony from such a
son. The career of another great man has just ended in the person of Professor
Faraday. He began life as a book-binder, but a love of science developed itself
early, and he seems to have embarked in experiments on his own account. His
zeal and industry became known to Sir Hum2:»hrey Davy, and from that moment
his rise was rapid. Unspoilt by prosperity, he leaves behind him the name of a
good, as well as a great man.
Another instance of wonderfid j^erseverance and untiring energy is supplied by
the life of Charles Knight, the publisher. He has done more for the improvement and
instiniction of the lower orders than can be easily believed; he found them in a state
of woful ignorance,—such literature as came within their reach was of a kind to de¬
moralize rather than elevate,—and his time has been devoted since then to purifying
their minds, raising their moral tone, and extending their knowledge on general sub¬
jects, by a series of cheap publications, which have obtained a very wide circulation.
The good that has been effected in this way is incredible; and the indomitable in¬
dustry of this one man has been the means of stirring vip many more to labour in
tlie cause, and has brought out results that even the most sanguine could hardly have
anticipated. To show my readers that earnest work, and the power it carries with
it, is not confined to the peaceful arts, I need only refer them to Mr Kaye's new
book, " Lives of Indian Officers," where men of obscure birth, and without the aid
of patronage, have attained the highest pinnacle of military fame, and have displayed
all the virtues that should adorn the Christian, and in both characters will leave
a name behind them that ought to rouse the ambition in the breasts of our rising
youth, to " go and do likewise." The present century has also on its roll the names
of many good and noble women whose work has contributed in no slight degree to
the relief of distress, and the promotion of worthy aims and objects. A Florence
Nightingale, an Elizabeth Fry, and many others less known to fame, are proofs of
what their sex is capable, whilst, in the ranks of literature, we are indebted to
the female pen for much that is instructive, and calculated to shed a beneficial
influence. Here is an entry in the diary of Mrs Fry, whilst still a mere girl,
" Never lose any time ; I do not think that lost which is spent in amusement or
recreation sometime every day ; but always be in the habit of being employed."
I cannot do better than conclude this paper with a quotation from a memoir of
THE   ATTEMPT. 233
her life, which brings out more clearly my meaning than any words of mine can
do :—" ' Woman's Mission ' has become almost a word of the day. Elizabeth Fry
was persuaded that every woman has her individual vocation, and in following it,
that she would fulfil her ma'ssion. She laid great stress on the outward circumstances
of life; how and where 2^i"0videntially placed—the opportunities afforded—the
powers given. She desired to have every home duty accomplished, every household
affection met; but reason and scrijature taught her tliat each individual has some¬
thing to bestow, either of time, or talent, or wealth, which, spent in the service of
others, would return in blessing on herself and on her own family." Alma.
" Ye Autumn leaves ! that from your parent tree
With rustling sound the summer's requiem sing,
How does your mournful melody
Make answer to the golden beam.
Glittering above ye like a dream
Of youth and spring t"
" Thy light can ne'er again restore the hour
When our fresh beauty opened to thy ray,
It has alone the mournful power
The memory of the past to wake,
And for tliat hallowed memory's sake,
To gild decay."
" Yet, lovely leaves, yet you are blest.
The sun that gleams upon your rest
Gleamed on your early day •
The darkness of a love obscured
Can never be by you endured,
Your sun has never set.
Then, gently to the earth descend.
Cheered by that true and constant friend,
Who never failed you yet." E. H. S.
2 G
234 THE  ATTEMfT.
Sowfu.
PAPER II.
As we gradually emerge from the immediate circle of our own homes, and enter
the arena of the world, we meet with such a complex variety of character, that some
of us are a little surprised, and not altogether pleased, with our new experience.
Possibly we had pictured to ourselves some vast Elysium, where we could be free
from all such petty annoyances and vexations as had been wont to haunt us in the
hitherto limited sphere where we had seemed constantly to come in disagreeable con¬
tact with the humours and fancies of our companions. With others, perhaps, their
lirst ideas of the world were as of a troubled sea ; one which must be crossed, but
only of necessity, not of free choice. That there is no escape from this voyage is
certain, and the sooner we set about training ourselves by past, and for future ex¬
perience, the better.
All men are brethren : deny it or not as we may, each forms a part of the
mighty whole, and we can no more be independent of one another than are cause and
effect. We enter upon life at first as weak, unconscious infants, dependent upon
others for life and support. Scarcely less so are we, whether directly or indirectly,
during the whole period of our lives. Not an article of food or clothing, of neces¬
sity or luxury, but must have passed through other human hands than our own.
Little, perhaps, can we realize the hard work, and, possibly, cruel strijies, under which
our sugar and cotton have been cultivated ; or, the wild hills and prairies, where the
huntsman has risked life and limb in the pursuit of animals whose fur serves to pro¬
tect us from winter's cold.
Descending from such more indirect connection, we all must feel our mutual
reliance on one another at home and in social intercourse. Whether we will it or
no, we are each respectively our brother's keeper, and are to some extent responsible
for him—responsible, that is, for the amount and kind of interest we exert.
" The evil that men Jo, lives after them."
So also do we say, in spite of Shakspeare's assertion to the contrary, does the good.
Footprints, of whatever sort, must be left on the sands of time ; and yet, to judge by
the conduct of a large majority of those we meet with ui society, how few seem
practically to acknowledge this !    If they did, how different often would be the ac-
THE   ATTEMPT. 235
quaintances and friendships formed ! The era of the entrance upon a first friendship
is a most momentous one, and is a step which may influence our whole future career.
Not lightly, then, seeing our character is so much at stake, should such a relationship
be formed. Friends must often, however unconsciously, imitate qualities which they
admire in each other, and woe betide us if our example and counsellor is ill-
chosen !
" Men, like some musical instruments, are set to each other, so that vibrations and notes excited
in one, raise correspondent notes and vibrations in the others."
It is not to the nearest of kin that we can always, or even most often, look for our
dearest friends, for the very plain reason that in one family there are frequently
such discords of temperament (if one may be allowed the expression), that any thing
beyond the instinctive love which mother Nature has implanted is not to be looked
for. It is just in the company of those persons with whom we are in daily inter¬
course that it is often most difficult to feel amiable : it is all very well talking of the
bonds of consanguinity as being the closest, but there are often fiery domestic trials
to thwart us. Not for a moment would we depreciate family affection, or seem
utterly to disbelieve in it—it does exist, and is a rare and beautiful jewel, to be trea¬
sured and prized beyond calculation when found, only it is not to be looked for in
every case. The instinctive love of relations is something quite apart from that we
bestow upon chosen friends. We could all quote many instances of those whose
nearest relations, if they were not such, would be anything but friends, simply
because the two natures do not draw to each other—are not tuned in the same
key.
To those who are capable of forming and sustaining a true friendship, what a
field for the exercise of many of the noblest virtues it opens up ! Let esteem be its
foundation, and the bright star of love will seldom wane. A generous confidence in
each other, unprompted by self-interest and untainted by suspicion or mistrust, will
guide friends, hand in hand, through the world, enjoying all the highest pleasures of
which our natures are capable. For, to maintain our rectitude in the world, what
virtues are there, the exercise of which are uncalled for 1 Sincerity and honesty;
consistency between our words and actions ; only by such can we have any assur¬
ance of mutual ti-ust and confidence—these last are the chief tests and charms of
friendship. We need scarcely mention unselfishness, indeed, the practice of this is
its own reward. The denying ourselves for, or the doing of a service to one we love
as a second self, is but indulging our own fondest longings, for what greater pleasure
236 THE  ATTEMPT.
can we give ourselves, than that of being the means of causing our dearest to rejoice ?
The love of tmth, too, is involved in the word " friendship," and a severe enough test
it is put to sometimes, when it comes to be exercised in the passing of judgment
upon, or giving advice to our friend. This is one of the mutual privileges entailed
in such a connection, and is one of its most delicate duties. We do not believe in
Cupid's blindness ; natxirally, the more we see of a person, the more we must come
to know of faults as well as of virtues ; but if friendship once formed is to be thus
easily damped, it must have been from the first of a romantic and Quixotic tendency.
We generally admire a person for the possession of some quality, in which we
ourselves are deficient, it being most probable that each individual failing in one of
the parties will find its counteracting virtue in the other; following, as a matter of
course, that such an interchange tends to the perfection of both characters.
A certain amount of reserve is, of course, necessary in all social intercourse, but
so small need it be hetween friends that we need scarce impress it upon them.
Tolerance, charity, and forgiveness, too, are verily noble dispositions, and all are
required to carry us throiigh life. The last-mentioned is perhaps among the most
difficult to define or limit—for discreet limit there certainly can be even to a vir¬
tue—carried to excess, there is a possible approach to vice, or, at any rate, to weak¬
ness.
For what piirpose was law—whether divine or human—given, if not to main¬
tain our perfect right ? If these are invaded, we must appeal to justice. When an
injxiry, however, is merely personal, or entails no evil on a third party, the good
man will readily forgive, and, if he can, will forget. To banish absolutely from the
memory is not altogether under our control, but this part of the precept we must
understand as the not brooding over, or acting upon, the remembrances of injiirj^.
How far real forgiveness can be carried when the oSence lowers the moral
character of the offender in our eyes, is a difficult question. It can be measured
only by the feeling that what are we that we should judge our brother, or how are
we better than he 1 A moral offence is one against a higher than we, and if His
forgiveness has been sought and obtained, dare we withhold ours ?        Kathleen.
THE   ATTEMPT. 237
BEING  MSS.   TEMPORE  CAROLI   PRIMI.^NOW   FIRST   PUBLISHED,
As I before stated, an interval of two years occurs between the wiiting of the last
letter and the one I am about to transcribe. I have looked most carefully through
the whole mass of MSS., but have entirely failed in finding any epistle, or part of
one, that appears to have been written during this time. I can hardly account for
the fact; for it seems strange that neither Eliot nor Bertram should have been
favoured with some correspondence, at least, from the young secretary, for such a
length of time. Time, however, plays strange freaks with many things ; and it is
not improbable that, by some mishap, a number of letters relating to this period may
have come to grief, and have been lost for ever. Indeed, I think it is rather won¬
derful that so many of them still remain, and are in as good preservation as they
are ; but perhaps the secret is, that Eliot treasured them so much, as having been
written by his dearest friend, and handed them down as heirlooms to his posterity.
But I need not, nor, indeed, must I indulge in so many useless surmises; only
naturally, these old things make one " put one's thinking cap on," and wonder if,
after long years, any antiquary will ever look over, with so much interest and rever¬
ence as I have read these, the long scribbles that my brother Jack sometimes sends
to Frank, or that I write to Bella Odell, or Captain Marston's wife 1 I am afraid
not,—but I think, if we anticipated such a future for our epistles, we should not
make them quite so silly and gossipping.
If you want to know what took place in England from 1639 to 1G41, I think
you had better take down your Hume, and find it out; for it would take me too
long to give you a slight abstract, as I at first meant to do, after all this chattering,
so I must premise, either that you know it without the telling, or that you will take
care to know, if you do not yet; so now for our secretary's budget!
" From Hubert Willoughbie, sometyme of Willoughbie Manor, in ye countie of
Gloucester, gentln., now of Whitehall, in ye citye of London, to Bertram Wil¬
loughbie, of ye aforesayd manor and countie, gentlii.—these :—
Righte deare Friende and Cousine, Bertram Willoughbie,
I shoulde have
sooner fulfilled arighte my promise made unto thee, when thoue did'st depart from
Wliitehall, to let thee know how went matters concerning my lord Strafibrd, had I not
238 THE   ATTEMPT.
beene fulle weUe occupied ia businesse touching this same affaire, soe that small
tyme have I had for mine owne private matters. And.of a suretie it is goode that
it shoulde have thus happed; for had I beene left alone to mine owne companion-
shippe, I shoulde have had but sorrie cheere—soe greatlie have I missed thee, Ber¬
tram, shorte tyme as thou did'ste staye with me ; but verilie I have done littel save
writing and reading of letters, petitions, and ye lyke, since laste I saw thee. My
hearte hath been greatlie gladdened by a siglite of thee, an it were but one short
seven days; for thou knowest I love thee well; and I tliynke, too, that thy heai-te
doth cleave untoe me.
But I have not yet sayd thee aughte concerning those greate doings which
of late have deeplie stirred everie English hearte; doings, trust me, friende Bertram,
that are but as yet ye small sproutings of a mightie harvest yet to be I'eaped—ye
firste brighte sparkes of a wondrous hotte fyer that shall ere long breake forthe, and
consume with its exceeding heate and fiercenesse all that tissue of—nay, cousine, I
will say no more, for in these dayes one muste in sooth be carefulle, for a man can
scarce call his head his owne in these stormie dayes; and although Hubert Wil-
loiighbie's head may not be of muche worthe in ye eyes of ye worlde, yet to himselfe
it verilie is greatlie precious, and he coulde not welle lose it with comforte or happi-
nesse vmtoe himselfe. "Welle, friende Bertram—when thoix did'st leave me, my lord
StrafFoi-d was a lieing in ye Tower, and awayting his tiyal in ye greate hall at
Westminster; and certes, he had some reason to feare somewhat that same tryal,
for ye Commons did greatlie hate him, as having counselled ye kinge againste ye
liberties of his subjects, and, as they doe maintaine, conspix-ed against ye Commons'
house, and made himselfe amenable untoe ye pxinishment for liigh treason by lawe.
Bertram, I saye noughte one way or other ; my loi-d Straffoi-d hath been a gobde
fi-iende ixntoe me, in getting me mine office in "Whitehall, as my lord Saxford did
aske him ; and he trulie is a vei-rie coxirteous gentlemen, and for manie things I doe
lyke him welle as a man—but not as a coxxnsellor for ye weal of this people ; yet doe
I greatlie pitie him, and am of a truth sorrie for his fate. And heai-ken—Bertram,
I will tell thee what I woxxlde not have thee tell agayne—I knowe not if I can veiTie
long stop at "Whitehall, for mine own conscience alloweth not those thinges which ye
kinge doeth; and I thynke, too, that some one or two of those about me sxxspect me
that I am not altogether a loyal subject; soe had I better get myselfe into shelter
before ye storm doth burste; yet will it be difficult to leave "Whitehall, and not be
accused of complicitie with ye Commons' pax-tie.
It did soe chance that I was in "Westminster Hall during some parte of my lord
THE   ATTEMPT. 239
Strafford's tryal; and I tell thee, Bertram, that when he did make his defence, I never
hearde aught that coulde equal it, for beautie, for grace, for reason, or for temper—
and that muste have been hard hearte indeede that did not feel pitie and admiration
for soe gallant a gentleman, traitor though they say he be. I did carefullie watch his
Majestie's face while ye Earle did speake ; and in sooth, ye kinge was moved untoe
his hearte's core, as was also ye queene, and manie others of ye Courte there assem¬
bled. Yet I coulde not but thynke, as my lord did speake, oh that he were but with
ye people, what goode partisan he woulde be, what goode for Englande mighte
he doe.
I woulde gladlie tell thee more, but tyme woulde faile me to say all concerning
this matter. Let me tell thee, in brief, how hath it ended—for it is indeede all ended
nowe, and never more will Thomas Wentworth trouble kinge, or lords, or commons—
his star hath set in dawnlesse nighte. An the tryal had gone on in ye Westminster
Hall, none knowes but that he mighte have escaped from ye anger of ye Commons,
soe manie friendes had he made untoe himselfe ; but ye leaders of ye people's partie
woulde fayne prevente suche thinge ; therefore did they propose to bring againste him
a bill of attaynder. Masters Hampden and Pym did not lyke this, and woulde wil-
linglie have proven the charges by impeachment; but their voices were uselesse
among ye numbers of those who did thirste for lord Strafford's blood. My lord
Falkland, whom I always opined did love welle ye kinge and his partie, hath verrie
greatlie ayded to j^ass this bill of attaynder : therefore may ye other side thynke
they have secured a great help untoe them; but I had always thoughte that he
woulde have stoode a faste and firme friende untoe my lord Strafford.
Welle, cousine Bertram, after manie rebuffs, and much voting, and quarrelling,
and manie speeches, and petitions, ye bill of attaynder was passed, this last seventh
daye of May ; and no sooner did ye people knowe what had happed, than they did
come together most clamourouslie, rounde this same Whitehall, crying for justice on
ye traytor Strafford, as they did call him. And verilie, King Charles coulde not frame
his minde either to one thinge or another ; he feared muche to offend ye people, and
yet did his hearte yearne untoe his friende of former yeares ; soe was he painfullie
perplext, and knewe not what to doe for ye beste. And nowe I muste tell thee of
a wonderfulle acte of my lord Strafford's ; I thynke not that there hath ever beene one
lyke untoe it; and it verilie was a noble acte too. My lord Strafford did write a
letter unto ye kinge, his royal master, begging of him to assent unto ye bill, and
soe to put an end untoe his lyfe, for ye people's peace and his owne ; however unfor¬
tunate he mighte have beene, yet still was he innocente, he sayd, of ye charges
240 THE   ATTEMPT.
broughte againste him ; yet it were better for ye people's good that his lyfe shoulde
be given uppe.
Soe at laste did Kinge Charles agree unto ye bill; soe was Wentworth's death
devised and broughte aboute. Yet I thyuke that he was somewhat disappointed
that ye kinge did agree untoe it; for I thynke that he had some thoughte that at ye
laste, ayde mighte have come.
Onlie three days had he given untoe him to prepare himselfe for his death, al¬
though Charles did greatlie entreate ye Peers, and ye Commons, too, that they woulde
grant him some delay. But they woulde not; so on ye twelfth day of May did my
lord Strafford meete his death with true fortitude and courage, soe as becometh an
English gentleman of noble name, and, whatever may be sayd else, noble minde, too.
On Tower Hill he layd his head upon ye blocke, and one blow did ende his Ijrfe.
Thus, Bertram, cndeth my lord Strafford ; let us fayne hope that, as Will Shakespeare
woulde have sayd, after lyfe's fitfull fever, he sleepes well. And nowe that hath ye
kinge done this, he must indeede doe manie other thinges he woulde fayne not have
done ; he hath pulhid out ye firste stone out of ye mill-dam ; and he muste look to
himselfe that ye rushing waters doe not sweepe him away from ye face of his fayi-e
kingdom of Englandc.
And nowe, Bertram, to turne untoe lighter matters—I woulde fayne knowe how
waggeth ye world at Willoughbie Manor, and concerning thee, and mine uncle, and
my brother Edgar. Bertram Willoughbie, I charge thee on thy lyfe, that thou let
test not this epistle of mine fall into ye hands of anie kin of thine or mine; for, by
my soul's honour, it woulde indeede be the verrie baddest thinge that coulde by anie
chance befall untoe thee and me. Not soe muche uutoe me, for I know mine uncle,
thy father, doth not regarde me with verrie greate excesse of loving-kinduesse alreadie,
good coz. ; but an he founde that his sonne, his owne youngest and dearlie-loved
Bertram, did hold and receive such traitorous communication from so pestilent a
fellow as he accounteth Hubert to be—by my halidom, thou knowest I speake but
truth when I say, that never a crowne of his silver woulde agayne crosse thy palm,
nor thy head lie imder his roofe one nighte agayne. Nay, deare friende, goode
cousine, be not aiigrie with me for that I doe soe speake of thy father; but thou
knowest he Idveth me not j and that, muche as he loveth thee, yet still more doth
he love ye honour of Willoughbie, as an house that hath been ever loyal and true
to ye kinge and ye crowne, and, if he hath oughte to doe with it, ever shall be.
Mas Alta.
[7*0 he continued.^
THE   ATTEMPT. 241
iss djatkeraii's Marhs.
(the village on the cliff.)
One can trace a more experienced writer in " The Village on the Cliff"" than in
" Elizabeth." The author has trusted herself more to give way to poetic thought, to
give out her own feelings ; she seems to have come more pei'sonally forward than in
her last. The pictures in " Elizabeth" are more like etchings ; here they are filled
up. One cannot read a page without being struck with the gentle, loving truthful¬
ness of the pen that has written it, while here and there come in little humorous
touches, as if to relieve its melancholy.
Miss Thackeray has shown great talent in giving us a heroine so completely
different from her last—differing in appearance and style, but still more in character.
Shy, sensitive, imaginative Catherine is not only a nobler, but a stronger woman
than Elizabeth. Do not let us, however, be too hard on poor Elizabeth ; hers had
been a gay, frivolous, neglected youth, whilst Catherine had been educated in the
hard, necessitous school of adversity. Our authoress has quite a peculiar knack of
making us love her heroines—they are so delightfully naive and original, and yet so
wondei'fully true to human nature. There is another in this story who may dispute
the palm of heroineship with Catherine—viz., Reine Chretien, the proud, queen-like
peasant girl of Normandy, for again the story is principally laid in France, though
this time in a small provincial town on the coast of Normandy.
There is a little glimpse of London life in the beginning, told in an easy, simple
way, with a little vein of good-humoured satii-e running through it. Very good-
humoured satire it is,—more at the conventionalities and world ideas to which the
people were slaves, than at the people themselves ; while, with that benevolent ima¬
gination we so often observe in the authoress, she allows a little spice of sentiment,
and real love, even, amongst those rich, comfortable, unromantic people.
How naturally is that five o'clock tea described, in the studio overlooking the
river, with its strange, grotesque furnishing, and the children, and the flowers, and
the pictures, and the impassioned music pouring itself into the happy Catherine's ear,
whilst to the other Catherine it seemed to be telling wondrous tales, which, from her
sympathy, made her feel doubly in love.   Poor little Catherine ! it was her lot to be
alone during all her sad life ; alone in the gloomy London house, alone iii the gay
French household, where she was only tolerated, and more than all, alone with her
little French husband, so unlike her, so different in tastes, habits, everything.
2 H
242 THE  ATTEMPT.
Dick Butler is not a hero any more than Sir John Dampier; but he is, at least, an
unworldly, unselfish young man,—kind, gay, and loyal. That to Catheiine he seemed
a hero, a Sir Geraint, an impersonification of all that was grand and knightly, was not
to be wondered at, for she was full of romance, and never met any one in whom she
could personify it; but he must, indeed, have been good and noble for Eeine the
magnificent to love him as she did.
I think the strongest feeling, in reading this book, is pity for poor little Cathe¬
rine. We feel for Heine, too, for she suffered bitterly ; but she is stronger, more able
to stand against the storm ; besides which, her sorrows were greatly fostered in her
own heart; whilst little Catherine, tossed about by circumstances, is so weak and de¬
fenceless. It is not that any one wished Catherine evil, or was ever unkind to her,
but she always felt herself in the way, till, in a sort of despair, she marries the polite,
French maire, the only person who seemed to love her.
She was very silly and weak, no doubt; but having once submitted to let fate's
waves roll over her, she bore her prickly lot bravely, and uncomplainingly. And
it was worse than a hard lot, that weary, monotonous one, that came to her; all her
bright dreams condensed into a little chalet, with a prim garden, playing whist all
afternoon with a snuffy old couple, and, in the interim, playing the piano, with her
kind, but strangely eccentric husband playing the cornet, out of all time and tune,
as an accompaniment.
But gladly and eagerly she claims him as a protector, even against her own
heart. When immediately after her hurried engagement, doubting and disquieted,
she rushes to Reine for counsel, and looking through the window, sees her speaking
to Dick, she, as if i^ursued by the ghost of her old love, turns, and hurries along
the beach ; how ludicrously contrasted must the little Frenchman have appeared,
coming towards her with his newspaper in his hand, and bowing so politely as
he conducted her to the chateau ! And yet, even then, she began to feel him a
protector.
" Butler was alone on the terrace, smoking a cigar, when they came back. When ho saw them,
he got up and came to meet them. He looked a little cm-ious, a little languid, and slightly senti¬
mental. ' Why did you go away V he said ; ' I rushed out to call you, Miss George, but you would
have nothing to do with us.'
' I—I did not want to stop just then,' she said, hastily.    He had recognised her then.
She tximed to Fontaine in a confused sort of way, and called him to her. ' Charles,' she said,
calling him by his Christian name for the first time, ' Have you, will you,'—the words died away; but
after that first moment she was quite outwardly calm again. Butler had recognised her then. She
made a great effort.    She spoke quietly and indifferently, whilst, to herself she said, passionately,
THE   ATTEMPT. 243
that at least he could not read her heart. She had taken her resolution, she would abide by it.
Eeine, in her place, would have done differently. Catherine was doing wrong, perhaps, but with no
evil intent—she was false, with a single heart.
She thought there was no other solution to her small perplexities than this desperate one she had
taken. If she had been older, she would have been wiser. Wait,—that is the answer to most sorrows,
to most troubled consciences. But how can one believe in this, when one has not waited for anything?
Some one says, very wisely and touchingly, ' To the old sorrow is sorrow, to the yoxuig sorrow is
despair.' What other interpretation may there not be hidden beneath the dark veil to those who can
see from afar ? "
Fontaine is one of the best drawn characters in the book—we seem to know
him so well, with his odd, childish ways, and kind, simple heart, and that extra
filial devotion of which only a Frenchman is capable, which made him so humbly
submissive to the old father and mother of his first wife. He loved his little
English wife dearly, and she, too, as she begins to fathom his love, strives to return
it; and her old love dies gi'adually away, as is seen the first time they meet.
" She seemed unaffectedly glad to see him, as, indeed, she was; and it was with an innocent
womanly triumph that she felt she could welcome him in her own house for the first time. The time
had come, she told herself, when she could hold out her hand and be of help to him, and show him
how truly and sincerely she was his friend. It was all she had ever dared to hope for, and the time
had come at last. Perhaps, if she had been less humble, less smgle-minded, and inexperienced in the
ways of the world, she might have been more conscious, more careful, more afraid ; but the fresh,
crisp winter sun was illuminating her world ; everything seemed to speak to her of hope, promise,
courage,—and the dead thorn had ceased to wound."
But it was not till she had lost her Irasband for ever, till that terrible tragedy
on the sea-shore had been enacted, that she felt all he had been to her. How
vividly all that sad day is brought before us, we feel as though we had lived it with
her. The visit to the convent at Caen, where Heine is in retreat, the air heavy
with the coming storm, the solemn sadness of the convent, the small incidents, such
as the passing through the hospital, the dark weary eyes looking wp from the
restless couch, the curtains of the bed drawn, the coffin in the chapel, the funeral
procession,—all combine to make us feel more the strange eerie feeling of apprehen¬
sion which Catherine must have experienced that day. The glimpse into the
convent chapel is one of Miss Thackeray's most beautiful pictures. The curtain
lifted, the flood of yellow light pouring into the chapel through the western window,
the great black tomb, the white nuns kneeling motionless round it; outside in the
world, the bright, beautiful Catherine and her husband, and the sad, subdued
Catherine standing by her old love, calm and contented, trusting that what is, is
best; while from amongst the calm-eyed nuns, one glances out with a storm of rage
244 THE  ATTEMPT.
and jealousy in her heart.    Poor Heine, we pity rather than condemn her, for she
struggled hard against that one infirmity of her nature—Jealous mistrust.
" Certain combinations, which, at one time, to some people, seem utterly shifting and un¬
meaning, to others are, as it were, stamped and arrested for ever in their minds. A certain set of
emotions have led up to them, a certain result follows."
So Miss Thackeray pleads for Reine, and shows how, what to others appeared
natural, from her point of view, and ia her state of mind, was striking, and brought
out latent fear and doubt which she had tried to smother.
Then follows the wonderfully graphic description of the night in the storm ; the
consternation of the little fishing village, as, through the tempest of rain, they
watched the little boat trying for the harbour; then the quick, sudden accident, and
then the little widow alone in her grief. Hers was, indeed, a sad life ; in the begin¬
ning one wishes a Miss Dampier might appear to make all right—^but it was better
as it was. And finishing, one is not troubled with the haunting fear, that in looking
forward from the beginning might have come to one, of an unfulfilled destiny, of the
possibility, as it were, of missing one's life. Catherine did not miss her life, if the
aim of life is, to make one nobler, purer, and more heavenly-minded; and she did not
even miss her share of human happiness, for she had the undivided love of one
tender heart.
I have not said much of Reine, the beautiful, interesting fermiere; but it
seems as though little could be said in this short sketch; or of Dick either, or of
Madame de Tracy, or Madame Mirard, or of one half of the characters, which, however
little they appear, are yet so distinct in their individuality.
The writing of this story is very delightful,—so graphic and interesting, and yet
full of strange poetic pathos. Nature is made a vivid personality; and there is
hardly an incident in which the whole outward surroundings of the scene are not
described : as if to bring it distinctly before our gaze, omitting no trivial circum¬
stance, no stray word which might have influence in balancing the reader's mind.
Those who dislike pre-Raphaelistic writing, may find it too descriptive, for the writer
spares no trouble in trying to bring the most insignificant personage clearly before
us, in describing scenes which have no real bearing on the tale, more than as they
make us enter more fully, not only into the outer bearings, but the inner feelings of
the actors.
It is hinted that there is a story at present appearing in the Comhill Magazine
from the same delicate pen; if this be true, and if it be but one-half so delightful as
either of her others, it will well be worth the trouble of reading. Enai.
THE  ATTEMPT. 245
^i Mmi^n.
" Rather a hackneyed subject," you will say, my reader; and I must acknow¬
ledge you are right. Scarcely a day passes that we do not discuss the subject in all
its bearings, often two or three times in the course of the four-and-twenty hours;
rarely do we meet an old acquaintance, or make a new one, that we do not hasten to
state our own opinion, and discover his, upon the all-engrossing topic, as if it were
one which we have the deepest satisfaction in discussing ; while, in reality, we, for
the most part (I know, I speak for myself), hate " weather conversation " from the
depths of our hearts. Oh, the all-absorbing, overpowei'ing weariness of saying and
hearing what a fine day it is, and what a heavy shower that was yesterday, and what
high wind we had on Monday, and if this sunshine will only last a day or two
longer what a benefit it will be for the country ! and how very apt you are to yield
a full consent to anything your companion may choose to affirm, although, in so doing,
you give the lie direct to some assertion you made youx'self not two minutes before !
and how very thankful you are to branch off into any other subject which may hap¬
pen to present itself to your mind ! Therefore, don't be afraid that I am going to
treat you to a resume of the weather we have had this year; and pray don't imagine
that I am going to advance any new, original, and profound meteorological calcula¬
tions and conclusions; and, above all, do not wrong me by supposing that I am
going to try my hand at that most hazardous and unsatisfactory of all trades—that
of a "weather pi'ophet," which generally ends by utterly overthrowing the predictions
of its professors, and covering both them and their disciples with confusion. "Then,
what are you going to say about the weather^" you very naturally inquire. Really,
dear reader*, I don't know ! I entreat your forbearance and clemency in the per-
2^1exities of my present position. Here I am in the country, enjoying every sort of
rural felicity, and thoroughly indisposed for any sort of work; but when a rainy day
brings some leisure time, I feel that it is my duty to take to the pen ; but instantly
the grand difficulty j^resents itself: what am I to write about ? l^have not seen a
newspaper for six weeks, and feel utterly in the dark with x-egard to the topics of
the day ; I never could write a rhapsody on the beauties of the country; I
have the deepest interest and admiration for ruined abbeys and castles, but I could
say nothing about them which has not been a thousand times better said by some
one else ; pic-nics, croquet, and archery parties are charming in themselves, and good
subjects for an essay when skilfully handled, bixt when I attenii^t anything of the
246 THE  ATTEMPT.
sort, I am speedily brought to a standstill by a sense that I am becoming too per¬
sonal ; then I do not think that treatises on driving, haymaking, jam-making,
gardening, rabbits, or pujjpies would be either suitable for the pages of the
"Attempt," or acceptable to its readers; and having thus exhausted the list of
our present occupations and amusements, I find that the rain has stopped, that we
are going out for a drive, and that composition is at an end for that day. My
troubles, too, are very much increased by the persecutions of my friends who sub¬
scribe to our magazine, who are constantly entreating me to "try to be funny." Oh,
if they had the least idea of the misery of "trying to be funny" when you don't feel
inclined for it, or of the exceeding dullness of all " fun " which is not spontaneous, I
think they would be more merciful! However, at present, write I must, whether
grave or gay, and as I sit longing for a bright idea, it suddenly occurs to me to
wonder if I could not say something upon the subject of our daily conversation, of
our constant hopes and fears, our nightly aspii-ations, and—I regret to add—our
frequent abuse, the weather ?—and " The Weather " is written at the top of the
page before I well know what I am to say about it.
It is raining hard, so I naturally think first of rainy weather. I don't know a
severer trial of people's tempers and capabilities than a long wet day in a country
house. Breakfast is prolonged to the utmost limits of possibility; still it must come
to an end sometime, and then you are thrown on your own resources. I must
acknowledge, for my own part, that I seldom have experienced the ennui I have
pitied in others during a rainy day; for between reading and writing, sewing and
music, the time goes quickly enough, and I have often been glad of a wet afternoon
to clear off arrears of letter-writing, mending, &c. But there are many young ladies
whose only idea of reading is the novels of Trollope and Miss Bi-addon; of imrh,
an easy pattern in tatting ; and of conversation, the fashions, and the " local intelli¬
gence ;" to them a rainy day is no trifling misfortune, but a real and serious trial;
and I have often wondered at, envied, and admired the serene good humour with
which they endured the affliction, and disguised the weariness which was preyiag on
them. But the two " types " of mankind on whom a rainy day in the country falls
heaviest, are boys and " business men " out for a holiday. Young men, in these
present days of intellectual pressure, have generally hard reading to occupy them for
a considerable portion of the day, and, for the most part, they have many ways of
amusing themselves ; so, though they always grumble, they are upon the whole not
much to be pitied. But the professional man, somewhat advanced in life, who has
come out to some Highland glen, or Lowland farm, or sea-side villa, or country
THE  ATTEMPT. 247
mansion, for a few days of rest and country air, and who finds himself a prisoner
amidst driving storms of rain, is indeed a fitting object of compassion.      " His
occupation's gone," and he cannot find a substitute for it; having mastered the con¬
tents of the newspaper, and of one or two periodicals, he is thoroughly tired of
reading; for it is not easy to break through in a day the confirmed habit of years,
and sit down to pursue, as an employment, that which you have long regarded as an
amusement merely; pen, ink, and paper are an abhorrence to him; was it not to
obtain a holiday from them and their accompaniments that he came to the country 1
He tries his hand at billiards with the younger men, but his hand has forgot its
cunning, and he retires from the contest disgusted with his own want of skill.    He
cannot occupy himself, like his juniors, in preparations, which will enable them to
make up for lost time when the weather takes a turn for the better, such as cleaning
their guns, oiling their golf-clubs, getting their  fishing-tackle  in  order;   he  sits
looking and listening, and perhaps acknowledging with a sigh, that " the days of our
youth are the days of our glory ;" and thankful, indeed, is he when dinner-time arrives,
accompanied and followed by genial conversation, bright fires and brighter faces, a song
from the gii-ls in the evening, or, perhaps, a quiet rubber of whist; after which he retires
to rest, three times more wearied than after the hardest day's work of the past year.
But the boys—what words can convey an idea of the sufierings they experi¬
ence and cause on a wet day in the country 1    I cannot imagine a more miser¬
able, that is, undeservedly miserable, animal (as regards his mental feelings) than
a boy from eight to fourteen years of age imder the above circumstances.    He comes
down in the morning, and  rattles on the barometer as if it were a tambourine,
apparently convinced that if by some extraordinary exertion of brute force he can
cause the marker to ascend, the weather will be all right immediately.   After break¬
fast he stands, with his hands in his pockets,  looking  out of  the window, and
whistling an air intended to be cheerful, for about an hour, when he suddenly be¬
comes possessed with the delusion that it is going to fair, and dashes out of the
house, but is captured by his " big brother," and brought back to durance vile.    The
big brother volunteers to give him some work to keep him out of mischief; they are
accordingly closeted together in the study for a considerable time, at the end of
which they emerge, looking much heated and excited, dishevelled as to the hair, and
disordered as to the shirt-collars, to use a classical form of expression.    The elder
brother has been inflexible and severe, the younger contumacious and impertinent,
and neither seems to have derived much benefit from the morning's study.    If our
young friend happens to have brothers or companions about his own age, they will
248 THE  ATTEMPT.
in all probability have recourse to such athletic sports as can be carried on in-doors,
for instance, riding on the bannisters, taking daring leaps on the stairs, ■wrestling in
the passages, and climbing out of the attic windows. But these proceedings are
sure, sooner or later, to terminate by breaking a window, or some such casualty, upon
which the culprits are allowed to make theii- escape from a house they have made
too hot to hold them; but they return in an hour or so, drenched and dripping, and
covered with mud, and drive the housemaid frantic by running up-stairs with their
dirty boots on. They invade the drawing-room, putting a stop to all reading or
conversation, knock over their sisters' work boxes, and leave the marks of their
thumbs on all the photograph-books ; and, a burden to themselves and others, they
drag out the remaining hours of the day, until bed-time puts a period to their afflic¬
tion, and they rush up-stairs to forget theii- sorrows in sleep, pausing, however, to
administer a parting rattle to the barometer.
But I have said so much about rainy weather, that a very few words upon
fine weather must suffice. But just picture to yourselves, that after a rainy day
such as I have attempted to describe, you awake next morning and find the rain
gone, and in its place " the clear shining after rain," everything sparkling, and
glistening, and waving in the luxuriance of life and light, the sunlight breaking
through every shade and variety of green, and lighting up flowers of every shape and
hue, the birds singing as if they would sing their very hearts out, and a lovely
landscape lying smiling before you, with a back-ground of dark-blue hills, and you
will confess what a joyous, exhilarating thing fine weather is, and how great is its
effect on the temperament of every one of us. And yet, as I am sure we all must
have known times when from some sorrrow that was weighing on us, or petty
cares that were tonnenting us, or, perhajis, from a discontented, jaundiced frame of
mind into which we had fallen, although nature was looking her loveliest, and all the
outer world was bright, yet
" Our days were sunless, and our nights were moonless,
Parched the pleasant April herbage, and the lark's heart's outbreak tuneless,"
SO I think most of us will acknowledge that the converse of this is true also, and
that it is quite possible to be exceedingly happy in the midst of rain, even of the
most determined and unwelcome character. So just try, next time a wet day shuts
you up in a country house, to make the best of it; to " accept the situation " instead
of bewailing it; to entertain the old gentlemen; and to do all in your power to
alleviate the miseries of the boys, and you will be sui-prised to find how pleasant a wet
day may be made.    And if you should happen to be in company with a persistent
THE   ATTEMPT. 249
and thorough-going grambler, who throws cold water on all your efforts to be
amusing, and will do nothing but abiise the weather, say to him or her, as an ex¬
cellent Irish lady once said to her niece, disappointed of a pic-nic by a pouring day,
and lamenting her lot in peevish speeches, " Do not be so discontented and ungrate¬
ful ; you should be very thankful that you have any weather at all !"
Dido.
^^t Singer to l^is Wxh-
I have searched the earth and the heaven for beauty brilliant and rare—
Beauty that with my roving fancy might compare ;
But now thy hand is in mine, as we sit by the winter fire ;
Better the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire.
Better to gaze afar into the eyes that shine with love,
True and tender and pui-e as the angels' in heaven above.
Than to dream of cloudless orbs like the blue o'er the sky-lit spire ;
Better the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desii-e.
Better thy truth, so womanly, gentle, loving and sweet.
Than the fancied homage of thousands, laid at the singer's feet ;
Better thy whispered words of love than the envied lyre—
Better the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire.
Better the clasp of the little soft hand that is now my own.
Than the visions of courtly greetings that came to me, dreaming alone ;
Better the gentle praise than the cold world's Mammon-hire—
Better the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desii'e.
Better a love that will last in sunny and snowy days,
Than the worship idly sung in the dreamer's idle lays;
Better Heaven's faintest hymn than earth's loftiest poet-choir—
Better the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire.
Yes, my heart's wishes wandered, my life was empty and sad,
But thou hast entered in, and my soul is calm and glad;
Earth's dreams are fading away, but heaven is drawing nigher—
Better the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire. O. M.
2 I
250 the attempt.
Part ii.—Its Dangees.
It is proverbially said, that those who know the least are always most proud of
their knowledge. Perhaps we imagine the application of this saying to be more
extensive than it really is, because the instances in which it is verified are so glaring
that we cannot soon forget them. It is so strange to see a school-boy vain, while a
sage is humble, that we are apt to overlook the amount of modesty which still
remains to the school-boy race. But, making all possible allowances, we cannot
banish from our memory the crowds which rise there unbidden of students whose
slender powers serve them only to ci-iticise their superiors, of persons who know
almost nothing, and who can yet talk fluently on any subject, and of authors who
confidently thrust books upon the public of which they themselves know neither the
aim nor the meaning. The recollection of these but too familiar faces and voices is
surely alarming enough to make us join in the warning cry, " Beware of a little
learning. Dangerous, indeed, must be that which lies at the root of so much
emptiness and folly."
But do these evils really spring from this root ? Are they the results of a little
learning, or simplj'- of the abuse of all learning 1 I am inclined to accept the latter
view, and to think that little knowledge is dangerous only when it is superficial.
" Can it ever fail to be so 1" you ask. " Do not the two expressions imj^ly the same
thing'?" We must confess that they are only too frequently united in particular
cases, but essentially they have nothing in common.
Regular study and accurate information do not, of themselves, create breadth
and depth of intellect, any more than colours and brushes can produce a picture
without the hand of the artist. If they could do so, then was the learned monarch,
who transferred his state from his native Scottish Metropolis to the more coveted
English throne, really the paragon of wisdom he professed to be ; and both contem¬
poraries and writers of our day unite in doing most grievous wrong to this " wisest
fool in Christendom." Yet the school-boy who forgets himself and the progi-ess he
is making, and the lines appointed for him to scan, while he plunges into the beauty
of the open page of Virgil and kindles into enthusiasm for the heroic men of old,
may, in five minutes, drink deeper into both truth and poetry than any mere
worshipper of self or of fame could hope to do in years of study.      The French
THE   ATTEMPT. 251
naturalist who proclaimed himself " a genius equal to the majesty of nature," might
well be shallow with all his vast stores of information. Hugh Millar could not be
so, not even in those early days when the world of books was for the most part shut
to him, when he knew little of the discoveries and opinions of other men, when his
only chance of learning was to pick up fragments that lay at his feet while pursuing
his daily toil.
It is easier to feel where superficial knowledge lies than to point out clearly in
what it consists. But its first token is its unlimited apj^robation of itself There
are few of us, I daresay, who can plead guiltless of having, at times, rated our attain¬
ments far too highly. We can remember, with a smile, some airy pinnacle of vanity
on which we once balanced ourselves, till we felt it tottering, and forsook it for a
second height, as unsubstantial. Well for us, if to this day, some new, flattering
day-dream is not giving confidence to the smile with which we rise superior to our
old delusions. However that may be, these disappointed aspirings were once very
serious matters with us.
We plunged headlong into great undertakings, nothing doubting of our power
to carry all before us, till, suddenly, our steps were hemmed in, and we found our¬
selves unable to advance, and bitterly ashamed to retreat. The Magician's Apprentice
of Goethe's ballad, who, by a magic word set his master's broom to carry water for
him, and discovered too late that he knew no spell to stay the devastating
flood, seems not more ridiculously forlorn than we have sometimes felt ourselves.
The folly of such a position is so oVjvious to us in our saner moments, that we
wonder how we ever came to fall into it. Must our scanty stock of knowledge bear
all the blame ? Scarcely so, for some, who have been truly great, have borne the
impress of their greatness even when their learning was very small, and some of the
truly wise and humble have shrunk, even in childhood, from entertaining false im¬
pressions which would have flattered their pride. We cannot all be great, but we
can all be true and humble.
Experience may often cure this, like other errors; but she does not always do it.
Great progress in science is no certain death-blow to vanity, great learning is not
always humble, though true greatness is so ; and where attainments only foster pride,
the sight is very sad and hopeless. We laugh at the child's conceit, but we grow
disgusted with the egotism of the scholar, and feel pained that he should strain his
powers to the utmost, add fact to fact, and reason to reason, for the mere purpose of
proving to himself and the world what a wonderfully gifted individual he is. The
Indian sees the sun extinguished in the ocean each night, and kindled again in the
252 THE  ATTEMPT.
morning, and he has not learned to doubt the apparent evidence of his senses in
deference to Sir Isaac Newton himself. But he is far less uiu'easonable than the
man of science, who, resting on a few ])artial discoveries, which are continually
being shaken and modified by new facts, proclaims a theory of the origin of earth
and its inhabitants which he resolves to hold fast, though the revelation of the all-
knowing God himself should prove him wrong. Suppose he has discovered facts
which are hard to reconcile with Scripture ! Has nature laid bare to him all her
secrets, so that no unexplored territory remains in which a solution may be sought 1
Has he forgotten what vast regions of wonder may be utterly beyond the power of
man to search at all ? There is none sufficient to pronounce with certainty upon
these things, but the Maker of them all.
We need not wait, then, through years of laborious study, to reach the humility
which is the first step to right knowledge. We may be in the lowliest valley of all,
so that the mountain tops are completely shut out from us, yet, while we can lift our
eyes and see the stars themselves, we dare not complain of a bounded view.
If to gain our own good opinion be too low an aim to seek in the pursuit of
knowledge, how much more mean is it to learn, or make a show of learning, in order
to win the flattery of society,—knowledge shrinks from the rude grasp of those who
would degrade her thus. They need never hope to find her in her native truth and
purity, though they may find a counterfeit which suits their jmrposes as well. The
medal made to glitter upon the breast is not the current coin of the realm.
Another sign of superficial learning is its thoughtlessness ; books and intelligent
conversation are food for thought, but not substitutes for it. They may find us
reasons, but they are not bound to find us an understanding. We must do that for
ourselves. The growth of our mind does not depend mainly on the quantity we
read, but upon the extent to which we cultivate the habit of thinking, and it is
equally possible to think solidly in one short half-hour, and to collect thousands of
facts without reflecting at all. It is very, very hard, I admit, if the half-hour be but
a solitary resting-place in the midst of a busy day, to call our thoughts fz-om trifling
cares and concentrate them on one object. A life of steady, settled attention to some
special subject would, no doubt, be infinitely more favourable to mental culture.
But though we may be tempted to fall into a lazy, shallow style of thinking, we
cannot bo forced into it. We may make veiy slow progress, but if it be in the
right direction, it is not lost. We do not aim at mere acquisition, nor even at the
orderly arrangement of what we acquire, but at an increase of life. We do not want
stones to build up, but sap to  grow by, for the  most  beautifully chiselled  stones
THE   ATTEMPT. 253
produce confusion so long as the palace is incomplete ; but the tiny sapling is perfect
from the fii'st, because it is full of life.
We may detect superficial knowledge by what Carlyle would call its want of
insight. It catches eagerly at accidents and accessories, as if its existence depended
on knowing the sort of coat a great man preferred to wear, or the several items of a
long past treaty, made, like pie-crust, to be broken. Profound knowledge, on the
contrary, goes straight towards the core of its subject, and prizes its details, not for
themselves, but as precious clues by which to gain access to its inner meaning.
Thus, shallow people are apt to attribute tbe Reformation in England to the
matrimonial scandals of bluff King Harry, and fancy that the essence of Scottish
history in the sixteenth century lies in the beauty and misfortune of Mary, Queen
of Scots. They read the story of the French Revolution as a mere chapter of mis¬
haps and misunderstandings. They find many causes for the terrible catastrophe—
the king's indecision ; the queen's want of etiquette ; the false gossip circulated con¬
cerning her and the far-famed diamond necklace ; the intrigues of Philip Egalite ;—
but they do not see tbat these were only fissures in the rock throiigli which the long
pent-up lava found vent at last. They do not see in tlie ridn that followed the con¬
vulsive efibrt of a nation to burn up the intolerable wi-ongs of centuries, nor the
judgment of God upon long arrears of ciime.
No view which does not take in God can be profound, because it can never get
beyond secondary causes. Could we discover all the natural laws in the universe,
without remembering Him who fixed them, we could only stare at the huge, strong,
ever-gi'inding automaton of nature in stupid bewilderment or fear. Could we learn
the world's history completely, and yet recognise no Providence in it, what could we
think of this living, toiling, daring, suffering, dying man 1 Why is his life thus
kindled out of nothing and then quenched again ?
"A monster then, a olream,
A (ILscord.    Dragons of the prime,
That tare each other m their slime,
Were mellow music matched with him."
It is not so. There is a hand that wields the force which quickens nature's pulses,
that nurses the rose-bud into bloom, while it guides the stars in their courses, and
rules in the wildest pages of man's history. We confess this truth, we feel it vividly
at times, yet too often we leave it out of mind in our intellectual pursuits. It is
little wonder if, at such times, the mere outside shell of knowledge should be all we
gain. M. L.
254: THE  ATTEMPT.
0n ^Rti,
In some circles, composed of very excellent peojile, how is it that we cannot be
a day without being rubbed, without having our whole nature jarred 1—-experiencing
this unpleasant sensation, we look around us and examine the component parts of the
gi'oup, but no apparent cause is at first discoverable. All the surrounding members
of society are affectionate and industrious, honest and amusing. What can it be ?
Where is the false note which gives the jangle to the whole tone of their society 1
A little general conversation with them soon solves the difficulty, and we discover
that it is not the presence of a vice but the absence of a vii-tue which causes us this
indefinable discomfort,—and the missing virtue is Tact. The members of the group
are as colours thrown together without harmonising, or as bright flowers mingled
without the softeniug effect of green leaves.
Some people affect to despise tact; they call it polite story-telling and conven¬
tional deceit. But they abuse the word who use it to describe such hateful sins as
these. However, we suspect that it is ouly as to the meaning of the term tact that
people differ, not as to the thing itself, though some may recognise its presence under
a different name. Lest we may be arguing from other premisses than our readers,
let us now put down our definition of the tei'm as follows :—Tact is but the quick
perception of the feelings of others combined with a wish to spare them pain. Now,
it is patent to the most thoughtless person that a keen perception and a good heart
are inestimable treasures, so that, according to our definition, tact will rank among
those blessings without which no person, no home, no society can be ti-uly happy.
When arguments are becoming hot, and voices loud, the presence of but one
person with tiiie tact will often make the bitter sweet without the slightest com¬
promise of truth ; he will soothe the perturbed feelings of the person attacked ; and
with a quick eye perceiving the irritating parts of the controversy, will here make
one person retract some word offensive to some one else, and there explain a phrase
which another has wrongly construed. It may not seem a gi-eat virtue, this smooth¬
ing and sweetening of every day life; it does not stir the heart as deeds of self
sacrifice and valour do ;—but is there not in it more of the patient love, of the charity
wliich hopeth all things, than in these acts done in the heat of the moment or hour
when great peril may have roused a noble impulse 1 But though the sacrifices
which tact calls on us to make are not those of which the flame is seen in the distance,
THE   ATTEMPT. 255
and of which the smoke wreathes above us, yet it is a sacrifice of holy oil poured
upon the stoney path of life.
True tact requii'es an utter forgetfulness of self, a blending of our own desires
and tastes with those of others till we understand their feelings almost as instantane¬
ously as they themselves can do. Yet though tact includes, and in a great measure
is the result of unselfishness, we do not mean to assert that all unselfish people are
possessed of tact. For the most unselfish person may be so wanting in quickness of
perception as to go blundering on in conversation on the most dangerous topics, with¬
out observing the slight indications of discomfort, the mental wince of his companions.
But tact, to a large degree, may be acquired even by a person of the most blunted per¬
ceptions, if he will but endeavour to enlarge his sympathies, to increase his interest
in the tastes of others, and to exercise a certain amount of kind caution in his con¬
versation. Good nature will often supply the place of tact, but not always. The
good-natured man will rise quickly from his comfortable chaii- to lift the book which
has fallen from the hand of his drowsy companion, but the man of tact wUl become
all the more absorbed in his paper till the would-be reader has resumed the book.
Tact makes things go pleasantly at croquet; it prevents discussion from becoming
disagreeable; and should a dispute arise, and be difficult to determine, the person
with tact will refrain from insisting on his opinion at the time, when the excited
players are unwilling to listen to reason, but will wait till the termination of the
game gives him an opportunity of quietly discussing and settling the question at issue
with the most experienced player present. Tact makes the public speaker to be
respected by his opponents, for by an intuitive sense of what words will particularly
annoy his hearers, he, though speaking the truth boldly, will so clothe his arguments
that no offence can be taken by any one.
The philanthropist toiling for the good of the people, devoting the best of his
time and thoughts to their service, is disappointed to see his eftbrts unajipreciated, his
work bear but scanty fruit; and wearied and vexed, he learns at last that strength
and determination will not suffice for the completion of his goods works, but that he
must even relinquish some of his vigorous efibrts, and practise more consideration
for the prejudices of others,—in fact, that half his work performed with tact would
have brought in a rich harvest. People will not be ridden over rough-shod even by
a philanthropist, but must be dealt with as rational beings, whether their claim to
such a title be small or great.
It is very usual to hear people pride themselves on theii' want of tact, as though
it betokened a frank, straight-forward character, which could not conform to social
256
THE   ATTEMPT.
conventionalities. But when we hear such an empty boast, we may feel pretty sure
that there is some selfishness, or, at least, some want of high breeding in the speaker.
Where would be the glory of saying, " We always do exactly as we like, we never
consult the wishes of any one 1" Yet to say we have no tact, is merely to say brieflj^,
" We never consult the feelings of others, we never consider how much our words
may wound them." A man without tact is bad enoiigh, b\it what can be said suffi¬
ciently severe of a woman without this softening virtue 1 A woman without tact
is just such an anomaly of nature as a woman devoid of love for children ; and hav¬
ing likened her to such an one, we think we have painted her in colours sufficiently
black to satisfy the harshest critic.
The influence which is aroused by tact is salutary though sweet. It is tact which
makes the family circle move pleasantly and gently; it is tact which puts the shy
visitor at ease, and keeps the forward from presuming. In truth, tact is just the
finishing grace of a Christian man or woman, and one which is included in the short
commandment laid upon us by the Apostle Pavxl, that we " Be courteous." And he
who gave this precept has left us also the most beavitiful example of the linking
together of uncompromising truth with conciliating gentleness, when, in his famous
address to Agrippa, he boldly yet affisctionately declares—" I would to God that
not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether
such as I am, except these bonds." des Eaux.
FBOM THE GEKJIAN OF STOLLBERG.
In the old paternal halls
Rested Rudolph's hero-arm;
Rudolph, battle-loving knight,
Rudolph, feared by France in fight.
And the Saracenic swai-m.
He, last branch of withered stem,
Wept his son's imtimely fall.
And the echoes of his grief,
Uttered hopeless of relief.
Echoed round the moss-gi'own wall.
Agnes, beauteous, golden-haired.
Was the hoary mourner's stay.
Dove-like, gentle, serpent-wise,
From her aged father's eyes
Kissed she all the tears away.
Ah ! she too wept bitter tears
In her moonlit room alone ;
For her love young Albert burn'd.
And his love the maid returned.
For to him her heart had gone.
THE  ATTEMPT.
257
Horst, a lofty suitor came.
Of a hundred warriors lord.
And with boast of high-born line.
And with conquered banners' shine.
Won the father's friendly word.
Once in open sign of love,
Albert kiss'd the maiden's hand ;
Vainly strove her eyes to frown.
Ah ! the hot tears trickled down,
Till they trembled on her band.
KindHng, Horst a sidelong glance
On his deadly weapon cast.
On his cheek glowed love and ire,
And a gleam of wrathful fire,
From his furious eyes there passed.
Then his glove, with threatening look.
On the maiden's lap he threw.
Bade her lover, for her sake.
From her hands the war-pledge take.
And in wrathful haste withdrew.
Silent, Albert raised the pledge.
And from Agnes' presence rode.
Glad the sparkling tears to view.
From those eyes of deepest blue.
From esteem and love that flowed.
E-uddy gleamed the armour bright.
In the light of dying day.
From his flying feet each steed.
Spurned the earth in eager speed.
Frightened fled the stags away.
Sadly from her casement high,
Agnes all the conflict eyed.
Saw the furbished weapons gleam,
Saw, as in a horrid dream,
Albert siiik—then sank and died.
Fearing vengeance, on in haste,
Horst his foam-flecked charger spurred.
Hears the wail for Agnes rise.
Seeks the chamber Avhere she lies,
There his life-blood dyes his sword.
Rudolf, in his tender arms
Clasp'd the maid's cold form of clay.
Two long days he held her so.
Not a sign betrayed his woe.
Till he breathed his soul away.
Meigeag Bheag.
2 K
258 THE  ATTEMPT.
Ilntn'f's incites;
BEING  MSS.   TEMPOKE   CAEOLI   PRIMI. NOW   FIRST   PUBLISHED,
" My goode Bei-tram, thou Avilt doubtlesse wonder that I did soe suddenlie leave
unfinished ye laste parte of mine epistle ; but a messenger did juste then come from
my lord Saxford, demanding mine instant presence with him, on matters of greate
importe ; soe had I to laye by my pen, and goe untoe my lord, verrie loath to quite
my talke untoe thee—for I had welle-nighe forgot that I was but writing uutoe
thee, and did almoste imagine myselfe to be speaking untoe thee face to face. And
even now I cannot telle when I may be agayne required ; I hear much noyse of
voices not verrie farre off, and I muste hasten to close mine epistle, or I may lose
this chance of sending it;—a nephew of Master Francis Egerton, of Cotiswoode House,
is a-going downe to visit his uncle ; and I doe know him a littel; soe hath he moste
courteouslie offered to carrie for me anie message or letter I desire to sende untoe
Gloucester; and he hath promised to be verrie carefulle how he doth deliver this
untoe you. He is a nghte goode fellowe, this Arthur Egerton ; he will, I doe not
feare me, be soone goode friendes with you, an you will it yourselfe as welle.
Hast thou hearde of late, tydings of thy brother Richard 1 How lyketh he ye
Coui'to of France 1 I conceive that it doth welle suit with his humour, and he is gay
and happie enough there. Richard is a goode fellowe, and I lyke him welle ; he
hath ever beenc kinde untoe me ; and I wish him welle for it. An it come to drawn
swords here, which syde thynkest thou he will espouse ? I hardlie thj^nke he careth
soe muche for ye Kinge's Majestie that he woulde risk his lyfe and fortune in his
favour; moniehe woulde give, willinglie and freelie, I am sure j yet woulde he rather
not chance losing's head and Willoughbie Manor. Readie he ever is, and ever will be,
to toss off a goode flagon of sack or canary to ye health of our CMaiies; but to doe
more—I doubte me. I suppose he will take to wyfe some French Popish damsel,
some Marie or Marguerite, and bring her over untoe Willoughbie, to astonish and
disguste Gaffer and Giles, and sette all Gloucester a-wondering at ye new tricks that
doe playe ye younge gentlemen of this daye.
Bertram ! Bertram! I to jest soe, when my hearte is heavie, and sore, and
THE   ATTEMPT. 259
bitter, and I feele welle-nighe as if I woulde gladlie lie doune and die, and i-este
my bones among ye Willoiighbies, and shut mine eyes on Whitehall, and Ivinge, and
Commons, and all, and be at reste. Keste ! reste ! what reste can I hope for or finde
ever in this wearie worlde 1 A wearie, wearie, worlde,—all vanitie, vanitie, and vexa¬
tion of spirit, as I did reftde in ye wordes of ye great preacher Solomon—all vanitie,
vanitie, and vexation of spirit. Ah, Bertram, when I doe feele myselfe a-wearie,
and tired oute, and sadde, and all my hearte doth seeme but one greate sigh, I long,
I long, for mine owne mother—she woulde surelie have comforted me, and have
greatlie helped with her love and her counsel. " As one whom his mother com-
forteth "—-I heai-de our chaplaine reading last Sundaye ; and I can never knowe what
that is—I muste live uncomforted, and beare mine owne burthen as best I may.
Ah, welle ! I speake thus to thee, mine owne goode Bertram, because I know
thou dost not despise me for these thoughtes. I doe telle oute untoe thee some of
my deeper, softer, better nature, that some knowe not I doe possesse. I doe goe
about my dailie tasks with a laugh on my lijjpes, and a jest or conceit on my
tongue, and ye young gallants I meete in ye Strande or ye Mall, and with whom
I doe mayke merrie, and bandie wordes and jokes, thyuke doubtless that Hubeit
Willoughbie is noughte but froth and bubble ; and they woulde as soone thynke of
talkynge of grave subjects untoe me as they woukle of calling me ye Kinge's Majesty
him self e.
Aye, Bertram, we are all riddles—'twoulde e'en puzzle ye wondrous CEdipus
himselfe to rede us aright; and I myselfe am to myselfe greatest puzzle, moste in¬
comprehensible of all. A moste strange paradox—an anomalie, that neither I, nor
anie other, can understande—that is, an anie one careth to thynke about me, which I
verrie much doubt—alwaies barring you, and my friende Eliot Warner of Chester.
That a man shoulde not be able to understande his owne soule—and that he doth
soe often appear to others to be soe compleatlie what he is not, by shrouding uppe
and covering over all that is beste and nobleste within him, by a cruste of laughter
and frivolities, and suche lyke—is it not wondei-fuUe 1 I doe sometyme feel as
though that terrible Sphynx of elde had piitte to me that question to answer, and
had layen me under a ban, a heavie weird, that shoulde never departe untille I had
gotten a goode and true answer thereuntoe. And ye ban niuste remayne where it
is—for by my lyfe, I cannot give an answer that doth satisfie me; and I muste walke
in darknesse, and thynke, and thynke—and never mayke it oute, and be quite
sure.
Tush! what nonsense ami writing! we muste fayne 
260 THE   ATTEMPT.
content thou and I, friende Bertram see   Sir Harry
Vane   Prynne 
Goode cousine.
Thy true frieude and cousine ever,
Hubert Willoughbie.
This 24th daye of Maye,
Anno 1641.
Our friend must have been somewhat addicted to the frequent use of P.S.S., for
here follows another sentence of somewhat serious import, written hurriedly,
and partly obliterated.
" Neville D'Eresbie of ye Kinge's Guarde, hath just tolde me that there are de¬
spatches of greate weighte to be sente to Bristol; and I may possiblie be ye bearer
thereof; so mighte I see thee agayne ; yet am I not sure. But saye noughte concern¬
ing it; when I leave Whitehall, it wo'not be fault of mine an I returne agayne
to it. An matters mende not with me or with ye Parliament, I must e'en goe
seeke my fortune on ye farre shores of America. But of this anon, meanwhile, I
goe on "
Which is more than the P.S. does ; so we must fold up that letter, and put it
away ; can you have patience, while I give you one or two scraps, preparatory to a
lengthy letter from our Hubert, detailing experiences of a rather exciting nature, of
his share in the Irish rebellion and massacre in 1641.
I was curioiis to discover whether Neville D'Eresbie's communication would
prove of any weight; and if our young secretary succeeded in effecting his release
from what he so evidently considered an irksome detention at Whitehall.
Two little slips of parchment, folded together, and secured by a thread of faded
green silk, looked as if they might contain something of importance; they were not
addressed as letters, but appeared as if they might have been an enclosure in some¬
thing else.
THE  ATTEMPT. 261
With a sigh of reverence for the dead hands that might long ago have fastened
that tight clumsy knot, I slipped off the silk, and read the following :—
" Eliot, I cannot write a long epistle, for tyme doth presse ; but I muste needs
sende thee a line to telle thee of some one whom I have scene but yesterdaye.
I have seene Hugh Shaw,—seene and spoken with him,—on this wise. I did
meete him at a shooting partie that had my lord Saxford, and to ye which he did
me honour to invite me. My lord is a greate one for keeping uppe ye use of ye
goode olde long bowe, and also ye crosse bowe; soe doth he oft gather his friends to
shoote in his fayre gardens, harde by ye river syde. And yestermorne as I did slowlie
walke downe from my lodging at ye Silver Spur, deeplie wondering of manie matters,
and not heeding where I was going, I did suddenlie strike agaynste some one, and
did welle-nighe sende him untoe ye gi-ound. On looking uppe to crave pardon, I
perceeved it to be my lord Saxford; therefore was I verrie sorie at my uncourteous
acte ; but he did laugh pleasantlie, and onlie bade me take betterheede to my steppes
another tyme; and then he sayd he had not seene me for long, and he was agoing to
have a shooting-partie that afternoon, an I woulde come I shoulde be verrie welcome.
Soe I went; and there were manie gentlemen there, of one sorte and another ; and
muclie shooting, and talking, and divers prettie jests and conceits. I did happen
to stande neare untoe a young gentleman of noble appearance, but of somewhat
gloomie countenance ; we did speake together, and presentlie my lord Saxford came
bye; and seeing us conversing, he did telle me that gay young gallant was yclept
Hugh Shaw, and he did come out of Cheshire; soe I did aske concerning you, Eliot,
and youre father, and of Sir William Shaw his father, and of suche lyke matters.
He sayd but littel in answer to my questions, for he had heard but verrie scant
newes of his home for some tyme past, ye which I coulde well beleeve. But when
I did speake of Lilian, his face flushed, and a half-smile came over it, " aye, she is
veriliea sweet, bonnie lassie, as my Scottish friendes woulde saye," he answered; " and
I doe not forget that we were once friendes ; we shoukle be soeagayne, an we had
opportunitie," but he sayd no more.
Soe, Eliot, he doth not forget you ; he sayd he loved you welle ; but he told
me stoutlie, that he was bounde to follow King Charles, whatever might betyde. I
have no more tyme ; soe I must e'en cry halt ! Praye thy fayre sister Lilian to
have me in her kinde remembrance, as I doe holde her in mine ; and to tayke com-
forte concerning Hugh Shaw, peradventure he may even yet returne untoe Chester;
he is indeede a fine noble young fellowe, though hotte, hastie, and head-stronge, and
muche misguided.
262 THE   ATTEMPT.
And now, friende Eliot, I praye God to have you and youres in his good keep¬
ing, untille we doe meete agayne,
Youre true friende,
Hubert Willoughbie.
The next is only a very short scrap—evidently penned in a huiTy, as it is not
written in the usually neat and clear style which Hubert adopted; for let me tell
you, as you cannot see the originals themselves, that the young secretary's letters
are even now quite a pattern to anybody for their beautiful execution, in spite of
the great difference between the writing now and then—the hand is so bold, free,
and yet careful and orderly. I think the time spent at Whitehall must have made
a better man of our Hubert than perhaps he acknowledged himself; even in these
later letters the diifereuce is very great between the first one or two hastily written
and rather untidy epistles that I had some difficulty in deciphering. But I must
not be too verbose, as I have a somewhat lengthier letter yet to come ;—
" Eliot, one worde to thee before I sette forthe on an errand from which I may
perchance never returue. Thou knowcst I was intending to leave Whitehall, and
soe separate myselfe from being an active partisan of ye Kinge's partie ; but yester-
morne I did receeve orders from my lord Saxford to carrie despatches of great im-
poi-tance untoe ye Goverour of Dublin Castle, which did require gi-eate haste and
care in ye taykinge ; and my lord sayd that he coulde thinke of none other so fit and
proper to tayke them as myselfe. Soe he hath furnished me with raonie, and letters
untoe ye governours of Warwick and Conway and Carnarvon Castles, as I muste
goe by that way ; and I muste sette forthe some tyme this weeke. This is Tuesday,
it is verrie likelie that I may tayke my departure on Thursday ; and then, Eliot,
farewell to all peace and quietnesse for thy friende for manie long dayes. For ye
populace over in Ireland are verrie unquiet and perturbed, and I wot not what
thinges may happen while I am there.
And nowe, Eliot, fare-thee-well for some tyme, it may be for ever, I cannot
telle; but an if I doe never see thee agayne, I thanke thee, for ye laste tyme, for
thy gi'eate and long kindnesse untoe me. Thou hast done me greate goode, deare
Eliot, goode Eliot; often when hearte-sicke, and wholly given up to sorrowe. I have
THE   ATTEMPT. 263
been comforted by knowing that I had one friende, if aughte or all else I mighte lacke.
And thou hast often welle advised me when I was in difficulty, and not knowing
what to doe; and I have followed thine advice, and have done welle, and prospered.
God bless thee, and keepe thee, and if it be His will, let us meete once more ; and if
not here, in His heaven. Thynke not that I saye overmuche about a mere journeye
to Ireland ; but my minde doth misgive me that somewhat maye happe there; and I
maye never see England agayne. Some one doth call me ; I muste not staye to saye
more to thee.    Fare-thee-well.
Thine ever,
Hubert Willoughbie,
If thou has aughte to write while I am in Ireland, send it uppe vmtoe my lord
Saxford, at his mansion of Saxfordham, by ye river at Chelsea, and he maye
perchance have opportunitie to sende them. He bade me soe telle anie friende I
mighte wishe to write untoe, or heare from. H.  W.
I shall give you, in my next, the copy of a short letter from Arthur Egerton to
Lord Saxford, and a long letter from Hubert to Eliot Warner ; but, for the present,
I must, like our friend, cry " Halt," or I shall never know when to stop.
I am afraid Willoughbie's next letter will read something like a chapter of old
Fox's Martyrs ; but I am not responsible for that; so you must take them as you
find them, and leave what you do not like. Mas Alta.
264 THE   ATTEMPT.
pnm,
or 1X0 Ilium.
I WONDER if all the grown up men and women—when they were small girls and
boys—had the same pet theories that we had; if they had as many, or fewer ; and if
they were ever realized ! I daresay not; and I have no doubt if they were fulfilled,
that by the time their hopes were realized, they had become so tired of the idea, that
its realization gave them no pleasure. I can remember, when we were children,
having set our hearts upon a large magnum bonum plum, which hung at the top of
a high garden wall. I think we spent about an hour trying to get it. We tried
every means we could think of,—but the stones fell short or else went over the
wall, the crooked branches we essayed were not long enough,—moreover, our time
was limited, for we knew, that ere long lessons would begin, and if we were to be¬
come the possessors of that plum, it must be by some stratagem, no less speedy than
effectual. Of course, you know the story about the Irishmen tiying to reach the
reflection of the moon in the water, thinking it was a cheese, and what means they
used. Well, we resorted to the same plan, only we know what became of their
cheese, and the magnum bonum was in our hands. If the plum had proved sweet,
and large enough to satisfy four of us, I need not have occupied your time by telling
you this—but, of course, you have already guessed that it was sour—that the small
part of one side which the sun had begun to ripen was eaten by wasps, who, happy
insects! needed no stratagems, but could at any moment visit it to report the
ripening progi'ess, and that, in short, we all looked extremely foolish, an<i quietly
withdrew to our lessons, sadder but wiser. From that day we date our knowledge
of the hoUowness of the world. But now we are older, and know that it is not
always the plums which are beyond our reach that are most to be coveted—we are
content to wait till they are ripe—and what is still more important, we know that
—no plum at all—is what is sometimes best for us. Clarence.
1. An objectionable member of society. 3. A bird.
2. A river in Kussia. 4.  Public good.
Mjjirst is generally looked for at this season, my second is much enjoyed by
the young, the appreciation of my whole is questionable.
THE   ATTEMPT. 265
" Christmas is coming !" The very sound is enlivening, people brighten up at
the very idea, cold and frost become natural, and even desirable, it is the " one
touch " that makes " the whole world kin." It certainly is a most fortunate thing
that Christmas comes exactly where it does in the year, right in the midst of the
cold, dark winter, like an oasis in the desert, with memories both sweet and sad, and
grand solemn thoughts above all, reminding us of what the day really means, and
filling our hearts with gratitude for all the mercies shadowed forth by that first
great Christmas day.
People talk of the delights of autumn, of the beauty of the changing trees, and the
mellow glories of the season; but, say what they will, it is a melancholy time, symbolising
the approach of death,—and there is an impression in watchmg the gradual signs of
decay that it is difiicult to shake off". We go about shivering in our thin summer
clothes, heartily wishing it was the fashion to put on warm ones whenever the cold
sets in, but we dare not, for nobody else does it, so we pave the way for influenzas
and coughs, that last on, perhaps, far into the spring, and we cannot understand how
we caught that nasty cold in the beginning of winter, and have been so long in
shaking it ofi". There is no saying what absurdities we might commit in this way, if
the advent of Christmas did not naturally call up visions of winceys, mufis, and furs,
and everything warm and comfortable, so that by the end of November the last
white bonnet (grown black with fog and soot by that time) has vanished, and we
walk out clad like reasonable beings.
First and foremost of the pleasures of Christmas, is the sense of all-prevailing
friendliness with which we are inspired, the desire for universal goodwill, and
anxiety to impart some of our own happiness to others. Do we not feel our organ
of benevolence assert itself more strongly then than at any other time 1 The rest of
the winter may be more severe, but we never realize the troubles of the poor so
vividly as then. " Peace on earth, goodwill to men," is the motto for that day,
and, on the whole, we are not apt to forget it.
Come, and we will take a walk through the crowded streets of some large town,
calling in here and there to see what the inhabitants are doing. It is early
morning, a keen frost makes us walk fast, and draw our wraps more closely round
us.      Here is a most in-vdting abode,—looking in, we catch a glimpse between the
heavy red curtains of a large family-party, young and old seated round a well-furnished
2  L
266 THE   ATTEMPT.
table, all talking and laughing together, while a cheerful blaze from the huge grate
casts warm rosy lights in all directions. We can see a fair little child on grand¬
papa's knee, holding up for general admiration his new horse, a remarkable animal,
that is always pawing the air, and seems utterly unable to stand on all fours. There
is papa in his easy-chair, in front of the fire, having finished breakfast, and taken up
his newspaper, from which he can hardly be beguiled for a moment even when his
eldest daughter, almost a woman, hangs over him whispering her thanks for the
pretty trinket that constitutes her Christmas box. What a profusion of green
leaves and holly berries all over the room ; there is the bust of Homer crowned;
and see, is not that a sprig of mistletoe peeping out slily from the holly under
the chandelier?
What dancing eyes and bright smiles, what happy laughter and innocent jokes,
how comely mamma looks superintending the tea and coffee cups, and what an air of
home there is over all. We can hardly tear ourselves away from such a picture,
but at last we pass on, and mix with the crowd which is hurrying on to the nume¬
rous places of worship. We enter a beautiful church, from which the grand tones
of an organ are pealing forth, and take our places amongst the worshippers. Look
around, and admire the stately arches and noble columns, the painted windows, de¬
picting scenes from " the sweet stoiy of old;" see the garlands and branches of holly
that deck and brighten up the whole, evidences of busy hands hard at work the day be¬
fore ; listen to the jubUant voices that join in the glad hymn, " Hark, the herald angels
sing, " and tell us if all this is not the best beginning to our Christmas we could
desire ? We are Presbyterians, and are attached to our own form of worahip, but
we love to enter an English church on Christmas day.
Look at those boys home for the holidays, rather unwilling to attend service at
all, with visions before them of tempting shop-windows and sjilendid slides. One
has his hand in his pocket, and if you look closely you will see a portion of a rosy
apple peeping out of it, which he longs to be devouring, but dares not. The other
has a pencil, with which he is supposed to be taking notes of the sermon, but a
nearer inspection shows certain remarkable figures, probably caricatures of some of
the congregation ; these he continues with great satisfaction to himself, till papa's
eagle eye catches him in the act, and he remains covered with confusion to the end.
There is an old lady, well provided with cushions, warm furs, and smelling bottles,
nodding away comfortably in the corner of her pew, from the combined effects of
repose and a hearty breakfast. Do you see that honest-looking man in the shadow
of the arch yonder ?    He looks like a well-to-do tradesman, for he and his  children
THE   ATTEMPT. 267
are respectably and suitably clad : he must have gone through sorrow and difficulty,
for there are lines in his face and furrows in his forehead that are not the result of
age ; he listens as though he were receiving the bread of life ; reverently he bows his
head at the close, and then slowly leaves the building, holding his youngest child by
the hand. They have some distance to walk, and it is hard work getting them along,
for here is a wreathed and laurelled poultry shop, displaying treasures of fat geese
and turkeys, looking so fresh and enticing among the green leaves, whilst the very
next window is a bewildering confusion of shortbread, bun, and rich cakes of every
kind, only to be followed by a resplendent toy shop, where, amidst other delights, a
large Christmas tree displays its glittering attractions, and rivets the young people
to the spot. At last they reach their own door, and here comes the mother to
welcome them, saying that dinner is ready, tJmt dinner looked forward to during the
whole year, with its roast beef and baked potatoes, and real plum pudding afterwards.
How the father enjoys himself, helping the little ones over and over again, till
mother gets alarmed, and is only consoled by the reflection that Christmas comes but
once a year. Out again, when dinner is over, to join the crowd of sightseers, and in¬
vest pennies in sticky sweetmeats, and big oranges, to watch the immortal punch and
judy, and perhaps visit some of the museums and other institutions, interesting alike
to young and old.
It is getting dark, the good folks are shutting their shutters and di'awing their
curtains, and preparing to enjoy a comfortable evening ; just peep into the dining-
rooms, if any have been so charitable as to give you the opportunity, and see the
groups assembled there, round numberless hospitable boards, groaning with the good
things of the season. Every one comes out in holiday attire,—white frocks for the
little girls, velvet knickerbockers for the boys, the young ladies repeat the national
flag over and over again, whilst staid mammas and aunts appear in more sober
colours and heavier materials. What a rapid disappearence of sirloins of beef,
turkeys, geese, plum puddings, mince pies as takes place, and then, when the cloth is
removed (though that good old fasliion is nearly obsolete), how the youngsters indulge
in oranges, apples, and nuts, with probably a glass of wine as an additional treat.
Here is a party preparing for the pantomime, that crowning pleasure of childhood.
Indeed, we do not think it is confined to children, for we enjoy the spectacle with
almost as much zest as they do, though, perhaps, our greatest enjoyment is listening
to their happy laughter. Look at the little folks as they enter their boxes with
eager, expectant faces, dazzled by the glare, and confused by the various sights and
sounds, the principal of which are shrill whistles and snatches of songs from the gods in
268 THE  ATTEMPT.
the gallery, and cries of ginger beer and oranges fr(3m their vendors. Play-bills come
fluttering down from the galleries, signs of impatience are manifested, and all eyes
are turned towards the drop-scene. It slowly rises, and discloses some sylvan abode,
probably tenanted by the heroine of the piece, whose troubles begin from the earliest
moment subsequent to her falling in love, thereby conveying a very useful moral
lesson against indulging in such a dangerous practice. Indeed, not all the frantic
efforts and knightly valour of the hero would ever accomplish her deliverance, if he
were not invariably assisted by an able staff of fairies, whose queen generally seems
herself to entertain a tender regard for the youth, but magnanimously paves the way
towards his union with his lady fair. This of course is effected through the aid of
clown, harlequin, pantaloon, and columbine, who then begin their reign, the two former
getting into all sorts of scrapes, and being knocked down, beaten, and thrown headlong
out of a window, till we wonder if there is an unbroken bone in their bodies,—surely
children must have a great deal of cruelty in their dispositions, for all this appears to
enchant them, and the more knocks and kicks administered the louder becomes
their merriment, and if a policeman's head should be cut off' by mistake, their
glee passes all bounds. We can never understand the grudge against those valuable
defenders of the peace, but there it is, an undisputed fact, that they are a butt for
all jokes, and receive no favour.
But oh ! the glories of the transformation scene ! What words can describe
them 1 What a hush thei-e is, as by slow degrees new wonders ixnfold themselves,
fair forms ascend to the very roof and seem to hang on air, flowers of lovely hue ex¬
pand and disclose fairy sprites nestled in their leaves, brighter and brighter shine
the colours till all glows in one deep rosy light, that fades away all too quickly from
our enra^jtured gaze. It is over, the curtain falls, the company rises, we get through
the crush, and out into the street, where people are rushing distractedly about, calling
for their carriages, and ladies, tucking up theii- dresses, and covering up their heads, go
running down the street, to seize the first empty conveyance. Little tongues go fast,
talking over all they have seen, but the bright eyes are growing heavy, and the tradi¬
tional dustman is coming rapidly round the corner, before all are at length safe in
bed, where they will dream their day over again, and long for perpetual holidays.
Much more we could say of the pleasures of Christmas, but we fear to weary
our readers, who know it all so well beforehand, and are afraid we shall begin to
prose. Have no fear ; we leave the day to impress its own moral, and sincerely and
heartily do we wish all our subscribers and friends "A Merry Christmas."
Alma.
THE   ATTEMPT.
269
% f itik WmmnQ.
Part hi.—Its Uses.
Work merely for work's sake, or learning for the sake of learning,is one of the
dreariest things imaginable. We cannot go on exerting ourselves for nothing, and if
we have even a doubt of the utility of the efforts we are making, the most natural thing
is to relax them altogether, and become lazy, heartless workers. Our tasks are then
as irksome as the daily constitutional walk of an invalid, who detests the path,
though it be sunny, because it leads him nowhither, and would rather go through the
gloomiest alley if he had but some ebject in so doing.
We talk of wet blankets, but none of them are so chilly as this : " It's of no
use." 'Tis not wet, but icy, and will freeze every nerve if we allow it to be wrapped
round our shoulders. We resent it bitterly when any stranger attempts to extin¬
guish our pet schemes in this way, yet oftenest, it is no stranger, but ourselves who
do iis this wrong. Sometimes, it may be owned, we are already weary of what we
have undertaken, and yet ashamed to give way to indolence, till some day, we make
the happy discovery, that after all our exertions are of no great use, and may as well
be discontinued. At other times, we are engaged heart and soul in some work,
when thoughts of despondency steal on us slowly and with pain, often repelled, and
as often recurring, till they at last win the day, and triumph in our humiliation.
Perhaps such enemies have often come to us at our books, and whispered low in our
ear, " What is the use of all this ? Can you name any benefit you hope to gain by
it 1 " We think over our motives in learning, and find none of them pure enough.
We once learned to gain a high place in a class, or a prize, or, better still, bright
looks of approval from the home circle. Afterwards, a delicious seuse of duty and
pleasure rarely commingled tempted us on, and ambition beckoned to us to follow.
But now, we cannot discern that duty calls us to study, ambition tells us of nothing
but defeat, and our delight in learning cannot long remain behind.
" It is of no use to me to read," sighs the girl whom people suppose to be enjoy¬
ing her first year of emancipation from school. She sees her brother set off" for
college, morning by morning, while her hours are stolen away, she hardly knows
how, by innumerable occupations which she would call trifles if she dared deny that
they are duties. The well-bound books in the shelf before her are, to her eye, but
grapes of Tantalus, apparently quite within her reach, but in reality inaccessible
270 THE   ATTEMPT.
treasures.   And yet she is not by any means debarred from intellectual employments.
Wise j^eople told her, only last year, that her school training had only made her cap¬
able of carrying on her oAvn education.      Mother and brothers urge her to keep iij)
her music, and friends beg for the possession of her pretty sketches.     Fraulein from
Berlin, writes her long letters, and insists on being paid in  coin, and sends her
Christmas presents of charming German stories to keep up her translation.    Her
needle flies pleasantly in the evenings to the sound of her father's reading, and now
and then she is found closeted with her brother in his sanctum, being initiated into
some deeper mystery of science.    But all this is not what she wants.    She has
occasional spare hours, but not a moment's security against interruption.    She puts
her mark at the place she is reading, without knowing whether it may be moved
onward one page or fifty for the next fortnight.    She is allowed to learn anything and
everything she pleases by snatches, but the grand aim of her ambition, to learn one thing
well, she may never attain.    She takes herself to task severely, because she cannot
rule her circumstances, but weakly lets them rule her, forgetting that Jier circum¬
stances may be just another name for her duties, to which she is bound to yield
obedience.    She calls herself fickle and superficial, and judging that such a con¬
temptible smattering as she is getting can do no good, she thinks it would be better
to give all up and confess that she has failed.    " I cannot read to any purpose, I
will not read at all," she says, and shuts her book with a firm   hand."    Whether
her resolution will keep or melt, we need not too curiously inquire, but she ought
never to have made it until she had fully settled one little question, " Is it true that
my studies are useless ?" And if she were here, and I could talk to her a little, I should
tell her boldly, "It is not true."    You may miss the painted goal of your dreams,
and yet grasp the prize which sober reality has in store for you.    That hateful word,
" a smattering," is most apt to frighten people who are least likely to degenerate
into smatterers.    If you think as well as read, no little bit of knowledge will be
mere tinsel.    It may not shine like the Koh-i-noor, but it is diamond dust for all that.
Nay, do not think me too desperate a heretic if I say, not only that it may be your
diity to be content with this little knowledge, but that it may prove the very thing
which will be of most use to you through life.
If you ask how this can be, I will try to tell you. My answer may be a lame
one, for scraps and shreds of time are all I have to give it in.
It must be understood, once for all, that I am writing for those whose life-work
lies any where, rather than on Parnassus, and that I have not the slightest apology
to ofier for trifling and desultory exertions on the part of those whose plain business
THE   ATTEMPT. 271
it is to devote themselves to study. Neither do I write for the few girls whose
ambition to excel in one thing proceeds from the consciousness of some special talent
committed to them, and the burning desire to unfold it, and with whom it is a
necessity to persevere till all obstacles have given way before them. I am writing
for the many who have no very marked bias in any direction, and who, were they
asked to choose an occupation for life, would be greatly at a loss to select one from
among the multitude of attractive pursuits.
The most obvious use of knowledge, gi-eat or small, is the fitness it gives for
every day work. The majority of mankind would never learn anything at all, were
it not for this practical stimulus. Idle boys are roused to exertion when the ex-
jiectation begins to grow distinct to them of learning a trade, or entering an office,
or of one day standing up at the bar, or in the pulpit, and thus becoming men.
Even the most ignorant London tramps must learn something, were it but how to
pick a pocket deftly. The Esquimaux is clever in building snow-huts and tracking
reindeer, and the lowest Hottentot savage is a good hunter. It is no degradation to
knowledge thus to be made the hand-maid of man, even if she only provide for his
bare necessities, but much more is she honourably employed in helping to make life
brighter and more cheerful, in teaching us how to make the lives of others more free
from pain or care than they would otherwise be.
Practical knowledge, such as this, has the first claim on us, and calls for the best
of our energies. It is'easy to see that, with this end in view, no information ought
to be rejected because it is little, and no means of getting experience neglected. If
there seems no present good in what we obtain, only let us keep it long enough, and
a use will be found for it. Sometimes a little observation will suffice to teach iis
what is needful, at other times we have to study hard for it. We may be forced,
perhaps, to spend hours on subjects which, in themselves, have little interest for us,
with only the hope to cheer us of one day gaining our end, and gladly relinqixishing
the tedious inquiry. Perhaps we have learned a little music, to give pleasure to our
friends, but not having much taste for it, we see no necessity for torturing our fingers
to any high degree of proficiency. We may have learned Italian, to chat with a sick
fiiend who cannot speak English, or a little Latin to help a younger brother with his
lessons, but'we stop as soon as we have done all that we intended. To stop short of
what we seriously resolved to accomplish, from mere love of change, would be super¬
ficial, but frankly to confess that we have done all we see needful in one direction,
and that now our taste leads us in another, is only reasonable.
A second advantage of learning is the mental training it gives.    We require
272 THE   ATTEMPT.
oiir faculties to be brought up to working order, and kept from rusting again by
constant use. It is not the amount of knowledge actually stored uji, but the labour
spent ill acquiring it that does this. The facts may be found nowhere, but the honest
hard work will tell to the end of life.
Here it is that the education of girls is often deficient. We have not enough
of hard work. There is a certain power to grasp a subject as a whole, and a quick
intelligence to follow its most tangled threads through all their windings, which we
have never been trained to, and which, indeed, is rarely attained but by a long
course of persevering study. But failing to get one sort of mental exercise, let us
brace ourselves as best we can in the way that is open to us. If we cannot con
centrate our thoughts on one special siibject, let us try all the more to devote our
full attention to each as it comes. Let the matter in hand always have our whole
mind, and when called from it, let us plunge every thought as heartily into the next
duty, learing no useless stragglers to linger on the field we have left.
If my readers will have patience while I quote a short passage from Locke,
they will get to understand what, I daresay, I have left rather cloudy. The philo¬
sopher says, " There is scarcely anything more for the improvement of knowledge,
for the ease of life, and the dispatch of biisiness, than for a man to be able to disi^ose
of his own thoughts ; and there is scarcely anything harder in the whole conduct of
the understanding than to get a full mastery over it. Men frequently say, nothing
is so free as thought, and it were well it were so; but the contrary will be found
true in several instances ; and there are many cases wherein there is nothing more
restive and ungovernable than our thoughts; they will not be directed what objects
to pursue, nor be taken off from those they have once fixed on, but run away with a
man in pursuit of those ideas they have in view, let him do what he can. . . .
And when a man can command his mind off at pleasure from incidental and unde¬
signed pursuits, it may not be amiss for him to go on farther, and make attempts
upon meditations of greater moment, that at the last he may have full power over
his own mind, and be so fully master of his own thoughts as to be able to transfer
them from one subject to another, with the same ease that he can lay by anything
he has in his hand, and take something else that he has a mind to in the room of it."
This sort of mental exercise is one which a woman's ever-shifting duties will give
her in plenty; the only drawback to it is, that it is so hard, so very hard, it is all
but impossible to succeed fully in it. Yet its usefulness lies in this very thing, that
it is so hard, that each effort made in the right direction will give strength and
bracing, and the most distant approach to success mil be in itself a rich reward.
THE  ATTEMPT. 273
But, granting for a moment that full mental discipline is not to be attained in
this way, and supposing that I might attain to it by giving all my powers to one
study, at the expense of leaving other gifts unused, I would not choose it. I dare
not let many faculties lie undeveloped for the sake of cultivating one, not a whit
more valuable than the rest. Women have a special need for leaving no part of their
nature quite fallow. One great use of all their study is to let them into closer sym¬
pathy with their fellow-creatures. There are many ties which link human hearts
together, and not the least are contact of mind with mind, and taste with taste,
mutual help and commingling of interests and occupations. Those whose lives are
spent so much in making others happy by kindly intercourse ought to take pains to
keep as many links as jiossible unbroken. It will not do to turn away from this or
that subject, and say I have no time to waste upon it,—I don't take the least interest
in it, or I never could understand how any one could care for it, if those around you
claim your interest or help in it. Try, at the very least, to find out how it is attrac¬
tive to them, and to enter into their feelings as far as you can. Try to have eveiy
string in your instrument tuned so as to vibrate at a touch. You do not know
whom its music may refresh, or how it may one day cheer and comfort yourself. If
you could shape your course through life according to your wishes, the case might
be different. But you cannot tell exactly where your lot may be cast, and who may
appear as claimants for your help and sympathy. The danger is, that if you find a
great many subjects wholly uninteresting, though you know that many of your
friends take pleasure in them, you may hereafter pronounce a great number of
human beings equally stupid and insipid, and may perhaps find yourself thrown into
the society of some with whom you have so little in common, that they know not
what to say or do to please you, while you are left hopelessly shut up within your¬
self, and powerless to influence them in any way.
To enter heartily into the pursuits of others is a habit worth cherishing, and
better for us than an isolated following out of our own tastes. You may say that it
will lead to a little knowledge on all subjects and perfection in none. If so, this
only proves the statement with which I set out, that fragmentary knowledge may,
after all, be the very kind of which we stand most in need.
I have not, as I expected, been able to conclude my subject before laying down
my pen, and therefore, though with fear lest I should exhaust the patience of my
readers, I must promise that the remaining uses of " A Little Learning" shall be
forthcoming next month. M. L.
2  M
274 THE  ATTEMPT.
Clje Seng oi il^t Cljnstmas '§db.
The Christmas bells are chiming joyously—
Now like soft echoes of the past they float,
Like some sweet story of the old child days ;
Again there bursts a merry pealing note,
As if they fain the angels' song would sing,
Of " peace on earth, glory to heaven's high king."
And as the silver ripple of the bells
Comes wafted through the clear, keen, frosty aii-,
Wliile by the fire-light's dancing flame I muse,
I know not if I dream, but visions fail-
Forth from the brain's dark chambers seem to steal,
Woven full sweetly with that hallow'd peal.
Methinks I gaze upon a woodland scene—
No more along the paths are flowerets twia'd ;
The naked boughs are swaying drearily
To the mournful songs of the winter wind ;
The twittering sparrow opes his eye to hail
The first grey streaks of mom, now glimmering pale.
And in the dawn's uncertain light there stand.
Beneath the leafless boughs, three sisters fair—
Faith, Hope, Charity—children of the skies,
Who, leaving all the bliss of heaven, now bear
A message of sweet peace and love to earth,
On this the morning of the Saviour's birth.
In and out through the bare and leafless wood
The angel Hope is gliding, here and there
A golden ray of heaven's own sunshine
Lies sleeping, hid among her waving hair.
All nature seems to brighten as her tread
Falls light o'er weather'd leaf and mossy bed.
THE   ATTEMPT.
The little red-breast sings a blither song,
And eats the scattered crumbs with glad content;
Now, she hath smiled on him—she waves her wand.
And e'en the biting frost obeys her sway,
Standing in glittering gems on every bush,
And wreaths of diamonds crown the hallow'd day.
Faith lays her soft caressing hand upon
The doubting, troubled heart, and bids it rest;
She hovers o'er the weary bed of pain.
Ever murmuring, still her message blest—
" Peace and good-will"—the holy Christmas hymn.
That weak fallen man with angels pure may sing.
And ever with her sisters—Charity,
The sweetest flower of heaven, goes hand in hand;
She leaves a print of golden sunlight bright
Whei-e'er her foot doth tread, as when from land
One marks the line of light on ocean's breast.
Tracked, as the brave ship rides the wave's proud crest.
Pleading she knocketh at the rich man's heart.
Singing the same low song—" 'Tis Christmas tide,
Open thy hand, give from thy well-filled store
To the poor, the needy—yea, open wide;"
He hears the sweet persuasive voice, and lo !
Gladness and joy the home of want o'erflow.
275
Thus do these visions mingle with the bells.
As fair dreams set to miisic's thrilling strain.
And ever runs the burden of their song—
" Peace and good-will, we to all men proclaim,
Sing loud ye heav'ns, glory to God give ye.
Who lends to earth, Faith, Hope, and Charity."
Nan.
276 THE   ATTEMPT.
'gmp.
Rings ! What a crowd of facts and fancies, associations romantic and prosaic,
ancient and modern, cluster round the word ! How many fairy tales, ancient legends,
historical episodes, " romances in real life," and simple domestic scenes, have for their
centre some ring, round which the web of the story is woven, and with which it is
indissolubly connected ! The symbols of honour, of favour, of union ; here the
tokens of pardon and clemency, here the agents of some baneful and mysterious spell,
here the pledges of constancy and truth ; in what varied and wondrous scenes have
these little circlets played a part.
I haA e neither the power nor the will to write a history of rings—to give an
account of their various uses, their many significations, the mysterious powers which
some of them have been said to possess,—my intention is merely to recal to my own
memory, and to that of my readers, a few of the rings which history, poetry, and
romance have gifted with an immortality more secure by far than the durability
of their gems, and with a value a thousand times beyond their intrinsic worth.
And first, the ring of Polycrates, well known both to classical scholars and
German students—for the spirited ballad of Schiller has told the history of this ring
to many who would otherwise never have known of its existence. Polycrates of
Samos, afflicted by a misfortune with which few of us can sympathise—namely, that of
superabundant prosperity and happiness, and fearing that his wonderful good fortune
would draw down on him the envy and wrath of the immortals, determined to pro¬
pitiate them by voluntarily sacrificing one of his most cherished possessions—the
ring—which he threw into the sea. But the next day it returned to him—being
found inside a fish, brought to him by one of his subjects ; and upon this, according
to Schiller's version, the friend of Polycrates, by whose advice the ring had been
sacrificed, fled precipitately fi-om Samos, exclaiming that the gods would not fail to
bring about Polycrates' speedy destruction. I don't know whether they did—and I
don't very much care. He must have been a very weak-minded man ; or, allowing
for the influence of superstition, he must have been one of these objectionable in¬
dividuals who are always on the look-out for misfortunes—who can never see other
people happy without entreating them to remember the transitory nature of human
bliss—who, instead of " gathering their rose-buds while they may," sit down and weep
because the rose-buds won't last for ever.
Here is another ring—a magic one—a German ring, this time—the wonderful
THE   ATTEMPT.
277
Zauben-ing of La Motte Fouque. Oh the irresistible charm of that wild, bewildering,
delicious book ! with its knights and ladies, tilts and tournaments, enchanted castles
and haunted chapels ! its sudden changes of scene, from the burning sands of Africa
to the frozen deserts of Lapland ; its wild sweet scraps of song, scattered here and
there throughout the book; its wandering minstrels and imprisoned damsels ! and
through all the story, connecting its parts, the aim and object of its most dissimilar
characters, gleams and glitters the magic ring. Surely there never was prose so like
poetry as the prose of La Motte Fouque; his stories are told so simply, so unaffectedly,
and yet with such splendour of imagination, and such romantic wildness; it is
like a man telling you something that has happened to him in a dream.
That was a wonderful ring at the Court of Charlemagne, which secured to the
wearer the affection of any one whom he or she desired to attract. That spiteful
old Archbishop ! why did he throw it into the lake 1 why deprive posterity of a
possession so valuable, of a spell so desirable and so potent 1 After all, I daresay, it
is just as well that the ring is lying quietly at the bottom of the lake. Just fancy
how we should all fight for it if it were suddenly to appear among us ! and fancy
the consequences of its getting into bad hands ! and then how humiliating would be
the thought that would doubtless often occur to the possessor of the ring, that the love
bestowed upon him was not of free will, but of obligation-—that it Avas not he himself
who was loved, but only his ring which forced others to love him ; and if he should
lose the ring, how painful and terrible would be the change ! The old Archbishop
was a wise man, after all, although one can't help wishing for the ring sometimes.
We have had a Greek ring, and a German one, and a French one; let us take
an English one now. No magic one this time, but a ring stained with sad memo¬
ries of rebellion, and treachery, and blood,—the ring that Queen Elizabeth gave to
the Earl of Essex. Every one knows the story ; how the Queen gave him the ring,
telling him that however deeply he might offend, pardon should be granted him if he
sent her back that token ; how he entrusted it to the Countess of Nottingham, and
she basely withheld it from the Queen, who, stung to madness at the silence which
she interpreted into contempt of her clemency and defiance of her authority, sent
Essex to the block ; and how, when the Countess, on her deathbed, tortured with re¬
morse, sent for her royal mistress, and confessed her sin, Elizabeth seized the dying
woman and shook her in the violence of her passion, adding the awful words,
" Woman, God may forgive you, hut I iiever will! "
Poor, unhappy Elizabeth ! Proud, vain, pitiless as she was, we cannot refuse her
our pity when we think of her lonely, unloved existence.    She never knew her
278 THE  ATTEMPT.
mother ; her father neglected her, her sister hated her, her brother disinherited her;
Leicester, whom she loved so passionately, insulted and deceived her; Essex, no
doubt, had a soi-t of fondness for her, but it was merely the fondness of a high
spirited boy for a doating old woman, who petted him one hour, and scolded him the
next; who gave him an estate to-day, and boxed his ears to-morrow. We can al¬
most forgive Elizabeth these savage words at the death-bed of the unhappy Countess,
when we reflect with what remorse, and anger, and woe, she must have listened to
that confession, and beheld that fatal ring. Why did she let her wounded pride
hurry her into signing the death-warrant of her favourite, before she had ascertained
his guilt beyond the possibility of doubt 1 Strong as were the proofs of his crime
and impenitence, yet had they been ten times stronger than they were she should
have paused for investigation and complete assurance. Did she experience nothing
of that strange paradoxical feeling, which, I suppose, no man can understand, and
which almost every woman knows, when our minds are fully convinced that a thing
is, and our hearts as fully persuaded that it is not—when we almost knoio a thing
to be true, and yet we don't believe a word of it ? No, surely Elizabeth felt nothing
of all this, or, proud though she was, deeply aggrieved as she felt herself to be, she
could not in such haste have doomed her young favourite to the scaffold.
Here are more rings—a whole boxful of them, which a gigantic Highlander is
offering for the acceptance of a girl who stands before him, a girl so small and slight,
that at the first glance you take her for a child, and, at the second, wonder if she can
be a fairy. Her harp lies beside her, and the Highlander points to it as if to tell
her that the jewels he offers are the well earned reward of her song. She takes a
ring from the box. Why does she start and grow pale as she looks at it, and why is
the brow of the Highlander darkened, and why are his eyes filled with a wild and
unnatural light, as the girl shows him the device on the ring—a death's head sur¬
mounting two crossed daggers 1 The Highlander is Allan M'Aulay, the maiden is
Aiinot Lyle ; and if any of my readers find this explanation insufficient, let them
turn to the Legend of Montrose, and thank the chance which directed them there.
Who could write about rings, and forget those which Portia and Nerissa gave
to Bassanio and Gratiano, and took back again, and gave again 1 with all the mirth,
and confusion, and astonishment, and anger, and joy that attended the various givings
and receivings. " All's well that ends well," and no harm, and a great deal of fun,
came of the double episode of the rings in the " Merchant of Venice; " and no doubt we
like the play better for having a good laugh after the almost painful excitement and
interest of the trial.
THE  ATTEMPT. 279
How many more rings there are, to the full as famous and as interesting as any
I have mentioned ! There is the copper ring that King Olaf gave Queen Sigrid for
gold, and gave her mortal offence thereby ;
" If ia his gifts he can faithless be
There will be no gold in his love to me."
and Count Bertram's ring, in " All's well that end's well;" and the ring that Ellen
Douglas received from " Snowdoun's knight," and restored to "Scotland's king3 "and
Preciosa's ruby ring, in Longfellow's " Spanish Student," and the Magic Ring in
" L'Orlando Furioso j" and " Das zerbrochene Ringlein" in the pretty plantive Ger¬
man " Volkslied ;"
" Sie hat mir Treu' versprochen,
Gab mir ein'n Ring dabei ;
Sie hat die Treu' gebrochen,
Das Ringlein sprang entzwei."
But, though " the ring is round, and has no end," I must make an end of this essay,
and that without delay; for I am sure that most of my readers must have heard
quite enough about rings for one "day; and if there are any who wish to hear more,
I think it is highly probable that they have rings of their own, about which they
may weave a romance much prettier than any that I could tell them. Dido.
(solitude.)
Having in a former paper taken that view of life which relates more imme¬
diately to our connection with others, we shall now proceed to think of it as chiefly
concerning our individual self, and our training for those duties consequent iipon
intercourse with the world. The best preparation for finding pleasure in society,
and for turning it to advantage, is solitude. No one is really capable of enjoying
society worth the name who cannot derive pleasure from being alone. This may
appear strange and contradictory to such as do not understand the word " alone " in
the sense in which we take it. We are, perhaps, never less alone than when we re¬
tire within ourselves: physically removed from all concourse with our fellow-men; we
can than mentally wander among them—see more clearly than when with them
their true characters—analyse more clearly their actions, and pei'liaps arrive at a more
just appreciation of their motives.    We shall have time, too, to detect any untruth
280 THE   ATTEMPT.
or falsity that may have been practised upon ourselves or others, and thus can put
ourselves on our guard for the future. From criticism of others, a just man will in¬
variably be led on to self-criticism; he will see what in himself is wanting, and will
go forth from such reflections more powei'fully armed against himself, and better
prepared for the fight.
Now, siich mental exercises cannot possibly be enjoyed by one who has no
tastes beyond the giddy whirl of fashion. Any girl, even, who has been subjected
to a season's " going-out," day after day, night after night, must know, if she have any
mind at all, how, when the excitement is over, she is utterly worn out—in mind, at
least, if not in body ; she must surely then feel that it would have been well for her
if she had resolutely retired sometimes, though it were only to the precincts of her
own chamber, and there thoroughly reviewed her experiences, concentrated any in¬
formation she had acquired, giving it time to settle in her mind before it has the
opportunity of escaping altogether, as, without this process, it certainly would.
Then, how much fresher, with how much renewed vigour will she re-enter the gay
arena, and, we may be sure, less harm and more profit will she then derive from it.
But let our meaning not be mistaken, nor let it be supposed that what we now
say is antagonistic to the opinion expressed in our former paper. The apparent con¬
tradiction is jjerfectly reconcilable. Either solitude or society carried to extreme is
bad. " Virtue itself turns vice, bemg misapplied," and it is only to those who seek
retirement for its j^roper use that we address ourselves. Compulsory solitude is not
what we advocate; that only defeats its own object, and renders its victims morose
and morbid; dead to all interests and questions of the day ; disposed to take a most
one-sided view of things, and often construing most unjustly their words and
actions. Perhaps there is no gi-eater penalty than " solitary confinement " when it is
laid upon us by circumstances, and we are compelled to bear it. Its opposite is
often equally oppressive; their effects are, however, curiously similar,—both, if
indulged in, tend to encourage indolence in its every form. A surplus of gaiety
causes a deplorable amount of brain-emptiness, as will also a surplus of solitude.
But it is of the advantage of the latter on which we would now enlarge. A
pure mind need never fear to give free scope to its fancies. In solitude, the mind is
thrown back upon itself, and if allowed freely to wander whithersoever it wills, tra-
vei'ses a vast amount of space, and touches ujDon an infinite variety of subjects.
These are suggested, partly by its own subtle imaginings, and partly by what it has
come in contact with in the world. The force of concentration can then be brought
to bear on those topics which best suit the individual case of the thinker, and from
THE   ATTEMPT. 281
mere faucies thoughts will shape themselves into fixed principles, influencing the
whole after-life. It is not difficult to discover who of our acquaintance are in the
habit of thus giving themselves up to self-communion—the difference in manner and
conversation is so marked ; habits of thought have been formed which can be traced
through the whole conduct of the man ; there is a meaning in what he says, so con¬
trary to what we see in one who, without this reflective disposition, apjiears to talk
for mere talking's sake, and to make those most hap-hazard remarks so wearisome to
listen to.
Under what conditions were most of the greatest discoveries in science and art
made 1 Not in the busy haunts of men, but in the silence of the laboratory,—and
just so in the less ambitious sphere of ordinary life; it is when we voluntarily re¬
move ourselves for a space from its tumults,and allow our own "self" to be our sole
companion, that our thoughts will soar the highest. Or, let us in our seclusion take
an author, in the form of some worthy record of his thoughts, for our companion,
and let us perase them in silence and leisure. We shall soon find that more enticing
employment could scarce be devised,—and, be it remarked, studies pursued, and ideas
imbibed in solitude, take the most firm and lasting hold upon us. Or, again, let our
retreat take the form of a stroll in the " pathless woods," or by " the lonely shore,"
with nought save nature, and her impressive music near us. Ah ! he who cannot
enjoy that is indeed to be commiserated ! Those who are thus capable of being
happy in solitude will never experience that terrible feeling of loneliness to which
those must be subjected who, finding their sole jjleasure in gaiety, are nevertheless
sometimes compelled to be alone. An insatiable desire for excitement betokens a
vacant mind ; such must ever be a burden to its possessor, and no marvel if he
should seek temporarily to lighten such a burden by rushing into dissipation. It is
a most happy condition of mind when we can cordially echo the poet's words :—
" To sit on rocks, and muse o'er flood and fell,
To slowly traoe the forest's shady scene,
This is not solitude ; 'tis but to hold
Converse with nature's charms,  and view her stores  unroU'd,
But mid'st the crowd, the hum,  the shock of men,
This is to be alone."    ....
Kathleen.
282 THE  ATTEMPT.
BEING  MSS.   TEMPOEE   CAKOLI   PKIMI. NOW  FIRST   PUBLISHED.
Before giving you the letter that I spoke of, from Arthur Egerton to Lord
Saxford, I must do my best to meet a difficulty that possibly might arise in the
mind of any one who would trouble himself to consider the subject,—how comes a
letter from a stranger, and sent to Lord Saxford, amongst the private correspondence
of our friend 1 Well, honestly, that is a question I cannot myself answer ; at least,
with any degree of satisfaction in imagining that I have ajjproached the truth. I
can only suppose vaguely that it is not the orignal, but only a copy, kept as we now
should keep a diiplicate of any especial communication to rather a particular person ;
I can think of no other way of accounting for its appearance here. I asked my
la%vyer-cousin, Frank, the other day, if he could give me any infonnation respecting
this certain document, but after a slight inspection he gave it up. " I don't think
I can tell you any more about it than you know already, Marie ; it got here somehow,
or you wouldn't be in possession of it now, that's a 25lain fixct; can't you be satisfied
with having it, without wanting to know what no one can tell you ? Ah ! female
curiosity, as your estimable brother observed just now." So I was obliged to remain
in uncertainty; and I fear you must fain bear me company, unless you can form
any theory of your own in the matter that will give you more satisfaction. But I
will let the epistle speak for itself 3 haply you may find out some reason, that I have
failed to discover, why it should turn up now amongst the correspondence of our
fi'iend Hubert ; noiis verrons !
"To ye righte honourable and noble gentleman, ye Earle of Saxford, of Wolfe-
woode Castle, in ye countie of Westmoreland, and of Saxfordham, by ye Eiver
Thames, in ye countie of Middlesex :—these :—
My Lord,—By youre lordship's expressed desire to be informed of ye state of
Master Hubert Willoughbie whenever I coulde chance to sende a letter, I nowe doe
myselfe ye greate honour of addressing yoii upon this matter. Since I did youe to
wit, of Master Willoughbie's greate and imminent peril, and of ye verrie greate hurtes
that have happened untoe him, he hath lyen sorelie sicke, nighe untoe deathe ; and,
indeede, I have often thoughte that he muste needes die, that it was verilie impossible
that he shoulde ever recover agayne. But nowe, thankes be untoe God, he is some¬
what amended; his lefte arme, ye which he did grievouslie breake in two places, is
THE   ATTEMPT. 283
ah'eadie muche better : and his otlier hurtes, of which youre lordshipe hath been in¬
formed, are, by ye skill of a wise physician, alsoe releeved ; and ye fever which
did soe greatlie oppresse him hath nowe departed; but hath left him sorelie
weake and spent. Therefore can he by no means write untoe youre lordship
himselfe, as he woxilde have gladlie done, but hath deputed me to be his secretary.
And he doth especiallie desire me to give his humble and obliged dutie untoe you,
and to thanke you muche for youre exceeding goodnesse untoe him ; yet doth he
thynke that it will be verrie long ere he can returne untoe Whitehall; but he will
surlie make your lordship acquaint with his doings so soone as he can leeve this
place. He doth desire greatlie to goe untoe Chester, where he hath friendes, and
there to stay ; but of that anon ; at this present, he cannot leeve his bed.
As for mine owne selfe, I am not soe sicke as my friende; yet am I not soe
welle as I coulde wishe for mine owne comforte; but able to attend untoe Master
Willoughbie to ye best of my poore abilities. God be thanked that we are both in
ye lande of ye living, and not buried aneath Irish grounde. Pardon me, most noble
lord, for thus writing at suche lengthe untoe youre lordship ; but it was as youre
lordship did desire me to doe.
And nowe, I doe pray God to have youre lordship ever in His most holy keep¬
ing ; and I doe begge, my lord, that he will allowe that I doe further more subscribe
myselfe as, Youre lordship's most humble, most obliged,
and ever most duteous servant.
This 16th daye of January, Anno 1642. Arthur Henry Egerton.
Written at ye house of Andrews Johnstone, at Kirkfannocher, neare untoe
Port-Patrick, in Scotland.
"To ye righte honourable ye lord Saxford, at his mansion of Saxfordham,
hard by ye river Thames, at Chelsea, neare untoe London."
Speede thee welle, post, and tarry not till thou hast reached Jaire London,
Now, at last, we shall hear some details of Hubert's stay in Ireland, and of the
manner in which he (and, I suppose, Arthur Egerton as well), escaped from the
fiendish massacre of the Saxons and Protestants by the Irish ; for here follows a let¬
ter, bearing date some weeks after the last, and addressed to our Chester friend,
Eliot Warner. It ajopears to have been written at different times; and the writing
is somewhat trembling and uncertain ; but after young Egerton's lugubrioiis account
of our  Hubert's bodily welfare, we cannot much wonder at that; for it would
284 THE   ATTEMPT.
have been little marvel if the last note we transcribed had indeed been his farewell
to Eliot, and ourselves too. We must, I am sure, feel very glad to welcome him
back, as it were, almost from the borders of the grave, and once more to be the re¬
cipients of his confidences imparted to the good Eliot. Here is the lettei-—well done,
Hubert, it is really very lengthy for a sick man's production:—
" Eliot, my dears goode Eliot, God is goode—far, far better to ye worste of us
than ye beste of us deserve ; and how goode hath He not been to me ? He hath kept
me alive from a multitude of devils incarnate ; He hath brought me through verrie
sore sicknesse and horrible paine ; from ye jawes of deathe hath he snatched me, and
I am alive nowe to thanke Him. And I doe thanke Him, my goode friende—thanke
Him heartilie; for verilie I had often thought never to have moved from my bed, save
to be canied to ye church-yard. I am not as yet able to doe muche; but nowe that I
am at all recovered, I doe hasten to writ© to thee as muche as I may, that thou mayest
see I am yet alive, and doe thynke of thee. But I will begin and telle thee how I have
fared from ye tyme that I did leeve Dublin Castle to go untoe ye northe, until nowe.
Thou knowest I did fare welle at Dublin, for I did write thee a long and fulle
epistle soone after I did come untoe Ireland ;* ye Governour was ven-ie courteous,
and did receeve me verrie kindlie ; and I did live happilie and gaylie ye while I was
in ye citie. I was greatly surjirised to meete suddenlie one daye with Master Arthur
Egerton, nephew untoe Master Francis Egerton of Cottiswoode House, in
Gloucestershire, and one with whom I had become acquaint at Whitehall. He is a
fine fellowe, this Arthur; and alreadie had we beene fi-iendes before he did departe
to goe untoe his uncle's house; he did carrie a letter for me untoe my kinsman, Ber¬
tram Willoughbie, and had besides done me, several tymes, some small actes of kind-
nesse. I was slowlie walking downe from ye Castle, where I had beene honoured
with an audience from ye Governour, when I met Arthur face to face in ye streete.
We cache did marvelle greatlie to see ye other, for he did not knowe that I was in
Ireland, nor was I informed that he was out of Gloucestershire. He did telle me
how that he had come over on private affairs, that had his uncle with ye lord
Dominick Garriemout; and that he had beene in Dublin some month or more. Soe
we did forthwith become fast friendes ; and when my lord, ye Governour, did desire
me to carrie some messages of importe untoe Coleraine and Belfast, Master Egerton
did willinglie agree to give me his companie thither, as he had no more occasion to
remayne in Dublin.     Soe from Dublin we did sette forthe one morning, on our way
* This letter must be lost, as I have searched for it in vain, and have not been able to discover it.
THE  ATTEMPT.
285
to ye northe, bravelie armed and equipped, and attended by Arthur's servitor, one
who had beene with him manie years; and I had a certain Irishman I had gotten in
Dublin, a Pi-otestant man, yclept Patrick M'Donnell, a righte goode ladde, and a
brave one to look to, whom I opined I covilde truste ; though Arthur sayd that, for
his part, he did thynke no Irishman coulde welle be trusted; for that they all,
Romans and Protestants as welle, did hate heartilie ye Sassenach stranger.
It was ye last week of October that we did sotte forth; and we did proceede by
easie stages, not wearying ourselves, nor tiring our horses and serving men by too
speedie journeying. Ye countrie, as we passed along, did appear outwardlie quiet enow;
but I did oft tyme mark ye scowl on ye face of ye hoste, when we woulde putte uppe
for ye nighte at some hostelrie, when we were plainlie perceeved to be Saxons, that did
bode us no goode. Neither did it boote aughte that my servitor was an Irishman, for it
was soone discoverable that he was no Roman, but a true Protestant; and that woulde
onlie make us to be ye more frowned upon by every Irishman we did come upon.
But, notwithstanding all ye frequent indications we did have, more and more
increasing as we did ye farther goe from Dublin, we did still push on, littel doubt¬
ing but that we shoulde reaclie Coleraine or Belfast in safety. But that we did not;
nor, an I live a thousand lives, will I ever be found upon Irish grounde agayne—
and soe saith Master Egerton; and goode and fuUe reason we both have soe to saye.
"We had one evening come untoe a small inn standing on ye highe roade, and
called, in ye Erse or native Irish language—" Ye O'Neil's Golden Stirrup-Cup"—I
doe thynke, for ye reason that once a great chief of ye O'Neils had halted his horse
there as he came from ye hunting, and had called for a flagon of wine ere he departed.
Our steedes were stabled, and we ourselves warme by ye fyer, for it was a cold night;
and ye two serving-men, Patrick M'Donnell and George Sampson, were sitting oflT
from us at a littel distance, and talking together in a lowe tone. Presentlie, two
dark men, of ill-favoured mien, did come in, and sitting themselves downe, did call for
a measure of wine, and something to stay their hunger withal; and soone vippe did
come mine hoste, and muste needes sitte downe and drinke and converse with them.
They spoke but in a lowe tone, and then in their owne tongue ; soe coulde we not
catch aughte of what they sayd ; but I coulde nowe and then see M'Donnell listening
most earnestlie untoe them, but tayking good care not to lette them see he was soe
doing. Nowe and then, too, I did catch ye names of ye lord M'Guire, and of lord
Charlemont; and they seemed to be speaking miiche of one. Sir Phelim O'Neil. Then,
as they grew more hotte over their wine, they did seeme to caste manie lookes at us,
and to be speaking of us ; yet collide we not for certaine saye.    I seemed, from ye
286 THE  ATTEMPT.
verrie firste of ye two men's in-coming, to imagine they coulde bring no goode with
them ; and I did resolve to be greatlie on my guard, and to warne Egerton soe to
doe likewyse.
Ye nighte was wearing on ; it was welle-nighe half-past ten o' ye clocke, when
they all three rose, somewhat ye worse of all their wine ; and ye hoste turned to me,
and sayd insolentlie—" Hark ye, Saxon, I am a-going to shewe these goode gentlemen
untoe their chambers ; and then, when I come backe, I will shewe you youres ; I have
no late hours kept in my house." To ye which surlie speeche, though my hotte
Willoughbie bloode alreadie began to boile, I answered civillie, that we were tii-ed,
and woulde gladlie goe to reste when he listed. So these three walked away, none
too steadily, closing ye door after them.
As soone as they were fairlie gone, M'Donnell rose uppe, and, with his face as
white as ye fulle moone, came swiftlie tintoe us. " My masters, for God's sayke, do
not reste one hour longer in this house than ye can ; ye rising hath begun ; ye lord
Charlemont hath beene slain, with his household, by Sii* Phelim O'Neil; and ye Irish
people have vowed to kill every Saxon and Protestant in ye countrie. And they have
beene talking of us—they knowe not I doe understande Erse—they meane to slay us
as soone's they may; our onlie hope is to leeve this, fly for ye coaste, and, if we can,
mayke for Scotland.
We all looked on eache other as men who awaite deathe ; Sampson coulde not
speake for horror ; and Patrick was panting with fright. Then sayd Arthur, in a
lowe, hoarse voyce :—
" Hubert, we muste all goe to bed, but, let us keep together—we muste, whatever
betyde; we can but die once; but, an we are separated, our lives are lost; then
when all ye house is still, we miiste creepe forthe of ye windowe, and hie to ye stable,
and flee whither we can; they may be awake, and may catch us; but that we
muste chance. Patrick, by all that's holie, do not let them knowe you knowe aughte
of Erse ; George, be as if naughte had happened ; and both of ye looke welle untoe
youre pistols and rapiers.    Hist—he is coming—backe untoe youre seats."
[To be continued.^
1. Snob. 3.    Owl.
2. Neva. 4.    Weal. K. H. D.
THE   END.
«
mym
•> ;  ••:
1     :;
nii
fli^^^H^BlWffi i
0 h'
SlEnSIS!Sl5nHl51SL«!^«5ISl«^^IISi5^^ ,r
I.-'   i  '   i  ■   i
'   K  ■   : <   I. •   1
s
il515il5il5l515n5l!515A5il5l5l5il5U5l515l51^^
