lSl5lSlSl5l51Sl5lEaE;i5lSa5l5l5l5l5l515l5l5U=aSlS^^
f
1
If
I
I
4U?
5
S
S
.^IHTSU^JISISI
i
w
'■'' <p/'
wm^m^.
\ m'<.^
"^'.■M
\b:,"--
5^-:^
Ja
^:. m
/^■../.
■,,-et^m^^:,
iiloii^ u, u-^v.
THE ATTEMPT
A   LITERARY   MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED   BY   THE   MEMBERa   OF   THE
LADIES' EDINBURGH ESSAY SOCIETY.
VOLUME    V.
"AUSPICIUM   MELIORIS   ^ V I."
PRINTED FOR THE LADIES' EDINBURGH ESSAY SOCIETY.
COLSTON & SON, EDINBURGH.
MDCCCLXIX.
CONTENTS.
A December Morning, from the German of Julius Mosen, by Dido,
An Invalid's Trip to Normandy, by Zoe,
A Eeverie, by Noli-me-Tangere,
A Sketch, by Veronica,
A Sketch of an Election, by Esther,
Assounta, by Maa Alta,
A Tour in North Wales, by Alma,
Autumn Thoughts, by Zoe,
Beneath the Beeches, by Dido,
Dona Juanna, by Mas Alta,   .
Frank's Churchyard Vigil: being a Lawyer's Ghost Story, by Ma« Alta,
Glimpses of Shere Ali, by Elsie Strivelyne,
Grumbling Peter, by Agnella, ....
Ladies' Sales, by Dido, .....
Life of Lacordaire, by Enai,   .....
Lines on a Monument in Wimbome Minster, by O. M.,
Lines written on a Cloudy Day in England, from the Italian of Rossetti, by Echo,
Longing, by O. M.,
Mediaeval Chivalry, by Lutea Reseda,
Mrs Browning, by O. M.,
My Sister Minnie, by Dido,   .
On the CUfifs, by 0. M.,
On the Picture called the Huguenots, by Millais, by 0. M,,
Origins and Derivations, by Minnehaha,
PAGE
273
176,211
164
262
20
120
68, 92
263
210
166
193, 217
156
39, 57, 87, 140
7
151
61
87
162
63, 78, 107, 134, 145, 169, 202, 225, 241, 279
274
73, 97, 128
23
223
187
ii                                                                                    CONTENTS.
PAGE
Our Own Place, by Mas Alta,                ......              96
Our Ragged Schools, by Des Eaux,
.      82, 102
Reading, by Enai,    .....
49
Since Agnes Died, from the German, by Dido,
240
Social Bores, by Alma,            ....
44
Something about Everything, by Elsie Strivelyne :—Every-day Justic
®»
183
26035
~                                        '—~—' ■ '  inuiiJc-oitJKiiess,
• '"— — iX±aiUdi^crOf
2361
i.¥J.y   X>UUKOj
Spanish Soldiers at Mass, by Mas Alta,
154
St Patrick's Day, by Mas Alta,
175
The Castle of Loch-an-Eilan, Rothiemurchus, by Mas Alta,
249
The Daisies, by E. H. S.,       .
127
The Force of Simplicity, by Lutea Reseda,
13
The Harp without the Crown, by Mas Alta,
19
The Hound of Peel Castle, a Legend of Man, by Mas Alta,
30
The Lake, from the French of Lamartine, by Dido,
190
The Legend of St Hubert, from the German, by Veronica,
201
The Paradise of Golfers, by Dido,
25
The Royal Scottish Academy, by M. E. T.,
113
The Siege of Roxburgh, by Dido,
66
The Song of the Highland Exiles, by E. H. S.,
186
The Three Sisters, by Meigeag Bheag,
5
The Tower of Truth, by Noli-me-Tangere,
182
The Viking's Chains, by Meigeag Bheag,
151
The Violet, from the French of Dubos, by Echo,
44
The Waverley Novels, by R. N.,
121
Thoughts by the Shore, by Ethel,
155
Translations from Heine, by 0. M.,
106, 259
Woman's Work and Woman's Culture, by des Eaux,
265
Wordsworth, by Des Eaux,    .                .                .                .                .
•
251
INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS.                                                                  iii
INDEX
OF CONTRIBUTORS' NOMS DE PLUME.
PAGE
Agnella,
39, 57, 87, 140
Alma,   .
44, 68, 92
DBS Eaux,
82, 102, 251, 265
Dido,
7, 25, 66, 73, 97, 128, 190, 210, 240, 273
Echo,
44, 87
E. H. S.,
.     127, 186
Elsie Striveltne,
.1, 35, 156, 183, 236, 260
Enai,
49, 151
Esther,
20
Ethel,   .
155
LuTEA Keseda,
.    13, 63, 78, 107, 134, 145, 169, 202, 225, 241, 279
Mas Alta,
19,30,54,96,120,166,175,193,217,249
Meigbag Bheag,  .
5, 15]
M. E. T.,
113
Minnehaha,
187
Noli me-Tangere,
.      164, 182
0. M.,   .
23, 61, 106, 162, 223, 259, 275
E. N.,   .
121
Veronica,
.     201, 262
ZOE,
176, 211, 263
THE ATTEMPT.
Somttf/mg uhont (^ij^rgtljiitg.
ROIIANCE.
Few things are so easy as to criticise after the manner of common-place critics ;
and certainly nothing is easier than to jeer at what we do not understand ; an off¬
hand manner, a flippant phrase or two, appealing alike to the general sense of the
ridiculous and the self-satisfaction of the listeners—and we may bring contempt on
the best feelings of our nature, or throw doubt on matters which have seriously oc¬
cupied and perplexed graver minds. It is an old truth that to be wise we must
know our own ignorance ; and it is equally true that in order to form a correct judg¬
ment we must be independent of all shallow prejudices : habit makes our matured
opinions second nature, and probably there are many beliefs both important and tri¬
vial which we all hold, and which, on reflection, we discover to be founded on
nothing more than the bare assertions that run so fluently off the tongue of society.
Among such we class the contempt that is bestowed on what is usually termed
romance, a contempt, which if it owns any otlier cause than custom, pi-obably arises
from a non-perception of the differences between the various kinds of the sentiment
condemned.
There has, we are bound to suppose, been an original at some time or other for
a type of romantic womanhood which should be relegated entirely to weak novels
and second-rate plays, and which has been finely caricatured in " Lispings from Low
Latitudes ;" but if these beings do exist, who, looking through their curls, proclaim
that romance is so nice, we can only say it has never been our misfortune to meet
them.
Perhaps it may be in part from the consciousness that the confession would be
A
2 THE  ATTEMPT.
roughly gi-eeted, but few care to say that they are romantic ; the higher form of the
feeling, indeed, shrinks from observation or comment; only the lower proclaims itself,
involuntarily sometimes, but almost always in a manner more or less hurtful to the
person chiefly concerned, if not to others as well. Both forms are equally ignored
by men, and considered in the light of feminine weaknesses, for it is rare indeed that
in the hurry and struggle of life, a man can resist the systematic training in selfish¬
ness, everywhere so liberally bestowed, sufficiently to retain the fresh sympathy and
generosity that are the groundwork of a noble romance. Accejjting this fact, and
refraining from comment thereon, we will confine ourselves to the subject as it affects
our own sex, and we may say broadly that not only is many a womanly charm
derived from the presence of romance, but its entire absence must indicate either
a most exceptional character, or one that has been educated and hardened in a bitter
school.
To feel instinctively what does or does not constitute a given quality is a far
simpler thing than deliberately to analyse it; in order to do the first we would recall
the old Komaunt, with its mingled fantasy and truth, its straining after the heroic
and impossible, and its vmderlying recognition of the beauty of self-devotion and the
power of faith ; in order to attempt the second, we would say that Romance is a com¬
prehensive word for the numberless and ever-varying moods and ideas produced by
the following causes, either singly or together—first and chiefly, association; secondly,
sympathy ; thirdly, the faculty of idealization with which women are largely gifted,
and to which the neglect of solid educational training gives undue prominence.
Romance in which this last influence predominates is of the kind we have termed
harmful, because it is in some degree false ; it belongs to extreme youth, and partakes
therefore of the charm which surrounds the spontaneous and uncontrolled ebullitions
of a simple and inexperienced mind, but its chief characteristics are impetuosity
and unreality.
Its first development takes place in early girlhood, vinder the form of friendship ;
and to onlookers there is something very pathetic in the imbounded faith and
enthusiastic partisanship with which its object is regarded ; it is an evidence of the
awakening in the child's heart of a craving instinctive in every woman, a craving
which, while the strength and energy are still unworn, desires scope rather to give
love and devotion than to receive them. To such sentiment one ending is almost in¬
evitable, though while a callous mind sees merely the ludicrous side of the catas¬
trophe, it appeals strongly to one capable of the higher romance. Sometimes the
friends differ widely in age, and circumstances prevent the elder from continuing a
THE   ATTEMPT.
one-sided intimacy; more often it is mutual, but springs from an erroneous estimate
of character; each girl is worshipping what, did it exist, would rightly merit her
reverence, bvit the beauty that has won her is a perfectly ideal thing, and in time
she must make this fatal discovery; she will be slow to realise it, and will lay the
blame in every quarter but the right one; then follow accusations, recriminations,
silences, and final farewells, in which each retains a sense of her own rectitude and
injury : probably, after a short lapse of time, neither could correctly describe tho
cause of separation ; and an enduring tie might be woven with the broken threads,
but it most frequently happens that meeting in after life, the ci-devant schoolfellows
can in no wise discover by what process they attained the semblance of sympathy.
This, then, is the first chapter of many a life's romance ; the second is similar,
but more lasting in its consequences, for it hovers on the boundary of that world of
love which cannot be crossed without permanently affecting the whole life. iSome
accident of companionship, some fascination of manner, some similarity of taste,
attracts the fancy of the girl, now treated as a woman, though a child in the
world's ways, and she undergoes a second time her previous experiences, but with
this difference, that the result depends less on herself, and almost entirely on the
character of the man who has impressed her imagination, far more than her heart.
These histories, too, like the first, have commonly a bitter termination ; there
is something of the world's talk " so ready to give blame"—so powerful to gall a
high spirit; something of thoughtless amusement on the part of the man ; and then,
when the circumstances which brought about the flirtation, bring also its conclusion,
there follows, on the part of the woman, the awakening which destroys her childish¬
ness for ever. Fortunately, the shock aids her to perceive how widely the reality
differs from the knightly hero of her dreams, and enables her elastic nature to
recover itself, and form, in time, maturer attachments, which contrast vividly with
her girlish fancies. If, unhappily, as sometimes happens, the wound has been deeper,
it will leave an ineffaceable scar, and will be the means of warping or destroying
much in her that is most gentle and endearing. It has been well said, that a heart
driven back upon itself, whether it belongs to man or woman, is a fatal possession ;
and the better it was originally, the worse is likely to be its eventual fate. In the
grave of a dead romance, other precious things are buried, and for them there is no
resurrection.
"We must look upon these early instances of the feminine capacity for idealisation
as on the first efforts of a child to walk—full of uncertainty, and resulting in many
falls, but, nevertheless, needful to the full development of its strength.    The power
4 THE   ATTEMPT.
itself, when duly controlled and balanced by the other elements of romance, notably
sympathy, which renders it unselfish, is among the best gifts bestowed on woman by
Providence. By means of the halo thus thrown around them, she goes through a
hundred daily duties, which, but for this, would be a hateful drudgery^—she invests
with a sacred character much of her work that is in itself distasteful,—and it is by
one or other of the various manifestations of romance that new sources of delight are
opened up to her, her lesser pleasures enhanced, and a peculiar charm given to the words
of those she loves.
Certes, those who have " been in Arcadia," would never have entered the beauti¬
ful region had they been destitute of the faculty which qualities them to appreciate
it. Memory, too, that boundless storehouse of a woman's treasures, owes half its
loveliness to the presence of Romance ; a fact that one of our great novelists has been
quick to perceive in the touching passages that describe the cjmic, deprived of the
pleasures and pains of remembrance, and the softening influences which finally bring
him to his knees with the quaint old prayer, " Lord, keep my memory green."
The more romantic a woman is, the more completely does she live in the past,
and that this should be so is a melancholy proof that only during a very limited
portion of her life can she obtain full scope for her natural healthy joyousness to spring
up ; the shadows chequer her path far more frequently than the gleams of sunlight,
but over each of these she lingers with a fond intensity of feeling very pathetic to
witness. There are few of Adelaide Proctor's sisters who cannot echo the cry that
fills her beautiful little poem, " A Dead Past:"—
"Spare me the Past, see, you have taken from me
The Present, and I murmur not nor moan ;
The Future, too, with all her glorious promise,
But do not leave me utterly alone."
Utterly alone, indeed, without this silent companion; the present, too, grows
precious when time has softened or obliterated its pains, and lighted up its joys, but
while passing it pales before the recollection of some sunny period when life was
young and beautiful; the Future is dim, and promises, as years roll on, rather in¬
crease of cares than increase of happiness ; but the Past is our very own; she can¬
not be changed or marred, but will wear, as long as our eyes can gaze upon her, the
same deathless smile, that smile that is near akin to tears.
Rightly looked at, Romance is not to be derided as an acquired folly, but ac¬
cepted as a primary instinct, and, as such, necessarily of some use ; it is to be treated
THE  ATTEMPT. 5
as we treat the delicate flower, that with careful training is a fitting source of plea¬
sure, but which must become a rank weed without the gardener's pruning knife.
Subject to such judicious control, it will pervade a woman's life like an under current
of music, and as we know that " love does not make all things easy, it makes us
choose what is difficult;" so Romance, which merges in love, makes the difficult part
easier, and goes far, by lightening many a burden, to render existence more harmo¬
nious as a whole. Elsie Strivelyne.
Cj}^ %l^xn Sisters.
In the bosom of the Christian lowly.
Ransomed by his Saviour's precious blood,
Dwell three sisters, pure, and true, and holy.
Making it a temple of all good.
One with radiant features ever smiling.
And with eyes of Heaven's own joyous blue ;
From each danger all the stings beguiling,
Throwing over all a golden hue.
One with face in darkness as in lightness
Ever calm, unruffled, and serene.
Gazing upwards to Heaven's changeless brightness.
Oft through shadows darkly spread between.
One with face aglow with light from Heaven,
Shedding brightest sunshine all around :
She, the highest gi'ace to sinners given,
Sitteth queen o'er these three sisters crowned.
Would'st thou know their names 1 'tis IIo2)e that ever,
Gazing far beyond this world of woe,
Dreameth of a glory fading never,
And of joys that everlasting flow.
THE   ATTEMPT.
And thus gazing past earth's sin and sori'ow,
Catcli her eyes the radiance of Heaven's blue,
Gaining glimpses of the joyful morrow,
And of glories hid from mortal view.
Faith her name whose gaze serene uplifted,
Through the cloudland piercing, dwells above
And that regal sister, highest gifted.
Call we, as we bless her, holy Love.
Christian ! with life's thorny journey weary,
When the pathway to the heavenly goal
Seem to lead through desert lands and dreary.
Still let heavenly Hope possess thy soul.
But should shadows press so dense before thee,
That Hope, trembling, spreads her wings for flight.
Still let Faith, serene-eyed, hover o'er thee,
Till she guide thee on to perfect sight.
But perchance, so deep the floods of sorrow
Faith herself may seem thy grasp to flee.
And, forgetful of the cloudless morrow.
Nought but rayless night thine eyes can see.
Then, though angry floods roar ever near thee,
Cling thou still to all-subduing Love ;
She will bid back Faith and Hope to cheer thee
Till they leave thee at the Home above !
Meigeaq Bheag.
-^=>HSH=^-
THE   ATTEMPT. 7
I DO not know a more glariag and flagrant mode of doing evil that good may
come,—a more open and shameless system of swindling,—a more wasteful and expensive
institution,—an employment more wearing to the body, or more injurious to the tem¬
per,—than the fashionable mode of raising money known as " a ladies' sale," or " fancy
fair."    How the evil continues so general, and of such frequent recurrence, baffles
my comprehension.      I have seldom indeed met an individual who enjoyed the prac¬
tice ; most people are heartily weary of it; and many thoroughly detest it.      (I be¬
long to the last class with all my heart and so\il.)      No doubt a large sum of money
is frequently obtained ; but I am sure no one who has had experience of fancy fairs
will deny that it is dearly earned.   The hard labour (for serioiisly, it is hard labour);
the waste of both " the raw material," and the completed manufacture ; the inevitable
expense ; the mortifications and vexations (and these are neither few nor small!); the
fatigue, the disappointment, the humiliating repulses which are the lot of every sales¬
woman ;—it would be difficiilt indeed to obtain pecuniary compensation for all these
evils.    But even without calculating all these, I feel very sure, that were the cost of
all the work-materials added up, some slight addition made for the manufacture, and
this sum subtracted from the total proceeds of the sale, the balance, in nine cases out
of ten, would be next to nothing.    If people would only have the common sense and
economy, when interested in any particular object, to give at once, in hard cash,
what they can afford, they would find it a better plan both for themselves and the
charity in question, than to spend their money in silks, and wools, and braids, and
variegated garments, their time in manufacturing articles which are occasionally
useful, generally ornamental, hut frequently neither the one  nor  the other,  and
their strength in acting as unpaid shopwomen to a very phlegmatic and unthank¬
ful public, often a very suspicious and depreciative one.    But although this view
of the  subject,   when propounded, is  generally admitted  to  be  true;   although
five-sixths of society vote ladies'   sales an unmitigated bore, and  the remaining
sixth will not deny the charge; still the evil exists, and flourishes, and spreads
on all sides.     Few,  I am sure,  of the  lady readers of  this Magazine have  not
been engaged, at some part of their lives, in promoting more or less actively a
fancy fair ; and those who have been so fortunate as to escape this portion of the
social treadmill, may expect that their turn will soon come.     Few of us have not
experienced the tumult of preparation, which for weeks before the gi'cat day, con-
O THE  ATTEMPT.
vulses the household whose mistress has, in an unguarded moment, consented to
preside over a stall at a ladies' sale.    Few are ignorant of the Herculean labour, the
unremitting diligence, the quenchless energy, and the amount of time, necessary to
bring matters to a satisfactory result.    Letters must be written to friends, far and
near, containing requests for assistance, and assurances that " the smallest contri¬
butions will be thankfully received;" mingled coercion and entreaty must be judi¬
ciously employed to obtain aid from every likely and unlikely quarter; every hand¬
book of ladies' work must be studied for suggestions ; every brain racked for new
ideas on the all-important subject, every member of the household pressed into the
service, every sjiare moment employed in the construction of some contribution to
the stall.    The house is turned into a workshop ; every room is strewn with ribbons
and silks, wools and canvas; ingenuity is tasked to the utmost to devise new and
striking combinations of colour, startling slipper-patterns, astonishing tea-infusers,
and cardboard articles which baffle all attempts to discover the purpose for which
they are intended.     Every talent is utilised for the work in hand; are jon an
artist?   then you must employ yourself ixpon water-colour drawings,   resplendent
illuminations, and fashionable caricatures; are you musical 1 appropriate airs must
be selected and aiTanged for the guidance of the band; do you dabble a little in
poetry ? you are expected to compose verses in laud and exaltation of the bazaar and
its moving cause, which will be printed and distributed among the stall-keepers ; are
you tasteful and ingenious, with qiiick eyes and nimble fingers 1 then hard indeed
will be your task, and various will be your occujiations.    Potichomanie will demand
your attention one moment,  dressmaking the next;   in the morning you  must
arrange the colours of a sofa-blanket, in the afternoon assist in manufacturing paper-
flowers, and in tlio evening prepare a children's scrap-book, in the midst of which
latter employment, while your fingers are covered with paste, and your lap full of
paper-cuttings, you will be summoned to put the finishing touches to some fabric of
delicate-coloured silk,  and requested to " be very careful not  to soil it."     One
member of the family is generally told off to the responsible work of dressing dolls,
which are to be arranged in every variety of costume, from the lady in the last ex¬
treme of fashion, with. Jichu, panier and buckled shoes, to the interesting infant in a
scanty garment of white cotton.     Once engaged in the all-absorbing round of oc¬
cupations, you may jiist as well make up your mind to resign all hopes of freedom
until the bazaar is over.    If, after an afternoon of diligent and energetic furtherance
of the mighty work, you venture to take up a book, or to open the piano, the eye of
maternal vigilance is immediately upon you.    " My dear ! don't you think you should
THE  ATTEMPT. 9
make haste with that piece of braiding ? or stay—I wish you would sew ribbons upon
these book-markers that Polly has finished ; and if you would chop a little flannel to
stuff my silk pincushions, it would be a great help," Kesistance is useless—down
goes your book, and the chain is round your neck again.
As the great day draws near, contributions from charitable friends begin to
come in, and the house is besieged by messengers bringing bags and boxes, parcels
and bundles, of every shape and size. With eager expectation, and not a little
anxiety, you examine the first half-dozen consignments, but the excitement gi-adually
wears off, and you begin to be tired of the often-recurring arrivals, especially as in
many cases they bring you nothing but disappointment. Much of the work is good,
and beautiful, and acceptable ; but alas ! much of it is eminently the reverse. Many
of your friends seem to have selected, with labour and pains, the most awkwardly-
shaped i^atterns, and the most hideous combinations of colour which ever offended
against the rules of taste ; some articles are composed of material so dingy that even
a Quaker would not be attracted by them, and others seem to have been planned by
the lady who declared her preference to be for " nane o' your flaunting colours, but
jist plain red and yellow." Half-soiled cushions, dingy slippers, and badly-made
pin-cushions, abound ; and one or two large parcels, which raise your hopes high on
their first arrival, turn out to be nothing more than—paper matches! This is a
most exciting period for the little ones of the family, who take a lively and some¬
times very inconvenient interest in the whole of the proceedings; their valuable
assistance is proffered at every turn, their curiosity knows no bounds, and numerous
indeed are the disasters which theii- energy occasions. On returning from a short
walk, you will find, to your consternation, that the juveniles have opened and un¬
packed a box of contributions which has arrived during your absence—and direful
are the consequences of their industry. A rose-coloured sachet, lined with white,
bears three distinct imprints of Harry's thumb; Jack has completely smashed an
elaborately painted fan ; while Cis and Polly are weeping over a doll which, but a
few short hours before, nodded its head, winked its eyes, and squeaked when
violently compressed, and which will now perform none of these feats, in consequence
of having executed them all by turns, without a moment's intermission, for an hour
and a-half by the clock, in spite of all the eloquence of nurse, who now assures the
delinquents that " they have killed poor dolly quite dead, and she won't never come
alive any more !" Great are the lamentations, and many the promises of amend¬
ment, but before the day is over, Cis has ransacked your work-box, Polly has pulled
out mamma's knitting-pins, and the boys have  put the large black doll, whose
10 THE  ATTEMPT.
toilet has just been completed, into papa's shower-bath,  " to try and make its face
clean."
At last the preparation is at an end, and the consummation of the sacrifice ap¬
proaches. On the morning of the bazaar, if you are to be among the saleswomen,
you must be up with the lark, and hasten to the scene of action, to arrange your
wares, and prepare your spider-webs for all unwary flies. If you have not had previous
experience of the process, you will soon discover a hundred omissions in your pre¬
paration. You have forgotten to bring a tablecloth, and twine, and pins, and scissors,
and wrapping-paper, and above all, change. You have no money-box, no raffle books,
no pencils; but at last all these mistakes are rectified, your various wants are sup¬
plied, your stall is put in order, your corps of assistants stationed at their posts, the
public pours in, and the business of the day commences. And what a business it is !
I do not know a more trying, humiliating, thankless, and fatiguing task than that
of a saleswoman at a fancy fair. It won't do to wait like an ordinary shopwoman,
till you are asked for some article, and then produce it quietly and civilly ; Si. fancy
saleswoman must obtrude her wares upon the public, and foi'ce them upon reluctant
customers; she must have a ready tongiie to puff her goods, a quick wit to parry all
objections, a mind undaunted by repulses, rebuffs, and even impertinence, a fund of
persuasive eloquence, and a considerable amount of coolness. All these she must
have, if she wishes to be successful; and the unfortunate apprentice who is too shy,
too slow, too stupid, or too plain looking (it sounds coarse, but I am afraid is a fact),
to prove attractive to the public, will soon find herself quite out of place at a ladies'
sale.
It is not very long since I had the misfortune to assist at one of these bazaars,
and from a combination of the above causes, was speedily pronounced by my fellow-
apprentices to be utterly unfit for active service. I was therefore requested to sit
down in one corner, and devote myself exclusively to counting out the change, and
wrapping up the parcels. With the greatest joy, I obeyed ; and in the intervals of
my employments obtained considerable amusement from observing what passed in
the busy scene before me. I need not describe the stalls; everyone knows what
they were like ; glittering many-coloured masses, composed of the most varied and
dissimilar materials; a lofty room, with flags waving here and there, evergreen
wreaths and coloured calico, a mingled odour of flowers, fruit, and scents, and the
strains of a band softened by the distance,—such was the framework apparent to the
various senses. Then the sellers, in their bright dresses, becoming head gear,
jaunty aprons, and little badges worn on one shoulder, their faces sparkling with ex-
THE  ATTEMPT. 11
citement, looked very gay and pretty; certainly, it was, in all its externals, a very
attractive scene. But looking a little longer, the faces seemed too eager, too bold
and self-confident; the voices were too loud, and the words too daring and frivolous ;
but I did not mean to moralise, and prefer to dwell on the comic side of the picture.
Assuredly the comic element was there in abundance ! One tall middle-aged gentle¬
man first attracted my notice ; he had been apjirenticed to one of the stalls, and sent
forth with instructions to rafile a large baby doll. He held the doll in one hand,
clutching it with a despairing grasp, which was not to the advantage of its well
starched robes ; he was evidently very shy, and I could see that in the raffle-book,
which he held open, there was but one name entered. I suppose it was his own.
His chances of success were small, and he evidently thought so himself, for he stood
gazing around hini with a look of tragic despair, which under more favourable cir¬
cumstances, would have been sublime, but which in his position was merely and
purely ridiculous. Poor shy gentleman ! he was sadly out of place at a ladies' sale,
and I am sure it will be long before he again enters one.
Near him was an old gentleman—stout, rosy, and good-humoured-looking—in the
centre of a knot of girls, bent upon victimising him.    One was extolling the beauties
of a pair of worsted slippers; another entreating him to purchase a pair of fire¬
screens ; a third, with beseeching glance, drew his attention to a collection of dried
ferns ; a fourth flourished a cigar-case ; while a fifth sternly demanded his name and
address, and entered them in a raffle-book.    Bewildered and astonished, anxious to
oblige, but dumfoundered at the multiplicity of rapacious demands, he gazed from
one to the other with a puzzled smile an da deprecating expression of countenance ;
but his tormentors knew no mercy, and in five minutes he was completely fleeced.
In strong contrast to him was another old gentleman, seated at the refreshment stall,
and partaking of a substantial lunch.    Not a word nor a look did he deign to grant
to the clamorous suppliants who besieged him on all sides ; vain were their blandish¬
ments, useless their entreaties, unavailing their arts; not the most attractive goods
in the bazaar could tempt him, nor the most fascinating saleswoman touch his flinty
heart; he sat unmoved amidst the noise and bustle he occasioned, eating sandwiches
as  calmly as if in his own dining-room.    Near him a distracted materfamilias in
vain endeavoured to reconcile her ideas of economy and her desire to oblige her
friends  and  help  the bazaar,   while  her  children  besieged her   with  clamorous
demands for sixpences, and the stall-keepers at once tempted her with attractive speci-
' mens of work, and horrified her by exorbitant demands.   A small brother and sister
with their little all clenched tightly in one hand, went prowling round the stalls in,
12 THE   ATTEMPT.
search of a judicious mode of investment, with faces grave with anxiety, and eyes
and mouths open in amazement.    Here, the belle of the bazaar reaped a golden
harvest by telling fortunes ; there, the " funny man," who is never absent from such
scenes, displayed conjuring tricks to an admiring audience at twopence a-head.    In
one corner stood a most amusing group, consisting of two fashionable-looking young
men who had volunteered to assist in the sale, and who were doing their utmost to
persuade a stout elderly countrywoman to take shares in a raffle for a resplendent
fender-stool, whose beauties they extolled in glowing terms.    The honest woman,
half shy, half amused, evidently delighted with the fender-stool, but thoroughly
bewildered by the mixture of fun, familiarity, and flattery poured forth by her
aristocratic petitioners, was no proof against their blandishments; her leather purse
was in her hand, and she was just about to impart her name and address, when loud
demands for change interrupted my observation of the scene, and I saw her no more.
Thankful indeed are you, when, at a late hour of the evening, you are released from
your post; but your labours are not over, for a second day, nay, sometimes a third,
the bazaar continues open, and each day the labour grows harder and more thank¬
less.    The work begins to get soiled and dingy, the gorgeous garments of the dolls
have lost their first gloss, and the most attractive of the goods have already been
disposed of.    Fatigue begins to tell upon the sellers;   their spirits flag, and their
energy abates; while the customers have grown wary and economical, and will take
nothing that is not " a bargain."    Alarming reductions of price are made upon all
sides; and, trying though it is to see work, which cost you hours of patient labour,
going for next to nothing, this is one of the evils incidental to ladles' sales, and you
are obliged to " grin and bear it;" while, often after you have reduced some article
to a price under the cost of its materials alone, a chilling, " Oh indeed !" is the
response, and the customer passes on in search of some more tempting bargain.    This
is especially the case on the last evening of the sale, when prices become, generally
speaking, a mere farce, and all hope of fair and reasonable trafiic is at an end.    Sale
by auction is generally commenced at this stage of the proceedings, and though it
contributes much to the mirth of the evening, it does not produce any great pecu¬
niary result, as the goods are generally knocked down at less than half their value.
In fact, on the last evening of a bazaar, raffles, and similar speculative amusements,
are the only sources of income worth speaking about; and ingenuity is tasked to the
utmost to devise new modes of gambling in a small way; one of the last inventions
being a large tub filled with bran, in which, at long intervals, half-crowns, lockets,
scent-bottles, and the like lie perdu; upon payment of sixpence, the customer is
THE  ATTEMPT. 13
allowed to thrust his hand into the bran, bring out a handful of it, and take his
chance of a prize. The last evening is a great time for the juvenile relatives of the
stall-keepers, who all appear " to join the dreadful revelry," and after getting rid of
their little fortunes, proffer their valuable services as assistant shopkeepers. Cis and
Harry go out to try and make money with a lucky-bag; Jack drives a roaring trade
in matches at a penny the bundle; Polly prefers to remain behind the stall, and
after half-an-hour's strenuous endeavours, triumphantly presents you with a sixpence;
you receive it with thanks and applatise, but, on inquiring further, are somewhat
startled to find that Polly's customer has received, in return for the sixpence, a col¬
lection of dried ferns worth fully half-a-guinea ! but you cannot find it in your heart
to damp Polly's exultation by reproaches, and are, besides, too completely wearied to
care much about the matter. The heat is overpowering, the noise is deafening, the
crowd excessive, and turbulent withal. At last the band strikes up the "National
Anthem ; never were sounds more grateful to your ears ! and after a little trouble in
clearing the room, a good deal of ingenuity in collecting and packing up, in the
smallest possible amount of time and space, what goods remain, and a final surrender
of the money-box into the hands of the treasurer, the bazaar is over, and you are free
to accord to mind and body the repose so ardently longed for, and so much required.
Dido.
Amongst the causes and results of genius and success, we are too apt to over¬
look the force, which, for want of a better name, I have designated simplicity. In
our compound, and ever-drifting language, words arise, grow, and alter as they grow,
with a power that is almost life. Many entirely change their meaning, even within
the tethering line that binds them to their roots ; some i)rune their growth, and slip
their cuttings into other words; while others, unable to stop the growth of a double
idea, and unable to find a substitute or a synonym to bear the burden of either, are
forced to carry two meanings on one branch, that can only be distinguished by a light
borrowed from surrounding circumstances. Such, to a great degree, is the fate of
this word, whose root is " sine plica," without a fold. The root explains the mean¬
ing—it has no folds laid on to hide under-layers of things evil or more mean; no
convolutions or crevices to conceal lurking secrets ; no wrinkles to throw shadows on
14 THE  ATTEMPT.
the rest; no plaits to mingle materials unequal or unfit. But there is a vast differ¬
ence in the way men accept this rendering. Its worst form is only an exaggerated
guilelessness—as iucapable of suspecting evil as of planning it. It is sad to see how
much it is sometimes made to suffer, but though I would look reverently and ten¬
derly upon it, as on the spirit of a little child, I would not desire to dwell in the
simplicity that consorteth with ignorance—the nature is more rich that striveth to
" be wise as serpents, but harmless as doves."
The nobler meaning of the word may be found in us in two ways—first, in the
simplicity of aim ; second, in simplicity of character; which two are not in all cases
necessarily conjoined.
First, the simplicity of aim generally proves its own value by the success which
it generally commands. How frequently, indeed so frequently as to be considered
almost a certainty, does any one, setting out in life with a determination to do any
one thing, attain his desire, if health and life be granted, over the issues of which he
has comparatively little control. Let the end be what it may, let the man be who
he may, he follows after it determinedly, always in the nearest path possible to him,
keeping his eye upon it, treading down obstacles, or driving round them, as the
stream, calm-flowing until rocks come in its path, leaps over them in boiling wrath,
or eddies round them in conquering impetuosity, or mayhap carries them along with
it, to serve but as excitement what meant to be an obstacle.
The possession of a simple aim implies certain qualities—first, a certain degree
of discernment to compare and select, amid all possible aims, this chosen one ; second,
firmness to resist distractions therefrom; third, perseverance to follow it unto the
end, for the pursuit of a single aim is never given up. It is the man of many aims
who has time to look at his own comparative perseverance ; the man of a single aim
lives unto it continually, no other love intrudes to break its force.
Does one give up honour and happiness, rest and peace, yea, all good things
earthly and heavenly, in order to win his idol—gold 1 Will he not die rich in the
possession of his desire 1 Alas ! that he must flee from the wealth that fled not
from him. If any complains, or endures, without complaining, the consciousness
that the fortune and success permitted to other men are denied to him, lie may gener¬
ally very easily discover for himself some disturbing element, some distraction or
division of his aim—making it not simjile, but complex. How many of us have seen
some hard-working honest youth, the only support of a widowed mother, chained to
his desk in a dark room, in a dull town, for a pittance small but sure, quenching the
burning day-dreams and aspirations of his youth, at the altar of what he calls fate ;
THE   ATTEMPT. 15
while he sees his equals and his school-fellows drinking up the spirit of learning, and
thence pouring forth their burning souls to a recognising world, or wandering abroad in
search of the riches that make rich. He sometimes sadly sighs that no success or
sunshine has come to lighten his hard and heartless work, at which the best part of
his youth seeiiis vainly spent. But he has laboured with divided aim. He set his
duty and affection first—and every drawback from the perfect satisfaction therein,
lay in the strain of each distracting desire, reaching out after other noble things and
good. He sought his mother's hippiness, and gained it; and he should almost be
himself content though a smaller measure of worldly success should flow unto the aim
his heart set second in his life. He, too, might have dwelt in books to satisfy him¬
self, had he cared to leave his mother to waste slowly through years of pinching
poverty. He, too, might have left her lonely, and gone abroad to win the gold of
eastern shores, had he risked the chance of coming home laden therewith, too late
to close her eyes, when they had shut hopelessly upon the life that held no light
for her.
Neither should the hard student, nor the poet, mourn greatly and wonder, though
their labours should bring them neither fame nor wealth. Was the glorious muse
they worshipped and sought after, only, after all, Queen Money ? If not, if they
wished both their inner treasure and a gilded show, their aim is also divided, and
their powers dispersed; the union that is strength deserts their faculties, and they
neither fully satisfy themselves with their high hopes, nor the world, with its chang¬
ing whim, though they should lower their muse to the level of the minds from whom
they would win applause ; or spend their learning in extravagance, upon base gold
that perisheth.
Men are not always the happier or the richer in their own natures, when they
thus yield up themselves to their Idea—in fact, it is generally otherwise. Had it
been happiness they sought, that also might they have attained. The student who
makes himself thus perfect in some one branch of learning is seldom so happy or so
generally interesting as the one who has learned enough of the language of all, to be able
to speak, though with stammering lips, to every man who passing by saluteth him.
The one seems to have built for himself a tall upright tower of many storeys, each
but a step wherewith to reach a higher step, in never-ending breathless toil. Tnie,
from the pinnacle the view is grand; the air is fresh and pure so far above the heavy
mists of the dull gross earth. But the solitude is saddening and oppressive—he has left
behind the earth, but he is no nearer to the sky than he was before. Though he
towers above some clouds, the eternal heavens stretch out above him just as far
16 THE   ATTEMPT.
away, and more unfathomable than ever they seemed before; his learning gives no
key to the cipher on their brow. And his yearnings grow to pain in a solitude not
meant for man; and when the winds come, and the storm, and the tempest, and he
feels his foundations tremble beneath him—he looks down almost with envy on the
long low buildings near, with firm foundations and broad base, that feel not the
shock, and that open their many chambers to the passer-by, so that cheerful mirth
within shuts out the outward gloom. But he should not murmur, comfort was not
his aim, nor society, nor mirth, nor safety.
Charles Fourier, I have seen quoted, announced that " the attractions of man
are proportioned to his destinies, in other words, that every desire predicts its own
satisfaction." To that I would add " every desire," if so be that each one man has
but 07ie desire !
Each ancient Roman merged his will in the Koman thought of the pre-eminence
of the Roman name. Each deed he did was for the good of Rome, each hope he had
was in the Roman power. Did not the nation win its hope 1 did not its single-aimed,
unscrupulous generals wave o'er the world the Eagle Standard of the " Senate and
the People of Rome ?"
Did the First Napoleon permit aught to interfere with his gigantic schemes of
self-aggrandizement ? So entirely simple was he in his aim, so gifted by nature and
his times to reach unto it, that he absorbed a nation into his will, and made it work
with him and for him. He said of himself " nothing has been more simple than my
elevation ;" nothing was so. Born in the time, he caught the tide at its flood. Dar¬
ing, unhesitating, unscrupulous—he knew what he wished to do, what he resolved to
do, what he would do. He knew no impediment to his will, no hindrance to his
purpose, but like Acestes' arrows, caught fire as he flew towards his high-set mark.
Hills sunk before him, and river-beds grew dry; ice melted from his path, and
armies vanished as the morning mist; locks sprung without a key, hearts opened at
a word j his talent was King-ship, and he became an Emperor, though he could never
have made a knightly noble, or a thorough gentleman ;—many of his deeds would
have stained a scutcheon of a long descent. "Well has he been named by Emerson,
Jupiter Scamin or the Scamp Jupiter—so much power, so much unconcern for the
means power used to win more power. Yet even he fell. The impetus of past
success urged him beyond his aim ; he went too far ; his " vaulting ambition over-
leapt itself, and fell on the other side." Or rather one came against him with an
aim more simple ; and a further power of which I yet have not spoken—whereby
the Duke of Wellington could conquer the hitherto Invincible Napoleon.    Did
THE  ATTEMPT. 17
Palissy the Potter suffer one intruding aim to hinder him in his out-reaching after
his brittle desire 1 or, if he did, was it not that one which caused all the discord and
difficulty in its pursuit, when he allowed love to interfere with labour; and the food
for his family, with the fuel for his china 1
Let all make sure that theirs is a single insistent and consistent aim, on which
no other longing has a weakening power; over which the love of rest, or peace, or
luxury has no ascendancy; in pursuit of which they give neither rest to their soul
nor slumber to their eyelids ;—then, surely shall they see their desire and shall be
satisfied. No wonder then, that St Paul spoke hopefully of the attainment of the
high mark he ever set before his eyes ; for his life proved that somewhere beyond it
he must have gained the desire he set beyond this life. He never strove to " serve
two masters" here !
Second, simplicity of character. This, unlike simplicity of aim, does not
command worldly success, yet from the same reason, that it does not often seek it.
It often finds itself impelled to spend its power on 'many little duties, which together
make up the sum of a worthy life. But, whereas each one who has a single aim,
must be more than conscious thereof, as of something that lies somewhat external to
itself; this simplicity of character is almost necessarily unconscious of itself, and
thinks not its deeds great things that naturally flow, nor reckons itself high, when it
knows no worse. But very frequently the simple soul doth choose a simple aim.
And when our nature and our aim draw our whole heart in one direction; when our
outer desire springs from our inner beiflg, when all our forces gravitate upon one
point, when our sun and our moon conjoin their attractions ; then have we the
floods, and the spring-tides in our life, " that, taken at the full, leads on to fortune."
Every one who lives always in, and up to his idea, when he has an opportunity, Tnust
become great.
What first gave power to the British name in India, but the simplicity of soul
and aim of our great Lord Clive, who opposed to the artful and deceitful policy of
men like Omichund, his fair and honest truth %    More bewildering to them was this
than the deepest dviplicity and art of a very Machiavelli, whose plots they might
have expected, and whose plans they might have undermined.   But they could neither
expect nor understand a man like this, who loved his country more than private
gains, his honour rather than a falser fame; who preferred to be a good servant
rather than a faithless despot, and to deserve success rather than to pilfer it; who
loved the truth more than gold, and his good name than diamonds.    No wonder
that he overcame them all.    Yet is it in the nature of such artful men to distrust
c
18 THE   ATTEMPT.
and to malign the simple soul, whose workings they cannot comprehend, and thence
would trace to deeper arts than even their own.
Herein also lay the secret of the power and success of the man Cromwell, when,
in troublous times, he stretched out either hand to arrest an avalanche, and saved the
jjeople of England alike from slavery and anarchy. No one can read his own
u.tterances without being struck by the simplicity therein, nor look upon his life and
aim without seeing the consistency necessary to simplicity. Yet had he many adver¬
saries then as now. Too great to be spanned by their feeble grasp, too simple to be
understood by their more tortuous and complex minds, he stood against many of
his day and generation, as Clive stood afterwards before the dispositions of Hindostan.
'No wonder they sought to find the greatest duplicity in the most simple. Had
they not been brought up to calculate on the changes of the words and the plans
of the faithless king, who " wavered like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and
tossed 1" Yet even this Charles had a simple end in view, and had he had more
power, more wisdom, and more simplicity, doubtless he would have enforced his
notion of the royal prerogative upon that generation of the English people.
It would take volumes to discuss fully all I fain would prove. I can but bid
you watch how this simplicity shines forth in literature, joined, not to ignorance, but
the wisest mind, for as Emerson says, " It is the last lesson of modern science, that
the highest simplicity of stnicture is produced, not by few elements, but by the
highest complexity." We might speak of simple manners, the result of simple
minds^ or of simple tastes which render men more independent of fortune, and
therefore more free to live; for our riches increase to us as our desires or necessities
decrease. But there is a simplicity of aim that makes the character simple ; there is
a simple character that can have but one single aim, as God is one. In such sim¬
plicity have men of all ages, counted all things but loss if so be they might win
Christ—the early Christians, the German Reformers, the Wycliffites, the Albigenses,
the Huguenots, the Covenanters. What a glorious galaxy has history recorded for
us—whose simjile aim seemed, to their simple souls, more dear than wealth, or friends,
freedom, or life ; yea, a bright group that shall shine as the stars for ever, reflecting
the light and the image of Him who, from His own nature, must necessarily be all
pure simplicity. It is long since it hath been written by Thomas a Kempis, " The
more a man is united within himself and interiorly simple, the more and higher
things doth he understand. For with two wings a man is lifted up above earthly
things; that is, with simplicity and purity. Simplicity must be in the intention,
and purity in the affection, and they both aim at God." Lutea Reseda.
THE  ATTEMPT. 19
if
%\i Par^ fcai!lj0ut t\t Crfltoit."
Oh Erin ! long gone are the days of thy glory !
Thy splendour, thy happiness, live but in story ;
Where once there was joy, now is weeping and wailing.
Where gladness once reigned, now is sorrow prevailing ;
In the dust low thou liest,—how sadly fall'n down !
Still thrills thy sad harp, but oh, where is thy crown 1
Where is the crown that once shed its brave splendours
O'er the brow of thy chieftains, thy kings, thy defenders ?
Where is thy palace, thy Tara the Proud,
Its courtiers, its princes, its gay thronging crowd.
Its fair bright-eyed ladies, its minstrels, whose lays
Told nobly of Brian's high prowess and praise 1
All past, and for ever—thy glory is vanished.
From thy harp the blithe joy-notes are echoless banished,
Thy Tara is ruined, thy chiefs are long dead,
" Requiescat" has over thy power been said ;
And the race of thy princes has died from the land
That groans 'neath the weight of the Sassenach's hand !
Yet still through the darkness, thy harp's mournful numbers
Awaken strange dreams in thy sad restless slumbers,
Dim visions of days in that shadowy time
When thy pi'oud head rose free in thy liberty's prime ;
And as the dream thrills thee, thou stirrest in sleep
And the bondage-chains check thee, and powerless keep.
Oh Erin, my own darling Erin ! I stray
Far, far from thy lakes and blue mountains away ;
I hear foreign voices, strange faces I see—
But my heart ever clings, my lost country, to thee;
And my eyes fill with tears, on this lone distant shore.
To think that I never may look on thee more.
20 THE  ATTEMPT.
Yet first in my love, 'mid thy bondage and pain,
Oh land of my life, thou shalt ever remain !
When I wake at day's dawning, my thoughts to thee turn ;
For thy green shades I long when noon's throbbing fires burn;
And my last prayers at eve, ere sleep falls, are for thee,
Sweet son-owful Erin, far over the sea !
Mas Alta.
-^==§■^3^
% Skefcfj 0f mx ^hciioxi.
During the general election that has just been causing so much interest, we
happened to be staying in a quiet English town, which was roused from its usual
condition by the excitement of a contested election. There were two seats, and
three candidates—one "blue" and two "yellow." The old town divided its
favours equally, and had always before returned one of each party to Parliament;
but the " yellows," looking to the new voters, were not content with their share,
and determined to try for both seats. For some weeks, the talk had been of nothing
but canvassing, and the chances of success of each party, and every one was glad when
this part of the election was over, and the eventful day that was to decide the matter
arrived. By the kindness of some friends^ we had secured a room opposite the
hustings, with a good view, but unfortunately just out of ear-shot; however, we con¬
sidered that on an occasion like this, to see was better than to hear, and as both com¬
bined were unattainable, we contented ourselves with the first.
Enthusiasm for the cause induced iis to display our colours, and we put on as
miich blue as we could, but prudence told us that it might be as well not to ex¬
pose ourselves, so arrayed, to the " roughs " of the other party, so we left home very
early, and reached our destination before any considerable crowd had begun to
assemble. We found ourselves in a snug little room, with a roaring fire, and so
many glasses of water provided for us, that we thought the good woman of the house
must have fancied that we meant to harangue the mob from the window, and had
made provision against possible hoarseness. As the hour approached, the crowd
rapidly increased ; many of them were women, and they seemed even more eager
than the men.
At last a great noise of tramping and shouting announced the approach of one
or other of the candidates ; yellow handkerchiefs and ribbons waving from the win-
THE  ATTEMPT. 21
dows, and cheers from the " yellow " part of the crowd, told nnmistakeably which
were coming. They walked up with a steady regular step, accompanied by the
members of their committee, three abreast, and followed by what the newspapers
call " a large body of their supporters," very rough supporters, I should say.
When the cheers had somewhat subsided, and the two candidates had bowed
their acknowledgments several times, counter-cheers were heard from the " blues,'
and a movement in the opposite direction told us that the other candidate was on
his way.
"We got out our blue ribbons and handkerchiefs, and prepared to wave, and the
gentlemen of our party, by the help of the afore-mentioned water, prepared to cheer.
The " blues " had to come round a very narrow corner, just before entering the square
where the hustings were put up, and as they were very much jostled there by their too
enthixsiastic friends, their first appearance was perhaps not quite so imposing as that
of their'opponents. But when the candidate presented himself at the front of the
hustings, he received (I must again have recourse to newspaper vocabulary) an
" ovation." Our arms ached, our handkerchiefs were handkerchiefs no longer, but
mere remnants of their former selves, when at last the cheering subsided, and the
business of the day began.
I have neglected to mention the arrival of the Sheriff, but as all he did was to
read the writ in a perfectly inaudible voice, the omission is not of much importance.
As we could only catch a word now and then, I cannot be expected to give a
very intelligent account of the speeches which followed, (the mover and seconder of
each candidate, and then the three candidates themselves.) However, this little
drawback did not prevent our waving whenever our candidate or his friends were
applauded by the crowd. If we did not hear the sentiments they uttered, we could
easily imagine them, and we knew quite well that the bursts of cheering were called
out by references to "our glorious constitution," or to "those principles which the
electors of this city have always maintained, and will always continue to maintain,"
and waved accordingly. The few sentences we did catch, or rather only scraps of
sentences, were rather amusing. For instance, all we heard in the speech of. one of
the " yellow " candidates, was his asking, sarcastically, in reference to the " blues,"
" Where are they now ?" which elicited shouts of applause, and cries of " nowhere,"
and nearly the only thing we heard the " blue " candidate say was, " I stand here."
When the speeches were all over, the Sheriff called for the " show of hands."
It was really a most singular sight, more like a forest of peeled oaks than anyT;hing
else I can think of     To our anxious eyes it seemed almost equal, indeed we even
22 THE  ATTEMPT.
thought the " blues" had it, when the Sheriff, for once audible, declared it to be in
favour of the " yellow." We then comforted ourselves by saying that the poll almost
invariably goes the other way. After a few more rounds of cheering, the crowd
dispersed, large numbers accompanying the candidates to their different committee
rooms. We went home rather down-hearted in spite of ourselves, the show of hands
weighing jiretty heavily on our spirits.
Next day was even more exciting, though the excitement was more prolonged,
increasing every hour, and culminating at four o'clock, when the poll was closed.
The only thing we could do was to look as " blue" as possible, showing our feelings
by our dress, as we could not by our votes.
It is curious to obsei-ve how men, who probably never in all their life before drove
in a carriage, seem quite unable to walk when they are going to vote. Nearly all the
voters of the lower orders had to be driven to the poll; and gentlemen's carriages,
lent for the occasion, were seen driving back and forward, full of " free arid inde¬
pendent electors," of a class that one would rather not see sitting in one's carriage.
By two o'clock the " blues" had so far outstripped their opponents, that success
was certain, and it only remained to be seen by how many hundi-eds they would be
ahead.
At four o'clock the successful candidate was to speak from the window of his
committee room, so about half-past three we stationed ourselves in a window oppo¬
site, and from it watched the singular scene in the street. It was growing dark, and
the nari'ow street was filled with an eager crowd, waiting for the clock to strike
four, and for the hero of the day to appear. They were far too excited to be quiet,
and every now and then they raised a great shout or a storm of hisses, as cabs be¬
longing either to their own side or to their opponents tried to force their way through
the crowded street. A diversion was made by some street boys, who, I am afraid,
are always ready to go over to the winning side, bearing aloft an effigy of the de¬
feated candidate, which was soon lost to sight, and, when it re-appeared, was so torn
as to be scarcely recognisable.
It was getting late, and we were growing impatient, and hoping he would soon
make his appearance, when a gi-eat shout from the crowd announced that he had
done so.
" England expects every man to do his duty," and I think I may say, on that
occasion, we did ours. For fully ten minutes we did what we could to assist the
triumph of the conqueror, scarcely pausing for an instant, and then listened eagerly
to what he had to say.    We could, alas ! do anything but hear, and as the growing
THE  ATTEMPT. 23
darkness almost prevented our seeing, we were obliged reluctantly to leave while the
speaking was still going on. The election was concluded, on the next day, by the
formal declax-ation of the poll, but it would be mere repetition to give any account
of this, as the proceedings were very much like those at the nomination.
Esther.
©n llj^ €Mb.
I STAND on the cliffs, above the waves ;
I hear them roll through resounding caves—
God's organ-music. His minster-naves.
Memory opens her scroll to me,
Tales of the wild and the cruel sea—
Things that have been, and again may be.
Of the Hellespont, and the lover true
Who nightly bafHed the cold sea-blue.
To tell the old story that still is new.
Of the Norselaud heroes, who roved the seas,
Seeking their prey over waves like these,
Kestless and fierce as the rushing breeze.
And through the mist and the sea-born spray
I strain my sight o'er the ocean gray.
And a prayer goes up from my heart to-day.
To Him who tunetli the sea's wild song.
For all brave hearts that have striven long,
Tossmg the perilous seas among.
For loving eyes that watch and wait
At early dawn, at evening late.
For the precious ships that bear their fate.
24 THE ATTEMPT.
For children playing beside the door,
While the mother's heart is sad and sore
With the thought of him who may come no more.
For the human want, and pain, and woe,
That trusts its best where the billows flow,
. For the hopeless yearning that none can know.
O eyes that watch ! O hearts that sigh !
As weary day after day goes by,
With a faithful love that can never die,—
Trust and be strong.    The pearls lie deep.
Where the sea-weeds toss and the surges sweep—
He who keeps them your pearls will keep.
And give them back to your love at last.
Though it should not be till the trumpet blast,
When the waves of this troublesome world are past.
See, the white wings flash through the whiter foam ;
The sea-bird seeking his rocky home.
Over the breakers will fearless roam.
So fleet oxir souls over life's wild sea.
Through the stoims that darken so suddenly,
Unto the heaven where they would be.
Yet bring the wanderers home again,
O Thou who rulest the restless main.
To the hearts that are waiting in doubt and pain.
And bring us all, when our day is done.
To the waveless sea, and the cloudless sun,
Where the central calm of Thy rest is won.
0. M.
THE   ATTEMPT. 25
Reader, has it ever been your lot to dwell in a place where the whole popula¬
tion seemed, to an vmprejudiced observer, to be hopeless monomaniacs ? and not only
so, but all possessed with the same mania ] a place where business and recreation,
manners, customs, and conversation, were guided and controlled solely with
reference to one great occupation, one subject of surpassing and absorbing interest ?
then, and only then, can you form an idea of the state of society in a Scotch seaport
town, whose name will be patent to most of my readers when I call it the Paradise
of Golfers. It is possible that a similar condition of monomania may exist for a
time under the pressure of some great local excitement, such as a contested election,
a mysterious murder, oi*, in remote and rural districts, the arrival of a new minister ;
but these are temporary and transient fits of insanity, while the golfing mania which
infests the seaport aforesaid is constant and unchangeable; like Tennyson's brook,
" men may come, and men may go, but it goes on for ever;" and neither the snows
of winter, the blazing suns of summer, the most copious deluges of St SwitLin, nor
the "storm-wind of the equinox," can quench the ardour of those whom the fatal
passion has seized.
And do not suppose that it is in the absence of all other sources of celebrity and
attraction that the town has selected golf for its one absorbing occupation, and has
attained honour and renown for the facilities it afibrds to the devotees of the game.
Many and varied are the facts and fancies, the soui-ces of interest and occupation,
which render the town attractive to those with whom the golfing-fever is not all-
potent and absorbing. It possesses a University of no mean celebrity, buildings in¬
teresting alike to the antiquary and the artist; it boasts the ruins of one of the
noblest of Scottish Cathedrals, and the crumbling remains of a Castle whose history
is interwoven with some of our country's most stirring remembrances, among whose
gray, ivy-covered walls stories of battle and of blood, of tyranny and revenge, crowd
thickly on the mind, and where the very sea, as it washes up on the rocky founda¬
tions, seems to sing the story of the past. Then there is the harbour and all its
picturesque and interesting adjuncts; the rocks, where scrambling walks and very
primitive pic-nics may be obtained in the most easy and enjoyable manner; and
finally, the sea itself, an unfailing source of enjoyment, both active and passive.
And yet these distinctions and attractions are thrown into the shade, neglected,
ignored, for the one all-important, all-entrancing pursuit;   and many individuals
26 THE   ATTEMPT.
have lived in the town for months withovit ever seeing the rocks beyond the harbour,
exploring the Castle dungeons, or entering the Cathedral gates.
It is not my intention here to give any description of golf, or to express any
opinion regarding it—the first undertaking would be iininteresting and unnecessaiy,
the second presumptiious beyond expression. I mean simply to shadow forth, in
some degree, the state of unanimity which the inhabitants of the Paradise of Golfers
maintain with regard to this one great subject. One remonstrance, however, I
would in all humility and hesitation venture to set down; and it concerns so
deeply the female portion of the community, that I trust I may be forgiven for ex¬
pressing my feelings on the subject. I allude to the vitter exclusion of all subjects
of conversation (save those bearing upon golf) which prevails in the Paradise of
Golfers. At the domestic hearth, at the family dinner-table, in the ball-room, on
the promenade, vainly do you seek to elude the subject; everywhere it pursues and
haunts you, and save in utter solitude you can find no place of safety. O golfers of
Caledonia ! husbands and fathers ! brothers and sons ! will it not content you that,
in order to accommodate yoiir ardour for the game, all household arrangements have
been bi'oken in upon, all domestic comfort curtailed? will it not suffice that the
dinner-hour is first altered and then neglected, that the hours of repose are shortened,
breakfast hurried over, and reading and singing with your unfortunate female
relatives totally given up 1 is it not enoiigh that we sit alone in the house, and walk
alone upon the sands, that we explore the most precipitous rocks, and the most
obscure recesses of the Castle, without a single cavalier to aid or protect us, that we
go pic-nics with no one to carry the baskets, and practice archery Avith no one to
find our arrows for us ? is all this not enovigli to have done and suffered for golf, that
you embitter the small allowance of your society which you vouchsafe us during the
golfing season by incessant harping on the one eternal subject ? Have you nothing
further to impart to us in the way of table-talk than the particulars of that match
between Brown and Robertson, the reason why Smith's putting is so very uncertain,
and the precise length of that extraordinary drive Thomson took at the high hole ?
When darkness has put an end to the labours of the day, and the family is assembled
for half-an-hour's social converse, why, oh why, continue to discuss the "ifs" and
" buts" whereon the matches turned, to confuse our imderstandings with such terms
as " dormy," " the like," " the odd," and " the one off two," and to lavish abuse on
your partner, who has an unfortunate pecularity of invariably " topping his balls."
Grant us but this one request ^condescend sometimes to speak and hear facts and
fancies which do not bear i^pon golf—and all else shall be forgotten and forgiven !
THE  ATTEMPT. Zi
The universal mania spares neither age nor youth, neither the high nor the low,
the grave nor the gay ; all sorts and conditions of men are alike possessed by the
engrossing passion. Small children scarcely emancipated from the nursery, boys of
all sorts and sizes, young men, middle-aged men, elderly gentlemen, and hoary
patriarchs,—all these may be seen, any fine autumn morning, in the Paradise of
Golfers, sallying forth with clubs in their hands, balls in their pockets, excitement on
their faces, and mingled hope and fear in their hearts. Grave and reverend signers,
with large families and anxious minds, whose demeanour in Edinburgh is guiltless
of the slightest alloy of levity or frivolity, are transformed by the atmosphere of the
Paradise of Golfers into noisy, rollicking, reckless athletes. The gambols they
execute on the putting-greens, the extravagances they commit, the execrable puns of
which they are guilty, the extraordinary hats in which they figure, the roars of
laughter at each other's play which they send echoing over the links, combine to
render this class of golfers cue of the most interesting and remarkable to be found
on the green; though they are also among the very worst sinners in the way of con¬
fining their whole conversation to golf. Two rounds of the links per diem are gene¬
rally sufficient for golfers of this denomination ; and in the evening they may be seen
by dozens s-troUing along the links, surrounded by their families, fighting their
battles o'er again for the edification of their admiring and delighted wives, and im¬
parting the results of their experience to their younger sons. On Sundays, of course,
there is a lull in the excitement, and decorum requires that for the day golf must be
suspended, so far as actions are concerned ; but as regards thoughts and words, the
universal mania prevails with its usual intensity. In the afternoon walk on the
links, in vain do you seek to turn the conversation into some channel of greater
depth and interest than the ordinary one; the genius loci is too much for you : " the
game, the whole game, and nothing but the game" rises and sweeps away all other
topics; or if a few moments of silence give you a respite, you can easily perceive, by
the downcast eyes and distrait air of your male companions, that they are studying
some difficult "put" near which you happen to be passing.
A fearful impetus has been given to golf and golfing conversation by the insti¬
tution, in the Paradise of Golfers, of a round of eighteen short holes for ladies. And
here, again, I must remark that I do not intend to express any opinion as to the
suitability or the enjoyment of golf on the ladies' course ; I wish to confine myself
to a simple statement of facts. There can be no doubt that the mania has increased
infinitely in ardour since the Ladies' Links have become an institution in the Paradise
of Golfers, and all qualifications, mental and bodily, all gifts and graces, talents and
28 THE   ATTEMPT.
capabilities, of both male and female members of society, are estimated and appre¬
ciated according to the possessor's skill or want of skill on the golfing-course ; this,
and this alone, is the standard by which all qualities and acquirements are measured.
No better proof of the complete state of mania prevalent in the town could be ob¬
tained than by seating yourself near the starting-place on the Ladies' Liiiks some fine
August evening, watching the different groups scattered over the course, and con¬
necting the scraps of conversation which reach you every now and then. In the
evening the gentlemen, for the most part, appear upon tlie Ladies' Links, the elder
ones to rest on the benches and contemplate the gay scene before them, to chat with
the matrons and discuss the golf-matches fixed for next day, and the younger portion
to "coach" their lady friends and acquaintances, with a view to distinction in the
coming contest for the Ladies' Medal; so that in the evening the course is always
full, and there are generally five or six parties waiting their turn to start. The
excited faces, the anxious and solemn expression of some of them, the hopeless de¬
jection of others, the trembling eagerness with which the foursome players watch the
performances of their partners, will give you an idea of the fierce intensity of
the mania which possesses them. Listen to the disjointed sentences which reach
you from the groups scattered round the starting-place, and you will hear how the
most ordinary watering-place gossip, the most common every-day remarks, are all
tinged with the prevailing sentiment—all alike redolent of golf. " What splendid
weather." " Yes, but the links are getting quite burnt up—I hope the rain
may come in the night," or, "How far is your house from the church?" "Oh,
quite close, about the length of a cleek-shot." " There's a splendid put ! what's
the match?" "Have you seen the new Professor?" " Yes, and I don't think
much of him; he missed a teed-ball three times yesterday, and after that." " Mr
Leslie is going to marry Miss Johnston." " Yes, I wonder what she can see in him ;
I never knew a worse style of play than his." " Is she a nice girl ?" '' Oh, charming !
can do the I'ound in forty-seven."     " What a delightful man Mr Morton is ! they
say he is the longest amateur driver on the links "    " What a waste of time it is
for him to coach that little Miss Sinclair, she holds her club like a rake, and her
dress trails the balls about;" and so on, ad mfinitum. It is my fixed belief that, for
a fortnight before the Ladies' Medal was competed for, several of the fair enthusiasts
neither ate nor slept. I do not mean that they existed entirely without either
nourishment or repose, but they partook of both at long and irregular intervals, in
the most homoeopathic quantity, and in a hurried and indiiferent spirit, which greatly
interfered with the benefit to bo derived from them.    From dawn to dark, and indeed
THE   ATTEMPT. 29
considerably after dark, the Ladies' Links were crowded with the industrious and per¬
severing competitors practising for the coming struggle.    Yery amusing was it for
those who, having no golfing reputation to keep up, had no reason for nervous agita¬
tion—who, having no chance of success, were troubled with neither hopes nor fears—
very amusing was it for them to watch the flutters and falters, the agitations and
tremors, of the "favourites" for the medal; to see them anxiously examining each
other's scoring-cards, and commenting on each other's putting ; to hear Miss A., in
the seventh heaven five minutes ago at having accomplished the round in forty-eight,
receive, with a hysterical giggle and a toss of the head, the announcement that Miss
B. had scored two consecutive forty-sevens ; to hear Miss  C. proclaim,  almost in
tears, that she has "got quite out of her game," and means to withdraw from the com¬
petition ; to watch Mr D. marching round the starting-place, and announcing, with
exultation, that his wife can give Miss E. a stroke a hole, and beat her; to see Mrs
F.'s face of delight as her daughter informs her that she has just defeated Miss G. by
four holes ; and to behold the scorers of Miss H. and Miss I. scowling at each other
over the heads of their respective demoiselles, who have a slight difference of opinion
about the last hole.     Certainly no one who has watched the scene on the Ladies'
Links can doubt the enormous increase of the golfing mania wliich this institution
has   brought   about;   and   those who were   present on   that   day of   culminating
glory and excitement for the Ladies' Club, when their medal was competed for, must
have been convinced that, whatever might be the intrinsic merits of the game, it had
in this, its stronghold, achieved boundless popularity and undisputed sway.     The
unfortunate outsiders, who happened neither to understand the game nor to be ac¬
quainted with the competitors, must indeed have lieard ad oiauseam the various facts
and on dits of the competition; but when you are in Rome you mast do as the
Romans do, and when in the Paradise of Golfers, you must make up your mind
to golf or inaction—golf or silence—golf or solitude and desolation, and you may be
thankful when a celebration like the Ladies' Medal Day gives some variety to the
eternal subject. Dido.
30 THE  ATTEMPT.
Cfj^ f 0uittr of f £el Castle:
A Legend of Man.
The night was cheerless, and dark, and cold,
And the wind blew chilly o'er hill and wold,
And moaned in the ivy-boughs, that clung
To the castle walls, and shivering hung
From the battlements of the keep so high,
Looming out dimly against the sky.
Over the heavens, grim and dark,
Scudded the clouds, as some tossing bark
Driving before a winter blast
Flies over the billows, far and fast.
And here and there, through a rift between
The cloud-banks, a star might be faintly seen,
Twinkling and glittering, small and bright,
Like a tiny gem on the veil of night.
Darkly and heavily broke the sea,
On the black rocks beating constantly,
Tossing aloft the gleaming spray
As it hurried on in its perilous way ;
Roaring, and trampling, and foaming in might.
Echoing wild through the desolate night.
Ruddily over the waves below
Fi'om the guard-room fire falls a wavering glow.
Streaming athwart the tossing tide.
As trails through the midnight a meteor wide.
And wild and weird, on the shrill night blast,
Sweeps a sudden echo of laughter past.
And a loud fierce burst of boisterous glee,
The sounds of drunken revelry.
For the tables are drawn in the guard-room old.
And a merry carouse the troopers hold;
The fire roars hot in the chimney wide,
And the flames leap up with fantastic stride.
THK  ATTEMPT. 31
And glow on the faces bronzed and scarred,
And the strong rough hands, so brown and hard,
And flash on the helmets upon the wall.
And the burnished heads of the halberds tall;
And gleam on the flagons passed about
'Mong the noisy drinkers, Avho madly shout
A chorus fierce, and deep, and long,
To every verse of an ancient song
That one of them trolls, till the rafters shake
With the surging swell that their voices make.
The song is ended—and slowly then
Silence falls over the hall again ;
But only a moment—for one starts up,
Holding aloft a massive cup.
Filled to the foaming brim with wine
From far-off vineyards beside the Rhine.
His bold eyes glitter, and flush his cheeks,
As loudly the reckless soldier speaks :
" Aye ! yes ! you can all of you roar and sing
Till the strong walls shake, and the broad beams ring ;
And there's never a one of you, I'll be bound.
That misses his pull when the jack goes round;
Or would scruple this moment to draw his sword,
And ride to his death, at our captain's word.
But, however true in camp or fight,
There's not one here of you all to-night
Would follow the Great Black Hound, and see
Whither he goes, and what he may be !
See ! it's good Rhein-wine that this cup doth hold—
Wine that is worth its measure of gold.
And such as you seldom taste, I trow !—
Now, this cup thrice filled, to the man will go
With the dark Mauthe Boog, and come back and tell
If aught of marvel to him befell."
Then one on another did turn and look.
And faces grew pale, and strong hands shook;
32 THE  ATTEMPT.
For who would follow, alone at night,
That dreaded spectre, that fearful sprite,
That demon hoiind, that some awful power
Sends forth on his quest at midnight hour 1
Oh, loudly laughed the challenger then :
" Ye are coward women, and not true men !
It is as I said—there is none will dare
To beard the fiend in his unknown lair.
What ! are you soldiers, and do you fear?
Can there never one brave stout heart be here 1"
He gazed around—with a scornful shout
A trooper steps from his comrades out;
His dark cheeks glow, and his bhie eyes burn,
And his teeth are set, and his face is stern.
" You shall not taunt us in vain—it's I
Will follow this devil, and win or die.
Men say—and 'tis true, by St Peter's beard,
That I never yet saw the thing I feared.
I'll prove it once more, for I'm proud of the boast—
Hugh Redpath cares nor for man nor ghost.
Aye ! see you shall, when the time comes round.
That I'm twice a match for this spectre hound !"
A sudden " Hist!" and a lifted hand
To silence the whispers among the band—
For there, in the fire-flame gleaming red.
With footstep swift, but with noiseless tread,
With head bent low to the shadowy ground—
There was the fearful midnight hound !
Blood on his muzzle, and blood on his paws.
And blood dropping slow from his dark heavy jaws ;
And around his neck, all torn and stained,
A fragment of cord there still remained.
But, as quickly he passed the still hall through ;
No panting breath that deep chest drew ]
No echoing bay from those gory lips
Breaks forth, though faster the red tide drips.
THE   ATTEMPT. 33
Silent as death he speeds him past,
On his awful errand, sure and fast.
The glow is fading from Eedpath's brow,
And his heart beats thickly and throbbing now ;
For the dog is crossing the rush-strewn floor,
And nearing the open guard-room door,
And the time has come to do the deed—
How will the daring trooper speed '2
He rises, and draws a gasping breath,
The stake is a heavy one—life or death !
And honour the glorious prize to be won—
He gi-asps his sword-hilt,—and then is gone !
Long in silence the troopers wait.
Marvelling what is their comrade's fate;
The song and the jest are hushed and stilled—
The empty flagons remain unfilled—
The fire sinks down on the hearth-stone wide,
Yet the logs lie untouched by the chimney side.
The wind has lulled, but it weeps and moans
In sobbing gusts, and in stifled groans ;
The owls in the ivy hoot and cry
As the pall-black clouds sweep the white moon by ;
And ever upon its rocks, the sea
Wails out its dirge incessantly.
A shiver runs round—a fearful dread—
But not one word by any is said.
For far in the distance a sound they hear—
One piercing shriek of mortal fear.
Then a burst of laughter—a bloodhound's bay—
And the echoes die in the wind away.
This silence is awful—it cannot last-
Will this night of horror be never past 1
Where can the gallant Eedpath be ?
Will they never again the morning see 1
34 THE  ATTEMPT.
An hour passed on—then a step was heard—
They gaze at the doorway, but speak no word.
Can that be their comrade, brave and gay,
The same Hugh Eedpath of yesterday t
Those glaring eyes, so fixed with fright.
That pallid visage, so drawn and white,
The brown Lair clotted with ruddy gore
That in heavy drops falls to the floor.
The strong, buff jerkin rent amain.
The good sword faii-ly broke in twain.
Wide quivering nostrils, and gasping breath,—
He is a picture of living death.
But not one sound from those lij^s so white
E'er came, to tell of that woful night j
Dumb was the tongue that so late had told
Of a fearless heart, and a spirit bold.
They never knew where Hugh had been.
They never could tell what Hugh had seen;
But, biirnt as though with an iron brand.
On his throat was the mark of a strong i-ight hand.
But, whether the grasp of man or devil,
Knoweth the awful powers of evil!
Three days and nights, in mortal pain,
While used the leech his skill in vain,
Speechless, yet conscious, Redpath lay ;
Then, the stout heart was called away.
Life was lost, but the deed was done.
And the prize of honour was nobly won.
But never more, from that night of pain.
Did the Mauthe Doog come to the hall again;
The spell was broken, the spirit at rest—
And the turf grows green on Kedpath's breast.
Mas Alta.
THE  ATTEMPT. 35
Somelljmg about (^ij^rgfljing.
Managers.
There is an instinct with which some women are, and some are not gifted, one
not to be entirely taught though it may be educated and improved, one which it is
difficult to define otherwise than as a combination of knack, common sense, inven¬
tion and enei-gy, commonly known under the name of management. When we see a
small cliild who is thrifty in the matter of dolls, clothes, and toys, extracting the
greatest amount of amusement from the poorest materials,—when we see her a few
years later always ready with the needful strings, nails, and other reqiiirements of
younger brothers; when, later still. Mamma says of her that she manages the children
capitally, when her face is well known in all parish committees, and the old Rector,
(for she does not need the incitement of a young curate's presence), delights to see
her take the most turbulent class in school, then we may be sure that we have got
hold of a woman in whom the instinct is irrepressible. If she remain an old maid, •
she will be one of those who make themselves work until their hands are full', if she
marry, she will be the cohesive principle, the centre link by which everything in the
house hangs.
But there are managers and managers as there are eggs and eggs, and according
to the rest of the character, the instinct will be well or ill used. Is there anyone who
has not at some time or other suffered from being over-managed, and is there any
pi-ocess more thoroughly irritating to the victim, not only from its inherent unpleas¬
antness, but from the total impossibility of offering any successful resistance. You
may be very determined, oh man, that you will be the head of your own house; you
may be very sure, oh maiden, that you will marry your present lover, and no one else ;
you may be very positive, oh friend, that you will brook no interference in your pri¬
vate affairs, but if you are in the hands of a thoroughly managing woman you will
give in, all three of you, before long. You may soothe your pride by thinking that
you retire from the contest for peace sake, or that circumstances have altered the
case since you made your resolve, but depend upon it, it is nothing of the sort; you
were beaten, only you have not the honesty to confess it; you need not liave been
ashamed,—there is a constant dropping that wears away the strongest heart. The
over-managing woman always knows what everyone wants better than they do them-
36 THE  ATTEMPT.
selves; has any little aiTangement been made for the day, she has some excellent
reason for substituting another; to do her justice, her way of doing things is often
by no means a bad one, viewed in the abstract, but the mode of attaining her ends
entirely destroys the possibly good results. We wanted to pic-nic on the hill, and
settled matters accordingly, but she finds the glen is better and we must go there ;
she may be right, the ground and the water may be undeniably better, but then it
is not what we wanted, and human nature must be excused if it feels rebellious.
We incline to think that the only way to render this dangerous individual harm¬
less, is to consult her on every occasion, but even this plan is not always successful, for
while trying to lead her to your way of thinking, she may still take up her own, and
whether or no, the necessity of such consultation constitutes a tyranny that is little
short of unbearable. There is one especial line in which she is incalculably baleful,
that of match-making. How many couples have, with the best intentions, been man¬
aged out of their happiness or managed into misery we would not venture to think,
for the meddler never remembers that love is a coy sprite and will not bear her
fussy handling ; perhaps in her own case she never realised it, for no doubt having
accepted an eligible offer, she immediately began to manage her trousseau and her
wedding breakfast, and accorded but scant time to love's young dream.
Wliat a contrast she is to the good manager, the queen of her home, respected
by her servants, loved by her boys, trusted by her girls, and appealed, to as a con¬
stant habit, by her husband on all sorts of matters. She is seen in perfection in that
class, where money requires to be carefully distributed, though it is never painfully
scarce, and where the mistress bestows a good deal of personal surveillance, not dis¬
daining to do also a good deal of actual work. Higher in life the same character would
expend much of its power on outside objects, not indeed less well, but in a manner
less easy to grasp and study ; lower in the social scale the wear and tear would be
so great that some of its sweetness must be almost necessarily destroyed: it is
impossible for a woman, who is always cogitating household problems, the result of
which is a financial deficit, to retain the quiet grace and equanimity which make
the whole nature in the happier instance seem so full of fitness and harmonious beauty.
Everything in the house of the good manager is well arranged, from her own
tasteful clothes, which she knows how to wear, and her pretty rooms, where there is
the due admixture of use and ornament, to her kitchen and storeroom, where the
frequent presence of the ruling eye and hand is detected at once. Her dinners are
ncA'^er expensive, for she cannot afford to pay high for things simply because they
are out of season, but they are always well chosen, well cooked, and neatly served ;
THE   ATTEMPT. 37
her children have learnt the happy medium between shyness and forwardness, and
her restraint of them, though complete, is invisible to a stranger's eye ; she can in¬
dulge them at times with safety, and has the wisdom to know when it is good not to
see, a certain blindness being of much worth in training ; to her servant she is per¬
fectly kind, perfectly just, perfectly firm, she can interest herself in them without
losing one whit of her own dignity, and they treat her with deference accordingly.
No one is readier in helping forward schemes of amusement, but unlike the hostess
who manages ybr people, she is quick to manage so that their wishes shall be carried
out, her native tact smoothing all diificulties and reconciling incongruities, so that no
party is complete, no fun enjoyed without her. We are describing a paragon, but
we believe she exists, and her faults are of a kind not apt to our subject; she may
cherish some pet heterodoxy, she may be slightly bigoted, she may have some peculiar
tenets as to her social position, some little follies which, by the side of her gracious
qualities at home, are readily excused ; they do not hurt the children, and the hus¬
band can afford to be lenient to them, for she is a being made to shine at home, thus
reversing the too common code that forms a woman for society but not for the fire¬
side. Perhaps the best excuse that can be found for the first housewife we have
sketched is, that however wearisome she may be in her too great carefulness, she is
better than the woman who cannot manage at all, and at whose door many a sin
may be laid among the poor, and much want of the fitting comfort and confidence of
home among the rich. She never knows exactly where anything is or how things
are being done ; her ideas on money are vague and confused, and while she wastes
even more than she spends, she wonders helplessly why the two ends do not meet;
there is an impalpable something in the air of her house of which one is immediately
conscious, a something of discomfort present, and good taste and care absent, which
mars alike her hospitality and the peace of her family. She never has good ser¬
vants, and her lamentations are endless respecting their shortcomings, for she does
not realise that, if it is too much for her to look after her own affairs, a hireling
cannot be expected to do it for her. These are the extremes of our subject, and
between them lie endless shades modified by training or circumstances. That it is
immensely more difficult to some women to learn the secret of good housekeejjing
and management than to others is certain, but they should none the less make the
attempt; with average brains, health and self command, every woman may at least
succeed in making her rule respected and obeyed, and in infusing system and thought
enough into her household arrangements to ensure an ordinarily comfortable result.
She who does not endeavour with all her might and motherwit to attain this, is
38 THE  ATTEMPT.
wanting in due comprehension of her natural worth and rightful honour ; even if she
be an old maid, with no one but herself to care for, and only her maid of all work to
rule, still her little kingdom should show, in every corner, evidence of the neat hands
and tasteful mind of its mistress; she and the maid will be all the better for the
daily care and pride in their work that helps to keep the dust out of the heart as
well as out of the room. No mere prettiness, and even no popularity makes up in
the long run to a woman's self for the want of these housewifely qualities, and
though it is true that, with a large class of men, prettiaess, fun, and a " gift of the
gab" do induce a popularity denied to more sterling merits, a girl possessed of the
latter will also in all probability be able to discriminate between what is and what
is not worth gaining in the world, and will feel in her own quiet self respect more
real satisfaction than falls to the lot of the butterflies whose restless vanity excludes
graver thoughts.
Just now, when the nature and capacities of women are being so freely can¬
vassed, it would be well if they would turn their energies somewhat more to the
acquirements of the homely skill we have described ; a good manager is of more use in
her sphere than a woman who, despite feminine weakness, covets masculine employ¬
ments, and the favourable opinions of a household are of more moment to the
"house-mother" than her solitary vote is to the nation. Let her be wise in politics
as in everything else which can widen her sympathies and educate her brains, but
let her beware of deserting her own post for one the duties of which she can hardly
understand; let her remember rather that she who is a traitor to her own cause will
scarcely be chosen by any sensible mortal as the champion of another. Want of oc¬
cupation is at the bottom of much of the confused jabber about woman's rights, but
if the talkers would look well first to their ordinary duties and develop! the powers
that are in them for womanly usefulness, they would not burst so rudely on the
" divine silences," with unaccustomed shrill voices, proclaiming impracticable or un¬
desirable schemes. Both talent and science are required to make a good manager,
and a woman who knows how easy failure is in that line, will have more humility and
less overweening self-assertion than those wlio deem the wide world their field for
exertion to the exclusion of such minor matters as the comfort of their dependants
and the happiness of their home. Elsie Steiveltne.
^^3€<=
THE  ATTEMPT. 39
6ntmHmg f cler.
Everybody grumbles, and so far as our neighbours are not made miserable, nor
our own happiness seriously endangered by the practice, there is not a more delight¬
ful recreation than grumbling ui moderation. This statement may be regarded by
some as extremely reprehensible, inasmuch as it may be supposed to encourage discon¬
tent and to discourage patience, which, even more than other vii-tues is a virtue, as a
well-known saying testifies. But every one who has conscientiously tried to bear up
against, for example, the miseries of a small country lodging in wet weather, will
know the relief that a reasonable amount of grumbling affords when all other cures
fail. There are, however, some persons who wofully abuse this precious gift of
grumbling, and to this unhappy class belonged our friend Peter. Peter grumbled
morning, noon, and night, and rarely did a day pass on which he did not exclaim,
" Oh ! that I had the management of things, how differently I should order
matters." His infirmity was so well known that he went by the name of Grumbling
Peter, and it came to be a sort of saying among the neighbours, when the perfections
of any article were discussed, " Why, it would even please Peter." This may seem an
unpromising hero for a story, but as Peter's adventures may prove instructive, we
hope the reader will kindly overlook our friend's little faults, in consideration of any
degree of benefit he may derive from a perusal of his misfortunes.
One fine morning Peter sat in his garden reading the newspaper. It was
May, and even Peter derived some little enjoyment in observing the boughs weighed
down with blossom, the grass fresh and glancing in the sunlight, and in listening to
the dull hum of the bees as they balanced themselves on the flowers. But his enjoy¬
ment was not of long duration, The day wore on, and the sun poured down his
ardent rays on Peter's head. The heat soon became unendurable. It penetrated
through the thickest foliage. The wind was like the breath of a furnace, the
flowers drooped their heads, and the very bees seemed to feel depressed, so heavily
they moved their wings. Wiser men than Peter would have grumbled, and Peter
quite excelled himself.
" Upon my word, this is dreadful," he gasped, wiping his shining head over and
over again with his handkerchief.    " I am not going in, though—I believe it is worse
in-doors.    No     I say such weather is shameful, and there, three months ago, I
was almost dead with cold, and now "
40 THE  ATTEMPT.
The remainder of his speech was lost in a succession of heavy groans.
" I never did see such a world," he resumed, " nothing as it should be.    Every¬
thing going wrong.    Upon my word.    Oh ! dear me—I wish I could have the man¬
agement of things for a month."
" You have often wished for that before, Peter, T think," said a gentle voice.
Peter turned hastily round, and standing beside him he saw a lovely creatui-e,
whether angel or fairy he could not tell. His first impression was awe and amaze¬
ment, but just then a faint breath of wind arose, shaking the blossom from the trees
and parting the branches overhead, allowed a sunbeam to dart into Peter's eyes.
This infuriated our friend still more.
" This is terrible," he said, making an ineffectual clutch at the sunbeam. " A
man can't say a thing without people taking him up. I should like to know. Miss
or Master, who you are, and what you mean by standing there listening to what I
say, and making me roast only to look at that yellow hair of yours."
We must here remark that our friend Peter must have spoken these words
under great excitement, as he was usually the gentlest of men to any small or help¬
less creature.
The beautiful being smiled and replied, " I am sorry I have annoyed you Peter,
but I have heard your complaints. My name is Nature, you have often abused me,
and now I intend to grant your desire and allow you to take my place for a month.
The whole world is now under your control. Do whatever you please. In a
month's time I shall return to claim my own."
Peter thought he must be dreaming. He closed his eyes tightly, and on opening
them he was alone.
" Yes, / have been dreaming," he said. " There is no one near. Well ! it toas a
queer dream. Pretty little creature that was, to be sure. I might have spoken
civiler though, but a man's not answerable for what he says in a dream. I declare
this is fearful. I wish that sun was not so hot. I wish the dream were true, then
I should hold out my hand like this and say,—' Clouds cover the sun, cool, west wind
spring up.'"
In a moment a breeze, fresh and gentle, rustled among the trees, fanning the
hot brow of the astonished Peter, and covering the grass with cherry blossom. At
the same moment little white, fleecy clouds arose in the west, and scudding merrily
before the wind, overspread the burning sky and intercepted the piercing rays of
the sun.
" Extraordinary !" cried  Peter,   " that really looks as if it were true.    Well!
THE  ATTEMPT. 41
I'll try. I don't think a shower would be amiss. Let us have one, if you please."
And he stretched his hand out in a commanding attitude towai'ds the clouds.
The gloom deepened. Masses of purple clouds hurried from the horizon. An
expectant silence reigned over the earth, broken only by the gentle moaning of the
wind, and then, with a soft pattering sound, large drops fell, first in twos and threes,
and then in a continuous shower, penetrating to the very roots of the drooping grass,
reviving the flowers, washing the dust from the leaves, and rushing in little stream¬
lets down the walks and into the fish-pond.
Peter sat triumphantly under a large green umbrella, which he had brought
to shield him from the sun.
" First-rate !" he cried, " Rain away, fine big drops.    That's quite delicious."
Just then hurried steps were heard, intermingled with little screams, and JPeter,
on going to his garden gate, perceived a number of young ladies armed with croquet
balls, hoops, and mallets, dashing wildly along the road, their petticoats splashed
with mud, their dresses dripping, and their feathers limj) and spoiled. Now, Peter
was a polite old fellow, so he opened the gate, and stepping into the middle of the
road, bowed and said,—
" Pray ladies what is wrong 1    Can I be of any use to you 1"
The girls drew up suddenly.
" Oh, dear, this dreadful rain," said one, " pray, could you direct us to any
place where we could get shelter ] We were playing croquet down in the meadow.
It is near a mile from home (the ground is so bad there). It had jiist grown so de¬
lightfully cool, when this tiresome rain came on, and we are almost wet through
already."
In a moment Peter stood by his gate, hat in hand.
" This way ladies, this way—deign to grace my humble dwelling. My house-
keejier (most worthy woman), will attend you. Lunch in half-an-hour. I am most
sorry about this rain. Had I known of your game, it should never have occurred.
I'll make it stop in a moment."
To Peter's astonishment, the young ladies, who, at the beginning of his address,
had pressed eagerly forward, drew back with screams of horror at his concluding re¬
marks, and with a general cry of " He is mad ! He is mad ! " rushed tumultuoiisly
along the road, scattering in their flight mallets, balls, and even cloaks and hats.
Poor Peter looked rather crest-fallen, but he did not lose his presence of mind,
so, looking upwards, he exclaimed, " Stop raining."
In a few moments a blue patch appeared, and rapidly spreading, the sun soon
42 THE   ATTEMPT.
shone out, displaying everything beautiful and refreshed, but dripping.    Peter was
in despair.
" How provoking !" he cried, " I have spoilt the pleasure of those lovely girls.
Oh ! sun shine forth in majesty, ten times more fervently than ever, and rejiair the
damage I have done."
And in the earnestness of this impassioned apostrophe, Peter gazed heavenward,
and waved his arms.
Suddenly a merry peal of laughter, half smothered, but still very audible,
aroused our friend to a sense of his absurd position, and turning round he saw,
peeping over the hedge, three or four of the bolder young ladies, who, on the return
of the sunshine, had ventured to return to the meadow, and who, attracted by a
voice in earnest declamation, were now watching, with much interest, the absurd
freaks of Peter, whom they evidently imagined to be an amusing, old madman.
Peter, with a conciliating smile, advanced towards the hedge, but on his approach
the girls shrieked and fled laughing away. This was rather hard for Peter. He per¬
ceived his mistake, and determined in future to keep his wonderful secret to
himself.
He began slowly to walk towards the house, when he found that the heat,
which had for some time been steadily increasing, was becoming almost unbearable.
Remembering his admonition to the sun some five minutes before, he hastened to
countermand his order, but the words stuck in his throat, and with a moan, he fell
senseless to the ground.
When he returned to himself, Peter found it was evening, but the sun shone
with unabated and almost tropical splendour. He was lying in bed, and bending
over him was the old doctor and the housekeeper.
" Oh ! sir, this is awful,".said that worthy woman, clasping her hands in terror.
" We found you lying like dead, hours ago in the garden ; and that fearful sun, and
there it is shining away the same as ever."
" It is certainly a most extraordinary phenomenon," said the doctor, " I never
had so many cases of sun-stroke before on hand. Yours, my dear sir, is a most
miraculous escape, but I hope my treatment may be successful, and that you will be
all right in a few days."
" I declare, yes; to be sure," exclaimed poor Peter, " it was really very
stupid of me to give such an order; yes, I must put things to right, of course."
The doctor felt his patient's pulse, and tapping his ample forehead slightly,
frowned thoughtfully.
THE  ATTEMPT. 43
Peter paid no attention to the doctor's movement, but said decidedly—" Sun
set, dew fall, moon rise, stars shine out, things go right till morning," adding, with a
pleased smile, " There, I think that's all right."
The doctor look compassionately at poor Peter, who had a second time displayed
his power so foolishly, but at this moment a wonderful occurrence drew the physician
to the window. The sun, which a few moments before had been almost overhead,
suddenly- appeared in the very act of setting with great splendour, beliind a bank of
crimson clouds. Through the waving branches of an old oak gleamed the pale
crescent moon, and soft glistening stars stole out, one by one, in the faint-blue sky.
Every leaf, every flower, was bathed in moisture, and a blackbird sang on the
cherry-tree. To paint the amazement of the doctor would be vain. Fear, astonish¬
ment, and bewilderment, chased each other over his expressive countenance. At last
he gasped, " Most extraordinary, altogether unprecedented. Peter, my friend Peter,
what can this mean 1"
" All right, doctor," replied Peter in a sleepy voice, " it's all right, never fear."
"But, Peter," persisted the astounded physician, "it is altogether contrary to
nature."
" I daresay it is !" cried Peter triumphantly, sitting up in bed. " Yes, the
little yellow-haired minx. She finds, no doubt to her surprise, that other people
can manage as well as she."
" Yellow-hair—people—manage—what do you mean," exclaimed the doctor.
" The man is undoubtedly gone mad, mad as a March hare."
" That's what the girls said when I said I'd stop the rain, ha ! ha ! ha ! Very
good ! it's really funny.    But I want to go to sleep, so good-bye old fellow."
The doctor slowly left the room, and Peter, as he turned on his pillow, smiled
and said, "I wonder what she'll say.    Pretty well, *T say, for a first-day's work."
Agnella.
•^-=»^^H<^^=«j-
44
THE  ATTEMPT.
Teanslated from the French of Dubos.
See la Lyre Feancaise, by Gustave Masson.
Hail ! gentle daughter of the Spring,
Low hidden 'neath the greenwood tree ;
Sweet incense thou dost o'er me fling ;
And yet wouldst from my homage flee.
The secret hand and open heart,
Unseen, unknown, the poor relieve ;
So thou dost generous gifts impart,
Nor wilt my meed of thanks receive.
No garish hues attract the eye.
Obscurely nestling in the shade ;
Thy flower were passed regardless by.
But by its perfume 'tis betrayed.
Nay come, these modest hues disclose,
And to the light thy charms unfold ;
Dost fear thee that the queenly rose.
Might deem thy rivalry too bold ?
All ! think not so ! the peasant may
With simple grace a court adorn;
And we,—tho' loving gladsome day—
Yet hail the gentle beams of morn.
Come, dwell where radiant flowers allure.
For ever quit a home so drear;
And, trickling from its fountain pure,
I'll bring thee water fresh and clear.
Perchance, none shielding thee from harm.   Yet no, beloved flower, remain !
Some ingrate foot may on thee tread; Like thee, in some sequestered spot,
Thus Innocence 'neath tyrant's arm, A silent minister in pain.
Crushed in her meekness bends the head.    In grief a solace—blessed lot!
Echo.
It is wonderful how many bores we meet with in the world, and to what an
extent they fret and irritate us, though no doubt we ourselves are often regarded in a
similar light, but then we are happily unconscious of it. There are bores of all
classes, all ages, and both sexes, and it is hard to say which is the worse, a mascu¬
line or a feminine bore (we believe it is incorrect now to talk of male and female).
To begin with the children. No doubt there are some unhappily constituted people
who regard all the little darlings in this light, such as old bachelors and similar
THE  ATTEMPT. 45
misanthropes, but then we never think of caring for what they say. No, children in
the main are delightful and refreshing, and even a little bad temper, or a fit of idle¬
ness, can be borne without making the small individual a nuisance to everyone it
approaches. One class we would di-aw attention to, is children who have the repu¬
tation of being clever, and whose sayings and doings are therefore constantly quoted
by admiring papas and mammas. There are no such keen observers as these little
people, and you may be very sure the praises addressed to the parents are carefully
noted, and eagerly drunk in by the small phenomena. Conceit, which is insuffer¬
able at all times, is especially intolerable in children, but people often seem to forget
that they have ears to hear as well as their elders, and talk about them in their pre¬
sence without any thought of the mischief they may be doing. Naturally, the child
gets an inflated idea of its own powers, puts in its word on all occasions, thereby in¬
terrupting conversation, and proving itself a fine example of the genus bore. Ten
to one, it turns out an ignoramus or somewhat of a donkey in after life; indeed, it
would be worth while taking a census of the number of clever children Avho are con¬
sidered stupid when they gi'ow up.
Then there is the affected child, with a ridiculous consciousness pervading all
its actions, and manifesting itself painfully in society. You cannot look at it but
it thinks you are admiring it, and simpers and puts on a sweet expression, which
would make you laugh if it did not provoke you. It cannot forget itself for a
moment, and consequently loses much of the natural grace of childhood whilst aping
the manners of its grown-up friends. It is wofully disappointed if you do not
take notice of it, and will generally hit on some plan to attract your attention, till
you feel inclined to wish it at the other end of the world. To advance further on
in life, we have the young lady who is troubled with mock modesty—that is to say,
who has an excellent opinion of herself, and is anxious others should have the same,
but who thinks it necessary to ape shyness, and to refuse to make herself useful
and agreeable when she is wanted, as it looks more interesting to pretend
to be incajoable of doing anything. She is asked to play or to sing, but has a
cold, or has not sung for a long time, or has forgotten her music, or wishes
you would ask some one else, and so on, till you feel inclined to box her
ears, and tell her the accomplishments she has learnt are meant to be useful
to others, not alone for her own gratification. If, however, you take her at her
word, and leave her alone, she is terribly vexed, as she probably only wished for a
due amount of pressing to enhance the value of her performance. A little whole¬
some neglect is the best cure for this complaint.    Then there is the gushing young
46 THE  ATTEMPT.
lady, who goes into raptures over everything, and is always appealing to others to do
the same. She is always meeting with some dear creature, masculine or feminine,
and is prepared to dilate on their excellencies by the hour together; or she has read
some book which has taken her fancy, and instantly she begins a course of per¬
secution to induce you to follow her exam^^le; for peace sake you get the work in
question, and probably find it very trashy, false in sentiment, and weak in execution,
with perhaps enough of stirring adventure and romance to carry away a vain excit¬
able imagination. Or else she has a pet parson—worst delusion of all—sets him up
on a, pinnacle, falls down and worships, and is sui-prised to find sober-minded people
judging her idol as an ordinary mortal. He is quoted on all occasions, his dictums
are infallible, his power absolute. Probably he regards the young lady in the light
of a bore, as well as her other acquaintances, but finds her devotion useful in many
ways, and submits to the infliction.
Perhaps the worst bore among young ladies is the kind who do nothing, who
take an interest in nothing, whose life is a weariness to themselves and their friends.
When any of this class go to the country to pay a visit, they become perfectly in¬
tolerable ; they take no pleasure in pastoral pursuits, and sit listless and idle
in-doors, not to be tempted forth to a little exertion even by all the sweet sights and
sounds around them; education has been utterly thrown away on them, as
the only use they make of their reading is in the perusal of silly novels; their
playing is restricted to strumming quadrilles and waltzes, whilst dressing, pay¬
ing visits, and shopping, constitutes the aim and end of their lives. What an
incubus they are to their friends, what a weariness to themselves. So many
shafts have been aimed at young men who excite derision and contempt by their
folly, vanity, and idleness, that it is unnecessary to add anything here, for fear of
being voted a bore oneself.
The bores of middle life and old age are also many and various. There is the
man who is always talking, and moreover talking about himself He is fond of
boasting, and if you show him anything you are proud of, will immediately depreciate
it in favour of some superior article of his own. At a dinner party he is fond of lead¬
ing the conversation, and will neglect the lady at his side to talk to a neighbour
across the table. But he is never so happy as when he has secured the attention of
the whole company, and in a loud complaisant voice tells his stories, laughing at his
own jokes, confident of the admiration of all. These men belong to the class of
habitual diners-out, and constantly get invitations from their well known power
of keeping up a conversation ; but though the hosts may feel great relief in the pre-
THE   ATTEMPT. 47
sence of such a guest, who is supposed to provide amusement for the rest, half the
company vote him a decided bore, as no one likes to have his little torch-light put
out by a shower of eloquence of unlimited duration. A most thoroughly disagreeable
class of men and women is that devoid of tact. What trouble they cause, what
heart-burnings they give rise to, what dissentions they spread. Very often this arises
from no bad feeling, perhaps quite the contrary, but at the same time it proceeds
from culpable want of thought. Tact may be cultivated. Let the person speaking
reflect beforehand on what he is going to say, or rather on the manner of saying it,
and not think he is making sufficient excuse, when blamed for his thoughtlessness,
by exclaiming " oh, you know I have no tact." Some people delight in dwelling on
their shortcomings, as though they were positive virtues, and feel quite astonished
and rather hurt if you suggest the possibility of overcoming them. But true tact
comes very near that " quality of mercy " that " is not strained," for what does it not
do 1 Does it not strive to hide the defects of others, and to bring out their good
points, does it not avoid all that can wound, or grieve others, as far as possible, does
it not say a kind thing in the kindest way, does it not appear to receive a favour
when really conferring one, does it not, in fine, require a loving heart, a thoughtful
mind, and a sweet temper ! What a world it would be if we were all gifted with
tact; but no, it would be almost heaven. Let those, however, who constantly err in
this particular, and are always rubbing against some sore, always stirring up some
fruitful source of strife, be well assured that by friends and foes alike they are ranked
in the large army of bores.
A much more mischievous class is that of tattlers, who are largely represented
by the female community. People whose delight it is to talk about their neighbours,
who ai-e ready to invent when they cannot speak from certain knowledge, who in¬
sinuate where they are afraid to bring forward open statements. To such, gossip is
as necessary to their existence as their daily food, and a piece of well authenticated
scandal is like a drop of water to a thirsty soul. This proceeds, in many cases, from
a want of regular occupation ; time hangs heavy on their hands, and as they must find
something to do, and are not burdened with affairs of their own, they kindly concern
themselves \yith those of others. We suspect it is chiefly this class who have given
rise to that terrible bugbear and truly awful female, Mrs Grundy, esjpecially obno¬
xious to British homes. If everybody was busy and well employed, where would the
tattlers be ? And if there were no tattlers, there would be no gossip, and if their
was no gossip, what a delightful society we should form. We are afraid, however,
that as long as the world lasts, " Tattlers, busybodies," will hold their own, and con-
48 THE   ATTEMPT.
tinue to constitute themselves, " a terror to evil doers," if not " a praise to them that
do well."
We cannot possibly class old maids in our list of bores, although for so long
the term has been one almost of reproach. Some of the most agreeable people we
know are old maids, unselfish, large-hearted women, a blessing to all who come
under their influence. There are some, to be sure, who have been soTired by disap¬
pointment, and who perhaps revenge themselves after the manner of the busybodies
we have described above, and no doubt the failings of this unhappy section of the
sisterhood have given rise to the accusation of their ascerbity of temper, but this
quality is by no means confined to the unmarried, or as we lately heard them ele¬
gantly and chivalrously termed, " unappropriated blessings." No, the world is be¬
ginning to do honour to old maids, and they must, as a rule, be excluded from the
catalogue of bores. We are not by any means so sure of bachelors, who are apt to
become as crusty as their joort, and fidgety and fastidious to an uncomfortable degree;
they find children a plague, a feeling returned with interest by the youngsters, can¬
not bear to be put out of their way, and grow self asserting and opinionative. Their
interests are centred in self, till self becomes an idol, and is petted and pampered
and encouraged till society can stand it no longer, and straightway the old
bachelor is set down as a bore, and will find it difficult to lose the appellation.
Much more might be said, and additional examples brought forward, but the limits
of this paper warn us to bring it to a conclusion. At the beginning of a New Year,
everyone is supposed to lament over the shortcomings of the previous one, and to
determine to turn over a new leaf, so if, at the end of 1869, we find peace and good¬
will reigning among men, no one living in fear of his neighbour's tongue, and a dis¬
position to believe the good, and reject the evil, we shall have great pleasure in
retracting all that has now been said on the subject of " Social Bores."        Alma.
The Prize offered for the best Prose Article appearing in the January Number of
The Attempt" has been gained by Elsie STEiVELYNEybr her article on ^'Bomance."
THE   ATTEMPT. 49
" Neither the hand nor the understanding, left to itself, can do much ; the work is accomplished
by instruments and helps, of which the need is not less for the imderstandmg, than the hand."—5acwi.
Such an instrument is reading, and surely its importance, as a means of self-
culture, can, in the present age, hardly be over-estimated. An old writer tells us
that books are some of the signs and figures by which God speaks to man ; and look¬
ing on them in this solemn light, it becomes our sacred duty to aj^ply ourselves to
gain from them all the benefit they are intended to impart. The most profitable
course to pursue, with regard to study, is to adopt some systematic plan in our read¬
ing ; this does not necessitate any fixed rule with regard to what is to be read, but
to endeavour that a certain method and order should ever pervade it. Without this,
the mind is apt to become like a confused library, well-stocked it may be, but of
little available use to the owner. These remarks refer only to those who are bound
to no presciibed routine in study; to those, or such as those, who form this society,
who are free to follow their own will and inclination with regard to their intellectual
culture. For such it is wise to choose some particular branch of study, in which
they feel interested, and to pursue it perseveringly. They need not fear that it will
make their knowledge flow in a narrow path ; if conscientiously followed, it will
widen of itself; as a writet of the present day tells us, " every track in the forest
steadfastly pursued, leads into one of the great highways," But above all, read
earnestly, remember—
" Better far
Pursue a frivolous trade by serious means,
Than a sublime art frivolously."
In this age of books, the privileges are great, but the responsibility is equally
heavy; and that su])erficial tendency, which is just now weakening everything,
appears also in our manner of reading. To read with profit there are two esssential
qualifications, viz ;—to read thorougJdi/ and to read sincerely. The tJtorough reading of
a book requires not only that its main tone, but that its general features be reprinted
on the mind, so that at any moment, by the aid of a practised memory, we may be
able to recal them accurately and faithfully.    To do this, we must read with atten-
50 THE   ATTEMPT.
tioii and digest with care. And here we mark the difference between the two kinds
of reading ; the studying of a book, which is the getting into the author's mind,
making his experience our own, and allowing our thoughts to go with his ; and the
superficial glancing over which is called reading, but which is not only profitless but
dangerous, even as reading a passage without the context, we get but half of the
writer's meaning, and consequently receive a false impression of the whole work.
There are, of course, some books which do not merit a careful reading, but in that
case we may pretty generally conclude, that though the reading of them may be
harmless, it is useless; if a book is worth reading at all, it is worth reading carefully ;
and apart from the evil effect which such reading is calculated to have on the mind,
it seems hardly fair, that what has cost the writer long thought and deep research,
should be glanced over carelessly, or receive from us but a partial attention. Sin¬
cerity in reading involves thoroughness, but goes also to the motive power. Reading,
to be sincere, must be undertaken from an earnest desire for knowledge. If we read
because others read, or seeking information merely in order to display it, we shall
be none the richer; it will never penetrate into our mind ; it will be kept, so to
speak, in an outer chamber of the brain, and this over-exercise of the faculties of
observation, whilst the powers of reflection lie dormant, cannot but have a perni¬
cious influence on the whole mental system. Next to sincerity in reading, sincerity
in judging of what is read, is requisite. Let us come to a book, free from bias and
prejudice, divesting ourselves, as much as possible, of any preconceived ideas with
regard to it, condemning nothing merely because others condemn it, and calling no
passage beautiful until its beauty has penetrated our own soul. An American
writer tells us that " we can make a book our own, just in proportion to its resem¬
blance in essence or in form to our own experience." But thei'e is a danger to be
avoided in this, viz :—an egotism in reading which too surely leads into want of sin¬
cerity. If we look too much for what will exactly suit our circumstances, or state
of mind, we shall get to value a book only in so far as it puts into words, or en¬
forces some pet sentiment or feeling of our own ; and this is a danger especially to be
avoided, as there is a class of literature at the present day which tends to encourage
this intellectual egotism. Very pleasant and soothing such books are, but too much
of their gentle insidious flattery has a weakening influence.
Next to the consideration of how to read, comes the question of what to read.
Of course, any rule with regard to this must be a comparative rule, and the
appliance of it must be left to each individual; but let us see that our reading
tends not only to cultivate the intellect, but to enrich the mind.    Let us choose
THE   ATTEMPT. 51
books that can bear careful study and after-reflection, books that give our highest
faculties something to exercise them, that give us a feeling of how little we know,
and how much there is to know.    Let all that we read of this wondrous earth and
sky be such as to open our minds more to every inherent beauty, whether small or
great; let all we read of the world and our fellow-men have the effect of widening
and enlarging our sympathies, for the mental and the moral must go together; love
must illumine youth, and the mind, equally with the heart, can  never reach its
fullest development unless guided by loving sympathy.
In the commencement of study, we must naturally be guided by the advice of
others, for feeling our way alone through the labyrinth of literature is a dangerous
experiment, and though there may be a few strong spirits like one we read of, who
" read books, good and bad," and who, though she says, " I lost breath sometimes
in my soul," adds,—
" Being dashed
From error on to error, every turn
Still brought me nearer to the central truth ;"
yet it is a perilous path, and one which no one would advise, at least to women.
To lead the mind, while pliable, in the right direction, is then most necessary ;
and instead of the strict prohibition used to children, with regard to certain books,
and then withdrawn at the most dangerous age, would it not be better to educate
the taste, to guide the mind to the knowledge of beauty and truth, so that, when
left to its own discretion, it may instinctively avoid the false and turn to the pure
and healthy? When choosing our own course of study, we should do well to take
into consideration Carlyle's words, " To each is given a certain inward talent, a
certain outward environment of fortune ; to each, by wisest combination of these, a
certain maximum of capability."
The first essential is therefore to discover our intellectual capability—to attempt
nothing which we feel beyond our comprehension, and though in all things to strive
after the highest knowledge individually possible to each of us, yet never vainly to
attempt to grasp what we shall not understand, and cannot retain. Let our
reading be such as necessitates thought, and we shall find, apart from mental
benefit, that it will make us stronger to meet the small trials of daily life, we shall
be more independent of the world, and therefore its little slights and disajjpoint-
ments will have less power to wound and vex ua. Sir John Herschel says, " If I
were to pray for a taste, which would stand me in stead under every variety of cir¬
cumstances, and be a source of happiness and cheerfulness to me through life, and a
52
THE   ATTEMPT.
shield against its Uls, however things might go amiss, and the world frown upon me,
it would be a taste for reading ;" and with respect to women, this is equally, if not
more forcibly true ; and a well-balanced mind can be none the less fitted for house¬
hold duties, that it has been breathing a high intellectual atmosphere. Domestic
duties are rarely so numerous as to engross the whole of a woman's time, and surely
the attention brought to these duties, would be none the less likely to be serious and
careful, that the leisure, instead of being occupied with frivolous pursuits, has been
spent in what required earnest thought.
But reading, to be profitable, should give pleasure—not mere temporary grati¬
fication—but lasting pleasure.
If, after the pursuance of a study sufficiently long to have overcome all
obstacles, which want of habit or custom might put in our way, we yet find it
yields us no pleasure, and is but a strain on the mind, it is better to give it up, and
betake ourselves to some higher and more congenial literature; but, above all things,
let us see that all we read has on it the stamp of truth, for this is as necessary in
fiction as in facts. A lie in history is but a lie against one man, but a false view of
life, a narrow estimate of our fellow-men, is a lie against humanity. There is a
class of literature, of the present day, false alike on moral and aesthetic grounds. A
strong mind may, for a time, yield to its fascinations, but will in the end turn from
it in disgust—but to a weak or young reader, it is as poison. It presents a dis¬
torted view of human life, confuses the ideas of right and wTong, and tends to
subvert the judgment, mislead the sympathy, and deprave the taste. These
writers seem sadly foi'getful that their Master has given them this great in¬
fluence as a sacred charge, when, for mere temporary popularity, they lower their
standard to pander to a corrupt taste. At all times there has been unwhole¬
some writing, but, with this great difference, that this is the first age in which it
has been allowed free circulation amongst the young. But let us beware of too
sweeping a condemnation of modern fiction, for there are novel writers of the pre¬
sent day, who, for truth, artistic perception, and beauty of diction, stand unequalled
in any age. They write of life as it really is, they make us feel that there is yet
nobility in man ; that there are still some jnire spirits striving for right and truth,
and when they tell of sin and suffering, it is not to excite our imaginations, and
harrow our feelings, but to make us more foi-beaiing and long-suffering, and to make
us go forth among our fellow-men, not hai'd and su-spicious, but witli a humble,
loving faith, that God will save, what " seems remediless." They make us distrust¬
ful of ourselves, lenient to others, feeling how very little we  know of their inner
THE   ATTEMPT. 53
lives, of the temptations that may have assailed them, the trials they may have under¬
gone,—and so following the divine command, we may withhold judgment, and deal
mercy. Such works raise the moral tone of society, even as the others lower it, and
we cannot be too careful, in an age when reading has such a wide and distinctly
traceable influence on every class.
Another point to be considered, is, that ovir reading be not too engross¬
ing; and that brings us to the second part of Mr Carlyle's advice, viz., with
regard to " Environment of Fortune." This consideration of social position
and circumstances must be ever most essential to a woman, if she would have
her moral keep pace with her mental, for the moral consists practically in fulfilling
faithfully the duties which lie nearest; and no true woman, valuing mental culture
at its highest, but will feel it must ever be kept subservient to moral obligations.
And if, at any time, as often does happen, they seem to jar ; if from lack of time or
individual circumstances, the much-loved study must be abandoned ; let us give it
up ungi-udgingly and without a murmur, remembering that, at best, it is but a
means to the end. It may seem a bitter deprivation, but it is but for a time.
Then, let those who enjoy the privilege of uninterrupted study, use it earnestly,
receive it as a sacred responsibility, and let those to whom it is denied, give it up in
faith, assured that God will no more suffer our mental than our spiritual faculties to
fade for want of food, and that whether in this world or not, yet in His own good
time, and by a way we know not. He who has planted those longings and desires
within us, will amply satisfy them. Enai.
54 THE   ATTEMPT.
The breath of the morning was fresh and free,
And a breeze was blowing from over the sea,
Curling the waves in their rijipling play.
As they washed the foot of the sea-wall gray.
A trampling was heard in the silent street—
A heavy trampling of chargers' feet—
The scabbard's clank on the stirruj) of steel.
And the ring of the spur on the horseman's heel.
Onward they came—a noble band,
Faithful in heart, and ready of hand ;
The Cid's warrior-spirit in each dark eye—
Ready to fight, or ready to die.
They rode up the street with a steady pace,
They rode through the ancient Market place ;
They passed through gateway and under arch—
Yet paused not then in theii- measured march.
They passed by ovir Lady's image tall.
High in a niche of a convent wall;
Each bared head bent to the saddle-bow—
Each man said an Ave, deep and low.
As the church-clock struck, with a heavy clang
On the Plaza pavement the horse-hoofs rang ;
And the church-bells pealed the hour of pi-ayer.
As slowly they crossed the sun-lit square.
THE   ATTEMPT. 55
Where the shadows fall from the church-tower tall,
At the great arched doorway, they halted all.
Rattled the scabbards, the rowels rang.
As down from his saddle each trooper sprang.
The soldiers were marshalled four by four.
And in they marched by the massive door;
As each man entered, his helm he doffed
To the carven cross raised high aloft.
They passed up the aisle, and the low sweet strain
Of a chant was heard—then silence again.
" Halt!" was the order, clear and loud—
And, hark ! like the burst of a thunder-cloud,
A thousand carbines came to the ground
With a clash would have made your heart to bound
Like a stricken deer—then to lie as still
As that deer when the arrow has di'unk its fill.
Slowly the echoes died away
In the dark old aisles, 'iiioug the shadows gray ;
And silence so deep on the church there fell
That the sound of a sigh you might almost tell.
A moment's pause—and then, full and grand,
Burst the glorious hymn of the choral band;
The pealing tones of the organ strong
Blending its notes with the choir's glad throng—
Now rising, now falling, now mounting higher.
The heavenly song of that high-voiced choir !
Louder and louder ! magnificent voice.
Making the dim old pile to rejoice !
Louder ! still louder !—Ah, no ! it falls.
And thrills no more through the soundijig walls.
5G THE  ATTEMPT,
The hymn had ceased—not a breath had stirred,
Till the muttering sound of a voice was heard;
Each eye at once towards the altar turned,
Where seven tall candles dimly burned.
A rich-robed priest with his missal stood
In rapt and worshipping attitude.
And slowly the solemn words he spoke—
The only sound that the silence broke.
Now he pauses—now speaks again—
And the choir chants softly the grand " Amen !"
And the heads bend low, as he turns about
And loudly reads them a Pater out.
Silence a moment—and then a sound
Like the first great storm tears that beat the ground;
Then stronger, louder, as every one
Joins in the psalm, by the priest begun;
Then it dies into stillness, slow at last—
As the rain-drops cease when the storm is past.
And once again, on the quivering air,
Trembles the organ's liquid prayer ;
Then comes the benison, soft and low,
Arid forth to the Plaza the soldiers go.
Pass on, brave hearts ! for the time is nigh
When death may darken each glorious eye,
May still the life in each thrilling vein,
And send to its Maker the soul again !
"O"
Pass on, but still, in your fitful life—
In the clamour and rush of the battle and strife—
When the soul is passing through Death's dark gates,
And the Angel of Death for the spirit waits—
Forget, oh, forget not your murmured prayer.
But breathe one more as you shiver there !
Mas Alta.
THE  ATTEMPT. 57
^rumWing ^thx,
(Continued.)
For about a week the world went on pretty much as usual, and Peter felt very
triumphant, although a little oppressed by the weight of responsibility which rested
upon him. Another thing which kept him from becoming too much at his ease, was
the tremendous excitement and alarm attending the sudden setting of the sun.
Several people went completely mad with fright, and the rest of the world went wild
with amazement. Meetings of philosophers and astronomers were held everywhere
over the civilized globe, and several very learned gentlemen published books, with
very fine Latin names, and containing a good many Greek and Hebrew quotations.
Peter procured one of these books, hoping to find a few hints as to the management
of the heavenly bodies, but becoming bewildered and alarmed, he soon threw the
book into the fire, and strolled into the garden to recruit his jaded intellects with a
mild cigar, and his morning newspaper. No sooner, however, had he unfolded its
damp columns, adjusted his spectacles, and glanced down the page, than a deadly
pallor overspread his countenance, and his heart leapt to his mouth.
And what was it that so disconcerted our friend Peter 1
Let us look over his shoulder, and read as he reads.
From Our Correspondent in Timbuctoo !
Horrible Occurrence!!
Extinction of a Whole Tribe !! !
"A terrible occurrence has just taken place in the centre of Africa, resulting in
the extinction of a whole race of Hottentots, with the exception of one man who
escaped to bring the news. A great cannibal feast was about to take place. The
victims were brought forth. The executioners were in readiness, when a sudden sun¬
stroke fell simultaneously on the whole assembled nation, cutting off in a moment
the unhappy people, from the king on his throne to the wi-etched victims who were an¬
ticipating another doom, with the single exception we have just mentioned. This
sad calamity has spread the deepest consternation among the surrounding nations,
many of whom have suffered, though in a less degree, from sun-stroke."
The writer then went on to state the day and hour of the catastrophe, aud
Peter, with deep horror and poignant despair, perceived that the consequences of his
rash act were not confined to his own immediate neighbourhood. All Peter's triumph
vanished, and willingly would he have resigned his fatal power.    Beating his brow
H
58 THE   ATTEMPT.
in violent agitation, he called loudly upon Nature, but no Nature appeared, and
Peter's heart saidi within him as he reflected upon the days that yet remained, in
which he must direct and guide the universe. He gave way to a paroxysm of grief,
from which he was at length aroused by the voice of Jacob, the old gardener.
Peter composed his countenance as well as possible, and said in a melancholy yet calm
voice—
" Well ! Jacob, how goes the garden ?"
Jacob grunted, and replied in surly tones—
" It goes to wreck and ruin, sir, I think." Then after a pause he repeated, with
renewed ill-humour, " To wreck and ruin. And in all my mortal days I—never
—did—see—such—a—world."
Jacob had caught this last expression from his master, and Peter sighed as he
answered.
" Ah ! Jacob—we ought to be thankful for our mercies, for they are indeed
numerous."
Such language had never before proceeded from Peter's lips within the memory
of man, and Jacob stared open-mouthed.
" If you say so, it must be," he said at last with emjihasis; " but I would say
nay. Such things as a man has to go against now-a-days. No dew for five nights
running, no rain through the day. Such things as these. And then just look at
—that—blossom. It ought to have been off a week ago. Forty years I've been a
gardener, and I never knew such a thing as blossom that wouldn't fall off the trees.
Never an apple, nor a cherry, nor a plum will you have at this rate, and it's the same
everywhere. It—is—the—very—most—exti'aordinary—thing—ever—I—heard—
tell—of."
And Jacob beat the ground impatiently with his stick.
Peter's first impulse was to command the blossom to fall instantly, but experience
came to his assistance, and he merely bent an attentive ear to Jacob's grumbling.
When at length he was left alone, he lazily shut Ids eyes, and with a smile of con¬
scious power he said:—
" Leaves wither and fall."
Instantly a change took place. Not only the blossom, but the green leaves
turned first yellow, then red, then brown, and fluttered sadly to the ground.
Peter ojDcned his eyes about five miuutes later, and aghast, quickly corrected
himself, calling over and over again, with frantic vehomeirce, " Blossoms, I mean,
not leaves—only blossoms."    The shower of leaves immediately stopped, while the
THE   ATTEMPT. 59
blossoms fell thick and fast; but what a change was there in the space of five
minutes !
Peter's blooming garden had become a perfect wilderness. The hawthorn hedge,
the admiration of the village, which had delighted the eye with its mass of fresh,
bright verdure, behold it now, in early summer, despoiled of its beauty. Thick lie
the leaves on the grass beneatli, and only here and there in russet patches appear a
few axxtiimnal leaves. Under the oak the turf is invisible, and beneath every
shrub and tree are heaps of leaves. As far as eye can reach, hedges and trees are
equally bare. The gentle breeze of early June plays with withered leaves, and
rustles, strangely out of place, among branches on which the leaves might almost be
counted.
Peter's distress may be imagined. It cannot possibly be described. Although
a less fatal mistake than his first, it was almost as painful. How sad to have
autumn usurping the place of summer ! how melancholy to see roses, only half
blown, lying withered before their time, and young buds standing on naked stems
unprotected by a single leaf!
Peter rose, and shaking the blossom from his coat, strode in perfect despair
through the leaves, which lay thick on the ground. He opened the gate aiid walked
forth into the village, more because he saw Jacob approaching than from any other
motive. He walked along the village street. Here all was consternation and
amazement. In every cottage garden, perplexed and wondering men walked to and
fro in eager examination. At every cottage door-way stood women, with babies in
their arms, talking and exclaiming loudly in accents of surprise. The children
coming out of school pelted each other with the leaves, and, never troubling their
unphilcsophic minds with any other feeling but perfect enjoyment, continued their
wild play, heedless of the ejaculations of their elders. At the door of the village
inn was a group of men engaged in earnest debate. Two or three gigs and carts
stood in the court, and their owners brought intelligence that all over the country
the phenomenon was universal.
Peter could hardly help feeling amused in sj^ite of himself as he thought how
little the real cause of the wonderful event was suspected. He drew near to the
talkers and listened to their conversation.
" Perhaps," said the tailor, a little sandy-haired man, unversed iu agricultural
matters, " perhaps it was the want of rain."
" How could that be," retorted the schoolmaster, " we have often been with¬
out rain for a miich longer space of time than a week, Snipes, and nothing of this
60 THE  ATTEMPT.
kind has ever happened.     It is much more likely to have been caused by some
atmospheric contraction of the air attendant on the late extraordinary heat."
Whether the schoolmaster was speaking sense, or the reverse, remains a ques¬
tion for the consideration of the intelligent reader. Certain it is that this speech
made some impression on the crowd, and the butcher nodded and said, " Something
of the same kind, I take it, sir, as killed them niggers away in Africa; extraction of
the hair you said, sir."
" I don't see how that would cause a negro's death," said the hair-dresser, who
was a bit of a wag.
The audience not being remarkably quick at perceiving the drift of a pun, this
fell rather flat, and the hair-dresser was discomfited.
" Well!" said a burly farmer, " you grand people talk a lot of nonsense now-a-
days, I think, or I'm not so clever as I once was ; at any-rate I don't understand a
half of what I hear. There my wife took me off to some meeting t'other night at our
town, and I'm blessed if I could make head or tail of it. T'was all about that sun
setting an hour oi' two before its time ! as if it mattered a pin one way or t'other."
" I'll tell you a queer thing," said another farmer, " as you seem to be talking
of queer things. It should have been full moon last night, and there was no moon
at all."
" No, nor hasn't been for three nights," rejoined the blacksmith. " T'is a queer
world this, I say. And it seems to have gone queerer lately. What with niggers
melting up one day, and the moon going amissing at night, I wonder what we're
coming to."
" And a stranger thing still," said a sailor who had just joined the group, " the tide
hasn't come in for about a week. There's my sloop, the ' Betsy Jane' (as fine a craft
as ever sailed), left high and dry this day week, and never got into the water again.
The whole shore's covered with women and children and men, carting sea-weed, and
as nothing's doing, I'm going a little cruise to see my old aunt, beyond this a bit."
Peter looked very uncomfortable as these remarks were made, and he inwardly
said, " Full moon appear to-night.    Tide come in this instant."
At this moment the miller sauntered up, " Hulloa, Grindei-," cried one, " are
you idle too?"
"Yes," was the answer, "the stream's gone down to nothing. Wouldn't turn
a cork.    Won't be any better till we have some rain."
" We shan't have good weather," said the sailor, " till we have a regular good
thunder-storm."
THE   ATTEMPT. 61
" A good hint," thought Peter, " and a good way of dispersing these chattering
fools."
Just then a few ominous growls were heard, and in ten minutes a terrific tem¬
pest raged, bending the stoutest trees, and changing the smallest rills into foaming
torrents. Lightning flashed across the lurid sky, and tremendous peals of thunder
crashed among the hiils. Peter ran home terrified by his own success, and as soon
as he collected his wits sufficiently, commanded a cessation of the thunder, at the
same time ordering the rain to continue all night.
No sooner had he seated himself by his parlour fire, book in hand, than Mrs
Dumpling, the housekeeper, appeared.
" Goodness, sii', how wet you are. Now, you'll change, won't you. Oh ! sir,
oh ! "
" Thank you, my good woman, very good," said Peter, politely leading Mrs
Dumpling to the door. " Law sir, have mercy on my bones and my new cap,"
gasped Mrs Dumpling, as Peter gently but firmly pushed her outside the door.
" Oh ! dear, oh ! sir, I'm sure I never meant no intrusion, oh ! dear." And
Mrs Dumpling continued to groan and sigh outside the door till she heard a sharp
click of the key turning in the lock, and heard her master poking the fire,
putting on the kettle, bringing out the whisky, the sugar, and other things
necessary for the manufacture of toddy. Then, indeed, Mrs Dumpling's pride
overcame her feelings, and with a haughty siiifi" she muttered—
" And never to think of offering me a drop." Agnella.
[To he continued.)
lines on a ^cnnmmt in Mimbornc ^^linsler.
There is the effigy carved in stone,
In the minster old and grey,
The knight and his lady; all alone
They are resting day by day.
And as I look on the figures twain,
Reposing side by side.
Thought wanders back through the years again,
To the time when they lived and died.
62 THE  ATTEMPT.
This knight in stone, was he brave and true 1
This dame, was she sweet and fair ?
The aisles are silent; they rest, these two,
Nor for censure nor praise they care.
Yet mark the warrior's mailed grasp.
Still holding the sculptured hand
Of his lady-love in its moveless clasp,
Though his soul's in the Spirit land.
As though he would say, " All else is gone,
Castles, and lands, and pride.
My fame is dead, but my love lives on.
And my truth ; they never died."
Does he still remember that evening fair.
In the summer long ago,
When the little hand that is sculptured there.
Like the heart, could thrill and glow ?
Wheu he pressed it in his, and vowed a vow
That should never be broken more.
To keep it safe all his life, and now,
Having passed the grave's grim door
Still he holds the hand that was given to him,
" To have and to hold " for life,
When life throbbed strong through every limb,
In its restless struggle and strife.
Did he hold it gently, that gentle hand 1
Did he prize it more than gold.
Houses, and serfs, and fame, and land.
That he clings to its marble mould 1
Was it a help and a stay 1 though weak.
Was it strong in its trusting love ?
Was it gentle and patient, tender and meek.
And soft as a nestling dove ?
THE   ATTEMPT. 63
Was it ever to him with its cool calm touch,
A balm in life's fever-pain 1
There are few such hands ; but blessed are such.
And their memory shall remain.
To my heart the dead knight speaks from the tomb,
" I have lost my earthly home ;
With its storied splendour, its haunted gloom.
It has melted like ocean foam."
" Melted away from my grasp," quoth he,
" As the shadow from the hill,
But this hand, this love, that were given to me,
I have and I hold them still."
O. M.
*s€^^«
Chaptek I.
A Knightly Youth.
In the history of every nation that has had power to advance itself beyond the
state of barbarism, there has been an era which in some degree corresponds to our
times of chivalry, when the noblest type of manhood was followed, admired, and
copied ; when the bravest deeds were set in remembrance and glory. We find it in
the Hindoo legends; in the true foundations of the Grecian fables, where heroes are
raised to demigods ; in Homan history ; in the tales of the AfFglian conquerors ; in
the Sagas of the Norse, or the wild tales of the brave forefathers of the North Ameri¬
can Indian. But in all these, there is an element awanting, that gave a grace and
glory to chivalry, not to be attained by the mere perfection of sinews :—the element
of religion, and of the love that grew forth as a natural blossom of that religion.
This it was, that raised our European chivalry to a higher place than that of other
64 THE   ATTEMPT.
times and other civilisations. But I am not at present about to compare its advan¬
tages and disadvantages—its beauties and its faults ; but simply to endeavour to draw
an unprejudiced and abridged sketch of its principal features—to restore habits that
have departed from us, so as to judge the spirit that gave them life.
The education of a noble youth generally began about seven years of age, when he
was sent to the castle of some friendly feudal lord. For the first seven years, his chief
duty was to attend on the person of his lord, as his page or valet, or he might be the
attendant and messenger of the lady, the damoiseau ; or the " little foot-page" of
many a ballad. Interspersed with these duties, however, were those relating to his own
education. He must make himself acquainted with the " mystery of woods, of rivers,
and the air," or hunting, fishing, and hawking ; for it was considered an essential to
knighthood to be an adept in all these. He was also taught, in prospect of some
future field, to blow the trumpet, to leap over trenches, to throw spears and darts,
to carry a shield, and to fight with light staves against his equals. He sometimes
even followed his lord to the field, carrying his helmet; and was in comparative
safety, as it was considered unknightly to wound a page. There his young soul was
stirred by the bravery he might not yet emulate, and his desire was kindled worthily
to serve out the twice seven years that miist elapse before he won the liberty to
prove his power. An interesting description of this period of training is given in
Hardynge's Chronicles.
" And as lordis sons been sett at four year age,
At school to learn the doctrine of letture,
And after six to have them in language
And sit at meat, seemly in all niirture.
At ten and twelve, to revel is their cure,
To dance and sing, and speak of gentleness ;
At fourteen year they shall to field I sure
To hunt the deer, and catch at hardiuesse
For deer to hunt and slay, and see them bleed
An hardiment giveth to his cotirage,
And also in his wit he giveth heed,
Imagining to take them at advantage.
At sixteen year to warry and to wage,
To joust and ride and castles to assail,
To skirmish also, and make sicker sewage
And set hia watch for fent nooturual."
For the next stage was the Armiger, Scutifer, Escuyer, or Esquire, which nomi-
THE   ATTEMPT. 65
nally extended over the next seven years, from the age of fourteen to that of twenty-
one. His duties were partly personal and partly military. He prepared the morn¬
ing refection for his lord ; and then went out to engage in chivalric exercises. He
perhaps practised along with his fellows at the Quintain, which was a half-figure of
a man, armed with sword and buckler—elevated on a post, and so fixed on a pivot,
that, if the assailant, with his lance, did not hit it in the very centre, the figure
turned round and struck him sharply. Or he might hang a shield upon a staff fixed
in the ground, and endeavour to strike it so skilfully, as to detach it from its liga¬
tures. But no exercise was so important, or so much practised, as horsemanship,
without which he could never hope to attain to the dignity of knighthood.
At dinner he waited, with the pages, on his lord, and presented him water
both before and after meals, to wash his hands. He never sat down with the knight,
though the relation should even be that of father and son. After dinner, however,
the Esquire took part in the general amusements. He sometimes learned the
minstrel's power from the harper, and by this attainment, deemed most worthy of a
knight, he rendered himself more interesting and amusing to all, particularly to the
ladies. His last service for the day, was to present his loi'd with his cup full of the
" vin de coucher," and then he also might seek his rest.
His dress ought to be dark or sad, but he seldom kept it so—in those days of
pageantry. He carried his lord's shield and armour to the field. In France, where
armour was strictly the emblem of rank, Esquii-es were only allowed to wear a coat
of mail without hood or hose ; but in other countries they were not so strict, and he
was sometimes well armed. Though always different from his lord, he wore silver
spurs, while his lord's were golden, &c. But, though he could not lead in the wars,
he often did noble serviee, and in Maturin's Romance of the Albigenses, a fine de¬
scription is given of the bravery of the Squires, that secured the victory of Bovines
to Philip Augustus, when he fought with Otho. Having gone through the duties of
page and squire throughout his youth, during which time obedience was strictly en¬
forced, and its dignity upheld, he became eligible for knighthood, the immediate
preparations for which, however, are worthy of moi-e particular and separate notice.
LuTEA Reseda.
>?*&€«
66 THE  ATTEMPT.
C^^ BuQi oi ^o%hmQ^.
King James II. of Scotland was kUled by the bursting of a camion while besieging Roxburgh
Oastle, in 1460. The Scottish army, greatly discouraged, was about to raise the siege, when
Queen Margaret, the widow of the slain King, appeared in the council, leading her little son. King
James III., then eight years old ; and, by her heroic words, so animated the nobles, that they at
once led their men out to battle, and Roxburgh was taken.
There was fear and doubt and trouble among all the Scottish host,
For brave King James was lying dead, their glory and their boast;
His strong right arm was powerless, his hero-heart was cold,
And Scotland mourned her monarch, and the troops their leader bold.
The chiefs were met in council, there was doubt in every face,
And each man talked of prudence, unmindful of disgrace ;
Then spake the oldest warrior, " 'Twere best to quit the field,
Our king is dead, the walls are strong, the townsmen will not yield."
The others praised his caution ; " We cannot match the foe.
And ere to-morrow's dawn," they said, " we'll raise the siege and go ;" —
The heavy doors flew open—a lady stood between—
And the warriors inly wondered as they rose to greet the Queen.
Queen Margaret of Scotland came slowly through the room ;
She marked the rugged faces, o'ercast with doubt and gloom,
She heard the craven whispers of retreat and of disgrace,
And a flush of shame and anger lit up her lily face.
Her sweet blue eyes were dim with tears, her golden hair streamed down.
Her little son, half-frightened, was clinging to her gown ;
But proudly then she raised her head, and spake in accents clear,
" How now, my lords and gentlemen ! what words are these I hear?
THE  ATTEMPT, 67
" The King my lord and husband is lying cold and dead—
And will the knights of Scotland allow it to be said
That a woman and a widow, in the first hour of her woe,
Was the only one who urged them again to face the foe ?
" He died a soldier's death, my lords ; he died as fits a King;
Then wherefore stand aghast and pale, as 'twere a shameful thrug ?
Behold your yoiithful monarch, the heir to Scotland's crown !
Fulfil his father's dying wish—go forth and take the town.
" Up ! for your country's honour ! up ! for your knightly fame !
Let Koxburgh be a memory of glory, not of shame !
Let not the Southron tongue repeat with scorn your ancient names.
Or say that Scottish valour departed with King James."
Then martial ardour all around in place of fear was seen ;
" God save King James the Third !" they cried, " and Heav'n protect the Queen !"
Then buckled on their trusty swords, and hastened all away
To bid their squires and men-at-arms prepare them for the fray.
A bloody fight in sooth it was—the walls were high and strong—
The Englishmen gave battle both manfully and long;
But nought could stay the Northern powers, and ere the west was red.
The Scots were lords of Roxburgh, the English leader dead.
The din of fight was over, the daring deed was done,
And Scotland's banner on the keep proclaimed the castle won ;
While fast the news of battle to the royal pavilion sped.
Where Margaret of Scotland was sitting by the dead.
She faced the knights and nobles without a sigh or tear.
And as she gave them thanks and praise, her voice was calm and clear;
Till all had left the tent, her high and stately mien she kept;—
And then she laid her weary head upon the couch, and wept.
"Forgive me, love !" she murmured, "they shall not call me weak"—
And fast her burning tears flowed down upon his icy cheek—
68 THE  ATTEMPT.
" By none of all thy subjects my anguish shall be seen,
But still I am a woman, although I am a Queen.
" Thy country's honour has been saved, thy dying wish fulfilled,
Thy flag is on the castle, the noise of fight is stilled ;
At last, at last, my aching heart in tears may find relief.
The Queen forget her dignity, the widow own her grief.
" Alas ! the years of happiness that passed so swiftly by !
Alas ! the sudden storm that overcast the sunny sky !
And thou hast left me lonely, my King, my lord, my love !
Cold is the world around me, and dark the heav'n above.
" Alas ! the dark and lonely lot that mine must henceforth be !
The weary time, the boundless space, that sever me from thee !
God grant me strength and courage to bear these years of pain.
And bring me safe, my trials past, to be with thee again."
Dido.
% Coitr in iort^ mvcliB,
It was in the beginning of July 18G8, that we made up a party for the purpose
of undertaking a tour in North Wales. We assembled at Chester, that charming
old city, so well known that any description of it would be superfluous. There we
formed our plans, and decided to take the Ruabon and Llangollen route.
Leaving Chester about two o'clock in the afternoon, we journeyed by train
through a rather uninteresting country, past Wrexham and Euabon, near which
latter place is Wynnstay, the seat of Sir Watkiti WjTine, celebrated for its beauty
and magnificence. We were rather disappointed with Llangollen, which must cer¬
tainly be indebted to its " fair maid " and its two old ladies of renown for the interest
it excites—the scenery being pretty, but decidedly tame. The " maid of Llangollen,"
was, I believe, Myfanwy Fechan, a beautiful girl who flourished in the year 1390, and
who excited the admiration of Hoel ap Einion Llygliw, a poet of. fame, whose name
THE   ATTEMPT. 69
I should be very sorry to be obliged to pronounce. Llangollen churchyard contains
the remains of two romantic ladies, the Honourable Miss Ponsonby, and Lady Eleanor
Butler, who lived together apart from the world in a small cottage near the town,
until death separated them, though only for the space of three years. The journey
from Llangollen to Corwen was certainly exciting, inasmuch as the train proceeded on
its way with a noble disregard of steam, the usual means of progress, and contented
itself with a very rapid descent of a steep gradient, for most part of the route. A
fall into the river Dee would have been the result of any obstruction in our headlong
career, and consequently the relief of arriving at the stupid and ugly little town of Cor¬
wen was great. Here we remained that night, and the whole of the next day, tak¬
ing advantage however of our kind host's offer to drive us to Bala Lake. On our
way thither, we saw the only woman wearing a bona fide Welsh hat that it was our
good fortune to fall in with during our entire tour. It was of black beaver, with a
broad brim and high crown like a sugar loaf. She told us that it was twenty
years old, and then running into the toll house, of which she was proprietress, she
returned with her Sunday one, declaring it was thirty years. These hats are almost
totally discarded in North Wales, as the younger generation found the advantage of
straw ones with low crowns, and adopted them \iniversally. The river Dee flows
into the Lake at Bala, which at certain points presents a pleasing picture, but loses
considerably on a nearer approach. The Dee is celebrated in many an old song; one
of the Welsh bards writes of it poetically in these words:
" I crossed in its beauty thy Dee's Druid water,
The waves, as I passed, rippled lowly and lone ;
For the brave on their borders had perished in slaughter,
The noble v/ere vanished, the gifted were gone ! "
On the second morning after our arrival at Corwen, we watched with much interest
the approach of the stage coach which was to carry us on to Bettws-y-coed. The day
was imclouded, and the sun shone out brilliantly, indeed the heat was intense, as
many will remember was the case all through the month of July in last year.
Mounted on the box seat, my face protected by a blue gauze veil, and over my head
an umbrella whose dimensions tried the temper and obstructed the view of my com¬
panions, but which was an absolute necessity to prevent an attack of sunstroke, I
felt as comfortable as could be expected when one is broiling. The coachman, Mr
Brooks, a fine old man, with beautiful white hair, and a flow of conversation, took
excellent care of me, and almost enveloped me in a thick rug, to keep the dust and
70 THE  ATTEMPT.
heat out. The scenery was not remarkable until we arrived within a few miles of
our destination, with the exception of a fine arch, named Pont-y-glyn, spanning the
river at a height of sixty feet, and resting on precipitous rocks. We never realized
the beauty of Wales till we came within two or three miles of Bettws, above the
Con way Falls, and there a scene of most exquisite loveliness opened upon us. Below
us flowed the river Llugwy, in many places almost dry from the intense and long
continued heat, and on the other side rose hills, one mass of foilage, whilst behind
these appeared chain upon chain of mountains, all alike green with trees of every
variety.
Far beneath lay the " Fairy Glen," dear to the hearts of artists, who indeed are
never weary of frequenting these lovely spots. Bettws-y-coed is a sequestered little
village, possessing however very comfortable hotels, and we recommend the Waterloo,
with its pretty hostesses, the Misses Williams, to all who like clean, comfortable
quarters. From these young ladies I learnt all the Welsh I gained during the ex¬
cursion. It has a strange effect to hear a perfectly foreign language spoken on all
sides, one might as well be in France or Germany, indeed on the whole one is more
likely to hear English in these countries than in some districts of Wales. One even¬
ing, as we were walking along the high road at Bettws, we passed two men sitting
on the bank, one of whom was reading from a newspaper, and on a nearer inspection
we discovered that he was translating from English into Welsh as he went on, a task
by no means easy, especially to one who appeared likely to gain his bread by the
labour of his hands. On quitting this sweet little place we came to one of the lions
of Wales, about two miles from Betws-y-coed, known by the name of the Swallow
Fall. In general this has a noble volume of water, descending in three distinct falls;
and dashing down between dark rocks and overhanging trees, is an impressive sight,
but alas for us, no rain had fallen for many weeks, and a burning sun had aided to
reduce this fine effect of nature to a very ordinary aflkir indeed. Rather disappointed
we mounted again, and were rapidly driven through the vale of the Llugwy, till we
reached Capel Curig, an insignificant little place, commanding a most exquisite view,
resembling the Swiss scenery. Two lovely lakes lie at the foot of the mountains,
and here the whole Snowdon range is seen to the greatest advantage. From this
point, all through the pass of Llanberis is indescribably grand. You leave the vistas
of smiling valleys and chain u2>on chain of jagged mountains, whose peaks seem to
pierce the sky, and then turn into the terrific gorge of Llanberis, which we thought
rivalled Glencoe in its sublimity.
The great dark rocks frowned down upon us, as if at any moment they might fall
THE   ATTEMPT. 71
vipon US and crush us, whilst enormous blocks strewn in every direction showed that
such things did sometimes happen. At length we reached the two lakes of Llanberis
Llyn Peris, and Llyn Paderu, only a quarter of a mile apart, and known to be of
great depth. The sceneiy is very magnificent at this point. The two beautiful
lakes, with mountains grapd in outline rising from their banks, the picturesque old
castle of Dolbadarn standing out on a rocky promontory, and the valuable slate
quarries, which extend along the mountain on the north east side of the lakes, glow¬
ing in the evening sun, faii'ly hushed our expressions of admiration, as too grand for
words to do it justice.
We did not stop at the village of Llanberis except to change horses, as we were
anxious to get on the same evening to Carnarvon, which is only eight miles distant.
About six o'clock we rattled through the streets of the old town, up to the door of
the " Sportsman" Hotel, an establishment containing the largest coffee room it was ever
my fortune to see.
Carnarvon is situated on the south east side of the Menai strait, and is chiefly re¬
markable for its ancient castle. If I here venture to quote from Black's Guide-book,
it is because I feel that his words convey a better impression of this noble pile than
any I could use. " Carnarvon Castle is one of the noblest and most magnificent ruins
of its kind in the empire, and externally it is still entire. It occupies a strong posi"
tion at the west end of the town, and before the use of cannon, must have been im
pregnable.
" The walls, which enclose an area of about three acres, are seven feet nine inches
thick, having within them a gallery, with slips for the discharge of missiles, and are
flanked by thirteen strong towers, all angular, but differing in the number of their
sides. The entrance is very imposing, beneath a vast square tower of prodigious
strength, having grooves for four portcullises. In the front appears a mutilated
statue of the founder, with his hand upon a half drawn sword, as if either menacing
his newly acquired subjects, or sheathing the weapon to indicate the termination of
the war. The towers are all admirable, that distinguished as the eagle tower is
decidedly the finest, more lofty, and more substantial than the rest, and having the
addition of three angular turrets rising above the roof, formerly surmounted and
adorned by sculptured eagles, of which shapeless fragments alone remain."
The sight of this castle would have been sufiicient of itself to repay the fatigue
of the journey.
We determined to enjoy a day at Beddgelert, and accordingly hired a conveyance,
and set ofi" on an over-poweringly hot morning on our long drive.    We had a very
72 THE   ATTEMPT.
fair view of Snowdon on the way, and certainly the ascent did not seem so appalling
from this side as we had fancied it, but the tremendous heat deterred us, and indeed
almost every one, from attempting it, especially as our chance of a clear prospect from
the summit was very dubious. I am well aware what is thought of people who go
to Wales without ascending Snowdon, but I resolved to brave the ignominy of the
confession for the great comfort of remaining at the foot.
We were not sorry when we drove up to the door of " Tlie Goat," the well known
hotel at Beddgelert. The scenery here is very fine, the Snowdon range and other
mountains completely shutting in the little village.
Eveiyone is aware that this is the scene of " G-elert's Grave," a story somewhat
mythical, but not the less affecting. The poem on this subject by the Honourable
Mr Spencer is familiar to all, and needs no repetition here.
The walk through the pass of Aberglaslyn is very romantic, though it did not
bear out the extravagant eulogiums we had heard pronounced upon it. The view
however from the bridge is really fine, looking up the gorge, with the clear stream
underneath, and the verdant banks refreshing the eyes, and producing a very lull¬
ing effect. By the time we got back to " The Goat," we were ravenous, and totally
regardless of everything but chops and potatoes. The children about Beddgelert are
a perfect plague, teazing everyone to buy their specimens of copper ore from the
mines in the neighbourhood, which nobody wants, and only buys in the end to es¬
cape from their importunities. In the cool of the evening we drove back to Carnar¬
von, passing Llyn Cwellyn, whose placid depths reflected the bold crags above, while
a gorgeous setting sun glowed in the deep waters like a sea of fire, and the cattle stand¬
ing, some in the water, others grazing on the banks, seemed to enjoy a doles far
niente of happiness after the scorching heat of the day.    It would have furnished a
glorious scene for a painter, as a breathing idyll of rest and peace.
Alma.
{To be continued.)
THE  ATTEMPT. 73
Part I.
" T don't like these handsome men, Jack," said I,  " I never did; and I  mean to
take care of Minnie,"    And I shut down the window with a bang.
Jack is my husband, reader ; and he is the very ugliest fellow you ever saw ;
which perhaps accounts for my dislike to handsome men. Minnie is my sister, and
no more like me than moonlight is like lightning, or than a rippling, murmuring,
lowland brook is like a noisy tumbling highland burn.
We were the only girls among a large family of boys; and, while I was the ring¬
leader in all mischief, and never out of a scrape, little Minnie seemed to have absorbed
and concentrated in herself all the softness and gentleness which should have been
distributed among the rest of the family, and which made her Papa's pet, and Ma¬
ma's darling, and the pride and plaything of the boys and myself. We were a terrible
family, the rest of us, and I was the most terrible of the whole ! I am perfectly
ashamed of myself now, when I think of the way I used to behave to Jack, when he
first came to Edinburgh to study medicine, and wm the hearty goodwill of my father
and the other Professors, by his steady diligence'^ and perseverance. How I teased
him, and laughed at him, and talked him down upon all occasions ! for besides being
very shy. Jack always was a man of few words, and rarely attempted to stem the
torrent of my talk ] but used to sit with his mouth and eyes wide open, staring at me
with all his might. However, he forgave it all; and, at last, one evening towards
the close of a Christmas party at our house. Jack waxed suddenly eloquent, and
I found myself engaged to him before I knew where I was.
Very soon after that, we were married (and my only sad recollection of that
day is little Minnie in her bridesmaid's dress, clinging to me, and crying not to leave
her) and Jack brought me to this pretty Warwickshire village, where we have lived
ever since, and which I hojie we shall never leave. Jack has a capital practice,
steadily increasing, and he is a favourite with everybody for miles round ; and I am
quite sure I am the most fortunate woman between John o'Groat's House and—
(oh dear ! what is the name of the most southern point of Great Britain 1 I must
wait and ask Jack)-in the meantime, let me speak metaphorically, and say, from Dan
to Beersheba.
Minnie was fifteen when we were married; but that is four years ago now, and
she is a beautiful girl of nineteen (I may say beautiful without any vanity, though
74 THE   ATTEMPT.
she is my sister, because she is so very unlike me), and she is visiting us at Barden—
Barden is the name of our village. I have left off all my wild tricks, sobered down
into a matron and a housekeeper, and no longer forget to order dinner, or give Jack
tea that tastes like chopped hay and water, as I used to do. (Poor dear Jack ! I shall
never forget how patient he was towards all my many sins and shortcomings !) And
now, to return to the place I started from. Jack and I have just had a long conver¬
sation on the subject of my sister Minnie, and the young squire of Barden, Harry
Wyvill.
Young Wyvill is (Jack tells me) a universal favourite. He is no favourite of
mine. Jack says an exception proves a rule. Very well. Then no one need be
displeased if I make myself an exception from the rule, and so prove young Wyvill
a universal favourite. Only I won't say he is a favourite of mine ; I don't trust him,
and T won't like him. " Jeanie," says Jack, "listen to reason." And then he pro¬
ceeds, in a slow, deliberate, most aggravating manner, to enumerate the various per¬
fections of Harry Wyvill, while I indulge in a running commentary uj^on them, and
the whole forms a sort of conjugal duet something like this :—
Jack, andante cantahile. Myself, con brio.
" He has a fine estate and £4000 a-year."      " Mere fortuitous circumstances that tell
neither for nor against him."
" He has an excellent temper." " So long as nothing crosses him."
(Crescendo) " Good abilities." " They have never been tested."
" He is musical." " That's nothing," (amoroso) "you don't
care for music. Jack ! "
" Fond of poetry." " You only like poetry when I read it to
you, and then," (molto tremolo) " you
sometimes fall asleep."
"He's a first-rate shot and a splendid     " Because he has been at it all his life."
horseman."
(Allegro  vivace)   "He   can   spar,   and    f'i^ofctmmo^ " You can beat him at them
wrestle,  and fence, and swim, and all, dear, and you know it."
play cricket."
" And then," says Jack, by way of a convincing argument, " he's such a hand¬
some fellow ! " and at this I grew very impatient, made the statement with which
my story started, and, as I think I said before, shut down the window with a bang.
Jack was leaning on the window-sill outside, and I was sitting at my work inside,
so this politic step on my part jirevented all further discussion.
THE   ATTEMPT. 75
Now, reader, as yon may have guessed, the cause of all this argument was the
veiy evident partiality of the young squire for my sister Minnie.    I had noticed it
myself for some time, with such a feeling of repugnance as made me unwilling to
mention it to Jack, until this afternoon, to my horror and astonishment, he  men¬
tioned it to me, and in terms of high  delight and approval, too.    Now, the fact of
Harry WyvUl's attentions to Minnie having become apparent to Jack, was a proof
that the said attentions were of a most determined  character; for, to all ordinary
things of the kind. Jack was as blind as ten bats, and as deaf as twenty adders ; and,
in great perturbation of spirit did I begin to consider the subject after I had shut
the window.      T had an instinctive feeling of strong mistrust towards Harry Wyvill.
In spite of many good qualities, he united the most inordinate wilfulness to the most
uni-easonable fickleness.     His father died soon after he was born, and  " the young
squire," the only son of a foolishly fond mother, took his own way from his child¬
hood upwards; and, as he never was crossed, he had the reputation of an unruffled
and amiable temper ; but, upon one occasion, I had seen the waters troubled by some
slight contretemps, and had been half-frightened at his violence.     I was meditating
over this, when I heard voices in the garden ; and looking out, sa,w Minnie, Jack,
and—no !—yes !—(O Jack, it was really too bad of you !) the young squire was there
too and, before I could compose my features to a smile, he was in the drawing room,
and had seized my hand.
" A beautiful afternoon, Mrs Somers! Your garden is far beyond anything
we can do at the Hall. I must send Dixon to you for some hints. I met Miss
Cunningham a little beyond Barden brook, and have had the pleasure of bringing
her home" (I'm afraid I looked very fierce). " Dr Somers met us in the wood,
and, in pity to my present forlorn aiid lonely condition at the Hall, has asked me to
dinner," (Jack looked awfully guilty) ; " so, you see, here I am."
I managed to bid him welcome after a fashion, and hurried Minnie off to change
her dress. I was wicked enough to wish that I could stain her with walnut juice—
put ajiatch over one eye, extemporise a hump on one shoulder—anything, anything,
to set Mr Wyvill's fancy free again; biit the jirovoking monkey came back in smiles
and blushes, curly brown hair and sparkling eyes, floating blue and white muslin and
libbons to match ; looking prettier than I had ever seen her. I had a moment's
conversation with Jack in his dressing-room, but I made very little of that.
" Couldn't^help it, really, Jeanie," said the culprit. " When a fellow stands at your
very gate, talking of being lonely and uncomfortable at home, what can you do but
a.sk'him to walk in ]    And if you had only seen how happy Minnie looked ! "
76 THE   ATTEMPT.
I suppose Jack intended the concluding sentence to be consolatory and cheering ;
but it was the worst of the whole; and, with a smothered groan, I rushed down
stairs to act duenna. Dinner passed pleasantly enough ; and certainly Hany Wyvill
was very intelligent and agreeable, and talked well—very well; and my prejudices
had once or twice hard work to maintain their ground—nevertheless they triumphed.
" Jack," I kept saying to myself, " is a model husband ; Hany Wyvill is utterly dili'erent
from Jack ; therefore, Harry Wyvill cannot be a model husband." (I am quite sure
this is logic, or something very like it.) O, if Jack had only had a twin brother, I
thought; perhaps just the least bit handsomer, for Minnie did not hold my opinions
on the subject of handsome men ; but what was the use of wishing ?
Just as Minnie and I were leaving the dining-room, the village saddler's little boy
came asking me to go down the Rectory Lane and see his granny, who was very ill.
(Our Rector's wife is very delicate, and 1 help her as much as I can in the village.)    I
went to the poor old body, of course, and sat a good while with her; she was sinking
fast, so I looked in at the Rectory on my way back, to ask the Rector to go down and
see her; then T stopped at the grocer's to send something back to the Cottage with
the little grandson ; so it was late when I got home—a lovely evening, though, soft
and balmy, with a glorious June sunset tinting the western sky.    The drawing-room
was empty—so was tlie dining-room.    I heard Jack's voice in his consulting-room—
but where, oh where, were Minnie and the Squire ?    I went to the end window of
of the drawing-room, and looked out; oh, horror ! horror ! down at the far end of
the garden, under the lime trees, I descried a fluttering vision of blue and white
muslin and blue ribbons ; and, towering above the topmost blue streamer, yet in suspi¬
ciously close neighbourhood to it, was Harry Wyvill's hat with its bright club ribbon !
I gazed transfixed ! when Jack entered the room, and burst out laughing at my
face of dismay.    " Jeanie, you're checkmated ! fairly beat out of the field !   Come here,
and I'll tell you all about it."    I obeyed in silent despair.    " You had scarcely left
us," said Jack, "when Wyvill began to speak to me—about Minnie, you know."—
I nodded—" and, ha, ha ! Jeanie, you won't guess where he was all last week, when
we thought he had taken a run up to London !    In Edinburgh, with Professor Cun¬
ningham."    " My father !" I almost screamed.   "Yes, I thought you'd be surprised"
(I should think I was) " and he gave me a letter from the old gentleman, who seems
delighted with him, and so is your mother—here's the lettex"—and upon my word I
think they're right.    So, Jeanie, neither you nor I have anything more to do with
it, and so I told him.    I wished him good luck, though, and he went off to speak to
Minnie, and they have been walking uj) and down the garden ever since."
THE   ATTEMPT. 7 7
It was all over, then ; I was checkmated, as Jack had said, and Minnie was going
to marry a passionate, headstrong, fickle ; but I must keep all that to myself
now. " 0 Jack !" was all I could say, and then I began to cry. " 0 Jeanie !"
and Jack tried to imitate the doleful tone of my voice, " I really do believe that
you're jealous because your sister will be the Squire's lady, and visit all the county
families, while your husband's only a country doctor." This, as Jack had foreseen
was such an excellent joke, that I lauglied in the midst of my tears, which very soon
stopped altogether. " Only a country doctor," indeed ! To say that Jack is worth
twenty Harry Wyvills, is to give a very faint idea, indeed, of his extraordinary ex¬
cellence. I am perfectly convinced that, if the Queen would only take it into her
head to appoint Jack Prime Minister to-morrow, the country would be governed in
a style very superior to anything that has been seen since the days of William Pitt; and
we should hear no more of the Rinderpest, the Fenians, or the defective state of the
Poor-Law. (I think it is the Poor-Law, but if there are no defects in it, any other law
will do just as well to finish the sentence.) And, of course, it was too much to ex¬
pect that Minnie should be as fortunate as I had been; so, all things considered,
I saw that my best course was to accommodate myself to circumstances, and receive
Harry Wyvill with open arms ; after all, perhaps,
" For ane she'll get better, it's waur she'll get ten; "
and just as I had made up my mind to this magnanimous course, in walked Harry
Wyvill with Minnie on his arm, both looking so supremely happy, that my way was
smoothed for me, and my congratulations came from the heart. I longed for a talk
with Minnie, and hurried her off immediately after prayers. What a talk we had !
while I folded away the blue-and-white muslin, and put on Minnie's dressing-gown,
and brushed her pretty curly brown hair ! She was in a subdued, gentle, unresist¬
ing mood, as she always was when very happy; though, indeed, her wildest moods
were gentle. So different from me, on the evening of that Christmas party I have
mentioned, when I successfully parried and returned the cuts and thinists, hints
and inuendoes of papa and the six boys, not only for myself, but for Jack,
who, after the one remarkable burst of eloquence I have referred to, relapsed
into silence, and sat grinning and blushing, till I was perfectly ashamed of him, and
fought his battle as well as my own. My little quiet Miifnie would have sunk under
such an ordeal; but, luckily, she was not subjected to it. And when I had seen her
fairly laid to rest, I went and sat at my window, and watched Jack and Mr Wyvill
pacing up and down the terrace.    And watching them so, not hearing their voices,
78 THE  ATTEMPT.
but seeing their faces distinctly by the bright moonlight, my prejudices returned upon
me with tenfold force ; and with immeasurable relief did I glance from Harry
Wyvill's handsome face to that of my husband (though I told you what an ugly
fellow Jack is), and then looked back to Harry Wyvill with a sigh of anxious ap¬
prehension for my sister Minnie. Dido.
{To he continued.)
Chapter II.—Knighthood.
" He seemed
The fresh-ope'd flower of Christian Knighthood, born
For feats of holy daring." —Spanish Gypsey.
In the middle ages, the profession of arms was considered an honourable office above
all others, except priesthood, which, of course, could not suit the taste of all the
stirring sjDirits in these troublous days ; in fact, it was the only profession in which
a man of honour might hope to win honour.
No wonder then, that so much importance was attached to the preparations for
the state, in which he was considered fully qualified to enter on this noble profession.
As a man's chivalry died with himself, each youth had, in a gi'eat degree, to
win his own knighthood ; and, consequently, was obliged to cultivate for himself
the knightly virtues—fidelity, liberality, valiancy, humility, kindness, gentleness,
courtesy. Through uncommon valour and virtiie, a man might rise from a lower
degi-ee ; but there was a strong prejudice against intrusion, among the higher orders;
so that we rarely hear of any, except the sons of knights, being made knights. Ac¬
cording to Don Amador,—" Are you ready then to listen, if I finish the wholesome
extract from the Seven Parts, wherein the wise King Alfonso hath set down the
reason why knights should be of gentle birth 1 Will ye now be silent ? . . And
this nobility cometh in three ways,—first by lineage, secondly by science, thirdly by
valour and worthy behavioui*. Now, although they who gain nobility through
science and good deeds are rightly called noble and gentle,—nevertheless, they are
with the highest fitness so called, who are noble by ancient lineage, and lead a
worthy life as by inheritance from afar ; and hence, are more boxind and constrained
THE   ATTEMPT. 79
to act well, and guard themselves from error and wrong-doing; for, in their case, it
is jnore true that, by evil-doing they bring injury and shame, not only on themselves,
but also on those from whom they are derived." A squire was seldom made a
knight before he was twenty-one; but if, at that age, he desired the honour, and had
passed through the time of his j^robation satisfactorily, he might repair to the court
of the king, where he did him some service, in token of fealty and obedience. Cer¬
tain knights were chosen as his governors, who arranged eveiything for him. They
took him to the room assigned to him, where he was left alone, fasting till the
evening. Then he watched all night with his governors, and made confession
in the morning. He passed through another vigil alone, dressed in a cope of black
russet, with a hood like a hermit. His head should have been shaven like the
ecclesiastics, as a symbol of servitude to God, but very few cut off more than a lock
of hair. The night before his inauguration, they put him into a bath, and, while he
was in it, instructed him in all the duties of chivalry. He was then dressed in
armour, and accompanied to chapel by a joyous company of knights, where he was
left to his lonely " vigil of arms." That whole night, he prayed and watched in the
silent church, with a single taper burning before him ; and we may imagine what a
feeling of solemnity must have thereby been thrown around the vows he was
about to take. Wliat hopes must have arisen in his young and ardent breast !
What prayers and vows must he have preferred ! What visions must have risen on
his imagination ! What revelations must have been disclosed to his own conscience !
A dreadful test must this have often proved ; for, to the timid, the superstitious, or
the guilty conscience-stricken ones, no slight courage would be required, to bide alone
with the dead, through the long, dark, lonely hours of the searching night that im¬
prisoned them in its inexorable grasp. No wonder that George Eliot poweifully
recals this time to the noble youth that broke the vows he once had made so solemnly;
when, a second time, he would have sworn his oath, and a second time goes through
a lonely watch, not in a chapel hung with ancestral trophies, but under the blue
vault of heaven, common to all men ; with no priest-blessed taper burning on the
altar, but the lurid light of the Zincali watch-fires flinging shadows round his
steps; with no echoes of departed hymns breathing up the aisles, but the low-
chaunted curse of the Zincali—
" In wild notes
Recurrent like the moan of outshut winds,
• The adjuration they were wont to use
To any Spaniard who would join their tribe."
80 THE   ATTEMPT.
How strongly miist the contrast have risen on his memory, as he thought—
" But the third day, though Silva southward gazed
Till all the shadows slanted towards him, gazed
Till all the shadows died, no Juan came.
Now in his stead came loneliness, and thought
Inexorable, fastening with firm chain
What is to what hath been.    Now, awful Night,
Ancestral mystery of mysteries, came down
Past all the generations of the stars,
And visited his soul, with touch more close
Than when he kept that younger, briefer watch.
Under the church's roof beside his arms.
And won his knighthood."
How the memory of that night must have thrilled him, as he recognises the fact that
this 7iight must for ever blot it out.
" Now the former life
Wag present in one whole ; and that great trust
His deed had broken, turned reproach on him
From faces of all witnesses who heard
His uttered pledges ; saw him take high place.
Centring reliance ; use rich privilege,
That bound him like a victim-nourished God
To bless ; assume the cross, and take his knightly oath.
Mature, deliberate : faces human all,
And some divine as well as human."
The candidate for knighthood having thus solemnly passed the night, at the
dawn of the morning the ])riest entered the chapel and proceeded to shrive him.
They sang the Matin Hymn, celebrated the mass, and next he received communion.
His governors then carried him off, and pvit him into a bath, and then to bed, to
symbolise the purification of the soul, before it reached the Rest in Paradise. He
was allowed some time to sleep ; then a company of knights went to his chamber and
awaked him, each of them claiming it as a privilege to invest him with some article
of dress. A white robe was put on, as an emblem of his spotless intentions, and a
red upper garment, to show his resolution to shed blood for heaven and the right.
They placed him on horseback to be conveyed to the church or hall where he was to
be inaugurated. He was preceded by a young esquire, who carried by its point a
sword in a white scabbard, with gilt spurs hanging upon the cross hilt, which he
reverently presented to the king or presiding knight.    The candidate knelt with
THE   ATTEMPT. 81
clasped hands before his Lord, answering every question put to him. Varieties of
questions must have been asked in different lands, as well as varieties in the oath
demanded from him.    The following is the form of the Scottish chivalric oath :—
I. I shall fortify and defend the Chi'istian religion to the uttermost of my
power.
II. I shall be loyal and true to my Sovereign Lord the King, to all orders of
chivalry, and to the noble office of arms.
III. I shall fortify and defend justice according to my power, and that with¬
out favour or enmity.
IV. I shall never flee from my Sovereign Lord the King, nor from his lieu¬
tenants in time of affray or battle.
V. I shall defend my native land from all aliens or strangers.
VI. I shall defend the just action and quarrel of all ladies of honours, of all
true and friendless widows, of orphans, and of maidens of good fame.
VII. I shall do diligence wheresoever I hear that there are any murderers,
traitors, or masterful robbers, who oppress the King's lieges and poor people, to
bring them to the law at all my power.
VIII. I shall maintain and uphold the noble state of chivalry, with horse,
armour, and other knightly habiliments, and shall help and succour all those of mine
own order, at my power when they have need.
IX. I shall enquire and seek to have the knowledge and understanding of all
the articles and points contained in the book of Chivalry. All these promises to
observe, keep, and fulfil, I oblige myself; so help me God, by my own hand, and by
God Himself."
Having sworn thus before the priest, the king, and the people,—the king gave
the right spur to one of the noblest lords, who knelt on one knee ; and placing the
foot of the candidate upon his knee, affixed the spur to the heel, then made a cross
upon his knee and kissed it. Another noble lord affixed the left spur in a similar
manner. He was then armed by the assembled knights and ladies. Last of all,
the king buckled on his sword, and smote him on his shoulder with his light hand,
dubbing the esquire knight; after which he threw his arms round him, and kissing
him, said " Be ye a good knight."
It was not necessarily the king alone who could perform this office. Every ap¬
proved knight could dub another of his own degree. But all preferred to receive
the honour from noble and worthy men, arguing that if the knight who dubbed
another were not virtuous, how could he make another so ; for how could he give
K
82 THE   ATTEMPT.
what he had not himself 1 He always looked with filial piety on the one who had
knighted him, and never could be induced to take him prisoner. Immediately after
the ceremony, he went again to the chapel, where he and his brother knights re¬
newed their vows, and the priest consecrated his sword. On his departure thence, he
generally displayed his horsemanshiji, and distributed largesses among the meaner
sort. When he returned to the place of his abode, his spurs wei-e taken off by the
master cook who received them as his fee, while he bluntly reminded him, that if
ever he should act unworthily of his new knighthood, he would hack off his spurs
with the large knife he used to dress meat. A great feast was prepared for the occa¬
sion, which commenced as he entered the hall, but he generally found himself too
modest to eat on this day, for the first time, in such company.
LuTEA Reseda.
Part I.
Twenty-three years this March have elapsed, since the Rev. Dr Robertson, minister
of New Greyfriars, preached in St George's Church, Edinburgh, a sermon on " The
Christian's Duty to the Poor." In this sermon, there was some account given of
the parochial operations then taking place in the large and very needy parish of the
Grassmarket. Notwithstanding much that had been done for the alleviation of misery,
and the palliation of crime ; still, in 1846, there remained more distress and profligacy
in that district than many of us can even imagiiie. A few statistics, borrowed from
the Missionary's Report for 1849, will give some idea of the state of matters then
existing in the Grassmarket; and will enable us more fidly to understand and ap¬
preciate the need of the exertions then made for its amelioration :—
One room, 15 feet by 13 feet, inhabited by 40 individuals, no bed.
One    ...      6      ...       9 ... 9 ...        no bed.
One    ...    12      ...     16 ... 27 ...        one bed,
To this we may add that, in another room, were living from 30 to 40 women
with only one gown among them.    In fact, crammed together in four lands or stairs,
were to be found 685 persons.    Wretched enough all this for the grown people, but
think of the children !   What could we look for but crime from these offsprings of
THE   ATTEMPT. 83
misery 1 Brought up in holes, where we should shrink from placing a cat or dog, how
could we expect anything that was good to be found in their young hearts 1 Appa¬
rently, for many centuries, the rulers of the land did expect that miracles should be
woi-ked, and that the neglected little ones should turn out respectable mem¬
bers of society. At least, by their laws, it seemed so ; for hundreds of these outcast
children, who knew not that there were such things as good and evil, were thrown
into prison, for breaking the laws which they had never been taught to respect. But, in
1846, when the sermon above-mentioned was preached, wise men were beginning to find
out that prevention was better than cure ; and that, in many cases, where cure
was impossible, prevention was still attainable. Thus it was, that, though not aban¬
doning the old people, they turned their thoughts more especially to the rescuing
and training of the young. It was the wretched fate of these little ones that so excited
the compassion of the Rev. Dr Robertson, as to induce him to become the leader in
Edinburgh of the Ragged School System. In his sermon, he explained to his
hearers, the plan which he had formed for rescuing the poorest children of his parish
from sin and misery. He purposed opening, in the Grassmarket, a Ragged School,
into which the totally destitute should be received, but the rule was to be for each
child to pay the sum of 2d. a-week, in all cases where such payment could be forth¬
coming. After giving some details of what he proposed should be the work of his
school, he added these words—" There are no fewer than 250 of my young
parishioners betwixt the ages of four and fourteen, who are left unprovided with the
means of the humblest education, growing up in ignorance, idleness, and vice, with¬
out hope and without God in the world. Oh ! if there is a case of misery on earth
sufficient to melt a heart of stone, surely it is that of these unhappy children, born in
a Christian land, yet born to heathenism ;—living in one of the most enlightened
cities of modern times, yet living in gross darkness; perishing hoj^elessly, as it were,
at the very foot of our Saviour's cross !" This was the state of afiairs in the Grass-
market in 1846. Let us now look at the same district in 1869, and see what appear¬
ance it presents. There is still sin and misery ; but in what a different degree ! In the
Vennel, there is now a refuge for all the little outcasts of the parish—no child knock¬
ing at the door for admittance is turned harshly away. We visited this school, a few
weeks ago ; and, for the benefit of those who may not yet have gratified themselves
by a like visit, we shall mention something of what we then saw.
Opening the first door from the entry hall, we found ourselves in a large room,
devoted to the use of the infants ; bxit the teacher only was present, having just dis¬
missed her little pujals to their mid-day meal.    This teacher is a woiiian, and one
84 THE   ATTEMPT.
apparently well fitted for her important post in the school; for her kind, cheerful
countenance bespoke love for the little ones, and spirit for her work. We next
entered a large, well-ventilated room, occupied by the elder children ; here all was
order and cheerfulness. Classes were arranged in groups, some standing to be ex¬
amined in their lessons, others sitting on benches pre2:)aring sums or conning their
spelling-books. One master, with an assistant female teacher, has the whole charge
of this department, and certainly the method visible everywhere, and the intelligent
looks and answers of the children, betrayed no need of a larger staff of teachers. We
were pleased to find that, among the older children, the girls ranked as high as the
boys in intelligence and learning ; the more so as, in other schools for the poorer
classes, some partiality seems to exist for the superior education of the boys. This
second class-room opens on an airy play-ground, where, for an hour or two each day,
the children amuse themselves with tops and skipping ropes, learning even in their
play to avoid the rough selfishness which a life in the streets and gutters cannot but
produce. Looking into the kitchen across the play-ground, we found our friends the
infants seated in rows, happily engaged in emptying their large bowls of their steam¬
ing contents, and those whose appetites could stand it returning them for a second
supply. As the children finished, and were passing out into the play-ground, they were
each given a hunch of bread. The elder children dine half-an-hour later in a different
room. In the sewing room, we examined the work of the girls; and must report
most favourably on the stitching, hemming, and knitting of the pupils. As regards
the girls, the school is to a certain extent an Industrial School; for they are
instructed in the useful arts of scrubbing, washing, and sewing—thus at least com¬
mencing their training as domestic servants.
The good which this school has worked in the parish, is not confined to the
children ; for the habits of order and cleanliness which they have there acquired, are
carried by them to their homes,—there working a change for the better, such as could
scarcely have been looked for, and having an incalculable influence on the parents.
Looking at the clean hands and faces of the children, their well-brushed hair and
tidily patched clothes, we could scarcely fancy them to be from the same class to
which those belonged, who, twenty-two years ago, congregated in the school. At that
time a strange appearance must have been presented by the little roughs called in
from the closses of the parish ; they were so dirty, that the woman engaged to sujier-
intend their morning ablutions,—could scarcely screw up her courage sufficiently to
continue her task. In about a year, a most encouraging change was observable ; the
parents began to wash their children before sending them to school in the morning,
THE   ATTEMPT. 85
and gradually the ofiicial washing was able to be given up, with only this pro¬
viso, that any child appearing unwashed within the bounds of the school should be
sent home to perform the omitted ceremony.
The Vennel School has done, and is doing, its work so quietly and unobtru¬
sively tliat many persons are tmaware even of its existence ; and but few recognise
it as the true Original Ragged School in Edinburgh. Its founder has sought not to
glorify himself in his good work, but so to labour that the naked may be clothed, the
hungry fed, and that " the poor may have the Gospel preached unto them." At
first, the Vennel Ragged School was intended only for the destitute children of Dr
Robertson's own parish; but, gradually, it has so done its work in reducing the poverty
and suffering in this parish, as to enable it to throw open its doors to strangers from
other parishes, whose destitution may give them a claim on such an institution.
The school opens at eight o'clock in the morning, when the children are all given a
good breakfast of oatmeal porridge, then lessons, with a certain amount of play, pass
the time till one o'clock, when the elder children dine, the younger ones as before
mentioned having had their dinner a little earlier; after that, there is about an
hour more of study, and at three o'clock the children are sent home with some lessons
pointed out, in preparation for the next day.
No large class of children turn out all well in after life, and it cannot be
expected that those who have for the most part spent their early years in the midst
of debasing influences, should prove an exception to the rule ; but a very large
number of these ragged children in the Vennel school grow up to be respectable
members of society. Many an honest tradesman owes his success in life to the
asylum opened to him in his youth ; and there are now many young men and women
earning for themselves an honest livelihood, who, in all human calculation, would
have trodden the downward path of misery and vice, but for the lessons of virtue
taught them under the kindly roof of the Vennel Ragged School. From time to
time, these men and women educated in the school, and now doing well in life, are
gathered together by their friend, Dr Robertson, in some sociable way, and thus a tie
of gratitude and kindly feeling is kept up between the school and its scholars, the
pastor and his parishioners.
"We rejoice to say, that but a short time elapsed between the opening of this
the first Ragged School in Edinburgh, and two others of which we hope next
month to give some description. The good which these schools have worked on the
morals, manners, and health of the poorest class has been incalculable. The blessing
of God has rested upon the efforts of their founders to such a degree, as must surely
86 THE  ATTEMPT.
overthrow all the objections first raised against them, by men who theorised
on the subject in their studies, but who never penetrated the dark abodes
of misery, or visited the prison cells, to judge practically what was needed
for the rescuing of these children of vicious parents. They spoke of the breaking
of the parental tie, of the error of taking from parents the obligation of
providing for their childi-en, of the encouragement we should give to idle
and drunken people to leave to us the care of their children. All this had a
certain grand sound about it, but what was being the result of this reason¬
ing ? Sin and crime were doubling at a fearful rate; each generation left to itself
was propagating more vice in the world; we were fostering in the hearts of our
towns a class of vicious men and women, who, separated from us in interests and
understanding as much as the wild beasts of the forest, might, like them, turn upon
us at any moment and destroy us. The law in vain exercised its rigour ; it only
hardened the ignorant in their crimes; we use the word ignorant advisedly,
shrinking from calling them the wicked; for what had we done for them that they
could know vice from virtue ? The hardened criminal sentenced to death had once
been a little child, with feelings impressionable ; and a heart that might have been
tempted to love the right, but Society had stood aloof, leaving him to be trained up
in vice; and then, when following the trade he had been reared in, perhaps that of the
thief or murderer, the law stepped m, and took the life it had never even tried to save.
Could good men stand by, and see such injustice done in the name of law? No, it
was impossible longer to refuse to stretch out a saving hand, and to let the love
which hopeth all things try what it could do to stem the tide of vice and misery
which was lising every day higher in our city, and which the law was unable to
subdue.
Next month, we hojje to give some account of the progress of the ragged school
system, and of the rapid rise and steady work of two other large institutions of the
same general description, though differing in detail, which were shortly opened as
blessed asylums for the destitute, ragged little ones of our city.
Since writing most of the above remarks on " Our Ragged Schools," an article
on the same subject has appeared in the " Sunday Magazine," from the pen of its
able editor, who is himself one of the foremost in the good work in our city ; yet we
have determined still to contribute our weak words on the subject, as a small testi¬
mony of gratitude to the great scheme which has done more for the improvement of
Edinburgh than any decorating on the most extensive scale could have accomplished.
[To he continued.) des Eaux.
THE   ATTEMPT.
87
'§mm Mnitm on a ^loubg gag in €nglanir.
TRANSLATED   FROM THE   ITALIAN   OF GABRIELE ROSSETTI.
How dark the night and di'ear !
Nor moon nor stars appear,
And hark ! that dismal wail—
The sea moans, and the gale—
As if in council grave
Had met the wind and wave.
Hail! sky of Italy,
Fair Venus smiles in thee;
And the Idalian star
Beams o'er thy plains afar ;
Thus nourished from above.
Thy very breath is love.
Alas ! my heart oppress'd.
Can find in thee no rest;
While groans thy troubled land
'Neath tyranny's fell hand ;
Ah ! 'mid such woe how vain.
Blue sky and verdant plain
Hail! island of the brave,
Great Empress of the wave—
Tho' mist may thee enshroud,
'Tis no grief-laden cloud;
Blest thou, tho' thrice bereft
Of light—thy freedom's left.
But thro' that shadowy night,
My thoughts descry the light
Of glorious truth revealed,
From scoffer's eye concealed;
Let me that light explore—
I ask, nor wish for more.
Freedom ! of Truth the nurse,
Of human weal the source;
Thro' these dull fogs thy fire
Doth heart and brain inspire.
Storm tossed, I hail thy shore,
And bless thee evermore.
Echo.
Crumbling '^tUx.
(Continued).
A CHEERFUL fire burned brightly in the kitchen that Mrs Dumpling fondly called
" my kitchen," with the peculiar emphasis common to all cooks who take a pride in
the whiteness of their floors and dressers, and the brilliancy of their " tins." The tins
on this particular evening of rain and storm reflected back, not only the dancing fiie-
light—but an oblong wooden table covered with a table-cloth, rivalling the floor
in whiteness, plentifully spread with what is called a tea-dinner for three persons.
These persons were, Mrs Dumpling, whom you now see holding her saucer in the
palm of her hand ; Betsy Jane, her young assistant, a fresh, fair, laughing girl, who
is pressing buttered toast of her own manufacture with laughing hospitality on a
88 THE  ATTEMPT.
third person, who presents a strange appearance, being enveloped in Mrs Dumpling's
large, old-fashioned dressing-gown, and displaying at the same time a brown, manly
face, and speaking in a deep, bass voice.
Some consideration will enable the reader to recognize our young sailor friend
who announced to the group of talkers at the village inn, his intention of visiting
his aunt. Some time later he arrived in a half-drowned plight at his aunt's abode
—this relative being none other than Mrs Dumpling. That worthy lady, foiled in her
attempts to coddle her master, was descending the kitchen stairs in no good frame of
mind, when she heard a loud, hearty voice in friendly conversationf with Betsy Jane.
With matronly and zealous vigilance Mrs Dumpling stole along the passage, confident
of entrapping Betsy Jane wasting her time with the baker, the postman, or some
one or other of those daily visitors, whose lingering attentions to Betsy Jane it was
one of the greatest of Mrs Dumpling's pleasures to cut short.
She entered the kitchen, and had just begun—" Well! I do say Bet—" when a
huge, damp figure rushed at her from behind the door, and, embracing her fondly,
danced up and down the kitchen in a kind of barbaric waltz, till Betsy Jane leant
against the wall, and gave herself up to hopeless shrieks of laughter, which were
echoed by screams of real alarm from Mrs Dumpling. But to waltz with Mrs
Dumpling was no joke, and the sailor soon stopped from sheer fatigue. Mrs Dumpling,
now released, turned savagely to Betsy Jane, when her nephew rushed up again—
this time taking the precaution to say—
" Why, auntie, don't you know me 1 "
" Jim, my dear, dear boy," cried Mrs Dumpling, laughing and crying both at
once.    " To be sure I do—my dear Mary's child, of course I know you."
And Mrs Dumpling and her nephew met in a hearty embrace, while Betsy
Jane went out of the room on pretence of getting a clean table-cloth.
A quarter of an hour saw Jim seated at the hospitable table of his aunt, minis¬
tered to by Betsy Jane. Mrs Dumpling, much against his will, had succeeded in
wrapping him up in her dressing-gown; and his own jacket now hung on a chair be¬
fore the fire, sending up a wreath of steam to the very ceiling.
They were a very happy party. Jim drank ten cups of tea, and Betsy Jane
had to make three more platefuls of buttered toast. Mrs Dumpling beamed all
over, and said a great many sentimental things about her youth being renewed ; and
made some other remarks that passed very well, as nobody had time to ask what they
meant.
Jim was particularly struck by the similarity of the names of his sloop and his
THE   ATTEMPT. 89
aunt's assistant.    He recurred to it frequently in the course of the evening,  and
always with a roar of laughter, that was exceedingly infectious.
" To think of you being Betsy Jane, and her being Betsy Jane—I declare it's
a good joke. Ha ! ha ! ha ! " And they all laughed, till the tears ran down their
cheeks.
At length these repeated peals penetrated to the ear of Peter, engrossed as he
was by weighty matters of stars and planets, dew and rain, moon and tides, volcanoes,
earthquakes, waterspouts, cyclones, and a hundred other things he had to manage and
control.
At first he fancied it might be the wind or the rain dashing on the window, but
at length a tremendous ha ! ha ! ha ! convinced him that it was genuine human
merriment he heard, and neither howling nor moaning of the tempest without.
These sounds were so unusual in the quiet dwelling of our hero, that he sighed,
pushed aside his papers, globes, and calculations, and finally rose. Peter walked
along the passage and proceeded down stairs. Every step he took the noise became
more uproarious; and, as he paused before entering the kitchen, he fully expected to
find that Mrs Dumpling had invited half the village to tea. He knocked. All was
silent. He entered. There was Betsy Jane demurely washing up the tea-things,
looking as if she could hardly have laughed to save her life. Jim sat quietly, strok¬
ing an ancient tabby cat, and stealthily watching Betsy Jane's nimble fingers. Mrs
Dumpling, who had not forgotten being turned out of the parlour—looked severely
and sternly respectful, as in a voice of exaggerated meekness she enquired—
"Was you wanting anything, sir?"
Peter was aghast. He stared round. Where could they be ? In the oven 1
In the flour barrel ?    In the china closet 1    Up the chimney %
All these questions lie rapidly put to himself, but Mrs Dumpling was waiting
for an answer, so he said faltering—
" Where is Jacob—I want to speak to him about something I want done to¬
morrow."
"Jacob is in his cottage, sir, as usual," replied Mrs Dumpling, with a touch of
irony in her voice. " Jacob never comes into the kitchen. I must say that for
Jacob, sir ; he may have his faults, sir, but coming spying into the kitchen, sir, ain't
one of them."
Peter felt exceedingly uncomfortable, but he only coughed and said—" Oh !
indeed."
Mrs Dumpling perceived her advantage,  and, like a good general, quickly
90 THE  ATTEMPT.
followed it up by another stroke, equally effective.     She coughed slightly, put her
hand on her side, and continued—
" Should you like to see Jacob, sir ; I dare say a step over to his cottage would
do my cough no harm, though it is a coarse night. Or perhaps Betsy Jane could
give your message, sir, if she wrapped up very warm for fear of toothache, which she
is rather subject to, sir."
Jim here started up. " I'll be very happy to be of any use, sir," he said
respectfully.
" I beg pardon sir," continued Mrs Dumpling, with an air of ceremony, " this
young man, sir, is my nephew. I should have told you so before. I hope you
haven't been disturbed, sir. I once thought of sending up to tell you not to be
alarmed if you did hear a little noise ; ' but,' says Betsy Jane, says she, ' 0, don't
trouble yourself, Mrs Dumpling, for,' says she, ' master's so good-natured, you might
scream yourself hoarse and he'd never think of enquiring what it was.' Many a
master's particular that way, you know, sir.    Why, in my last place I remember—"
Peter, who had been eyeing Jim keenly during this speech, and knowing by
experience what" in my last place I remember" might lead to, interrupted Mrs Dump¬
ling by saying—" You are the young man I saw at the inn, are you not?"
"Yes, sir."
" "Well, I should like to speak with you for a short time, upstairs, if you can
come up with me. I should like to hear the particulars of that strange occurrence
about the tide not coming in."
" Yes sir," said Jim, preparing to follow. (I should mention that Jim had
discarded his aunt's dressing-gown by this time, and was clothed in his own dry coat.)
" What about Jacob, sir 1" screamed Mrs Dumpling, as Peter strode along the
passage, followed by Jim.
'• To-morrow will do, Mrs Dumpling," replied Peter, feeling that he had had the
worst of the battle. Alone with Jim in his parlour, Peter questioned the young man
closely with regard to this interesting phenomenon.
" And what do people say about it?" he asked at length.
" Well, sir, some says one thing and some another; but so many things has
been going wrong lately, that they are beginning not to be sui'prised at anything."
" What sort of things have gone wrong?" enquired Peter.
" Why, sir," answered Jim, " such things as the leaves falling off, and no moon,
when it should be full moon. But this about the tide, sir, was rather an advantage,
as the poor people get gi-eat lots of sea-weed, and sell it to the farmers; and then
THE   ATTEMPT. 91
they are building a pier, too, next town to where the Betsy Jane is lying, and they
haven't half the expense they would have with that, owing to seeing where they're
going, and not having to work under water."
Peter was silent.     At last Jim said, " It's a terrible night, sir.    If the rain
keeps on like this much longer, 'twill work some mischief."
" How  long do you think it might go on without damage ?" asked   Peter,
starting.
" From what I saw of the rivers coming along, I think they might stand an¬
other good two hours of this ; after that, I'm afraid the banks might give way."
" Then, after midnight it shall stop," said Peter decidedly, " I  want no more
mischief done."
" Eh ! sir," cried Jim, staring.    Peter immediately saw his mistake.     " Oh !
I forgot.     Never mind ;   it is nothing," he stammered.    " Good night."
Jim took the hint and withdrew.
" That's a rum un," said he to Betsy Jane that evening, before departing for
the inn, " what do you think he said to me?"
"How can I tell?" replied Betsy Jane.
" Well," said Jim, " he said we weren't to have any more rain. He said he
wasn't going to have no more mischief done.    Is he all right in the upper storey ?"
" Who ? master 1 of course," cried Betsy Jane indignantly, " and a very nice
pleasant-spoken gentleman he is too, and I won't have you speak against him."
" Oh ! I beg your pardon," said Jim hastily, " but, really, it is rather queer.
I took a squint at some of them papers on the table, and, as sure as I stand here, on
one was written, rules for the direction of the moon. Now, I am sure no man in
his senses would think of directing the moon."
" Perhaps it is a man called Moon," suggested Betsy Jane, " or a beast, or a
boat."
" Very likely," said Jim, " and now, I remember, there was a craft a-lying
beside the Betsy Jane called the Moon, but I didn't know your master had anything
to do with her."
" More people have to do with these things than you would think," replied
Betsy Jane. To which intelligible sentence no answer was given, as Mrs Dump¬
ling suddenly appeared, carrying off Betsy Jane in triumph.
Meanwhile Peter sat by his fire meditating. " Precisely at twelve that rain
must cease," said he aloud. And then he went on to think of Mrs Dumpling,
and  he sighed   as   he said,   "  I   might   some  day   come   to   manage   the world^
92 THE  ATTEMPT.
but I never could manage a woman." At tliis moment he noticed a red-hot
coal which had a singular reseinblance to Mrs Dumpling in her Sunday-
cap. Soon it changed into a castle on fire. Peter gave a great nod,
and looking up, the castle was gone, and a monkey sat grinning in its place.
Then the whole room seemed full of monkeys, mouthing and jabbering. Peter
shook himself, and found it was the clock striking. Too tired to notice the
circumstance, our hero leaned back in his chaii*. Some one seemed singing sweetly ;
some one he had heard long ago. Then it was a choir of voices, then it died away.
In five minutes Peter was fast asleep, but the sound went on ; not the sweet voices
of choristers singing, though such it had appeared to our dozing friend, but the rush
of many waters, mingled with the howling of the wind.
Outside, in the silver moonlight, the river was foaming down; the rain poured
in torrents ; the garden was a lake. On the water came, driven by the fierce wind
—up to the house, up to the window. Voices were heard in the village, cries of
distress mingling with the waters' horrible gurgling. The clock struck three, and
Peter woke with a sudden start, to find the flood rushing in at the window, and in
at the door. Agnella.
{To he concluded next month.)
% tmxx m iortfj Mules.
Part II.
On the following day, we decided to leave Carnarvon for Bangor, and a consul¬
tation on the best means of getting thither resulted in our hiring a small sailing boat,
and lazily gliding along the Menai Strait, past the fertile Isle of Anglesea, until we
drew near the wonderful tubvdar and suspension bridges, which are seen to the
fullest advantage from the water. The Tubular Bridge, as everyone knows, was the
invention of the celebrated Robert Stepheuson, and is composed of hollow square
tubes, of great breadth and height. It is supported on each side by towers, one in
Carnarvonshii'c, the other in Anglesea, whilst the Britannia Tower rests on a rock
in the middle of the Channel. Though conveying an idea of great strength, it is
totally wanting in beauty, and acts as foil in this respect to its elegant neighbour, the
suspension bridge, about a mile nearer Bangor, a most fairylike structure, combining
solidity and grace in a truly wonderful manner. The effect when passing imderneath
is very fine.    So delightful was the cooling breeze on the water, and the succession
THE  ATTEMPT. 93
of beautiful and interesting objects on our way, that it was with great reluctance we
quitted our little boat on arriving at the G-eorge Hotel, Bangor, a very magnificent
house of entertainment, overlooking the straits, and the Isle of Anglesea. The next
day was the only rainy one we had during our tour, and we were therefore tinable
to make out an excursion to Penryhn Castle and slate quarries, which had been
planned the evening before. There was a beautiful drawing-room for the ladies,
furnished very elegantly, and a piano for their recreation ; but though condemned by
the weather to seek amusement indoors, not a word was exchanged during all those
long hours, each party kept to itself, and avoided the extreme impropriety of hazard¬
ing a remark to the general company. Had a foreigner entered the room, he could
not but have admii-ed the rigour with which the British female carries out her ideas
of decorum, preferring inexpressible dullness to any attempt at breaking through her
rules of etiquette. The next day dawned bright and clear, and gladly we steamed
away for Llandudno, a fashionable watering-place, passing Beaumaris on our way.
How fresh the breeze seemed on the Irish Sea, we drank in new life after the baking
we had endured inland.
About four miles from Llandudno are the old town and castle of Con way, the
latter having been erected by Edward I. A more beautiful ruin I never saw.
It is situated on a precipitous rock, and must have presented a magnificent appear¬
ance in its palmy days. " The walls were of great thickness, and flanked by eight
vast, cii'cular embattled towers, each of which was surmounted by a slender watch-
tower, singularly graceful and elegant. The two at the sides of the grand entrance
were called the King's and the Queen's towers ; and in each there was a beautiful
oriel window. The interior of the castle was divided into two courts. The great
hall was one hundred and thirty feet long, thirty feet wide, and twenty feet high
lighted by nine windows—six lancet-shaped, opening upon the creek, and three larger
and pointed, looking towards the spacious court. The roof was supported by eight
massive arches, four of which remain, overgrown with ivy. Beneath were extensive
vaults for ammunition and provisions, Edward, accompanied by his consort Eleanor,
and attended by many English nobles, spent a Christmas here, indulging in all the
festivities of a luxurious court,"
I must now give some account of our visit to Haddon Hall and Chatsworth.
From the west coast of Wales to the centre of Derbyshire is a pretty long
journey, and involves many changes, and it seemed like a dream when we found
ourselves, on the evening of the day we left Llandudno, at Buxton, a very fashionable,
but extremely dull  watering place, celebrated for   its natural   tepid baths.    Our
94 THE  ATTEMPT.
reasons for paying this city a visit were however not sanatory, but purely to enable
us to see Chatsworth and Haddon Hall, two remarkable places in the country. We
hired an open carriage one fine and intensely hot morning, and drove thi-ough a suc¬
cession of rich and fertile scenes to Haddon Hall, which is situated on the east bank
of the river Wye, and is in the possession of the Rutland family. It is a most ro¬
mantic building, and in this instance distance does not lend enchantment to the view,
for its interest increases on a nearer approach. It is quite a relic of byegone days,
as although not yet a ruin, it seems in a fair way to become so, and the gloomy old
rooms give one the idea of desolation and decay. After passing under the large arch¬
way and courtyard, we entered the Chapel through a Gothic arch. Here is to be
seen an old Norman font, also remains of stained glass windows, representing the
Crucifixion and the twelve Apostles. There is not room for a very large congrega¬
tion, but probably thei-e was quite suflScient for those who attended. The great Hall
is a very remarkable room, and is deeply interesting to the antiquary. Here the
Vernons used to hold their feasts, and the long oaken table where they sat still re¬
mains in its old position. A wainscotted gallery occupies two sides of the hall, with
stags' horns at intervals. At the doorway there is a terrible iron hook, to which the
hands of those who found themselves unable to swallow a certain quantity of liquor,
were fastened, and cold water poured down their sleeves ! "The dining-room is a curi¬
ous apartment, and is enriched with quaint carvings, amongst which are to be found
portraits of Henry VII. and his Queen ; also of Will Somers, the King's jester. The
entire room is wainscotted, and contains strange old furniture and portraits.
The great ball-room is 110 feet long and 17 feet wide. Queen Elizabeth is
said to have danced at a ball given in this room, which is covered with cai-ved
work in the shape of boars' heads and peacocks, the crests of the families of Vemon
and Manners. Balls are still held here^ though the dancers of the present day are
of " lower degree " than in the old times.
There is a charming little romance in connection with one of the ante-rooms, to
the effect that a certain fair Dorothy Vernon stole through it whilst the family were
entertaining some friends, and eloped with her lover, and there is Dorothy Veruon's
door, and Dorothy Vernon's walk to heighten the interest and vouch for the veracity
of the story. There is abundant evidence of hospitality, but not much appearance of
comfort, which indeed was a small consideration before the Elizabethan era; but no
doubt noisy merriment reigned where there is now the silence of the grave, and the
terraced gardens, groves of trees, lawns, and courtyards, now so deserted, once echoed
with light footsteps and happy laughter.
THE  ATTEMPT. 95
" Haddon, within thy silent halls,
Deserted courts, and turrets high,
How mournfully in memory falls
Past scenes of antique pageantry."
From Haddon to Chatsworth, is only a distance of four or five miles, and is a very
delightful drive. This " Palace of the Peak " is the seat of the Duke of Devon¬
shire, and is a truly regal residence. It was like awaking out of some dream of the
past, to quit old Haddon, with all its historical associations, and find oneself in a
fairy land of beauty, most emphatically belonging to the present day. Everything
that is beautiful in art and nature is to be found here, and the task of describing it
is hopeless. The park is more than eleven miles in circumference, and is varied by
hills and valleys, forests of trees, streams, and gardens, with the magnificent houf e
rising like the jewel in a gorgeous setting. The state apartments are gained by the
grand southern entrance, and are adorned by rich allegorical paintings on the
ceilings by Verrio and Sir James Thornhill. The floors are of mosaic work. In
the state bedroom is the bed upon which George II, died. The suite of rooms
extends for nearly 200 feet, and they are filled with exquisite articles of vertu,
amongst which the malachite clock and vases presented by the Emperor Nicholas to
the Duke, are very noticeable. The galleries contain an unequalled collection of
paintings by Titian, Rubens, Salvator Rosa, Raphael, Claud Lorraine, Correggio, and
others. A rich feast of art is to be found in the sculpture gallery, which contains
exquisite groups by Canova, Bartolini, Thorwaldsen, Rinaldi, and others. On one
side is a sleeping Endymion, on another a wounded Achilles, here, a graceful Venus,
there a Cupid or a Hebe. The walls of this gallery are of polished gritstone, and
light is admitted at the top. The Orangery alone is 108 feet in length, and is
always gay either with blossoms or fruit.
Nothing can be more charming than the gardens, which cover an immense
extent of ground. The fountains are the great attraction at ordinary times, but un¬
fortunately when we were there, it was an extraordinary time, as the long continued
drought had caused such a scarcity of water, that it would have been a wicked
waste of the precious fluid, to expend it for our gratification. The grand con¬
servatory, by the late Sir Joseph Paxton, is 277 feet by 123 feet. The roof required
70,000 square feet of glass to complete it. Everything that is beautiful and rare in
the way of plants and shrubs is gathered together here; palms, plantains, and
bananas flourish luxuriantly, and suggest a very difierent climate from ours. There
is a carriage drive right through the centre.
96 THE  ATTEMPT.
There are various objects of interest in the gTounds, such as cascades, huge
rocking-stones, and a singular model of a tree, called the "Weeping Willow," which
sheds copious streams of water through the thin tubes which so successfully represent
branches. The unlucky individual who is near this piece of deception fares badly
when the water-works are suddenly turned on, as I was a witness to, though not a
sufferer from the trick. Edensor village adjoins the park, about half-a-mile from
Chatswoi-th House. The church is being rebuilt, whilst care is being taken to pre¬
serve the old monuments. In the open churchyard lie the remains of the late Duke
of Devonshire, the builder of the greater part of the " Palace of the Peak," and, I
think T cannot do better than conclude this paper by quoting a verse from the j)oem
by Holland, on this celebrated man:—
" Concordant with his humble wish—
In this grave's narrow roon-.
Lies an illustrious Cavendish,
Beneath a nameless tomb."
Alma.
 s^=»S.^>?«=^ 
The verdure bright that clothes the fields So, our own place, however low,
Is not one mass of brilliant green ; No one so well as we could fill;
Each little blade, not singly seen, Our work, by God's wise ordering will.
Its quota to the landscape yields. Fits us more surely than we know.
The sunbeam, that with joyful ray Of trifles, life is ever made,
Gilds the glad earth with glorious light, As is the field of blades of grass ;
Is not one ray of perfect white— When o'erthis world God's breath doth pass,
Seven blended hues their tints display. We sway in waves of light and shade.
The broad sea-beach, on which the tide, Let us, then, each his own place take,
With giant gambols woos the land, In stUl obedience and content;
Holds myriad tiny grains of sand— Knowing that we to earth are sent,
Each helps to form that expanse wide. ^ record of our lives to make
Thus, each small particle its place, '^^^^ ^^^^1 withstand the searching light
By God appointed, silent takes; ^f that great day, when he shall read
And of the whole great earth, each makes ^^ iieaven and earth, each humble deed
One perfect part of strength and grace.       ^^ S^°^> once done through Hisgreat might.
  Mas Ai.ta.
THE   ATTEMPT. 97
g Sister Sinnw.
Part II.
Next week was a time of consultation as to the how, when, and where of Minnie's
marriage ; and, after mature deliberation, it was agreed that the time should be
November, the place Edinburgh, and that Minnie should remain with us at Barden
till October, as Papa and Mamma were this year to accomplish a long-talked-of trip
to the Continent, and would be absent from Edinburgh the whole of August and
September. Meantime Minnie (Mamma wrote) was to be by me " initiated into the
mysteries of housekeeping," and for ten days I kept her hard at work; but, during
housekeeping hours, Minnie was liable to fits of absence of mind, most detrimental to
the accuracy of my accoiint-books and the neatness of my store-room ; she entirely
ruined a " boiling" of raspberry jam, by leaving it to take care of itself, while she was
out walking with Mr Wyvill; and when, at last, this amateur housekeeping began
to have a visible and painful effect upon our dinner-table, I felt that, in justice to
Jack, it could go on no longer, and I resumed the keys of office. Poor Minnie! she
was deeply penitent for all her errors, though ; and if the Hall had only been six
miles off, instead of five hundred yards, I daresay I might have made something of
her after all; but Harry Wyvill's presence was utterly incompatible with house¬
keeping, and Harry was a circumstance over which I had no control.
The country began to be gay about the beginning of August; the houses were
filled with visitors; and pic-nics, and croquet, and archery parties abounded. Mrs
Wyvill arrived at the Hall on her annual visit to her son (she was nervous and
fanciful about her health, and generally resided in Cheltenham, in the neighbourhood
of a favourite physician); and we had our share' of visitors too, for my brother
Davie, who had just passed M.D., came to us for rest from his labours as soon as the
ceremony of "capping" was over; and Dr Irwin, a friend of Jack's, joined us on
the fourth or fifth of August. Mrs Wyvill took a violent fancy to Minnie (oh ! how
could I use the word " violent" when talking of Mrs Wyvill, the most languid,
placid, and inert of created beings 1) Minnie's soft voice, gentle manner, and amia¬
bility of disposition, exactly suited Mrs Wyvill, who soon treated her in all respects
like a daughter. She introduced Minnie to all her country friends and neighbours,
who about this time, as I have said, began to appear in the country ; so that Minnie,
M
98 THE  ATTEMPT.
and in consequence Davie and Dr Irwin, came in for a large share of the rural
gaity, in which I sometimes took a part; bvit Jack's professional duties, of course,
prevented him from joining us, and I myself could seldom find time for any lengthy
excursions. Minnie was thus generally confided to the chaperonage of Mrs Wyvill;
while on the days unoccui)ied by any pleasure-party, Harry seized the opportunity to
instruct her in riding ; and, altogether, I felt very clearly that Minnie no longer
belonged to me : but she was as happy as the days were long, and Harry's evident
pride in her, and affection for her, almost reconciled me to the change in my sister s
position with regard to me.
It was about the middle of August, the 17th or 18th, I think—that we were all
invited to a large dinner-party at the Hall. I remember the evening so well !
oppressively hot and sultry as the weather had been for some time, it had that day
been fierce and fervent beyond anything we had before experienced; and though the
intense glare of heat had of course considerably abated by the time we were walking
up to the Hall, it was still sutficiently oppressive to spread over the party an air of
very unusual langour, speedily dissipated, however, on our arrival in the lai-ge, cool,
fresh drawing-room at the Hall, which was soon ringing with laughter and talking. I
had not much time upstairs to notice the component parts of the company ; but I had
scarcely taken my place at the dinner-table, wiien my attention was riveted by the
face of a yoiing lady opposite me, whose very remarkable beauty held my eyes cap¬
tive from the moment I first looked at her. She was (my next neighbour informed
me) a Miss Caroline Tyrrel ; and certainly, never before or since have I seen so
faultless a face, or so magnificent a figure and bearing. I never could describe a
face, and explain the style ■ and shape of the features, as you would the cut and
texture of a dress ;—and I shall not begin with Miss Tyrrel,—so just take it for
granted that she was " beautiful exceedingly," and you will know all that I can
tell you. Davie had the honour of conducting Miss Tyrrel down stairs, and for the
first time in his life, he apj)eared to have lost his self-possession and his powers of
convei-sation ; but he speedily recovered both, and seemed quite at his ease, though
I was glad to find that it was still j)ossible to put Davie out of countenance, even for
five minutes.
In the evening we had music and singing; and, wonderful as was Miss Tyrrel's
beaiity, her voice was still more wonderful. That glorious voice !—but it is as in¬
describable as her face. I never heard a voice that gave such expression to every
line, to every word she sang. The deepest pathos—the wildest joy—the fiercest
anger ^the most melting tenderness—she gave them all by turns, and all with equal
THE   ATTEMPT. 99
fervour and effect. And it seemed to me that even her beauty increased as she sang,
and her face glowed as if insjiired. But I am growing sentimental, and I am sure
Jack would call these last few lines " bosh," though I saw Jack himself tliat
evening,—unmusical, uupoetical, unimpressionable Jack—.very suspiciously red about
the eyes at the end of one of Miss Tyrrel's songs. Towards the end of the evening,
I had gone out on the balcony with Dr Irwin, to show him the " lie " of a stream
which he and Davie intended to fish next day; but the moonlight fell unfavourably,
and the part of the landscape we wished to see was shrouded in darkness. Harry
Wyvill came out to us, the bearer of Mrs Wyvill's entreaties that I would
"come in from the night air;" so we turned to re-enter the drawing-room. But
just opposite the window, at the far end of the drawing-room, was a " tableau
vivant" so beautifully grouped, that we all three paused to look at it before we
entered. Miss Tyrell was kneeling on a low ottoman, looking up with a smile at
my sister Minnie, who was adjusting some flowers that had slipped from their proper
position in Miss Tyrrel's hair; and the two figures, for grouping and colouring, would
have delighted the eye of an artist; but alas ! alas ! my eye was that of a sister—
and the picture was spoiled for me. Caroline Tyrrel, with her majestic figure, her
grand, calm face, her lustrous eyes, and (pardon the feminine observation !) her
magnificent dress, looked, in spite of her kneeling posture, " every inch a queen;"
while my little Minnie, small and slight as a fairy, with laughing blue eyes, a
flexible, ever-changing face, a plain white dress, and a blue ribbon snooded among
her brown curls, looked like the handmaid to the princess, honoured by rendering
her a service—happy in wreathing flowers in Miss Tyrrel's hair ! I looked up at Mr
Wyvill, and by the expression of mingled wonder, curiosity, and disappointment on
his face, I saw that his thoughts were something like mine, and, mortified beyond
expression, I dashed into the room, caught hold of Jack, and begged him to come
home—thus breaking up the tableau, and partially relieving my feelings.
Harry walked home with us, and everything seemed just as usual; but T could
not forget that look,—and when I fell asleep, T dreamt that Miss Tyrrel was Bloody
Mary, and had ordered Minnie to be executed for plaiting her hair too tight.
Next day began a period of terrible anxiety and grief for us all at Barden ; a
fever broke out in the village. When Jack came home that night, he told me there
were two cases of fever in Barden, and next morning one of the grooms at the Hall,
and the lodge-keeper's little boy were taken ill. This terrified Mrs "Wyvill nearly
out of her senses, and she left that very day for Cheltenham. Misfortunes never
come single, and two days after the first case of fever in Barden, Dr Carleton of
100 THE   ATTEMPT.
Sutton, the only medical man (besides Jack) for miles round, broke his leg, and the
entire medical work of the district devolved upon Jack, for a time. It was well for
him that Davie and Dr Irwin were with us at that juncture ; for the ravages of
the fever in Barden were terrible, and it spread to Sutton and several of the other
villages round about. Jack worked literally night and day, sleeping and eating any¬
how and anywhere, and the other two were most efficient assistants. I helped where
I could with the nursing, for I had never any fear of infection, and many of the
women were terribly careless of the doctor's instructions about food, medicine, and
above all, air. There was a family of oqjhans in our village, who lived with an old
decrepit grandmother ; three of these children took the fever, and as the old grand¬
mother was quite unfit for night-nursing, Davie and I sat up with them night about,
and two of them came through, I am glad to say. But of course all this labour and
anxiety kept my eyes and my thoughts away from Minnie ; we did not allow her to
take any part in the visiting or nursing, and except at our hurried meals, I scarcely
saw her. She was much with the Rector's girls, and I supposed with Mr Wyvill,
until she told me one day he had been for a week at Hartley Manor, but was to be
back in a day or two. Still my mind was quite easy, till one morning at breakfast,
after I had returned from nursing the little Carters, Dr Irwin said, laughing, " Mrs
Somers, you are a wonderful woman ! After sitting up till nearly five o'clock, you
are as fresh as paint at eight again ! Any one would think Miss Cunningham was
the nurse, and not you."
I looked at Minnie^ and was perfectly shocked at her pale cheeks and heavy
eyes; but she vehemently disclaimed all indisposition, and I did not think of mental
maladies. But, when I left the dining-room, Davie ran after me. " Jeanie," said
he, " Wyvill's still at Hartley Manor." " I know," said I, "but he's to be back to¬
morrow or next day." Davie whistled increduously. " We'll see ! but, Jeanie,
Miss Tyrrel's there too ; I met her riding with Wyvill yesterday." My heart was
in my mouth, but of course I tried to talk Davie down. " I knew Miss Tyrrel
intended to pay a visit to Hartley Manor, and it is very natural that she
should ride with Harry Wyvill. I don't know what you mean by telling me all
this, Davie." (But I did know—I knew quite well, and felt very miserable in con¬
sequence). " Oh, very well," said Davie, " then, of course, it doesn't matter ; it is
all right, I suppose. Only that's what ails Minnie, if you wish to know," and off he
went. My first move, of course, was to rush for advice and consolation to Jack, but
Jack had already started on his rounds. I searched the house and the garden, but
he was not to be found, and I entered the drawing-room in no enviable state of
THE   ATTEMPT.
101
spirits or temper. Minnie sat at her work, and Dr Irwiii was busy at the writing-
table. I took up my work, and we sat almost in silence till Dr Irwin had finished his
letter ; then, just as he was folding it, he remarked, " What a very beautiful girl
Miss Tyrrel is !" (I knew what was coming, and hadn't presence of mind to say a
single word.) " I saw her yesterday," continued Dr Irwin, in a slow, deliberate
tone, " when I was coming down Hartley-Lane with your brother, Mrs Somers."
(Minnie turned round sharply. The mischief was done, there was no use stopping
him now.) " She was on horseback," the doctor went on, more deliberately than
ever, " and really, Mrs Somers, she looked most beautiful ! An excellent horse¬
woman she appears to be, too. She was riding with Mr Wyvill." Before I could
say a word, Minnie had thrown all her work upon the table, and stepped through
the open window into the garden. O, Dr Irvvin, Dr Irwin ! thou little knowest the
mischief thou hast done ! but I fear if I had apostrophised the doctor at that moment,
my language would have been less philosophical and more energetic than Sir Isaac
Newton's. However, I restrained myself, and Dr Irwin shortly afterwards departed
for Sutton in the gig. In the course of the day I asked Minnie, as carelessly as I
could, when she expected Harry home ? "I don't know," answered Minnie, wearily.
" When did you hear from him, dear ?" said I. " Not for a week and two days,"
and Minnie sighed. I tried to laugh. " You little goose ! a week and two days !
how you would have laughed at such a speech from any one else three months ago !
I've no doubt he'll come to-morrow." But my spirits were very low, notwithstand¬
ing ; and the whole day I scarcely saw Jack, for the fever was spreading among all
the adjacent hamlets; Dr Irwin reported several new cases of it in Sutton, and all
thought of private grief was set aside by the general sorrow.
Dido.'
(To be continued.)
102 THE   ATTEMPT.
Paet II.
About a year after the opening of the Yennel Ragged School, described in our
last paper, a zealous champion in the cause came to the front rank in the person of
the Keverend Dr Guthrie. Bringing the energy of his character and the eloquence
of his pen to bear on the subject, he soon gained the sympathy of the public, and its
ready co-operation with the work which he proposed to undertake. Having under
his own charge a wide, and, in many parts, wretched parish, Dr Gutlirie had frequent
opportunities of observing the misery and want caused oftentimes by the ignorance
and vice which were sapping the vitality of our city, and undermining its industry
and prosperity. Nor did he rest satis&ed with studying the condition of his own
parish ; but, by frequent wanderings through other of the lowest localities of the city
and by visits to the gaol and the police office, sometimes by midnight, he saw enough
of the sorrows of the young to induce him to become a leader in the war waged by
good against evil, and a party to the truce then forming between justice and mercy.
In 1847, Dr Guthrie opened his school in Ramsay Lane, under the name of
" The Original Ragged School." The system pursued in this admirable institution
is, in its leading features, similar to that followed in the Vennel School, but in many
details they differ. Whereas the Vennel School has kept more to the original plan
sketched out for Ragged Schools, namely, the gatheiing in daily of destitute children
for education and food, the Original Ragged School has superinduced on this first
more simple plan many improvements. The Vennel settled what was the work re¬
quired for it to do, and is doing it most efficiently. The Original Ragged School has
taken to itself a wider range of work, and is fulfilling equally well the duties thereby
entailed. The word " Industrial " might be more fittingly applied to Dr Guthrie's
School than Ragged ; as within its precincts no rags are to be seen, and the children
are so instructed in industrial pursuits, as to fit them for being apprenticed to trades
on their leaving the school; but the special adoption of this designation was left to
another excellent institution, of which we shall hereafter speak.
The school in Ramsay Lane deserves commendation as regards the manner in
which its rooms are laid out. The kitchen is well-sized, and fitted up with all con¬
veniences for the cooking required for the hungry inmates of the school; and is pre-
THE   ATTEMPT. 103
sided over by a cook, whose countenance indicates good humour, and whose soup
seems excellent. She not only cooks breakfast, dinner, and supper for the scholars,
but also a capital dinner for the apprentices, who, though having left the institution,
are, for a small sum, provided with dinner during their apprenticeship : thus keeping
the eye of the school upon them during their first years of self-dependence. The
laundry arrangements also are admirable, and we are pleased to find that learning to
wash and do up clothes forms one of the most 2:)opular occupations of the girls. The
sewing-room is light and well ventilated, containing among other conveniences a
sewing-machine, so that the girls may be instructed in the many mysteries of dress¬
making, in a manner that enables them to fill useful situations at the expiry of their
school course.
So far we have only spoken of the industrial training of the girls, but that of the
boys is equally thorough. In a large, cheerful room, box-making is taught in a most
masterly style. All the suitable machinery for the work is to be found there, with
an experienced box-maker for the teacher. As may be expected, this trade is
popular with the boys, and not only is it profitable in the way of training them in a
useful art, bu^t it is of real substantial profit to the school, as the finished style of the
boxes there manufactured brings many orders from the best shops in our city.
Opening off this room, is a smaller one, dedicated to the use of the tailors. This we
could have wished a little larger, but apparently there are not so many young tailors
in the school as box-makers. Off this, again, is another small apartment for the use
of the shoemakers ; so that every facility for learning these three trades is afforded to
the boys, who, but for this or some similar institution, would have inundated our
streets with mendicants, and filled our gaols with criminals.
Several large rooms are furnished as dormitories, as in many cases the children
must be housed all night, or turned out on the cold streets to seek refuge on some
stair, or in the police office, as was their custom before such hospitable asylums as
our Ragged Schools were open to receive them. The bathing arrangements are
admirable,—there being several baths of the plunge description, besides the shower-
bath, in which children of all ranks so mvich delight.
The teaching given to the children is such as enables them to fill most respect¬
able situations on leaving the school; and we have the testimony of Dr Gutlirie that
many who have crossed the ocean in quest of work, and who have there found it,
are able to keep up an intelligent correspondence with friends at home—being much
cheered in their far-away dwellings by the comfort and counsel constantly sent them
by those interested in their welfare during their school days.
104 THE   ATTEMPT.
All honour is due to this noble institution, which has worked such peace in our
most wretched districts, and to its founder, who has strenuously and successfully ex¬
erted himself in the good cause. But it is now time to give some account of the third
institution of this kind in our city, and of the reasons which led to its existence.
Dr Guthrie published, in 1847, his first " Plea for Ragged Schools," a pamphlet
setting forth in the most Christian spirit, the wants of our wretched little brethren
in the Old Town, the " little Arabs" of our streets, as he touchingly termed them, and
calling upon all denominations and sects to stretch out a saving arm, and join in the
work of rescuing the children of the lowest class, by means of Ragged Schools. As
at the blast of a trumpet, the citizens of Edinburgh rose, and flocked to the standard
now raised in the name of universal charity. Unfortunately it was but a shoi-t time
before this work, the basis of which appeared at first sight broad enough to include
men of all religious views, added another of the many proofs of how hard a task it
is to join all sects in any one work. When it came to electing those who should be
on the Committee of management, and who should regulate the religious instruction
to be imparted to the children, it was found impossible to satisfy all parties. It ap¬
peared that Dr Guthrie, in his call to all denominations in our city to join in the
work, had not included the large body of Roman Catholics residing amongst us. At
least, this class was vii-tually excluded by the arrangements made for the religious
teaching, which were, that this instruction should be entirely free from all Protestant
denominational spirit; but the Bible as read by the children, and explained by a Pro¬
testant teacher, should form part of the daily exercise of all the children. This being
the case, it was not to be expected that Roman Catholics would join the work, know¬
ing, as they did, that a large propoi-tion of the poorest population was at least noi-iin-
ally of their religion. We say nominally, for Dr Guthrie was right in asserting that
many of them were practically heathens ; yet others were not so, and though sunk in
poverty, and oftentimes neglectful of their religion, still the faith that their parents
had bequeathed them was, in their belief, the true road to heaven. Nor was it only the
Roman Catholic community who objected to the plan laid down for the guidance of
the new institution, for many staunch Protestants could not reconcile the system to
their consciences. When this division first arose between those who would not toler¬
ate any Roman Catholic teaching, and those who were desirous of respecting the re¬
ligious opinions of all, many attempts were made to conciliate the parties, and com¬
promise the matter. But the attempt proved abortive. Men may, and do fre¬
quently, relinquish their wishes to each other, and give in to the majority in matters
of mere opiuion ; but no man can be asked to go against his conscience : thei'efore.
THE  ATTEilPT. 105
painful as it was to split into parties in this good work, a division was unavoidable;
so Dr Guthrie, with his followers, worked according to their plan, and the opposing
party went its way, and did its work bravely according to its views of Christian
charity.
This work was the founding of "The United Industrial School."
This school was opened within a year of the Original Ragged School, and is
situated in South Gray's Close, in the midst of the poverty it seeks to overcome, and
the ignorance it strives to remove; but, though thus situated, the air is rendered
tolerably fresh, by means of a large play-ground between the school proper and its
dormitories.    A detailed account of the working and internal arrangements of this
institution  is  unnecessary  here, as in  its industrial and secular departments,  it
resembles the plan followed in the school just described.    But what endows this, the
third Ragged School in our city, with a special interest, is the example it affords of a
work carried out in an entirely impartial spirit; for, within its walls, sectarianism is
unknown.    The system of religious teaching is simply this.    At nine o'clock in the
morning, after the children have had a good breakfast, those of the Roman Catholic
persuasion are collected in one large room, where, under the guidance of a Roman
Catholic teacher, they read and hear explanations of the Douay Version of the Bible,
besides such other instruction as their church may appoint.    At the same hour, in
another large class-room, the Protestant children are gathered together, and in¬
structed in a like manner by a Protestant teacher.   At ten o'clock, the children meet
together for general instruction, not to be parted again at lessons, play, or meals.    It
is pleasant to learn that no bitterness of spirit is ever engendered by this plan, either
in the breasts of the children or the teachers ; and that the gentlemen of the Commit¬
tee, selected impartially from the Protestant and Roman Catholic communities, meet
together harmoniously month after month, to look after the interests of the school.
The trades here taught are those of carpenter, brushmaker, tailor, and shoe¬
maker. The carpenter's or joiner's work-room is fitted up with the proper
machinery for giving thorough instruction in the trade, all worked by means of a
small engine. The brushmaking is also well carried out, and able to be made of
some profit to the funds of the school.
As regards the funds of this admirable institution, we are surprised and vexed
to find them so far behind those at the command of The Original Ragged School.
We are willing to believe that the eloquence and popularity of the Rev. Dr Guthiie
may, in part, account for this difference ; but we fear there is also an unconquerable
dislike in the hearts of our fellow-citizens to contribute to the maintenance of Roman
N
106 THE  ATTEMPT.
Catholic children, however gi-eat may be their need and sore their distress. It is
strange that this institution, which seems, by its comprehensive charity, to be one to
which all denominations ought gladly to contribute, should be supported by the
beneficence of a few. Indeed, if it were not for the merciful Dunlop Act, which
sends many a little prisoner to the United Industrial School, as to a reformatory,
there would be difficulty in keeping this refuge for the destitute of all denominations
open. Another reason for the deficiency of the funds, may perhaps be found in the
strange ignorance which exists in the public mind regarding the difference between
these schools. The general public does not trouble itself to visit them, and so judge
for itself which it should support, or whether indeed all the three Ragged and
Industrial Schools in our city, may not have crying claims on its liberality.
Whilst advocating liberality in the management of our Ragged Schools, we
must not lose sight of the need of charitable feeling between all the institutions of
the kind; which, though working in different paths, are nevertheless aiming at the
same goal—the rescuing of children from misery, vice, and it may be death. All
we ask of our readers is to spend a few hours in visiting the three institutions
of which we have endeavoured to give a slight sketch, and to j iidge for themselves,
to which, if not to all, they will lend their aid; knowing that to whichever they
give, they give to a righteous cause. des Eaux.
Cranslatron ixom J^itte.
Lord Ulrich rides through the good green- " Therefore, tliese sweetest lips of thine.
The leaves are rustling low,—        [wood. Stained with thy falsehood's sin.
He sees a lovely maiden's face Are like a rose-bush, rich with scent'—
Through the tender branches glow. Where snakes creep out and in.
The youth he says—" Full well I know " And that deep dimple, dinting soft
This blooming, glowing face, The cheek so wondrous smooth ;
That weaves its spell about me still, That is the grave where my longings wild,
In the crowd and the lonely place. Have driven me in my youth.
" Twin roses are the tempting lips— " I see a tress of golden hair
So lovely, fresh, and rare ; Stream from the fair young head ;
Yet many bitter, cruel words. That is the mesh in which my soul
Slipped through them unaware. Was tangled and misled.
THE   ATTEMPT. 107
"And that blue eye, so still and calm, " Oh, might I dry thy wet sad eyes
Clear as a crystal well: With the glow of my sorrow's smart,
I thought it was the gate of Heaven, Oh, might I redden thy pale pale cheeks
And it proved the gate of Hell." With the best blood from my heart."
Further he rides through the good green- And onward rides Lord Ulrich still.
The leaves are shivering still, [wood. Through the gloom of the forest ground,—
And he sees another face, as white And the evening wind it wliispers low.
And sad as a wintry hill. And strange voices rise around.
The youth he sighs—" Ah, mother mine. He hears the sound of his own sad words,
Who loved me best of all, Echo around his way;
Whose life, with evil words and deeds. That is the merry woodland birds,
I troubled, and filled with gall. That sing from branch and spray.
Lord TJlrich sings a sweet old song—
A song of remorse and pain ;
And when he has sung it unto the end.
He must sing it over again. O. M.
Chapter III.—The Knight's Armour.
" My good blade carves the casques of men,
My tough lance thrusteth sure ;
My strength is as the strength of ten,
Because my heart is pure."—Sir Galahad.
We see how much was demanded from a knight in the way of training, and all the
virtues, without which strength or any other personal advantage was thought to
profit little or nothmg. The elevating effect of this opinion on personal character
can hardly be rated too highly.
But while we turn our attention to chivalry, we must not forget to take some
notice of the armour, offensive and defensive, that belonged peculiarly to knighthood.
The " thrillant spear" of Spenser has been often sung in song. The staff of
the lance was generally made of fine flexible ash-wood, and its head of the iron of
Poitou.    From this union of material arose the frequent accident, told in many a
108 THE   ATTEMPT.
ballad, of the lance-head breaking in the wound. It was impossible to pennit this to
remain, and yet, upon the removal of its large head, so great a flow of blood took
place, that the life of the wounded frequently ebbed away. So we need not wonder
at the anxiety of young Lavaine, when, serving as esquire to Sir Lancelot at the
Diamond Tournament, he was asked to perform this oflice for his woimded friend ;
nor at the long illness that ensued, when, hovering between life and death, Sir
Lancelot was carefully tended by the sweet Elaine.
The lance was made very long, and required great skill to wield it well. At
the top of the wooden part was an ensign of silk, linen, or stuif, which bore a cross
or a piece of heraldry, so that, when fixed in the ground before a tent, it served to
designate its owner. This ensign was originally called a " gonfanon," latterly a " pen¬
non," and might be made of various sizes, and with either one or two indentations.
"The dagger of mercy" was the long, thin, shai-p blade, which could enter
between the plates of armour, and was the only means of destroying a full-armed
knight. But this was seldom used, except in cases of deadly hatred ; because chivahy
obliged the victor to spare the vanqiiished, should he "yield, rescue or no rescue."
The martel or maule was only occasionally used by knights, and that in early
times. Charles Martel won his name from this weapon. A giant is always fabled
to be swaying it; and ecclesiastics, if they ever went into action, wielded it, as the
next best weapon to the sword, which the Church forbade them to use.
The bow was an honoured weapon ; but, being unsuited to close combat, and not
advantageous to horsemen, it fell to the use of a class of men, still honourable, but
lower far than knights,—bowmen or archers.
But every worthy knight felt a most truly chivalrous attachment to his sword.
There was a sense of personality in this, as if the sword were a part of himself; a
sense of dependence,—as he felt that without it he could do nothing worthy the name
of knight; a sense of pride,—as it bore witness to his knightly deeds and personal
bravery. With all this, there was also mingled an element of devotion—the cross-
hilt was used as a crucifix, the name " Jesus" being engraved upon it; and it was
thought to give a spiritual, as well as an earthly and practical protection. It was
often handsomely jewelled, and the knight's seal cut on the head. When King
Arthur's sword was last waved in the pale moonlight,
" All the haft twinkled with diamond sparks,
Myriads of topaz-lights, and jacinth work
Of subtlest jewellery."
Swords were generally named ; and who has not heard of Oi-lando's " Durin-
THE   ATTEMPT. 109
dara;" of Charlemagne's " Fusberta Joyosa," and above all, of King Arthur's fam¬
ous Escalibert, Caliburn, or Excalibur ? We have a beautiful romaunt about this
sword in the Moi-te d'Arthur. The king had fought his last battle with it, and was
wounded, and Sir Bedivere had borne him away to the little chapel across tlie fields,
beside the broken cross. His last thoughts connect themselves with his sword, and
he tells Sir Bedivere how it had been given him from a hand waved in the middle
of the lake, the mystic gift of Faery; and that he had taken it, and worn it like a
king, well knowing that wherever he should be sung or told, there also would be
named Excalibur.
" Thou, therefore, take my brand Excalibur,
Which was my pride.    .    .    Take Excahbur
And fling him far into the middle mere."
It was the greatest hope of orphaned youth to win his father's sword, and
wear it worthy of him. To use his sword in an unknightly deed, or to deliver
it ujD to an enemy—were things a knight would rather die than do. Great
strength of arm was necessary for feats like that of Geraint, who, faint and seemingly
dying, hewed oS" Earl Doorm's head at a single blow, or
" Swung from his brand a windy buffet out
Once, twice, to right, to left, and stunned the twain
Or kiUed them."
The names of sword-makers even often became famous. Spain was the chief
seat of the manufacture. Saragossa was at one time as famous as Toledo. The
blades were sometimes plunged red-hot into the river Salo, near Bilbiles, in Celtisria,
as it was believed that its waters had an extraordinary efl^ect ujion its edge.
The shield was also held ia great esteem, and it was considered very disgraceful
in a knight " to lose the badge that should his deeds display." It generally bore
some insignia, heraldry, or motto, as the bearings of its owner. Besides these were
the nobler dints that told of tough-fought fields. So when Lancelot journeyed forth
to tilt unknown, he borrowed one quite plain, of plain Sir Torre, and left his own in
keeping of Elaine. Tennyson paints a touching picture of Elaine, guarding the sacred
shield of Lancelot; and working for it an embroidered case, in patterns like its own,—
" And made a pretty history to herself
Of every dint a sword had beaten in it.
Conjecturing when and where ; this cut is fresh,—
That ten years back ; this dealt him at Caerlyle ;
That at Caerleon ; this at Camelot ;
And ah God's mercy what a stroke was there ! " .
110 THE  ATTEMPT.
The shield was originally made triangular, wide at the top, and tapering at the foot,
like a kite; and so fitted as to be able to support a wounded knight when he was
borne from the field.
The first direct protection for the body was a Currasse—from " ciiir, leather;"
on which flat rings of steel were sewed, with an outer row of larger rings, " macula"
or "maglia." This was in use about the time of the Norman Conquest, and gave
place to scale-mail, the "Lorica Squammata" of the Romans, where small iron plates
overlapped each other, sewed on a wadded leather garment called a gambeson.
If this s\iit was a simple tunic, it was called a hauberk. The lower members were
defended by chausses, which, when joined to the hauberk, made it a haubergeon.
The sleeves of the jacket were carried down over the fingers, and a continuation of
the chausses protected the foot, where foppery first began; for it soon became fashion¬
able to have the mail several inches in length inclining downwards beyond the toes.
But this did not last long; because, when fighting with knights of other countries or
of other faith, like the Moors, who did not follow this fashion, they suflfered dearly
for it. It was the undivided aim of a Moorish Knight to unhorse a Christian, who
could not fight on foot. The back and crown of the head were protected by a hood
of mail, sometimes joined to the rest of the dress, and covering the chin and mouth.
The chain mail was borrowed from the Saracens, who still wear it in Asia. The
Crusaders brought it to England in the reign of Henry III. It is formed by inter¬
laced rings of mail, each ring having the others inserted in it, so that they form a
garment of themselves. They were generally arranged in double rows, and proved a
flexible protection, neither cumbersome nor heavy. It allowed the knight the free
use of his muscles to attack or defend himself; it saved him from ordinary thrusts
of sword or lance ; but it proved no protection against the formidable maule.
The efiigy of Edward I. in the Tower, is dressed in a hauberk, with sleeves and
chausses of chain mail, and a hood with camail (the piece of mail hanging down over
the shoulders.) His spurs are of the ancient kind, called prick-spurs. The kite-
shaped shield of the Normans had been superseded at this time by the square-
topped. Suits of mixed chain and plate-armour were introduced in the reign of
Edward II. Plates of solid steel were fixed upon the breast, and other parts soon
seemed to become necessary. In the reign of Henry V., the Hero of Agincourt,
complete armour of plate came into use. The different parts received their titles from
their position, the Pectoral, on the breast j the cuisses for the thighs; brassents for
the ai-ms ; aillettes for the shoulders ; the goi-get for the throat; and a scaly gauntlet
gloved the liand.    Atone time, the weight of the armour was made so great, that
THE   ATTEMPT. Ill
knights sometimes fainted under the burden; and, when unhorsed, could not rise.
Yet, to prevent surprise in time of war, it was necessary to wear it almost con¬
stantly, as it was not always fitted to be quickly clasped. Indeed, before an
expected attack—
" From the tents
The annourers, acoomplishmg the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Gave dreadful note of preparation."
So there must have been gi-eat fatigue incurred before a battle, by the outstretched
limbs supporting such a weight; and the loss of sleep, consequent on such an exer¬
tion. Active warfare must, therefore, have been as much a trial of strength as of
skill in these days. Without remembering all this, we can hardly do justice to
the feats of prowess described in such books as " The Faery Queen;" and our wonder
that ever women should be able, like Britomart, to endure it all, and win success, is
increased tenfold.
The surcoat, cyclas, or tabard, which covered all the armour, was arranged ac¬
cording to the wearer's taste, and was the article of dress in which magnificence
might be displayed. It was at first sufiicient to distinguish a knight, saying that he
wore a coat of "Or," "Argent," "Gules," " Sinople," " Sablegris," or "Ermine."
But, as these became more numerous, they were cut into various shapes and adorned
with devices and cognizances, which were the original of the armorial bearings of
the oldest families. One knight could not give another a more deadly ofience, than
to wear his coat of arms without permission. Hence, knights, when they were
desirous of again signalising their prowess, unaided by the momentum of a " dreaded
name," entered the lists without their coats of arms, and fought unknown.
The knight's helmet was made at first conical, then cylindrical, and afterwards
again conical. A broad piece of iron was made to connect the frontlet of the helm
with the mail over the mouth. This was imperfect as a protection, and inconvenient
to the wearer; because, if vanquished, he could be held down to the ground by it.
So, cheek-pieces or bars were added; also, oreillets or ear-protections, till it appeared
as the complete aventaile or iron-mask, which was joined to the helmet, leaving aper¬
tures only for the eyes and mouth. It was at first immovable, but ingenuity
invented means to raise and let it fall, and it became a visor. Then plates were
brought upwards from the chin to meet the upper part, which could be opened. This
was called the "bever," from " bevere, to drink." The helmet, also, soon began to be
adorned with the  knight's crest,   and became an emblem  of his rank.    It was
112 THE   ATTEMPT.
generally borne on the saddle of his squire or p.xge,—the knight wearing, except in
time of war, an open casque, morion, basnet, or basin.
As the spirit died, the splendour of chivalry increased, and sometimes knights
who might only have been taken prisoner, were slain for the sake of their spoil.
The Milanese armour was considered the best, and was often richly ornamented
with gold. Many varieties of armour have been worn; indeed, each age seemed to
have its own peculiar fashion of protection, doubtless dependent on the fashion of
assault. In the Tower, we see fine examples of these : Richard III. is there attired
in a suit of ribbed armour, with a salade helmet, furnished with oreillets;
Henry VII. in fluted armour, with a burgonet helmet; Henry VIII. in armour
damasquined (inlaid by gold wrought at Damascus); Edward VI. in a suit of
inxsset armour.
The knight valued and loved his horse; and it was essential to his own safety;
so it soon was also protected in the most vulnerable parts. Edward IV., equipped for
the tournament, has a fine war-saddle, while a spiked chaufron defends his horse's
head. The destrier, " cheval de lance," was armed or barded like the knight.
Henry VII.'s horse was the first that wore a complete suit of horee armour.
The bridle was made very splendid, and covered with ornaments,—hence
called Brigliadon or " bearing bells." The good steeds of Spain were prized above
all at one time ; but after the Crusades, when the merit of the Arabian horses was
discovered, they were largely imported. Nothing contributed more to a knight's
pride, pleasure, and safety, than a noble horse; and many a tale is told of the affec¬
tion that subsisted between them. This concluded the personal appurtenances of the
full-armed knight; and it remained only to him to keep his armour bright, and use
it well. Emblematically the sword signified to him the cross, its double edge chi¬
valry and justice ; the spear stood for truth; its iron head, the strength of truth ; the
mace, the force of courage; the helmet, shamefacedness ; the hauberk, the spiritual
panoply; the spurs, diligence; the gorget, obedience; the shield, the oflice of a
knight; the saddle, safety of courage. Allusions to such connections are made in
Spenser; and even the Apostle, when he bids us put on the whole armour of God,
associates meanings with each.
It is easy to see what immense sums must have been spent on the accoutrements
and support of a knight, his followers, and horses,—so that, though estate was not
nominally necessary to qualify a man for being a knight, the want of it really pre¬
vented him from becoming one. They had a maxim, that one had better be a good
esquire than a poor knight.    Liberality was one of the knightly virtues, and we may
THE   ATTEMPT. 113
well imagine how, through the applause of others, and the self-satisfaction consequent
thereon, it might come to be considered chief of all. Many esquires, therefore, re¬
mained so from poverty. But they could lead their own followers to the field, under
their own penoncale, or triangular pennon. Even after being knighted, they were
sometimes unable to support the expense, and became poor wandering knights,
travelling abroad in search of adventures—the knights-errant of many a tale. Some
of these, however, only embraced a temporary and voluntary poverty, like Geraint,
when he started with Enid, saying
" ' Effeminate as I am,
I will not fight my way with gilded arms—
AU shall be iron.'   He loosed a mighty purse,
Hung at his belt, and hurled it towards the squire-
So the last sight that Enid had of home,
Was all the marble threshold flashing, strewn
With gold and scattered coinage, and the squire
Chafing his shoulders."
LuTEA Reseda.
In making a few general remarks upon the Pictures in these rooms, we intend, as
before, to select those paintings which, telling their own tale, are likely, from the
historical or domestic interest they possess, to interest the readers of this magazine;
and in so doing we shall deal alone with the sentiment the scene is intended to con¬
vey, leaving all attempts at art criticism to abler pens than ours.
A great artist is a great poet in action. With his brush or his pencil he is able
to bring home to the mind and heart of his fellow-men those high thoughts and lofty
aspii'ations which conduct to a higher platform, and, separating our life from that of
the mere animal, make us feel the soul within ; and although we have this year no
picture which we can, in the popular sense, term "great," there are not a few that, to
the thoughtful mind and earnest heart, speak of those things that make life great in
itself and for itself. And first upon our list is a picture, the sentiment of which fully
corroborates our preceding remarks, for it is of the highest and noblest, and appeals
to the sympathy of the spectator with great vigour and fidelity. South Room—No. 1.
" The Parting of Ugo Bassi from his Sister," by Carlo Ademollo, an Italian artist
whom our readers may remember as the painter of a strange but efiective painting,
114 THE  ATTEMPT.
" II Fior di Primavera," which excited so much adverse criticism in Exhibition 1867.
Bassi is not alone pai'ting from his sister, and, through hei", with all life's dearest
hopes and affections : he is parting with life itself. Erect and unconquered to the
last, the Italian patriot and martyr stands composed, yet defiant, amidst all the dis¬
cordant elements around. The suppliant yet stately girl—the stolid soldiery, soon to
be his executioners—the frowning Gorgoski, who has now ordered his execution—
all are by him unheeded ; his cause is won, although his life is lost, and with an
unmoved soul he prepares for that death, to him the opening portal of a still nobler
existence. This is a great and effective picture. The most agonising and heart¬
rending scene is here portrayed with all the force of genius, and yet without exag¬
geration. The serenity of the unjustly condemned patriot, occupied with other
thoughts than that of his approaching doom—the agony of the sister—the stolid yet
not indifferent soldiery—the troubled and uncertain expression of the Austrian
judges, all are rendered with that unerring and simple adherence to nature which it
is the privilege of high art alone to accomplish. There are other noticeable pictures
in this room taken also from Italian life. No. 2—" Via della Vita," in Rome, by M.
G. Brennan, who, although resident in Rome, is surely of Irish extraction, to
judge by the broad and farcical humour of his subject, which, apparently of a
serious, if not tragic nature, being no less than the starting of a funeral procession,
is, by the humorous treatment of the artist, one of the broadest pieces of farcical
expression in the rooms, not exceeded even by some of the former efforts of Erskine
Nicol in his delineations of Irish character. We must hope, for the sake of the poor
penitents, over whom these unclerical priests preside, that they are not the universal
type of priesthood in Rome. The broad fun of the picture is hardly redeemed by the
expression and gait of the noble and sorrowful matron beside the bier, or by the one
or two higher-class faces among the attendant priests ; and yet the subject is intensely
solemn,—the advancing coffin and shrouded mutes, the sorrowing stately woman by its
side, bearing the funeral wreaths, and the attentive group in the distance, with the
noble face of the priest in the foreground. But all this true feeling is so ludicrously
mixed up with the heterogeneous throng of quizzical priestdom, and the conglomera¬
tion of strange umbrellas, that one can hardly realise it as truth, in our sober Pro¬
testant country, where the solemn and the ludicrous do not meet in such unseemly
relations. No. 91 represents another phase of Southern clerical life,—"II Bolero,"
by W. E. Lockhart. This is by no means so clever or successful a picture as the two
preceding ones, but is still sufficiently characteristic to repay a short notice. It re¬
presents a young girl dancing  the Bolero,  or national dance, and a reverend body
THE   ATTEMPT. 115
of priests and lawyers are sitting round, to decide whether the exhibition is to be
allowed, or to be summarily put down, on the ground of immorality. So potent, how¬
ever, is the charm of the dance and the music, that these grave and reverend Signors
are ready to join in, with the exception of one old priest, who, with eyes fixed on his
beads, manages to escape the fascination of the scene before him. The story is suffi¬
ciently well told, although, we must confess, the wondrous charm is by no means ap¬
parent to the spectator,—the dancer being rather a hard and dry exponent of Spanish
softness and grace, and the musicians have more the air of conspirators than of
tarantula enthusiasts. But this is one of the things that no man can under¬
stand ; and the tarantula madness seems, from this exposition of the disease, more
inexplicable than ever. No. 8—"The Fish Auction," by Keeley Halswelle. This is an
incident of fisher life at Newhaven, and is of considerable merit. The young woman,
however, in the foreground, is too evidently intent upon striking an attitude, and the
principal fisherman to the light is apparently unconcerned with the business he
has in hand. The other personages are full of life and character. With the excep¬
tion of this picture, this artist has entirely devoted himself to depicting Italian life ;
and although, it is to be observed, his treatment and colouring exposes him to com¬
parison with a still abler hand now passed away, this aitist possesses power and
talent entirely his own. Nos. Ill, 467, and 660 are all admirable paintings, rich
in colouring and powerful in drawing. The last. No. 660—" Contadini waiting for
Hire," North Octagon,—is worthy of all praise. The girl reclining in the fore¬
ground is a charming specimen of Italian beauty, and seems, from her -gentleness and
grace, to be almost unfit for the rough companionship and rougher toils that await
her, amongst which, it is evident, circumstances have cast her lot in life.
As we have only space to describe a few among the most telling of the figure
pictures, we have to eschew the Landscapes, however lovely and inviting they may
be ; but before leaving this room, we must deviate for once from this rule, and draw
attention to No. 28—" Old Edinburgh—Night," by John M'Whirter. The old town,
grey and ancient, is here presented to us under an asjject rarely seen. The pale
moon overhead, breaking through the fast-gathering clouds, looks down upon the
silence beneath,—almost as solemn as the silence overhead. No star is visible, only
the moon and the gathering clouds; the dark bulk of the castle rock, the vai-ied
outlines of house and roof and building, are all tinted with that grey shadowy hue,
like the death-shade of humanity. It speaks of the quiet midnight hour—of that
silence when busy restless man is for some short hours at peace ; typiSal, it may be, of
that great eternal rest far off, yet close at hand.    There is another landscape by
116 THE   ATTEMPT.
this artist, to which we must, for one moment, call attention, as, although depicting
still life, the sentiment it conveys is as vivid and as graphic as if other voices than
those of nature told the tale. 588—" The Haunted House," North Octagon,—is as
redolent of a ghostly atmosphere as if we saw the ghost visibly from out the ruined
walls. A sentiment of lonely horror pervades the whole scene—the veiled statue
turning away its head, as if it even were afraid to look across the stagnant pool. The
solitary stork alone stands unmoved, the one bit of life in a scene where death seems
to reign, and by its lonely presence makes the still silence seem all the more eerie
and intolerable to human presence. The waveless trees, the stunted flowers : nature
sympathises with the gloomy horror, and refuses to shine upon so drear a scene.
We now pass on with alacrity to a subject, as charming in its expression as it is in
its sentiment. No. 153—"The Minuet," by John Everett Millais. We hear much
hyper-criticism upon this great artist's over-attention and devotion to the mere
technicalities of his art. True it is, that by no other hand do we see such wonderful
perfection of details, and it is a work of supererogation to refer to them ; although we
cannot but examine with wondering admiration the real velvet of the tiny shoes, the
wavy muslin of the frilled apron that a breath seems to disturb, and the real lace of
the old-fashioned ruffles round the tender arms. Unapproachable as they may be, and
shewing the perfection of the hand that drew them, still these details are not what
entrances the spectator, and enchains him to the spot. It is the surpassing loveliness
of the child's face that is the crowning grace of this admirable painting. Hogg's
charming lines come invohintarily to one's recollection—
" Kilmeny looked up with a lovely grace—
But nae smile was seen on Kilmeny's face ;
Ab still was her look, as still was her e'e,
As the stillness that lay on the emerant lea ;
For Kilmeny had been she knew not where,
And Kilmeny had seen what she could not declare."
Sweet thoughts are also with this little one; and although her attention is now
directed only to the difficult achievement of making successfully the slowly descending
curtsey, and the still more difficult matter of rising again to the perpendicular, still
we feel and know all that sweet face portrays,—true index to the mind within.
" Rare will she be, of goodly mould,
Of fairest type of womanhood."
So sang some old poet of a fair child of other days. Almost ethereal, and yet of
livin" flesh and blood, is this charming child of Millais.
THE   ATTEMPT. 117
We must now pass on to No. 162, South Octagon, by W. Douglas—" The Lady
and Hudibras." This picture is full of character and humour; but we prefer to
notice No. QIO, North Octagon, by the same artist—"Left Behind," which, for
genuine pathos of feeling, is a marvel of expression, and reminds us forcibly of one
of Millais' illustrations, where, in like manner, attitude and figure are made to ex¬
press all that unutterable grief, that complete abandonment to despair, which we are
apt to believe only the human countenance is able to give expression to. The young
wife, "left behind," has thrown herself against the rugged wall, and lies prone and
despairing, in that utter desolation of the heart with which the stranger inter-
meddleth not. The accessories are all in good keeping. The cold, green sea; the
fast receding ship ; the long look-out,—all tell the same tale of loneliness and grief.
We must now look at No. 224—" Waiting at the Cross Road," by Erskine Nicol.
The sentiment of the scene before us lies in the contrast presented of comfortable
well-to-do-ism, and aged, but decent poverty. In the centre stands the English
traveller, buttoned up to the chin, coated and protected from the biting wind, while
by his side stands a poor old woman, decent and gentle in her poverty, with her old
cloak about her, protecting herself with one feeble hand from the frosty air, while
she extends the other for help from the traveller. The scene is entirely Irish,
and yet, without the slightest exaggeration, depicting the humour rather than the
buffoonery of the country. The Englishman has evidently had so much of beggars
and beggary, that, although a man of genial nature, he is tired of giving, and
resolutely rejects the appeal of the plaintive old woman, buttons up his pockets, and
stares right before him, in hopes that the anival of the mail-coach will deliver him
from such incessant appeals to his purse and feelings. The small post-boy to the
right is a true Hibernian, and the comical air of solemn patronage that he bestows
upon the blind piper, sitting on the stone, who, with wistful up-turned face, is follow¬
ing the air that the small but important functionary is whistling, is amusingly good.
The keen out-look of the busy post-office and sho];)keeper; the burly gamekeeper, with
his game and snuffing hounds around him; the pretty peasant taking leave of her old
father; and, in the distance, the village street and groups of Irish peasants, make up a
picture of Irish life, pleasant to the eye and interesting to the feelings. Thomas Fued
has two charming pictures,—33G, Great Room; and 587, North Octagon. Of the
two, we prefer the former, 336—" Pot Luck." 587, North Octagon—" Music hath
Charms, etc.," is also a capital picture. The peasant girl, shading her eyes at the cottage
door ; the young musician, charming her to forgetfulness of all the busy life within ; the
rough tyke at his feet, soothed also to a contented state of mind,—make up a picture
118 THE   ATTEMPT.
of rustic peace and contentment that are very pleasant to contemplate and muse over.
We now come to what, in the popular accej)tation of the word, is the " Picture of the
Exhibition," Sir Noel Paton's " Fairy Raid,"—which, however, may be familiar to
some of our readers, as it was exhibited in Mr Hill's Galleries last winter. This is
quite the finest specimen of Sir Noel's wondrous knowledge of " Fairyland." No
poet's fertile imaginings, no long-forgotten magic lore, but has here found life
and movement. Fairies, elves, mountain sprites, and woodland nymphs, are here
in all their magic loveliness. Brownies and Pixies, Trolls of the cave, and Will-
o'-the-Wisps of the air, all are here,—swarming, gambolling, leaping, flying, whirl¬
ing, creeping, sitting, standing, riding, walking, dancing. On the left hand of the
picture is a group of mortal children changelings dancing in a ring, and in the midst
of all this fairy revel is the Queen of the Fairies, followed by her gorgeous train,
and holding in her arms the blue-eyed babe,—the newly stolen changeling,—distinct in
its mortal immortality; not amazed out of its placidity at the uncanny spirits
around, yet drawing itself carefully from all elvish touch. The shrinking foot, the
doubled fist,—was ever open-eyed, wondering babe, so faithfully portrayed 1 We
deal simply with the story that the picture tells; but who would not linger over the
delicate foliage, the bright yet harmonious colouring—the exquisite grouping of the
heterogeneous and innumerable throng,—order springing out of disorder. But we
must of necessity pass on to No. 480—Great Room, " Nickar the Soulless," by the
same artist. This beautiful and strange picture at once arrests the spectator's
attention. The lonely weird-like scenery, the strange peculiar light, the solitary
star shining overhead, the luckless elf, "Nickar the Soulless."
He sits inconsolable. In the words of the original—he weeps, because for him
no Redeemer liveth !—"Waiting his destiny! Nickar the Soulless." Our readers
must perceive how difficult must be the rendering of the true sentiment of this
picture. The result is to the spectator a mingled feeling of pain and wonder,—
wonder at the skill with which the artist has accomplished this, and painful
sympathy with the forlorn genius of the stream, weeping for itself and by itself,—
" Friendless and foeless,
Waiting his destiny,—
Nickar the Soulless."
Our Royal Scottish Academy seems to act in the capacity of nursing-mother to
the generality of our Scottish artists. No sooner do they attain a certain reputation
under its fostering care, than off they fly and devote all their brighter efibrts
for exhibition in  the   Royal   Academy in London.      We  are glad to say, how-
THE   ATTEMPT. 119
ever. Sir Noel Paton is not of this number. He, as well as some others
of our native artists, still pitch their tents among us, and do not fail, as each
year comes round, to send us worthy and more worthy examples of their labour and
genius. We must now bring our musings to an end; but before doing so, we should
like to call attention to the " Water-colours," which this year are particularly fine.
We have often heard it remarked that Scotland is too poor a country to foster this
fine and delicate branch of art to its full perfection, and that Scottish patrons of the
fine arts are loth to spend sums upon water-colours, that would probably purchase a
more tangible and lasting possession in an oil painting; and therefore,not finding proper
encouragement, water-colours languish in this clime. No one will deny, however
time or false this taunt may be, that water-colours possess a peculiar and delicious
beauty of their own, that no oils can emulate or surpass; and we have more than one
in this year's Exhibition that fully support us in this view. For instance, take
that charming and perfect gem. No. 770—" Ruins on Inch Mahon, Isle of Mon-
teith," by Sam Bough. It is absolutely wonderful in its effiscts, and perfect in every
part. There is no cleverer or more perfect thing upon the walls. No. 769—" Edin¬
burgh, from the Echoing Rock," by Waller H. Paton, and we must remark en
passant of this artist, the lovely poetry of his landscapes, whether in oils or water-
colours; they are this year finer in sentiment and feeling than we have ever seen
from his hands. Also 760—" Arch of Titus, and Coliseum, Rome—Moonlight," John
M'Wliirter; and those two splendid figure pictures by John A. Houston, No. 678—a
" Kingsman," and No. 925—" On the Walls." The former is a wonderful thing,
and has a depth of colour and force of expression that oils could not surpass. No.
677—" The Gleaners," by Hugh Cameron, is as sweet a bit of child life and sunny
landscape as could be wished for; and with such specimens as these,—to which we
could add a whole host of names, whose pictures are in this year's Exhibition, if we
had space and time to do so,—it can never be said that Scotland is no patron of
water-colours, and that so delicate and lovely a branch of art will ever be allowed to
languish for want of due support and appreciation. M. E. T.
120 THE   ATTEMPT.
" Jisounta."
MARBLE BUST OP A BRIGAND S WIFE, CONDEMNED FOB LIFE TO THE GALLEYS.
Beautiful face, so sternly sad,
With sullen eyes, and with bended brow ;
Oh, what a tempest sweeps over thee now,
Of agonised hate, and passion mad !
The proud, strong mouth, with the haughty curve
Of the lithe, long upper-Hp, cruel as death,—
The stedfast chin that is lying beneath,—
The throbbing nostrils that heave and swell,
All alive with the power and nerve
That could bid thee pluck from its jewelled sheath
The vengeful dagger's keen-ground blade,
And thinist it with force, but given too well.
And with never the sign of pause or swerve.
To the heart of the foe that thy passion had made ;—
Ah ! the tale they tell of wrath and pride.
Of merciless jealousy, vengeance fell;
Of every feeling of good defied ;
Of womanly gentleness flung aside ;
Of pitiful whisperings stifled deep
In the burning anger that knew no sleep !
That boiling tide will never be stayed,
But will dash thee along in its downward leap,
Hopeless and helpless, till thou art laid,
Stranded upon the shores of life,—
A shattered wreck from thy self-made strife !
Mas Alta.
[The Editors regret that in consequence of a pressure on their space, the conclud¬
ing part of " Grumbling Peter" cannot be inserted till next number.]
THE   ATTEMPT. 121
Cfjc mnhnhu lobels.
We hear on all sides that the Waverley Novels are losing their popularity,—that
they are not much read in England, still less read in Scotland, and, strange to say,
are better known in France and Germany, than in the country where they gained
their first fame. In a certain sense, this statement cannot be denied,—another class
of fiction has succeeded to the popularity these Novels once enjoyed ; and we
must expect that, as a taste for the new kind of literature grows, the old romances
will more and more be left in the shade. It is curious and interesting to notice the
difference between tales written by authors of the old school, and those which come
out in the present day. Putting aside the whole stock of " Sensational Novels,"
wisely named, which, being devoid of literary merit, are not worth one moment's
consideration, let us consider the Avorks of the best fiction writers of the last twenty
years. It must strike the most casual observer that they are, in great measure,
novels of character,—that is to say, the interest of the story hangs from first to last
upon the way in which its characters develope. The plot is generally simple, and in
some instances, can scarcely be called a plot at all; as for example, in the writings
of George MacDonald, daily becoming more popular, which gather none of their
interest from exciting events or hairbreadth escapes, but are often nothing more
than simple chronicles of homely lives. He will take some trifling incident, it
scarcely matters what,—three children playing with a toy boat, a little beggar girl
falling asleep in Madame Tussaud's Waxwork Exhibition,—and reveal a depth of
meaning and poetry in it which opens your eyes for sometime after to the beauty
lying hidden and unsuspected in common things. His motto seems to be—" What
God hath cleansed, that call not thou common." Nothing in human nature is unin¬
teresting to him: he will engage, without any help from plots and secrets and marvel¬
lous discoveries, to write a story which shall rivet the attention of all who open it,
simply by his delicate insight into character, and his wonderful power of making
what he sees visible to other people.
In the Waverley Novels, there is an absence of this accurate delineation. The
characters are powerful and true to nature, but they are dashed off with the touch
of a master's pencil. There is none of the delicate shading and careful defining,
carried almost to weariness, as we see it in the tales of MacDonald, Mrs Gaskell, and
Miss Bronte. In most of Sir Walter's Novels there is a villain,—one character
who is marked out from all the rest by his atrocity, who is represented as being dead
122 THE   ATTEMPT.
to every feeling of truth or goodness, and past all possibility of reform. Lady
Ashton superintends the torture of her victim, without one touch of compassion,
though the unfortunate sufferer is her own daughter. Varney watches the dying
struggles of Amy Robsart as unconcernedly as if she were a pointer dog. Eashleigh
Osbaldistone dies as he lived, a hardened reprobate, no word of regret or prayer for
pardon on his lips. We turn from these characters with shuddering antipathy. It
seems as if they were made of other flesh and blood than our own ; and we console
ourselves by saying that the author has trespassed beyond the bounds of possibility
in depicting such wretches ; or if convinced that they are not merely phantoms of an
over-heated fancy, but have had their types in humanity, are willing to consider
them as shut otit from the rest of the world by a dreary fate, which, while it con¬
demned them to be what they were, prevents us from falling to the same depth.
Just as theologians of a certain school draw a line between the elect and the non-
elect, so are we apt to separate the evil from the good, and to imagine that such
characters have nothing in common with ourselves but mere humanity.
The influence of the present style of writing is widely different. Wlien an
author of this school describes a wicked and hardened character, he takes us back to
the very beginning,—sketches his childhood, and shows us the influences which were
at work with him from his earliest years. We are admitted into the inner secrets
of his heart, and watch the struggle that takes place between innocence, a natural
love of goodness, and the temptations which are too strong for him. No one can
read the history of such a straggle, without feeling his deepest sympathies aroused.
It touches us too nearly for indifference: we instinctively place ourselves in the same
position, and wonder whether, under such difficulties, our own principles would stand
firm. When at last we see the gradual defeat and falling away, and watch one virtue
after another decaying, a host of fresh vices springing up to take its place,—our pity for
the sinner is as great as our hatred for the sin; we look upon him not as a creature of
another frame to ourselves, biit a companion, a fellow-sufferer, who, by his fall, has
only shown us what we, in other circumstances, and with fewer restraints, might have
been. It is impossible to feel unmitigated hatred for a man, when we have revealed
to us the remorse which cats into his heart like a canker; the passionate recollection
of purer days, which now only adds to his despair; the moments he knows of sadness
and reflection, when it needs only a hand held out, to lift him from his degradation.
Hearing of all this, we pity and wonder,—but dare not condemn.
These are regions where Scott never takes us. I think I only remember one
character in which something of this struggle is exhibited,—that of Brian de Bois
o
THE   ATTEMPT. 123
Guilbert in " Ivanhoe." A few more there may be : there is a feeble fight between
good and evil in the selfish heart of Leicester; Nanty Ewart, in the novel of "E,ed-
gaunlet," might be considered an exception, but these are so few as almost to prove
the iiile. Scott is content to tell us what a man was, without describing the process
by which he arrived at such a conclusion; he is satisfied by recording his actions,
and does not enter into long metaphysical explanations of the motives which went
before, and made him act. In this respect he resembles Shakespeare, so much is left
for the reader to make out for himself. He has before him living pictures of men,
women, and children, about whom he forms all kinds of conjectures, wondering what
their past lives were, and what influences had been acting upon them, almost
wondering what they would have done, had they lived in another time, or under
different circumstances. This is why a talk about the Waverley Novels, among
people who are familiar with them, seems as if it could never cease; each one
observes something that the other overlooked ; there is room for various interpreta¬
tions, and material for endless discussions ; they appear inexhaustible in their riches,
and no amount of criticism impairs their beauty.
Another point the Waverley Novels have in common with Shakespeare's plays is,
the interest they inspire in foreigners. There is nothing peculiarly national about them;
they are true to human nature all the world over. English people lose mvich of their
beauty by an inability to appreciate the Scotch tongue, but this difhculty is removed
when they are translated into French and German. For these reasons, I cannot
believe that their popularity will ever be seriously diminished ; they are always
favourites in early life, and it seems to me, that as people grow older, they lose their
taste for such novels as are celebrated now, and return to the breezy, cheerful pages of
Sir Walter Scott. They have more or less willingly studied human characters all
their lives, and have generally seen enough to weary them; what they want is rest
and refreshment, which cannot be obtained in reading metaphysical discussions or
conversations about theology and politics. There are few people who, after a certain
stage in their lives is reached, would not prefer setting out on a journey of ])leasure
with Darsie Latimer, than following Romola's course from darkness to light, over a
path where each step towards victory is made at the cost of mortal anguish ; and still
fewer are they, who, after a number of years spent in the world, would not like
better to dine with Robin Hood in Sherwood Forest, than to accompany Thackeray's
heroes and heroines into the streets of "Vanity Fair."
Tlie best way of understanding the Waverley Novels, is to take a few as tj^pea
of the rest.     "The Bride of Lammermoor," as a tragedy, stands alone.   In order
124 THE   ATTE-MPT.
fully to appreciate its beauty, we should consider what, in other hands, it might have
been made. How easily could this story have sunk to the level of an ordinary sensa¬
tional novel, fit only to rank with those yellow-covered romances which cz-owd every
railway book-stall, and whose titles are sufficiently unpleasant to deter any one, with
a natural and simple taste, from opening them. Let us thank the happy fate which
gave us the stoiy of the Bride, in all its pathos, from the pen of Sir Walter
Scott, and preserved it from the profaning touch of Mr Wilkie Collins and his
like. In his hands it has risen from the level of a frightful tale, to rank with
some of the best tragedies ever composed. Throughout the book there is a
simplicity and absence of horror, for horror's sake, which gives it dignity, and adds to
the pathos; there is no extravagance in the expressions used by the author; nor does
he say a word too much, but gradually allows the story to unfold itself, until the
awful climax is reached. Here, as I believe is the case in the Greek tragedies, we
see circumstances conquering men. The principal characters seem acting under a spell;
they struggle against their destiny, but, like sleepei-s in a night-mare, no eiForts avail
to deliver them. In the description of the three old women, the peculiar nature of
Sir Walter Scott is shown, who, with a true poet's feeling, never liked making any of
his charactei's coarse when he could avoid it. In spite of the loatliing they inspire,
there is a veil of poetry thrown over these old hags, which shields their deformity,
and softens the disgust we feel in reading about them. They resemble in some re¬
spects the witches in " Macbeth." Their giim uneai'thly faces and wild talk add fresh
horror to the tale ; but though we turn from them shuddering, it is less with disgust
than fear. They do not " leave a disagreeable taste in one's mouth," as Miss Bronte
expressively said of some of Balzac's characters—they are too unearthly, and too far
removed from human beings for this. Into the midst of the gloom which overhangs
the story, comes the character of Caleb Balderston, one of the most "facetious," to
borrow his own expression, that the whole set of novels contains. Yet there is no
discrepancy between his fun, racy as it is, and the sombre nature of the tale. He is
so well described, and his talk occurs at such oj)portune periods, that the most
critical taste could scarcely be offended.
" Ivanhoe" may be taken as a type of Sir Walter's romance writing ; " Kenil-
worth" as more purely a drama ; and " Guy Mannering" and " The Heart of Mid¬
lothian" as the most complete specimens of novels, accordmg to our usual acceptation of
the term. An especial charm seems to hang over the romance of *' Ivanhoe." It is a
very sunny tale, notwithstanding the dark threads interwoven with its brightness.
Rebecca has  alwavs   seemed  to   me  the finest female  character Sir Walter ever
THE   ATTEMPT. 125
described,—the beautiful union of strength and sweetness in her actions must strike
every one.     She appears as queenly when about to be burnt for a witch in the lists
at Templestowe, as ever she had done when decked with jewels at the tournament of
Ashby.    Shame and contempt do not hurt her ; flattery and homage scarcely seem to
touch her.     She rises above them all,—her dignity never more aj)parent than in the
midst of disgrace ; her gentleness never so striking as when she is the envy of all
beholders.   Some novelists have succeeded in depicting female characters as grand as
Rebecca's, but they generally fail in one point—their heroines are too hard :  we
miss the touch of softness which fascinates us in the Jewess.    She carries her woman¬
hood as a crown,—it is the secret of her courage.   She is only brave in circumstances
when  a woman, if true to  herself, would be brave;  in all cases where masculine
courage is required, she breaks down.    This is shown in the terror and disgust with
which she turns fi'om the window, where Ivauhoe is urging her to watch the fight;
in her distress during the tournament, when he is in danger (though living at a time
when ladies delighted in such sights) ;  and in her agonized shrieks when the Templar
carries her away from the burning castle.    Kovvena does not show lo advantage be¬
side Rebecca,—the contrast between her acquired dignity and the natural queenliness
of the Jewess is too striking.    There is a curious scene between her and De Bracy,
after the sacking of Front de Bceuf s fortress, in which her assumption of grand airs
is very amusingly described.     She is exacting, and takes homage as her due, even
while she betrays the pleasure it affords her vanity.    Rebecca, on the other hand,
receives it with the simplicity of one to whom such attention is natural; she takes
it quietly as a queen ; but, when it is withheld, is none the less queenly.    These things
are like the jewels which only serve to show off beauty—they can neither enhance
nor impair it.    I cannot agree with those who say that the book gives a good picture
of the days of chivalry ; a picture cannot be good, without being in some degree true,
and the impression " Ivanhoe " leaves behind, of the times about which it was written
seems to me as false as it is delightful.     I remember, after reading it, when I felt
very enthusiastic about the knights and their deeds of prowess, some more authentic
histoiy  came   in my way,   containing  a description of a banquet at which King
Richard was present, copied from an old chronicle or ballad of the time.    It is not
pretty enough to repeat; let it be sufhcient to say that the account it gave of Coeur
de Lion and his companions resembled more one's concejition of Polyphemus and the
Cyclops, than the gallant chivalrous heroes of Sir Walter's novel.    It recalled a say¬
ing of Mrs Stowe's, that she believed the people who cried over Wallace in Miss
Porter's story, would have been in consternation had they seen the real man.     Still
126 THE  ATTEMPT.
one does not care to peer too closely into errors of this kind (if they be errors); the
spirit of the age has been caught, and the veil of our own refinement thrown over it.
" Guy Mannering" was almost entirely written in six weeks, at Christmas time,
a fact which perhaps accounts for the wonderful compactness of the story. The plot
is brilliantly worked out; the characters as life-like as in any of his former novels ;
and the supernatural element in which he delights most delicately introduced.
But, instead of discussing the Waverley Novels, let us call to mind the days
when they first opened their treasures to us,—when Jeanie Deans and Flora Mac-
Ivor became our intimate friends; when we escaped with Queen Mary from Loch-
leven Castle, or passed long summer afternoons in the Antiquary's study. Delightful
days ! when there was no reluctance to avow ourselves Jacobites, nor shame in adopt¬
ing Queen Mary's cause ; when conscientious scruples did not prevent us from
laughing at old Mause and Gabriel Kettledrummle, even while we sympathised With
Henry Morton and detested Claverhouse. Those days of enchantment soon pass,
and are genei-ally followed by a time when the new class of literature is much more
inviting, until it has done its work, and people return to their first and last favour¬
ites, the novels of Sir Walter Scott. The attempt which is being made to revive
Richardson's novels, though they may be welcomed as improvements upon some of
the books in favour now, shows in what direction we are going. Sooner or later the
re-action must come, though it may not begin until we are plunged into the abyss
from which Scott rescued a former generation, and need the aid of another genius,
who, by introducing purer and more healthy tastes, will sweep clean the shelves of
libraries and bookstalls, to make room for fictions of a nobler stamp. The misfortune
has been, that those writers of the present scliool wlio handled great social questions
in books, whose influence for good cannot be calculated, were followed by a host of
imitators, touching on the same topics, without the same genius, and writing merely
for temporary fame. As might have been expected, they brought discredit, in many
circles, upon the books they endeavoured to copy, and destroyed much of the good
which would naturally have resulted from them. Like most true geniuses. Sir
Walter Scott felt deeply his responsibility before God for the use of his talents. It is
refreshing to turn away from the idle fiction-mongers, who are so plentiful now, and
read the dying words of the great author, as Lockhart reports them :---" I am draw¬
ing near to the close of my career. I am fast shufiling ofi" the stage. I have been, per¬
haps, the most voluminous author of the day, and it is a comfort to me that I liave
tried to unsettle no man's faith, to corrupt no man's principle, that I have written
nothing which on my deathbed I could wish blotted out." R. N.
THE   ATTEMPT. 127
"CIj«   gaishs
" The daisies 1 the daisies ! my little ones cry,
And their young, beaming faces are bright as the sky;
The daisies ! the daisies ! the winter is past,
And the flowers and the sunshine are coming at last.
No fears for the future my little ones feel,
No thought that the cold winds may yet o'er us steal ;
The spring has poured forth her best gifts at their feet.
The daisies are come, and what flower is so sweet 1
My May flowers ! my blossoms ! my birds of the spring
How sweetly, how clearly, those young voices ring.
These are greetings to Nature which He must approve.
Who gives them emotions of beauty and love.
Still, still be the sweet, simple flower their delight,
More precious than gold in their innocent sight;
They are laying up treasures of heaven-taught truth.
The blos.soms of childhood, the sweet flowers of youth.
It will guard them from evil and keep them from ill.
To cherish the flower of simplicity still,
Then let us respond as their sweet voices sing—
The daisies! the daisies ! are come with the spring.
E. H. S.
128 THE   ATTEMPT.
P;n Sister "ITnmrc.
Part III.
Poor little Tommy Carter, one of the orphans I mentioned before, died that after¬
noon, and as his sisters were now in a fair way to recover, I was not required
at their cottage after nightfall. Minnie went early to her room, but I felt anxious
and unhappy about Jack and Davie, and was unwilling to go to rest till I had
seen them, and heard what they had to report; so I lay dozing on the drawing-
room sofa, every now and then waking with a start, and then again sinking into an
uneasy sleep. Suddenly the drawing-room door burst violently open, and I sprang
up wide awake. To my utter astonishment, Harry Wyvill entered the room ! His
dress was disordered, his hair hung wildly over his face, which was deadly pale, and
he showed in his looks and behaviour tokens of the greatest mental distress. He
grasped both my hands, and poured out a broken series of entreaties and exclama¬
tions, begging me to forgive him—not to let Minnie know—not to be alarmed, for
it might end well yet—and so on, till I was half-frightened by his vehement and inco¬
herent manner, and moved as if to leave the room. But he sprang to the door.
" Don't go, Mrs Somers,—oh don't, don't look out!"
"Not look out? What is the matter? oh, where is Jack?" cried I; and I flew
past Hany Wyvill, and through the house porch ; and there, just inside the garden-
gate, I saw Jack and Dr Irwin coming slowly towards the house, carrying between
them my brother Davie, bleeding and insensible.
Next morning Jack told me how it had happened. Davie left, after the conversa¬
tion with me, mentioned a little way back, to visit the patients at Hartley. In
Hartley Lane he again met Harry Wyvill riding with Miss Tyrell, and responded
rather coldly to Harry's greeting. His professional duties carried him several miles
beyond Hartley, and 2)assing through tlie village on his return, the idea suddenly
occurred to him to go up to the Manor House, demand an interview with Harry,
and " have it out" there and then. To form a plan, and to put it into execution,
generally meant the same thing with Davie, and he was in the drawing-room at the
Manor House before he could have had any definite idea of what he was to say to
THE   ATTEMPT. 129
Harry Wyvill, or what was the result to be obtained from the interview. The ser¬
vant showed him into the drawing-room, and went to look for Mr Wyvill: but
Davie had not been many minutes in the room when he heard voices in the conser¬
vatory, which he recognised to be those of Mr Wyvill and Miss Tyrrel. (Jack had
heard the story from Harry Wyvill himself, so that this part of it was not quite clear.)
But this much we understood, that before Davie could make known his presence, he
had heard Harry address Miss Tyrrell in language which Davie conceived to be very
far beyond what politeness and friendship required, and which had the immediate
effect of sending him into a towering passion—never very difficult to do. He
entered the conservatory looking black as night, and bowing coldly to Miss Tyrrel,
requested a few moments conversation witli Harry Wyvill, who replied tliat he was
just about to start for Barden, but would be happy to ride at a foot-pace for some
wa}'-, if the " conversation" was in any hurry. Davie consented, but preserved a
" dour" silence until they were outside the Manor gates, when he broke forth with
all his pent-up reproaches, and demanded an explanation. Harry said " none was
required." Davie grew more and more violent; Harry lost his temper too, and was
just going to set spurs to his horse, and gallop off, when Davie laid hold of the reins.
Harry, enraged at this attempt to detain him, seized Davie by the collar, and hurled
him backwards ; he fell heavily, and his head struck violently against the rough
stone wall at the side of the road. Harry dismounted, and found him quite insen¬
sible. Horrified beyond measure at the result of his violence, he was no less per¬
plexed as to the best course to adopt; but they were very near the place where
Hartley Lane strikes into the Sutton Road ; and about five minutes after Davie had
fallen, Dr Irwin came down the road in the gig, into which they lifted Davie, and
drove slowly home.    Jack met them in Barden Lane.
Jack and Dr Irwin assured us that Davie was in no danger, although very
badly hurt; for, besides the blow on his he.id, he had fallen with one of his arms
doubled under him, and broken it just above the elbow; he was to be kept very
quiet, and not allowed to talk.
" And what shall I say to Minnie, Jack V I inquired.
" Tell her just what I've told you," said he, " the truth's always best, and
Minnie is a good, patient girl."
And Jack rose and went out. One of the Hall grooms met him at the garden
gate, and after a few moments' conversation with the man, Jack took the short cut
to the Hall, instead of going down to the village. What could it be 1 thought I;
but Minnie entered at that moment, and I forgot all but the painful task of relating
Q
130 THE  ATTEMPT.
to her the history of yesterday. She heard me quietly to the end; then going to the
bed, she patted Davie's head, saying, " Poor Davie, he meant to help me !" and then
left the room as quietly as she had entered it,—not another word, nor a sigh, nor a tear !
I was amazed! O ! if I had been Minnie, and Jack had been Harry—-bat then
Jack would never have behaved as Harry had done. Well ! but if I had been
Minnie, and Harry had been himself—but then I could nevej- have fallen in love with
him. How am I to arrange the hypothesis 1 Come ! supposing I were Minnie,
and supposing, by some awful stretch of imagination, that Jack had behaved as
Harry had done, do you suppose I should have waited quietly as Minnie was doino-.
I can assure you that in a very few moments I should have made the house too hot
to hold me. How I should have raged and stormed, and cried and sobbed, and
abused first Harry and then Davie, and then both together ! I'd have reproached
my sister and insulted my brother-in-law, and banged the doors and kicked the cat,
and very likely ended by letting down my back-hair, and going mad in the front
garden. But then I always had a very quick temper. I can never be sufficiently
thankful that I mai-ried a man like Jack, who not only never loses his own temper,
but never gives me the slightest temptation to lose mine. Still, quiet as Minnie
always was, there was about her to-day a quiet firmness, a dignified tranquillity, quite
new to her, and, as I have already said, I was amazed. In the midst of this amaze
I saw Jack coming up the garden path : he beckoned to me, and I ran down stairs.
" Jeanie," said he, " here's a bad business; Harry Wyvill's taken the fever."
I felt a hand on my arm,—it was Minnie !
" Is he very ill. Jack ?" said she, " tell me all about it, please."
Jack hesitated, but I remembered his words to me that morning. " Jack," said
I, " truth's always best, and Minnie's a good patient girl—a brave girl too."
" He is very ill, Minnie, dear," said Jack ; " but I think we may bring liim
through yet; he has youth and strength in his favour—we'll hope the best, Minnie."
" We'll hope the best," repeated Minnie, and went back into the house, so calm
and quiet, so tranquil and patient, that I looked after her in wonder; and with a
heavy heart, I went upstaii's again to Davie's room. Deep emotion alone could
have changed the girl thus in four-and-twenty hours ; and her patience and resigna¬
tion showed more clearly than any paroxysm of grief could have done, how tei-ribly
she felt the weight of the double trial that had come upon her.
I need not tell you of the weary days and nights that followed ; of the ups and
THE  ATTEMPT. 131
downs of the invalids, their disheartening relapses, and their gi-adual recovery (for
they both recovered, Harry Wyvill very slowly, Davie more rapidly and satis¬
factorily) ; nor need I say more of Minnie's conduct during the terrible period of
anxiety, save that its uncomplaining patience and self-forgetfulness justly entitle her
to the name of a heroine ; but I shall pass on to the 11th of October, about five
weeks after Harry Wyvill was taken ill. By this time, our village and those in the
neighbourhood were almost entirely free of the fever ; only a few straggling cases
now remained; but Dr Irwin was still with us, as Jack found it impossible to attend
both to his own and Dr Carleton's patients. Davie was himself again, and he and
Minnie were to return to Edinburgh next day, the 12th of the month. Well, on
the 11th, I was working in the drawing-room; Dr Irwin sat reading the news¬
paper, waiting for the gig to be brought to the gate, when the Hall carriage drove
up, and Harry Wyvill got out, looking feeble, and very thin, but better than I had
expected to see him. It was a most embarrassing meeting. After a few questions
and answers as to his health, I felt utterly stranded. I ventured a few inane, and
I fear contradictory remarks on the weather; but Mr Wyvill did not follow them
up, only cleared his throat as if preparatory to some burst of eloquence; but his
courage always appeared to fail him, and the eloquence never came. I looked to
Dr Irwin for aid, but he had basely retired from the field, leaving me to bear the
brunt, and he sat almost concealed behind his newspaper. Suddenly he gave a loud
exclamation of surprise. " Mrs Somers! have you heard of this 1 Sir William
Ellesniere married yesterday to Miss Caroline Tyrrel !" "Hooray!" cried Mr
Wyvill, suddenly springing from his chair, and knocking my work-basket into the
middle of the room, " I beg your pardon, Mrs Somers, but I am really so
astonished, and delighted, and—I really scarcely know how to explain myself"
Apparently he thought the easiest way to explain himself was to shake hands with
Dr Irwin, which he did violently several times in close succession, the doctor sub¬
mitting to the operation with the utmost gravity.
" I came here this morning," continued Mr Wyvill, when he had become a
little more composed, " with only one distinct idea in my head, and that wa"s, that I
was the most miserable rascal in creation; and suddenly the difficulty removes
itself ! It's enough to bewilder any man." (It certainly seemed more than enough to
bewilder him.)
" By 'the difficulty,'" said I, as coolly as I could, " 1 suppose you mean Miss
Tyrrel ?"
" I do," rejjlied he, with great vehemence, " and she was a difficulty with a
132 THE   ATTEMPT.
vengeance ! To tell you the whole truth, Mrs Somers, four or live years ago, before
I had ever seen Minnie, I used to admire Miss Tyrrel very much—dance with her,
and ride with her, and all that sort of thing. Well, when I went to Hartley
Manor, the first day I was there, she began talking about " dear old times," and
" undeveloped friendships," and all sorts of nonsense like that, till she made quite a
romantic story of it. I was an awful fool not to see what a scrape I was getting
into ; but everybody there was wild about her, and so T felt rather flattered, and so
it went on from bad to worse, till J really believe she bewitched me—it must have
been that, for I never was a bit fond of her. But her eyes, and her voice, and all
that, turned my head, I think ; and she's so confoundedly clever, Mrs Somers ; she
remembered every word I said, and twisted it till it meant ten times as much as I
meant. I was beginning to be uncommonly miserable, but I didn't know how to
get away ; and then Davie came. I knew he was quite right, but he came down on
me so sharply that I lost my temper, and behaved like a brute. O ! Mrs Somers,
I'm awfully ashamed of myself! I've got a lesson I shall never forget. If you
would only say a word for me to Davie ; and, Mrs Somers, do you think Minnie
will ever speak to me again 1"
" I think I can answer for Davie," said I, restraining a strong inclination to
get up and dance round the room, " but Minnie must speak for herself,—you have
behaved very badly to her, Mr Wyvill ; you must plead your own cause ^vith her ;
and I shouldn't wonder if you found her in the garden just now."
I knew that would be quite enough. He was off instantly, through the open
window, at a i)ace very unsuitable to his character of invalid. How he managed it
I do not know ; but when he and Minnie appeared at luncheon two hours after¬
wards,—the last six weeks, and Miss Caroline Tyrrel (Lady Ellesmere I should call
her), seemed as completely forgotten as if they had never existed; and it would have
been hard to find a merrier party than we were that day.
Harry Wyvill was right; he had received a lesson which he never forgot, and
indecision and violence of temper, the two great faults of his character, he fiom that
time set himself earnestly to correct, with such success, that if he goes on as he is
doing, and lives to a good old age, I should not wonder to see his temper, before he
dies, stand comparison with Jack's ; but, of course, he has still much to make up.
He and Minnie were married in Edinburgh in November, as we had originally fixed.
Jack and I went north to be present at the ceremony, and Davie was best-man.
Davie and Harry are the best of friends, which is a great blessing, on more accounts
than one ; for old Doctor Carleton, after his accident, never resumed active profes-
THE   ATTEMPT. 133
sional work, and Davie, who had found great favour in his eyes during the summer,
has come to Sutton as Dr Carleton's assistant; so we shall be near neighbours to
each other and the Hall.
Jack and I have been at the Hall at a large Chistmas party—Minnie's first
"state dinner," at which she acquitted herself to the wonder and admiration of Ja.ck,
Davie, and myself, the great satisfaction of her other guests, and the delight of her
husband. Sir William and Lady Ellesmere (or, as everybody calls them, Lady
Ellesmere and her husband) were there. She is more beautiful than ever, and her
voice is the; grandest I ever heard. Her conversation on every variety of subject is
brilliant and intellectual to a very unusual degree ; and her manner is affability
itself to every one but—Sir William, whom she treats with a sort of contemptuous
pity. But all her spells have lost their power over Harry Wyvill, who now declares
that Lady EUesmere's beauty has been much over-rated ! So I could afford to
admire her, and I did it to my heart's content, and was quite charmed with the way
she spoke of Davie—(" So delighted to have Dr Cunningham settled near us, Mrs
Somers ! a young man of such talent, and such an acquisition to our society !")—and
I was only sorry she did not bestow a few more of her smiles on her husband, whose
mission in life, so far as I could see, appeared to be to carry her music-book, and to
stand beside her chair.
" What do you think of Lady Ellesmere, Jack?" said I, as we were walking
home that night.
" She's a regular Sultana," answered Jack, though how he could compare her to
a Turk I cannot imagine.
" Aiid what do you think of Sir William V
" He's an unmitigated duffer," replied my oracular husband.
"She does manage him dreadfully, Jack."
"It's all for his good," rejoined the oracle. "The fellow's incapable of managing
himself to any useful or ornamental purpose." And, certainly, that was veiy
true.
We reached our own door, and turned to look for a minute at the frosty starlit
night, only for a minute, for the cold was piercing. How different from the heavy
sultry night of the former dinner-party at the Hall! and how different, too, were
my feelings this Chistmas evening ! TJmt night was the beginning of my serious
fears for Minnie's happiness—the first of many nights and days of anxiety, not for
my sister alone, but for my brother and husband, and many a poor, fever-stricken
neighbour.    Now all that was happily over.    The fever was gone, and neither Jack
134 THE   ATTEMPT.
nor Davie had suffered in the discharge of their duty; while, as to the Wyvills,
I felt well assured that their time of trouble had not only tried, but imjjroved
and strengthened them ; and that the probabilities of my sister Minnie's happiness
were now such as to lay to rest my most importunate misgivings.
Dido.
The End.
Chapter IV.—Social Life.
" Within the old baronial haUs,
Within the massy fortressed walls—
Where life alone was safe."
We have already seen the training considered necessary to the muscular develop¬
ment of the Knight, as well as that which conduced to his moral perfection and
knightly refinement; and we must now notice, though but very briefly and imper¬
fectly, the effect of the social life of his times upon him.    From his earliest infancy
he was taught respect for all superiors, consideration and affection for all his equals,—
reverence for all things great and good, high and noble, Christian and pure.    But we
must acknowledge that whether directly taught or not, he soon learned to hold in
supreme contempt, what he scornfully called the baser herd.    He forbore to kill
or annoy them, as a man would forbear to kill or torment flies,—because of the
degiadation such deeds would be to his own nobler mind—not for the sake of the flies
or serfs.    He  had no  sympathy with them, no feeling for them, seldom even pity ;
nothing but an indifference so complete and calm, that it required to be roused to be
kindled even to contempt.   But amongst his equals, or those who shared like him " the
blessings of the gentle blood," his nature blossomed out in strongest feeling.     Family
bonds and affection were strong, but they were sometimes weak compared to the ties
of love and generosity which bound him to  his friend, his brother by choice.    He
often shared in a love like that of David and Jonathan, passing the love of woman.
Sometimes it was for the son of the knight at whose house he had been trained, or
for some other peer, who had been fellow-page, and squire, and knight,—rising with
him through each  step to promotion, and emulating him by noble example; or a
THE   ATTEMPT. 135
worthy and long equal combat might have ended in a hard-won victory and stoutly
contested defeat,
" And the stern joy that warriors feel
In foemen worthy of their steel,"
might have melted into an admiration that sought satisfaction in a lasting friendship
and an oath of aifection. Or one in dire danger, encompassed by fearful odds, sees
flying recklessly to his help some unknown valiant knight, who, side to side and foot
to foot, fights with him, cheers him, bears him up, until the two together make the
foemen fly—and panting, turn to look upon each other's faces. Then gratitude on
one side, and the joy of giving help upon the other, aid the admiration produced by
the deeds each other did, and blessing the knightly laws that bid men succour the
oppressed, they swear brotherhood in arms for evermore. When fair Nina had
brought Prince Arthur to free her Red-Cross Knight,—
" Then those two knights, fast friendship for to bind,
And love establish each to other true—
Gave goodly gifts, the signs of grateful mind,
And eke, as pledges firm, right hands together jomed."
Companionship in arms was a habit borrowed originally from the Scandinavians—
who swore it in a solemn oath, drinking a goblet of each other's blood in confirmation
thereof. This custom still exists among the Albanians and other people on the
eastern shores of the Adriatic. The Christian knights who united their lots, shrunk
from this custom, and confirmed it with other rites, receiving together the holy
communion and the priest's patei"nal blessing. They generally divided their acquisi¬
tions, and even their honours. When a certain Kobert de Oily received from
William the First the honours of Oxford and St Walerius, he gave St Walerius to
his sword brother, Robert de Tuery. This bond was often entered into for a specific
purpose, either for a limited time or for life, and its obligations even surpassed the
knight's duty to womanhood.
The advantages of this association with a worthy friend may be easily known.
The high conversation, the noble emulation, the self-sacrificing affection, the satisfied
trust, the constant atmosphere of all chivalric thought. King Arthur discovered
its capabilities, and endeavoured to prove them on a mighty scale around himself,
and train—
" In that fail- order of my table round,
A glorious company, the flower of men—
To serve as model for the mighty world,
And be the fair beginning of a time."
136 THE   ATTEMPT.
Were ever knights so widely famed as they ? did any ever do like mighty deeds t
We have already noticed the force of the bond between one knight and that
other who had dubbed him so, old or young, king or baron. To him he yielded every
honour,—against him he never would lay lance in rest, though his inaction should
be at the risk of his own life. But the affection that most powerfully swayed the
knight, was the peculiar character of his devotion to womanhood.
In his mind, woman was a being with a mystic power, and of a nature differing
from his own,—more akin to, and conversant with, the spiritual world beyond.
This idea was increased by the idolatrous love and worship paid to the Virgin Mary,
and through her to her sex. So when a knight learned to love, he also reverenced
the object of his affection. Fickleness in him was a sin classed with impiety; dis¬
respect a fault unprovided for. His lady was no toy to be played with, but a
divinity to be worshipped, and to be worshipped through life and death. Loyalty
was the choicest, the most essential quality in the " preux chevalier." No penalty
was annexed to disobedience, as such a thing was deemed impossible, seeing that a
knight was permitted to break the rules of his order even, at his lady's command.
But she was too careful of his honour, ever to ask him to do anything that would be
reprobated by the society they moved in. The high idea formed thus of her
character and power, raised her almost to its level, as far as was possible to mortal.
Even until this day, we find men to be greatly what we expect them to be. Great
expectations plant the seeds of great results, and so it was then. In that more single-
minded, even-paced age-—the knight who expected his lady to be a goddess, found
her nearly so. His reverence naturally led him into some absurdities. Each knight
maintained, at the point of the lance, that his chosen love was the fairest lady known.
To us it seems that it would have been much wiser to have insisted that she was the
fairest for him; and then all might have been satisfied at once. But then many a
pleasant cause of displaying his bravery would have been lost; and he knew how
much his bravery did him service in winning his lady's affections. Indeed, in those
days, it was the one thing needful; it could atone for the want of every personal
grace. A damsel, who was once reproached with having loved an uncommonly ugly
man, replied—" He is so valiant, I have never looked in his face !" Indeed, if
bravery had no effect, the knight was at a loss how to proceed further.
Wo, in these modern days, might think other things as impoitant as bravery ;
and that, of itself, certainly not all-sufficient. But in those unsettled and lawless
times, nothing could give a woman a greater sense of security and tinist than a tried
and brave lover or husband, who was not only willing, but able, to defy the Avorld
THE   ATTEMPT. 137
in her defence. Further, she had a certain Avarranty of happiness with a " brave
knight," that we can hardly now realise. To be a " true knight" was of itself a
certificate of gentle birth and breeding, and of all the patent virtues ; while, to be a
"brave knight," ensured his honour, wealth and truth. Besides, the story of a
brave man's life never remained long hidden : his past deeds were fully sung, and
she might judge the future from the past. It generally proved the fact that knights
who were, like Bayard, " without fear," were also, like him, " without reproach."
And there is no doubt that a life of continued earnest action, and of simple aim,
would induce a tone of mind and feeling so high, that the test of fearless braveiy
would more often be proved satisfactory than the many tests by which women
would now wish to try their suitors. This plan was also useful when the fame of
any beauty had won for her such a crowd of suitors, that she knew not how to
choose the best among so many good. The tournament, or other trial of strength,
became to her a means of casting lots. Let us hope that, foi- the time being at least,
the right one was the mightiest. That he was not always successful we have many
a proof " A fair English maiden, in the reign of Edward the First, had so many
suitors, that she vowed she would only bestow her hand upon him who would keep
the perilous Castle of Douglas for a year and a day. Sir John Walton did so valiantly
for some months, but was slain in a sally into which Lord James Douglas had
provoked him. On him was found a letter, in which the maiden, commending his
bravery, declared herself satisfied, his honour complete, her heart his own, and asked
him to return to her." Alas ! for the sadness that must have darkened her after
life!
Occasionally, however, when the lady sent her admirers into needless risks,
merely to gratify her overweening pride and vanity, she was punished in the way
she deserved. Froissart tells that a young knight named Claribard went to the
splendid court of the Count of Foix, without having sworn faith to any lady. There
he saw two beauties,—Brunissenda, a proud and haughty dame ; and Isaura, soft and
gentle, between whom he hesitated for a time. Brunissenda could ill brook this; and
taking some trouble to attract him, she made him promise her to prove his bravery,
throwing him vainly into the greatest danger. His squire told him how she had
ever delighted in dealing thus with her knights, of whom many were dead, and some
still roaming abroad, performing her quest. He refused her favour in public with
scorn, delivering her a lectui-e upon her nnwomanliness,—that would punish her, if it
did not cure her; then, fixing Isaura's scarf upon his crest, he disclosed his
motto to all eyes—" Fixed at last !"     Doubtless, many other instances might have
138 THE   ATTEMPT.
been given us of the humiliation of the proud damgs whose vaunting ambition over¬
reached itself. To send a knight forth on any distant quest was not then the simple
thing it now might be. He was beset with dangers ; his path was not marked by a
king's highway, but lay through the wildering forest, or over the barren moor; in
peril by day and night, of nature and of man, of famine, of thirst and of disease.
To the lady who had
" Emptied hearth and home
Of life's light love,"
the time of separation was still more dismal, lasting as it did often for years. Sus¬
pense, but seldom-cheered, was her lot, for the means of communication were few and
not to be relied on ; and many a time a knight and his whole company might have
been destroyed, and not one left alive to tell the tale ; and so the sickening fear mirdit
often reasonably dash her hopes when she made ready for her love's return. And
the nature of her occupations did not tend to distract her mind from him. Her
exercise was limited to the court-yard, garden, or castle wall ; and such a thing as
forenoon visiting was a dissipation of time and thought then undiscovered.
True, all the domestic arrangements were under her supervision, and cookino-
and brewing, and distilling herb-waters and lotions, gave her many a busy hour.
Her needles were all kept bright. Her ordinary garments were very plain and
simple, but she embroidered richly the gay robes she kept for festivals, adorned with
intricate devices of bird and beast, of tree and flower; and as she wrought, she
doubtless hoped that when her knight returned, she should seem fairer in his eyes,
decked thus with the labour of her hands. Or she woukl work for him anew the
gorgeous scarf knights wore above their armour, lest her first gift should have
been frayed in war; or stitch another pennon with his arms, or put rich work upon
the gauntlet, sleeve, or scarf, he yet would wear for her sake; her favour in his
helmet. Or she might work a cover for his sliield, like sweet Elaine ; for she
would know its patterns all by heart. Or perhaps, less charming task—the matron,
head of all the house, who had already passed tlirough these youthful labours, and
had done them well, might be intent upon completing the more thrifty work of
arras, that she might have her chamber tapestried before her lord returned; and set
all her maidens down to forced tasks by her side. But through all these duties, made
so easy by constant use, she could always think and dream of him who was so far
away. Dream when she tripped about the silent halls; dream when she wi-ought for
him or herself; dream while she looked into the glowing fire or up to the night sky ;
dream while she fed her singing birds or patted his proud hounds ; dream while she
THE  ATTEMPT. 13'J
sung of other happy loves to her lone harp : and dream, while bowing before her
God, she bore him on her heart in earnest prayer.
But when he came again, there was a time of rejoicing and feasting in the hall,
and of gladness hidden in her heart. It was considered unmaidenly to show joy ;
and the signs that she could give of her interest in him, after all his toil for her,
were only to be read by lover's eyes. Indeed though the knight himself might
announce his love to the world, he might not descant much on the theme to his
lady, until they were betrothed. There was a great reserve, the natural fruit of the
reverence to woman, in all the behaviour of knights and ladies.
In marriage, though it was necessary that the parties should both be of gentle
birth, estate or perfect equality was not insisted upon. It was essential that there
should be an agreement in religion, though of course tlie only diversity possible in
the reign of chivalry in Europe, was in the Catholic or Mahometan. The brave
Moorish knights occasionally loved the Christian beauties, and we see, in Lock-
hart's Spanish Lays, the horror in which such unions were held. In the ballad of
King Estmere, we see him risk his life—
'' For pity it were that fair ladye,
Should marry a heathen hound."
The marriage ceremonies were very solemn, and the rejoicings very great; but,
in spite of the love he felt for his beautiful bride, the time seemed soon to hang
heavy on the hands of the active and ambitious knight. He was a great chess¬
player, and romantically fitted legends to the motions of the pieces on the board ;
especially to the knight that could alone, by his peculiar step, attack the fairy-
charmed castle, or unseen jjiotect his liege-lord the king, or the more j)owerful
queen. But he could not always play chess ; and would rush forth to hunting as to
something more akin to war. Then he would come back weary and heavy, laden
with his spoil, to his evening meal, accompanied by his friends. At such entertain¬
ments the knights reclined on benches round the table, and above the salt. Only one
plate was set for two people, and it was considered the greatest mark of friendship
or of love to share the plate of another. In spite of the want of many things that
we have now learned to deem necessities, they kept up a luxurious table. Pea¬
cocks were their favourite and peculiar delicacy. These, after they had been
cooked, had their plumage replaced, so that they might beautify the table. So much
were these birds held in honour, that the knights often swore by the peacock.
LuTEA Reseda.
140 THE  ATTEMPT.
Part IV.
It is not my purpose to give in full detail the lamentable history of the unhappy
Peter. Enough has already been written to prove that happiness does not consist
in power, and that the governed, if they only kn'ew it, are often far more to be envied
than the governors and rulers to whose functions they so often seek to attain. A
few words will therefore suffice to wind up tlie affairs of our friend Peter. I hope
the reader will recollect that we left the wretched man awakened from a fearful
slumber by the sound of many waters, and that a devastating flood was pouring its
murky torrents over the whole country. From the village rose shrieks of despair,
and peojjle were seen rushing wildly to and fro on such of the higher grounds as
were not yet submerged.
In this trying moment, Peter's presence of mind did not desert him. With quiet
decision, he at once ordered the flood to abate. Immediately the river fell, and by
day-break it was confined to its own proper channel. Peter walked forth in the
morning with a heavy heart. Ah ! what a change was there. His garden was as
the bed of a river, strewn with stones and broken branches. A few bare stumps
marked the site of his once flourishing orchard. Deep ruts were furrowed out on
the lawn, and scarce a blade of grass could be seen peeping above the mud and stones.
In the village all was consternation and dismay. Sturdy men stood gazing
with vacant look upon what had once been a tidy cottage and a pretty little garden.
Women rushed wildly after lost children, or sat disconsolately weeping. All seemed
paralysed with fear and grief. A few, more collected than the others, stood talking in
whispers of the flood.    As Peter passed, he heard one man say to another—
" And they say that yesterday the tide came in suddenly at that seaport place,
you know, and drowned more than a hundred people that were gathering sea-weed.
And they say "
Peter turned away sick at heart. " Oh ! what a fool I have been," he exclaimed,
as he retraced his footsteps to his own desolate house.
With heavy step he ascended the staii-case, and just as he was entering his room,
Betsy Jane came out of it.
" Oh ! master," she cried, " do just look at your head."
Peter rushed to the glass, and beheld, instead of the grizzled locks which had
hitherto adorned his head, a shock of snow--\\ lute hair.    He stood gazing in mute
THE   ATTEMPT. 141
despair, and was inclined to ask, with the old woman of the celebrated nursery rhyme,
—" Can this be me ? "
"I used to be stout and hale," he soliloquized, "and now I am gaunt and old-
looking : my eyes were bright enough, but now they are so heavy that I can hardly
open them. My hair is now white, my face furrowed with wrinkles, my step is
slow and feeble. I used to be happy,—although I used foolishly to suppose otherwise.
And what has wrought this change 1 My own mad^ incredible folly and wickedness.
Oh ! that I could be released from this intolerable bui'den."
As he spoke, a light touch fell on his drooping shoulders, and looking up, he saw
before him the beautiful creature that had appeared to him once before. A mocking
smile played around the vision's mouth, and pointing to the miserable landscape, she said—
"You have managed well, Peter."
Peter writhed beneath her light touch, and groaned deeply.
"How much better should I manage such things," continued the fairy, using
Peter's own words with a malicious emphasis ; and then, in a graver voice she added,
" Are you then willing to resign your power 'i "
"Yes, oh yes ! " cried Peter—" Take it back, I entreat of you, and never shall
you hear a murmur from my lips again.     Do take it back."
" I shall do so," replied the fairy, sadly,—" but never, never can I undo the evil
effects of your short reign. In due time the leaves may bud afresh, the fallen trees may
p\it forth new shoots, and this desolate country may once more be lovely and fruitful;
but never can I bring back the lives of those who have perished,—never "
" Spare me," ciied Peter, falling on his knees—" I repent. I am very miser¬
able.    If patience can atone "
" Patience can atone," said the fairy gently.    " Farewell."
And Peter was alone.
Of course, in a novel, any great crisis in the hero's history is followed by a
brain fever of frightful severity, in which the patient long hovers between life and
death. Peter was no exception to this universal rule ; but as no one ever heard of a
hero dying of brain fever, Peter conformed to this rule also,—and, after much nurs¬
ing and doctoring, recovered.
One fine morning, as he lay, weak and heljiless as a baby, but happy in the con¬
sciousness of returning health,—he heard a merry whistling in the garden, and the
sound as of a vigorous arm at work in raking the gravel walk beneath the window.
" Mrs Dumpling," said Peter languidly, to his worthy housekeeper, " surely
that stroke is too firm for our old gardener.    Who is it ?"
142 THE   ATTEMPT.
"Please, sir," said Mrs Dumpling, "when yon were ill I did not like the idea
of having nobody but that old fool to trust to,—so knowing as how my nephew Jim
is a good steady lad, willing to make himself useful, and tii-ed of the sea to the bar¬
gain,—which I must say it is an idle calling,—I made bold, sir, to fit up the little
attic, sir, and if you only knew of what use he has been, sir, and so anxious about
you, you would forgive the liberties took by an old servant, sir."
Peter smiled kindly. " Quite right, Mrs Dumpling," he said,—" could not have
been better."
Mrs Dumpling stared. Such unqualified approval had never before been
accorded to any plan of her's by her master.
" I'm afraid he'sweakish in the head yet," she said to herself. " It don't look
right; but I'll try him a bit."
Accordingly Mrs Dumpling strode across the floor with heavy steps, slammed
doors behind her, upset articles of furniture, and otherwise did all in her j^ower to
arouse the gi-umbling qualities of Peter, for the space of two or three days, but all to
no purpose.    Peter's temjier was angelic, and not to be ruiHed.
" It don't look right," she again said at the end of that time. " I'll try a ques¬
tion or two."    So accordingly she began.
" Doesn't that there light fell in your eyes, sir 1"
" Not at all," was the answer, " I like to see the light, it's a pleasant thing, and
does no one any harm."
" Doesn't the noise of Jim a-cutting that grass disturb you then, sir?"
" Not at ;ill, Mrs Dumpling," replied Peter, with his sweetest smile, " 'tis the
pleasantest sound in the world."
"Then, sir, you would surely like that there bluebottle removed. It's noise
is not agreeable, at any rate."
" Not jjarticularly, Mrs Dumpling, but I don't think either you or I could catch it,
so we must bear it.   What can't be cured must be endured, you know, Mrs Dumjsling."
" Did I ever !" exclaimed Mrs Dumjjling, with upraised hands and eyes.
"What is it, pray, Mrs Dumpling?" enquired Peter mildly.
" Oh ! nothing, sir, nothing," replied Mrs Dumpling, bending over her work
with renewed assiduity, " only jaerhaps, sir, you'll excuse all the noise and uproar as
I've been making the last few days."
" Noise and iq^roar!" echoed Peter, in much surprise, " I am sure I never noticed
any. You have been most kind and attentive to me,—and if I could give you any plea¬
sure, anything to reward your trouble, you know,—I should be most happy to do so."
THE   ATTEMPT. 143
" Dear sii-, there is one thing I should like so much ; hut knowing as how you
did not like to be put about "
" Go on, Mrs Dumpling, if you j)lease."
" Please, sir, might I have another servant under me?"
" Certainly, Mrs Dumpling ; l:)ut I always thought you objected to more than
one girl about the place."
" So I did, sir, and always shall."
" Then why do you want two 1"
'• I don't want two."
" What on earth do you mean, Mrs Dumpling?" cried Peter, becoming
excited.
" I don't want no girl along with Betsy Jane ; I want a girl instead of her.
That's what I want."
" Mrs Dumpling, is it possible you want to part with Betsy Jane 1"
"Quite possible, sir," was the answer, and a broad grin illumhied Mrs Dump¬
ling's rosy countenance.
" This is most unaccountable," cried Peter. " Why I thoiight you would as
soon think of losing your right hand, as of losing Betsy Jane."
" So I should, sir."
" But you want her to leave?"
" I do, and I don't, sir," was Mrs Dumpling's enigmatical answer.
It was a good proof of Peter's reformation that he bore this mysterious be¬
haviour on the part of Mrs Dumpling so well. He, however, gave vent to his
feelings in a tremendous sigh, and renewed his apparently endless cross-examination
with tolerable calmness.
" Mrs Dumpling," he began with solemnity, " wliex'e do you expect Betsy Jane
to go to?"
"That depends on you, sir."
"On me! how?"
" This way, six-," said the housekeeper, grinning more than ever. "You asked me,
you know, to name anything I was in particular set on. Now I'm set on Betsy
Jane leaving my kitchen,— and going to live in the white cottage at the foot of the
washing-green."
" Extraordinary !" exclaimed Peter.
" Yery," assented Mrs Dumpling jocosely, " but true."
Peter sighed again, and his toi-mentor continued,—
144 THE   ATTEMPT.
" There's only one other thing I'd like, sir, and that is to have Jim kept on as
under gardener."
Petsr gave a long, low whistle.
" Oh, that's it," said he, after a lengthened stare at Mrs Dumpling's face, which
was puckered up into all sorts of odd shapes, to prevent an explosion of laughter.
This laughter now burst forth, with a violence proportionate to the length of time it
had been restrained.
Peter joined in the hearty peals of the good housekeeper, and Betsy Jane in the
kitchen, and Jim in the garden, or rather, at the kitclien window, wondered what
could be the meaning of so much mirth, and laughed in concert.
Now, having referred to one habit of novelists and writers of different kinds
regarding their heroes, I shall mention another little trick they have, and then
humbly venture to use it myself. This little trick resembles an ingenious method
children have of obtaining possession of some coveted sweet, such as a knot of sugar
or a piece of cake. The little urchins fabricate a pretty little story of a certain
naughty little boy or girl, who was forbidden under severe penalties to touch sweet
things at table. At a certain part of the stoiy, a fat little hand is put forth, a pair
of blue eyes look slyly forth, and a little mouth, half smiling, half pouting, lisps—
" And what do you think that naughty child did ? He took it." This little incident
of nursery life is always recalled to me by the tantalizing way some authors have
of saying, for example,—
I shall not say how Betsy Jane was led blushing to the altar by our old friend
Peter, nor describe how Jim blushed far redder, and looked far less at ease than she.
Nor shall I tell of the gorgeous crimson shawl Mrs Dumpling wore, how important
she looked, and how she did not grin for very dignity and profundity of bliss.
Nor shall I inform the reader how Sarah Anne, Betsy Jane's cousin and Mrs
Dumpling's new handmaiden, acted bridesmaid; nor how a tall young man, Jim's
brother, was the groomsman. I shall leave it to the reader to imagine how Peter
feasted the villagers; how he never could get the guests to eat enough, iior be merry
enough. I shall not mention the future bliss of Jim and Betsy Jane in the white
cottage at the foot of the washing-green; nor mention how, in years to come, little
Dumplings took strange liberties with their grandaunt Dumpling.'
But one thing I will say, and that is, that Peter became a wiser and a better
man, and was known for his patience and goodness over the whole village ; and
how, in a wonderfully short time, jjeople forgot the very existence of that once
appropriate name—Grumbling Peter. Agnella.
THE  ATTEMPT. 14:5
Chapter V.—The Tournament.
" To other days my fancy went ;—
Called up the stirring tournament."—L. E. L.
Few as were the occupations or amusements of the knight in time of peace, we need
not wonder at the great importance he gave to the preparation for, and action in, the
Tournament.
There only could he satisfactorily display the result of his long training and
knightly exercise. In its mimic strife, war was freed from all its grossness, its im-
2>etuosity, its passion; there was no mel^e of crowding soldiers of the common rank
impeding his ambitious arm, no unseen archer to be feared, whose cloth-yard shaft
might shorten his hour of triumph by a blind death, unsweetened by revenge : he
had leisure to address himself to every point of knighthood, to display his coui'tesy
and his grace, as well as his valour ; he had no bitter feeling, he nourished no hate
and no revenge against the man with whom he fought, but rather the honoured and
honouring admiration men feel for their own virtues, reflected from another's face,
who are, what they would he. His reward was more sudden and sure; and let us
not now, in colder times, depreciate the love of glory that carried him through deeds
of high emprise—the very words had not then degenerated into the narrower
meaning they now bear. And a knight who shone in the lists, leapt at once into
fame and favour—and grasped his desire in the bud. There was no hearsay in the
proof he gave of what he was, to the bright eyes that bent so lovingly upon him ; no
doubt in the satisfaction to brother or to father looking on, that this youngest one
was indeed a worthy scion of their noble house. Nobles and kings looked favourably
upon him, pointing the road to fortune and more fame ; tried knights found he was
worthy to be taken as a friend; and some fair maiden trustfully believed that it
was well for her to give her life into such keeping. The nation also learned the
mightiest arm to follow in the time of war—and kept that arm in strength; as
King Arthur said of his own " Diamond Jousts,"—
" By nine years' proof, we needs must learn
Which is our mightiest, and ourselves shall grow
In use of arms and manhood."
s
146 THE   ATTEMPT.
How different from the fierce contest on the reeking battle-field of foreign lands;
where, it might be, encompassed with treachery, and placed at all disadvantage, he
saw his friends sink down one by one by liis side, and those he could not help, he
vowed must be revenged; so that, with head reeling with repeated blows, with
weariness and angry grief, his right arm still might do undreamt-of prodigies of
valour, and make all foemen fly. But there he took his rest, amid the horrors of
the bloody field that cost him far too dear ; his friends not won, but lost; his lady,
safe afar, unwitting of his danger or his deeds; and glory, when he most deserved,
eluding most, as Chaucer tells us in his House of Fame, the goddess can award
silence instead of fame, not for the man's deserts, but her own will. For they were
dead who might have blazoned it, and his own lips were sealed on his own deeds.
So, we need not wonder that, when the time drew near that chivalry (in form)
should die, the pageantry of the Tournament should have outlived the spirit
thereof; and its educational value be superseded by its representative—as the safer
and more easy path to fame.
But, to know chivaliy—we must not judge it from its latter days ; but listen to
" What resounds
In fable or in romance, of Uther's son,
Be-girt with British and Armoric knights;
And all who since, baptized or infidel
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban,
Damasco, or Morocco, or Trebisond;
Or, whom Besirta sent from Afric shore,
When Charlemain, with all his peerage, fell,
By Fontarabia."
Originally no person was allowed to tourney who had not at least four quarter-
ings on his shield, but afterwards bravery proved all-sufiicient, under certain
limitations. " None were permitted to tourney who had blasphemed God ; who
had offended the ladies ; who had in any way been false to gratitude and honour ;
who had violated his word; who had deserted his brother-in-arms; who had,
ivithout waring, assailed his enemy, or by indirect means, despoiled his territory."
In Crermany, there was a peculiar clause excluding knights who had imposed taxes.
But, as they often fought incognito, it was not always possible to examine their
credentials too minutely; indeed, they seldom seemed to find it difficult to satisfy
the constable as to their right of entrance. The sense of trust in the honour and
word of a knight, that made the time so rich, smoothed their way for them.    It
THE   ATTEMPT. 147
provided a safe-conduct even, for any knight to travel through the territories of his
bitterest enemy, on his way to a Tournament. An untried knight might un¬
questioned keep his armour veiled, till he had done some deed that might suggest
some motto, or fulfil some vow. Or knights, too long tried and well-known, like
Lancelot, would desire anew to prove the truth of wide-spread fame. In such cases,
a grouj) would occasionally assume for the time the names of King Arthur and his
Knights of the Round Table, or Charlemagne and his paladins.
Their arms were duly examined by the constable, who judged if the lances
were sufiiciently blunted or covered with wood, called Rockets; so that there might
be no accidental or intentional danger. Strangers received every preference possible
under the laws, throughout the whole day.
The lists were encircled with ropes or railings, to keep oif the crowding spectators.
Tlie ladies sat on an elevated dais, richly canopied and adorned; clad in their
richest robes and jewels, and surrounding the Queen of the Tournament, who sat in
a gorgeous chair, elevated above them all. At the hour appointed, the herald cried—■
" A I'ostelle, a I'ostelle! To achievement! Knights and Esquires to achievement !"
and they retired into tents erected for the purpose, to don their harness, attended by
their friends, esquires, and an official. After due space, the herald again cried
loudly,—" Come forth, knights, come forth !" They eagerly responded to this call,
and, mounting their steeds, took the place and order assigned to them ; and waited
in breathless silence for the next words of the herald—"Laissez aller !" Then the
cords which divided them were slackened, and the cavaliers, dressing their spears
to their rests, commended their cause to their ladies, and dashed forward on either
side. Three esquires attended each knight, who performed their ordinary services ;
and carried messages to and from the ladies,—ribbons, notes, or emblems. The air
rang with the clashing armour, the clanging hoofs, the shouts of excitement and
encouragement. " On valiant knights, fair eyes behold you !" " Loyant6 aux
Dames !" " Honour to the sons of the brave !" But the knights who fought, and
the ladies who watched, kept the dead silence of suspense, with clenched teeth, and
straining breath, and inward prayer. To break a spear between the saddle and the
helmet, was one point of honour ; the higher the better. If on the helmet, it was
considered worthy of ten points. To strike one off the saddle, reckoned three points.
Good horsemanship being the first quality in a knight, it was thought better to fall
with his horse than from it. To take away the rest of the lance, was the highest
honour. To break a lance against the pommel of the saddle, was a great disgrace.
Breaking one transversely was a proof of unskilful riding, so that the phrase—" to
148 THE   ATTEMPT.
break across," did not die with the use of the lance. Richard 1. re-introduced
tournaments into England, to increase the dexterity of his knights in the art and
practice of war. In the reign of Edward I., a digest of the laws and ordinances of
the tournament was made by John, Earl of Worcester, by order of the king, which
we may give here completely, as they are not so minute and lengthy as those of
some other countries :—
"1st. "Whoso breaketh most spears, as they ought to be broken, shall have
the prize.
2d. Whoso hitteth three times in the helm.
3d. Whoso meeteth three times coronel to coronel.
4th. Whoso beareth a man down with a spear stroke.
5th. Whoso striketh a horse shall receive no prize.
6th. Nor Whoso striketh a man, his back turned or disarmed of his spear.
7th. Whoso hitteth the toil or tilt thrice.
8th. Whoso unhelms himself twice shall have no prize, unless his horse fail him.
9th. Whoso breaketh a spear between the saddle and the charnel of the helm,
shall be allowed for one.
10th. Whoso breaketh a spear from the charnel of the helm, shall be allowed
for one.
11th. Whoso hitteth the toil twice, shall be abased thrice.
12th. Whoso breaketh a spear within a foot of the coronel, shall be judged as no
spear broken, but a good attempt.
13th. Whoso beareth a man down out of the saddle, or putteth him to the
earth, shall have the prize above him that striketh the coronel to coronel two times.
14th. He that doth strike coronel to coronel twice before him that striketh the
sight thrice.
15th. He that striketh the sight thrice before him that breaketh the most spears.
If there be any man that foi-tunately in this wise shall be deemed to have abode
longest in the field helmed, and ran the firmest course, and gave the greatest strokes,
helping himself best with his spear, let him be adjudged victor."
When all had sufficiently proved their valour, or when the time was spent,
though others should still be desiring to run another course, the Lord of the tourna¬
ment dropped his warden, and the heralds cried " Ployez vos bannidres."    Then all
THE  ATTEMPT. 149
drew near to attend the judgment, which was, however, generally pretty well known
beforehand, as all present had the code of laws by heart. The ladies were the judges
proper; but, if any objections were made, or if they refused to give it, the verdict
was pronounced by " the Knight of Honour," chosen expressly for the occasion
from among the witnesses of a scene in which he had often before acted nobly his
own part.
Occasionally we have seen the prize to have been the fair maiden herself, who
presided at the tournament; which, of course, could not be accepted by those whcse
faith was plighted elsewhere—and they sometimes received instead, a crown of laurel.
Sometimes a jewel of price was won, as in the Diamond Jousts, and then the Knight
invariably j^resented his prize to his lady-love. Occasionally the reward was a silver
helmet, or piece of armour, which was delivered to the kneeling knight by the Queen
of Love and Beauty, who added some graceful words of praise to the valour that was
above all reward. He modestly disclaimed this praise, insisting that " the victory
was entirely owing to the favour of my lady, which I wore in my helmet, to her
smile, or to her love !" Or, if more personal, his reply might be in Adelaide Proctor's
words:—
" If in the fight my arm was strong,
And forced my foes to yield ;
If conquering and unhurt I came
Back from the battle field ;
It is because thy prayers have been
My safeguard and my shield."
We can but dimly imagine the pride and pleasure with which a maiden would
thus honour her lover ; and the intense and yet modest joy in the satisfactory feeling
that beautj'^ had been given to her, that raised her to this position of thus doubly
honouring him.
The next day the young esquires fought, often in the armour of their Lords,
and young maidens gave the prize. The third day there was a melee of knights and
esquires, where ambitious youths, though yet but squires, might dare to run a course
with men so tried, that it was no slight honour even to be vanquished by them—
learning thus their art. A splendid feast closed the proceedings, and then, after
some days' amusement in hunting or hawking together, the knights and ladies would
separate and wend their way homewards—their memory filled with bright images
of this Tournament, to reach forward eagerly to the next.
The Joust was inferior to the Tournament, and might be held without pomp, and
150 THE   ATTEMPT.
with much less expense than we hear of being lavished round such lists as " The
Field of the Cloth of Gold." He who had tourneyed, and given largess to the herald,
might joust without any further cost. The presence of ladies even was not indis-
pensible to the joust, which therefore became rather a preparation, than a substitute
for the Tournament. There was a still inferior contest called the " jjassage of arms,"
when a company of knights would undertake to defend a road or a bridge from all
persons of their own rank. Those who challenged this passage had their arms
attached to the lists, and a description of the kind of arms and nature of the adven¬
ture they desired.
They soon found antagonists, who, coming up, would show their choice of their
opponent by touching his shield. But this, and all such amusements, went out of
use along with the Tournament, whose natural death was hastened by a Papal bull
that asserted that " Tournaments were sinful, and all who were killed in them were
assuredly doomed to eternal destruction."
Besides the Tournament and joiist of peace, there was also a joust to the utter¬
ance, when the antagonists were enemies. There was also the ordeal joust, to prove
the right of either side by might. Even ladies had sometimes to abide the issue of
their champion's struggle, as when Rebecca waited for Ivanhoe to prove in the lists
that she was no sorceress. It was always considered better for a youth to fight in
any cause rather than his own—especially in a lady's.
" Suits it young warrior well to fight,
For lady's cause and lady's right,
'Tis just a field for knight to win
His maiden spurs and honours in."
Judicial combats were to the utterance, but were unconnected with chivalry. Sir
David de Lyndsay, first Earl of Crawford, and Lord Wells, jousted before Richard
II. at London Bridge, on the feast of St George. They were sheathed in armour of
proof, and mounted on mighty war-horses. The clash of their assault was tremendous,
but they both stood it,—Lord Crawford so firmly, that the people ciied out that he was
locked in his saddle. Immediately he sprung to the ground, and armed as he was,
vaulted again upon the back of his charger. The endurance and skill of the Scot
at length prevailed, and he brought Lord Wells to the ground, then raised him up and
presented him to the Queen, saying that ''mercy should ever proceed from woman."
LuTEA Reseda.
THE  ATTEMPT. 151
CIjx biking's Chains.
I HAVE left my heart o'er the salt sea foam,
With a blue-eyed maid in a mountain home,
She hath bound it fast with her locks of gold—
My heart that was ever so free and bold !
O woe is me for woman's art !
0 woe is me for my captive heart!
1 have sailed the sea for many a year ;
I have never known the name of fear ;
My limbs have never learned to feel
The galling weight of captive steel,
And now a mountain maiden's art
Hath conquered my unwary heart.
Yet I love my vicbor all too well
To rue the day she wrought the spell;
Those silken fetters are light to bear,
That golden chain I am proud to wear.
I vow 'tis a kind and a blessed art
That hath tamed my haughty Viking's heart.
Meigeag Bheag.
By Doea Greenwell.
This book, published towards the end of 18G7, is the life of a Poman Catholic
Priest and Dominican Monk, written by an English Protestant lady. The subject is
interesting, and the memoir ably written. It is free from those faults of egotism or
partiality, which so often destroy the merit of biography. There is no striving to gain
our sympathy through working on our feelings, and it is altogether more objectively
152 THE   ATTEMPT.
written than is often the case with female biographers.    The language is rich in
poetic taste and imagery. We feel that the author's heart is ia her work, that she has
a deep interest in the man of whom she speaks ; and yet she obtrudes no per¬
sonal opinion ; allows herself to wander into no sentimental digression j but having
drawn the picture from facts, and placed it in a clear light, steps aside that we may
see it for ourselves.    It is sknply and graphically sketched,—a life little ruled by ex¬
ternal circumstances, in which the outer accidents of life seem to have ever been
made subordinate to the inner conflict of the spirit.    The volume contains many
quotations from PSre Chocarne and other French authors, and also some beautiful
passages from Lacordaire's own correspondence with Madame Swetchine ; and con¬
cludes with a slight glance at his works.    These are less attractive than the living
record of his life.    The " Lettres a un jeune homme" contain deep and beautiful
thoughts; but his sermons, when written, lose much of their charm; and his " Life of
St Dominic" is so grounded on the necessity of Papal infallibility, as to seem to
extenuate even cruelty and oppression.    It is hard to reconcile it with the wide
liberal mind of the writer, and we can only, as his biographer says—" Suppose that to
be a Roman Catholic and a Papist is to abrogate all power and moral discriaiiuation."
But the life is a great life, a noble life—as all lives must be, when every selfish ambi¬
tion, every personal desire, is merged in devotion to one grand idea.     The one
thought of Lacordaire's life—the mission to which he gave himself up, was to reconcile
the Church with society, to make Christian principle the mainspring of social action.
This mission, (and man has seldom devoted himself to a nobler  one), was difii-
cult,   more especially  in France at   that time   (183—),  whilst the   mass of   the
nation looked on religion with distrust and suspicion; but his was one of those fear¬
less spirits which no danger or difficulty will turn aside from an arduous, though self-
imposed duty.    His early life was devoted to study and thought, and his first ap¬
pearance before the public was with Lamennais and Montalembert, as joint editor of
the Avenir, a publication which, with its strong fearless cry for truth, liberty, and justice,
startled all France to its foundations.    They desired liberty for the church, but they
desired   also  to  reinstate  it   in  its   old   arbitrary   power;   and   France,   freed
from the thraldom of centuries, shrank from bowing again to the spiritual yoke;
and the Avenir, after a short and brilliant career of bold protest, sank, feared alike
by the friends and enemies of the church.    These  men  seemed  too simple, too
straightforward, too single-hearted for the world around them, when strong in their
own siacerity of purpose, they set off to Rome to lay their cause before the Holy
Father.    He received them with benign paternal  kindness, like children who may
THE   ATTEMPT. 153
be humoured, but must be silenced—and Lamennais' proud sensitive spirit, feeling
the full importance of the mission on which they had come, writhed under the
indifferent and contemptuous treatment which it received. His was one of those
tenderly-strung natures, whose faith once shaken, can never be re-established. He
was an ideal-worshipper ; and, his ideal shattered, he became a universal sceptic. He
was struck with a contradiction, a want of reality, in this Home, which had seemed
to him the outer court of heaven. He had looked, he said, " for a certain analogy
between the outward fact and the ideal type," and not finding this, he, who for
years had been the bold champion of the Church, suddenly broke away from her, to
follow ways of his own devising; and dropped silently and for ever out of the record
of Lacordaire's life. Montalembert, after long doubt and indecision, submitted. But
to Lacordaire, submission seemed to be easy. Born to combat and command, he
had yet, with regard to the Church, the ready obedience of a true soldier. This
want of individual opinion in a man whose life's cry was liberty, may seem to
a Protestant unintelligible ; but Lacordaire connected all light, and truth, and
perfection with the Papacy, as " its radiating centre," and we must remember how
different everything appears to minds " which have once accepted authority itself as
a spiritual fact."
One of his strongest desires and objects of labour was, the re-establishment of
the religious orders in France; and he entered into this work with all the ardour
and vital energy which characterized every undertaking of his life. But as a preacher
is Lacordaire best known. When he appeared in the pulpit of Notre Dame, preach¬
ing " Christianity as the one universal perfect society," all France seemed to hang
on his words. It was not the eloquence alone which rivetted all hearts, nor even
the wonderful power of sympathy, by which he identified himself with his hearers :
it was the power of truth with which the words were fraught, the sight of a vital,
practical religion,resuscitatedfromthedust,whereit had been despised,—a large liberal
Christianity, which appealed equally to reason as to faith; which, while pleading the
cause of eternity, had yet hope and consolation for the present time. His hopeful¬
ness and faith were ever his strength, and sustained him not only under outward
opposition, but under the far greater trial of suspicion and distrust from the very
Church he so loved and worked for. He was a Liberal—a Liberal in the widest
sense of the word; desiring liberty, not only for his own party, but for the party
opposed to his,—not only for his own religion, but for all others,—not only for his
own country, but for the whole world. " Humanity," he says, " is one, and its
rights arc the same in all places, though their mode of exercise may vary, according
154
THE   ATTEMPT.
to the existing state of manners and minds." " Such men," as his biographer says,
"must always, in some degree, disappoint their friends. They are not to be reckoned
on when names are called over and numbers taken. They are altogether wanting
in what makes the soul and strength of the thorough-going, uncompromising
partisan ; incapable of the narrow hostility to all influences, however generous and
admirable, which do not lie within a given circle."
It is refreshing to meet with a book written in such a large liberal spirit;
where there is no palliating, no softening of differences of opinion; no attempt to
compromise to gain the sympathy of Protestant readers; but where it is ever borne in
the wi'iter's mind tliat this is the life of a Koman Catholic priest,—everything looked at
in that liglit, and nothing condemned which is consistent with a Christian's life as such.
What strangely incongruous elements seem to rule in the nature of this man, who was
at once an eager advocate of civil libei'ty, and a devoted Pa2)ist; whose loving
generous heart says—"The Christian, even the saint,ought to look on an honest man
with reverence," and in another passage, adds that, whoever loves God, " is a living
member of the church, in whatever age he lives, and under whatever sky,"—and yet,
who, in his life of St. Dominic, becomes the defender of one who had shared in the
worst horrors of Papal tyranny.
It would be a difficult character to round to seeming conformity; but his
biographer does not attempt it. She presents it to us as it is, with its apparent
contradictions ; and leaves it for us to judge, or rather not to judge, but to examine
into and to love—even while we look with wonder and sori'ow on some things which
may seem to us incomprehensible in the life of a man so noble and large-hearted.
But his public career ended sadly—as, alas for the world, most lives struggling for
a great idea are sure to do. All the confident hopes of his youth were shattered.
He had seemed to foresee his country rising into a glorious liberty, in which Chris¬
tianity should pervade and illuminate society ; and now, looking round him, he saw
the France which through dark and terrible days had once seemed to have bought
for itself a path to freedom, bowing again beneath a despotic yoke, and he felt him¬
self standing alone, speaking to a people who heard his words, but whose heart had
gone from him. For the first time his heai-t seemed to die within him, and silently
and sadly he withdrew from public life. But even yet the strong hope which had
all his life upheld him, did not quite deseit him. " Lacordaire was one who never
despaired for either his age or his country; his generous efforts for liberty and
progress were to last as long as his life did, only he now carried them into another
field of action."    In  his  preaching, his great aim had been to i-aise  the  individual
THE   ATTEMPT. 155
by raising the mass ; but now his influence took the direction of personal teaching,
and he retired to the school of Sor§ze, and there spent a great part of the last years
of his life in the education of youth. Some short time before his death, he was
chosen Provincial of the Order of the Dominicans, for the re-establishment of which
in France he had so laboured; and here, in quiet retirement, surrounded by kind
friends and devoted pupils, his life ended.
This time seems to have been the most peaceful and happy of his active, worthy
life. " To read of it," says his biographer, " affects the mind with a sense of solemn
repose and fulfilment, such as is apt to steal across the spirit at the close of one of
those lovely autumn afternoons that are soft with all the tenderness of spring, yet
warm with the sunshine of the long golden day that has gone before. A solitary bird
sends from the thickets a plaintive yet cheering note, that seems to recal the
thousand vanished songs of siimmer, and to jiromise yet more than it recals; the
gossamer floats lightly on the air ; the leaf reddens, the apple loosens its hold upon
the stalk ; all is peace, unspeakable peace, but the end is not far off."
Enai.
-s--^Hg>g«
Striving and restless as the days pass on.
The weary wave
Rocks itself ceaseless till the height be won.
That weary wave !
Lashing in fury 'gainst the cliffs that stem it;
Sinking back sadly where their brows contemn it;
That weary wave !
Awhile, a seeming conq'rer, it may win
A little space ;
Defeated, once again it must give in
A little space;
Now hither hastened as the wind compels it,
Now backward driven as the rock repels it,
A little space !
156 THE   ATTEMPT.
The rapture of success is not for thee,
O restless tide ;
(Aye—whither would'st thou, e'en if thou wert free,
O restless tide 1)
Till the great quietude fill all creation,
To painful struggle ending all temptation,
O restless tide!
Perchance may'st thou some lesser fragment break,
O weary heart;
Fret not thyself so small impress to make,
O weary heart!
A mightier power than thine shall crush resistance ;
Hear'st thou no voice that promises assistance 1
" A little while"—then, from thy long persistance.
Rest—weary heart!
Ethel.
(^Itmpsfs oi ^l]m %lh
We, in common with the rest of the Punjaub, have been spending our energies and
time in seeing and doing honour to the Ameer of Affghanistan.
John Bull is curiously given to extremes. Usually the soul of economy, he even
went so far, not long since, as to put the horses in his mail vans on the lowest
possible rations, the price of grain having risen considerably. Perhaps it is in con¬
sequence of such care of his pence, that, when a liberal fit seizes him, he outdoes him¬
self in reckless expenditure. So be it,—let the horses starve, and the Ameer go home
a richer as well as a wiser man. Seriously speaking, the sums that have been ex¬
pended on the gaieties of the last month, and the allowances paid for the daily sup¬
port of the guest and his suite, are large enough to make us marvel for more reasons
than one, and fancy we see the shade of Income Tax looming darkly over our heads,
as among not the least important consequences of the outlay.
Of the performances at Lahore, we cannot speak except by hearsay ; but we can
THE  ATTEMPT. 157
vouch for everything having been done to make our own little station a pleasant
resting-place for the Ameer. A road lined with troops, a good four-in-hand, with
escort and outriders, a band, and a royal salute, were the preludes to his entry into
a mess-house given up to him, and very prettily decorated for the occasion. A
neighbouring Rajah aided in the preparations, and sent silver furniture and rich
carpets, which added greatly to the general effect. Numbers of tents were pitched
for the suite,—among them, two of elaborate scarlet and yellow for the head men.
For days a perfect army of natives had been at work, making bedding and other re¬
quisites, chattering, smoking, and wasting time at once, as only Indians can; but
certainly, the results were satisfactory. Shere All was received at the door of the
mess by four soldiers' children, who presented him with bouquets, and were kept by
his side most of the morning, receiving finally a handsome donation from him. His
liking for children is at least an amiable point in his character. In the afternoon,
the British regiment turned out, and gave him evidence of the power and rapidity of
Snider rifles, in which he seemed to take great interest, watching first the field
manceuvres, and then proceeding to see one company fire at the target. He inspected
the efiect of the shots himself, and, we devoutly hoped, was duly impressed thereby.
Then ensued Scotch dancing, and a very picturesque scene it was. On one hand was
the mess, with its decorations and sentries; in front were seated the Ameer and
some of his entertainei's; and at a little distance, under some trees, was the platform,
with the pipers, dancers, and a semi-circle of spectators, lighted up by large torches,
on which the torch bearers poured oil every few minutes, from quaint long-throated
vessels.
The Ameer's personal appearance is by this time almost a hackneyed theme;
but we must say both of him and his followers, that their manliness is a great
contrast to the effeminacy of the natives hereabouts. Their very walk is different;
they have the free, long step, which of itself suggests superiority, when compared
with the mincing, noiseless movements to which our eyes are accustomed. All the
Affghans had the same deep-set eyes and straight brows, which gave tliem a crafty
look. They are not tall, but strongly made, and Shere Ali himself has a very Jewish
cast of face. Only once during the time of his stay at Umballa did we see him in a
different dress, and then the change was only to another of a darker shade. He in¬
variably wears the Choya, or long brown dressing-gown of Cashmere (we cannot
describe it in other words), and the high black cap, of curly lamb's wool, which en¬
tirely covers the forehead, and greatly diminishes one's power of estimating the
character of his physiognomy.    His little boy wore a beautiful aigrette of diamonds.
158 THE   ATTEMPT.
valued at £1000, and an emerald buckle given him by the King of Persia, and worth
£600. His coat, too, was richly embroidered ; and a story we subsequently heard
confirmed our idea that personal ornaments are only worn by women and children in
AfFghanistan. A photograph was being taken of the principal personages at the
Durbar, and the Rajahs attended in great array for the purpose. Just when the
group was duly arranged, one of Shere Ali's suite, addressing an Englishman, asked
contemptuously—" Is that a woman over there ?" " Of course not," was the surprised
answer,—the individual pointed out being of a decidedly hairy countenance,—"that is
the Rajah of Kappoortullah." "Then, what does he wear all those jewels for?"
This speech was a fair indication of the scorn with which the mountain race treat
even the princes of this country \ and, certainly, we might almost think the latter
would be painfully conscious of the difference between their position,—dependants
where their ancestors ruled,—and that of this rough mountaineer, feted and courted
before their very eyes. To return to the little boy. It is the fashion to laud him to
the skies ; but, we confess, to us he appeared much like his compeers in other
countries. He is very fair, and has long-shaped eyes, which are rather Chinese in
appearance. Further than this, we saw nothing remarkable about him, unless it were
the 7ionchalance with which he accepted his position, and the total absence of any¬
thing like childish surprise or amusement. He is the son of Shere Ali's favourite
wife, and is intended by his father to succeed him ou the throne; so this early
glimpse of civilisation may be to his advantage.
In a weak moment, we too thought we would see the gay doings at Umballa; and
fain would we give our readers a true picture of our suffeiings on the way there : but
our pen fails us when we seek to pourtray the exasperation and fatigue of travelling
a hundred miles by a bad dak, with insufficient horses. Suffice it to say, that
we accomplished in thirty-two hours what might have been done in twelve ; that we
underwent two thunder-storms, during one of which our vehicle proved by no means
waterproof; and finally, that our average pace, including stoppages, was on the first
day precisely two miles an-hour. The thunder-storms deserve a further word. One
passed over us as we waited disconsolately on the road, without any horses at all,
and realised our notion of tropical violence. The light suddenly became a lurid
yellow, the rain literally fell in torrents mixed with hail, the wind was strong
enough to rock the gliarry, startling us after the previous deathlike stillness, and
many-coloured flashes of lightning succeeded each other with such rapidity, that we
could not distinctly count three between two of them, while they were at the same
time reflected in the sheet of water that speedily flooded the dry road.    Fortunately,
THE   ATTEMPT. 159
the tempest was brief as well as severe, and we watched it roll away from us like
a leaden curtain folded across the sky. The morning after our arrival at Umballa,
we mounted our elephants at six o'clock, to see the entry of Lord Mayo. The view
of the camp at that early hour was very striking. A great barren plain, ordinarily
used as a parade ground, stretches on one side of the cantonments, and here were
pitched tents, rising rank behind rank in seemingly endless array, backed by the
soft blue of the distant Himalayas. In the centre, the British flag indicated the
Viceroy's quarters, flanked by those of the Commander-in-chief, Lieutenant-Governor,
&c., and thence stretclied a double line of troops across the plain to the railway
station 3 while behind surged a crowd of police, natives on foot or mounted on elephants
or camels, and English spectators in great numbers. Tlie troops included the sturdy
little Goorkhas, and other native regiments, some of them brightly dressed. But the
lower end of the line was in itself a sight worth seeing, for here were ranged detach¬
ments from the little armies of Rajahs who have always remained faithful to us, but
whose forces are distinguished, we should imagine, more by their uniforms than by
their discipline. Every oddity of costume and colour was to be seen among them ;
but two groups were especially remarkable. One consisted of a selection of men
clad in dressing-gown-shaped garments of red, blue, and green; the others were in
tight suits of scarlet, such as we remember seeing in an Edinburgh pantomime,
when small lobster-like imps stormed a fairy fortress. The elephants, with the state
howdahs and trappings belonging to the various Rajahs, were in some cases really
beautiful; the howdahs being silver or gold, some of them with three miniature
domes, while the huge cloths entirely covering the anim_al, were a mass of era-
broidery,—one, the most splendid, was a net of gold, each mesh held down with a
knob of silver. In due time, when we were growing very weary of the odours and noise
that indicate the presence of an Indian crowd, and our ears were deafened with tlie
jingling of the elephants' bells, the procession appeared in sight, and we kept pace
with it up to the camp. There were of course the usual escort, body-guard,
carriages, bowings, and playing of the Anthem ; but, excepting for the gay dresses
of the Rajahs who followed the carriages, the general effect was poor. Moreover
here again appeared the incongruities that almost invariably mar any spectacle in
this country. We were of course endeavouring to feel impressed with the dignitv
and power of the British, and the general grandeur of the scene, when we happened
to glance at the rear of the procession, and there, oh hideous sight! moving at a
dignified pace, between these imposing lines of soldiers, came a dak yluirry, and two
or three  vehicles, compared with which an Edinburgh cab would be magnificent.
160 THE   ATTEMPT.
Truly in the East there is hardly even a step from the sublime to the ridiculous,
though only those who have become pi-actically acquainted with a dak gharry
can appreciate the absurdity of such a finish to a state display. That afternoon, we
were fortunate enough to witness the durbar; but compared with others, this one
was, we were told, very quiet, being in fact, a reception for the Ameer alone, not
the usvial presentation of all the native dignitaries, who therefore came less brilliantly
dressed than if they had figured prominently. The durbar tent is hung with
yellow and black, and in the centre were three golden chairs, raised on a couple
of steps. Behind stood native servants iu the scarlet Viceregal livery, bearing
hand-punkahs stifi" with gold, and white yaks' tails, with which they carefully
described circles in the air, to the destruction of imaginary flies. On each side of
the tent were tiers of chairs for officers and ladies, this being the first durbar to
which the latter were openly admitted: formerly, they gazed from behind screens,
after the fashion of the Ladies' Gallery in the House. Outside the tent were
the guard of honour and the batteries, and we may aver that, from this date,
salutes were incessant. Each Rajah is entitled to a certain number of guns, and
on this point of honour they are excessively tenacious ; so, as the iuterchange of
visits was considerable during the ensuing week, and the salutes from the Royal
Artillery were usually followed by others from the private batteries of each petty
monarch, the expenditure of powder was not small. Two rows of chairs
were filled by these Rajahs and their special attendants, and we could hardly
help smiling at the etiquette of their entrance; each was led in by the hand
by one or two English officers, according to his rank, and deposited on his chair very
much like a child at dinner. Their dresses were very handsome, some of gold, some
of satin or moire, their turbans were mostly of golden stuff looped up with jewels,
and they all wore belts and necklaces of enormous value ; things beautiful in them¬
selves, but, as the Affghan thought, looking singularly out of jjlace on men. Indeed
these dignitaries did not impress me at all favourably as to expression or features,
with one exception, the young Rajah of Puttiala, who has an intelligent and (for an
Indian) a frank face. After some time, during which there were audible complaints
of the heat, Lord Mayo appeared, and walked quickly up to his place, whence he
ought to have advanced immediately to receive his giiest. Here, however, a hitch oc¬
curred, for no giiest was forthcoming, and for some minutes the Viceroy was kept
waiting in a manner not suited to Viceregal dignity ; but at last he sat down, while
an expression of discomfiture prevailed on the faces of the attendant aides-de-cam]i,
and sundry strong remarks were hurled sotto voce at the " i)oliticals," who ought to
THE   ATTEMPT. IGl
have timed the arrival of the Ameer.    Finally the carriage drove up with Shere Ali
and his son ; and Lord Mayo, according to the programme, met them at the entrance,
and placed them one on either side of his own chair.    A long conversation ensued,
through an interpreter, but of this no doubt the home papers have given plentiful
ropoi-ts;   then  tray after tray  of presents was  brought in, and  laid  on the floor,
Eastern fashion, for the Ameer's accejitance; and after a couple of minutes removed
by servants, who were sorely embarrassed by their attempt to walk backwards.    The
Viceroy,  with his own hand,  presented a beautiful sword to the Ameer, and a
jewelled chain to his son, and then the ceremony was concluded.    After all, the
whole affair was chiefly interesting from a political point of view ; for, perhaps, the
day may come, when it will be a pleasant thing to say that we too saw the durbar
from which such great results sprang.    We had other opportunities of studying both
Shere Ali and the Rajahs, as they came to the Viceroy's receptions and some races ;
but the results of further observation were in accord with our first impressions.   We
saw endless vai'ieties of jewelleiy on the persons of the latter, and looked with some
curiosity at an uncommonly fat young prince, who afiects English ways, smoking
cheroots and drinking soda-water, and wearing, in singular contrast to the rest of his
dress, a very loud English  tie duly slipped through a gold ring.    It is said he in¬
tends coming to England; and,   if so, will no doubt be received with infatuated
adulation, whereas here he ls a small man by comparison with others.    Shere Ali's
face certainly betrays a great capacity for evil; there are sinister lines in it, and
those who saw him when a slight contretemps occurred during the joiirney, say the
glimpse they obtained of his rougher mood was anything but encouraging.    He is
not a little scandalised at the appearance of Englishwomen in p\iblic, and especially at
their riding.    He is reported to have said at Peshawar, where he first saw them, " If our
women did that, their throats would be cut."    However, he observes them carefully
enough, as he does everything, however minute.    When he drove into our station, the
Commissioner who escorted him drew his attention to a stand filled with ladies, on
which he remarked that he supposed he ought to bow.   He did so, putting his hand
to his cap in the usual  manner, and leaning forward till the carriage had passed ;
then he turned and said, " Commissioner Sahib, you will say whatever is proper from
me to the ladies ;" and afterwards,  at the review, he had his son lifted into one of
their cari-iages, as the best way of paying them some attention.    Those who saw most
of him were much struck with his sharpness in noting everything new.   On being
shown a spring bed, he examined its construction and  exclaimed, " You do every¬
thing in your country with iron."    The railway naturally impressed him, especially
u
162
THE  ATTEMPT,
as a means of moving troops and supplies; and he heard with evident surprise that
Lord Mayo had travelled fix)m Calcutta to Umballa in forty-four hours.
After the durbar some days were passed in races, dinners, reviews, fireworks,
and receptions. The latter entertainment seemed rather to puzzle the Rajahs, who
required the pleasures of conversation explained to them, and the songs to which we
listened, translated. "We wondered what idea a rendering of Figaro would convey
to them ! The heat by this time was becoming too gi-eat for life in tents to be agree¬
able, and we were all glad when the political purpose of the visit being concluded,
the camps broke up, and the guests scattered to their various places of abode.
Already, ere we left, the tide was turning, and instead of the wild praise bestowed at
first on the Ameer, reports began to circulate that he is placed on the throne by
Russia, and has been playing us false from the beginning. Something in the air of
India must give to rumour even more than her " hundred tongues;" for life would
be unbearable, did one heed a tithe of the wonderful tales that spring up with
mushroom rapidity, no one knows whence or how. At least we may hope the best
from this interview, since it is so far a step in advance, that no one a few years
since would have imagined that an Ameer of Afghanistan would come from beyond
the terrible Khyber Pass to seek the alliance or accept the courtesies of a British
"V^iceroy. Elsie Strivelyne.
g 0 It jg I n g.
■ Happy are the home-sick, for they shall go home."
"When the night is falling cold and gi'ay.
Over the sea;
And my heart is sad as the dying day—
"With the want of thee ;
Then I thirst, and yearn, and faint, and pray
Thine eyes to see,
Shining like Hesper's earliest ray—
Down over me.
THE   ATTEMPT. 163
When the trees are rustling sad and low,
Round the forest stream—
That pauses and shudders amid its flow,
In a troubled dream.
Then T sigh my sigh for the evening glow.
And the morning gleam ;
And the hopes that glittered so long ago
In the sun's bright beam.
The day is dark and the night is long.
And the stars are fled.
Day—for the want of thy careless song
And thy sunny head.
Is gloomy, and Night sits sad among
Her splendours dead,
And grieves for the waning moonlight, flung
On the page unread,
Of the book that lies on the window-sill,
In thine empty room.
And oh for thy voice and thy face to fill
The silent gloom !
The songs of the birds and the winds are still,
And the rich perfume
Of the rose is faint, and upon the hill
Droops the golden broom.
All things are waiting until thou come.
Oh ! love of mjnej
Then the birds will sing, and the bees will hum.
And the stars will shine.
And the moon will scatter the darkness dumb.
With a light benign,
And my heart, that long has been cold and numb.
Shall thrill to thine.
164 THE   ATTEMPT.
Peace to my love, wherever her feet
May tread the gi'ound,—
May they bless the earth with their traces sweet.
May no woe be found
Where her soft eyes shine, and her pulses beat ;
May her voice's sound
Ring blythely ever until we meet,
And my joy is crowned.
Yet oh, will the gain that shall come at last
Efface the loss,
When we stand where the shadows of boughs are cast
Athwart the moss.
In the wood's green heart, and will the Past,
With its heavy cross,
Be quenched in joy, as we wander fast
By the sea waves' toss?
I know not yet, but to longing hearts
Sure hope is given.
When the tear of the home-sick wanderer starts.
He is homeward driven;
And by such sore pain when from Love it parts.
The soul is shriven—
To look with eyes where no sorrow smarts,
Up to its Heaven.
O. M.
%   §1 e 1j «r u.
Is it possible, in this busy round of commerce, to rest a little space, and revolve the
actions of i:)ast years in my mind 1
A Reverie ! I scarcely know its meaning.    The toiling and moiling of life have
left mo no leisure for thought;  and, indeed, I have even shunned such an indul-
THE  ATTEMPT. 165
gence for long years past. The events of these years are entombed in my bosom in
dim vaults, and no grass waves greenly over their memories. But to-day, though
unbidden, these sorrows and joys, long buried and nigh forgotten, come surging
through my mind like waves of thought on the sands of memory. The embankments
of my will are waxed weak through age, and they are giving way at last.
The glass tells me my forehead is shaded now with silvered hair, not thin
and spare, but rich and gleaming. Though I feel I am going fast down the
hill of life, I am yet hale and strong ; I have many friends, and many a home
circle opens to receive me. I cannot call myself an unhappy man; and yet to-day I
can almost say it truly.
Ah ! how those "memories of long-ago" rise around me ! and many a lovely
scene of gladness, many a happy day of youth, comes thronging in strange distinct¬
ness to my brain ; and as the memory of each touches some long silent heart-string,
and thrills it with forgotten emotions, I find it is a memory of pain that awakens
the loudest chord.
Yes, all these past joys converged in intensity to one sacred point of bliss, and
that is now the centre of deepest pain. What mysterious connection exists then
between joy and sorrow 1 In my heart they are ever joined together in fellowship,
and entwined round one gentle Christian name—Mary; the sweetest and the saddest
name. And as I linger over the " soft dissyllable," I ponder the sweetness of that
name, whose essence is bitterness. Sacred history first, and the world's history ever
since, alike have their records of sorrow linked with the name of Mary. I am but
one mourner more to swell the silent train of the past; and now, as I murmur that
gentlest sound, scarce can I keep a tear from welling up to betray me to myself.
What! shall T weep a wily enchantress, a faithless heart-breaker ?
Ah, never again may such words break from my lips ! I have learnt in long
years to forgive, and to rejoice in her welfare : and shall a life-long lesson be for¬
gotten now 1 I dare not linger over this heart's history, lest I forget I am a man,
and weep, or give way to fiery thoughts of indignation. Farewell, then, to this
brief hour of recollection; I must close for ever this heart-cemetery. It is full
now,—its memories may never more awaken in this present world,—but its inmates
will meet me in a world eternal. JSToli-me-tangere.
166 THE  ATTEMPT.
'*§0na  I« a HUE a/'
Oh black, black were her eyes.
And her laughing lips were red,
And glossy the soft jetty hair
That decked her graceful head.
Oh, her voice rang silver sweet,
And more light than snow-flakes fall.
Was the patter of her dainty feet
Over the dark old hall.
And who, that once has seen her,
E'er afterwards forgets
Juanna's fairy dancing,
And her meny castanets 1
In the evening, when the sunlight
Had glared itself away.
And long and cool the shadows
On the quiet Plaaa lay,—
While Don Alvar sat and smoked,
Dona Isabel would bring
Her gay guitar, and seat her
At her father's feet, and sing.
While blithe Juanna rests not.
But fidgets, pouts, and frets,
Till she's dancing like a fire-fly.
To her merry castanets.
Young Lancelot was only
A subaltern, in one
Of the bravest light-horse corps
That e'er gallant deed had done ;
With no heavy well-filled purse,
Nor great patron, high in place,—
With nothing but his sword,
And his winning handsome face.
THE  ATTEMPT. 167
Yet, the first time that he sees her.
The lad his heart's love sets
On Don Alvar's child Juanna,
With the merry castanets.
He loved the maiden dearly,
And he told her so one night,
As they wandered 'mid the olive trees.
All in the calm moonlight;
And he said, with choking voice.
While his dark-blue eyes grew dim—
There was nothing left to live for.
If she did not care for him.
And one heavy tear-drop falling,
Juanna's small hand wets,—
The hand that snaps so joyously.
The merry castanets.
She blushed, and deeply sighed.
As she drooped her veiled head,—
" I love you, Senor Lancelot,
But we can never wed;
Ere Easter next comes round,
I must be Don Luis' wife,—
Then, farewell to all the joys
That can make me cling to life.
Oh, if you only knew
Of my father's angry threats !
Oh, my singing and my dancing.
And my merry castanets !"
" Come, fly with me, my darling,
I will love you deep and true ;
By my honour ! 'tis a shame
That you such a thing should do !
168 THE  ATTEMPT.
As my dear and and wedded wife,
You can face the whole world then ;
And not all the Dons in Spain
Could e'er part us two again.
Oh, what days of quiet pleasure
May shine upon us yet,
With dance, and song, and music.
And merry Castanet !"
Don Luis wrathful heard him.
As beside the wall he stood ;
In his grasp the dagger quivered.
As though athirst for blood.
One hasty step—one cry—
And one deadly vengeful blow !
But it was not English Lancelot
On the greensward lying low.
Juanna faintly whispers,
As the life-blood wells and jets,
" I saved you—love—adios—
Isabel—my—castanets !"
On red Vittoria's Held,
When the night fell still and dark.
Young Lancelot lay dying,
'Mong the corpses cold and stark.
In the morning when they found him.
He was lying pale and fail".
With the heavy blood-drops clotted.
In his shining yellow hair.—
And in one poor dead hand, grasped
By the fingers stiflF and set.
Were—a lock of raven haii',
And a little caatanet.
Mas Alta.
the attempt. 1g9
Part vi.—Honours and Dishonours.
" He rode
Upon a coal-black steed ;
And tens of thousands thronged the road,
And bade their warrior speed.
His helni, his breast-plate, were of gold,
And graved with many a dent, that told
Of many a soldier's deed ;
The sun shone on his sparkling mail,
And danced his snow-plume on the gale.—L. E. L.
We cannot but notice more particularly the honours peculiar to knighthood, or, more
strictly, to the virtues considered to be embodied in the knight; though we
have already seen how much was awarded to him for proved bravery, even in a tour¬
nament. It introduced him to the society of the noblest in the land ; to self-trust
and self-respect; to fame, praise, admiration, perpetuation in song ; to noble love or
marriage; to future deeds of high emprise and higher honour,—for men must choose
to do their toughest deeds, the toughest hearts. He might be chosen to escort the
king to distant war, or to head his troops in his place ; and an opportunity given
him to show that it was no chance success, but that the bravery and prudence that won
his own triumph, could command victoiy upon all his followers. New honours then
awaited him. If he had had fifty knights and squires under his command, with
their attendants, he who had been well-tried in battle, and signalised himself equally
by his personal bravery and his wise over-sight, might aspire to be made knight-
banneret. On the herald proving his claims to this distinction, his king or leader
cut off the end of his triangular pennon, and it became square,—the outer sign of his
advanced rank. He then fought under no other baron, nor any leader except the
king, being made equal to the hereditary baron, and having, like him, his own war
cry, equal bearings, and escutcheon. His wife became " une dame bannerette ■" and
his family a " hostel banni^re."
In some old books there is given an amusing account of a young esquire's indig¬
nation, at a lawyer-friend of his claiming for his profession a position above that of a
knight.    Determined to make sure of a point that seemed so vital, and to meet his
170 THE  ATTEMPT.
disjjutant on his own ground, he borrowed his friend's law books; and, contrary to
his usual habits, sat burrowing in them for many hours, to see if he could there find any¬
thing to settle his doubts.   In an " Abridgement of Law : Cases concerning Knights,"
he found to his comfort that it had been decerned that " no man, uvder the degree of a
knight, except spiritual men and sergeants-at-law, should use more cloth for a gown
than four broad yards," by the force of which exception he was able to prove his legal
friend really under his degree.     Further, he found that the Chief-Justice saj^s that,
" If an action be brought against a knight, not naming him a knight, the suit could
not go forward, because the word ' knight' is a name of dignity."    In another place,
" one Richard Haukford having begun a suit against another, about the presentation
to a benefice, who was during the suit made a knight, judgment was given that the
suit should fall to the ground."    At two several times he noted that " divers of the
judges were of opinion that this word ' knight' was not only nomen diynitatis, but
parcel of his name also."    Also Presot, a great and learned judge, affirmed that " If
an esquire be made a knight, the  name of esquire was gone from him;   but if a
knight be made an earl or a duke, the name knight remained, as more valuable than
the other."    And, turning to and fro, he found "Another old ordinance concerning
matter of tournaments, in which noble exercise knights were associated with barons
and earls, and one law for all."     In many ancient documents the signatures of
knights are placed before those of barons, who have not been expressly admitted
to the order.    The youth continues :—" Knights-witnesses signed Iliis TestiU Do-
minus M. C. J. I. MilitiU, and yet, I know well, these witnesses were never lords.
If he were a lord and a knight also, it were all one, and many knights in their own
deeds did sign themselves,—Sciant qd ego Dominus, E. F. Miles ; and their wives
were called ladies as long as they lived.  " Dominus" in Latin is "Lord" in English, and
in French "Sire," whereby you cause me to observe, that unto this day knights are
commonly called Sii'e J. E., ifec.    No judge, unless he be also a knight, can wear the
Collar of S.S. ; but the judges that be knights use them, as my father doth."     And
the young esquire, knight prospective, legally confuted his antagonist, and remained
in his superior position.     This curious incident was of the latter times of chivalry,
when custom had clearly jiassed into law.    The property in the title,—as if the word
knight had become almost the man's Christian name,—we frequently find insisted
on in old tales.   A second and more distinguishing name was taken from the place of
his birth, from the place of his admission into the ranks of chivalry, from his family,
property, or from the scene of his noblest exploits.    A distinguished honour was to
be called  the knight of the mines; which was won by victory in a sort of under-
THE  ATTEMPT. 171
ground tournament. The vaults were lit up by torches, a board, breast-high, divided
the combatants, swords and short battle-axes were the only weapons in their pro¬
tracted struggle.
They had a strong idea of a mysterious virtue which passed from the giver to
the receiver of knighthood ; and the refinement of feeling which this idea introduced,
was strikingly marked by the value it gave honour for its own sake. As the author
of his chivalrous existence conferred on him a sonsliip of glory, and a consequent
return of duty and reverence, it was esteemed of the utmost consequence that the
author of his chivalrous existence should have 2^i"eserved his honour pure, and un¬
mixed with any base or unworthy alloy. For this reason, an esquire would often
remain so for a long time, that he might gain an opportunity of begging knighthood
from the hands of some one whom he reverenced, and desired to emulate. Next to
his zeal in performing the duties of a lover, was that of following the track of such a
model. Hence many monarchs were constrained to seek knighthood from foreign
potentates. Henry II. of England received knighthood from David, King of Scot¬
land, at Carlisle ; Edward I., at age of fifteen, from Alj)honso XI., King of Castile ;
Malcolm and Alexander, Kings of Scotland, were both knighted by John of England ;
and Henry III. knighted at York, Alexander III. of Scotland, and Magnus, King
of the Isle of Man. But it was only theii- knighthood, and not their royalty, that
gave them power to do so. Originally, as we have seen, every knight had power to
create another of his own degree. But as chivalry, like all human institutions,
lost its purity, it was impossible to believe that no unworthy member could be ad¬
mitted into its ranks—though only through ignorance, neglect, or misconception.
The power which even one such might gain, were he inclined to be rebellious, by
knighting many men, and thus binding them to his service, would be immense ; so
that kings found it necessary and wise to limit the right to royalty, and it became a
practical part of the feudal system,—the knight who held title and lands from him
under military tenure, swearing to him fealty and obedience. " The honour, indeed,
which this title conferred, was of such a nature, that it seems to have beeen considered
capable of giving an entirely new character to the persons who obtained it. Even a
serf, if he had the good fortune to do something wortliy of knightliood, became im¬
mediately enfranchised on receiving the order, and his base blood was accounted
gentle."
And truly this honour of the knightly spirit was more high in its source, and
more ennobling in its effects, than the honour we now give to fortune. It weighed
what was intrinsic and inherent in the man himself, and hence became a more proxi-
172 THE   ATTEMPT.
mate measurement of how much a man was worth, than our modern notion of his
extrinsic possessions of the current gold coin of the realm. And while the moth and
the canker may consume what the robber hath spared of these external things, that
having not life in themselves, may be corrupted,—no freaks of fortune could destroy
the possessions of the knightly spirit—neither wounds nor weakness, neither
robbery nor poverty, neither old age nor death. For he who could no longer
fight could still endure ; if weak—he could wait for strength ; poverty had no shame
for him, death no terrors. Was Earl Yniol less a noble knight, when old, infirm, and
poverty-stricken, he was forced to suffer the peckings of the sparrow-hawk, and let
his own dainty daughter serve the guest who came to crave his crippled hospitality 1
Were his knightly atmosphere and training not proved in her pure, womanly spirit ?
Brave, tender, independent of fortune, yet dependent on all kindly love and feminine
feelings throughout her after life, as well as when she sang from her cheerful spirit,
by her own busy wheel, to Fortune,—
" Tliy wheel and thee we neither love nor hate !
Turn Fortune, turn thy wheel with smile or frown,
With that wild wheel we go not up or down.
Our hoard is little, but our hearts are great.—
Smile and we smile, the lords of many lands —
Frown and we smile, the lords of our own hands—
For man is mam and master of his fate."
Or even amid worae trials than all these,—amid shame and tortures and ignominious
death, a knight might prove himself. As when Crescentius the latest Roman patriot
was doomed to die—his spirit sunk not for a moment:—
" He stood—the fetters on his hand.
He raised them haughtily ;
And had that grasp been on his brand,
It could not wave on high
With freer pride than it waved now.
Around he looked with changeless brow
On many a torture nigh—
The rack, the chain, the axe, the wheel,
And, worst of all, his own red steel!"
He who fixced danger, did not so recklessly, but with a full consciousness of all
its risks,—" He jests at scars who never felt a womid." He knew the keen pain,
the burning fever, the torturing thirst, the giddiness and weakness that would
ensue ; and more bitter than all, the long and irksome confinement, the weary period
THE   ATTEMPT. 173
of convalescence, when he lay conscious of impotent desire to rush forth anew to the
field that called so loudly for him. Yet knowingly he risked this, and when it came,
endured it with knightly fortitude. And occasionally, as if to reward him above all
other honour, amid his bitterest pain arose the sweetest pleasure of his life. The
lady was always then taught surgery, and the simple herbal medicine of the times,
and she tended the wounded brave with skilful and tender hand, and thoughtful and
admiring heart. She -wiped the cold dews from his brow, and bound his fiery
wounds, pouring in oil and wine. Her presence changed the groan upon his lips into
a thanksgiving ; her fingers prepared him delicate food ; her lute and voice soothed
him to slumber; and her smile waked him to life again. All this was no slight
task for a high-born, delicate damsel; but she was proud to share with the knight
the cliivalry of the times ; which, in the form of self-denial and endurance, or more
properly fortitude, was as binding on the maiden as the youth. For " daughters
give up more than sons;" and she who waited alone, dumbly to weep and pray,
proved her high heart as clearly, as he who rushed excited forth to bloody fields, to
clasp the golden glory floating there. And she, who after long and trying suspense,
received the wounded or the dead, in the room of the high spirited knight she had
sent forth, and yet bore her grief, or her anxiety and toil, as became a dame of noble
race,—was as chivalrous as the enduring knight, whose sufferings she watched and
soothed, or who bore her favour with him to the grave.
Faithfulness was a necessary accompaniment to the worship of truth the knight
evinced, j^ext to religion, the first principle with him was the most punctilious
respect for honour,—so that to keep his word, though it had been pledged to a thing
altogether destructive of his success or happiness, was inculcated as the most absolute
of duties ; to break it, whatever excuse any change of circumstances might have
seemed to bring, was the greatest disgrace which the genius of chivalry could receive.
The refinement to which the principle was carried, affords many interesting
traits of the purest and most admirable regard to truth ; and some of the histories
of celebrated knights inspire us with delight at the pictures they occasionally present
of this devotion to the foundation principle of all that is great and good in oxir
social nature." We have already noticed the honours that were given to the new-
made knight, who had just passed through his time of probation. In this country,
the first description we have of the ceremony was in a.d. 50G, where it is ex¬
pressly mentioned that at the great feast immediately afterwards, he was placed in a
rich silver seat, with green silk curtains, in the centre of all the company, the king
sitting on his right hand, and the queen on his left, the other lords and ladies l)eing
174 THE  ATTEMPT.
seated three descents beneath the king. Yet there it is, that while honour was the
fashion of the day—many followed, or seemed to follow, its maxims, that had not
its spirit in their hearts. There was no searching test then to find out the true man
other than what we have now. But if his nature broke forth of itself beyond
chivalric bounds, society revenged itself for his contempt most mercilessly. Every¬
thing opposed to the ideal of knightly honour, of course, became dishonour. If he
instituted an action against a lady, or did not dismount to tender his services to any
one he met, he lost the favour of the dames. If he refused to perform any service
she might choose to ask of him, he was called " the discourteous knight;" and this
title called out against him the first of his comj^eers who chanced to approach.
Knights could not fight against nor kill agriculturists, and it was a great disgrace
if, through any untoward circumstance, he was forced to surrender himself to one of
" raskall rout." We have examples, in such cases, of the vanquished amusing his
pride by there and then raising his captor to his own rank.
The degradation of a knight generally preceded any legal judgment against him.
"If any knight absented himself dishonourably from the king's service, leaving his
colours, going over to the enemy, betraying of castles, and such like,—or ofl'endiug
against the articles of chivalry,—for such offence he was apprehended, and prepar¬
ation made for his degradation." Solemn as were the ceremonies of making a
knight, the reversal was still more solemn. He was armed cap-a-pie by his brother
knights, as if for battle, and taken to a high scaffold erected in the church.
There the priests sang the burial service for him as if he were already dead—at the
end of each funeral psalm, removing one piece of armour. They first took off his
helmet or " shamefacedness," that his face might be exposed to public view. His
sword was broken, his spurs hacked off his heels by men of low degi'ee,' his gauntlets
pulled off, and his coat of arms reversed. His military girdle was taken off, then
his left cuirass, and his right cuirass, the king-at-arms calling out, " Behold the har¬
ness of a disloyal an<l miscreant knight." A golden basin, full of warm water, was
brought in, and the herald held it up, asking the knight's name.
The pursuivant told it, and the king-at-arms replied,—" That is not true, for this
is a miscreant and a false traitor, and hath transgressed the ordinances of knight¬
hood." The chajilain said,—" Let us give him his right name." The trumpets
sounded an enquiry, and the king said,—" Let him, with dishonour and shame, be
banished from the kingdom as a vile and infamous man that hath offended the
honour of knighthood." The herald cast the warm water in his face, as if baptising
him,—" Henceforth be called by thy right name, Traitor!"    Then the king and his
THE   ATTEMPT. 175
nobles put on mourning, as for one of their order dead ; and they buffetted him into
an oj)en coffin, where the conclusion of the burial service was read over him.
But, in time, the order itself sunk from its high position. The greatest glory
of the sun is shed around its setting ; gold and jewels deck his decline ; the pure
white light sufficed for his strong day's race, and mighty work upon the earth. So
do all nations and institutions under the sun. Unconscious of themselves, or of de¬
corations external to themselves, while their whole spirit is sj^ent upon the work
they have to do, whenever their attention is turned to the signs of theii' work, and
to the adornments thereof, lo ! the reality has slipped away from them, and
though not utterly lost,—for all life will re-appear under some other phase,—yet
lost to them. Lo ! amid the outer glories of equipage and display, the spirit of
knighthood declined. The display involved so much expenditure, that estate be¬
came necessary. Still further, and knighthood came so to depend upon tenure,
that he who held a knight's fee might be compelled to take the same, or undergo a fine,
which quite debased the honour of the title. Camden says :—" Knights were made
on account of their estates, for they who had a great knight's fee, could claim the
honour of knighthood as thereby entitled to it. In the reign of Heniy III., all men
of £15 revenue were compelled to receive it, so that it became a burden rather than
an honour; though the king allowed to every knight 100 shillings for equipage,
that he might support the charges thrust ujoon him." I find elsewhere mentioned,
that in the reign of the first three Edwards, the qualification for knighthood was laid
from £10 to ^50 i)er amium. What a descent from the grand old qualifications of
all the cardinal virtues, and what might almost be called the knightly " merits cf
supererogation ! " Lutea Reseda.
St  jpairick's  §a:g.
'Tis mid-day, and the sun flares hot—the very air seems dead,—
The dusty palm-boughs motionless hang silent overhead;
The skies seem tux'ned to scorching brass,—the eai-th glows hot as they.
And oh ! in Ireland it is spring, and this St Patrick's Day !
I hear the punkah heavily go swinging to and fro,—
It scarce can bring one breath of air to cool my heated brow ;
176 THE   ATTEMPT.
For one strong blast of heaven's sweet breeze, in vain I long and i^ray—
And in Ireland now the wind blows fresh, and 'tis St Patrick's Day !
From the still court comes wearily the fountain's drowsy call—-
I hate the dull monotony of its slow measured fall ;
I want to hear the river sing about its old rocks grey,
To watch it rippling in the sun, for joy of Patrick's Day !
I care not for the gorgeous flowers that here they bring to me—
I want once more the violets and primroses to see.
That gi'ow amidst the grassy dells, and by the hedgerows gay.
And welcome spring's return once more, with glad St Patrick's Day !
There are no snowy hawthorn buds, nor buttercups so bright,
Nor lilac-blossoms bursting from their sleep through winter's night;
There are no yellow cowslip-bells, with which I once would play—
It is not spring-time here, it does not seem like Patrick's Day.
And oh ! but there are sights and sounds, so dear—alas ! how dear.
That wearily I long to see, and sadly want to hear ;
But it's I must wish and long in vain : for, weep how much I may,
I cannot be in Ireland now,—and 'tis St Patrick's Day!
But oh ! my heart is with you still, oh darling isle of mine !
The fairest land, the dearest land, on which the sun can shine ;
I love you more a thousand times, that I'm so far away ;
God bless my shamrock-island green, on this St Patrick's Day !
Mas Alta.
>§-«^
^it Jnijalib's ^ni^ to |lormaniry.
In the department of Orne, between La Ferte Mad and Couterne, may be found a
quaint and picturesque spot called Bagnoles. My readers have possibly never
heard its name ; but, though nearly unknown in England, it has a great and in-
THE  ATTEMPT. 177
creasing reputation in France—especially among the Normans and Parisians—as a
health resort; the virtues of its thermal and other springs being supposed to be, in
some cases, little short of miraculous.  . They are said to have been discovered from
the fact, that an old broken-winded horse, which had been left as useless by its
master on the outskirts of the forest of Andaine, was found the following year in a
marvellous state of health, due to its having bathed and quenched its thirst in the
thermal waters of Bagnoles.     The first baths were founded in 1G91 by De Cemy,
secretary to the King.     The waters became celebrated in Normandy and Brittany.
In 1813 the old establishment was re-constructed, and was visited in that year by
Vauquelin, the celebrated chemist, who analysed its waters.    It boasts of three dis-
tmct springs,—two iron and one sulphur.    Wishing to test their virtues for our¬
selves, we determined on paying a visit to Bagnoles ; and, accordingly, on the lltli
June 18G8, left Southampton for Havre.     The packet left about midnight,  and
after a very good passage, we arrived at Havre next morning, about 9 o'clock.    The
tide being too low to admit of our getting up to the landing-place, we were obliged
to go on shore in a boat; which, we were told, was a most unusual occurrence.    We
went to the Hotel Amiraute, on the quay, to be near the starting-place of the Hon-
fleur boat.    In the evening we took a drive to see the town ; and at 12 o'clock next
morning started for Honfleur, where we arrived after a very pleasant sail of about half-
anhour.     There was a motley and amusing collection of passengers on board,—
among them two girls, who sang to a guitar, and collected centimes afterwards.    We
had to wait an hour for the train at Honfleur, but there was quite enough of amuse¬
ment in the scene before us to prevent its appearing tedious.    They were busy
lading the steamer in whicli we had come with fruit, vegetables, etc., to take back to
Havre; and the different groups on and about the lading-place were very amusing.
Piiests, gendarmes, men and women in motley attire and peculiar head-gear, were
as busy as a hive of bees, chattering together in groups, or going and coming to and
from the steamer"with their merchandise.    The unlimited kissing that went on was
something new and strange : everybody seeming to kiss everybody else, whether they
were men or women—sometimes two or three times on each cheek—as rapidly as
possible.    After a short time the vessel took its departure ; the excitement suddenly
subsided, and the little town assumed its normal condition.     Beyond a certain
quaintness, it does not appear to possess much interest.    After a railway journey of
about two hours, we reached Lisieux.    The country through which we passed, all the
way from Honfleur, was more or less beautiful, being richly wooded, with now and
then an interesting old chateau or a few picturesque cottages.     The cherry trees
178 THE   ATTEMPT.
were bright with their rosy fi-uit, and acacia trees were plenty,—some in blossom.
It was not easy to say wherein the difference lay,—but there was a difference,—be¬
tween it and England. For one thing, you could hardly travel through the same
extent of country at home without either agriculture or manufacture proclaiming
that you were in busy, money-making England; while here, beyond a few cultivated
fields here and there, or a crop of wheat in an orchard,—which was but an
uncommon sight,—the useful gave way to the beautiful, and nature reigned
peacefully, undisturbed by art and Mammon. The orchards were very numer¬
ous ; and j udging by the fabulous quantity of cider we afterwards heard some
of the people drank, ought to be lucrative. The " dolce far niente" character of the
railways too, was essentially ^wi-English ; and though it may not be agi-eeable to be
kept waiting for an hour or so at every station, or to find that you cannot perform
a six or eight hours' journey in one day, still there was something rather delightful
about the whole thing, when one thought of Paddington or Crewe. "We came in for
a very amusing scene at the Lisieux station, while the omnibus was taking its time
about starting. A party of women had come to meet some children by our train,
and welcomed them with most eloquent demonstrations of delight; and what with
their snowy caps of various patterns, and their lively gesticulations, they were worth
stopping to look at. They chattered and laughed and cned over the children, mak¬
ing as much noise as a cage full of macaws; they would then suddenly calm down,
take up their bundles or baskets, walk on for a few yards, and go through the
whole scene over again with fresh vigour, the children all the while looking as
grave as possible. We went on chance to the Hotel de Normandie. A primitive place
enough it looked on first entering, but it proved much better than it appeared. The
ctiisine was veiy superior to the Amiraute at Havre; the people were very civil, and the
charges very moderate. Here we stayed till Tuesday morning. The town was all alive
on Sunday, as there was a fete in honour of some saint, and a fair, also I believe in
honour of the saint. A church jjrocession, with gorgeous robes, banners, etc., was con¬
siderate enough to pass through our rather out of-the-way street; and from some of
the windows hung sheets, with flowers fastened on them. On Monday evening we
started for an exploration of the town, the gar(;on having contrived to borrow a very
comfortable vehicle, with a strong family likeness to a bath chair, from his friend the
houlanger, in which his wife drew me for two hours, making a better chairman than
many to be found at Bath or Cheltenham. Lisieux is a very interesting and pictur¬
esque old place. There are two cathedrals—one a beautiful old building, the two
carved towers of which rear their hoary heads graiidly and reverently over the old
THE   ATTEMPT. 179
town. It was begun in 1022, destroyed in 1136 by fire, re-constructed from 1141 to
1182, and restored in 1233. There are several curious old wooden houses about the
town, belonging to the 16th and 17th centuries. Two of these, in the Rue aux F^vres,
are said to be very complete specimens of the ti'ansition from the pointed style to that
of the Renaissance: they are much ornamented with carvings. Many pretty bits of
landscaj^e are to be found about among the streets and shops,—country and town
being curiously mixed up together. One in particular we stopped to admire,—to the
evident bewilderment of the chairwoman and passers by,—would have made a perfect
picture. It was at the end of an uninteresting street where we came upon one of the
old wooden houses, on one side of which ran a stream overhung with trees; a little
rustic bridge crossed it, underneath which the Blanchisseuses were beating their
linen, and over it tripped a girl; while up the street, at the other side of the house,
came one of the odd-looking, time-and-weather-worn old women one so often sees
here, with her sabots, short petticoats, and cotton nightcap, not a very lovely object
in herself perhaps, but contributing her share to the picturesqueness of the whole.
After going through the fair, where there was little to be seen but English wares of
the cheapest and worst description, we went round the public gardens, where the
roses were very fine. We then proceeded a little way out of the town, where we passed
some very pretty villas, and saw the cloth and other manufactories in the distance.
Lisieux does a good deal in that way, and contains one of tlie largest linen manufactories
in ]SI"ormandy. On retui'ning to the hotel, we found a large wedding party at dinner
in the salle a •manger. They had gone through the necessary ceremonies at the
chapel and before the Maire in the morning ; and after a substantial breakfast at the
hotel, had gone off in a string of carriages, of different patterns, to spend the day in
the country, and had just returned for dinner. The door was wide open as we passed
up to our rooms, so we had a peep at the party. We were told that the festivities
ft-equently go on in this fashion for three or four days, before the newly-married pair
settle down in domestic felicity. Next morning, at seven o'clock, we left for Bagnoles,
passing through the same sort of richly wooded country nearly the whole way.
Our first stop was at Mezidon, where we breakfasted very comfortably and leisurely,
in the refreshment room, which, low be it spoken, was far superior to the generality of
those to be found on English railways, where, if refreshments existed, they would
probably be comprised in the few antedeluvian penny buns, dusty sjjonge cakes, or
antique sandwiches indigenous to such places, and which Dickens has immortalized.
In about an hour we went on, at a dignified pace, to Argentan. Here again there was
a delay; but our train at last appeared, and we got into a nice airy saloon carriage,
180 THE   ATTEMPT.
where our only fellow-passengers were a fat little man and his fat little wife. He
looked like a tallow chandler or bacon merchant in a small way, and took snuff and
ate chocolate most perseveringly. Their luggage consisted of two small deal boxes,
and altogether they were a funny couple. He wore the badge of the Legion of
Honour, and might have been a Marquis for all we knew ; if so, he was certainly
not a pleasing specimen of the French noblesse. About two o'clock we reached
Brionze, where the diligence was waiting to take passengers to Bagnoles. It
was a very hot dusty day, and as there were already two priests and a
bonne in possession, we decided on sending on our heavy luggage, and driving
down oui'selves in the cool of the evening, the gendarmes having stated very
confidently that there were plenty of "Voitures" to be had at the village about
a mile off. " Les voitures," however, proved to be the most extraordinary collec¬
tion of vehicles that ever were seen, and there was nothing to be found in which we
could go. There was no other diligence till nine o'clock, and nothing to be done but
make the best of it. The station was quite a mile from the town,—or rather vill¬
age,—which did not boast of an hotel; so our chances of getting any dinner during
the day seemed small. However, a very civil woman, at a primitive-looking cafe
opposite the station, promised to do her best for us; and, after a trip to the village
. for materials, produced an amusing repast, which we partook of in the waiting-room,
the Maitre d' Hotel himself acting as garc^on. Our first dish was, of course, potaye,
without which, ajiparently, a Frenchman cannot exist. This was a compound of
the water in which mutton had been boiled, a large proportion of oil or grease of
some kind, and very indifferent maccaroni. The ladle was a pewter utensil, with a
long black handle like a toasting-fork, which the old gentleman seemed to think was
something quite out of the common,—as it certainly was in one sense ; and he drew
our attention to it, telling us it was " Eccossaise." After the potage came some
very peculiar mutton cotelettes, dressed neither in French nor yet in English
fashion, but ^ la Brionze, pure and simple. They suggested vague suspicions as to
their having already done duty in the manufacture of the potage, and under more
prosperous cii-cumstances we should probably have scorned them ; but it was no time
to be fastidious, and they were an improvement upon the soiip. Next came a really
good milk cheese, indigenous to the country, which, with a bottle of Bordeaux, and
a dessert assortie of two ratafia cakes, and a few Naples biscuits, completed our meal.
I should not advise any one to dine at Brionze, unless compelled by untoward cir¬
cumstances. After a tiresome wait of about seven hours, the diligence made its
ajipearance, and we settled ourselves comfortably in the coupe.    Shortly after, the
THE  ATTEMPT. 181
train arrived from Paris, and we set off, regretting that the fast-waning light would
not allow of our seeing anything there might be to be seen between Brionze and
Bagnoles. However, the drive was very pleasant in the cool evening air, with our
three rather unpromising-looking Breton horses going a very good pace; the
banks on either side lighted with glow-worms; and every now and then a
delicious scent of new-mown grass and woodbine coming through the open
window. About an hour and a-half brought us to " La Ferte Mace," where we
left some of our passengers, and one horse,—going on with the remaining two to
Bagnoles. We were not in till near midnight, and the whole place looked strange
and weird-like, with its two white wooden bridges gleaming out of the darkness.
Two women and a man, with candles in their hands, were standing at the door of
" Les Bains " to receive us, and light us across the bridge to the rooms we were to
occupy at the opposite side. The house looked like an institution for destitute
orphans, or something of the kind ; the uncarpetted floors, and by no means luxuri¬
antly furnished bedrooms, appearing cheerless and uncomfortable. The beds, how¬
ever, as they had been wherever we stopped, were beautifully clean, as were also the
rooms. At seven o'clock next morning, the bomie made her appearance with a
wooden tray, on which were a large bowl,asmall jug of very strong and very black coflee,
a small jug of boiled milk, a huge slice of bread, which had just seen the fire, and was
called toast by courtesy, and a large metal table-spoon wherewith to sup the coffee.
Having relapsed into that delightful state between sleeping and waking, so insinuating
and dangerous, I was roused by another tap at the door, and the permission to enter
was hardly waited for, when in marched a gar9on and the bonne, with one of my
boxes between them. My feeble effort to explain that I did not want it then, only
resulted in their both staring at me ; so there was nothing for it but to be resigned
to circumstances, and French manners and customs. After breakfast, I went over
the establishment with the housekeeper, and chose much better rooms than those we
had been put into. Madame C, the housekeeper, was most civil and attentive
during the whole of our stay. She had lived in London for two years, twenty years
ago, and was generally supposed, in the establishment, to understand and speak
English ; but this was quite a delusion. We dined " alfresco " at one of the little iron
tables scattered about the square, our honne bringing "les plats" from the salle ct man¬
ger close by. After dinner, all the inhabitants made their appearance, sat round the
little tables chatting; drank coffee at the estaminet; or set off in twos and threes
for a stroll in the park, or " dans les sapins." The establishment is curiously situ¬
ated in  the midst of a sort of mountain gorge, thickly wooded on all sides, tlie
182 THE   ATTEMPT.
forests of Andaine and La Fert6 extending for miles in every direction. The trees
close about Bagnoles are chiefly pines, the resinous odour from which is very
pleasant, and is said to be particularly beneficial to consumptive or delicate patients.
There are two or three very curious and picturesque groups of rocks scattered about.
One, the Roc du Capv/^in, consists of two large blocks or peaks standing opposite,
and a considerable way apart. A Capu9in Friar—so the story goes—came to
Bagnoles on crutches, and made a vow, that if he was cured, he would leap from one
peak to the other; which, according to tradition, he did, leaving his crutches embedded
in the rock as he flung them away. Being on crutches myself, it was impossible to
scramble up to verify the truth of the statement. Several nearly, if not quite as
mii-aculous cures, performed at Bagnoles, were sometimes related by eye-witnesses.
ZOE.
( To be continued.)
 s-=.H^.§«=^ 
I wandered slowly through the woodland wild,
Where brilliantly the sun shed down his rays
Amidst the shadowing trees; and scarce a nook
I found where I might rest, and quite escape
The all-illuming presence of his beams.
And so, for weariness I thought to lie
E'en 'neath the burning brightness of the sun;
Wlien suddenly I came upon a tower.
Ruined with age, its ivy-mantled walls
Affording me the shelter that I sought.
Then, while I lay beneath its hoary height
Of gray uprear6d pinnacles, I mused :
" In some slight manner dost thou image Truth.
And thou, tall ivy, which ambitiously
Stretchest thy clasping arms on high, and fain
Would reach the heaven itself, thou figurest
A sage who, wanting the support of Truth,
But grovels on the earth, and aimlessly
Doth wander here and there.    Yet if he find
THE   ATTEMPT. 183
The tower of Truth, straight he begins to rise,
And mounteth ever on unceasingly ;
Yet still no further upwards can he reach.
Whene'er he quits the prop to which he clung."
And while I still was turning in my mind
If further emblem might the scene afford,
Close where I lay, at the tower's lowest base,
I spied a tiny t\ift of tender moss.
" Thou too, sweet little dweller on the tower,—
Whoe'er dost show most fair and freshly bright
When clinging to a gray and massive wall,—
Thou imagest a lowlier child of earth,
Whose life is never good or beautiful
Bereft of Truth."
And rested now, I rose.
Retraced my steps along the sunny path,
With all my inmost heart one earnest prayer,—
" May I, too, rest upon the Tower of Truth."
NOLI-ME-TANGERE.
I
Every-Day Justice.
A CERTAIN standard of moral excellence is held up before the eyes of the young as
desirable, and certain qualities are enumerated in copy-books, and other implements
of instruction, as conducive to its attainment; but among these some have an undue
preference, while others are chiefly conspicuous by their absence.
For instance, except in the homely adage "fair play's a jewel," we find so
little mention of Justice as a needful virtue, that we might imagine her reign to be
limited to the precincts of courts of law. Perhaps the framers of our best known
axioms were of the same opinion as Shakespeare's learned judge,—
"That in the course of justice, none of us
Should see salvation;"
184 THE  ATTEMPT.
but if they rightly rate justice low, in so far as mercy may override it, they forget
that in the ordinary human mind, if justice be omitted, its place will be occupied by
the sin of injustice, rather than by that gentler virtue.
As a rule, the average British schoolboy is strongly imbued with a love of fair
play ; and the code of honour impressed upon him by the hard experience of school
life, helps to increase in the man the sense of justice and impartiality.
So much cannot, we fear, be said for woman. Apart from the different ten¬
dencies of their respective occupations and upbringing, the cooler and less impulsive
masculine mind is by nature rendered more capable of striking the golden mean iu
matters of judgment, than the easily influenced and enthusiastic woman, whose
education, moreover, as at present conducted, is far from being the required correc¬
tive for this failing. Few girls receive the systematic teaching in solid studies that
might arouse their dormant love of equity; and very few are taught the mental
self control, which, while it checks too great impetuosity, stimulates their perceptive
faculties, and trains them to a wise discrimination. For this neglect, not theirs but
their preceptors', they and their immediate circle suffer,—in inexact statements
credited, in unjust criticisms uttered, in hasty sentences passed, they give too fre¬
quent evidence of their weakness.
Some would defend this incapacity on the ground of a mistaken charity, that
would fain deprecate judgment and decry justice ; while others, from a somewhat
similar feeling of kindliness, seek to palliate every fault, however grave, that comes
under their notice.
However estimable such sentiments are in their fitting degree, we cannot but
consider them examples of the common practice of exaggerating the value of one
quality at the expense of another. To take the highest ground, the same volume
that bids us " Judge not," speaks of an " anger that is without sin ;" an anger rarely
seen, but of which there is only too great a need, since it indicates a true and there¬
fore just estimation of good and evil, and a determination to do the former and rebuke
the latter.
In numbers of the miseries and sins of life, if charity be called on to comfort
and cover irreparable griefs, justice ought first to be summoned to decide their cause,
and if possible, to punish the offender; yet, of this mode of treatment, there is but
scant measure in the world. Were there more of it, it would perhaps be needed
less, and many a Gordian knot of sin and suffering would be done away with, or
may-be never woven, if the keen blade of absolute justice were more freely wielded
by society.    Truth may be indeed the polygon Mr Ruskiu deems her, and every
THE   ATTEMPT. 185
question may have a hundi-ed sides; but at the root of the matter, could we but
strike so deep, there must be two given quantities—right and wrong, and respecting
these, only one broad decision can be made. That done, the simple goodness or
badness of a thing made plain, it becomes wonderfully easier to distinguish between
admissibly palliative circumstances, and mere excuses thrust forward as a shield for
wilful wrongdoing ; following on which discrimination, the sentence is likely to
keep the even balance between justice and charity, which forces respect even from
those who come under its ban.
What applies to great things is no less predicable of the trifles which make up
the sum of woman's ordinary existence ; and an unjust mistress will be immeasur¬
ably behind one whose equitable dealing is so well known to her household, that her
calm decisions are unquestioned, and she becomes, in any perplexity, a trusted
referee. How difficult of attainment this state of mind is, only those know who
have tried patiently to unravel some tangle of misapprehension in which they them¬
selves are involved, and apportion the necessary blame as correctly as if they had
no part in the affair. But the effort brings its own reward ; for she who can acknow¬
ledge herself in fault, aud see how her deeds appear to other eyes, is far less liable to
suffer from the soreness of small quarrels, than she who, judging herself too favour¬
ably, is therefore irritated and ofiended by the supposed shoi-tcomings of others
towards her.
That there is an instinct of justice in most natures, Ls evidenced by the keenness
with which children resent every partiality or unfairness shown towards them by
their elders; but it demands the cultivation, without which such impulses become
stunted, or entirely wither away.
This is one of the many reasons for which we advocate so strongly the introduc¬
tion of mathematics and logic as an important part of feminine education. They are
means to the end of all learning, the development, refining, and perfect training of
the whole mind. They specially induce clearness, precision, a power of comparison,
a habit of weighing and viewing, under every aspect, whatever is brought forward
for discussion ; and not one of these results but tends largely to further the growth
of the instinct we have mentioned, and to increase the harmonious proportions of
every mental faculty.
This equity in every-day life acts also as a salutary check on the extremes of
partisanship, and ought to repress much of the class feeling now so forcibly thrust
upon our notice. No less should it, aid us to pierce some of the mists of theory, senti¬
ment, and false excitement, that surround the vexed question of woman's proper
186 THE   ATTEMPT.
work and sphere, rendering it a hard thing for her to select quietly what she feels to
be the course meetest for her, and often a still harder one for her to pursue it, unde¬
terred by the well-meant interference of those who approve, or the opposition of those
who differ from her.
How many women, for instance, who felt the need of some new task to employ
their energies, have been prevented from venturing to carry out their schemes by the
foolish talk of unreasonable champions ; and how many men, really anxious to do
all for woman that she needs, have been hindered by the opprobrium brought—alike
on their intentions and on the sex—through similar effusions.
In such cases we cannot but perceive the need of justice. Without it we lean to
whichever side first catches our ear, or has our personal bias, and, perhaps, espouse
it hotly, though unable to render a lucid reason for so doing ; whereas, were justness
of mind habitual to us, we should, as a thing of course, weigh contending claims,
and be able to give our aid to what is truly worthy of support, without being drawn
into apparent sympathy with clap-trap and false argument.
A little knowledge is more especially a dangerous thing, when there is no steadi¬
ness, no guiding principle to regulate its use.
It were an endless labour to point out the various ways in which the presence
of this virtue of justice would advantage its possessor, but we may partly realise
them by merely observing the miserable consequences of its absence ; the ill-temper
and annoyance,—not to mention actual sorrow,—caused by the iinfaii-ness of which
almost every one of us is at times guilty ; nor can we fail to recognise it as a duty
for each of us to use his or her greatest endeavour, so as to steer clear, as far as it is
possible, of such errors. The gain will be great to those around us and to ourselves,
and we shall count no learning, no patience, no struggle wasted, that conduces to so
happy an end. Elsie Strivelyne.
l^fjc Song flf i^t Jig^Ianb feles.
We return no more.     This lingering light.
That falls from off the mountain blue,
Shall rise again more clearly bright,
Shall bathe agaia in morning dew.
THE  ATTEMPT. 187
But to our sad and wistful gaze
Who can these lovely scenes restore 1
The sunset-hill, the heathery braes,
We shall behold no more.
Through the wild wood the winds may rave,
From the rude rocks the torrents roar;
But we must wander o'er the wave.
We must return no more.
No more, no more can we rejoice
In the far land beyond the wave.
Which has not heard our father's voice,
Which does not hold our father's grave.
Now from our sight these glories fade,
The light has passed, the dream is o'er;
In gleam or gloom, in shine or shade
We shall return no more.
E. H. S.
^^€§3^
Origins aniJ ^txxbRtxans.
Do not be alarmed at the title, reader, for I am not going to enter into a dis¬
cussion upon etymology, or to trace the histoiy of words through their misty wind¬
ings and crooked paths back to their birth-places at Greece or Rome. My present
intention is merely to try and give the origins of a few phrases, words, and customs,
with which we are all well acquainted.
There are many words and phrases which we use day by day, many customs
with which we have been familiar from our very earliest childhood,-—but of which if
any person were to ask us the meaning, we should be at a loss how to answer them;
the mere fact of their familiarity having taken away all curiosity as to their meaning
figin.
But before proceeding, I must offer an apology for the want of arrangement of
188 THE   ATTEMPT.
my subjects. The materials were collected from time to time, as opportunity offered,
and are put together like a badly-arranged piece of patchwork, without any regard as
to size, shape, or colour.
Let us begin with the custom of exclaiming " Bless you " after sneezing. Here
we have a custom which prevails in most nations, and for which various origins have
been assigned. One authority (Father Feyjoo) gives the credit of its institution to
Pope Gregoiy I. This Pope came to the pontifical throne in the year 590, at the
time of a great plague, to which his predecessor had fallen a victim. The crisis of
this pestilence was attended by a violent fit of sneezing, which in most cases was im¬
mediately followed by death. Gregory ordered a blessing to be used in order to
counteract tlie fatal consequences.
The Rabbins give another origin to this custom, in a tradition which informs us
that before Jacob, a sneeze was the forerunner of sudden death. No man ever
sneezed more than once, and that act was his last in this life. The tradition goes
further than this, however, and states that Jacob was the first who ever died of any
natural disease,—the memory of which was ordered to be kept up in all countries
by a command from every prince to his subjects, to use a benediction after sneezing.
There are some phrases which are corruptions or contractions, and which have
thus entirely lost their original meaning. Thus the slang phrase " All my eye
and Betty Martin," which now simply means nothing, was the beginning of a Latin
prayer to St Maj-tin, " Oh milii beati Martini." The story told of it is, that an
Italian sailor and an English one were at sea during a frightful storm. The Italian,
paralyzed with terror, threw himself on his knees, exclaiming " Oh mihi beati
Martini." " Hear him, " said the English sailor, " he is praying to Betty Martin to
save the ship ! "
Another example of the extraordinaiy way in which phrases are contracted and
corrupted, may be seen in two signboards in London. One is " The devil and bag of
nails." This sign once was " Pan and the Bacchanals." In the process of time the
picture was partly efiiiced, and nothing left but the picture of Pan, represented as
usual with horns and hoofs. Tradition had handed down something about the
Bacchanals, the transition from which to " bag of nails " is easy, and was not long in
being effected.
The other sign above referred to is the " Goat and compasses." This is a cor¬
ruption of the old Puritan inscription " God encompasseth us."
Many names now in daily use were originally political nick-names. The name
of " Tory" was first applied to the royalists by the opposite party, as a term of con-
THE   ATTEMPT. 189
tempt, the original Tories being at that time a band of Irish robbers. The royalists
in return bestowed on their adversaries the name of Whig, which was derived from
" Whigg, " the Scotch for sour milk, as being expressive of their dispositions.
The word Silhouette, which now means nothing more than a " black profile,"
was also a political nick-name. Silhouette was a French minister of state in 1759.
At that time, the treasury of France was at the lowest ebb. Many were the
expedients which were tried by Silhouette to improve matters ; but all without
success. At last, he advised excessive economy, and himself set the example.
At first the citizens of Paris pretended to take his advice, and now the fashions
took the air of the greatest poverty; the coats were cut short and worn with¬
out sleeves; gold and silver snuff-boxes were exchanged for rough wooden ones ]
and the only portraits now to be seen, were those taken by the profile of the face
being traced in black on the shadow cast by a caudle on white paper. These
portraits then received, and still retain, the name of Silhouette.
"We are all familiar with the peculiar kind of verses called Bouts-rimes. These
owe their origin to a poet of the name of Dulot. It was his habit to prepare the
rhymes of his poems, leaving them to be filled in at his leisure. On one occasion,
when a number of his papers had been stolen from him,—he regretted most having
lost three hundred sonnets. His friends expressed some surprise at his having
written so many of which they had never heard. Dulot replied that they were
blank sonnets, and explained his system of " bouts rimes." Struck with the origin¬
ality of the idea, these soon became all the fashion.
The phrase, to " write like an angel," is one which originated in France, and is
to be found iii most languages, though more common on the Continent than here.
At first sight it seems peculiar, for whatever qualities we are in the habit of ascribing
to angels, good penmanship certainly is not one of them. Among the Greeks who emi¬
grated first to Italy, and afterwards, in the reign of Francis I., to France, was
Angelo Vergecio, who was celebrated for his beautiful handwriting. He was
employed by the French monarch to copy Greek manuscripts, and after that his
name became synonymous for good writing.
The story of the monkey and the chestnuts, which originated the phrase—" To
make a cat's paw," is too well-known to need any reference to it. But there is
another phrase of much the same character, whose origin is perhaps not quite so well
known. The phrase I refer to is " To pluck a crow." A monkey was kept in a
zoological garden, fastened to a pole, at the top of which he generally sat. Every
day his dinner was brought to him, and  placed  at  the foot of the pole.     But a
190 THE   ATTEMPT.
hungry crow was always on the watch, and used to carry oif a great part of the
monkey's dinner before he could reach the ground. This went on for some
time, till the monkey determined to put a stop to it. One day, when his dinner
was brought, he pretended to be too ill to come down quickly. When at last
he reached the ground, he lay as if exhausted : the crow, emboldened by the
monkey's conduct, continued eating. Meanwhile the real owner of the dinner
rolled slowly up to the dish, and with a sudden spring, seized the astonished crow,
and carried him in triumph to his perch on the top of the pole. There he proceeded
deliberately to pluck his feathers, and threw him screaming into the air. Hence
the phi-ase—" To pluck a crow."
Florimond de Reymond gives us a new derivation of the word minister. The
hall of the School of Equity at Poitiers, where the institutes were read, was called La
Ministerie ; and Reymond says, that because he had been a student of the institutes
at this Ministerie of Poitiers, Calvin used to call him Mr Minister, and afterwards
gave the name of minister to the pastors of his church.
Many fabulous stories are told of beautiful princesses guarded by dragons.
These seem to have had their origin in the fact, that the walls of castles in the early
and middle ages encircled them, and were called by a name signifying serpents or
dragons.    In these ladies of distinction were secured during times of war.
The origin of the term " Blue-stocking " is given by Dr Johnson, and may be
given here in a few words. A club of literary ladies who used to meet for discussion,
was presided over by an old gentlemen who wore blue hose. The club thus got the
name of the " Blue-stocking club." Minnehaha.
From the French of Lamartine.
Hurried relentlessly to newer shores,
Borne down to Night by powers we cannot stay;
Ah ! can we never, on Life's ocean wave.
Cast anchor for a day ?
THE   ATTEMPT. 191
O lake ! the year has barely run its course,
Aud near the cherished waves she loved to see,
Behold ! I sit upon the rock alone,
Where once She sat with me !
Thus didst thou roar beneath thy caverned rocks.
Thus broke thy waters o'er the cliifs in sleet.
Thus did the wind dash up thy foaming waves,
On Her beloved feet.
One eve, remember'st thou 1 we silent sailed.
No sound was heard, between the earth and sky,
Except the cadenced fall of oars, and waves
Harmonious gliding by.
When accents sweeter-toned than those of earth,
Awoke the echoes of the channM shore ;
The waves were hushed to hear the silv'ry voice
Of Her whom I adore.
" O time, suspend thy flight! propitious hours,
Pause in your course, nor gjieed so fast away !
Permit us to prolong the fleeting bliss
Of this our happiest day.
" How many mourners long that day were done.
Flow on with them, and dry their bitter tears;
Biit we are happy ! 0, with us prolong
This blissful day for years !"
0 jealous Time, do these delicious hours.
When with their happiness our hearts o'erflow.
With as much speed pass onward and depart.
As did our days of woe ?
And can we not at least preserve their trace 1
What! lost entirely ? gone for evermore 1
192 THE   ATTEMI'T.
Can Time, which brought them here, and bore them hence.
These moments ne'er restore ?
O dark recesses of th' Eternal Past!
Year after year becomes in tui-n your j)rey ;
Speak—will you e'er restore these hours of bliss
Which you have rent away 1
0 lake and caverns ! rocks and forest dark !
Ye whom time spares, or smites to heal again
Fair Nature ! of that sweet and peaceful day.
The memory retain.
Preserve it in thy calms and in thy storms.
Fair lake, and in the banks thy waters lave.
And in the gloomy pines and rugged rocks
That frown above thy wave.
Retain it in the breeze that hovers by.
In ev'ry echo sent from hill to hill.
And in the silver star that lights thy wave
With lustre pure and still.
Let ev'ry wind that moans, or reed that sighs,
Let ev'ry perfume that embalms the air,
Let ev'ry sight and sound u^jon thy shore.
Say—" They were happy there !"
Dido.
THE  ATTEMPT. 193
Jfrank's   C^itrt^jrarb  Uigil,
Being a Lawyer's Ghost Story.
One dismal, foggy evening last January, my cousin Frank dropped in after dinner,
to see my brother about some of their perpetual law-business,—matters which he
always persisted he could much better discuss in Jack's cosy study than in their
dusty office in Chancery Lane.
On this particular evening, having brought their discussion to a happy termin¬
ation (and performed the same kind office to Jack's last dozen of Havanas), they
joined my aunt and myself in the dining-room ; we preferring, on this miserable
night, the dark warmth of the heavy crimson curtains and oaken furniture, to the
somewhat cold and unseasonable glories of buhl and or'molu in the spacious drawing-
room above. I was heartily glad when the two gentlemen appeared; for my aunt
had been dozing over her knitting for the last hour, and I had finished the last page
of the Christmas Number I had been reading; and now sat thinking over the
" thrilling" ghost stories it contained, until I could almost perceive strange figures
wrapped in every curtain-fold, and peering from behind every chair.
" Wliy, Marie, what are you glowering into the fire in that absent-minded
fashion for ?" was Frank's greeting, as I looked up with a start. But my answer
was prevented by aunt Loo suddenly waking up, with a jerk that threw her knitting
to the ground, and sent her ball of wool rolling into the fender.
" Dear me, Frank ! is it you ? I thought I heard some one knock a little while
ago. I do think I must have been taking a nap—oh ! my poor wool!" For Frank
had gallantly rescued it from among the cinders, and was trying to render it present¬
able by removing the ashes which adhered to it.
" Well, my boy, draw in your chair, and tell us what you have been about since
we saw you last.    You have been away, haven't you, Frank ? "
"Yes, down in Somerset, upon that precious business of Hildyard's; no end of
ti'ouble it's given me. If the fellow hadn't been an old friend, J should have been
very much inclined to wash my hands of the whole affiiir, long ago."
" And whose fault is it that things are in such a state ?" asked my brother.
" It's that stupid muddling Perkins, who made old Barrow's will : that's always
the way with those wretched little local attorneys.    And there's so much property
2 a
194 THE   ATTEMPT.
concerned too ! The whole concern should have been iu the hands of a competent
London man from the first."
" Like you, of couse 1" suggested Jack, quietly.
" Certainly—why not have it just as well at first as now ? Why, Jack, I should
have saved the estate some three hundred pounds or so in law-business alone, not to
speak of other necessary expenses."
" Oh, clever Frank ! I shall expect you will set Captain Hildyard's affairs
straight in a very little time now."
" Now, Marie, you know nothing whatever about law, so I consider you utterly
incompetent to form any opinion upon the matter.    What have you here 1"
Frank took up my magazine, and looked somewhat superciliously at the title.
I saw that he wanted to change the subject of conversation; for he knew we con¬
sidered him rather conceited regarding his legal abilities (which, to do him justice,
were above the common order) and so was desirous of escaping the " chaff" he saw
was coming.
" Ghost stories ! So that's the way you young ladies improve your minds.
Aunt, I wonder you allow this child to read such trash ! And I suppose, Marie, that
you believe all these horrifying ancestral traditions !" This last in a patronising tone,
that Frank chose to assume towards me sometimes, in consideration of his fifteen
years of seniority.
" You are very rude, Frank," I answered, trying to get the book out of his
hand, but he held it fast. " I just read them for amusement, and because"—I hesi¬
tated for a moment.
" Well, why ? any very potent reason 1"
" Because everybody reads Christmas Ifumbei's, of course."
" Not everybody ! I never do, for one—except my Christmas bills, they are
quite enough for mo ! And do you really believe in ghosts, you silly child 1"
" Frank, I do not know that it is such a sign of silliness to believe in ghosts,"
aunt Loo said somewhat solemnly. I think she always had rather a leaning to¬
wards the supernatural, and did not like to hear anyone speak irreverently or flip¬
pantly, as she considered it, on the subject.
" Have you ever seen a ghost, or an apparition of any sort, aunt Loo 1" Jack
asked.     He woiild have been sarcastic to anyone else, but not to her.
" That has nothing to do with it, John. If I never believed anything I had not
seen, I should be a very narrow-minded and ignorant woman. I have never been
to Iceland myself, and yet I am quite certain that such a place exists."    And aunt
THE   ATTEMPT. 195
oast a triumphant glance at my brother, as if to say—" Dispute or disprove that
argument if you can !"
" If ye had been whaur I hae been
Ye hadna been sae brankie, oh ! "
hummed Frank, with a very wise look.
" 'On the braes o' Killiecrankie, oh !' is that where you have been, Frank," I
asked, laughing.
" 1^0 ; but ' if you had seen what / hae seen,' it would either have kUled you,
or made you cranky, with your present apparitional tendencies," replied my cousin.
" What did you say you had seen, Frank?" asked aunt, "you spoke as if it
were something of importance."
" It's a real ghost-story, aunt, that happened to me not more than a month ago.
I can assure you it's quite exciting ; would you like to hear it ?"
" I thought you said just now that you didn't believe in anything of the sort."
" If I hadn't been a strong-minded lawyer, with a natural and professional
desire to get to the bottom of everything, I should have believed in them most
firmly ever afterwards,—ghouls, vampires, wi-aiths, spectres, banshees,—anything you
like. But aunt, do put down your work, and rest your dear old eyes for once,"
Frank added affectionately, as he laid his hand gently on the busy knitting-needles.
" I'll turn the gas lower, so as to have the proper light for a ghost-story; and we'll
draw round the fire comfortably."
So the gas was turned down, and the fire replenished; and we disposed our¬
selves to listen to Frank's spectral experiences. I will give you his narration as
nearly as possible in his own words, as I think it will sound better than if I were to
translate it into the third person.
" It happened in December, when I was down at Combe-Walsingham on that
business of Hildyard's that I was telling you about. I had gone down to Walsmg-
ham Lodge on Tuesday; the next day I went to Bristol, and, with the captain's
agent, saw this man Perkins, who had just set up an office in the city. We had a
somewhat disagi-eeable interview ; for Hughes, the agent, is a peppery Welshman,
with a great idea of his own and the daptain's dignity; Perkins being a vulgar-
looking, blustering fellow, with an extremely deep, gi-uff bass voice,—please to
remember that fact ? and a bullying, overbearing manner that would irritate a saint,
—excuse me, and did most effectually irritate me.
" I stayed in Bristol that night, returning to Walsingham the next afternoon.
196 THE   ATTEMPT.
Here I found my client laid up with a lame leg, the effects of a kick from a fiery
young colt he had been breaking in the day before. It was not dangerous, but for
the time prevented him from walking; and coming just at this jimcture of our
business, was very vexatious, as there were many places we had to go to together,—
hunting \ip witnesses, deeds, certificates, and I can't tell you what else besides.
"' And this very evening of all others, too. Lament,' Hildyard said, with an
impatient sigh, after we had been talking over our case for some half-hovir or so. ' I
had sent word to Harrison, at the Old Grange, that I should ride over to-night, and
look over those deeds about the Valley Farm with him. It must be done to-night,
or at latest to-morrow at noon, as Perkins' head-clerk is to come and read them here
at one o'clock. Bother that fool Perkins ! the fellow gives me no rest. I don't
know what to do, for Harrison can't walk for gout, and I can't go to him ; at least,
Pounceby said I mustn't move this leg for two or three days : and Harrison
wouldn't trust a servant to bring the deeds here—he's such an eccentric being !'
" 'Would he trust me V I asked.
"'You ! yes, of course he would ! But what do you mean? You're never
thinking of going there now, are you V
" ' If you'll give me a mount, and your directions, I'll certainly go—the interests
of our case demand it; and then I can look at the papers with him, bring them back,
and we'll be ready to nonplus Perkins to-morrow.'
" The captain objected first of all, saying it was cold and dark, and the rain
was coming down before long ; but I soon overruled him, and he sent word to
have Lord Cardigan saddled in half-an-hour. At the expiration of that time, after
a substantial dinner, and being well protected against ' a' the airts that win' can
blaw,' I heard the clatter of horse's hoofs outside the window, as my Rosinaute was
brought to the door.
" ' I'm sorry I can't send a man with you, Lamont,' Hildyard said,—' but they're
all gone to Churton-Bassett to fetch my hunters, and to Stowfield station to meet
the new tandem team coming from town; so there's nobody but old Hicks and a
boy at home. But if yoii leave Lord Cardigan at tlie Three Ploughmen, near the
Grange, it will be all right; Sutton knows all my horses. By-bye, and be back as
soon as you can.'
" Well, off I went, and a nice ride I had, I can tell you. Before I'd gone
a quarter of a mile, the rain came down in bucketsful, and a good stiff breeze blew
it right into one's fixce. Lord Cardigan didn't like it. He liad not been out for a
couple of days, so he was rather skittishly inclined ; and I had to bring my bt^st
THE   ATTEMPT. 197
horsemanship to bear on him. At last he fairly bolted—thus performing a
considerable part of the journey in much less time than I had reckoned to do it in.
After a few minutes, he settled into a long swinging gallop, that, but for the rain,
would have been pleasant enough, as the road was good, and free fi-om vehicles. It
took the wind out of him, though ; for, when we came to the hill on whose top the
Three Ploughmen stands, he began to cool down, and would have gone rather more
leisurely up it. But I was going to read 'my lord' a lesson ; for as soon as he began
to flag, I gave him the spur well, and drove him up as hard as he could pelt; and
before we came to the top, I'll warrant you he repented his escapade. The ostler
came up and took the reins from my hand, looked him over, and then said drily,—
' He've been bolting, and you've run him up the hill, sir 1'
" 'Aye, and taken a little of the spirit out of him. Is he often up to such
tricks r
"'I believe you, sir, rather; but he's a splendid feller for all that. Back
soon, sir V
" 'In about an hour and a-half; which is the nearest way to the Old Grange?'
The man directed me, and off I set.
" To make you sensible of my story, as our friend Thornton Odell would say,
I must jiist tell you how the land lay about the Old Grange. After climbing the
hill I just now spoke of, you saw the country for some distance on either side gently
undulating here and there, like waves of a calm sea. About a furlong from the Three
Ploughmen, on the right hand side of the road, stands the Grange—a long, two-storied
house, with a large lawn in front, bounded by a low paling, and high walls on each side.
The great gates at the end of the drive are never opened after dark ; but ingress and
egress ai-e obtained by a small wicket in one of them. On the other side of the road,
just opposite the house, stands Great Walsingham Church, rather an ancient
building, with heavy overhanging buttresses, and a short square tower. It is built
on the summit of a slope, and the churchyard extends to the road,—a turnstile admit¬
ting you to a narrow path leading to the porch. The churchyard, therefore, com¬
mands a full view of the front of the Grange.
" I was admitted by the wicket; and walked up the broad wet drive to the
hall-door, which was opened, in answer to my knock, by an elderly man in a gorgeoiis
livery, that contrasted strangely with his sombre face. To my request to see Mr
Harrison, he made no reply, but marched off, leaving me standing on the steps—
rather a strange proceeding. I heard a door open, and from it proceeded two voices
loud in conversation ; one, I suppose was that of the  master of the  house,—in  the
198 THE  ATTEMPT.
other I immediately recognised the deep gruff tones of my opponent Perkins. Here
was a nice state of things. I had stumbled uj^on the man of all othera that I wished
to avoid at present,—aud now the question was, how could I help meeting him? I
recollected, with some comfort, that the man had not taken my name or card; and
thereupon I devised a plan of escape from a rencontre which must prove anything
but pleasant, and might probably irritate Harrison more than I wished. It was
desirable to keep him in as good temper as possible ; and this, you may be sure, his
gout did not by any means facilitate.    The man re-appeared shortly with his answer.
" 'Mr Harrison is engaged, and won't be at liberty not for half-an-hour. He'd
much rather you'd put off seeing him till to-morrow ; but if you must speak to him
to-night, you may come in and sit down in the hall until he's ready.'
" I felt my temper rise at the cool way in which I was being treated; but re¬
membering Harrison's eccentric character, and his ignorance of my name and busi¬
ness, I kept my wrath to myself.
"' No,' I said, ' I'll not come in, I shall return in about three-quarters of
an hour.'
" 'Very well,' said the janitor stolidly, ' but I don't see any use of openin' the
gate twice for 'ce, when once 'ud do.' With which ^Jolite speech, he shut the door
in my face, and I retreated by the wicket.
" My plan was, to go to the church opposite, and take up my stand in or against
the porch, whence I could see whenever the hall-door was opened and shut; and
there to wait until I saw Perkins take his dejjarture.
" I went through the turnstile, and up the narrow path—the white tombstones
gleaming dimly on either hand, the long dark grass swaying dismally on the lowly
hillocks, and the heavy rain-drops pattering monotonously on the leaves of the ever¬
greens by the wall. Far off a bell was ringing, and its solemn measured tones
chimed in mournfully with the feeling of loneliness and depression that pervaded the
place. On reaching the porch, I was not a little vexed to find that entrance to it
was prevented by some horrid arrangement of planks and boardings, apparently in
connection with some work going on inside the building, the doors of which leading
into the porch were open, and through which I could dimly see the high backs of
the old pews standing out darkly against the opposite windows. There was nothing
for it but to stand up against the wall, tiiisting to the broad buttress to keep some of
the rain off me. I would not return to the house before my time, and it was hardly
worth while to go to the Three Ploughmen; so I pulled my collar higher round my
ears, thrust my hands into my pockets, and settled myself against the church wall.
I
THE   ATTEMPT. 199
"From thinking about business matters, I gradually fell into a reverie more
suited to the sj^ot wliere I stood,—recalling to mind many of my old friends and
school-fellows far away, lost sight of, or dead and buried many long years ago. Yes,
indeed, Marie, long years ago; for I was rowing and grinding at Oxford, when you
were a small child toddling about in your nursery.
" Perhaps what set me thinking about poor Paterson, and Brichan, and
Lumley, and some others, was my recollecting Hildyard's telling me that Viscount
Churton, Lord Stowfield's eldest son, had just died at college, and that the vaults
were being opened to prepare for his funeral. Well, altogether it was rather dismal,
as you may imagine ; and my feelings towards Perkins gradually became most
intensely inimical,—my amiability being in nowise increased by the recollection
of the famous game of chess that the captain had promised me when I came back,
and which was becoming more unlikely the longer I stopped.
" I might have been in my present position some fifteen or twenty minutes, dur¬
ing which time the rain had in no degree abated, but still poured down with aggra¬
vating steadiness. Everything was quiet with the stillness of death—-even the
distant bell had ceased its tolling ; the dropping of the rain was the only vestige of a
sound to be heard. Gradually—so gi-adually that I could hardly tell when it first
attracted my notice,—I became aware of a soft, slow movement, almost too indistinct
to be called a sound, which seemed to come from the direction of the chancel-window
on my left. I turned my head to listen. It was not possible to see anything, for the
darkness had been closing in more heavily, so that you could scarcely see your hand
before your face ; and only by the lights in the windows could I tell where the
Grange stood. I did not know what to make of this strange sound—it seemed more
a feeling in the air than anything else. What could it be 1 Slowly it came nearer—I
held my breath to listen ! It was passing the porch—passing me, involuntarily I drew
back, and pressed more closely to the wall. It had gone on out of hearing, and all
in a maze as I was, I began to breathe more freely. But, in less than two minutes—■
though it seemed more like half-an-hour—it came back ; and as it passed still nearer
to me, I thought it sounded something like a man walking barefooted. I may as
well confess it,—as you would be sure to get it out of me sooner or later—I began to
feel very queer indeed, and to wish heartily that I were at the Three Ploughmen in¬
stead of where I then was. You may smile at hearing me say so, Jack, but I think
you would have felt the same in my place.
" Twice again the thing, whatever it was, passed me, and each time I shrank
more closely to the wall; but as it nearly touched me the third time in passing, I
200 THE   ATTEMPT.
could bear it no longer,—but, drawing a quick breath, I made a dash forward with
my hands outspread, and touched something rough and wet. It was the longhair of
a large deer-hound that I gi-asped ; for just then the moon crossed a small clear space
in the heavens, and before the clouds covered her again, I had seen what my appar¬
ition was !"
Frank paused; his face was woi-king strangely, and looked deadly pale in the
firelight. Indeed, his appearance entirely belied the nonchalant air of amusement at
our discomfiture at the denouement of his story, with which he had spoken the last
few words. However disappointed I might have been, I said nothing ; and presently
he continued.
" I made short work of leaving my post, for I had had quite enough of it; and
a very few minutes brought me to the Grange door again. And here T found that
Perkins had been gone nearly half-an-hour. He must have left by some side door, as
I should have been sure to see the light fi'om the hall, had he gone out at the front
entrance. I got through my work with Harrison pretty well to my satisfaction ;
and then went to the Three Ploughmen for my horse. I asked the ostler whose
black deer-hound it was that I had seen about the churchyard, and why it was prowl¬
ing abroad at this time of the night.
" ' Don't know, sir ; he came here by hisself about a fortnight agone. Some said
he'd cut away from a passenger at Gately Green station; but I only know he've been
going about the village, but most about the church, since he were first seen. He
won't let anyone touch him, nor he won't take food from anyone j he'll starve if
he go on so long. He have a collar on, with a brass plate on it, but no one
knows what's on it. Rein's a bit twisted, sii-,—steady, horse, till I put it straight.
All right, sir,—good night, and thank you kindly.'
" I thought about the black dog all the way back ; and told Hildyard my ad¬
venture, such as it was, on my return. We didn't have our game, as it was too
late ; and all that night I dreamed of nothing but spectre huntsmen, and deer
run down by huge shaggy hounds. I couldn't get the dog out of my head, and
so determined to see him by daylight if possible. I rode over to the Three Plough¬
men the first thing next morning, to investigate the case.
" As I walked up to the churchyard, it was very difierent in appearance from
the previous night; for the sun was shining brightly on the wet gi-ass, and glint¬
ing  on the windows, and  gleaming cheerily on the vane above  the tower;   and
THE   ATTEMPT. 201
indeed, although it was winter, yet it looked quite bright and joyous. Close by
the porch I found my ghost of last night lying—a magnificent black Scotch
deer-hound, but very thin and weak from long fasting. As for the ostler's tale,
that was flatly contradicted by the animal himself; for, as I approached, he rose
up, looked me in the face with the most melancholy expression I ever saw in a
dog's eyes, and thrust his nose into my hand, and we were friends at once.
After many enquiries in the village, I found that no one could give me any further
information about him ; so I took him back to Walsingham Lodge, and he has
been my constant friend and companion ever since. That is all ; but you shall see
him for yourselves."
Frank went out, opened the inner-hall door, and called " Douglas ! " There was
a pattering of dog's feet, and he re-entered with one of the finest deer-hounds I have
ever seen—a splendid animal, whose large soft eyes seemed almost human in their
loving gaze at my cousin's face. A heavy collar was on his neck, with a brass plate
on the under side. Frank's hand trembled as he smoothed the hair over it, and his
lips twitched ; but he said nothing.
That is not quite all that happened, however, though Frank told us nothing
more ; and if it were not for Captain Hildyard, I should not have been able to give
you the real secret of the affair, which makes it, after all, quite a real ghost story.
Mas Alta.
(To he continued.)
»§-^i^«^^^
Ut f^gentr ai St fubcrt.
From the German.
Sir Hubert rides with lance and hound, AW up the hill and down the hill.
To hunt the hart and roe, Through miles of rugged way.
The forest through, the forest round. Till in a rocky cleft the hart
And where the rivers flow. Imprisoned, stands at bay.
Oh merrily with the huntsman's horn Then at its breast his glittering lance
The peaceful valley rings ! Sir Hubert aims aright;
From crag to crag the snow-white hart But powerless sinks his stalwart arm.
Before the huntsman springs. And fails his fierce delight.
202 THE  ATTEMPT.
The chase it is Sir Hubert's joy, For on its head the huntsman sees
He rides with might and main; A cross is shining clear;
And still he hunts the snow-white hart An arrow seems to strike his head,
And still it is in vain. And makes the brave man fear.
Sir Hiibert bows before the cross.
His hunting now is o'er.
Eternal blessedness he makes
His aim for evermore.
Veronica.
Part vii.—The Influence of the Church.
Section I.— Its Origin.
" And thou brave knight, whose hand haa poured
The life-blood of the Pagan horde
O'er all the land ;
In heaven shalt thou receive at length
The guerdon of thine earthly strength—
And dauntless hand !"—Langfellovj's Translation of Coplas de Maurique.
We find many of the chivalrous virtues in the ancient heroes of Greece and Rome ;
but not under the shadow of the Eagle standard, nor within the pale of civilization,
were the first-fruits of chivalry sown and reaped. Farther north, under more wintry
suns, upon more barren soil, was that seed first planted by the Scandinavian races,
whose valour was essential to their freedom, whose freedom was as necessary to
them as the breath they drew; whose manners were simple and severely pure;
whose reverence for womanhood raised woman to the position of becoming worthy of
reverence; whose grave and solemn sujicrstitions were natural to their bleak and
windy wilds; and whose worship was that of unseen deities, created through apotheosis
of seen heroes. In the rude ceremonies with which German youths were admitted
into the assembly of warriors, we observe a near approach to the observances of
knightly initiation. As soon as they had thus publicly been endowed with the spear
and the shield, they attached themselves with devoted constancy to some particular
THE   ATTEMPT. 203
chief. We find in Tacitus—" The noblest youths were not ashamed to be numbered
among the followers of a celebrated leader, to whom they devoted their arms and
service. A noble emulation prevailed among the companions to obtain the highest
place in his esteem; among the leaders, to acquire the greatest number of bold
followers. To be constantly surrounded by a band of select youths, was the ambition
and glory of the chiefs,—their ornament in peace, their protection in war. The glory
of such distinguished heroes diffused itself beyond the narrow limits of their own
tribe. Presents and embassies were employed to obtain their friendship; and the
fame of their arms often ensured victory to the party which they espoused. In the
hour of danger, it was shameful for the chief to be surpassed in valour by his com¬
panions,—it was shameful for his companions not to emulate his bravery. To survive
him, if he fell in battle, was irretrievable disgrace ; to protect his person, and
increase his glory by their own triumphs, were the most holy of their duties." This
union of so many of the elements which gave biitli to chivalry in a subsequent
age, affords sufficient reason for ascribing its origin to our northern ancestors, who,
at that time, alone seemed to have been possessed at once of the feeling of religious
awe, of respect for woman, of purity of manners, and of free and heroic courage,
which distinguished the early votaries of chivalry. Without much apparent change,
after their conquests in southern Europe, they became friendly to the Christian
religion. There was thus engrafted upon their original nature a new system of
belief, which, in its native purity, would have been singularly in opposition to all
their former principles of conduct. But the doctrines and precepts of Christianity
had been becoming more and more obscure, through the departure of the clergy from
the Scriptures, their adherence to tradition, and their approbation of time-serving.
Besides, this modified Christianity was generally embraced by the founders of the
most chivalrous kingdoms, when they came fresh from one battle-field—only to
take breath before beginning another. It was not the conversion of a jjeople
by the labour of missionaries, and the slow progress of reason and faith; but the
blind impulse of an army,—as did the Burgundians, following thoughtlessly the
example of its venerated leader. Thus did Clovis, the renowned head of the French
monarchy, profess himself a convert to the faith of liis wife, when he believed that
an invocation to her God had given him the doubtful battle of Tolbiac.
But we cannot expect such conversions to have the effect they would have had
in more primitive times. Dimly understood as it was, their new religion could do
but little to soften them, as may be seen from many a legend. When the famous
Earl Siward felt death approaching, ho  lamented  the  sad   fite  which had thus  so
204 THE   ATTEMPT.
undeservedly awarded him such an ignominious end. " Alas ! that I have escaped
death in so many battles, to yield up my life thus tamely and disgracefully like a
cow ! I beseech you, my dear friends, dress me in my impenetrable coat of mail,
gird my trusty sword upon me, place my helmet on my head, my shield in my left
hand, and my gilded battle-axe in my right, that I may die in the dress of a
warrior, if I may not have the happiness to die amid deeds of glory and slaughter !"
It showed that he looked forward rather to the Valhalla of Odin, than to the rest
that remaineth for those of a broken and contrite spirit. The noble attempts ■vyhich
were made by the early missionaries from Rome, had only a very partial effect; but
the after-result of the evangelization was more considerable. Though it did not
subdue, it softened their wild hearts, and gradually gave a new direction to their
energies j as the little silent helm turns the head of the boat, unconsciously to the
mariners, who with brawny arms and straining sinew, row without pause the
creaking oar.
Down to the times of Alfred and Charlemagne, the mass of the people were sunk
in the grossest ignorance ; but the wise policy of these enlightened princes led them
to endeavour to raise them through religion and learning. They erected public
schools and universities, and encouraged great teachers; they built churches, and
appointed officiating ministers. Chivalry was an institution purely military before
the reign of Charlemagne ; then for the first time we hear of vigils and vows, of the
blessing of the sword, and the prayer of consecration. Christianity, in its passage
through the dark ages, had become too closely blent with the errors of the times and
the superstitions of Paganism, to be easily purified. Yet it was to the very pre¬
dominance which superstition had over the gospel, that chivalry owed its strongest
nourishment. As the Rev. H. Stebbing says—" I am inclined to think that we
should at all times be more coiTCct, when speaking of modern chivalry, to apply to it
the epithet Ecclesiastical, rather than religious or Christian ; for it was never the
pure principle of religion which characterized it, so much as the glory with which it
was invested by the church, and the maxims which it was the interest of churchmen
to place among its laws. The gorgeous hues with which the banner of the Cross
was dyed, made it more fitting for the pomp of the battle-field, and the tent of
kings and conquerors; and as much in harmony with triumphant clarions and
neighing war-steeds as with the meek voices of jii'eachers and confessors. The
offering of a bloody sword was more acceptable to her than that of a bleeding heart;
and spoil-laden soldiers better worshippers at her altars than penitents who brought
nothing but their sins.     When it had become as much a wonder for its magnificence.
THE   ATTEMPT. 205
as of veneration for its holiness, men found in its sanctities a new fountain of honour,
which could be attained in no other way."
The peculiar relation which the church held to the civil government thus con¬
solidated the influences of chivalry into its perfect form, as something different from
the mere military honours of earlier times, when there was no special sacred autho¬
rity distinct from that which warred and governed. The religions of Paganism never
rivalled the majesty of the king, or acted independently of the state; Mahometanism
was an indissoluble compound of the religious and civil power: in neither the one
case nor the other was there any authority which kings could not of themselves ac¬
quire. But the Christian church, originally planted on a separate foundation, grew
in outward power as it departed from the principles of its Founder, or retained only
such as suited their increasing idea. The consecration of the soldiers of the cross
suited their ends ; and thus, in the days of Charlemagne, they glorified his knights.
The personal fame he himself acquired has made him gladly acknowledged as the
founder of Mediseval Chivalry. In his reign we first find women of rank taking that
interest, and exerting that influence on society, which induced that courtesy of
manner which so esseutially belonged to it. The taste for display and magnificence
also extended remarkably; for, though he, like many other great monarchs, affected
extreme plainness of dress, his followers seemed to have rivalled each other in their
costly garments and showy adornments.
There was a close union between Charlemagne and the Pope. To his father and
grandfather the Roman See had more than once owned its deliverance, and he made
himself not only the benefactor and champion, but the " Favoured Son of the
Church," who was proudly crowned Emperor, as the legitimate successor of the
Caesars. The mutual interchange of honours and rewards must have had a powerful
influence upon the military character of the times ; as it is likely that his knights and
barons would share the ecclesiastical favour of their master, if they imitated his de¬
votion to, and reverence for the church. The wars in which he engaged during the
greater part of his life, were made to partake of the nature of crusades, by the im¬
portance he always gave to the consideration of the interests of religion and the pro¬
tection of the Pope. In his contests with the Saracens, he faced the most renowned
enemies of Christianity ; and in his long and bloody wars with the unconverted
Saxons, he attempted either to incorporate them into the Catholic church, or
slaughter them mercilessly if they obstinately refused his faith,—a manner of proce¬
dure which, even in these days, was considered highly meritorious.
Charlemagne further increased the influence of the clergy by employing them
206 THE   ATTEMPT.
in the important offices of state, and opposing their character to that of his more
warlike subjects; but he never, throughout his alliance with the church, lost sight
of the interests of his kingdom. Under the reigns of some of his successors—Louis,
Lothaire, Charles, and others,—this even balance of things altered, for they had not
his great mind to hang the scales evenly. The church was better fitted to consecrate
the shields and standards of a powerful and conquering host, than respect the
possessions and desires of a pusillanimous prince, whose loss became her gain. So she
was by turns the tyrant and the subject of these Christian monarchs. Her rites
were regarded with most solemn veneration ; and if a life of aggression and wicked¬
ness was concluded by submission to her dictates and recejition of her sacraments,
its peace was considered sure, its piety certified. Lothaire, about a week before his
death, clothed himself in the garb of a monk, went through their consecration, and
expired in the full assurance of present pardon and future joys. The great ignor¬
ance of mankind deepened the power of the religion they so little understood ; and
any threat u.ttered by its ministers was winged with superstition. A spiritual
worship is impossible without an active spirit, which tho priests did not encourage ;
for they, instead of raising mankind to the level of their faith, degi'aded their faith
to the level of their minds, and made it not spii-itual but sensuous, consisting of
things seen and heard, and such as the heart of man could conceive. The worship of
relics was carried to a pitch of absurdity. Pilgrimages to Home and other notable
places became pr(jofs of piety; to reverence the clergy themselves blindly became
the height of faith ; to become one of their body the height of glory. Then came
a great overturn in church and state. The descendants of Charlemagne were driven
with ignominy from the throne, and Hugh Capet attempted to restore order and
tranquillity in the troubled kingdom. As having so great an influence on the nation
at large, one of his first acts was to reform the orders of chivalry, giving them a more
strictly religious character.
About this time Sixain had been nearly overrun with tlie Moors ; but tlie noble
Pelayo and his brave followers defended their lives, their liberty, and their faith,
amid the rocky fastnesses of Asturias,—and their deeds showed the action of the
living spirit of chivalry in its highest form. Other brave bands stood out in
Navarre and Arragon, keeping alive the national spirit even in misfortune. No
Christian nation was ever so ])laccd, for heretofore the religion of the conquered had
subdued the conquerors; but the Moors were strong in their faith as in their sword.
Nowhere was war so blent with piety ; nowhere was the devout and valorous spirit
of chivalry so much the birthright of every knight.     His enemies were the enemies
THE   ATTEMPT. 207
of his country and of his faith ; his contests were all to the utterance. There was
then, perhaps, less of courtesy to his opponents, and more earnestness and solemn
purpose ; less of the gaudy display of the tournament, and more of the resolution of
the gory battle-field, when the Spanish knight proved his mettle. And his nature
rose high to meet the risks. To save his fatherland from the Moor, was to fight on
the side of God ; and to affix the standard of the cross where the crescent once had
waved, was to conquer Satan through the leadership of Christ.     Therefore, George
Eliot says:—
" Is not Spain the land of chosen warriors,
Crusaders consecrated from the womb;
Carrying the sword-cross stamped upon their souls ?
By the long yearnings of a nation's life,
Through all the seven patient centuries,
Since first Pelayo and his resolute band
Trusted the God within their Gothic hearts
At Covadunga, and defied Mahomed ;
Beginning so the Holy War of Spain,
That now is panting with the eagerness
Of labour near its end."
We have proof that the order of chivalry existed in our own country among the
Anglo-Saxons, and that there was considerable solemnity and religious ceremony in
fast, vigil, and investiture. The Normans, at their conquest, despised the native
warriors for submitting tluis their honour to the priesthood. A religious, or rather
superstitious character, had distinguished the Anglo-Saxons from early times. They
reverenced the church, believed in the efficacy of relics and pilgrimages, in the power
of witchcraft and the truth of omens,—so that the religious character of knighthood
obtained an early footing with them. But this was greatly lost amid the violent and
sanguinary contests at the decline of their power. After the conquest, the feudal
system was engrafted upon tlie existing form. William divided the land into so
many knight's fees ; and the vanquished inhabitants had to submit to hear his
proud followers vow to him the service of their swords, for the possessions they
thus gained and would keep. The occupation of a conquered country is unfavour¬
able to knightly virtue; for if courage be not opposed by courage and power,
equal or nearly so, it generally degenerates into brute force. The Saxons, deprived
of every advantage that could allow them to meet their conquerors on/air ground,
were massacred, or crushed down into some degree of slavery or tributary service,
so that   the warriors of  Normandy,  in   a few years,  became   little   better  than
208 THE   ATTEMPT.
a tribe of plunderers. Though William Rufus had received his knighthood at
the hands of an archbishop with all solemnity, he gave his young knights free
license to practice their courage in the plunder of travellers and ill-protected castles,—
the very ministers of religion being in nowise protected by their sanctity. Gradually,
however, the tumults subsided—the Saxons contended no more, the Normans turned
from the acquisition of property to its protection; their manners became softened
by milder principles ; pomp and splendour suited their tastes. The church was re¬
stored, and received due veneration; and chivalry regained some of its earlier power.
Its customs were reintroduced from France. There its education had retained its
ecclesiastical direction, though there was but little reference to the pure word of God.
The fam.o\is romance of the " Petit Jehan de Sauitre," which has furnished
so many amusing illustrations to writers on chivalry, affords us some kind of
notion of the teaching the page received in matters of faith and doctrine. There
the "Dame des Belles Cousines" ordains herself his instructor, and commands him
" to avoid the sin of pride, hateful to God ; of anger, of envy, of idleness, of
gluttony, of luxury." He was to keep inviolable the ten commandments; to
treasure in his heart the twelve articles of faith ; to exercise the seven cardinal vir¬
tues in opposition to the seven deadly sins; to perform the seven works of spiritual
mercy, which consisted in saving men from error; and the seven works of corporal
mercy, which embraced all acts of charity done to the body. And then she diverges
into an elaborate education of trifling ceremonial; of dress; of manner; and of
love-making—which seemed to consist in braveiy and courtesy. A nobler style of
education can be gleaned from the pages of the Faerie Queene, when, in later days,
Spenser immortalised the manners and beliefs of the past.
The favourite seasons for investing knights were at the great festivals of the
church—Christmas, Easter, or Whitsuntide. At such times the whole pomp and
ceremonial of investiture was observed with scrupulous exactness, and a holy occasion
was recommended to the acolyte, because then, as says the Book of Chivalry, " Much
people would be gathered together, and God would be besought by many voices to give
him grace to acquit himself well in his further career." His sword was blessed with the
following prayer—" Hear, God, we beseech Thee, our prayer, and with the right hand
of Thy majesty deign to bless this sword, wherewith thy servant desires to be girded,
that it may be the defence and protection of churches, of widows and orphans, and
all who serve God, against the cruelty of Pagans; and that it may be powerful, and
a fear and terror to all deceivers,—Through Jesus Christ." Then having taken the
oath which bound him to the performance of all the duties implied in the above sup-
THE   ATTEMPT. 209
plication, the priest returned the sword, with these words—" Receive this sword,
accompanied with the blessing of God, by which, and by the strength of the Holy
Spirit, you may be strong to resist and cast out all thy enemies and all the adver¬
saries of the Holy Church, and to protect the peoi)le of God, by the assistance
of the invincible Conquei'or, our Lord Jesus Christ. Be mindful of what the
Psalmist says—" Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, and powerfully throw down the
mount of corruption,"—defending the Holy Church of God, and execrating and
destroying the hypocrite not less than the infidel. Be the merciful protector of
widows and orphans; raise the fallen, defend them when raised; revenge the
wronged ; confirm the well-disposed ; and, in as far as thou doest these .things, thou
shalt come as the glorious champion of virtue, to dwell with the Saviour of the world,
and enjoy in his kingdom eternal and celestial joys !" Then all the congregation
joined in this antiphonal—" Be of good courage and observe the ordinances of thy
Lord. Walk in his ways, and may He be with thee in all thy undertakings !"
Tlien the priest again prayed—" God, who by Thy providence dost oixler all
things, both in heaven and earth, prosper Thy servant here devoted to the duties of
Thy warfare. May all the power of his enemies be broken by the strength of the
spiritual sword, and altogether destroyed, Thou contending for him,—through Jesus
Christ."    The congregation then sung a part of Psalm xliv. three times.
As the honour of knighthood was frequently conferred upon the very field of
battle, when it was won, these prayers were necessarily omitted at the time, and the
church took some later opportunity oi signalising the favour, and binding her votary.
But even in the hours of greatest peril, it was not forgotten that he must be conse¬
crated in the name of the Holy Trinity. When the prince struck the kneeling
candidate with the flat of his drawn sword on the back of his neck, he pronounced
him a knight, in the name of the Father, of the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The
allegorical meaning of the different parts of his ai-mour was to serve as a reminder
that religion must go everywhere with him : indeed, the love of glory was not
allowed of itself to be a worthy motive for seeking the order, unless it was sub¬
jected to the wish of thereby more fully honouring God. But the impossibility
of retaining this refinement of feeling and of obedience, caused the church to insti¬
tute new and more strict rules, which were observed by what have been called
" The Religious Orders." Lutea Reseda.
210 THE   ATTEMPT.
We sat and talked at fullest ease,
That summer day of cloudless splendour;
While overhead, the wliisj:>ering trees
Rustled their leaves so green and tender.
The rippling burn ran past our feet,
Beyond it rose the ruins hoary,
Around us all was fair and sweet.
Above us all was light and glory.
And both our hearts responsive sung
To nature's song of joy and gladness ;
On us no weight of sorrow hung.
Our spirits knew no touch of sadness.
We had not learnt, with tearful eye.
The lessons Disappointment teaches;
Our lives were young, our hopes were high,
That summer day beneath the beeches.
We sketched each other's future days,
We filled each other's lives with glory ;
Each smiling at the other's praise.
And pondering deep the other's story.
But great although we meant to be,
Famous, and good, and wise, and clever;
No better climax could we see.
Than that we should " be friends for ever."
Alas ! our castles in the air
Have crumbled into dust and ashes ;
Forgotten are the day-dreams fair.
That looked so bright 'neath Fancy's flashes.
Our hopes of fortune and of fame,
Have proved a bright but fleeting vision ;
And mine is no illustrious name.
And yours no life of joy Elysian.
THE   ATTEMPT. 211
But part of yonder vision fair
Shall still remain, whate'er betide us ;
The ancient friendship still is there,
And what on earth can now divide us 1
And still we love the woodland walk.
And still recall the loving speeches,
That mingled' with the school-girls' talk,
That summer day beneath the beeches.
Dido.
^n litljalijj's Crip to pormantrjr.
(Continiued.J
At the other side, close to the little village of La Forge, and guarding the en¬
trance on that side, is the " Roc au Chien," so called from its fancied resemblance
to a dog's head,—which I confess I never could see. L^Etablissement consists of
" Les Bains," a large house on the right as you enter from La Ferto Mace, contain¬
ing, on the lower storey, the warm, douche, and other baths. Above this are two
stories of rooms for visitora, and above these again is an upper storey, containing
servants' rooms. The best rooms for visitors are in this house. Next to it is a
curious looking one-storied building, which contains " La Source Thermale" and one
or two very old and seldom used baths. Hero Sophie, a picturesque and very civil
Normandy peasant girl, dispenses the water for drinking. Putting a tumbler into a
little tin can fastened to a long pole, she dips it into a sort of well, and brings up a
glass of water fresh from the Source. It is said to lose half its virtue if not taken
a la cuvette. Sophie demands ten centimes for every glass of water so taken, and
must bring in a considerable revenue of centimes to the proprietors, as numbers come
to drink the water besides those in the establishment. Though a sulphur spring, it
is by no means disagreeable to the taste, as at Harrowgate and elsewhere ; and the
natural temperature is hardly lukewarm : to give even a tepid bath it is necessary
to add artificially heated water. The natural heat is 25 centigrades, and a bath
at 32 is by no means a warm one.
Behind " La Source" is the chapel; a small ugly building, merely for the use of
the visitore at Bagnoles.    Beyond this is a solid stone house, lately built and not yet
212 THE   ATTEMl'T.
quite finished, belonging to the principal proprietor, Mons. R—-—, where lie and his
family spend part of every summer, and seem thorouglily to enjoy " la Vie a la
Campagne." Underneath this, house is a swimming bath for children, and beyond it,
towards the Park, is the Grande Piscine, a magnificent swimming bath, holding G354
litres, which has been lately built. It is supplied from " La Source," the water being
at the natural temperature, and constantly iiinning. It takes an hour to fill. Eight
through the establishment runs the river Vee, which is crossed by two white wooden
bridges ; and, retracing our steps from " La Piscine, " we cross one of these, and find
ourselves in a large gravelled square, on three sides of which stands a block of build¬
ings, more like barracks than anything else. These contain a large number of visitors'
rooms, the saloon and two salles a manger, an estaminet, billiard room, doctor's con¬
sulting room, &c. There are about 250 beds in L'Etablissement altogether. Be¬
yond the square ojjposite " La Piscine," are "Les Ecuries" and "La Lingerie," where
all day and every day the Blanchisseuses may be seen and heard beating their linen
in the Y6e. There is a first and second class Table d'H6te, " L'Ancienne" being about
two francs a-day more than '' La Nouvelle." None of the visitors belonging to the latter,
with one or two very rare exceptions, ever appeared in the salon; they always
vanished into some mysterious region at the other end of the house. A small sub¬
scription gives the right of entree to the salon for the season. Both it and the salle a
manger are very good rooms, with nicely polished oak floors ; but both are very much
spoiled by the lowness of the ceilings. There were not more than about twenty at the
dejeuner next morning, the establishment having only been open about a fortnight.
Nearly opposite us sat two of our countrymen, a General S and his son, who had
arrived the night before. An English lady and her son made their appearance a day
or two after, and these were the only English visitors during the season. We all
drank iron and suljihur water, abolished tea drinking, and took quite naturally to
the half-past ten o'clock dejeuner,—substituting Bordeaux and water for tea, and par¬
taking of five or six plats of various food and unwholesome things, mushrooms,
truflfles, etc., etc.; a style of reckless living that would have horrified the proprietor
of a cold water establishment. The cuisine was very good and beautifully clean, and
the charges very moderate, being only six francs and a-half a day for " la premiere
table." The life at Bagnoles during the first part of our stay was a very quiet pri¬
mitive one ; the iidiabitants spending most of their time out of doors. The weather
was lovely, and they Avere to be seen in all directions, carrying light wicker chairs
or camp stools, settling in groups under the trees, reading, working, chatting and
playing cards ; or roaming about in the park and through the woods.    After dinner
THE   ATTEMPT. 213
they sat or strolled about the square for a short time, and then went off for a short
walk; the ladies generally wearing little woollen shawls, put over their heads in a
coquettish and tasteful manner, which seems natural to a French woman. About
eight o'clock it invariably became very chilly, no matter how hot the day might have
been; and ladies going to Bagnoles would always do well to provide themselves with
some warm wraps. After the evening walk they all met in the salon, till about ten
o'clock, when they generally dispersed to their rooms. The bathing began as early
as five o'clock in the morning,—so that "early to bed and early to rise" was
the order of the day. Later on in the season, however, when the place filled,
things were different. There was a dance every Thursday and Sunday evening,
which was not unfrequently kept up till half-past two o'clock. The average
number of visitors iii the height of the season was about sixty of the first-
class. There were very few of the second after the first two or thi-ee weeks.
Every Sunday morning a well-to-do looking old abbe drove over in his carriage for
the service at the chapel, remaining the day, and making his appearance at breakfast
and dinner. He made more noise and laughed louder than anybody else, and
appeared by no means to despise the good things of this life ; and with his rosy good-
humoured face and frequent bursts of hearty laughter, formed a striking contrast to a
reverend brother, who for a short time joined the table d'hote,—a pale, spare, rather
aristocratic looking priest, who seemed to consider anything beyond a faint smile
beneath the dignity of his office, if not something worse, and who never sat down to
his meals without crossing himself twice, a ceremony the abbe entirely dispensed with.
None of the party appeared to pay much attention to the duty of fasting; though it
must be confessed, the meals on Fridays, in spite of salmon or turbot, were never so
good as on other days. There was sure to be one dish at least which must have
been especially concocted for the mortification of the flesh,—particularly the soup
maigre and a sort of galette, which was only tolerable when eaten with some sweet¬
meat, of which there was generally a liberal supply. Ponding au kirche was always
to be found in the menu for that day's dinner, and very good it was.
We made several excursions in the neighbourhood,—one to Domfront, about
twelve miles distant. It had been described to us as superbe, magnifique, etc., etc.,
after the manner of the French, who seem to think (making all due allowance for
their natural love of exhaustive language) that an Englishman has no opportunity
of seeing anything like fine scenery out of France,—at all events, not in England.
An old gentleman gravely supposed (as we sat out one evening, admiring the group
of pine trees and the Roc du Capucjin, just before us) that there was nothing like
214 THE  ATTEMPT.
that to be seen in England. He was an inhabitant of Domfront, and an evident
admirer of the beauties of nature; which, to hear him talk, you would suppose had
reached their greatest sublimity in " La Belle Normandie." A visit to England
might perhaps have convinced him that we had a few more opportunities than he
thought of studying the sublime and beautiful, and must have reduced him to
speechlessness, from sheer want of language to express any greater admiration than
he had already expended on his pretty little bits of scenery at Bagnoles and Dom¬
front. The latter is very curiously situated, and worth driving over to see. There
are two Chateaux close to Bagnoles,—the one quite new, belonging to a nouveau
riche Mons. Goupil; the other a venerable old place, belonging to the De Frotte
family, built by Jehan Frotte in the sixteenth century, and restored in the
eighteenth. Leading up to it arc two beautiful avenues of beech trees. There is an
aristocratic and by-gone look about it, mixed np with a good deal of stately gloom ;
and it is altogether an interesting old place. We also drove to Chantepie, a very
pretty place about three miles off, belonging to the Marquis de Maltpierre. Close
to the park at Bagnoles there is a chapel dedicated to St Horter, whoever he may
be. He lived in the eleventh century, and died in the forest of Andaine, near a
fountain, which has the reputation in the country of possessing curative virtues, and
many pilgrims are said to visit the chapel and the neighbouring fountain. In the
trees about it may be found numbers of small stones, placed there by the pilgrims.
Every one who has been cured of any disease puts a stone in a tree, and it is said
that whoever is rash enough to take any of these pebbles away, gets whatever disease
the person who put it there was cured of. Wild boars and wolves are to be found in
the forests, and towards the end of the season there was a chasse, but nothing came
of it except an invasion of dogs, a few wretched-looking horses, and about half-a-
dozen huntsmen, with most unmusical horns. In the winter, however, it is said to
be a very exciting amusement, and is sometimes carried on by torch-light. With
the exception of a few Parisians, a family from Monte Video, and another from
Constantinople (Armenians), and an eastern Consul, most of the visitors were from
" La Belle Normandie." We met with much kindness, and I found there was by no
means the wide gulf of diiference and su])eriority my British arrogance had expected
to find between the thoughts, habits, and feelings of the two countries. The absence
of salt spoons, and the necessity for using the same knife and fork " pour tons les
plats" was decidedly objectionable, according to English ideas; particularly when
some highly respectable people resorted to the expedients they did for cleaning the
aforesaid knife and fork.    The enjoyment of a chicken, or it might be a mutton bone,
THE   ATTEMPT. 215
with the help of one's fingers, is also highly unconventional; but to atone for all
this, the cold shade of English exclusiveness seemed nearly as great as at home, and
though snubbing in Fi-ance may be more politely practised than in England, it
undoubtedly exists,—that is, among the French themselves. They appeared quite
ready to meet English foreigners on equal terms, generally expressing a great admira¬
tion of the country,—a feeling which was just then very much in the ascendant,
owing to the successful termination of the Abyssinian expedition. No doubt, as is
all very right and proper, they always admire England with a strong mental reserva¬
tion in favour of France. As the old abbe remarked, when, one day expatiating on
the glories of London, where he had once spent a month, I asked him if he thought
it equal to Paris. " II rily a qtHune Paris dans le monde," he replied, with the air
of a man who thought it absurd folly to think of the two covmtries as comparable.
Bagnoles belongs to two joint proprietors, and is managed by a directeur, Mons.
Rabault, a housekeeper, and a staif of very civil and willing servants. Madame L.,
the head of the ladies' bath department, is a wonderful woman in her way ; and her
husband, though an old man, seemed quite up to his work in the gentlemen's side of
the house, assisted by a very active young nephew, who does duty alternately as
bath attendant, housemaid, and gar^on, and seems equally at home in each capacity.
Madame L. has been thirty years at Bagnoles, and her husband forty-six. She does
her own work, and that of other people besides, in such a skilful hearty way, that
she seems to be the mainspring of the whole concern. Whatever she does she
appears to do with her whole soul, scolding not excepted. It was most amusing to
hear her in the morning ordering about her two handmaidens, " Virginie" and
" Victorine," as she flew about from one bath-room to another, and then off to the
Piscine, to see that all was going on right there, as she was under the full conviction
that nothing could go on right without her. She would flash in and out of the bath¬
room, just waiting to enquire, ''Madame va-t-elle hieni" or " A-t-elle sonneel" for,
with all her cleverness, she never knew what bell had rung. An instant after, she
was heard in the far distance, calling " Victorine" at the top of her voice, and when
answered, giving the unfortunate girl half-a-dozen orders and as many reprimands
in a breath; and the next time she appeared she would probably inform you that
Victorine was stupid and lazy, and that she could do her work " beaucoup mieux"
if she had not any assistants to plague her. She has a nice little cottage at La
Forge, which she lets in the summer, and lives in during the whiter. She assured
me it was " tree jolie," and " tres commode," that it contained ten beds, was very
nicely furnished,  and that she got five francs a-day for it.     La Forge is a small
216 THE  ATTEMPT.
village, about ten minutes walk from Bagnoles, where there is a very fair hotel, very
moderate in its charges, and where many people stay during the season, coming to
Bagnoles for the baths, etc. Bagnoles consists solely and entirely of L'Etablisse-
ment and its immediate surroundings ; there is no village of the name. It opens in
the middle of May and closes in October. The Mede9in Inspecteur is appointed by
Government. The present one, Mons. Bignon, has been there for nine years. He is
said to be very clever, and is most kind and attentive to his patients. A certain
number of sick poor are paid for by Government, and live at the back of the proprie¬
tor's house, in a wretched-looking old building called the Hospital, which they talk of
pulling down and re-building before next season. Several other alterations and im¬
provements are also contemplated before that time.
After a sojourn of ten weeks, we returned the way we had come, by Lisieux
and Havre ; the country looking as lovely in its autumn robe as it had done in its
summer one ; the apple-trees laden with fruit, and one very small and z-emarkably
bright red ajiple eclipsing the cherries in its beauty. We stayed two days at Havre
to see the Exhibition,—the first was Sunday, though strangely unlike one in England.
It hapj^ened to be a fete day, on which all the bands in the different towns in
Normandy meet together for the distribution of prizes. We were told that 6000
musicians had come into the town for the occasion, and we had great difficulty in
getting two small rooms at the Hotel de Normandie. They looked on the street
where the chief excitement prevailed, and all day crowds were passing and repassing,
and bands parading about with gorgeous velvet banners, embroidered in gold and
hung with medals, the trophies of former success. The sight was really a very
pretty one : the wonderful varieties of caps, some of most curious construction, and
the brightness of colouring made up by the universal blue blouses of the men, the
snowy caps and aprons of the women, and the uniforms of the gens-d'arms and
soldiers of various kinds, with the gaudy banners of the bands; here a vivandiere, and
there a swarthy vendor of pink and white sweetmeats, with his white dress and
turban or Greek cap,—altogether formed a striking contrast to the sombre blackness
generally pervading an English crowd of the same discription. They enjoyed them¬
selves, too, very differently ; taking their pleasure in a careless, happy, childlike way,
as if there never had been, and never was likely to be anything but enjoyment
derivable from life. On Monday we visited the Exhibition. The Aquarium was
the great object of attraction, and amply repaid a visit. That evening we left for
Southampton, where we arrived early next morning; and so ended a Trij) to
Bagnoles. Zoe.
THE  ATTEMPT. 217
Jfrank's   C^wrt^garb  ^x^xl,  •
Bein6 a Lawyer's Ghost Stoby.
(Conclusion.)
About a fortnight after that evening on which we first saw Douglas, Captain Hildyard
came up to town on business ; and, as he was something of a chum of my brother's,
he was brought home by the latter one evening to dinner. When the gentlemen
joined us in the di'awing-room, Captain Hildyard's attention was instantly caught by
a beautiful Parian group of pointers on one of the side tables ; this led the conversa¬
tion to dogs in general, and at last to Frank's dog in particular.
" Very strange occurrence, wasn't it ]" said our guest to Jack. " I was inclined
at first to be sceptical on the subject; but Lament will have it that it was nothing
less than poor M'Kay's spirit that he saw and heard.   What do you think about it ? "
We were all amazed,—the speech was Chinese to us; and Captain Hildyard
met our looks of astonishment with" equal surprise depicted on his own face.
" What! don't you know that part of it ? Didn't he tell you anything about
M'Kay and Colonel M'Pherson 1 Well, I wonder at that, for I should have thought
he would have told you if any one ; but still I know he is very reluctant to speak
about it. But he couldn't help telling me that night, when I noticed the state he was
in. I thought he was a dead man, almost, as he entered the room—never saw a
fellow look so ghastly in all my life."
We all begged to hear this new version of the story; and this is what he
told us :—
"I daresay you have often heard your cousin speak of Ronald M'Kay—first
a schoolfellow of his at Loch Venie, and in after years one of his dearest friends. I
think you met him once at my place. Jack, when you were down after the partridges
one September, some five years since. A splendid fellow he was—a thorough model
of a Highlandman : it was as good as a play to hear him and Lamont chattering
Gaelic together.
" When Lamont took to the law, M'Kay entered the army, joining the —th
Highlanders. He was out in the Indian Mutiny, and distinguished himself very
much by his gallant conduct: but your cousin can tell you about that better than
I can.
2 D
218 THE   ATTEMPT.
" When the —th came home from India, they were for some tune in Scotland ;
and with Lamont's holidays and M'Kay's leaves, they saw a great deal of each other.
So Frank was a good deal cut up when, three years since, M'Kay was ordered to
the Mauritius. The regiment had gone out some time previously ; but he had re¬
mained at the depot, and was now about to take out a number of recruits. As a
parting present, Frank gave him Douglas—that same Douglas he has now, then quite
a young dog. M'Kay called him Douglas, because it was your cousin's second
name.
"When they parted, Ronald seemed to have a presentiment that he should never
return again; he grasped Frank's hand as though he would never let it go. " Frank,"
he said, as the dog came bounding up to him, " if I never see you again, remember
that I leave you Douglas to take care of I value him beyond all price, as your gift;
and, if I die away from Scotland, I should like him to come back to you again. I
promise you • that somehow or other you shall have him; I'll ask Donaldson, our
senior majoi-, to see that you get him all right,—now, remember."
" The —th, as you know, stayed three years at the Mauritius after M'Kay went
out, and during that time the friends corresponded frequently, and M'Kay seemed
almost to have forgotten his presentiment. He had told Major Donaldson his wishes
about the dog ; but to no one else had he said a word on the subject, as he said he
disliked being laughed at for a soft-hearted fool. At last the regiment was ordered
home; but, a fortnight before leaving, Major Donaldson was seized with fever and died.
M'Kay had it slightly, but not, as it was then thought, at all dangerously ; indeed, he
was well enough to go on board with his company. He felt Donaldson's death very
much, for they had been great friends ; though some of the younger men said, What
a lucky dog that M'Kay was—he was sure of his promotion now.
" Poor fellow, he never got it; for, just after they passed the Straits, having
touched at Gibralter, he became terribly ill with the fever again, and it was easy to
see, from the first, that there was no chance for him.
" For hours before his death he lay in a heavy stupor, hardly giving any sign of
life,—and Douglas never left his side, but sat by his cot as motionless as his dying
master, only now and then giving a piteous whine, that nearly brought tears into
the eyes of the grim old surgeon. Suddenly, at dawn, a change came over M'Kay's
face. He opened his eyes, and a gleam of intelligence shone in them as they fell
upon the dog at his side ; then, so suddenly that his servant watching him sprang to
his feet, he raised himself on his elbows, and gazing intently into one corner of the
cabin, as though he saw some one there, cried in a clear ringing voice, " You shall
THE   ATTEMPT. 219
have him, Frank, laogh niochridhe, you shall have him, as I said,"—and then with a
deep sigh, he fell back dead.
" He was buried at sunset; and before land was sighted, the youngsters were
envying Murchison, who would now get his company without purchase.
" M'Kay had very few friends, and fewer relatives, and all the latter were abroad
in Brazil, China, and Australia; so the Colonel had his effects stowed away until
some one should claim them, as it was not known whether he had left any will, or
if he had, where it was. In the meantime, knowing nothing of M'Kay's wishes re¬
specting Douglas, the Colonel appropriated him, having always admired him greatly.
I should say, by the way, that Ronald's servant had been with him only a short time,
and so knew nothing about Lament.
" Well, when regimental affairs were settled. Colonel M'Pherson went off to see
his father—a very old man, living near Inverness ; and of course he took Douglas
with him. Ever since his master's death, the dog had been ill at ease, restless and
unhappy,—always wandering about, as though in quest of something, and eating barely
enough to keep himself alive. Strange to say, as soon as he was fairly started on his
journey, he seemed to settle down into a state of quiet expectancy, very different
from his former unrest, and utterly unintelligible to the man who had charge of him.
Colonel M'Pherson had to visit Gloucester on business on his way home; so for
that place he booked himself, Douglas being committed to the care of his
groom.
" Now comes an extraordinary feature of the case. At one point of the route, not
being then on the line to Gloucester, passengers had to change trains,—and this
was at a station called Gately Green, distant about three miles from Churton-Basset
and five from Combe-Walsingham—to which latter village, indeed, it was the
nearest railway station. The Gloucester train had just come up, and the passengers
were looking after their luggage in a great hui-ry, when a porter shouted to Mason,
the groom, who was standing with his finger through the ring of Douglas' collar—
" Hallo ! does yonder load of harness belong to you 1 Because if it does, look sharp,
it's labelled for Cheltenham." The man, fearing to lose any of his master's property,
ran off to the luggage-van, dragging the dog after him ; and, as he did so, he heard
behind him, as plainly and distinctly, he said, as ever he had heard it anywhere, the
long low whistle with which Captain M'Kay was wont to call Douglas. He started
round, amazed—for he had seen M'Kay buried ; the dog struggled violently, nnd
howled in his grasp; but the porter called him again, and he went off to see after
the harness.    A second time the strange whistle was heard—and then, with a jerk
220 THE   ATTEMPT.
so sudden and strong that he was unable to resist it, and, as he afterwards said, just
as though some other hand had pulled the collar ring from his, Douglas broke from
him with a bound—cleared a paling dividing the station from the road, crossed a
stubble field, entered a plantation, and was lost to sight.
" Of course, it was useless to attempt following him, as the train was just on the
point of starting ; but, at the next station, Mason told his master of the dog's escape,
suppressing, however, the incident of the whistle ; as he thought, very likely, that it
might be regarded only as an excuse on his part. The Colonel's wrath was great,
and nearly cost the man his place : for Douglas was, to all intents and purposes,
entirely lost. As it was, an advertisement was sent to the Times, offering a liberal
reward for his recovery ; but it resulted in nothing. I was away from Walsingham
just then, and I think that, excepting myself, hardly a soul for miles round sees any
paper but the stupid little local Heralds and Oazattes and Intelligencers ; so that the
notice of the dog's loss never penetrated to our remote part of the world. You can't
have any idea of the ignorance of the people concerning affairs in general, in fact
of anything, except their own little matters. I think it's doubtful if half-a-dozen of
them could tell you who is Premier at this moment."
" But," said Jack, " how was it that neither you nor my cousin chanced to see
the advertisement ? "I should have imagined that, reading the Times as you both do,
you could hardly have missed it."
" Lament assures me that he never troubles himself to read that second column,"
Captain Hildyard said, with a smile; " and I can easily believe that it is not in his
line. As for myself, had I been at home, I should most likely have seen or heard
something about it; but I only returned from Cornwall the day before Frank arrived
at Walsingham, and I had hardly seen a paper since I left home.
"Your cousin has told you all about his expedition to the Old Grange: ah, and
very kind it was of him to go, I can tell you ; for I couldn't move a peg, and the
business was of the greatest importance to me just then. And if you had only seen
how fagged he was when he got in from Bristol. But as soon as he had made up
his mind about it, nothing I could say would keep him at home. I suj)pose, though,
that other influences must have been at work as well, and I shouldn't wonder if you
come to the same conclusion presently.
" He told me afterwards, that when he left the Grange to wait for Perkins' de¬
parture, some irresistible impulse, for which he was utterly unable to account and
as powerless to oppose, impelled him to go up to the church. He said he felt as though
some unseen power were drawing him there, whether he would or no. As he first heard
THE   ATTEMPT. 221
the footsteps, a sort of cold, chilly mist seemed to envelope him all round. It was not
the effect of the pelting rain, for he avers that it was entirely distinct and different
from it j it was more like a Highland hUl-fog. As the footsteps passed him. a second
time, through the thick darkness a figure seemed to shape itself before him. In¬
distinct and shadowy at first, it gradually grew more clear and defined, assuming the
appearance of a man in kilt and bonnet, wraj^ped round with a heavy plaid. Just
then, came a gleam of moonlight 3 and, ghastly pale, M'Kay's face looked out from
the folds of the tartan^ and a smile, inexpressibly sad in its sweetness, passed over
it, as the footsteps again approached. And then—^you may hardly believe it, but
Lament says he would swear to it with his dying breath,—then, his friend's voice said,
as distinctly as ever he heard it in life,—"You shall have him, Frank, laogh mochridlie,
you shall have him, as I said." And as Frank gasped out the word—" Konald!" he
was gone."
"We were all silent after Captain Hildyard had done speaking. Jack was staring
into the fire, and Aunt Loo's face wore a very amazed and uncomfortable expression ;
while as to myself—well, I won't say what I felt, except that I was very thankful
I had not been in Frank's place. None of us stirred, until Captain HUdyard spoke
again :—
" Taking one thing with another, I think that the most likely conclusion to
arrive at is, that if ghosts do appear at all, M'Kay's spirit appeared to Lament; and
that it had also something to do with the dog's strange escape from Gately Green.
I have tried to talk with your cousin about it two or three times, but he always
begs me so piteously not to speak of it, that I forbear; and I think that, more than
anything else, is proof that our strong-minded friend believes that there was some¬
thing besides his imagination at work in that church-yard."
"Well, whatever he may think about it himself," Jack replied, "he certainly
did his best, the other evening, to make us believe him a thorough sceptic on the
siibject. I am sure that no one, to hear him talk, would think he had the least par¬
ticle of faith in the supernatural. Why, he even told us he had got to the bottom
of this, and found out it was nothing but a dog after all."
" Precisely so ; that was to throw dust in yovir eyes, if I may be allowed the
expression. He thought, I daresay, that you would never imagine there was any¬
thing in the occurrence beyond what he told you."
222 THE  ATTEMPT.
" But," asked my brother again, after another pause, " did the Colonel never
hear of Douglas turning up 1"
" Yes ; Lament communicated with him directly, and heard from him the par¬
ticulars of his friend's illness and death ; of course, at the time he was at Walsing-
ham he did not know of it. He had written to him not long before ; but, knowing
that the regiment was returning home, he was not astonished at failing to receive a
reply. Then our Bristol business happened to be on hand at the time, so, alto¬
gether, he was totally unprepared for his friend's loss.
" When he came back that evening, as he entered the room as white as your
marble mantelpiece, and I asked him in a fright what was the matter,—he just sank
down into a chair, and covered his face with his hands, unable to say a word. As
soon as he could speak, he said, " Hildyard, I have seen Bonald M'Kay or his spirit
to-night, and I believe he is dead;" and then he told me all.
" When Colonel M'Pherson came back from the north, Frank had an interview
with him, and gave him an account of what had happened to him; and the Colonel
told him that those woi-ds he had heard in the churchyard were the last that M'Kay
ever spoke. He was willing enough for Lament to retain Douglas, as he would
never have taken possession of him had he known Ronald's wishes on the matter.
I think Frank transmitted a considerable gratuity to Mason, as compensation for his
discomfort arising from the dog's loss. You may have noticed that Douglas wears a
collar with a large brass plate on it; that was M'Kay's, and still bears his name.
That is the end ; and I think you will agree with me that it does turn out a real
ghost story after all.    I can only say that I am glad I was not in Lament's place."
" Many thanks," said Jack, " it's very strange, and I can't but believe that there
is something beyond the ordinary in it. I must have a good look at that animal
next time. Why, here's Morley with the tea. I had no idea time had gone so
quickly. Now, Marie, see if you can give our friend a good strong cup, after his
exertions in story-telling. Well, I suppose it must really have been M'Kay's
ghost."
Mas Alta.
THE  ATTEMPT. 223
She stands, her fair face white with one great fear.
Close to her lover.    Not one tender tear
Trembles into her eyes, for scorching pain
Has burnt them dry.    Ere long she will be fain
To bow her weary head, and weep them dim;
But now she keeps them clear to look at him—
To look their last at him who is their life.
Ere he goes forth into the bloody strife.
The Eve of St Bartholomew.    The heat
Has hushed the steps along the echoing street;
Nature is waiting for some Terror yet
Unborn, and scarce can stir expecting it.
But they—these two—while soft the daylight dies.
They only look into each other's eyes;
They only cling together, heart to heart.
Waiting the cruel hour that bids them part.
And see ! she strives to bind upon his arm
Love's latest pledge to keep her love from harm,—
As once she gave him flower or ribbon gay,
Worn in her hair throughout some holiday,
To nestle near his heart, and shun the light,
Like her own love.    But now that ribbon white
She seeks to fasten where all eyes may see.
Will it not save from bloody treachery
The life she holds far dearer than her own ?
Is this a time to shrink from making known
The tenderness that chose him from the world,
And love's own banner over him unfurled 1
She cannot weep, she cannot even speak,
She does not feel the kiss upon her cheek ;
And through quick heart-beats she can hardly hear
Her true-love's voice,—" Thanks for your oflfer, dear.
224 THE  ATTEMPT.
You offer safety, but the price is hard ;
Alas ! I needs must stand upon my guard,
Against my coward heart, that dares to doubt,—
Against myself.    For what is life, without
Honour and truth ?   Shamed life were worse than death,
And stained honour worse than parting breath,
And love that stoops to lie !—What can I say ?
Smile in my face and chase my doubts away,
The soul that looks from out your eyes, my own.
Is dearer to me than the eyes that shone
My heart away.    And so it is with you.
My darling, ever tender, ever true,
Even to death.    Ah ! parting is full sore,
And sore the thought that never, nevermore,
Here in this quiet garden we shall meet,
While evening sunlight glows upon the street;
But sorer far, my darling, if above
I might not lift my eyes and claim my love.
My own true love, the dearer for the pain
Of parting now, so soon to meet again.
Yoii will not bid me change, like shifting sand.
And live a traitor to my God, my land,
My father's faith.    They that deny Him here
He will deny before the angels, dear ;
But they who wear for Him this crown of sorrow.
Shall feast with Him in Paradise to-morrow.
The pain is short, and oh ! the joy is long.
Look in my face, my dearest, and be strong!
Strong to endure, and I am strong to do,—
Firm to believe nothing can part us two :
Nothing but cowardice that fears to die.
That cannot look beyond that sultry sky.
And see the martyr's gain.    Farewell, my own,
The night is dark; for us the light is sown.
Soon to spring up !    Oh, for that dawning bright.
Seine shall run red through Paris streets to night.
THE   ATTEMPT. 225
But we shall stand beside the other stream,
That maketh glad God's city.    This bad di-eam
Shall be forgotten on that happy shore.
Or, unforgot, shall make us love the more !"
* * * *
And here the painter leaves us ; does not tell
Whether the tocsin of the midnight bell,
Parted those lovers.    But we know tlie end,
The fitting close, for love is strong to lend
Strength to the weakest.    Ah ! she flung aside
The craven token, that the river's tide
Might bear it far away; and said good-bye
With lips that quivered strong in agony.
Ah ! Love, most sweet in peril and in strife,
Twining and blossoming on blighted life ;
If fires of suffering cleanse and strengthen thee.
Dare we lament ?    Thou hast the victory !
O.  M.
Part vii.—The Influence of the Church.
Section II.—The Crusader.
" Know then, that we have borne all this distress
By land and sea,—war, want, reverses,—all !
To the sole end that we may gain access
To sacred Salem's venerable wall;
That we may free the faithful from their thrall,
And win from God his blejsing and reward.
From this no threat our spirit can appal,
For this no terms will be esteemed too hard
Life, honours, kingdom lost, or dignity debarred."
Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered.
Immediately after the ascension of our Lord, Jerusalem had been made the natural
centre of the infant church ; which, though persecuted, continued its struggling exist¬
ence until the times of the Emperor Constantine.    On his conversion, he restored
2 E
226 THE   ATTEMPT.
Jerusalem to its ancient importance; repaired the tomb in which our Lord was said
to have been buried, built over it a magnificent vault; and to the east of it a
splendid temple of mysterious commemoration, consecrated by the celebrated
Eusebius. He built another church at Mamre, in honour of Abraham; while his
mother Helena built one at Bethlehem. Pilgrims flocked in increased numbers to
the Holy Land. Protection and hospitality to them became the greatest pleasure,
as well as the most sacred duty of the pious Christian residents; princes passed laws
in their favour ; merchants assisted them by every means in their power; an Itiner¬
ary from Bordeaux to Jerusalem was published, to indicate to them the proper routes,
and the wisest resting-places and ports; prayers and religious ceremonies accom¬
panied them as they went; affectionate greetings, friends and succour awaited them
in Jerusalem ; prayers and thanksgivings received them when they returned to lay
theii- palm branch on the altar of their native place. These were the golden days of
pi Igi'i mages. "When Heraclitus was Emperor of the Greeks in 610, Jerusalem fell
into the power of the Persians ; and 36,000 Christians are said, by William of Tyre,
to have perished on the occasion. The survivors tremblingly prayed, with bitter tears,
for the remoA'al of the pollutions; and their prayers seemed heard, for the brave
Emperor defeated theii* oppressors ; and, in the glow of victory, bore back the cross on
his own shoulders, with naked feet, and placed it on the top of Calvary. Then arose
the great religious and temporal power of Mahomet, who endeavoured to extirpate
all rival sects. At his death, in 632, his successors followed out his plans, and con¬
quered Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa and Spain. Had it not been for the valour and
ability of Charles Martel, not only Spain, but Gaul, would have fallen a prey to the
arms of the victorious Caliph, and Europe might have experienced the same fate as
the eastern countries. Abu-beker, the immediate successor of the prophet, defeated
the Christians in Syria, and his successor Omar took Jerusalem,—a city sacred alike to
Jew, Christian and Mahometan. It had been the scene of Mahomet's chief vision, and
of his transit from its temple to the seventh heaven, on the back of a strange animal
called the Borack, and in company with the angel Gabriel. The Mahometans
claimed descent from Abraham, and honoured all the biblical prophets ; having, how¬
ever, from the uncommonly pure nature of the imposture of their faith, a detestation
of idolatry so thorough, that the very sight of knees bowed before cross or image
roused them to indignation. The sacredness of the city, and the mildness of its con¬
queror, secured the inhabitants more favourable terms than any other conqueied
town received. There was neither pillage nor slaughter; they retained the liberty
of observing their religious rites in the church already built, but were forbidden to
THE   ATTEMPT. 227
erect new ones, to place crosses on their churches, or bear them or the gospels about
with them in their processions; their bells were only to ring when they served as
clocks ; and in names, dress, and customs, they were to keep themselves apart from the
Mahometans, whom they were bound to honour. Omar agreed to the complimentary
request of the patriarch Sofronius on surrendering the city, that he should take
possession in person ; and the two men rode together into the city and towards the
church of the Holy Sepulchre, where Omar modestly worshipped on the outer steps,
while Sofronius within was exclaiming, in the bitterness of his heart, that the
prophet's " abomination of desolation " was at hand. The generous forbearance of
the conqueror could not spare the conquered every cause for mourning. A lofty
mosque rose conspicuously on Mount Moriah, and another on the scene of Jacob's
vision ; while the inferior ranks constantly showed signs of their triumph and super¬
iority. But, as if their ingratitude was to be punished, at the death of the noble
Omar, the Chi-istians began to experience the real bitterness of living under the rule
of conquerors of a different faith. They were compelled to wear always a leathern
thong,—but that might be endured in a city where their Lord had likewise been
clothed with scorn; restrictions and taxes were multiplied into bondage; neither
church nor house was safe ; the Moslem might bring with him unchecked insult
or death to them ; and, at last, what seemed the hardest, the right of electing a
Patriarch without intei-vention was taken from them. Meanwhile the continual
contentions amongst their rulers kept them in a state of alternate hope or despair,
according to the disposition of the chiefs. Under the reigu of the celebrated Harun
Al Raschid, their condition was greatly alleviated. The contemporary of Charle¬
magne, he was his equal in dominion, power, courage, nobility and wisdom. He
encouraged learning and philosophy, and extended civilisation. Convinced of each
other's merits, the two princes formed an alliance, which history and romance de¬
scribed in glowing language. Amongst the many splendid gifts interchanged, the
Caliph presented to the Emperor what he considered the most valuable offering he
could make to his pride or devotion,—the keys of the Holy City and the Holy
Sepulchre. But his successors, imable to control his vast dominions, delegated their
power to Turkish Emirs, who shortly erected independent sovereignties. The Greek
Emperor Nicephorus advanced to save the Holy City from them, but his capture of
Antioch was dearly revenged by the murder of the Patriarch of Jerusalem. His
successor, Ximiscus, however, conquered all the cities of Jiidea, and reduced the
Caliph of Bagdad to a tributary. Bxit his career was stopped by death ; liis acquisi¬
tions were lost as fast as they had been gained, and things fell into their old courses.
228 THE   ATTEMPT.
Under the Fatimites the Christians enjoyed as much i-eligious liberty as under the
Abbassides, until Hakem arose, the third Fatimite Caliph, whose repulsive cruelty
was only equalled by his wild caprice. Though his mother had been a Christian and
his uncle Patriarch of Jerusalem, he aspired to be a prophet as well as a king,— and
hated the disciples of Christ and Mahomet as followers of rival divinities. Forced
from his position to be cautious in his manner of treating the Mahometans, he was
unrestrained in the exercise of his cruelty to the Christians. He reduced the noble
church of the Resurrection to a heap of ruins, and strove with impotent rage to de¬
stroy even the traces of the Sepulchre itself. The hatred of the Mahometans to the
Christians took advantage of this opportunity. Their churches were destroyed or con¬
verted to some base purpose ; their rites interdicted, and theii* lives in continual danger.
Their great distresses awoke their superstitious feelings, and they connected every ele¬
mental change with their own fate. An extraordinary winter of storm and gloom and
earthquakes, fixed in their mind the expectation of some tremendous change,—perha])s
the end of the world. A new importance attached to the Holy Land, and believers of
every rank thronged to it in pUgrimages. Hakem died, and his successors, more
lenient, allowed the Christians to rebuild the churches he had destroyed, and to exer¬
cise their religion. They paid, as the price of their safety, a tribute of two pieces of
gold 3 and they were permitted to possess a partic\ilar quarter of the city, to estab¬
lish hospitals for their foreign brethren, and to hold an almost uninterrupted com¬
munication with Eiirope. But, in 1016, a rude tribe from beyond the Axus spread
over Syria, and took Jemsalem. Despising both Christians and Mahometans, they
slaughtered all they met. The Christians that survived suffered severely. When
they attempted to worship, their prayers were drowned with threats; their churches
were polluted, theii" lives every moment in danger ; and, what seemed worse than
all, the pilgrims were forbidden to enter. Their reception had ever been their
greatest hope and comfort in time of trouble ; for, besides the strong tie of religious
brotherhood in persecution, they often formed other ties of nationality and relation¬
ship, and always kept up, through them, a communication with the west. Hard as
this seemed to them, they knew it must be worse to the pilgrims, who, besides the
prospect of really seeing the Holy City of their imagination, looked forward to it
often as their only hope of rest, friends and succovir. Many of the pilgrims, having
exhausted all their stores by the way, were in a state of complete destitution and
exhaustion, preserved only from despair by the knowledge that when they reached
Jerusalem, their bodily toils at least were over. They never had been disappointed
till now,—when, with horror and despair, they found themselves shut out in the open
THE   ATTEMPT. 229
country, without food or shelter; without means of return, or will to do so ; without
the satisfaction of their chief desire,     E"umbers perished of want, and by diseases
brought on through fatigue and exposure ; some hopelessly attempted to return, and
perished by the way.   Under the persecutions of Hakem, the Christians of Jerusalem
had felt that their miseries were wrought by a single man, whose successors, they
could always hope, might be better.     But now, that hope even was taken from
them,—they had fallen into the cruel power of a whole race of enemies,—and their
prospects were never so dark.    Had all the pilgrims, however, been mere obscure
men, the dangerous and degraded condition of the Holy Land might have lasted
much longer without the interference of the spiritual and temporal rulers of Europe.
But men of high rank and wide fame had often gone forth, and returned to ring the
descriptions of their sorrows in the startled ears of Europe.    " The i!^'arrative of
Lietbert's Unsuccessful Journey to the Holy Land," contains an interesting account
of the dangers of a pilgrimage at this time.    The Reverend Lietbert was the Bishop
of Cambray,—who set out with 3000 persons, and reached Laodicea only to hear
that the Holy Sepulchre was for ever closed against Christians.    The old man then
returned home in shame and sorrow.     Another celebrated pilgrimage of a company
of 7000 people, took place under the command of the Bishops of Utrecht, Banberg,
and   Ratisbon,  about twenty   years   before   the   Crusades.      Many  brave   French
wai'riors accompanied them, not in the humble guise of pilgrims, but adorned with
martial splendour.    They received a gi-acious reception from the Emperor Ducas at
Constantinople ; biit, no sooner did they cross into Asia, than they were beset by
troops of Arabs, eager for their prey.    After gi-eat loss they reached Jerusalem ; but
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, destroyed by Hakem, was still in ruins,—every¬
thing sacred lay desolate.    They were forbidden to bathe in Jordan, or gather palm-
branches from  Jericho;   a cruel enemy ruled within the city, and robber Arabs
awaited them without;  so they were glad to take ship in a Genoese fleet, and
return to Europe,—their duties only half-performed, their hopes unsatisfied.
Many different reasons impelled people on pilgrimages,—pride, piety, penance.
In the eleventh century, most of the penances were commuted into pilgrimages,—a
species of religious punishment more in accordance with the spirit of the times
than any other. It satisfied at once the restless yearnings of the penitent, and
the desire of the priest to inspire reverential feelings. Few could return un¬
altered, or without having undergone some beneficial effects. Nothing was so cal¬
culated to bow down a proud spirit, or soften it by deep and purifying thought, as
the long and distant journey itself,—amid strange, novel, and impressive scenes.
230 THE  ATTEMPT.
amid danger and toil and self-denial; separated from all pomp and earthly vanity,
from admiiing friends and flattering followers; often in utter solitude and silence
amid the grand changes of the elements. Besides, what could be more suitable than
to send him who had broken the laws of Christ, to scenes where he would be con¬
stantly reminded of the greatness of the sacrifice required for the greatness of his
sin; where the memories of His love would inspire desires for a new and purer
obedience ; where faith would be strengthened by viewing the reality of the scenes
described in Scripture, and in the mysteries that then delighted the superstitious
minds of the people. At every stage he would meet the palmers returning from
their missions, and his imagination would become fired by their conversation, and
his spirit kindled in their society. The pious worshipper will ever find sins to
be repented of, and desires for new strength to meet his manifold trials and tempta¬
tion ; and many an humble Christian doubtless thus won what he sought. The
proud—desiring not to be outreached in any greatness—also sought that far-away
land, and attained their desire ; and those who would be fashionable, and do what
others did, would also naturally find themselves in the pilgrim's path.
With the veneration for the Holy Land, there arose a great regard for relics
connected with the Saints and the Saviour. The most solemn preparation of mind
and heart was thought necessary when they were being inspected; and the be¬
holder was believed to receive a fresh addition of divine grace if he approached them,
and contemplated them in a fitting frame of mind. Oaths taken on them were
considered doubly binding. Mii-acles of the most extraordinary kinds attended
even the opening of the caskets, and they were sought for and valued as the best
gifts of heaven. When a pUgrim was fortunate enough to obtain one, he hid his
treasure in his breast, and defended it with his life, and thought every toil over¬
paid if he bore it safely home. Though the custom soon arose of buying and selling
them,-—and through it that system of fraud that so disgraced the Church to an
extent which no one had either the power or the inclination to discover,—the custom
in its origin was not all evil. The association of ideas is one of the fundamental
principles of the human mind ; and other men than the lover, the poet, and the
religionist, prize the relics of their past, and hold them as talismans to re-kindle
memories. The value of a faded flower depends upon the associations with which a
man clothes it in his individual mind ; the value of a patriot's sword, of antiquarian
remains, of a martyr's relic, depends upon what he knows of their history ; but when
he brings this treasure himself, through danger and toil, from a far-distant land,
the personal and historical associations unite in one intense feeling,—the very con-
THE  ATTEMPT. 231
templation of it might restore in him  his past thoughts, feelings,  and life, and
memory become ever-present.
The news of the shutting up of the Holy City could, therefore, be no pleasant
news to the nations of Europe.     Doubtful of its truth,  as  the hearsay of the
times  was  not  always trustworthy,  many   set out to experience for themselves
the real trials of the journey.    Among these was Peter the Hermit, born at Amiens,
the son of Regnaut I'Hermite, of a family of rank.    He had been a student,  a
soldier, a monk,—but finding nothing satisfying, he set out on pilgrimage.    His
excitement at beholding really with his eyes the scenes of Holy Writ, and his
anguish at seeing the oppression and pollution sufiered there, were too intense to be
expressed.    But he had formed a resolution within his own mind.    He induced the
Patriarch of Jerusalem to send a letter to the Pope, begging his assistance; and
bearing it himself to the Head of the Church, urged him with all the ardour of enthusi¬
asm to give a favourable answer.    Urban, seeing that it was not a project to be sum¬
marily dismissed, called a council at Placentia, and a more important one afterwards at
Clermont, to consider the subject.    The rising influence of the people, acting with
the crown, tended to reduce the ecclesiastical power; and as more than one prince
showed desires to be free from the temporal tyranny of the ecclesiastics, this plan
of employing their energy and resources in the sei-vice of the church, on foreign
plains, seemed a fine stroke of policy.    But perhaps the Pope hardly expected the
full co-operation that he received, and had yet to learn that other princes might also
find it a simple way of employing turbulent subordinates.    Meanwhile Peter had
not been idle.    Clad in coarse raiment, with his head and feet bare, and bearing on
his shoulders an enormous crucifix, he wandered through the mountain passes of
Italy into Germany and France, preaching in powerful language the miseries of the
Christians in the east, the pollution of the Holy City, and denouncing its cruel
infidel possessors.    The plain man, in bodily presence contemptible, had been roused
by enthusiasm into an eloquent orator.    All men listened, spell-bound ; thousands
followed him; ordinary pursuits lost their interest in the glory of this new idea;
men flocked to the appointed place of meeting, and uttering as with one voice the
war-cry of the Crusades—" God wills it!" pressed eagerly to receive the red-cross
badge.   The first person who wore it, was Adhemar, the Bishop of Puy.   Nobles and
princes followed him, and multitudes of meaner men.    The Pope gave his warmest
encouragement, changed all penances into this military pilgrimage; granted to all
engaged in the enterprise the full remission of sins, and the martyr's honours and
heaven should they die therein.   They and their property were considered as being put
232 THE   ATTEMPT.
under the special guardianship of the apostles Peter and Paul—no creditor could
touch them, and their wives and children were provided for.
Chivalry had by this time taken deep root in the European States, and a military
service like this would necessarily be the most pleasant penance men could owe their
church.    Their knightly vows commanded them to succour the distressed : here were
hundreds of oppressed pilgrims calling for their assistance.    At the same time we
must notice a political fact of the times, that, siding with the influence of the church,
raised the flood-tide in the affairs of the Crusades.    In these feudal times, when a
noble gained possession of a wide extent of territory, either by gift or conquest, he
found it necessary for his own safety, for the protection of his family, and the safe
storing of the property he had acquired, to build a castle, strongly fortified and remote
from neighbours.    There all the work was apportioned amidst his retainers; his own
occupation was gone.    The only society of rank equal to his own was that of his
family; and, however well he loved them, he soon found that their resources of
occupation and amusement were spent, and that he was weary of all, so that he
must go forth from the walls that confined as well as protected him, and seek in new
incursions—variety, occupation, and the society of minds like his own.    The com¬
munity of religion, under the bond of the universal sway of the Pope, made the wars
on the Continent comparatively petty and brief; but here was one on a grander
scale,  with novel accompaniments, where all the nobles of Europe,  as disputing
brethren restored to peace, could unite, in fighting against the enemies of their faith and
friends, and relieve at the same time the suffering Christians and polluted soil.    We
could not conceive a nation of proprietors now-a-days so impulsively abandoning their
estates and families on such a knight-errant's mission ; because the  Crusades were
only possible among people who had been brought up from childhood ia these restless
adventurous habits, who could leave safely behind them their families within their
castle-walls, and go forth alone, reckless of risks.    Their lives, indeed, had been a
continual foretaste of the Crusades.
Their soldiers also shared their feelings; but the imjmlse did not move these
classes alone. The preaching of the Hermit was heard aud answered by all men.
And no wonder; for here was the first step towards the enfranchisement of the
masses, and the elevation of the lower ranks out of the bondage of the caste into
which they had been born. Their voluntary enrolment was as meritorious, their
devotion as sacred, their reward as full and sure, as that of their leaders, and they
rose with the dignity they now first knew. The transformation of mean men into
soldiers,  pilgrims, cimsaders, was often a change  deeper than the name.     Their
THE   ATTEMPT. 233
eager enthusiasm, however, often carried them away. The day fixed for their
departure seemed only too far distant; the preparations that prudence dictated
seemed a distrust of the Providence that had so signally sided with them. Sixty
thousand people eagerly petitioned the Hermit to become their captain, and lead
them ofi" at once to the Holy Land, and he could not find it easy to refuse. After
finally stai-ting, his followers gradually increased as he went, till they reached about
three hundred thousand, and he found it literally impossible to exercise any practical
control over so enormous a multitude of untrained and unruly followers. Ill-pro¬
vided as they were with provisions, they spread desolation wherever they went.
Their violent conduct at Constantinople forced the Emperor to hasten their depar¬
ture ; and when they reached Asia, in want of stores, of arms, of any definite guidance
or plan, their dissensions and foolishness made them an easy prey to the Sultan's
troops, and but very few either reached their destination, or succeeded in finding
their way back to their homes.
Very difierent, however, was the character of the real expedition that was now
being prepared. The kings of Europe themselves were occupied with the internal
troubles of their own kingdoms; but their most distinguished nobles hastened towards
this glorious warfare,—chief among whom was Godfrey of Bouillon, Duke of Basse-
Lorraine, the hero of Tasso's verse. He had sided with the Emperor against the
Pope, and prepared thus to expiate his ofience, by setting out at the head of
80,000 foot, and 10,000 horse, accompanied by his two brothers, Eustace, Count of
Boulogne, and Baldwin, and his cousin Baldwin du Bourg. There were also Hugh,
Count of Vermandois; Robert, Count of Flanders, surnamed the Sword and
Lance of the Crusaders; Stephen, Count of Chartres; Raymond, Count of
Toulouse; Bohemond, Prince of Tarentum, and his cousin Tancred, famed
by Tasso. Robert, Duke of Normandy, the eldest son of William the Con¬
queror, mortgaged his duchy to his brother to obtain funds for the purpose. It
must have been hard enough for the nobles who had to support so many, to raise
sufiicient money, even amid the universal enthusiasm. Besides the personal duties
of the feudal system, the vassals owed to their suzerain, the feudal " aids" or
auxilia. Three of these were called legal aids—1st, When his suzerain required
a ransom ; 2d, When his eldest son was knighted ; 3d, When his eldest daughter
was mai'ried. Other auxilia were called courteous or willing aids, because they
could not be enforced legally. But occasionally particular aids became also
obligatory,—as the loans for the Crusades very frequently seemed to be. In
some way or other, means were found as well as men;   and parties set out by
234 THE   ATTEMPT.
various routes from their different countries to meet at Constantinople.    Adliemar
accompanied them as the Pope's Legate.    When they had crossed the Bosphoms,
they presented  a splendid army of  100,000 mounted warriors, the flower of the
Chivalry of Europe ; and an army of foot-soldiers, said even by Gibbon to have ex¬
ceeded that of Darius or Xerxes.    Their first action was the taking of Nice, the
capital of the kingdom of Bourn; and the unexpected battle of Dorylceum, where
they were again victors, caused them a frightful loss of life.    The sufferings they
subsequently endured, from the want of provisions and water, were very terrible.
From   this   trial they   were temporarily relieved  by the   taking of Tarsus and
Malmistra;  but  now  personal ambition appeared amongst the leaders, who wished
to  become  possessors and princes of the lands they conquered.    The most deter¬
minedly selfish was Baldwin, who crossed the Euphrates, married an Armenian
Princess, and founded a kingdom for himself at the expense of the Crusaders, whose
army  he  necessarily  weakened.    The  others  proceeded  by toilsome  marches  to
Antioch,—at the time of Josephus, the third city in the Roman Empire, and made
venerable to the Christians as being the birth-place of their name.   In spite of the great¬
est bravery of the leaders, dreadful sufferings were endured, and many of their bravest
companions were lost. Tasso forbids us to forget the amiable and accomplished Suenon
the Dane.    The city was at last taken by Bohemond in concert with the renegade
Phirouz, who gave it up on condition that Bohemond should become king.    They
had hardly taken possession, before they were in their tm'u besieged ; and, amidst the
greatest sufferings and miseries would have been comi^letely  destroyed, but for a
miraculous intervention.    An Italian priest asserted that in a vision there had been
disclosed to him the very lance-head that pierced the side of Christ, buried in a cer¬
tain church.    He promised that it would lead them everywhere to victory.    Many
believed the story, while others found  it convenient to seem to do so, and on the
discovery of the lance, a new hope inspired the troops; their assailants were really
put to flight, and their rich camp left in the power of the Crusaders.    The heart of
the Moslems had so quailed at their onset, that had there been more unanimity and
prudence among the princes, the whole country could then have been conquered, and
the end of the Crusades safely attained. But now Bohemond insisted on being installed
as prince of Antioch ; many other knights followed his example, and settled down in
their conquests ; the army was hindered on its march, and suffered much from in¬
dolence and immorality.    So many lives had been thus lost through hardships, in¬
dulgence, i-ashness, and cowardice, that, when in the early part of March they set out
from Laodicea, they numbered only 1500 horse and  20,000 foot.    But they had
THE   ATTEMPT. 235
been well sifted, and the best, the strongest, and most faithful were left, and they
found it more easy now to march steadfastly on. Had they been prudent they would
have subdued the strongholds as they went along, but their eager desire to see Jei-u-
salem overcame every other thought. They were at last drawing near to the holiest
place upoii the earth, after passing through toils and perils that had destroyed
so many of their fellow soldiers; prodigies had attended them on their way; saints and
angels had been seen fighting in their ranks; could they now doubt that they enjoyed
the special favour of God 1 A rapturous cry of exultation burst from them
when they first came in sight of Jerusalem; knights and men flung themselves
from their horses, to prostrate themselves upon the earth in adoration and humility.
Their enthusiasm could not be restrained ; they proceeded at once to the attack,
and were repulsed. They began again to suffer hunger and thirst,—the streams
were dried up, and the wells poisoned; death and pestilence fought against
them. The garrison was 40,000 strong, well-disciplined and commanded; their
storehouses were full, their fortresses strong. The Crusaders had no engines
of attack, or means of making them : they were on the verge of despair, when
they heard at the same time that succours from Genoa had arrived at
Joppa, and abundant timber for the construction of engines had been discovered near.
Saint Geoi-ge was said to have appeared on Olivet, beckoning them on; Peter the
Hermit and the Monk of Olives again excited them, and with more foresight, they
renewed the assault and scaled the wall. Godfrey himself rushed to the gate of St
Stephen and opened it to the crowding soldiery. Kaymond says, that the victory
was achieved at three o'clock on Friday afternoon, the same day and hour of the
week in which Christ suffered. The shout of " God wills it!" was now the prelude
to a slaughter as merciless as it is now incredible, showing the barbarian side of
chivalry. The pious Godfrey sought the Holy Sepulchre, to weep and confess his
sins; the merciful Tancred strove to spare the conquered. The slaughter lasted
eight days, and on the eighth they assembled to choose a king. Some of the leaders
refused to become candidates, shrinking from the responsibility, or desiring to return
home. Tancred avoided any honour or advantage which might seem to be payment
for the pure and disinterested exercise of his chivalrous virtues ; Kaymond was con¬
sidered too ambitious, and the universal choice fell upon Godfrey. They had com¬
manded the retainers of the nobles to give in their causes of complaint against their
masters, and the worst accusation brought against Godfrey was his too long and
strict attendance on the ceremonies of the church, whereby their patience was often
wearied and their dinner cooled.    He refused to wear a diadem where his Saviour
236 THE  ATTEMPT.
had worn a crown of thorns; and asked only to be named " The Defender and Baron
of the Holy Sepulchre." The disputes with Raymond, and the departure of many
warriors, weakened the power of Godfrey; but Tancred, ever generous and unselfish,
remained faithful to him, and defended him with a small force of 300 knights and
2000 foot-soldiers, while he jjroduced the celebrated code of laws named " The
Assise of Jerusalem." A fortnight after the taking of the city, an immense army
assembled to retake it, but it was defeated, and Ascalon left in the power of the
Christians—and the fii'st Crusade was terminated.
"When dangers again manaced the Holy City, other Crusades were preached and
led forth, but the first may stand for them all. Difficulties and dangers of a similar
kind, with gradually less and less of the chivalric and devotional spirit, they become
less interesting as we read on, though crowned heads take the place of knights.
Occasionally gleams of the courteous spirit of chivalric valour shine out, as in the
contests of Richard Coeur de Lion and the Sultan Saladin in the third Crusade ; and
of Frederick the Second and his opponent Sultan Malek-Ramel in the fifth; and of
the devotional spirit in Louis the Ninth surnamed the Saint, in the sixth. But the
youth and power of the Crusades departed with their chivalric age.
LuTEA Reseda.
My Books.
Mr Roebuck said, not long since, in speaking of art and literature, that " he who has
this means of enjoyment within his grasp, is above the reach of fortune ;" and here,
from the far slopes of the Himalayas, we re-echo his words. If there is one gift more
than another for the possession of which a man should give thanks to God, it is for
the power of giving utterance to beautiful thoughts which shall spring to perennial
life in successive minds, when the hand that penned them is relaxed in the inaction of
the last long sleep. We say advisedly that he should be thankful for power of utter¬
ance, since there are not a few mute inglorious Miltons, oppressed with the desii-e to
convey to others the knowledge that is sweet to themselves, who are yet denied
capacity of expression, and pass through existence with a pathetic yearning in their
THE   ATTEMPT. 237
hearts, to be satisfied, we hope, in some region of fuller freedom and greater strength.
But of those who can speak, who can, as it were, with a magic touch anoint our
blind eyes, lay open before us worlds of whose existence we had no suspicion, what
shall we say ?    They are the kings of these unseen monarchies, the rulers who, often
through   toil  and   pain,   have   won   their way to   the calm   repose    of   assured
sovereignty.    If they have, in some degree, sorrows unfamiliar to the common herd,
they have more than compensating joys.    To them the earth is more lovely, and the
heavens are more wonderful; and by their marvellous intuitive perception of what is
universal in the human race, they can touch the hearts and raise the minds not of one
or two, not of some limited circle, listening to the syllables of its local prophet, but
of all who come to them for solace, however widely separated by age or clime.
Never did we feel this more clearly than now, living in a lonely bungalow, as we
have said, on the heights of the Himalayas.    Behind us rises range upon range of
hilly brown fading into purple, and this again into blue, faintly tinged with the rose
where the eternal snows lie breasting the clouds; before us steep slopes tread abruptly
to the dim heat-haze, through which we catch glimpses of the burning plains stretch¬
ing for miles and mUes five thousand feet below.    Not slopes these such as we love
in a Scottish hill, rich with wealth of trickling burns deep hidden in fern and flowers;
not heathery knolls, crowned with the tossing tresses of the white-stemmed birch, and
showing, perhaps, between their broken lines, gleams of a silvery burn, where the
stately heron stands knee-deep beside the reeds and lilies.    These are the pictures
that are painted in living colours on our hearts, and compared with which all others
are poor, since they want the subtle touch of the master-artist—love.    Here they are
far other mountains on which we gaze.   Boundless hillsides, where not a gracious drop
of moisture is to be seen, clad with  sparse grass that hardly veils the brown earth,
rocks cropping out, round which the great kites soar lazily, watching with keen eye for
the carrion they may find, where wearied horse or straying cattle have fallen over a
ledge, or broken down under their bui'then ; trees there are—melancholy pines, whose
stems take no red and golden glory in the sunset.   They seem not to have life in them
to give back the brilliant tones; but, shrunk of limb and pale of foliage, they battle
with the hurrying winds and scorching sun, and only by the music among their
branches seem to be akin to the grand old firs of home.    Here, then, amid such sur¬
roundings, we live another inner existence with our books, and worship at many a
shrine first known in more poetic lands.    Here, for us, banishing unsightly visions of
fierce-tongued eastern hags, Chaucer's " world of ladies " makes our world to seem
full of grace ; here sweet Will reigns gloriously, and wins more and more reverence
238 THE   ATTEMPT.
as he is studied in solitary grandeur.    Is my soul dreary, and this strange foreign
life distasteful, then—
'' I am again for Cydnus,
To meet Mark Antony."
and, in the mightiness of the " old Roman fashion " forget the littleness of to-day.
When the voice of the present will make itself heard, and the need for more modern
food arises, unfailing resource is the book which never sends a student away unsatis¬
fied, —the noblest work of our noble-hearted Laureate,'' In Memoriam." There between
the pages lie the windflowers that once rippled in a northern breeze, and beneath their
green leaves are pearls, the preciousness of which only he knows who has sought long
and vainly for them elsewhere. Carlyle's strength of fiery calm, and I*fovalis' tender
laments—these and many more there are to suit a varying mood ; while high is the
value, in a region where books are scarce, that we place on that article despised and
quizzed at home,—a volume of extracts. Far from valueless is it now, with its choicely
culled gems from many lands ; the glowing Italian poetry, of which we owe our ver¬
sion to Rossetti, the strong sentences of the Port Royal Logic, quaint rhymes of
Whittier and Landor, with picked thoughts from Plato, Heine, Browning, and
George Eliot, lying side by side. Not for the worth of many books would we part
with this collection, evidencing, as it does, the truth of the dream-like memories of
those days when first we trod the enchanted ground of literature. Our reading is
not all so choice. Sometimes we have attempted a novel of the period, but invariably
with the same result of unutterable disgust. When we are told that " Sir Philip
was leading his cob by the bridle, which was lame," we are prepared for almost any¬
thing, even for the young lady who, at a tete-a-tete luncheon in the country, has her hair
" shot through with an arrow, and her neck encircled with a heavy necklace of
opals," or the inevitable " young soldier with luminous eyes" who is so marvellously
unlike any mortal warrior, that we wonder at the originality of the brain that
created him.
Ye gods of prose and poetry, who, in some far Atlantis, yet remember your
great past, may the fates forefend that our mushroom authors should ever approach
your hallowed gates ! One more book we keep, as the choice wine that is to banish
gloom and form a sparkling crown to the feast; when for us, too, the ambrosial cup
(of tea) is filled and the lamp is lit, shall we not also have our Noctes Ambrosianse?
Of all the volumes wonderful for varied idea, powerful expression, and well-sustained
character, this is one of the most remarkable.
When the wind soughs in even these scraggy pines, we could almost, Noctes in
THE   ATTEMPT. 239
hand, fancy ourselves in the forest, so lifelike are the descriptions ; nay, we recognise
them as we read. There is one of a rosy isle and a dark loch in Skye that we once
saw and never forgot; have not we, too, been in Arcadia 1
Were it only for the sake of two or three passages, the Noctes should take high
rank. We seldom meet with so noble an idea as this, " If he were a Christian, his
heart and head should alike tell him that the animosities ai-e mortal, but the
humanities live for ever." It reminds us of the generous sentiment that concludes
Shelley's lines to a Critic—
" I hate thy want of truth and love,
How can I then hate thee ? "
a feeling which, in a meaner mind, would have become contempt, but in the greater
turned to pity. Nowhere do we know of so perfect a bit of simple and yet poetic
childlife, as the description of the juvenile Shepherd, blowing his first soap bubbles.
The stolen delight, the anxiety, the solemn preparation, and the breathless happiness
of success, the child's belief that he had conjured up fairies; followed by the " paiks,"
that yet could not destroy his dream; last, the sad acknowledgment that, even in
childhood, the visions of sleep are more exquisite than reality,-—the whole passage from
beginning to end is an idyll, in which not a touch is wanting or superfluous.
It is matter of regret that so few lady readers are acquainted with the Noctes.
Chiefly, we believe, from the existence of a strong party spirit at the time of its publica¬
tion, the work obtained most unjustly a questionable name, so that orthodox parents
would forbid its jjerusal to their daughters, while passing over the poisonous trash of
modern novels ; or, if a quasi selection be made, still leaving on their permitted list
many, say at random James Grant's, full of foolishly impossible adventure, and not
over refined description. Let those who doubt that a comparison would be in favour
of Professor Wilson, place side by side any two sketches of a woman, one by Grant
and one by Christopher North, and he cannot but be sensible of the difference. All
that is dubious or blameable in the Noctes, is precisely the sort of blameableness that
a high-minded girl will pass by unhurt; while, if she have any sense of the beautiful,
her mind will readily assimilate the exquisite and often pathetic bits of word
painting to which we have before alluded.
One more plea we would urge. Surely it is a pity that we of Scottish blood
should cease to value or understand the rich tongue of our native land, with its
quaint and quiet peculiar humour, and its unrivalled variety of expression. We be¬
gan by quoting Mr Roebuck, and we will end by quoting Mr Froude,—" Loyalty^
love of kindred, love of country, we know not what we do when we trifle with feel-
240 THE   ATTEMPT.
ings the most precious and beautiful that belong to us." These are wise words, and
we venture to assert that we shoiild do well to know something of such thoroughly
national works as the Noctes, even as a means of keeping alive in our hearts the
generous fire of the old Scottish character. Elsie Strivelyne.
" Bxna %QmB gh&/'
From the German of Moritz Hartmann.
Since Agnes died, one truth seems clear and plain,
There must be worlds beyond this scene of strife ;
For, soothing all my heart's most bitter pain,
I feel the hope of everlasting life—
Since Agnes died.
Since Agnes died, I have been calm and bold j
I know the utmost now that hearts can bear.
What fiirther sorrow can my life unfold 1
What now remains for me to do or dare—
Since Agnes died 1
Since Agnes died, there lives within my heai-t,
A holy feeling of protecting power ;
I know that till we meet, no more to part,
Her sainted hands will guard me every hour—
Since Agnes died.
Since Agnes died, a high and hopeless wall
Of mine own loneliness has girt me round ;
In vain, in vain the echoing ring of all
The merry voices, that about me sound !—
Since Agnes died.
Since Agnes died, a deep mysterious peace
Has poured upon my heart its healing streams ;
My spirit's eyes are closed, its thinkings cease ;
I live within a world of hopes and dreams,
Since Agnes died. Dido.
the attempt. 241
Part viii.—Orders.
" With a pilgrim's vow and a soldier's brand,
To fight in the wars of the Holy Land,
No colours are placed on his hehn, beside
No lady's scarf o'er his neck is tied."—L. E. L.
It was but a natural fruit of the conservative spirit of Cliivalry, that new hedges should
be planted even within the barriers of knighthood, to fence in select members with still
greater honours. These fences were found in the institution of the Orders of Knight¬
hood, which are so numerous, that their very names may not perhaps be safely men¬
tioned here. Much interest is connected with some of them ; and our narrow limits
how, more than ever, become constraining, when we feel that in fuller space many
dry names might be brought up before us with the tints of life. It naturally happens
that in many cases the stream of orders will lead us out of mediaeval times into
modern ; but we can hardly, in this case, separate the efFects from the cause, and
must treat the latter as a continuation of the impulse given by the s])irit of chivalry
in earlier times. In this light, it beeomes interesting to compai-e the dates of the
institutions in different countries,—for we thus may calculate the power of the in¬
fluence at work, and note the era at which chivalry first flourished in any soil; to
compare also the balance of the religious and military elements.
Following our chapter on the Crusades, it is suitable to take up first the Reli¬
gious Orders,—but we find that in Roman Catholic countries the ecclesiastical element
is so frequently mixed with all military action, that it is next to impossible to divide
them by any broadly-marked line, so that we must be content to name, par eminence^
those orders as religious that were founded in Palestine or elsewhere, for the protec¬
tion of the Roman Catholic religion and rights. Their influence was in reality, how¬
ever, prejudicial to private and general piety,—while they supported the Church tliat
was drifting away from the fountain of truth. At the rise of chivalry, that Church
had exercised a softening influence upon the violence of the times, and had conse¬
crated swords, in order to gain a right to see them used on the side of justice. But
when these swords were drawn as the rightful weapon of conversion ; when slaughter
was taught as a part of her ritual, the Church made the most cruel dispositions of
man's nature a more Christian character than the purest feelings of gentleness and
242 THE  ATTEMPT.
brotherly kindness, and the way to heaven through triumjjhant carnage rather than
the narrow path of meekness and self-denial. Much, of course, depended npon the
individual character, and no doubt many who would have suffered degradation had
they dared to doubt the theory,—yet gave in practice the example of noble wisdom
and a better life. For that theory was bent on changing brave soldiers into savage
fanatics, and it was only to be expected that, on the increase of theii- power and
wealth, the nobler feelings and rules of the pious and enthusiastic founders of these in¬
stitutions should die out, and the vows of humility, poverty, and obedience be for¬
gotten amid pride, rivahy, and luxury. In these orders the principles of chivalry
reached their climax, and should have changed their name when the religious soldiery
advanced into the military priesthood. Yet the flower of European knighthood
took such vows, renouncing even their own wills, renouncing society, mirth, and the
smile of womanhood; for no lady's scarf coidd be borne, no challenge in the lists
given by these.
" The light and brilliant spirit of chivalry suffered in its union with these un¬
natural elements. Its gallantry, its gay and festive bearing, its courteousness and
grace, were exchanged for severer characteristics; but in too many cases it was only
an affected severity—and thus knighthood lost its best and brightesi' principle, its
devotion to ti-uth, its fearless and constant following of whatever was gentle, gener¬
ous, and praiseworthy. Bound to the observance of rules which they were continu¬
ally tempted to violate, they became schooled in the hypocrisy of their ecclesiastical
predecessors, and the proud knight at last learnt to look with no horror on the trickery,
untruth, and mean advantage the Church allowed against all infidels." Yet even in
these religious orders it was only when the corrupt princij)les overcame the purer,
that it sank so low, and shared the fate of chivalry. Doubtless the persecuting spirit
that broke out on St Bartholomew's Day was brought forth in their colleges; but
there was also laid the foundation of many a deed and many an institution of self-
denying charity—when the strong spent themselves willingly in helping the weak.
Amid orders familiar to every ear, as the Templars and Knights of St John, we find
many another orders now forgotten, or retained only in the volumes of the antiquary
or the herald.
The earliest known religious Order was that of St Anthony. John, Emperor
of Ethiopia, vulgarly called Prester John, erected into a religious order of knights
certainmonks, who lived an austere life in the deserts, after the example of St Anthony.
Their chief seat was the island of Therse, where the abbots, both spiritual and tem¬
poral, resided ; though they  had many  other monasteries and properties, and two
THE   ATTEMPT. 243
millions of revenue. The ancient monastery of St Anthony is in the desert of
Thebais, near the mountain where that famous hermit lived and died. It is sur¬
rounded by an oval wall, forty feet high, to keep out the plundering Arabs; and
pilgrims are admitted by being drawn up in a basket by a rope and pulley. The
knights took the rule of St Basil, and wore a black garment, with a blue cross
edged with gold, in the form of the letter T. They were allowed to marry, but were
kept under great restrictions. They vowed to defend the Christian religion and the
empire, and to go to war whenever or wherever commanded.
1063.—The Order of St Katharine, at Mount Sinai, was instituted to defend
the Sepulchre of St Katharine, who suffered martyrdom in Alexandria, under
the Emperor Maximius, and to protect and entertain pilgrims. They wore a white
garment, and a Katharine wheel interlaced with the cross of Jerusalem.
The Order of St Blaize, called also the Knights of St Mary in Palestine, wore
a sky-coloured garment, and a gold cross, bearing the figure of St Blaize.
Tits Order of Knights of the Martyrs in Palestine took their name from the
hospital dedicated to St Cosmos and St Damianus—Martyrs, and wore as their badge
a red cross, in the middle of wliich the two saints were encircled with a glory. They
were bound to exercise all charity to the sick and poor, to redeem captives, and bury
the dead.   When they removed to Europe they conformed to the rule of St Augustine.
The Order of Mount-Joy, called so from the name of the castle built upon the
eminence near Jerusalem, whence the pilgrims first perceived the Holy City. Their
habit was a short red mantle, on the breast of which they wore a white star with five
rays. They protected the path of the pilgrims; and, after the loss of the Holy Land,
they retired into Spain, and were incorporated into the order of Calatrava.
1099.—Tli^ Order of the Knights Hospitallers of St John and of Malta owed
theii' beginning, or rather restoration, to Gerard of Provence ; though some of their
legends refer their original to Johannes Hircanus, or John Patriarch of Jerusalem.
It is, at least, known that a monk named Bernhard, in 870, had liuilt an hospital in
the valley of Malta, near the church of St Mary, and that certain Christian
merchants of Malfi, in the kingdom of Naples, trading to Palestine, obtained leave
from the Caliph to support it, and to build another house for women. Finding their
accommodation still too limited, they built a large hospital, which they dedicated to St
John, near the Holy Sepulchre. So many volunteered their services, that the attend¬
ants were formed into a band, and finally an order of knighthood. Gerard of Provence
disciplined them and framed their rules ; but it was not until the third Superior
after his death, that it became a part of their duty to  fight the infidel as well as to
244 THE   ATTEMPT.
tend the sick. Tliey were eminent for their devotion, chaiity, hospitality, and bravery;
which, however, did not increase with their increasing wealth and power. When
Godfrey, the leader of the first Crusade, saw how much good they did, he presented
them with the rich lordship of Mountboie in France; Baldwin gave them part of all
the booty he took; and many others followed their example, till the once " poor
knights of St John" became noted for wealth. They had above 20,000 manors
throughout Europe. When they were driven out of Palestine they removed to
Cyprus, and thence to the island of Rhodes, where they were attacked, and, in spite of a
brave resistence, expelled by Solyman the Magnificent. Malta, Tripoli, and Gaza were
granted them in fee by the Emperor Charles V. in 1530, upon the tenure of one falcon
yearly to the Viceroy of Sicily, and the acknowledgement of the King of Spain and
Sicily as their protector. They settled in Malta, where, in 1563, they were besieged
by Solyman, but the Turks were compelled to retire with great loss. The number
of knights was one thousand, of whom five hundred were to reside in Malta, and
the remainder, dispersed in seminaries throughout the Continent, were to be ready
to collect at any summons from their Grand Master. They must prove their gentility for
six descents, and swear to defend the Church, to obey their superiors, follow their
rules exactly, and live only on the revenue of their order. Their smallest errors were
punished with most severe penances, in their earlier times at least. Each knight was
bound to keep a light burning near him while he slept, that the wicked enemy and all
evil spirits might be scared off. They wore the black habit of St Augustine, except in
war, when they wore a crimson robe, and on their breasts a white cross. There
were several branches of this order.
1107.—The Order of Ladies Knights of Malta was instituted by Agnes, Abbess
of the Hospital of St Mary Magdalene, who, with her companions, made the same
profession, took the same habits, and vowed to obey the same rules as Gerard de
Didier had appointed in 1099 for the Knights of St John.
The Order of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem was, according to Favin, in¬
stituted by Baldwin I. They resided near the Holy Sepulchre, and were bound to
guard it, and, at the same time, to relieve and protect pilgrims. The Patriarch of
Jerusalem was their Grand Master. Their habit was white, and on their breast a
gold cross-potent. When the city was taken by the Saracens, they retired to
Perugia in Italy, and were afterwards united to the Knights of St John.
1119.^—In this year Hugh de Paganes and Godfrey de St Amor, with seven
other gentlemen, went to the Holy Land, and devoted themselves to the duty of
dispei'sing the robbers that infested the path of the pilgrims to Jerusalem.    From
THE   ATTEMPT. 245
Baldwin II. they received  lodgings near Solomon's  temple ; whence, when they
became known as an  order, they were called Templars.     Pope Honorius, at the
request of Stephen Patriarch of Jerusalem, prescribed to them an " Ordor of Life."
They wore linen coifs like the serjeants-at-law, shirts  of mail, and swords  girt on
with a broad belt, the upper cloak white and reaching the ground, with a red cross
ou the right shoulder.     They kept their beards of a gi-eat length, at  a time  when
most  similar orders  shaved.    When at war, their banner was half white and half
black ; signifying white and fair to  Christians, but black and terrible to enemies.
The manner of their introduction to their order resembled that of the initiation of
knights,  except that the spiiit of the warrior was subjected to the vows of the
religionists.    After the preliminary rites, the Chapter of the Society met in the
church during the night, and sent two of his brethren to ask the  candidate three
times, " if he desired to be admitted."    The novice, in reply, asked three times for
bread  and water ; and  was then  taken before  the  Chapter, when  the  President
addressed him thus :—" The perils you will have to meet in pursuance of the vows
you are about to take are many and imminent.    The rules of our order are severe
and  strict;     You will have to suffer hunger and thirst when you desire to eat and
drink ; to watch when you wish to sleep ; and to pass  into another country when
you desire to remain in the one where you dwell."    Questions were then put to him
respecting his life and opinions, and if the answers were satisfactory, the following
oath was adminstered :—" I swear to devote my conversation, my strength, and my
life, to defend the faith of God and the mysteries of the Gospel.     I promise to be
obedient to the Grand Master of the Order.    Whenever the  Saracens shall attack
any  possessions of the Christians, I will pass the seas to deliver my brethren.     I
will render the aid of my arm to the  church, and  to  kings in  battle against  the
infidel.    Whenever I am opposed by but thi-ee enemies, I will  combat with  them
and never flee; I will contend with them alone, if they be infidels, &c."   The duties
which the Templar imposed upon himself, would have made him the most faithful
missionary the Church ever had, if religion could be propagated by the  sword.
Though their protection and charity to pilgrims at first made them acceptable to all,
for many years they remained in great distress and poverty.     But their wealth in¬
creased with   the  number  of their  members  and of their friends.    The Count of
Anjou settled on them thirty pounds of silver yearly, and many other nobles and
kings followed his example.    Their  successful enterprises against the  infidels had
gained the favour of many princes, whose  substantial  acknowledgments increased
their power.    But with their wealth theix- spirit changed from humility to pride ; and
246 THE   ATTEMPT.
their ambition made them rivals of all others, especially of the Order of St John.
To assert their power, they withdrew from their obedience to the Patriarch of Jeru¬
salem, and joined the Pope. But he repaid their advances badly enough, for shortly
afterwards by him, or at least by his consent, they were charged with infamous
crimes, and all the princes of Euroi)e were roused against them. In 1290, Philip
of France showed his first sign of ill-will by ordaining that the privileges of their
order should be taken from them whenever they omitted to wear their habit. In
1308 he convoked the States-General at Tours, to receive their counsel as to what
should be done with the Templars, before he repaired to meet the Pope with his
opinion ; and with one voice they were pronounced worthy of death. And so, in
the great General Council imder Pope Clement V., at Vienna, in 1311, his vote was
on the side of the majority, and the Templars were doomed. Their lands and pos¬
sessions were seized, their order suppressed, and their brethren imprisoned and
cruelly executed. All that remained was given to the Knights of St John. Many
authors consider that the 16,000 lordships they possessed throughout Eiirope was
the greatest cause of this summary destruction ; but there is no doubt that great
disorders had arisen amongst them. "We find the English branch noticed in Ivanhoe.
The first settlement of the order in England, was in Holborn in London ; but their
chief residence in the reign of Henry II., was the Temple in Fleet Street, which they
designed after that of Jerusalem
The Teutonic Order owes its origin to the piety of a German and his wife, who,
in the time of the Holy War, built an hospital for the maintenauce of German
pilgrims. Several German gentlemen assisted their charity, and, being joined by
others from Lubeck and Bremen, they erected a sumptuous hospital at Acre. Some
German chevaliers, at the same time, associating themselves for the attendance and
protection of this institution, they assumed the name of Teutonic Knights, or
" Brethren of the Hospital of Our Lady of the Germans of Jerusalem." This was
approved of by the Pope, and a code of laws drawn up for them like those of the
Templars. They wore a white mantle, with an embroidered cross-potent sable, and
the King of France permitted their Grand Master to wear the Fleur-de-Lys. Their
humility, charity, and patience were famous even amidst the other orders, and they
rose into great favour. When they left the Holy Land in 1230, Conrad Duke of
Suabia invited them into Prussia, and gave them the territory of Culm. Growing
very powerful, they conquered Prussia, and over-run Livonia, building many towers,
and, under pretence of bringing the miserable inhabitants into the true fiiith, prac¬
tising many cruelties.     But the order divided against itself, and the kings of Poland
THE   ATTEMPT. 247
benefited by their dissension. Prussia revolted, and Casimir IV". received the
homage of the knights. At length Albert Marquis of Brandenburg abjured the
Roman Catholic religion, abdicating his dignity of Grand Master of the Order, sub¬
dued Prussia, and expelled such of the order as would not follow his example, to
Mariendal, in Franconia. It is now divided into two branches,—the first for
Roman Catholics, who take the oath of celibacy, and have a house at Mergenheim
in Germany to transact their affairs; the second branch is for Protestants, who
have their house at Utrecht: but all must give proof of gentility for four descents
before being admitted into either.
1200.—The Order of Christ in Livonia, or of the Sword-Bearers, was instituted
by Albert, Bishop of Livonia, after forming the Bishopric of Riga, for the conversion
of the natives from idolatry. It was avowedly in imitation of the Teutonic Order,
which they afterwards joined ; and they, too, often imitated their cruelty,—extirpa¬
tion being as praiseworthy as conversion. They took the Cistercian rule and habit—
a long white mantle and black hood, and on their breasts two swords in saltire—
whence their name.
.—Tlie Order of the Passion, founded jointly by Charles IV. of France and
Richard II. of England, on the plan of the Templars, for fighting against infidels.
Their number was to be 1000, and each was to be attended by one esquire and three
servants.    The badge was a cross gules, with a lamb engraved.
1206.—The Order of Jesus Christ, instituted by St Dominic, to fonn a respect¬
able body to put down the Albigenses ; the first example of a systematic war against
those differing in some of the opinions of the church, and adhering to others—
heretics, not necessarily infidels.
1561.—The Order of St Stephen, instituted by Cosmo de' Medicis in memory of
his victory at Marciana, after the model of that of Malta, partly religious, and partly
military.
1606.—The Order of the Cordon Jaune or Yellow String, was instituted by the
Duke of Nevers, but abolished that same year by Henry IV., who put in its place,
in 1607, Tlie Order of Mount Carmel, open to one hundred knights, who must be
able to prove their nobility from the year 1300. They wore tawny-coloured robes,
ribbons, and crosses, and were united the year following to the older Order of St
Lazarus, who, in earlier times in Palestine, had devoted themselves to the care of
persons afflicted with leprosy in the Hospital of St Lazarus in Jerusalem. The badge
of this order was a green cross, like the golden one of Malta. Tlirough the perse¬
cutions of the Saracens it had become almost extinct, till revived at the time of the
248 THE   ATTEMPT.
Crusades. When driven from Palestine they spread over Europe. In 1572, Pope
Gregory XII. united those of the order in Italy with the Order of St Maurice, then
newly instituted by the Duke of Savoy j and, in 1608, this order was united in
France to that of the above-mentioned Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel. The
knights of St Lazarus and Mount Carmel are allowed to many, even twice, and
to hold ecclesiastical sinecure benefices, or pensions charged upon ecclesiastical
livings.
It may be suitable to class among religious orders those instituted in the Pope's
dominions; as the military was then necessarily subordinate.
1198.—The Order of the Holy Ghost at Rome, instituted by Innocent III.,
lived under the rule of St Augustine, and did many great deeds of charity with their
ample income of 24,000 ducats a day.    A certificate of gentility required.
1233.—The Order of the Virgin Mary was instituted by Bartholomew, Bishop
of Vicenza. They followed the rule of St Dominic, wearing a white surcoat, over
which was a cloak of gray, and on theii' breast a cross pattee red, suiTaounted with
two stars. Their profession was to protect widows and orphans; to endeavour to re¬
concile domestic difi^erences between husband and wife ; and to promote everywhere
reconciliation and peace. They had no monastery, and were allowed each to dwell
in his own house and with his own family.
1320.—The Order of Jesus Christ instituted by Paul XXII. while residing at
Avignon.
1498.—The Order of St George at Rome, instituted by Alexander VI. in order to
encourage naval enterprises against the pirates.
1520.—The Order of St Peter ami St Raul, instituted by Leo X. to defend the
sea-coasts of his territories against the Turks. There were four hundred of them
chosen, who were distinguished by wearing a medal with an image of the saints, one
on either side.
1534.—The Order of St George at Ravenna, instituted to defend that town and
the marches of Ancona against the Corsairs.
15GO.—The Order of Rius, instituted by Pope Pius IV.
1587.—The Order of Loretto, instituted by Sextus Quintus, on his creating a
new sea at Loretto, and appointing the celebrated church there a cathedral. The
knights were numerous, and were distinguished by wearing an image of the Virgin
Mary hanging to a gold chain at the button-hole,—hence called Chevaliers Dores.
1615.—The Order of Jesus and Mary, instituted by Paul V. to jiiotect the
Holy See against infidels and heretics.    The badge was a cross of eight points,
THE  ATTEMPT. 249
enamelled red, edged with gold, and bearing the letters I. H. S., over which was the
Greek letter fl, the emblem of the Virgin Mary.
1618.—The Order of Mary the Glorious, instituted by  Paul V.  in order to
suppress the Barbary Corsairs.    He gave the order the town of Civita Vecchia, and
the Convent and Palace of St John of Lateran.
LuTEA Reseda.
Fak in the Saxon south, I heard
Stories of Highland hiUs and streams;
And often, in my midnight dreams.
My heart's deep fastnesses were stirred
By pictured visions of some wild strath.
Some awful gorge, or black ravine.
Or whispering rivulet, dimly seen
By banks of glorious purple heath.
Or, deep in some still, solemn glen,
A dark loch, lying lone and sad,
Whose silent shores but seldom tread
The busy feet of curious men.
Or, crowned with cloud-wreaths, towering grand
Above the pines that sway beneath,
Some hill-peak, motionless as death,
Standing a sentry o'er the land.
All these, and more, were pictured grand
In thought by day, in dreams by night;
And fancy cast a halo bright
O'er all that glorious northern land.
But never, in my dreams most rare
Of glen, or loch, or broomy brae,
2 H
260 THE   ATTEMPT.
Or tossing stream, or hill-top grey,
Sweet Loch-an-Eilan, saw I e'er
A scene so fair, so bright, so wild,
Or so entrancing to my sight.
As thy calm waters' rippled light.
Deep-bosomed 'mid the mountains piled
In splendid wealth of hue and form
Eound thy still shores, toward which they bend
As though most careful to defend
Their charge from battle with the storm.
On its lone isle, how silent stand
The ruins of thy fortress bold—
Last relic of grim warriors old—
The Wolf of Badenoch and his band.
Those crumbling battlements no more
Hear the defiant war-pipe's note ;
No standards from those turrets float,
Pyed stiff and red with Highland gore.
But from his eyrie screams the erne,
And lords it where the Comyn stood,
And feeds his clamorous, hungry brood
Where watch and ward kept sentry stern.
Long ivy trails where banners blew.
And moss grows green where broadswords hung.
And robins chirp where minstrels sung.
And dead leaves fall whence arrows flew.
And nought remains of strength and pride.
Of ancient knightly prowess brave.
Of angry feud, of bloody gi-ave.
Of those who here once fought and died,—
THE   ATTEMPT. 251
But, these old walls, this falling tower,
A legend here and there—a name—
And such is life, and such is fame 1—■
The plaything of a passing hour !
Mas Alt a.
It is more usual to end an Essay by a quotation than to commence by one,
but I wish to open this paper by a remark from a writer in the May number
of " Temple Bar." He says, in speaking of the Poetiy of the period :—" The age in
which we live is, in the formation of opinion, if not absolutely in the expression of
it, such an oppressive one,—the conversational sense of the majority so overpowers the
critical sense of the discriminating minority,—that when an opinion has, in the
phraseology of the day, " once turned a corner," and got itself accepted by a prepon¬
derance of voices, it is almost hopeless to think of reversing it." Now, somehow
the present day has pronounced Wordsworth " dull," " prosy," and " childish," and
this opinion once started, gets itself repeated and repeated by people who know
absolutely nothing of his works, and who yet dare to give an opinion as to their
merits. And here we beg to state that we consider all those of our readers ignorant
of Wordsworth, and therefore unable to express any opinion on the subject, who are
only familiar with such of his poems as—" We are Seven," " Peter Bell," and " The
Idiot Boy." Critics have seized upon one or two commonplaces, such as any volum¬
inous poet must at some time let slip from his pen, and held them up as specimens
of the poetry of Wordsworth ; and these commonplaces have been re-echoed by many
thoughtless people, who never cared to study for themselves any of our poet's works
in their entirety. There is so much simplicity in the style of Wordsworth, that it re¬
quires a pure taste to appreciate him. What has been termed " childish" in his
writings is, in reality, only the utterings of a child-like faith, -s^rhich believed
that beauty and truth were to be found in the commonest objects around us, and
which cared not to deck its thoughts in the false ornaments of grandiose phrase¬
ology. I remember hearing George Macdonald,—a poet whose refined taste well
qualified him to understand and criticise Wordsworth,—remark that in his character
there was to be found " no sense of the ludicrous," which accounts for there beinsr.
252 THE  ATTEMPT.
every now and then, in his writings, some phrase or expression which he, in all
simplicity and good faith, could make use of, but which, to the minds of other men,
might suggest a ludicrous idea. Wordsworth was pre-eminently a lover of Nature ;
its spirit seemed at times to breathe new life into his soul, so thoroughly did he love
all that was pure and beautiful around him. To us he is an interpreter ; for, though
we common people may wander through the valleys and over the mountains with a
vague yearning for something that we feel to be around us, and yet beyond us, it is
the poet who satisfies for us this yearning desire. He makes Nature speak to us as it
does to him, in comforting, elevating words, which purify the soul. And few poets
do this more completely than Wordsworth.
" The sounding cataract
Haunted me like a passion : the tall rock,
The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
Their colours and their forms, were then to me
An appetite, a feeling, and a love."
This is the description of the manner in which Nature affected him in his
youth. As time passed on, something still higher was added to these thoughts ;
something which to his large sympathy appealed more truly, than the lovely
sights and sounds of Nature could ever do without this one touch more,—it
was " the still, sad music of humanity." Lest my readers do not know the
lines on the Wye, a few miles above Tintem Abbey, let me quote the following
passage, and they may judge for themselves if the heart that conceived it was that of a
poet or not. After speaking of the rapturous feelings which in his youth iaspii'ed
him when he looked on nature, he turns to what he feels in later years on looking on
the same scenes :—
" I have learned
To look on nature, not as in the hour
Of thoughtless youth ; but hearing oftentimes
The still, sad music of humanity,
Not harsh and grating, though of ample power
To chasten and subdue.    And I have felt
A presence that disturbs me with the joy
Of elevated thoughts ; and sense sublime
Of something far more deeply interfused,
Whose dwelling is the hght of setting suns,
And the round ocean, and the living air,
And the blue sky, and in the life of man :
THE  ATTEMPT, 253
A motion and a spirit that impels
All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
And rolls through all things."
Thus he would commence with nature, reading in her lessons not only of
humanity but of divinity. He could write truly of the blessings which nature can
give to those who seek them, without fear of spreading Pantheistic doctrines.
" Knowing that nature never did betray
The heart that loved her."
Nor was it only the grand aspects of nature that could speak to him of poetry,
nor even "the meadow grove and stream ;" but to him "the meanest flower that
blows" could bring "thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears." He could muse
for hours over a daisy, and has paid homage to the little flower in several poems.
While looking on the gentle flower, he would liken it to many things, or as he him¬
self expresses it, " he would play with similes."   First it seems to him
" A nun demure of lowly port;
A sprightly maiden of love's court,
In thy simplicity the sport
Of all temptations ;
A queen in crown of rubies drest;
A starvelmg in a scanty vest ;
Are all as seema to suit thee best
Thy appellations."
After flitting from one thought to another,—one fancy quickly following another,—the
poet's true heart returns to the simple name—
" Bright jiower ! for by that name at last,
When all my reveries are past,
I call thee, and to that cleave fast.
Sweet silent creature ! "
Perhaps, after all, it is by his Sonnets that Wordsworth will be best remembered and
loved by those who appreciate true poetry, and who do not need the enticing interest
of a story to fix their attention. For have we not all observed how the poets of our
day skilfully blend a tale with most of their poems, and how through almost all the
poetry which we now-a-days most admire, there runs the thread of a story. Take as
examples of this Tennyson, Jean Ingelow, and Mrs Barrett Browning, especially
the two latter. Most of the poems by which we know them are beautiful little
tales mixed with much good poetry; but take away the incident which is in most
254 THE  ATTEMPT.
cases the body of the poem, and compare the spirit that remains with the poetry of
Wordsworth, and then we shall be the better able to judge of the comparative merits
of the poets.   I do not mean to assert that Wordsworth has not given us many tales
in his poems, for they abound, and it was one of hLs peculiarities as a writer to tell
many little incidents which befel him in verse ; but his poetry can stand without the
borrowed aid of narrative.    To prove this we shall merely call to your recollection
a few of his Sonnets.   Several of his best are addressed to Sleep ;  the one ending
with—
" Come blessed barrier between day and day,
Dear Mother of fresh thoughts and joyous health,"
has been characterized by Coleridge as " eminently beautiful."    The same may be
said of those commencing
" The fairest brightest hues of ether fade,"
and
" Weak is the ^vill of man, his judgment blind."
And now turning from his Sonnets and from his Poems inspired by nature, let
us see what he has to tell us of human nature. There is a calm large-hearted philo¬
sophy about Wordsworth, that makes him not only a pleasing but a true painter of
his fellow men. He does not often give us pictures of the grand heroic type of man,
but he loved to paint scenes of domestic life, dwelling with a gentle hand on sin
and sorrow, and dealing generously, hopefully, with all. There is very little to be
found in his works of love, as distinguished from domestic affection, though we could
quote passages to show that he was not unable to pourtray this phase of human
affection.
But he wrote with an aim,—and that aim was the raising and purifying the taste
of the time, by teaching it to love and understand simple things. As he himself says,
all he aspired to was,—
" To pipe a simple song for thinking hearts ;"
and in that one word thinking we get to the bottom of much of the adverse criticism
that has been lavished on our poet. We of the present day do not care to meditate
over our poetry, unless, indeed, some scientific poem, which had better have been
written in prose. Yet, to a mind which has been vexing itself with many of the
modern casuistries, vainly seeking to quit itself of doubts and difficulties in an ob¬
stinate disbelief in everything not perceived by the senses, much rest and refresh¬
ment may be drawn from the simple faith and deep philosophy of Wordsworth. He
loved to depict domestic affection as he found it in many retired hamlets around his
THE   ATTEMPT. 255
North of England home. " The Brothers" and "Michael," are perhaps among the
two best examples of this style of poetry that we possess. In " The Brothers," we
have a tale of two orphans, who loved each other with an all-absorbing love ; but the
elder and stronger of the two goes to sea, and on his return, finds the gi-ave of his
brother in the churchyard of their old home. In " Michael" it is parental love that
is beautifully described ; but to quote from these poems would be useless, for to those
of my readers who have not already studied them, a few disjointed quotations would
do little good ; and to those who have, the mere mention of the titles will remind
them of two of the most touching pictures to be found in the writings of Words¬
worth. His was a mind that could sympathise with affection under every aspect
Many of his poems seem inspii-ed by a love for children. Such are—"We are Seven,"
" Lucy Grey," and " The Mother's Return." Then we have a father's affection for
his son described, as mentioned before, in " Michael;" and a mother's love for her
son, as in " The Affliction of Margaret," where a mother has had no tidings of her
absent son for seven long years. The last stanza expresses accurately what many a
mourning heart has felt:—
" Beyond participation lie
My troubles, and beyond relief :
If any chance to heave a sigh,
They pity me and not my grief."
" They pity me and not my grief,"—is not that true to nature 1 Do not many aching
hearts long for one who will weep with them, and not for them ? Once again a
mother's sorrow for her son is painted,—young Romilly has been drowned in the
wharf, where " the river was strong and the rocks were steep." In two verses our
poet brings out the difference between the passionate grief of a betrothed bride and
the sorrow of his mother,—
" If for a lover the lady wept,
A solace she might borrow
From death and from the passion of death,—
Old Wharf might heal her sorrow.
She weeps not for the wedding-day
Which was to be to-morrow ;
Her hope was a farther-looking hope,
And hers is a mother's sorrow."
Domestic affection plays so great a part in Wordsworth's writings, that I could
go on quoting for ever,—but time passes, and there is yet something that must be
256 THE  ATTEMPT.
said. Sometimes in a line or two we find a mine of thought,—something which to
the unthinking reader is nothing, but which to the tlioughtful yields much food for
reflection. Take for instance " Simon Lee." In that we have merely the simple in¬
cident of the poet seeing a poor old man overtasking his strength by vain endeavours
" to unearth the root of an old tree," and of his taking the axe himself, and with a
single blow severing the tangled root. At this the old man's heart overflows with
gratitude and praise; and the poet ends with this reflection :—
" I've heard of hearts unkind, kind deeds
With coldness still returning ;
Alas ! the gratitude of men
Hath oftener left me mourning."
It is not often that "Wordsworth selects classical subjects for his poems, but one
there is among his works that requires special notice,—I mean " Laodamia." In it he
throws such a human interest around the chai-acter of " Laodamia," that she is no
longer a cold classical personage, that we read of in ancient history, but a woman like
ourselves. You all know the outline of the story,—how with sacrifice and vows
Laodamia implores great Jove to restore her lost husband to her sight, and how her
prayers obtained such grace because of her fidelity, that she is permitted for three
hours to behold Protesilaus face to face. The spirit which breathes through the
whole poem is the purifying ennobling spirit of a soul whioh has triumphed over all
earthly temptations, and has had all its earthly afiiections not lo.st, but elevated, by
the change from the seen to the unseen. When passionate yearning to keep him by
her seems to overcome Laodamia, he speaks to her calm majestic words,—
" Be taught, O faithful consort, to control
Kehellious passion ! for the gods approve
The depth, and not the tumult of the soul;
A fervent, not ungovernable love.
Learn by a mortal yearning to ascend,—
Seeking a higher object.    Love was given,
Encouraged, sanctioned, chiefly for that end ;
For this the passion to excess was driven,—
That self might be annulled ; her bondage prove
The fetters of a dream opposed to love."
Surely those who dare to term Wordsworth " weak, " have never read those
lines. Are they the utterings of a weak soul 1 No ; they are the deep thoughts of
one who fathomed many things which men with greater pretensions dreamt not of
THE   ATTEMPT. 257
in all their philosophy. I shall only mention " The Character of the Happy
Warrior" left us by Wordsworth, as being another example of what we may call his
strong writing. I have already referred to George Macdonald, and must do so once
again,—as it was from him that I first learned, or, at any rate, learned to love, the
little poem, commencing " She dwelt among the untrodden ways." The last line has
been seized upon by critics, who have vainly endeavoured to turn it into ridicule; but
what is in itself simple and beautiful, can survive even the critic's unhallowed touch.
That you may judge whether it be a line jirovocative of mirth, or, as it appears
to me, one full of pathetic beauty, I am tempted to quote the poem, which is
only three verses in all:—
" She dwelt among the untrodden ways,
Beside the Springs of Dove ;
A maid whom there were none to praise,
And very few to love.
A violet by a mossy stone,
Half hidden to the eye !
Fair as a star, when only one
Is shining in the sky.
She lived unknown, and few could know
When Lucy ceased to be ;
But she is in her grave, and oh,
Tlie difference to me ! "
Such a poem as Hart-Leap Well, full of true philosophy, as all good poetry is,
would require many words to itself, and an abler exponent than I to give any just
idea of the merits of this great work ; but to those of us who have read the poem
with anything like attention, the following words, quoted second-hand from
De Quincey, will throw a clearer light over it as a whole, than any which may
yet have dawned on our unaided understanding. He says—" Over the poem Hart-
Leap Well, the mysterious spirit of the noonday, Pan, seems to brood. Out of
suffering is there worked the image of peace. Out of the cruel leap and the agonizing
race through thirteen hours; out of anguish in the perishing bnite, and the headlong
courage of his final despair,
' Not unobserved by sympathy divine,'
the  poet  calls up a vision of Palingenesis;   he  interposes his solemn images of
suffering, of decay and ruin, only as a visionary haze, through which gleams transpire
of a trembling dawn far off, but surely on the road."
2 I
258 THE   ATTEMPT.
I now pass on to a poem which ranks among the very highest productions of
English poets. Even the pale light of the critic's lamp dies when he seeks to throw
censure on this almost divine inspiration; and the tongue of the scoffer at Words¬
worth is tied when we quote the Ode on " Intimations of Immortality," as the
ground on which we go for claiming a place for Wordsworth among the great ones
in the world of poetry. Feeling from his early youth the spirit of immortality
within him, he used to marvel to himself how that living soul which then was, could
ever have been non-existent, or how it could ever cease to be. After communing
with himself, he tells us how, when he " was impelled to write this poem on the
' Immortality of the Soul,' he took hold of the notion of pre-existence as having
sufficient foundation in humanity for authorising him to make use of it as a poet."
What can be more beautiful than the idea that children coming from the hand of
their Creator bear on their souls some impress of divine purity 1 Or, that our birth
is as our death, only a change ?
" Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting :
The soul that rises with us, our life's star
Hath had elsewhere its setting—      ,
And Cometh from afar :
Not in entire forgetfulness
And not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we como
From God, who is our home.
Heaven lies about us in our infancy !
Shades of the prison-house begin to close
Upon the growing Boy,—
But he beholds the light, and whence it flows,
He sees it in his joy ;
The Youth who daily farther from the east
Must travel, still is Nature's priest,
And by the vision splendid
Is on his way attended ;
At length the Man perceives it die away,
And fade into the light of common day."
Yet, while mourning for the brightness which passes from off the earth, as we grow
in years, he finds comfort in his calm, trusting philosophy.
" We will not grieve, but rather find
Strength in what remains behind ;
In the primal sympathy—
Which having been—must ever be ;
THE  ATTEMPT. 259
In the soothing thoughts that spring
Out of human suffering ;
In the faith that looks through death,
In years that bring the philosophic mind."
And here I take my stand for Wordsworth. For deep sympathy with all that
is, was, or may be, let us go to his works and draw for ourselves rest and refresh¬
ment. DES  EaUX.
 ^--=>:<gH«=^-^ 
Cranslations from gnm.
The summer lays its roses
On thy cheeks so sweet and fair;
But in thy little heart, love,
Is winter and frosty air.
The years will change them for thee,
Beloved as thou art;
The winter will chill thy cheeks, love,
The summer will warm thy heart.
"When two who love are parted,
Cold hand in hand they lay;
They weep, they sigh unceasingly,-
They gaze their eyes away.
It was not so with us, love.
We did not weep and sigh ;
But tears, and sobs, and sighing,
Came after the good-bye.
The world is so fair and the heaven so blue,
And the breeze as sweet as if earth were new ;
And the flowers young, that the soft winds woo,
They glitter and shine in the morning dew ;
And the folk are blithe, and sad faces few.
260 THE   ATTEMPT.
Yet, fain would I that my life were fled,
And I lay in the grave with my darling,—dead.
Her eyes are violets, dewy and deep ;
Her cheeks are roses, aglow with sleep;
Her hands are lilies, which moonbeams steep ;
They bloom and blossom from day to day.
And only the heart is withered away
O. M.
Home-Sickness.
It is a great mistake to suppose that home-sickness, or properly mal du pays, is an
altogether imaginary com2:)laint. It may be irrational, but it is real; and, unfortu¬
nately for the sufferers, incurable. That there is a general tendency to believe in its
existence is indicated by the wide-spread mention of the Swiss soldiers, who deserted
at the sound of the ranz des vaches ; and the Highlanders, who were similarly un¬
manned by the strains of " Lochaber no more," so that regimental pipers were for
bidden to play that air. Mal du pays is, in fact, an exaggerated effect of strong
patriotic feeling, and is therefore peculiarly developed among races like these, full of
the mountaineer's proverbial attachment to his native hills. The " Mountain
Gloom," too, has cast its shadow on their hearts, and made them keenly susceptible
of the pathetic element, and thus more easily affected by it than are those whoso
patriotism is of a more sunny, cheery kind, who would, perhaps, be induced to think
of home (when absent) rather by the hearing of a festive " Eoast Beef of Old
England," than by the heart-broken wail of the departing emigrant, who will almost
certainly return to Lochaber no more ;—who can but carry with him a handful of
earth and a plant of heather, wherewith to brighten, if it may be, his new abode.
No doubt the eater of beef is the wiser and more practical man of the two,
(helped therein how much by the generous diet %)—but there is more to evoke sym¬
pathy in the hardly-used, poorly-fed son of the hills, who is yet so fondly attached to
the home where, in all probability, his life was spent in a perpetual struggle with
difficulties.
It is strange that the English language should contain no exact equivalent for
THE   ATTEMPT. 261
mal du pays, and stranger still that the expression sliould occur in the tongue of a
nation so unlikely to realise the idea, as the light-hearted French. Perhaps proximity
to Switzerland may explain the anomaly. Our word—home-sickness, besides being
unacknowledged in, at least, some dictionaries, does not convey the same meaning,
for it infers the longing for the actual home, the dwelling place ; whereas mal du
pays speaks of a wider love, a craving which might be satisfied apart from the hearth
of the exile.
One capable of this feeling might experience it, though not a stone were left of
the walls that sheltered his infancy, nor a soul of his kindred were ready to welcome
his return. He simply suffers from an inexpressible desire again to breathe the air
and see the face of the mother country, whose every feature is dear. In lonely
watches, and amidst merry companions ; in anxious toil, and in restful idleness,—a
chance likeness, a stray allusion, will recall some of the scenes of old, so well known,
and even the recollection of which is so prized : but it is in sickness that the yearning
becomes all but unbearably intense, the dream-pictures unnaturally vivid. Then,
indeed, to the exile it appears as if one glimpse at the beautiful realities would bring
repose and health, nay, almost it seems as if, like a prisoned bird, he would wear
his life out in the restless rebellious craving that possesses him. Those distant
regions are for him invested with a kind of sacredness—for they are the home of his
race, peopled by the traditions of by-gone glories, of passionate lives, of deeds
and misdeeds, handed down from father to son, and cherished as men cherish their
most precious memories : such were the Sagas of the Norsemen, in which were
preserved the minutest details of family history, side by side with the chronicles of
events that concerned the kingdom at large. Perhaps the feelings we have been
describing belong, in some degree, like the Sagas, to a past age, when men had
wider external beliefs, and worshipped less fatuously at the shrine of Self. Which
period has producedthe most noble work,—work not of the money-making kind,—is a
question not here to be discussed : suffice it that there are yet among us souls, and
those not of the least notable when measured by another standard than that of yearly
income, capable of such patriotic attachments as Norseman or Swiss of old.
Nor yet is the ancient incident altogether unknown, of a man who, on his
death-bed, prays to hear again some wild national strain, full to him of music more touch¬
ing than the wisest master could discourse ; nor are some of us ashamed to stand and
listen eagerly to a shower-born trickle of water, which, in " a barren and dry land,"
suddenly echoes faintly the rich ripple and gurgle of the mountain streams of home.
Similarly we may speak of home-sickness, which is of a like nature to mal du pays,
262 THE  ATTEMPT.
only individualized. It is in some ways a less generous sentiment, for it may exclude
almost entirely the love of country, and confine itself to the merely local affection for
home. How much of this is the result of habit, of association, even of time, locality,
or distance, depends on individual character and cii'cumstances.
A cheerful household may originate it in one instance; while in another, some
shadows at the fireside leave the chief claim on the affections to be made by beauti¬
ful surroundings. One may care, for some special reason of his own, for a region utterly
uninteresting to other eyes, while another, from want of adaptability, may fail to ap¬
preciate a home fall of attractions. Some again, apparently callous to any such senti¬
ment, only awake to a consciousness of the hold their home has upon them, by the
consequent home-sickness—when they are banished from it, and life is deprived of one
of its most natural charms. Whoever is entirely wanting in tlie capacity for these
feelings, wliether applied to his home or his country, misses a great incitement to
well-doing. They combine to spur a man to greater nobleness of thought and deed ;
while for a woman, there is no safeguard so perfect, no influence so powerful for good, as
the possession of a happy home; and perhaps, as with her the love of her own fireside is
more intense, so she experiences in a quite unutterable degree the yearning of home¬
sickness, if, in course of events, she is banished from it. How many lonely women
think with a piteous heart-ache of the hearth by which theii- happier hours were
spent, and say that the toil of bread-winning would be as nothing could they return
to such another when the day's task is done. Let none scoff at their lingering love,
at the rough sketch, the withered flower, that to the eye of imagination are full of
beauty and bloom; for woe be to us if the time ever come when such tenderness shall
have died from among us. Britain will have lost one chief element of her strength,
will have sullied the purity of her ancient glory, when her men shall have ceased to
reverence, and her women have ceased to uphold, the sacred dignity and loveliness of
Home. Elsie Strivelyne.
She has no merry witching ways. But in her presence there is rest,
No flashing glance, no brilliant smiles; And with her, wheresoe'er she goes,
No beauty that attracts all eyes. With placid brow and gentle step,
Nor grace that every heart beguiles. She brings a feeling of repose.
THE  ATTEMPT. 263
Her voice is soft and full and low, And dwelling with her day by day,
And tender as a cradle-song; And watching all her gracious ways.
And listening to its soothing tones. One learns the beauty of her soul.
The wearied heart grows calm and strong.     And sees the beauty in her face.
Vekonica.
Why is it that if, in a confiding mood, you declare a preference for the season of
autumn, you are immediately accredited with possessing a half melancholic, half
misanthropic turn of mind, and are met with intimation that spring is the season
which all rightly-constituted minds should prefer ? The spring of the year, the
spring-time of life, is generally supposed by the poets at least to be the very creme
de la creme of existence. But where, we would ask, throughout the whole circle of the
year, can richer, riper beauty and gladness be found, than in the much-maligned
season of autumn, when " The valleys stand so thick with corn, they shout for joy,
they also sing 1"
The glorious months of September and October, why should they ever be regarded as
melancholy,—beautiful as they are in their rich robes of warm brown and bright yellow
their endless hues of red and blue-gray, and deep purple and gold. What more bright
and beautiful, less melancholy-inspiring, than the splendid mountain ash, with its wealth
of scarlet berries; the hedges ripe with blackberries and red berries and blue berries,
the gathering of which is enjoyment only to be surpassed by the still keener one of
a nutting in the woods,—before which even croquet might well " pale its ineffectual
fire." The bright crisp mornings, when we feel invigorated by every breath we draw,
the very leaves that strew our path adding to our pleasure, as they musically rustle
beneath our tread, or dance before us in an exuberant whirl, swept along by the
fresh autumn breeze,—seeming to us as companions, not as the dead things they are,
but changed to another form of life and beauty. True, the summer days are fading,
and their fresh bright hues have melted into deeper soberer tints; and winter is ad¬
vancing, with its snowy mantle and its icy hand, its time of need and suffering to the
poor and homeless, its apparent death and dreariness. Yet, in spite of all this, there
is to me something especially pleasant, and restful, and holy, about autumn,—the man¬
hood of the year, as it were, when the promise of its spring and summer, its child-
264 THE  ATTEMPT.
hood and youth, has come to perfection ; and, gathering in its harvest, it calmly awaits
the sleep of winter, to awake again to new life and vigour and beauty on the morn¬
ing of spring. And is it not thus with a fuller, deeper meaning as regards the autumn
of life ? " Heaven lies about us in our infancy," sings the poet, and people talk of
" happy childhood" as if it was par excellence the happiest time ; and doubtless it is,
and in a certain sense we probably never in after life experience any enjoyment
quite the same in kind, though it may be far greater in degree. We lose our relish for
dolls and drums, and whips, mud-pies, and tame rabbits, and a thousand dear delights
we relished with such gusto when we were getting into our teens; and yet how
often are we but children of a larger growth, with our croquet and our archeiy, our
balls and bazaars (where we play at being charitable, as we used, when small children,
to play at being " real grown-up ladies and gentlemen"), things which we pursue
with as much apparent eagerness, though not always, perhaps, with equal satisfac¬
tion. But no doubt, there is, in the spring-time of life, a purer enjoyment, a nearer
approach to a happiness we often vainly strive after later in life. At no period pro¬
bably is the feeling of content, of satisfaction in what Imppens (which, we take it, is
the ordinary meaning attached to the word) so complete as in childhood. " All that
glitters is gold" to us then ; and the seen and tangible, the present, without thought
of the future, is enough to satisfy our deepest needs, our highest aspirations,—even
though we may occasionally cry for the moon. But surely it is only in this lower
sense that the spring-time of life can be said to be its happiest time. Its enjoyments
are chiefly those of mere bodily sentient existence ; its sorrows, the passing emotion
of an hour or a day. The joy or sorrow that is felt by the soul comes afterwards.
" The thoughts that lie too deep for tears" are the life harvest of our autumn days,
and it is only when we have learned that—
" Not enjo3anent and not sorrow
Is our being's end and way :
But to live that each to-morrow
Finds us farther than to-day,"—
that we can be said rightly to have learned what life really is to us, and that we
must be exposed to the chill and cutting winds of spring, and the scorching summer
sun, before we can reap the golden harvest of autumn, that thoughtful eventide
of life and of nature, in which methinks it must have been that England's great poet
walked abroad and mused, when he wrote of finding " tongues in trees, books in the
running brooks, sermons in stones, and good in everything.
ZoE.
THE   ATTEMPT. 265
toman's Mork antr Mtoman's €ultmt.
Edited by Josephine E. Butler.
We have already allowed this interesting series of Essays on " Woman's Work and
Woman's Culture" to pass too long a time unnoticed in our pages, but we desire now
to offer our best thanks to those earnest men and women who have devoted their
time and thoughts to the consideration of this great subject, and who, in the volume
before us, give us the results at which they have arrived.
We hear so much of woman now-a-days,—of her " rights," her " mission," her
" sphere," and her " work," that many women themselves weary of the subject, and
beg to be left in peace,—assuring us that they are very comfortable as they are, and
desire no change. But if we examine the condition of these contented women, we
find that they are of that class which is surrounded by friends and relatives, and
which has the path of life made easy and pleasant to its feet. Well-cared for per¬
sonally, fairly educated, and much loved, what need they care for the tumult raised
on behalf of the women of the present day 1 Certainly, at first sight, there is more
dignity about such persons, who, feeling thoroughly contented with their lot, are able
to say calmly that they neither require nor desire any change. But what of the
women who are not well-cared for ; what of the thousands of starving women who
have none to lean on, none on whom to depend 1 It is, as the writers of the book
before us feel, for us who are happy in our homes, and who have no desire to quit
the retirement of them, to think much and earnestly of and for our less happily
situated sisters. In this book, men and women have joined in bringing before the
public much valuable information regarding women in the past and present genera¬
tions, in our own and foreign countries, and have tried, as far as possible, to elicit
from the tangled web of mistakes and difficulties, successes and failures, what should
be the aim of the present generation in its education and treatment of women.
Every one knows the value of first impressions, and in nothing is it of more conse¬
quence that the impression should be good, than in the introduction to a book,—it
gives tone to the whole volume. In this particular, the book under our notice is
highly satisfactory,—the introduction by the editor, Mrs Butler, is so wholesome in
its tone, that it stamps the book as being of a superior order to the numerous
productions of the age purporting to bear on the same subject, but which are often
filled with mere vapid platitudes, or with vain railings against the customs of the day.
Mrs Butler, though contented with her lot, neither fears ridicule nor loss of dignity
2 K
266 THE   ATTEMPT.
ill taking up her pen to plead the cause of her sex. We call it the cause of her sex,
for it affects women primarily; but, as she truly remarks, the cause " is secondarily,
in a yefc graver and more weighty sense, the cause of men." The following pas¬
sage seems to us so fair and unprejudiced an explanation of women's feelings in the
matter of advocating the cause, that we quote it in full:—
"It is certain that all who look upon this question of woman's interests from a great and lofty
point of view, must behold it, as it is indeed, a question which concerns humanity at large, and that
very vitally; and I wish it were felt that women who are labouring specially for women are not one¬
sided or selfish. We are human first ; women secondarily. We care for the evils affecting women,
most of all because they react upon the whole of society, and abstract from the common good.
Women are not men's rivals but their helpers ; there can be no antagonismfthat is'not injurious to
both. When women, laying claim for women to certain privileges hitherto withheld, are called self-
seeking and self-asserting,—terms applied to them by ladies living in ease, and ignorant of the facts
of life, much more frequently than by men,—it seems to be forgotten that the term'" woman" is a
large and comprehensive one. When men nobly born and possessing advantages of wealth and
education, have fought the battles of poor men, and claimed and wrung from Parliaments an exten¬
sion of privileges enjoyed by a few to classes of their brethren,—men who are toiling and suffering,—
I do not remember ever to have heard them charged with self-seeking ; on the contrary, the regard
that such men have had for the rights of men has been praised, and deservedly so, as noble and un¬
selfish. And why should the matter be judged otherwise, when the eyes of educated and thoughtful
women of the better classes are opened to the terrible truth regarding the millions of their less-
favoured countrywomen, and they ask on their behalf for the redress of wrongs, and for liberty to
work and to live in honesty and self-reliance ?"
Mrs Butler meets the well-worn argument, that tlie extension of woman's work
and education will tend to lessen their love of home, with a clearness and freedom
from prejudice which might of themselves be arguments in her favour, showing how
the tendency will be more to promote domestic harmony, and even to create homes
where now there are none, than in any way to injure the happiness of our homes. She
then proceeds to look at the subject from the stand-point of Christianity. There is
great confusion in the minds of many people as to the doctrines which Christianity
really teaches. Many laws in reality instituted by man have received the sanction
of the world for so many centuries, that we have at last come to believe that they are
laid down in the Gospel; and having once imbibed this idea, we naturally feel a cer¬
tain diffidence in thinking out the different laws for ourselves, and have an instinctive
dread of letting ourselves in any way doubt their propriety. But men now-a-days
are beginning to break through some ancient trammels which have hitherto bound
their consciences, and are daring to i-ead for themselves the Gospel, not fearing to
let reason shed its brightest light on the teaching therein contained.    The result of
THE   ATTEMPT. 267
this is a great widening of the religious views of the present day, and we cannot but
think an increase of charity towards all men.    Mrs Butler writes :—
" Persons of every shade of opinion professedly bring their theories, with more or less respect
for that standard, to the standard of Christian ethics ; yet, from the earliest ages of the church until
now, we find them very rarely indeed bringing them to the test of the very works of Christ himself.
They appear to prefer to be guided by the earliest adaptations of the principles announced by Christ,
rather than the pure principles themselves. Thus accepting, as if it were a necessary part of the
principles themselves, the prunitive form into which these principles were constrained by the circum¬
stances of society, they have fallen into confusion and error, which they would have escaped by a
faithful and constant reference to the pure principles themselves—to Christ, in short, and to none
other. It seems as if there were a certain awe, a doubt perhaps, which keeps them at a distance
from that Judge^ while they continually appeal to and wrangle over the words and teachings of the
Apostle. This Apostle (St Paul) spoke for the exigencies of a given period, and from the point of
view of a man born under limitations of vision and judgment, but enabled by a divine insight to
apply with wisdom the essential teaching of his Master to the accidents of the time and society in
which he lived. It was thus that, without revolutionizing society from the outside, or setting
masters and slaves, men and women, at variance, by abruptly altering their relations, he promoted
the most certain revolution, and the deepest and only sure reformation, namely, that which begins
in the conscience of those who are in a superior position, and who, by freely granting freedom,
make it needless for the oppressed to snatch it."
The writer goes on to point out shortly, as the limits of her essay required, how
Christ's dealings with women were always marked by justice and mercy. All
earnest readei's of the Gospel must have observed and pondered over the fact, that
our Saviour seldom lays down any ritual for oiir guidance ; He gives us large loving
precepts, which, when once grasped by us, will teach us how to act in every position
of life, and to be in truth " a law unto ourselves." And as there are certain words
which He spoke conveying to us broad principles—not small obligations ; so there
are in His life certain acts, which teach us more than the mere act would seem.
The writer before us points this out well in the following sentence :—
"Among the great typical acts of Christ, which were evidently and intentionally for the announce¬
ment of a principle for the guidance of society, none were more markedly so than His acts towards
women ; and I appeal to the open Book and the intelligence of every candid student of Gospel
history for the justification of my assertion, that in all important instances of His dealings with
women, His dismissal of each case was accompanied by a distinct act of Liberation."
Here follow two or three pages, which we should willingly quote had wo
sufficient space in this brief notice, but we must reserve what remains for a few com¬
ments on what the other writers have contributed.
First in order comes an essay by Frances Power Cobbe, a writer with whom the
2G8 THE   ATTEMPT.
public is already acquainted. The subject selected by her is " The Final Cause of
Woman," under which title she discusses well and freely the different opinions
current as to the end and aim of woman's existence. She pleads strongly against the
too common error of first making a mould, into which women are supposed to fit,
and then forcing them into it, whatever theii* natural unfituess for the mould may
be. This second writer, like the first, advocates no cause which may unfit women
for home and home duties, but what she does argue for earnestly is, that
women should be looked upon as in themselves human beings, requiring the very
best that can be done for them as such, not only as women who are to be made of the
greatest possible use for men. Miss Cobbe knows that by making woman as peifect
in all respects as possible, that we are benefiting, not injuring men. There is no con¬
flict between the sexes, if human beings all feel that first and foremost, even before
seeking to please each other, they must serve God; they will be the better able to
fulfil all their duties to their neighbours. In this essay we find a slight sketch of the
theories propounded by Comte, on the subject of women, with which any one as yet
ignorant of his extraordinary opinions, and who does not wish to waste time over the
deeper perusal of such wild notions, may be glad to meet.
The next essay, " How to provide for Superfluous Women," is written with
an enthusiasm which makes us feel that the writer, Jessie Boucherett, is very warm
in the cause she advocates. There is a sad ring about the ex])i-ession " Superfluous
Women." We feel things must be far wrong when such a term can be applied to any
of God's creatures ; yet when we see and hear of thousands of women ground down
by poverty, unable to find honest work to which to put their hand, we are almost
tempted at times to exclaim—" Why cumber they the ground 1" This the writer feels
deeply, and the great object of her essay is to prove that in emigration is to be found
the best cure for this dreadful state of things. But it is a difficult subject, and
if the writer has failed to make quite clear what should be the remedy, who can
be astonished 1 The true spirit in which we ought to seek a solution to our diffi¬
culties, is that which breathes more or less through all these essays before us :—Lay
no embargo on any work for woman ; let all try what work they will, for in
the long run we need not fear that woman's work will be done by men, or men's by
women; the work will always be done by the best woikers, and why forbid either
men or women to do that which they cannot?
The next essay in sequence, is from the pen of the Reverend G. Butler, and
takes up the subject of " Education considered as a Piofession for Women." This
essay deserves to be read in full by every one interested either in the giving or re-
THE   ATTEMPT. 269
ceiving of education; we here can only give its brief outline. Mr Butler is
strongly of the opinion that women are naturally well-qualified to be educators. Even
as things stand at present, he asserts that many have proved themselves worthy of
the profession ; and that a very much larger number might be pei-mitted to enter it
with advantage to themselves and society at large, he is convinced, were certain dis¬
advantages removed which have most unnecessarily been put in their way. These
disadvantages he classes under four heads :—
" First, want of fitting preparation for the work ; second, want of recognition of their position
and services ; third, want of proper pay ; fourth, want of anything like a system."
Under the third head Mr Butler speaks out manfully:—
" Let us bear in mind the principle on which labour ought to be remunerated. Every sound
political economist teaches that labour ought to be paid in proportion to its intrinsic worth and
value, and not in proportion to the arbitrary ideas of the payers as to the necessities, or the supposed
abilities of the worker. Let the work done in teaching by women be fairly compared with the work
done by men. If it be equally good, let their pay be equal. This is simple justice and sound
political economy."
His exposition, under the fourth head, of the want of system in the educating of
girls, many of whom are destined in their time to become educators, will go straiglit
to the heart of many a female teacher, who, worn-out and weary with the attempts
to teach the many branches of knowledge demanded of her, looks despairingly at the
mass of confusion before her, and bitterly laments the want of that system in her own
training which might now have supplied her with a method in the training of others.
On the subject of the next essay, there is gi-eat diversity of opinion, the title
being " Medicine as a Profession for Women." The argviments against this question
are so well known that we need not enter on this part of the subject, but shall
merely remind our readers that the writer, Miss Jex-Blake having already studied
for the profession, must know more of its suitabilities for women than we can j)ossibly
do, so that we should at least read her paper with attention and humility ; with a
mind open to conviction, not closed with obstinate pride in our own judgment. Miss
Blake proves in the most satisfactory manner that the study of medicine was formerly
very usual with women, and that it is only lately that the art of healing has passed
entirely from the hands of women into those of men. She mentions instances, so
recently as in the last and present centuries, of women on the Continent holding high
positions in the medical profession. The one great, and at first soiind decisive argu¬
ment against female doctors is, that women would rather be attended by men, so that
there is no demand for female physicians.    But a moment's thought shows us that
270 THE   ATTEMPT.
this arises from women having, as yet, no confidence in a new class of doctors. Of
course we all prefer being attended by tried and experienced physicians ; but as soon
as we see thorough-going female doctors, surely most women have an instinctive feel¬
ing that they would in many cases thankfully avail themselves of the services of one
of their own sex. The whole tone of Miss Blake's essay is just and high-minded, and
thoroughly lady-like, by which we mean that the severest censurer of medical
studies for women can find nothing in it to prove his long-cherished and somewhat
threadbare argument, that the study of medicine must brush off some of the woman¬
liness of woman. It is not much that Miss Blake asks of her country,—merely that
women who wish to become doctors should be enabled to attend women who wish for
their services. We people of Scotland cannot but feel a certain pride that our Edin¬
burgh University has been the first in Great Britain to respond to the earnest appeal
with which she concludes her essay :—
" Is there not one of the English, Scotch, or Irish Medical Schools or Universities that waU win
future laurels by now taking the lead generously, and announcing its willingness to cease, at least, its
policy of arbitrary exclusion ?''
Turning for a time from the contemplation of professions for women, we find the
next essay to be on " The Teaching of Science," by James Stuart, M.A. Besides
the interest of this admirable essay itself, the pure classical style in which it is
written makes it a valuable addition to the volume. After remarking on the practi¬
cal value of science in tlie training of all human beings, the writer proceeds to
meet those objections which are still raised by some against the teaching of science to
women.
" By some," he says, " it is maintained that women do not need to learn science to make them
better women, or abler to help and bless the world, and that they also are incapable of being scientifi¬
cally educated. Those who make this double assertion are consistent, so far as their theory goes;
for if their theory be true, God has done wisely, in bo far that He has limited the capacity to the need,
as in the case of the lower animals, to whom He has given neither the need nor the capacity for a
scientific education. But experiment, as far as it has gone in the education of women, has thrown
these unscientific persons into an inconsistency ; for they have either to prove, in the face of experi¬
ments, by some arguments not yet discovered, that their position is a consistent one, or they have to
give up their position ; the only other alternative being that they should accuse the Creator of women
of a great folly. For when they confess (and how facts drive them to this confession) that women are
very capable indeed of receiving a true scientific education, and while they at the same time declare
that women do not need such scientific education, masmuch as it will not, they say, make them better
women, wives, and mothers, they traduce the wisdom of God, who gave to these women the capacity
for science, and who has adjusted every means to an end, as science hath itself shown, and every gift
to some good result to be \Vorkod out by the use of it."
THE   ATTEMPT. 271
Mr Stuart is able not only to theorise on the subject, but to speak from per¬
sonal experience of the fitness of women for the study of science, having himself
conducted classes for ladies in several of the great towns of England. He is able to
tell us tnily of the great comfort and pleasure that women have derived from the
study of physical science. We all know the comfort we derive by escaping some¬
times into the realms of literature, when small troubles and difficulties have been
vexing our minds, and from this can imagine what woidd be the result of having
ever with us a sense of the greatness and beauty of the surrounding universe, as
shown by science.    As Mr Stuart beautifully says,—
" We do the duties of earth better when our mmds dwell among the harmonies of God, and not
always among the discords of human society."
In this essay, an interesting letter from Mrs Sommerville is inserted, written to
the editor in answer to a request that she would contribute an essay to the volume,
and with which request she only refused compliance on account of her great age.
Next follows an instructive essay "On Some Historical Aspects of Family Life," by
Charles H. Pearson, M.A. This and the following essay, on " The Property Dis¬
abilities of a Married Woman, and other Legal Effects of Marriage," though recently
written, have happily become already less needed by the passing of the " Married
Women's Property Bill," which, in a great measure, tends to correct the social evils
of which these writers complain. Mr Pearson gives much valuable information
concerning family life in our own and other countries, in both early and later
periods. He shows how everywhere opjjression and tyranny worked for ill, and
how all progressive steps were steps in the direction of freedom and self-de¬
pendence.
Such a book as the one at present under our notice, would be incomplete without
mention being made of the question now agitating the minds of some of the most
advanced thinkers in the literary and political world,—we mean the question of
Female Suffrage. This is taken up by Julia Wedgwood, who, in her treatment of it,
does not dwell so much on the advantage to women to be derived from the mere
possession of the vote itself, as from the indirect results that would arise from their
enfi'anchisement. Some of those advantages would be the enlargement of view
which women would gain by having some voice in affairs not purely domestic; the
feeling of responsibility which would awaken in her a desire to understand for her¬
self the condition and needs of society; and the greater sympathy which she would
have with the world around her were she brought in contact with the real interests
of the nation.    The object of this essay is not to claim the suffrage as a right for
272 THE   ATTEMPT.
women, but to prove its expediency, and we think that the writer has shown that
there is at least much to be said in favour of her opinion.
In most of the essays we have noticed, mention has been made more or less of the
education of women, but the special essay on " The Education of G-irls, its Present
and Future," is taken up by Elizabeth C. Wolstenholme. She is strenuously opposed
to the system which sends so many of our girls to fashionable boarding-schools for
some of the most valuable years of their lives, though acknowledging, in many cases,
the good which some specially-enlightened schoolmistresses have worked. A judi¬
cious mixture of home influence and " collective instruction" is what she advocates.
"We want first," she says, "in every considerable town in England a High school for girls,—
perhaps a High school and Secondary school,—under Municipal or Government control, which
should offer the best possible education on very moderate terms. ... To such a school as this
it would be very easy to attach all manner of appliances and apparatus, in the way of lectures or
special classes, which might be attended by pupils from private families or the smaller schools."
The writer then proceeds to lay down a clear and well-matured plan of what
should be the method of providing for girls who must leave theii- homes for
education. There is something specially attractive about this essay, from its prac¬
tical nature. The writer never points out a difficulty but she suggests a cure.
She ends her essay with some earnest remarks on the advantage to be gained by the
whole community from the higher education of women ; and we think there is
nothing high flown or over-strained in her closing appeal,—
" Help women to become wise, that they may be just and true, merciful and loving."
This interesting volume concludes with a paper full of common-sense and justice,
from the pen of one of the thinkers of the age, John Boyd-Kinnear, entitled "The
Social Position of Women of the Present Age."     Starting, as he says, from
" The very moderate and incontrovertible proposition that at all events women must live,"
he goes on to prove that in order to live they must be permitted to do all honest
work that they can perform properly.   Hearing so much, as we do now-a-days, of the
world being over-populated,  and consequently of labour being over-stocked,  it  is
refreshing to read such passages as the following :—
" Far from the world being over-populated, it is still infinitely underpopulated. Nature offers
room for a thousand times more labour than has yet been bestowed upon her. . . . There is not,
and there cannot be, for more years than the world has yet lived, a real overplus of labour in the
world. On the contrary, there is a huge unsupplied demand for labour ; and our blunder is forcing
too much labour artificially into certain channels, and thus artficially depriving ourselves of the
benefits it would yield us did it flow in natural channels."
THE   ATTEMPT. 273
This answers effectually the argument that women, by entering new trades, will
only throw men out of work. There has been no difficulty made as to men entering
trades which have been generally filled by women, though by so doing they often do
throw women out of work, for their labour must be measured by their physical
strength ; still there has been no law to prevent this, nor would it be desirable that
there should be any such, for, as Mr Boyd-Kinnear remarks—
" There is no principle that can live save that of freedom of labour, and the freedom must be com¬
plete and universal."
After viewing the question of woman's work from the lower ground of mere sub¬
sistence, the writer proceeds to consider it from the higher ground of their intellectual
requirements. We shall bring our notice to a close with a few sentences from this
writer :—
" Wherever there are faculties, there is an innate craving to find work for them. That women
have intellectual and moral faculties no one in terms denies, however he may choose to ignore the
fact. How terrible do the consequences seem, neglecting to provide the food which nature demands for
the himger she creates.    Perverting the healthy instincts we pervert the whole mental constitution."
Speaking of the principles of education, he says,—
" The principle is the same for women as for men. That is a true education which teaches how
the faculties which its Maker has implanted in the soul can be made most serviceable to our fellow-
creatures ; for in serving others consists self-elevation."
We feel that it is no vain hope that Mr Boyd-Kinnear holds out in the closing
sentence of this thoughtful volume :—
"Women and men will be drawn the closer in the bonds of mutual service, and love, and com¬
fort, when we seek woman's aid, and train them to give their aid, no longer only in our idleness and
amusements, but in the daily romid of duties which makes the noblest portion of our lives."
DES   EaUX.
 ^=,§.€8H-==-^ 
From the German of Julius Mosen.
I.
The moon is sinking through the morning grey,
But on my weary eyelids sinks no slumber ;
The mist is flying from the light of day,
But still awake the fleeting hours I nuniber.^
2 L
'7i THE   ATTEMPT.
My life is turned to reverie and song,
Because I looked upon thy face too long.
II.
Have I been sick, and am I now grown whole ?
Have I been well, and is this Love's wild sickness?
My lips are burning, feverish is my soul.
My thoughts whirl through my brains with maddening quickness.
Is it in grief or bliss that here I stand 1
I have done nought but gently press thy hand.
III.
I know it; I must siimmon up my strength ;
Must press my hand on this poor heart of mine, love ;
I know that I must lose thee, dear, at length—
'Tis I who suffer—peace and joy be thine, love !
I know my stern resolve will gain the day,
But ah ! my happiness is gone for aye !
IV.
And should the Fates deny me Love's sweet rose.
Yet crown my brow with laurel wreaths victoriou.s—
Should Fame and Splendour gild my last repose,
And all my latest hours be calm and glorious—
Yet—yet alone 'mid memory's tempest wild,
My soul will weep like a forsaken child !
Dido.
C^« '^onuB of llrs §rotoning.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning's claims to immortality seem to me very strong. She
may be said to stand alone, for certainly no woman ever ajiproached her in poetic
talent. Sappho is to us a shadow of the past, the fragments that remain of her poetry
are very few and far between ; but Elizabeth Browning has been dead but a short
time. In reading what she has written, we feel her heart beating in every line,—
the heart of a suffering, troubled, loving woman. Her music is nearly all in the
minor key, which may be partly accounted for by the fact that her life was most of it
THE   ATTEMPT. 275
spent in sickness and in pain.    She waited long for happiness, and enjoyed it but for
a short time; though a nature like hers, keen to intensity, must have crowded more
joy into a few years than many feel in a life-time.    She who had felt how hard it is
for women
" To sit lone
On winter nights by solitary firea,
And hear the nations praising them far off,"
while the common delights of home-love and tenderness are denied to them, must
have lifted up her heart to God in a thankful happiness that knew no bounds, when
these last were given as well as the fame, which is to a woman so often a crown of
thorns,
" Because God's gifts put man's best dreams to shame."
"We are glad to know that she who had written
'' We scarcely care to look at even
A pretty child, or God's blue heaven,
We feel so tired, my heart and I,"
could say before she died,
" Oh ! children ! I never lost one,
Yet my arms round my own little son,
And love knows the secret of grief."
Elizabeth Browning was a proof, if proof were wanting, that keenness of intellect
in a woman is compatible with the greatest tenderness of heart and of nature. There
is nothing hard or unwomanly in her.
But in contrasting her poems with those of such a poet as Wordsworth, we feel
the difference between a woman's talent and a man's. Wordsworth looks into a
number of hearts and tells us their feelings ; Mrs Browning looks into her own, and
tells us its soiTow and its joy, but cannot reach beyond it and think herself, as it
were, into the existence of another. She cannot rid herself of her identity, and
become, for the nonce, the man, woman, or child whose thoughts and sensations she
is expressing, which nearly all great poets have been enabled to do. Her husband,
for instance, seems able to speak with the very voice, and think with the very
heart, of a monk in a Spanish cloister, of a fair wicked woman of the Ancien E.6gime,
athirst for revenge upon a rival.
"Is it done? Take my mask off, nay, be not morose,
It kills her, and this prevents seeing it close.
The delicate droplet, my whole fortune's fee,
If it hurts her, besides, can it ever hurt me ? "
27G
THE   ATTEMPT.
We seem to see and hear the soft, languid beauty, stirred into fearful energy
by that jealousy which is cruel as the grave. It is this faculty of absorbing all
the emotions which stir humanity, into one heart, which makes Shakespeare im¬
mortal, and which, I greatly fear, no woman ever has possessed, or ever can gain.
But this essay being intended as a criticism on Mrs Browning, and not for the de¬
preciation of female intellect, I must go on to say that I think she took larger views,
and had a wider and nobler mind, as well as heart, than almost any woman who has
ever trod, like her, the stormy path that leads to the temple of fame. Her poetry is
thoroughly natural; and is written straight from her heart, and enriched by the
classical knowledge which she possessed to a far greater degree than most women.
One of the most beautiful, I think, is that addressed to H. S. Boyd, and called " Wine
of Cyprus." The tenderness with which she recalls the old days when he was
teacher and she learner, is "true womanly" :—
' Ah ! my gossip, you were older
And more learned, and a man ;
Yet that shadow, the enfolder
Of your quiet eye-Uds, ran
Both our spii-its to one level ;
And I turned from hill and lea,
And the summer sun's green revel,
To your eyes that could not see.
Now, Christ bless you with the one light,
That goes shining night and day ;
All the flowers that grow in sun-light
Shed their fragrance in your way.
Is it not right to remember
All your kindness, friend of mine ?
When we two sat in the chamber,
And the poets poured us wine."
"Aurora Leigh," as the most considerable of her works, ought to be noticed first.
One remarkable thing with regard to it is, that the story, though told in verse, never
loses its interest, and yet that it does not attempt to be a drama, though there is
much of dramatic force in some parts of it. In Aurora, Mrs Browning probably
intended to describe herself. The lonely girl, with her passionate dreams of fame,—
feeling all the while that life is slipping fast away, with its best joys all untasted, is
drawn to the life ; and the proud humility with which at last she lays down her
visions and their fulfilment, and asks only to be eyes to the blind, and help to the
helpless,—giving willingly to her lover in his loneliness and pain what she had denied
when the world was at his feet, touches us all. Lady Waldemar, with her patrician
grace and unscrupulous self-serving, is well-painted also ; and poor Marian Erie and
her sleeping child are described with exquisite tenderness. The picture of the baby
waking is so perfect, that I cannot forbear quoting it,—
" He saw his mother's face accepting it.
In change for heaven itself, with such a smile.
THE  ATTEMPT. 277
As might well have been learned there, never stirred,
But smiled on, in a drowse of ecstasy,
So happy, half with her and half with Heaven,
He could not have the trouble to be moved."
But I must pass from Aurora Leigh to her smaller works. " Casa Guidi Windows,"
is in some parts very beautiful, in others too obscure ; and I do not think it at all
equals the generality of her shorter poems. To dilate upon the beauties of thes^
would occupy too much time and space, but I may mention some of them. J'he
rhyme of the Duchess May is in its close especially full of faith and hope,—
" Oh ! the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west,
And I smiled to think God's greatness flowed around our incompleteness,
Round our restlessness. His rest."
" Bertha in the Lane," is tender with the love that overcomes. Jealousy and misery
are quenched in the half-motherly love of the one sister for the other. She who is
left, taking the joy the dying one had been deprived of, whose " wedding-gown "
had been the last work the failing fingers had wrought, is not even to weep over
Bertha's grave.—■
" Rather smile there, blessed one,
Thinking of me in the sun,
Or forget me, smiling on."
" Bianca among the Nightingales" forms a strong contrast to the last-mentioned
poem, in its fiery Italian abandonment of love and hate. The birds whose songs
had once soothed her, now madden her with their melody, peacefully trilling on,
though the music has gone from her heart, and from her life for evermore. She can¬
not be passive, patient, indifferent; her whole nature is in a flame.
" Oh, cold white moonlight of the north.
Refresh these pulses, quench this hell!
0 coverture of death drawn forth,
Across this garden chamber—well!
But what have nightingales to do
In gloomy England, called the free,
(Yes, free to die in !) when we two
Are sundered, singing still to me ?
The nightingales, the nightingales."
" Sonnets from the Portuguese" are instinct with the love that perfected
her life.
278 THE   ATTEMPT.
" How, dearest, wilt thou have me for most use ?
A hope to sing by gladly ? or a fine
Sad memory, with thy songs to interfuse ?
A shade, in which to sing of palm or pine ?
A grave, on which to rest from singing ? Choose."
Is she sorry, if from the " Eden Land unknown," she can look upon the earth
to see that the strong heart she left behrad her has not rested from singing, but sings
still, the stronger for its sorrow 1 I think not. Her " Last Poems," especially those
relating to Italy, are among the best she ever wrote. They are all pictures di-awn
from a woman's point of view, but none the less beautiful for that. " Mother and
Poet" above all, is one that can hardly be read but through tears ; so full is it of a
patriot fire mixed with a mother's agony. She would give her sons to serve her
country, but when the other country
" Above the star pricked by the last peak of snow"
receives them both, and leaves her only a memory, her song dies away :—
" Both, both my boys.
When you sit at the feast
And ask a great song for your Italy free,
Let none look at me."
The loss of one she has tried to endure, but both.
" We aU
Have been patriots, yet each house must always keep one,
'Twere imbecile, hewing out roads to a wall;
And when Italy's made, to what end is it done.
If we have not a son ? "
There are innumerable minor beauties, scattered gems of thought and feeling,
which I would fain stop to gather, if space allowed. Elizabeth Barrett Browning's
name and memory will long live among us. She has what Burns called "ae spark of
nature's fire," and her poems do most certainly " touch the heart." Therefore we
may hope that they will be handed down from one generation to another, as things
that men do not willingly let die, and that, woman as she was, she may be crowned
by the hands of ages, to come among the poets at whose enchanted wells none ever
drank more deeply than she.
O. M.
THE   ATTEMPT. 279
ibia;bal Clji&alrjr,
Military Orders.
" I am speaking of an order of men who are ready to rally round the throne, and are, indeed, if
Justice were done them, its natural and hereditary champions."—(Si)- Vavasour Firebrace, in Sybil.
In the British Islands, the oldest Order of Knighthood is that to which every reader
of romance looks fondly back, as the purest ideal of chivalry,—King Arthur's Order
of the Knights of the Romid Table. To support the honour of his country, Arthur
elected twenty-four of his noblest knights, of whom he was the leader and example,
and upon any complaint being made to the king of any injury or oppression, either
here or beyond the sea, one of these knights, whom the king should appoint, was to
revenge the same. If any foreign knight came to the Court to show his prowess,
some one of them was to be ready to answer him ; and every one, for the advance¬
ment of chivalry, was to be ready to instruct young lords and gentlemen in the
exercises of arms. Their great meetings were about Whitsuntide, in Winchester
Castle, where, in order to prevent all petty questions about precedency, so destruc¬
tive to fraternal love, the king ordered to be made a great round table, at whicli
they sat. Favin gives a list of the names, not only of this first twenty-four, but of
all the eight chapters through which the order lasted. The names become more
peculiar as we read on, meeting such as " The Goodly Coward," " The Deformed
Valiant," "The Strong Always Found," "The Ancient Knight of the Hollow
Deeps," "The Fairy for Ladies," "The Brown Without Joy," "Armont of the
Green Serpent," <tc.
The Most Ancient Order of the Thistle was said by John Lesly, Bishop of Ross,
in his History of Scotland, to have taken its beginning from a bright cross, like that
of St Andrew's, which appeared in the sky to Achaieus, King of the Scots, and
Hungus, King of the Picts, the night before they defeated Athelstane, King of
England, at Athalstaneford. Saint Andrew, at the same time, having promised them
success whenever they saw that sign, they solemnly vowed that they and their pos¬
terity should ever bear that figure in their ensigns and banners, and thus the Order
of the Thistle or of St Andrew was for some time confined to princes of the blood
royal. The ancient number of brethren was twelve, of the noblest families, with
the king as sovereign. Their garments were purple velvet, lined with white, and
on the left shoulder, on a field of green, was the image of St Andrew, bearing before
him his cross, in embroidered silver.    A circle  of gold round it bore the words,
280 THE   ATTEMPT.
in gi-een enamel—" Nemo me impune lacessit;" and in the lower part was a
thistle in gold and green, with a jjurple ilower. The Collar of the Order was
made of thistles, alternate with sprigs of rue, from the centre of which fell the St
Andrew of gold, enamelled white, with thirteen diamonds, and rays spreading out
beyond the points of the cross. The officers were:—The Dean, the Lion King-at-
Arms, the Secretary, the Usher of the Green Rod; and the fees for admission
were, even in the old times of valuable money, £111, 2s. 2Jd. They met at
Holyrood Chapel.
The Order of St Tlwrtias, instituted by King Richard at the siege of Acre, soon
died out.
1344.—The Most Noble Order of the Garter was instituted by Edward IIT.,
when, in his wars with France, he attempted to gather round himself the best soldiers
in Europe. The Garter is supposed by some to have been intended as an emblem of
the tie or union of warlike qualities to be employed in the assertion of the founder's
claim to the French crown; and the motto is a retort of shame and defiance to any
one who should think ill of the enterprise. A well-known popular tradition connects
it with the Countess of Salisbury and an accident at a festive occasion ; which may
be sustained by probability, but there is no written authority for it previous to the
reign of Henry VII. They wore a surcoat, mantle and hood, as well as this dis¬
tinguishing gartei-, and Henry VIII. added the George collar, cap, and feathers.
The Gai-ter is of blue velvet, bearing the motto in letters of gold—"Honi soit qui mat y
jKuse.'" It is first assumed in the ceremony of installation ; and tied round the left leg,
with these words—" To the honour of God omnipotent, and in memorial of the
blessed martyr St George, tie about thy leg for thy renown this noble garter. Wear
it as the symbol of the most illustrious order, never to be forgotten or laid aside, that
thereby thou mayst be admonished to be coui-ageous; and having undertaken a just
war, in which thou shalt be engaged, thou mayst stand firm, valiantly fight, and
successfully conquer." The sovereign then puts about his neck a sky-coloured rib¬
bon, to which is pendant the " St George and the Dragon," and the following admoni¬
tion is given—" Wear this ribbon about thy neck, adorned with the image of the
blessed martyr and soldier of Christ, St George, by whose imitation provoked, thou
raayst so overpass both prosperous and adverse adventures, that having stoutly van¬
quished thy enemies, both of body and soul, thou mayst not only receive the praise
of this transient combat, but be crowned with the palm of eternal victory." A
similar address is given with each piece of the habit, as in the investiture of the
knight.     The knight's helmet, crest, sword, and banner, and a plate containing his
THE  ATTEMPT. 281
arms and titles, are then set over his stall in the chapel of St George at Windsor
as a mark of honour, there to remain during his being of that oixler. At his death,
his mantle, with the book of statutes, is sent to Windsor. For the convenience of
travelling now, the knights of the order are permitted to wear a blue ribbon under
their boot instead of the garter, but without that, and their lesser George and Star,
by the statutes of the order, they are never permitted to appear in public, except
iipon the principal feasts of the year, when they wear their collar, and the ribbon
and George become unnecessary.
The first ofiice is the Prelate—the Bishop of Winchester for the time being ;
next the Cliancellor—the Bishop of Salisbury for the time being. Both of these re¬
ceive the highest honours in the land.    They wear purple velvet robes.
The Register of the order wears a crimson satin robe, and on his breast a red
book of the order, with the device of two pens saltere within the garter. The fourth
officer is Garter, appointed by Henry V., who is the princij^al officer within the
College of Arms, and chief of the heralds.    His robe is the same as the Register's.
The fifth and last officer is the Black Rod. He also must be a gentleman of blood
and ai'ms, born within the sovereign's dominions, and if not a knight at his election, he
must be knighted, and appointed Chief Usher in the kingdom, for the honour of the
order. He wears the same robe as the Register and Garter, and carries a black rod, on
the top of which is a lion of England, before the Sovereign in any of their solemnities.
This serves as a mace, and by touching delinquents, has authority to apprehend
them. There were fifty-six knights elected by Edward III., amongst whom were
all the royal family and great noblemen of the kingdom ; twenty-eight by Richard
II.; twenty-five by Henry IV. ; twenty six by Henry V., amongst whom were the
Emperor of Germany, the Kings of Portugal, Naples, and Poland; thirty-six
knights were chosen by Edward IV., amongst whom were the Kings of Naples and
Portugal, Hercules d'Este Duke of Feri-ara, and Francis Sforza Duke of Milan.
There were onlyseven knights elected by Richard III.; and thirty-seven by Henry VII.,
amongst whom were Maximilian King of the Romans, afterwards Emperor of Ger¬
many, and the Kings of Hungary, France, Portugal and Scotland ; thirteen were
chosen by Edward VI., and eight by Queen Mary, amongst whom were Philip of
Spain and the Duke of Savoy; fifty-three were knighted by Queen Elizabeth,
amongst whom were Maximilian of Germany ; Charles IX., and Henry III. of
France; twenty-six by James I., amongst whom were Christian IV. King of Denmark,
Maurice, Prince of Oi-ange, Frederick Count Palatine, and the Dukes of Brunswick
and Wurtemberg ;   twenty-five by   Charles I., chief of whom  were Gustavus of
2 M
282 THE   ATTEMPT.
Sweden and Prince of Orange ; forty-seven were installed by Charles II., amongst
whom were Charles XI. of Sweden, Christian King of Denmark, and William
of Nassau Prince of Orange. There were only five knights made by James II., and
fifteen by William and Mary, amongst whom were Frederick I. of Prussia, George
Lewis Elector of Brunswick, afterwards King of England, and the Dukes of Bruns¬
wick and Saxony. Queen Anne elected thirteen, amongst whom was George
Augustus Elector of Hanover, afterwards King of England. Twenty-one knights
were made by George I., thirty three by George II.   This list goes no farther.
The fees due to the king's servants, from all who receive the honour of knight¬
hood, amount to X76, 15s. 4d. ; but there is a scale of installation fees, according to
rank, for those who receive the order of the garter. The Dean and Canons receive
£20 from a king, down to .£3, 6s. 8d. from a knight. The Choir receives from
£1G to £3. The Register receives 13s. 4d. for installation fee, and from £40 to
£28 for the Robe; while Garter receives for installation from £40 to £10,
and likewise for the Robe from £60 to £30. The Black Rod receives from £40 to
£10; and various sums are distributed to the king's servants, amounting in all to
£103, 16s. for a king, down to £26, 11s. 8d. for a Knight - Bachelor; so that there
is no slight expense incurred in receiving this highest honour in our land.
The Order of the Bath was revived and restored by King George in 1725, but the
date of institution cannot here be given. The Seal was engraved on one side, with
the king's effigy on horseback in armour, the shield azure, three impeiial crowns
or, the arms usually ascribed to King Arthur, with the superscription—" Sigilluno
Honoratissime Orduris Militares de Balereo." The knights of the order wear a
surcoat of red tatfata. lined with white, and girt about with a white girdle, and a
mantle the same as the surcoat. The ensign on the left shoulder bears three imperial
crowns or, and the motto " Tria juncta in uno" inscribed in a circle gules, ujion a star
of eight points azure. The collar is composed of nine imperial crowns of gold, and
eight gold roses and thistles issuing from a golden sceptre, enamelled in proper
colours, linked together with seventeen gold knots enamelled white, representing the
white laces mentioned in the ancient ceremonials of conferring the Order of the Bath.
To the centre knot is pendant the badge of the order,—a rose issuing from the dexter
side of a sceptre and a thistle from the sinister, between three imperial crowns placed
within the circle of the motto. This must be worn on all feast day.s. Their banners
are hung up over their stalls in the Chapel of King Henry VII.
Their oath is—" You shall honour God above all things; you shall be steadfast in
the faith of Christ; you shall love the King your sovereign Lord, and him and his
o
THE  ATTEMPT. 283
right defend to your power. You shall defend maidens, widows, and orphans in
their rights, and shall suffer no extortion, as far as you can prevent it; and of as
great honour be this order unto you as ever it was to any of your progenitors or
others." Each knight is bound, in case of invasion, to maintain, when called upon,
four men-at-arms at two shillings a-day, for a time not exceeding forty days ; after
which, if required, they shall be paid by the king along with the regular forces.
The ofEcers are the Dean, Register, King-at-arms, Genealogist, Secretary, Usher of
the Scarlet Rod, Messenger. The Dean is the Dean of the Church of Westminster
for the time being ; the Genealogist investigates the pedigree of all candidates ; the
Bath King-at-arms carries the white rod of the order ; the Gentleman Usher carries
the scarlet rod, surmounted by three imperial ci'owns.
The, most Illustrious Order of St Patrick.—The first investiture of these knights
was performed on the 11th March 1783, at Dublin Castle, by Earl Temple, then
Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland. The forms are similar to the other orders. The collar
is formed of Irish harps, knotted with roses, in the centre a crown, from which is
pendant a large harp, which supports the medal, bearing a cross like St Andrew's
with a crowned shamrock.     Motto—" Quis separabit."
Many interesting facts we might relate regarding the Continental orders, but
our narrow limits permit us only to give the names of such as were instituted before
the end of the eighteenth century.    In France, then—
700.—The Order of the Dog and Cock, by Lisoye de Montmorenc6.
726.—'The Order of the Genet, by Charles Martel, after defeating the Saracens.
800.—The Order of the Crown Royal, by Charlemagne, were invested with  a box
on the ear.
1022.—The Order of the Star, by Robert Capet.
—The Order de la Sainte Ampouille.
—The Order of the Broomflower, by Louis IX.
1269.—The Order of the Ship or Double Crescents, also by Louis.
1390.—The Order of Bourbon, or of the Thistle, or of Our Lady, by Louis of Bour¬
bon, in honour of the Virgin.
1393.—The Order of the Porcupine, by Louis of Orleans, at the baptism of his son.
1400.—The Order of St George in Burgundy, by Philbert de Miolan.
1450.—The Order of the Ermine, by Francis, the last Duke of Brittany.
1469.—The Order of St Michael, by Louis XL, for 100 knights of high rank.
1579.—The Order of the Holy Ghost, the most illustrious in France, by Henry III.
—The Order of Christian Charity, also founded by Henry III.
284 THE   ATTEMPT.
1693.—The Eoyal and Military Order of St Louis, by Louis XIV.
1759.—The Order of Military Merit was founded by Louis XV.
1703.—The Order of the Bee, by Louisie de Bourbon, for both sexes.    " Je suis petite,
mais mes picquares sont profondes."
—The Order of the Celestial Collar of the Holy Rosary, by Queen Anne of
Austria and France, for fifty ladies.
Military orders peculiarly suited the disposition of the Spanish.    In Spain—
722.—The Order of the Oak of Navarre, by Don Garcia Ximenes.
837.—The Military Order of St lago de Compostella, by Ramira, King of Leon, or
by Ferdinand of Castile.
1120.—The Order of St Saviour, by Alphonso of Arragon against the Moors.
1158.—The Order of Calatrava, by Sanchio III. of Toledo, the most powerful.
1219.—The Ladies' Order of Calatrava, by Donna Gaysley Maria Younes.
11—.—The Military Order of Alcantara, or of St Julian, or of the Pear Tree.
1212.— The Order of the Rosary of Toledo, founded to defend the Romish religion.
1218.—The Order of the Lady of Mercy, by James I. of Arragon
12^.— The Order of Montesa, instituted at the end of the thirteenth century.
1312.—The Ladies' Order of St lago de Compostella, similar, as far as possible, to the
Knights' Order.
1320.—The Order de la Scama, by John II. of Castile, to fight against the Moors.
1330.—The Order of the Rosy Band or Scarf, by Alphonso XL
1379.—The Order of the Dove, or of the Holy Ghost, founded at Segovia by John I.
1410.—The Order of the Lily of Arragon, by Ferdinand of Castile.
—The Order of the Lily of Navarre, by Garcias of Navarre.
—The Order of the Golden Fleece, by Philip of Burgundy.
1171.—The Order of Charles III., instituted by himself in commemoration of the
birth of the Infant.
In Portugal, the Order of Avis was the earliest, by Alphonso Henriquez, at
the siege of Evora.
1172.—The Order of the Wing of St Michael, by the same Alphonso.
1317.—The Order of Christ, by Dionysius, after the pattern of Calatrava.
In the German Empire, the earliest date belongs to the peculiarly-named—
1380.—Order of Fools, by Adolphus, Duke of Cleves, at the feast of St Rupert.
1447.—The Order of St Hubert, by Gerard, the fifth Duke of Julices, Berg, and Cleves.
THE   ATTEMPT. ZOO
1535.—The Order of the Burguudian Cross at Tunis, by Charles V.
1652.—The Order of the Death's Head, founded by the Duke of Wurtemberg for
both sexes, but carried on by his daughter, Louise Elizabeth of Saxe Mers-
burg for ladies alone, partly literary.
1690.—The Order of Sincerity, by John, fourth Elector of Saxony, and Frederick III.
of Brandenberg, at their reconciliation.
—The Order of the Red Eagle, foundation unknown, for general officers.
1701.—The Order of St Eupert, by John Ernest,  Louis de Thue, Archbishop  of
Saltzburg.
1702.—The Order of the Chace, by the Duke of Wurtemberg.
1704.—The Order of the Noble Passion, by John George of Saxe Weissenfels.
1729.—The Order of St George, by Albert, Elector of Bavaria.
17—.—Tlie Order of the Golden Lion, by the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel.
—The Order of Merit, by the same person, at the same time, for civil distinction.
—The Order of Tusin, by the Archduke of Austria.
1662.—The Order of Ladies' Slaves to Virtue, by Eleonora di Gonzaga.
1668.—The Ladies' Order in Honour of the Cross, by the same Empress.
1708.—The Order of Neighbourly Love, by the Empress Elizabeth, at Vienna.
1757.—The Military Order of Maria Theresa, by tlie Empress herself.
In Venice, the oldest is that of St Mark's.    Badge, the Venetian Winged Lion.
—The Order of the Golden Stole, called so from the garment worn.
1400.—The Order de La Calza, or of the Stocking, at the inauguration of Duke
Michale Steno.    Their employments were conversation and festivity, and
they were distinguished by brilliant stockings of all colours, chiefly blue,
1463.—In Naples.—The Order of the Ermine, by the King of Naples,
1464.—The Order of the Crescent, by Een6 of Anjou, brother to the King of Naples.
—The Order of St Nicholas, in Naples, bore the ensign of a ship in a storm.
1738.—Tlie Order of St Januarius, the patron saint of Naples.
In Sardinia, the oldest order was founded in Cyprus, then belonging to Sardinia,
11—.—The Order of the Sword, in Cyprus, by Guy de Susignan.
1355.—The Order of the Annunciation, by Amadeus V. Count of Savoy,
1434.—The Order of St Maurice, by Amadeus VII., in honour of his patron saint.
1572.—The   United Orders of   St  Maurice and St Lazarus, revived by Emanuel
Philibert of Savoy.
286 THE   ATTEMPT.
1660.—In Prussia.—The   Order  of Concord,  by Christian  Ernest,   Margrave of
Brandenburg.
1685.—The Order of Generosity, by Frederick III., then Elector of Brandenburg.
1701.—The Order of the Black Eagle, by Frederick I. at his coronation.
1740.—The Order of Merit, by Frederick III.
1325.—In Poland.—The Order of the White Eagle, by Uladislaus I.
1765.— The Order of St Stanislaus, by Stanislaus Augustus at his election.
1219.—In Denmark.—The Order of Danebrog, by Waldemar II.
1478.—The Most Illustrious Order of the Elephant, by Christian I.
1732.—The Order of Fidelity, by Sophia, wife of Christian VI., soon abolished.
1290.—In Holland.—The Order of St James, by Florentius, Earl of Holland and
Zealand.
1334.—hi Sweden.—The Order of the Seraphim, or of Jesus, by Magnus II.
1366.—The Brician Order, by Queen Bridget, afterwards canonized.
1525.—The Order of the Sword, instituted by Gustavus Vasa.
1561.—The Order of the Saviour of the World, by Eric King of Sweden.
1564.—The Order of the Lamb of God, by John King of Sweden at his coronation.
1645.—The Order of Amaranta, by Queen Christina.
1748.—The Order of the Polar Star, by Frederick I.
1772.—The Order of Wasa, by the King of Sweden.
In Russia, the patron saint who was said to have introduced Christianity, was
honoured by
1698.—The Order of St Andrew, by Peter the Great.
—The Order of St Catherine, by Peter^ when his wife saved him from danger
on the banks of the Pruth.
1725.—The Order of St Alexander Newski, by Peter the Great.
1738.—The Order of St Anne, by Duke of Holstein Gottorp.
1782.—The Order of St George, by Catherine II., for military officers.
1782.—The Order of St Waldemar, instituted at the same time for civil distinction.
LuTEA Reseda.
The End.
A Prize will be awarded for the best Prose Article appearing in the January Number of " The
Attempt."
'mm^.
mv-'
n^-s^
i r II
10
uJ«5l515lEilSlHl51SL^St'5ftSl5l51EaHl!^^
LEfErSTH
i
It
5l5lBlSlSl51Sl5l5l!3li3l
