^ni'
»^
THE  LADIES'
EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.
JAN.  TO  DEC.   1878.
VOL.   IV.   NEW   SERIES.
EDINBURGH:
MURRAY   &   GIBB,' 11   QUEEN  STREET.
MURKAY AND GIBB, EDINBVROH,
PRINTERS TO  HER  MAJESTY'S  STATIONERY   UVFICE.
PREFACE.
In putting forth the concluding number of our volume for
1878, we are glad to take the opportunity, while drawing
attention to the increased circulation of The Ladies Edin¬
burgh Magazine, of thanking our friends most cordially for
their support. The enlarged size, and consequent greater
variety of subjects, seem to give all the satisfaction we
hoped for; and from the materials now in our hands, we
believe that a no less copious and attractive table of contents
will next  year be offered for their approval.    In January
1879, we hope to begin an original and romantic story,
entitled The Beggar of Capo di Monte, and besides continu¬
ing the different series already begun, to add others equally
interesting,—as, for example, that on Country Subjects and
Pursuits.
The Question Series will be renewed, with a few modifica¬
tions which we think will be acceptable to the competitors,
who have sometimes been embarrassed by the limited space
assigned for their answers. Special attention is invited to
the details which will be issued in January, as to the terms
of competition. The prizes for the present series will be
awarded as soon as the Answers for January are in the
Editors' hands.
The fact of the increased circulation has brought us many
new writers, some of them with names not unknown in the
literary world. To their contributions we are doubtless in¬
debted for the many favourable notices in the critical
journals. We can but hope that these facts, added to our
own redoubled efforts, will secure a renewal of their support
through the coming year.
Edinburgh, December 1878.
CONTENTS.
PAGE
A Thousand Miles up the Nile (Our Library Table),          .        . 235
After Winter, by A. C  282
Alpine Flower, The, by Hon. Mrs. Lionel ToUemache,     .        .        . 408
Art of Beauty, The (Our Library Table),  426
As You Like it: Studies from Shakspere.—II., by Sidney Philips, . 203
At Home and Abroad. —I., Cannes, by Sidney Philips, •.        .        . 457
Aunt Elsie, A Sketch, by M. T., 398, 446, 502
Aurora Borealis, by Alma Glen,       ....... 396
_- Barbauld, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by J. Menzies,   ... 1
Birth of Cain, The, by H. A. DuflF,  18
Book Exchange Column,  47, 94
Breaking of the Storm, The (Our Library Table),     .... 93
^Bronte, The Sisters (Our Female Novelists), by B. C. J. D.,    .        . 433
—Brunton, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by A. D.,    .        .        .        . 194
-Catharine Sinclair (Our Female Novelists), by A. D.,       .        .        . 337
Cockatoo's Creed, by Charlotte Carmichael,  222
Concerning some Modern French Novels, by H. A. Duff,         .        . 511
Correspondents, Notices to,    48, 90, 144, 192, 240, 288, 336, 384, 432, 480,
528, 570
Cui Bono (Our Library Table),  235
Damascus, by H. A. Duff,  540
Debates of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society  44
Door, The, by Hon. Mrs. Lionel Tollemache  516
Dream-Maiden, A, by Mrs. H. King,  467
Edinburgh Housekeeping Two Hundred Years ago, by M. S. il.,     . 619
End of the Feud, The, by E. J. 0.  112
E. Werner, A German Currer Bell, by M. Montgomery Campbell,   . 562
Exhibition of the K. S. A., Notes on the, by L. D.,         ... 231
-^Female Novelists, Our,       1, 49, 97, 145, 194, 241, 289, 337, 385, 433, 481,
629
Frozen Thames, The, by L. D. Raikes  541
Girls' Friendly Society, A Short Account of the, by Sidney Philips, 38
Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of Women, by M. E. M., 184
Reportof the, by G., 329
Greek, by Ma^nTiit,  43
Greek, by Mafyufityis,     ......... 89
Green Pastures, and Piccadilly (Our Library Table),        ... 92
—Hamilton, Mrs. Elizabeth (Our Female Novelists), by M. B.,   .        . 529
Happy Valley, A (Where shall we go ?), by E. J. 0.,       .       .        . 22
Contents.
■_Harriet Martineau (Our Female Novelists), by E. A. Huntley,
Helios, by Dumse 
Hesperos, by C. M. Williams, 
Highland Widow's Lament, The, by A. C 
Hints to Nurses (Our Library Table) 
Historical Notices of S. Fillan's Crozier (Our Library Table),
In Memoriam, Eurydice, by L. D., .
In My Indian Garden (Our Library Table),
In Time of War, by C. M. L. F. 
Incident of Table Bay, An, by L. Dean Pitt,    .
'Is the Theory of Evolution necessarily opposed to Christianity?
byL. D 
' Is Wagner's Theory of Music and the Drama Correct ?'—I., by L, D.
-n.,byE.J.O.
Joseph Cook's Monday Lectures, by Jeanie Morison,
Knight of To-day, A (Our Library Table) 
— Lee, The Misses (Our Female Novelists), by M. B., .
Letter from Edinburgh, by A Bird of Passage 
O   LetThem Alone, by L. C. G.,       .   8,69,122,174,212,263,312,
Libraiy Table, Our, 46, 90, 141, 188, 235, 283, 333, 380, 426, 472,
Life of the Prince Consort, vol. iii. (Our Library Table),
London in the Jacobite Times (Our Library Table), .
Lost Piece, The, by H. A. Duff,       ....
Maiden Margaret, by Alma Glen,    ....
-»-Marsh, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by L. D.,
Medusa and other Poems (Our Librai-y Table),
Men's Rights, by M. Forsyth, 
Midnight Adventure, A, by M. D.,
Mixing the Christmas Pudding, by C. Ray,
Modern Frenchmen (Our Library Table), .
.^Norton, Hon. Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by Alma Gle
Norway (Where shall we go ?), by J. Menzies, .
Notes on Fish and Fishing (Our Library Table),
Ode for Music, by Anon., 
On Poetic Interpretation of Nature (Our Library Table),
Only in Dreams, by H. A. Duff,      ....
...^pie, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by H. C. Reid, .
Our Christmas Dinner and its Consequences, by Nono,
Outpost Duty, by R 
Page of Modern History, A, by a Member of the Red Cross Society
Palm Sunday, For, by H. A. Duff, ....
Paris Exhibition of 1878, Notes on the, by Nono,    .
Partition of the Earth, The, by Dumse,   .
Paul Knox, the Pitman (Our Library Table),   .
Peace and Goodwill ; or, Two Christmas Eves, by Nono,
Philochristus (Our Library Table),   ....
Pontius Pilate, a Drama, and other Poems (Our Library Table),
Question Series,        47, 94, 142, 189, 237, 285, 333, 381, 428, 473,
Quiet Haven, A (Where shall we go ?), by E. V. Lynne, .
Retribution, by L. D.,    .        .       .        .       ,
n.
PACK
529
161
445
493
91
285
193
283
878
468
152
,   152
352
107
46
97
254
363, 409
524, 569
141
472
131
273
385
380
559
322
30
567
481
113
189
423
91
230
241
554
211
493
151
370
140
236
132
525
188
568
74
351
80,
526.
VI
Contents.
430, 475,
Riddle Unsolved, A, by Mrs. Ramsay Laye,
Riven Bonds (Our Library Table),    ....
Romeo and Juliet : Studies from Shakspere.—L, by Sidney Philips,
Rubinel, by Dumse, 
St. Katherine, by H. L. R. 
—Seward, Miss (Our Female Novelists), by J. Menzies,
—^^helley, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by F. Gair, .
..jSherwood, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by J. Menzies,
Snowdrop, A, byM. T., 
Solution of Double Acrostic,    .....
Sonnet, from the Italian of C. M. Maggi, by Anon.,
Sonnet, from the Italian of Petrarch, by C. Ray,
Spring Song, by Joan Scott,    .....
Stray Notes,     .        47, 94, 143, 191, 238, 287, 335, 382,
Studies from Shakspere, 
Thistledown, by F. D 
Thoughts and Experiences of a Charity Organizationist (0
Table) 
To Music, by Joan Scott, .....
Transcaucasia and Ararat (Our Library Table),
, Trollope, Mrs. (Our Female Novelists), by K.,
Valentine, A, by H. A. Dnfi", 
Vicar of Morwenstow, The (Our Library Table),
Voyage in the Sunbeam, A (Our Library Table),
Washed Ashore, by A. C, 
Wave, The, by Anon. 
Where shall we go ? 
Woman's Influence as viewed by Two Poets, by Constance O'Brien,
Working Ladies' Guild, A Short Account of the, by Sidney Philips,
World Well Lost, The (Our Library Table),     ....
Young Poets, by H. L. R., 
1878, by R. C. W. 
ur Library
527,
58,
FA.OB
275
427
58
490
369
49
289
49
552
45
262
68
202
569
203
471
333
121
46
145
57
90
524
362
321
113
162
424
380
188
7
THE LADIES' EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.
©ur JFemale i^o&elists*
XII.
MES. BAEBAULD.
Mrs. Barbauld, b. 1743—</. 1825.
In a time of such widespread and multifarious literary
activity as the present, when few people can spare the leisure
to read what their neighbours have written, it is pleasant to
look back a hundred years upon a quiet, unobtrusive, yet at
the same time eminent literary genius. The thought of such
a woman as Mrs. Barbauld is like meeting with a moorland
tarn on a fine summer morning, and seeing the sky mirrored
in it without a cloud. An educational reformer, yet one who
never ran into the dangerous extremes of the present day;
an essayist and writer of fiction of the highest tone, both in
morals and imagination; a critic of rare acumen and justness
of thought; and, above all, a woman of the most exquisitely
refined, lovely, and retiring character, we find in Mrs. Bar¬
bauld one of those rare beings of whom the world has un¬
mixed reason to be proud. So, too, thought Mr. Henry Crabb
Eobinson, who, when asked, ' Would you like to know Mrs.
Barbauld ?' exclaimed,' You might as well ask me whether
I should like to know the Angel Gabriel!' ' Mrs. Barbauld,'
replied the interlocutor, ' is much more accessible;' and
forthwith came the introduction.
The life of Anna Letitia Aikin, from her birth in 1743 up
to her fifteenth year, was a period of quiet growth in a
secluded home. Her father, the Eev. John Aikin, D.D., was
a dissenting minister at Kibworth Harcourt in Leicestershire;
her mother was descended from Wingates of Harlington
Grange on the one side, and from Earls of Anglesea on the
other. The father of our authoress was educated by the cele¬
brated Dr. Doddridge, who afterwards resided for some years
No. 37.—January 1878. j^
2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
under his roof, and exercised a great influence over the up¬
bringing of both Anna and her brother, afterwards Dr. Aikin.
As is probable from such surroundings, there was more virtue
than pleasure in these the earliest years of her life; and as
no suitable companion of her own age existed in the village
of Kibworth, she was thrown upon her own resources. Thus,
fostered by solitude and lovely rural scenes, her girlish muse
awoke to life. So precocious was her mind, even in infancy,
that her mother thus writes of her:—
' I once, indeed, knew a little girl, who was as eager to learn as her
instructors could be to teach her, and who, at two years old, could
read sentences and little stories in her ivise hook, roundly, without
spelling; and, in half a year more, could read as well as most women;
but I never knew such another, and I believe never shall.'
Besides a love of poetry, she had in youth great bodily
activity, and a lively spirit. An amusing instance of this is
related by her niece, Miss Aikin. "When about fifteen, a stout
farmer, who had for some time admired her, was permitted
by her father to pay his addresses. The young lady hap¬
pened to be in the garden at the time, and, as soon as he
had revealed his errand, she took flight up the nearest tree,
' leaving her suitor plante Id,.' The poor man lived and died
a bachelor; and the only book Avhich he was ever known
to buy and read, was the works of Mrs. Barbauld.
When she had attained her fifteenth year, her father re¬
ceived the post of classical tutor in an academy at Warring-
ton, and she was thus thrown among congenial companions.
She was at this time of great beauty, slender, with a blooming
complexion, regular features, and dark-blue, sparkling eyes.
During the next fifteen years, the academic nurture of her
new home, and the society of pleasant companions, tended
both to encourage her muse and to give it a more cheerful
tone. Many poems were written during this period, all noted
for gaiety and elegance. In 1771 her brother induced her
to publish a volume of poems, which proved so successful
that four editions of the work were called for within a year
of its publication. This procured her the friendship of Mrs.
Montague and of Dr. Priestley, the latter of whom admired
specially her poem on Corsica. Shortly after this, she issued
a volume jointly with her brother, entitled MisceUanemts
Pieces in Prose, by J. and A. L. Aikiu. As no care was taken
to distinguish the works, mistakes have often been made as
to the authorship.
In 1774 she was married to the Eev. Eochemont Barbauld,
the grandson of a French Protestant, who had been conveyed
to England in a cask during the persecutions in the reign of
Our Female Novelists. 3
Louis XIV. Before her marriage, she was told by a friend
that Mr. Barbauld had experienced an attack of insanity.
' Then,' said she,' if I were now to disappoint him, he would
certainly go mad.' So she rushed upon her melancholy fate.
Some distinguished ladies, upholders of an improved
system of education, now advised Mrs. Barbauld to open a
ladies' college. The answer made by her, declining the
proposal, reveals her views on the subject of the upbringing
of young girls. She feared tlrnt ' a literary academy ' of the
kind desired would only produce a set of pr^cieuscs and
femmes savantes. Men, who were bound to exhibit their
knowledge to the world, might well read together and form
debating societies; but far be such an aim from the minds
of women, whose chief end in life was to form suitable com¬
panions for men of sense. Any knowledge beyond the
average, therefore, which women should obtain, ought to be
gained on the sly, that they might never be discovered
poring over books. Her idea of the age at which instruction
ought to be imparted is of a piece witli the foregoing. Geo¬
graphy, languages,—in fact, all that is difficult,—ought to be
learned between the ages of nine and fourteen.
'I should have little hope,' she says, 'of cultivating a love of
knowledge in a young lady of fifteen, who came to me ignorant and
iintaught; it is too late then to herjin to learn. The empire of the
passions is coming in ; a new world opens to the youthful eye ; the
grace and ease of polished society must now be acquired.'
It is pleasing to learn that she shortly afterwards, along
with Mr. Barbauld, opened a boarding-school for young men.
Her literary fame attracted large numbers to this academy.
Mrs. Barbauld gave lectures on geography, taught English
composition, and even wrote plays, which her pupils acted.
The celebrated Mr. Taylor of Norwich, one of her pupils,
writes of her with enthusiasm, and calls her ' the mother of
his mind.'
After eleven years spent in teaching, Mr. and Mrs.
Barbauld felt so exhausted that they spent a year on the
Continent, and afterwards one in London. They ultimately
settled in Hampstead, where Mrs. Barbauld found many
friends; among these were Miss Joanna Baillie and her
sister, who had taken a house in their neighbourhood. Of
the tragedy of De Montfort, by the former of these ladies,
Mrs. Barbauld writes with much admiration, remarking that
the writer of it' had as innocent a face as if she had never
written a line.' At Hampstead our authoress wrote several
prose essays, including some of the pieces in Dr. Aikin's
Evenings at Home.    Only fourteen, however, of the ninety-
4 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
nine pieces in that work are from her pen. Having
addressed to Mr. Wilberforce a poem on the rejection of the
bill for abolishing the slave-trade, she received from Mrs.
Hannah More a highly congratulatory letter on the subject.
The poet Eogers, then a young man, was an esteemed visitor
at the house in Hanipstead.
In 1793 she paid a visit to Edinburgh. Sir Walter Scott
gives an account of an evening spent by her at Mr. Dugald
Stewart's, where she had first turned his attention to German
ballad poetry by her animated reading of a translation of
Burger's Lenore by Mr. William Taylor of Norwich. Beloved
as the abode at Hampstead was, yet Stoke-Newington, 'a
very Elysian field of nonconformity,' as the names of Defoe
and Howard can testify, was to be the home of her latest
years. Hither she with her husband removed in 1798, and
here she enjoyed daily the society of her brother Dr. Aikin.
A constant correspondence with the Edgeworth family began
here; and on Miss Edgeworth starting the idea of a literary
magazine, to be entirely conducted by ladies, Mrs. Barbauld
gives her opinion on the subject in these words :—
' As to the scheme of a periodical paper, there is no one who would
not be delighted to see it undertaken by yourself and Co., provided
the Co. was in any measure adequate to the first of the firm ; but I
do not know what to say to the idea of inviting the literary ladies to
join it. All the literary ladies ! Mercy on us ! Have you ever
reckoned up how many there are, or computed how much trash would
be poured in from such a general invitation 1 I am also doubtful of
the propriety of making it declaredly a lady's paper.'
Such being Mrs. Barbauld's views, we cannot but think
that ladies in general must have written trash in those days,
and required some ballast to float their magazine.
In the year 1808 Mrs. Barbauld was left a widow, in very
melancholy circumstances, her husband having caused his
own death in a fit of insanity. By literary activity, she
struggled bravely against her grief, and in time attained to
calmness and composure. Thus, gentle, loving, and beloved
by many, she lived to the advanced age of eighty-one, and
died on the 9th March 1825. Her appearance as an old
lady is thus described by Mr. Crabb Eobinson:—
' Independently of her fine understanding and literary reputation,
she would be interesting. Her white locks, fair and unwrinkled skin,
brilliant starched linen and rich silk gown, make her a fit object for
a painter. Her conversation is lively, her remarks judicious, and
always pertinent.'
Naturally of acute perceptions and keen feelings, she so far
overcame these as to acquire a habit of uniform gentleness
and forbearance towards all, never judging harshly of any
Our Female Novelists. 5
one, but taking virtue for granted where she could not
discover its existence. The elevation of her character ia
shortly described by the fact that, throughout the course of
her long life, she never made an enemy and never dropped
a friendship.
Besides the works already mentioned, Mrs. Barbauld wrote
Hymns in Prose for children, highly valued by many; she
also edited, in 1795 and 1797, with critical essays, the
Pleasures of Imagination, by Akenside, and CoUins' Odes.
Selections of papers from the English Essayists, and from
Eichardson's Correspondence, appeared in ]804; and a col¬
lection of British Novelists, with biographical and critical
notices, in 1810. Her last work, a poem entitled '1811,' is
scarcely worthy of her reputation.
Her great power in fiction, though never put to the test by
any larger work, is very strongly felt in the perusal of minor
tales which she has left, and we can only regret that her
lively and graceful pen did not achieve the task of a greater
romance. Two of her minor tales may be noticed here, the
one grave, the other gay. In a dream, entitled the Hill
of Science, a pilgrim represents himself as going through the
gate of Languages, past the wood of Error, the fields of
Fiction, and the dark walk of Allegory, each of which, in its
turn, entices him to linger. Almost in despair of ever reach¬
ing the top of the hill, he is consoled for the non-attainment
of Science by a meeting with Virtue.   The story ends thus :—
* "I am found," said Virtue, "in the vale, and I illuminate the
mountain. I cheer the cottager at his toil, and inspire the sage at
his meditation. Science may raise you to eminence, but I alone can
guide you to felicity ! " While the goddess was thus speaking, I
stretched out my arms towards her with a vehemence which broke
my slumbers. The chill dews were falling around me, and the shades
of evening stretched over the landscape. I hastened homeward, and
resigned the night to silence and meditation.'
The style of this suggests that of Johnson and the classic
authors. Her own playful wit appears more in a ' Dialogue
between Madame Cosmogonia and a Philosophical Inquirer
of the Eighteenth Century.' The inquirer questions the
venerable dame as to her history; and we find the story of
the world vastly simplified by her calling the flood a severe
ducking she once got for being naughty. After that, she built
a prodigious house of cards, meant to reach the sky, but left
off in the middle, and had her tong\;e slit for being so con¬
ceited. She then baked dirt in the sun, and made a great
many mounds in the form of sugar-loaves. The Dark Ages
are thus described:—
' "I somehow got shut up in a dark cell, where I took a long nap.
6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
'' And after you waked ?" "I fell a-disputing with all my might, about
whether one be a number; whether men should cross themselves with
two fingers or three; whether two and one make three, or only one."'
Certainly, all this makes the poor old world look very
foolish indeed. The brilliancy of the allegory reminds us
of Swift's TaU of a Tub. We think the last idea of Dame
Cosmogonia, come to in the 18th century, the best; she says:
' I am going to turn over quite a new leaf.   I am singing '' Ca Ira."'
The poor inquirer, quite disappointed with the foolish
doings of the old dame, concludes thus :
' I am sure, from this account, it is high time you should turn over
a new leaf. All I can say is, that if I cannot mend you, I will
endeavour to take care you do not spoil me; and one thing more,
that I wish you would lay your commands on Miss Burney to write
a new novel and make you laugh.'
And we, in our turn, would beg Dame Cosmogonia to give
a very large allowance af holidays to some of her most
wearied brain-workers, who are getting into a very languish¬
ing condition indeed. From the foregoing extracts, we cannot
but conclude that Mrs. Barbauld, in addition to ease and grace
of style, a lively and ingenious fancy, and vast stores of infor¬
mation, invariably took the high tone of a social reformer.
Upholding, as she frequently did in her writings, the principle
of dissent in church matters, she did this partly for the sake
of introducing the end of the wedge of Liberalism in general
opinions. The social disabilities of Dissenters, still existing
in those days, were doubtless great hindrances in her way.
Her lively wit never passed the bounds of reason and
moderation; and this characteristic made her critical
writings peculiarly valuable. Miss Edgeworth, on reading
even her unsigned critiques, invariably recognised the pen
of Mrs. Barbauld, so patent to all was the spirit of justice
and moderation, tending rather to leniency than otherwise.
Of a political pamphlet of hers, Thomas Moore wrote that
he hardly knew anything in the English language superior
to that truly eloquent performance, in delicacy of irony and
strength of reasoning. Though her tales, essays, and reviews
are superseded by the vast number of similar productions in
this prolific age, yet they are not forgotten, and we may
accept without hesitation the tribute of Sir James Mackin¬
tosh when he says :
' If ever there was a writer whose wisdom is made to be useful in
the time of need, it is Mrs. Barbauld. No moralist has ever more
exactly touched the point of the greatest practicable purity without
being lost in exaggeration, or sinking into meanness. It is the
privilege of such excellent writers to command the sympathy of the
distant and unborn ; it is a delightful part of their fame, and no
writer is more entitled to it than Mrs. Barbauld.'
1878. 7
In the estimation of Wordsworth, she was the first of our
literary women. Among her works, published after her
death by her niece, Miss Lucy Aikin, was a stanza on Life,
written in her declining years. A copy of this publication
was given to Miss Wordsworth. Long afterwards, Words¬
worth begged to have those lines repeated to him again and
again, until he knew them by heart. He was at the time
walking in his sitting-room at Rydal, with his hands behind
him, and was heard muttering to himself:
' I am not in the habit of grudging people their good things, but I
wish I had written those lines.'
We cannot better pay a tribute to the memory of Mrs.
Barbauld than by concluding with the entire stanza:—
' Life ! we've been long together,
Through pleasant and through cloudy weather;
'Tis hard to part when friends are dear ;
Perhaps 'twill cost a sigh, a tear;
Then steal away, give little warning,
Choose thine own time ;
Say not good-night, but in some happier clime
Bid me good-morning.'
J. Menzies.
1878.
New Year, dawning young and glad.
Tell us how to greet thee ;
Shall we come with more of fear.
Or of hope, to meet thee ?
In thy full hands dost thou bear
More of joy or sadness %
Love and rest, or loss and care,
Days of grief or gladness ?
Thou art silent, answer none
To our vain words making ;
Yet we hear the voice of One
On the silence breaking.
Calm the words that bid us cease
Caring for the morrow;
Rest He offers us, and peace,
Strength for joy or sorrow.
Then whate'er the silent year
May for us be hiding.
Nothing evil can we fear.
All to Him confiding. E. C. W.
8 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
5Let Efjem ^lone.
A TALE TOLD IN LETTEES.
' It is a hard matter for friends to meet ; but mountains may bo
removed with earthquakes, and so encounter.'—As You Like it.
LETTER I.
From the Eev. Frederick James Eeynolds to his Sister,
Miss Eeynolds.
Illingham Parsonage, Moewick,
Tuesday in Easter Week, April 10, 1849.
Dearest Helen,—It is twelve o'clock at night, but I can't
go to bed, still less to sleep, till I have had a word with you.
After the long, silent journey, I feel the need of a chat;
and if I cannot get it in speech, I must have it in pen and
ink. Illingham at last! But how different an arrival to
what you pictured, or even to my own more sober hopes !
I got here three hours ago, in a pelting rain and in a close
fly; no scenery to be seen, nothing but a white sheet of rain
all the way from Morwick; not a human being in sight, not
a parishioner, old or young, male or female, looking out as we
toiled up the last hill into the village. Arrived at my own
house, I saw no signs of life; shutters up and blinds down.
My flyman knocked long and loud, swinging his arms
across his chest from time to time to warm himself. At
last a key creaked slowly in the lock, and the door was
opened by an old woman, who looked as much astonished
to see me as if she had not been apprised of my coming
three days ago. ' 'Deed, sir, an' I didna think as ye'd ha'
come, not in sic-like weather,' was her first greeting; and in
answer to my questions whether she had a fire for me, she
answered cautiously, ' Well, she couldn't just say as there
was one i' the parlour, not just noo, but she would light it
in a minute ;' and accordingly, when, after settling with the
flyman and bringing in my own baggage, I went into the
parlour, there it was just sputtering and struggling for
existence. I next threw the poor soul into great embarrass¬
ment by asking if she had anything for me to eat, and she
began a perplexed statement with 'Well, sir, ye see as I
didna just expect you,' etc. I came to the relief by saying, if
she would give me a cup of her own tea, and some bread and
Let Them Alone. 9
butter, it would do for me very well; and in due time these
were produced, though in scanty measure for a hungry
traveller. I then asked for some lights, and with many
apologies and offers to go out to ' the shop' for some
'moulds,' which, of course, I wouldn't hear of in such a
night, she brought in a couple of dips, by which I am writing
now. Neither of them will stand straight in its socket, and
the snuffing they take is prodigious. So, if you find gaps in the
flow of my narrative or of my penmanship, you must ascribe
it to the constant attention which they require.
Now I must give you a description of my house, which I
have looked over thoroughly inside, and cursorily outside in a
lull of the storm before it got quite dark.    My church I have
not seen at all yet, save for a glimpse of a square tower that
I got from an upper window.    It is very close by, but there
are trees between.    "Well, the house is not at all what I would
have built if I had been the last incumbent instead of the
present.    Come down from all your romantic notions—and
hear !    It is a little matter-of-fact, squab, stone house, with
a slated roof, saved from being a regular carpenter's box by
having two windows on one side of the door, and only one on
the other.    There are two sitting-rooms,—one small, and the
other smaller.    The last man kept the small one as dining-
room and sallc de reception, and lived, with his books, in the
smaller.    This I shall just reverse:   the small will perhaps
just hold my books, and the smaller will do for me to eat in
{N.B., if I find there is anything to eat in lUingham). Outside
the window of the small room (which I suppose I had now
better begin, for convenience' sake, to call the larger) there
is a sort of verandah, over which creepers are attempting to
grow, hitherto without success.    This I shall take down, for
it is useless and ugly; and when I can afford it, I shall build
a stone porch in front of my door, with   seats in it, where
my poor people can shelter from sun or rain whilst waiting
to see me.    Over the sitting-rooms there are, of course, two
bedrooms to match.    I have taken the better of the two, as
I daresay it will be a rare event to have a friend to stay
with me;   but I will turn out of it when you come, to give
you room for those vast possessions you always travel with.
Kitchen and servant's rooms you must imagine; they are in
proportion to the splendour of all the rest.    I have a garden
of about a quarter of an acre, much out of order, a stable of two
stalls, and a handsome pump.    I possess thirty acres of glebe,
but it is not near at hand ; so I suppose I shall let it, as my
predecessor did.    This is all I can tell you as yet, so now I
lO Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
will say good-night. My fire, after smoking about two hours
and a half, is now gone out, and the wicks of my candles
have grown to a ghostly length. The wind is howling
through the house, and a tree is creaking outside and beating
its branches against the window in a way that has made me
start and shiver many times. My old woman has long been
gone to rest. I tried to keep her, to talk to, while she was
taking away the tea things; but she was shy and laconic, and
I could not get on with her. Good-night. I know how you
and dear mother will be thinking of me all day. My love
to you all.    I will write more to-morrow.—Your loving
F. J. E.
LETTER II.
From the Kev. F. J. Reynolds to his Sister.
Wednesday, 7P.M.
By my fireside, in my slippers.
Dearest Helen,—I must now give you an account of my
first day as Perpetual Curate of St. Saviour's, lUingham,
though I shall hardly know where to begin, or how to say
enough to satisfy that craving of yours to 'know everything.'
I cannot deny that my first impressions here have been far
from exhilarating; perhaps the gloom of the weather may
in part account for it, and the feeling of loneliness that I
experience for the first time in my life. I slept little, and
was up soon after six; came down and found old Mary was
not about; took an umbrella and \vent through the wind
and rain to my church. My first feeling when I saw it
was, that if I had seen church, house, and village for myself
at the outset, instead of trusting to a friend's report, I should
never have found myself in my present position. Few men,
I should think, take their first glance of their parish when
they actually come to reside; but I have done it, and must
take the consequences. Well, I did not come here to find
an easy life and enjoy the picturesque, but to do the work
appointed me—God grant I may ! There was nobody about,
and I did not know where the keys were kept, and thought
it too early to go knocking at people's doors, so I contented
myself with an outside survey. Building in good repair,
solid and ugly; square towers, with battlements; sash windows
here and there among pointed ones; an aisle on one side'
only, giving it a lop-sided look; roof at an ugly angle. The
churchyard is a pretty piece of ground; it stands high, and
there must be good views from it in fine weather; no houses
Let Them Alone. II
very close; grass growing wild all over it; large tombstones,
with the most ' uncouth rhymes' and the most ' shapeless
sculpture' decked!
Came back to breakfast, in which Mary had done her best
for me; unpacked a box or two (for I found that some had
preceded me here), and tried to make my room look a little
less desolate. About eleven o'clock, a Mr. Grant, rector of
a neighbouring parish, came over to induct me in due form ;
so now there only remains to ' read in,' and I am fairly in
possession. Mr. Grant went away directly his duties were
over, and I began to take a leisurely survey of my churcli,
accompanied by the old clerk. ' In excellent order, and in
very good taste,' said our friend Mr. Villiers—good, easy
man ! Now, Helen, hear! High pews with doors, cushioned
mostly, but with nothing to kneel upon ; a gallery at the
west end, where the choir performs to a bass fiddle; a
ponderous reading-desk and high pulpit above it; a hideous
wooden font in the centre of the church, slop-basin in it to
hold the water—all this I saw at a glance, and my face, I
fear, must have grown very long, while my poor old clerk
showed off everything with conscious pride. The chancel
is rather a redeeming feature. It has three well-shaped
lancets, tolerable altar furniture, and is stalled. This must
have been Villiers' ' good taste,' and he could have looked no
farther. I am thankful, however, for some negative blessings.
There are no great modern monuments, no squire's pew with
curtains (that is in the other church), no bad stained glass.
You shall paint the Commandments, as you promised, for the
chancel; there is a reredos of stained wood and tolerable
design, empty panels at present. I will send you the dimen¬
sions and other particulars next letter. After leaving the
church, I explored my half of the village thoroughly, and
learned the geography of the whole place. My clerk, who
is a cobbler, went back to his work, and I made my observa¬
tions alone. I should be ashamed to tell you how depressing
they were to me. The place looked wofuUy ugly, and had
a strange lifelessness about it. Every one I addressed seemed
cold and shy; not a woman curtsied or gave me good-day as I
passed her door, though some turned to look at me inquisitively.
I saw many public-houses, and three men passed me reeling
drunk—two of them cursing and blaspheming. In the after¬
noon I went into my schools—good buildings, but blank and
cold, like all else. The master received me frostily; he
looked like a man accustomed to have his own way, and not
inclined to stand interference from a  young  hand.     The
12 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
mistress, on the other hand, offended me by ostentatious
deference. I spoke to a good many little curly pates as the
master took me round the different classes, but not one of
them answered me; whereupon the master in each case cuffed
them soundly on the head, and tears and sobs accompanied
my first prog^ress through my school. By this time I was so
out of heart that I felt positively grateful to a man who re¬
marked in a cheery tone to me, as I went home, that it was
a ' fine night, sir.' I disagreed with him totally in my heart,
as it was about four o'clock on a very dismal afternoon; but
it was meant for a greeting, and as such I valued it. Now I
must positively say good-night. Don't fancy from all that
I have said that I am not going to do my best to like the
place and be content. These are only first impressions, with¬
out which I know you would not be satisfied. My best
loye to dear mother. Tell her I am well and have had no
headache since I left home. Take care of Wowski; I wiU
send for him some day.—Your loving F. J. E.
P.S.—I find the name of tliis place is not pronounced
lUing-ham, but Illin-jam. There are many other local
names on the same pattern. I hope soon to make acquaint¬
ance with my colleagues at the other end of the village.
Villiers said, you know, that the rector was ' a charming
person, though of the old school in Church matters.' He
did not know much about the curate, who is more likely to
be a companion to me.
LETTER  III.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to the Eev. Edward Beilby.
Illingham Parsonage,
April 11, 1849.
Dear Beilby,—Here I am! I am instituted, inducted,
and all the rest of it, and am, next Sunday, to read in. You
told me to write you my first impressions of the place and
my work; and though it is, perhaps, too soon to give you an
account worth anytliing, I begin, as much by way of finding
companionship as anything else. This is only my second
evening here, and already my solitude frightens me! And
when I think that this solitude will probably be my portion
to tlie end of my days, I feel as if I had put a hand to the
j)lough that was not strong enough for its task. Sure no
one was ever so spoiled in a first curacy as I: six fellows
of us, mostly friends and contemporaries, all working together
under the best rector that ever lived; help, sympathy, talk
Let Them Alone. 13
always to be had, and a good friend like yourself ever at
hand to pitch into one on the smallest occasion or none.
Already I look back to our evenings at Priors worthy as to
a kind of lost paradise.    My arrival here, in cold and wet,
was very cheerless, and my first glance at things in general
this morning has been infinitely depressing to me ; the bleak¬
ness of the country, the strange lifelessness of the village, the
cold manners of every one I met, a reception in the school
that vexed and angered me, but, above all, the church !    The
building is bad enough, but my quarrel is not with that.    It
is that cold, dead, once-a-weeJc look that chills me; doors
carefully locked, everything covered up inside, and a damp,
mouldy smell, like a vault.    What a contrast to the old
church at P., which was our true liome; and how I have
longed this day to throw myself down in the dear, accus¬
tomed corner and disburden myself of all my cares!    A
frightful feeling came over me as I entered my new church :
I thought I could not pray there; and worse, while I took
that miserable walk round the parish, I thought the whole
place rejected me.    Beilby, I know what you will say—that
I am letting my morbid feelings get the better of me again;
that I am a great deal too much influenced by externals; that
ugliness, bad manners, and bad weather ought not to weigh
with me one straw.    True, but this time the matter goes
deeper.    Bear with me, dear Ned, while I explain myself.
I have been for more than three weeks under the influence
of the deepest misgiving as to whether I had done right in
taking this preferment at all.     I think I acted from too
sudden an impulse.  . . . You know what it was—that I
might be farther from home, and from a presence daily be¬
coming dearer to me;  too dear, if I am to keep to my
resolution, as by God's help I will, to give myself wholly to
His service.   This flight may have been right, or it may have
been cowardly.    In either case, was this a moment (and was
this a motive ?) to take upon myself a vast responsibility ?    I
caught too readily at the wish of my father's old friend, Mr.
Villiers, to have me in his county, and gave too much weight
to his representations of the place and of its suitability to
me.    Surely it was great presumption in me, at my age, and
inexperienced as I am, to leave a place where, if I was not
doing much good, I was, at all events, learning some, and
charge myself, unaided, with the burden of more than 2000
souls.   It was these thoughts, which have been long rankling,
that gave the sting to my experiences of to-day, in them¬
selves, perhaps, indifferent enough.
14 TJi.e Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
To return. As I passed through the village in the after¬
noon, there was a horrid brawl going on in a public-house ;
two or three men, with their heads broken, came out, and
reeled past me, cursing, while little boys in the street laughed
at them and repeated the bad words. At this moment (do
not laugh, Ned; it is true) I seemed to hear a voice behind
me in a mocking tone say,' It is yoii who have to give account
for these souls; you, who can scarcely take care of your own!'
It was so real that I turned sharply to look, but there was
nothing. ... It is true that I am not called upon to do
anything in my own strength ; it is true that for these souls
I am ready to spend and be spent to the last breath I draw:
only let me be assured that my call here is a true one, and
I fear nothing—but there's the rub! You know all now,
and will help me if any one can. I have had too happy a
life up till now—so much dear companionship, so much
undeserved love; and I have basked in this sunshine as if
it was to last for ever ! I think now a sterner discipline is
prepared for me, a harder fight is before me, and I must fight
it alone.
My little parsonage is very mean and ugly, but I care
little for its discomforts. I have made the most of them and
other trifles in writing to my sister, for I would not have her
and my mother guess yet my graver misgivings. Now, good¬
bye, dear Ned. Eemember me in your place in our dear old
church this night and always.    Let me know how your affair
with T tiirned out, and whether you have succeeded in
the school plans we discussed. Write to me, and blow me
up as much as you see occasion. Only make me see this
once, that my way is straight before me, and I promise you
shall have no more whining. I meant to have told you
what little I have gathered and surmised about my brother
clergy at the other end of the village, but I have left no
time.—Yours always affectionately,
r. j. E.
Go and see my mother and Helen as often as you can,
and make the best of me.
LETTER IV.
The Kev. F. J. Reynolds to his Sister.
Friday Evening, April 13.
Dearest Helen,—I must begin  another letter to  you
without waiting for your answer to my first, or I shall not
Let Them Alone. 15
be able to keep you up in all my affairs as you desire.
Indeed, I feel as if I were growing as fond of pen and ink
as yourself, the reason I suppose being that I have ' nobody
to speak to.'
To begin, then, where I left off. On Thursday morning,
as I was arranging my books, old Mary came in with a
serious air, and, shutting the door carefully behind her,
begged to know if I would please to allow her to speak to
me. So I pleased, and with much circumlocution she got to
her subject. It was, whether I was satisfied with her and
would keep her on, and whether I would please look at her
' characters' that she had had from former places; and how,
if I would not keep her, she must begin to look out for
herself; and how, if I would keep her, she must have help,
etc. I felt much cast down to think that housekeeping
troubles were actually come upon me, and that I should
have to do with wages, house books, and all the rest of it;
however, there was no help for it. I laid down my books,
got into my arm-chair, and resigned myself. Mary and I
put our heads together, and the result of our cogitations is
that now my household is organized. It was clearly proved
to me that I must have a girl; and the plot must have been
all cut and dried, for she had a girl ready to produce on the
instant. Her niece ' BeU' arrived this morning, a most
blooming lass. All the young women about here seem to
be called Bell, only you must pronounce it Ba-11—that is,
make a sound like the bleat of a young lamb and put an I
after it. Besides Bell I have half a boy,—no, not half; I should
say one-twelfth of a boy,—for a certain young Willie Hall
(pronounce Woolley Harle) is to give us two hours of his
valuable time every morning to clean shoes and knives.
The next event yesterday was a call from the curate of
the old church, Mr. Slade. He brought me the compliments
of Mr. Mdler, the rector, and his excuses for not calling in
person, on the score of ill-health. He is, I am told, quite
confined to his sofa and has done nothing for years. Mr.
Slade lives at the rectory with the old couple, and has, they
say, everything his own way. I feel convinced somehow
that this Mr. Slade and I shall not get on, either as fellow-
workers or socially. In our first ten minutes' talk I found
we were wide as the poles apart. The very sight of him re¬
pelled me. I rose to receive him warmly, being glad to see
a man and a brother, but such a ' keep-your-distance' air as
he made his bow with I never beheld. He looks the Puritan
all over, and talks in the set phrases of the extreme Low
16 Tlie Ladies Edmburgh Magazine.
Church school; and yet he's not a bad-looking fellow, nor
otherwise than a gentleman. I suspect he fully returns my
dislike; I saw him glance round my room, and his eye fell
on the little ivory crucifix T. gave me, which happened to
be on my writing-table, and I thought he froze up stiffer
than ever. He is Oxford, but about five years senior to me ;
however, we fovmd one common friend to talk about. Baker
of Caius, and we made the most of him. Baker, I heard
some time ago, had got to the very lowest depths of Puri¬
tanism ; but Slade spoke of him with such peculiar emphasis
as being a ' true minister of the gospel,' as clearly implied
he was not inclined to believe as much of me. ... It is a
weak thing, as you have often told me, to be reacted on by
the impression you feel you make on others, but I felt
thoroughly gene in this man's presence. To-day, when I was
out, I looked into his church, and thought it exactly like
himself, cold, formal, and white-washed (I mean no allusion
to whited sepulchres as applied to Slade, but the word seems
to me to describe his cold propriety). I had visits to-day
from two or three other gentlemen, including Mr. Benson,
who is squire of the parish—I should say of the two
parishes.    They all came while I was out.
Now I must give you a little clearer idea of the village or
* toon' of Illingham, for I thinli I may have impressed you
too unfavourably in my former letter. It is a long, large,
straggling place of about 3000 souls, standing prettily on
undulating ground, with plenty of green space about it, and
a brisk little stream running through it. You wonder why
it is not pretty, but it has carefully avoided it. The houses
are nearly all of stone and slate, the hetter-to-do in the style
of my parsonage, the humbler sort a smaller edition of ditto.
Anything like a rustic cottage is unknown, and there seems
to be very little taste for gardens or flowers. The population
is agricultural, and the wages are high ; so there is not much
poverty, and the people are wondrously independent. Slade's
parish and mine meet in the middle of the village, whose
general plan consists of one long street, with various lanes
branching out from it. One of these lanes divides our
domains. On one side of it there are rubbishy cottages, on
the other chiefly pigsties; the cottages are mine, the pigsties
are his. On the whole, however, I have the poorest, and he
the most' genteel' part of the village—a division which suits
me. We both have far too many public-houses. I hardly
know what to make of the people yet, but I think I shall
like them.    Their blunt, sturdy, independent manners are a
Let Them Alone. 17
great contrast to those of our village folk. They don't seem
to think anything of you because you are a gentleman, still
less because you are a priest; but they meet you in a frank,
kindly, man-to-man spirit which has its charm. They seem
intelligent, though their wits move slowly; and they are
wonderfully cautious in their speech, and shrink from
committing themselves to direct afiirmation. ' I expect it
weel,' seems to be the favourite formula for expressing the
highest degree of human certainty; and if they meet you
when you are nearly wet througli, they will say, ' It's vary
like a few drops, sir, I think.' I was asking to-day after a
woman whom I knew to be ailing, and her husband told me
she was 'much aboot soom otherwise.' I was not enlightened.
Saturday, lith.—I called to-day at the rectory, and made
acquaintance with old Mr. and Mrs Miller, Slade being out.
The rector is an interesting-looking old man, with a noble
head, but a sad look of suffering. He has a kind manner,
but talks little, as it fatigues him. The old lady is of the com¬
fortable, cosy, motherly sort. She sits in a large easy-chair,
incessantly knitting, and purring on complacently. They
both think Slade an angel on earth, and Mrs. Miller more
than hinted to me that I could not do better than take him
as my model in all things. Poor thing, she has no children,
her only son having turned out ill and died; so I suppose all
her motherly instincts have centred upon Slade. She insisted
upon showing me his study and bedroom, patterns of neat¬
ness and comfort. Such elbow-chairs, such screens and
footstools, worked in wool, such a luxurious reading-table,
such Eussia leather bindings, such slippers set ready by the
fire ! When I got back to my untidy little den, my first
feeling was of disgust with it; but my next was of great
thankfulness that I had not all these indulgences to tempt
me to my natural indolence. Good-niglit. I long for your
first letter; home seems so far away, and my sight of it so
long ago !—Best love.
F. J. R.
There are placards all over the place about a missionary
sermon, signed iV. Slade. Wliat can the fellow's name be ?
Nicholas, I suppose ; or Nathaniel, more likely still.
[L. C. G.]
{To be continued.)
No. 37.—January 1878.
18 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
5ri)e aSirti) of Cain.
(Eve sjpeaks)
Oh ! was there ever such a day as this.
Since first upon the darkling water's face
The Spirit moved ?    And has it been, indeed,
A day like other days, made up of hours.
Just common hours, of daybreak,—noontide,—night,-
Such hours as mark the everydays of life ?
Ah! surely not.—I have known so many days :—
The day, when first I woke to life and love;
The day, when first I knew of sin and shame;
The day, when first those flaming swords were set
Eound Eden's gate,—and then, those other days,
When Adam sallied forth to daily toil.
And I was left alone to watch, and weep;—
But never day like this.    The skies stooped down
To kiss the straining earth,—athwart the trees
I heard the angels move, and surely felt
His Presence, too, who walked beside us once
In Eden's grove.    A solemn silence fell
On all things living.—To their grassy lairs.
The howling, grovelling creatures noiseless crept;—
The birds swung still and silent on their boughs;—
The waters soundless swelled and swayed.—My soul
Seemed widening slowly ;—o'er my spirit stole
A sweet, strange sense of swimming into space,—
Until at last across that silence broke
A little cry,—my babe was born,—our son.—
0 Adam, come and look upon ' the man
Which I have gotten from the Lord' to-day !
Poor Adam, thou art weary too, and worn
With many a day of travail and of toil;
Methinks the curse hath fallen sorer far
On thee than me,—and yet the sin was mine.
The arid ground yields not such fruit as this
For all thy delving.—Ah ! my pretty bud.
My fairest flower in all the world,—nay, nay.
Thou must not wrinkle up thy forehead thus.
Nor frown like that.    Do babies always frown ?
Does the world seem to them so ill a place.
They needs must pucker up their little brows
Birth of Cain. 19
At sight of it ?    How should I know ?   In truth,
There never was a haby born before
On all this earth,—this is the first,—our child !
Look at him. Moon and Stars !    Look at him, once.
And then draw off your twinkling silver rays,
Lest they disturb his slumbers.    Sun, arise
In splendour, so that he too may awake
To light, and joy, and gladness.    Birds, trill out .
Your sweetest songs; 'twill make him leap for joy.
Come hither, beasts, and let him stroke your manes,
And draw his fingers down your furry coats;
For is not he the first-born babe on earth ?
And should not all things minister to him,
Their infant lord and master ?
Ah! my babe,
My precious babe, how shall we train thee up ?
How rule him rightly, Adam, thou and I,
Who are so ignorant of life ourselves ?—
What shall we teach him ?    Shall he be as thou,^
' A tiller of the ground,'—and learn to delve,
And offer up his first-fruits to the Lord,
And carry home his faggots on his back ?—
And some day, some far distant day, when we
Are resting 'neath the fig-tree's fragrant shade
(One must grow weary as the years go on).
We'll watch him coming through the palms at eve.
And know that he is working now for us.
As we worked once for him, our little Cain.—
What! frowns again !—ah no ! this must not be;
I cannot bear to watch those shadows pass
Across thy brow.    There;—nestle down once more,
And sleep and dream the ugly marks away. . . .
Lullaby Song.
Sleep, then, my little one,
Peacefully sleep;
Father and mother your
Vigil will keep;
Angels watch over you,
God above all.
So that no evil thing
Can you befall.
Sleep, then, my little one, peacefully sleep;
God's holy angels your vigil will keep.
20 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Sweet be your dreams, my babe,
Tender and bright.
Visions like stars that shine
During the night;
Daybreak they flee before.
Drop into dew,
Spangle the earth afresh,
Darling, for you!
Dream, then, my little one, peacefully dream;
Star-shine, or dewdrops, about you must gleam.
{Four months later)
0 Adam,—quick !—come tell me what is this
1 hold within my hand, all stiff and stark ?
It was a butterfly, I know—a thing
All full of pretty life and light;—but 7iow,
What is it now ?    It does not move, nor fly.
But lies here like a lifeless stick, or stone.—
This morn it flew above my baby's head,
Through the blue air.   He stretched his fingers out.
And caught it thus, and crunched it up between
His tiny palms, and laughed to see it start.
And struggle (oh! he's lusty now, and gay,
Our four-months' babe), and then he let it fall;
And there it lay until I picked it up,
All bruised and crushed—a pretty thing no more !
What! never any more—never again
To flit across the sunbeam's path, nor float
Through summer breezes like a rare-winged flower.—
What! dead—quite dead !    Oh, Adam, 'tis not dead !
Death is a thing for thee and me, but not
For babes to deal to creatures such as these !
Dirge.
Dead,—dead,—dead,—
The word has been said,
And blood has been shed
Upon earth;
For all that have breath
Are as certain of death,
As of birth!
Birth of Cain. 21
{A year later.)
Another son, dear lord ; we are rich in sons.
I might have wished a woman-child this time.
But God knows best; and this, our last-born son.
Looks mild and gentle as a little lamb.—
No frowning here.    But where's our elder son ?
Where's Cain ?—ah me ! he toddled off awhile
To pounce upon some little unfledged bird.—
See! there he comes, his prize between his hands.
How fierce he looks !—nay, boy, put off for once
That scowling face, lest it affright the babe.
What is it that offends thee ?    Can it be
That thou art jealous of thy brother, Cain ?
Nay, but thou, too, thou sturdy year-old child,
Once sat upon my knee as Abel now.
So come, and give him one fraternal kiss.
What! clenched fists '—a rush,—a blow,—a cry:—
' Oh, Cain, what hast thou done ?'    See, Adam! see.
Thy elder strikes thy younger!    Oh, my God,
Is this the punishment reserved for me ?—
To see my blessings turned to curses thus,
My children, foes,—to know that through my sin
All men shall sin, that but for me alone
There had not been in all the world, such things
As envy, hatred, strife, or death.    .    .    .
 Ah! Lord,
My punishment is more than I can bear.
(Eve svjoons, an angel sings.)
Great was thy guilt, 0 Eve,
Cruel thy crime ;—
Yet shall thy seed atone
For it, in time.
Death shall be swallowed up,
Strife shall be o'er;
Men shall through Man attain
Life evermore!
H. A. Duff.
22 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Ifjcre s!)all ixie 30?
v.—A  HAPPY  VALLEY.
Scene.—A lawn shadowed hy trees from the afternoon sunshine.
A tea-table stands under a large weeping ash which forms
a dome of green foliage. The company are strolling about,
or seated on garden chairs and lounges.
Marjorie. Can any one here answer a difficult question ?
The Edinburgh ladies want to know where to go. Where
shall we go for our summer holidays ?
Claudia. Don't go anywhere. Have we not here, close to
our native city, hills and trees, flowers and sweet shadows,
tea and all comforts ? You travelled people come back and
boast of the delights you have experienced, the splendours
you have seen. You leave out the reverse of the medal—
dusty railways, extortionate inns; constant anxiety, calcula¬
tion, and trouble; all sorts of discomforts that you would
not put up with for a day at home. Then the contretemps—
miserable weather when you must go out—splendid sunshine
when you are packed in a train—dirt and bad tobacco;
wretched crowds making each other more wretched on board
filthy steamers tossing on dismal seas—
Marjorie. Stop. That is not to the purpose. We must
and shall go somewhere. Please speak to the question;
criticise suggestions, if you like, but consider the first point
carried.    We are going—whither ?
Claudia. Then, while one makes a suggestion, let the
rest of us form a committee, and cross-examine the witness.
All will not prove so coideur-de-rose as it is painted, I sus¬
pect, in that case.
Chorus. Agreed; and Claudia shall be chairwoman.
Claudia (taking the easiest garden chair). I now put the
question to this company: Where shall we go ?
Chorus. Go to Italy—to Norway—to the Pyrenees—I
know a delightful place—to Labrador—to Iceland—to Egypt
—to Argyleshire, etc.
Marina. For real refreshment of body and mind, I should
recommend Etretat; or, indeed, any of the best sea-bathing
places on the Norman or Breton coast; but I mention
Etretat as typical. Fine bold coast scenery; a pure, green
sea rolling in upon a pebbly shore, so that the water is as
clear and transparent where it breaks on the land as out
in mid-ocean; a sweet climate, and most beautiful sunsets
over the western sea, when all the ivory cliffs turn crimson
Where shall 7vego? 23
in the glow. Then the clean, honest, handsome fishing popu¬
lation, so picturesque when busied about their brown boats,
so gay when they dance the ronde up by the farms of an
evening, so kindly always—it is a real pleasure to be among
them. Then the air is most exhilarating on the cliffs above,
covered with short herbage which cuts in soft green against
the bright blue of the high sea horizon. And the bathing
is delicious.
By the Chair. WhdX do you do all day ?
Atiswer. There is the bathing. Small boats lie to seawards
to rest the swimmers. All should swim, as the shore is so
steep that you are out of your depth about the third step
in the water. Half the Monde, smartly dressed, is disporting
itself in the water all the forenoon.
Chair. And the other half ?
A. Looking on. It is delicious swimming in that trans¬
parent water; for when it is still, you can see the weeds
swaying over the sunken rocks and emerald-green sand far
below.    You glide over fatal depths,
'Just
An inch from death's black fingers, thrust
To seize you, whom release he must!'
with a pleasant sense of ease, triumph, and safety.
Chair. So much for the forenoon; and in the afternoon ?
A. There is the afternoon bath.
Chair. Just the same ?
A. Just the same, only more people.
Chair. But if you don't swim ?
A. Then you learn to swim.
By the Parson. Are there hotels, horses, newspapers, books ?
A. The hotels are so-so, but nice fishermen's houses are
let by the month. There is the Petit Journal (laughter) and
a book about Etretat, but it is rather stupid; there are some
French novels, and there is a donkey.
Chair. Thanks; delightful. But perhaps some people
might think the life a little special in interest, a trifle mono¬
tonous.    Any other suggestion ?
Parson. Go to Italy. After all, Italy has the finest climate,
the most interesting history, the loveliest scenery, the noblest
art of all nations.
Chair. Granted; and we wiU not trouble you to describe
Italy. It has also the most voluminous guide-book literature
of all nations. But we are speaking of summer holidays.
Is it your experience that Italian railway carriages are, in
summer, like hot ovens ?
24 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
A. Yes.
Chair. Is all exertion a trouble ?
A. Yes. But you might stop at the baths of Lucca, or at
La Spezia, where Italians go for coolness, and be quite com¬
fortable.
By Martin. Have you there any of the Italian attractions
you enumerated, except the fine scenery and climate ?
A. No.
Martin. And these may be found more easily nearer home.
Do you consider that Italian cities can be weU seen in a
hurried tour ?
A. Well, you ought to stop some time in most of them.
Martin. Did you enjoy Eome itself the first day ?
A. No; nor the first week—hardly the first month.
Martin. Then would you recommend any one to scramble
through Italy in the height of summer ?
A. They would have been there; and if strong, they would
probably not suffer from the exertion.
Chair. Who said Labrador ?
Captain (E.N.). I did. Everything there is on a grand scale.
Splendid rivers rolling down through immense forests; a
most healthy climate; tlie place is quite accessible across
the Atlantic, and there is the exciting chance of actual
exploration, of drawing a new line on the map. You must
take a tent, but you can travel at no great expense, and you
can always get salmon.    In fact, there is capital sport.
Chair. Are you aware that the ladies will not fish, on
principle ?
A voice. The ladies consider all field sports wrong.
Witness. Wrong! to kill the fish, and, of course, to eat
them !    Oh, vegetarians !    I understand.
Chair. Pardon me. As a majority we don't consider it
absolutely and always wrong to catch fish; it is only wrong
to enjoy doing it. You may—driven by necessity, if your
feelings are sufficiently obtuse (our finer spirits would rather
starve)—cheat one of these poor fish out of his native element
into your frying-pan, but you should not like doing it; do
it with a groan or a tear, and reflect all the time how you.
would like to be dragged by a meat hook in the chin into
the water, and so drowned.
Witness. Ah, I see ! and, of course, the same reflections
apply to eating the fish. You may do it, but you should
not like doing it.    No; I do not recommend Labrador.
Martin. The Pyrenees are, perhaps, the most characteristic
mountain lands in Europe.    They are, I think, as beautiful
Where shall we go? 25
as the Alps, and yet with a difference: less pastoral, more
romantic; less lovely, more mysterious. I shall never forget
those dark ravines where the unseen rivers brawled along,
those wide forest lands, those thickets of box and myrtle, the
little forbidding dark-stone villages, the grand expanses of
snow, the wild riding, the brilliant southern climate. How
we used to enjoy it all!
By Marjorie. What do you say of the inns ?
A. I divide them into two classes: the big ones, where
the landlord devours your goods; and the little ones, where
the small game of the country devour you. Here and there
there is an honourable exception.
Marjorie. What do you get to eat on the Spanish side ?
A. Chocolate.
Chair. Can you get meat, wine, eggs ?
A. Seldom meat, wine not always. Eggs you can get, but
even they taste of garlic.
Chair. Can you get cheese ?
A. (hesitating). Yes.
Chair. I must ask you to be explicit.
A. After smelling the cheese, you are not likely to taste it.
Chair. You said you enjoyed the riding; how much does
that mode of travel cost per diem ?
A. From thirty to forty shillings each for two people who
need a guide.
Chair. This is an excellent mode of eliciting the facts of
foreign travel. The Pyrenees seem very attractive, but it
is as well to know the cost.
Selena. I have been all over the world, and to my mind
there is nothing like Norway. Honest kindly people, excellent
air, scenery superb. Those who know the west coast of Scot-
laud may have some feeble idea of it, but Norway is on a far
nobler scale. The extent and grandeur everywhere impart a
feeling of elevation, of real joy to the traveller. Those fiords
where the salt water wanders so far inland, and where the tall
ships from the outland seas are dwarfed by the great precipices
under which they glide, where the birch trees and grasses
stoop right over the sea-weeds and sea-shells that cling about
their roots—all these must be seen to be imagined. Then
what an historical and ancestral interest for us we find in
this cradle of the best of our race.    Norway for me.
By the Captain. How do you get there ?
A. There is the  line of First-class Full-powered   Screw
Steamers; splendid  accommodation, vast saloons on  deck,
smoking-room, state cabins, etc.    See Advertisement.
26 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Captain. Where do you see these splendid Steamers ?
A. In the advertisements. But there is a line of Screw-
Steamers owned by—
Captain. Screws ! I know them ! Do they provide pro¬
visions ?
A. Yes; and you must buy them. But if you want to
eat, tahe your own. It is better to go by Leith, but there
is only a steamer thence once a fortnight. After all, what
matters it for two or three days ? Once on board a Norse
steamer, aU is changed. You have good food, good tea and
coffee, and kindly captains.
By Gudrun. How about inns ?
A. Well, I suppose the luxurious might call them poor,
and the delicate might think them rough; they are cheap.
Chair. Pray report further on Norway.    Any more views ?
Fenella. For the delicate there is nothing like the Camp
cure. I was delicate, and it cured me. Go to the western
slope of the Rocky Mountains. Take a horse, get an Indian
and a Spanish passport. Eide all day by yourself: the country
is charming; you may explore it. At night choose a fine
tree; picket your horse close by, wrap yourself in a buffalo
robe, and go to sleep. The nights are cold—sometimes
frosty; but the air is so wholesome that you are probably
cured in a month.
Chair. And if not, are you killed ?
A. By Indians ? Well, just at present it may not be quite
so safe for a lady alone as when I was there, but that will
all blow over.
Chair. As it is not safe at present, we may postpone dis¬
cussing this Camp cure.
Gudrun. Iceland has many of these advantages without
the drawbacks. It is only a five or six days' voyage ; there
are no Indians, but delightful inhabitants, like the Norsemen,
only"better; capital fishing {murmur of disapprohation),—I
speak not to those finer spirits, who will still, however, have
to endure fishing, as well as cakes and ale. The air is a
regular elixir of life. The country is little explored; there
is constant riding ; no inns, which I think better than the bad
inns of Norway.
Chair. An admission from a Norwegian traveller.
Witness. No roads, which I prefer to railroads; all sorts
of curious things, such as wild geese, hayfields on house-tops,
volcanoes, green pointed shoes, boiling bogs, gold and silver
embroidery, underground grottoes lined with ice, etc.
Chair. You slept ?
Where shall zve go ? 27
A. In our tent, or in a church.
Chair. It was cold and rainy sometimes, I suppose; what
did you do for a fire ?
A. We did without.
Chair. All the bogs were not boiling, I believe ?
A. Oh no ! there were bogs of all kinds, and every size.
Chair. Were you ever in one ?
A. What do you mean ? I am here. Of course I was
frequently going over one.
Chair. Were you ever wet ? and, in that case, how did
you get dry ?
A. You could sometimes dry one foot at a time over a
stick fire in a farm kitchen.
Chair. Were you ever hungry ?
Witness. I should think so.
Chair. Had you enough to eat ?
Witness. What do you mean ?    I am here.
Chair. Evidently this witness has a disregard for creature
comforts that would make her a dangerous guide to those
who depend on them.
Marjorie. I consider that those who would allure an aver¬
age lady to Iceland for a pleasant holiday tour, would show
a love of practical joking beyond the mischievous, reaching
the positively malevolent.
Chair. Have you any recommendation to offer yourself ?
You used to write in our old Attempt most enthusiastically
about Switzerland.
Marjorie. I wrote some time ago, about long ago. The
Switzerland of my youth is gone. The ordinary Swiss hotel
is now a big palace or a big barrack, where life revolves
round the dinner at 7 P.M., for seven francs, in seven courses.
When you arrive, you are received by a crowd of waiters,
all speaking bad English, who rush up before you to light
seven candles in three rooms, to appear afterwards in tlie
bill. That same bad English sounds round you all day long.
Provincial English, inferior American English, German Eng¬
lish. You live in a crowd much given to dress and flirtations.
All the expeditions round are ticketed, charged for, and
crowded. One hundred carriages in a day often drive up
the Grindelwald valley, once so sweet and sequestered.
Excursion trains disgorge themselves on the neighbouring
meadows; crowded steamers give smoke and noise and
publicity to the lakes. The inns have everywhere increased
enormously, while the glaciers have diminished. The moun¬
tains are fitted with iron clamps for convenience of climbing
28 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
them; the real guides and the real Alpine travellers have
retreated with the chamois to the remotest glens, and I
daresay they will all become extinct before long.
Martin. Your remarks point, I think, especially at the
Bernese Oberland and Chamounix. You will hardly assert
that they apply to all Switzerland ?
A. I draw a picture of the ideal aimed at by the Swiss,
and rapidly being attained in the most beautiful parts of
the country. Sometimes, no doubt, you find in the hotels
the size and costliness, without the good food and cleanliness
which are generally the redeeming points. The Swiss nation
is, however, organized into one great company for extracting
the largest amount of profit from the annual shoal of tourists.
We travellers are their lawful prey, their game, their food.
There are game laws, but rather to regulate the division of
prey among the sportsmen than for the protection of the
game. In the interests of these sportsmen themselves—and
none other, you may be sure, will be considered—it w^ould
be well if the game laws could be made more stringent. As
it is, in all disputes and cases of imposition, the tourist goes
to the wall. The Swiss have neither justice nor mercy. Nor
do they understand what people come to see in their country,
and they spoil any landscape that they meddle with. The
whole country is spread with traps, baits, and nets for the
tourists, who have as many enemies as the herring have with
us. Of course there are honourable exceptions,—some honest
landlords, some kind landladies, and some gallant and un-
mercenary guides still left.
Chair. Can you not tell us of some charming mountain
retreat where ladies can find good pedestrian excursions, not
necessarily in Switzerland ?
Marjorie. Yes, I do know of a Happy Valley; it is some
2000 feet above the sea-level, but noble mountains rise all
round. Just in front, the valley deepens into a dark ravine,
masked by thick woods, where a great, unseen river runs and
roars and thunders. Over the tops of the nearest hills rise
the serrated edges of one of the most splendid snow ranges
ill Europe; glaciers come down near our valley, but not into
it. It is a lovely meadow, shadowed by scattered walnut
and chestnut trees, here and there diversified by a picturesque
grey rock. A few little strips of yellow corn give value to
the greens of the pasture. In the little village the carnations
trail from the sparkling lattice windows of the dark wooden
houses. The village church rises from the brink of a steep
descent into the ravine, just after it has been spanned by a
Where shall we go ? 29
high bridge, under which the river leaps down in a great
waterfall. People live in that cold clammy ravine, and
climb with toil out of their low dark abode to the sunshine
of our valley. But, if you climb higher yet, you get through
the grand larch woods, carpeted with wild strawberries, and
over the open Alp pastures, right up to the glittering glaciers
and pure snows; for in our valley, though there are
lovely little strolls about the doors, suited for an invalid,
there are also glacier excursions to be made in the day, which
might baffle a member of the A. C. There are no tourist
crowds here; the present company would fill the two pretty
little clean inns ; but there is sometimes a market, and always
a celebrated pilgrim shrine, to which the peasants largely
resort in their quaint costumes. Tlie place, in short, is real,
and is not made up for the season; it has a life of its own.
Chair. The cooking is probably bad.
A. On the contrary, I still remember the soufflets fondly,
and the dainty breakfast rolls, new and hot every morning,
the fried trout, and bowls of rich cream, the salmi of chamois,
and the kid, which tasted like it.
Chair. Is the place dear ?
A. The charges are most moderate, because it is not yet
found out.
Chair. Is it very inaccessible ?
A. No; the shoal of tourists passes not so far off but that
I fear it may some day be deflected into our valley.
Chair. I know; it is in the Engadine, and very cold, with
uncertain weather.
A. No, it is not in the Engadine, and the climate is warm,
yet fresh.    It is in the corn and chestnut zone.
Chair {and Chorus). Where is it ?
A. That is the only question I am not prepared to answer.
It would indeed be delightful to fill the two little inns with
the present company, but their friends, and their cousins, and
their neighbours over the way, and their enemies would come
too. Then a big Hotel would grow up, and the waiters would
come, and the Yankees, and the Company. Our valley would
lose all its distinction, it would be advertised in the railway
stations, Cook would personally conduct parties to it once a
fortnight, and tourists would tell each other, not about the
Happy Valley, for that would be no more, but about the
New Place to go to.
{Marjorie hastily takes leave.    The discussion is closed hy a
remark from the Chair.)
After all, though no one has said it, there is a great deal
to be said for staying at home. E. J. 0.
30 Tke Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
iHiiinfl tije CJjrtstmas futilitng.
I.
' Now, ladies, prepare for a treat to-day, that seldom falls to
tlie lot of English tourists in Norway.'
Thus spoke the cheery captain of the steamer which plies
along the Stor Fjord, from AUesund to Hellesylt.
' I think we can scarcely have a better sight than that
already given us,' said one of those addressed. ' It seems to
me as if God, in creating Scandinavia, had begun a huge
range, like the Cordilleras or the Alps, but stopped short
and left half remaining under water. Fancy this big steamer
going thus close to such rocks as these.' She pointed up to
a range of beetling cliffs rising hundreds-of feet above their
heads.
' Well, it is a wonderful country,' replied the captain,' and
I like to see people enjoy it; and I'm glad, too, to show
you a part where I myself have only been twice before—the
Ta-fjord. I am going expressly to take that family there
for the winter.' He pointed to a group sitting quite at the
bow, and gazing intently at the prospect ahead.
' They are English,' exclaimed the elder of the two sisters;
' I was talking to him a few minutes since. Why do they
stay in this out-of-the-way place ?'
' He is a Cornish miner,' replied the captain ; ' an English
company has opened an iron mine, and he was here all last
winter alone. He found it too hard a life, and has been
home to fetch his wife.'
The younger sister immediately joined the emigrants.
' Are you really going to spend the winter here ?' she said,
looking with unfeigned pity at the rather delicate little
woman, whose physique seemed utterly unfitted for the task.
' Yes,' replied she, smiling. ' I could not let my husband
come alone a second time.'
' I could not have done it,' said he ; ' one winter in such a
place was enough to send any man mad; the loneliness is
something terrific—perfect stillness all winter, and then the
awful change that follows — the roar of falling avalanches
and rush of torrents, accompanying the winds and storms of
spring.'
' What made you come at all ?' asked his countrywoman.
' What made Livingstone die in Africa, Borrow ramble all
over Spain, Gordon Gumming shoot lions and tigers ?    To
Mixing- the Christmas Pudding: 31
explore, and dare, and—make money' he added with a sly
twinkle in his merry brown eyes. ' Every man in decent
health tries to leave the world richer than when he entered
it. I must try for the sake of this little woman;' and he
raised his child of sixteen months proudly in his arms.
'Mind she doesn't fall over, Walter,' said his wife nervously.
' Nay, nay, you must not begin thus,' said a voice behind
them, ' or poor Walter will have sair times with you ;' the
accent was unmistakeably Scotch. Clara Dennison turned
and beheld a man of about eight-and-twenty, whose face,
though serious and scarcely to be called handsome, was
reUeved by the kindly gleam of his blue eyes.
' That is Mr. Forsyth, the engineer of the works,' said the
husband by way of introduction.
' Are you, too, going to remain here for the winter?' asked
Clara, with that unconscious freedom from reserve acquired
in foreign travelling.
' Yes, my time will be spent partly at this mine, partly at
the other which I saw Captaiu Aasen point out to you
further back.'
'And did you feel lonely too ? Were you here last winter?'
said she quickly.
' I was,' he replied, reversing the order of his answers to
her two questions, ' and I did feel very lonely ;' and looking
into the sympathetic eyes now raised to his, he added:
' Vivyan is happy, he has a wife willing to share his lot. I
asked the girl I loved to do the same for me, and—she refused.'
He turned quickly as if ashamed of this sudden confidence
in a perfect stranger, and walked away as far as he could go.
Vivyan laid his hand on his wife's arm, and looking fondly
at him, she whispered,' I am not afraid of anything with you,
Walter.    I am thankful you came to fetch me.'
The rock which guarded the entrance to the fjord was
safely rounded, but instead of disclosing, like other fjords
passed on the journey, a green valley, sloping gently up to
snow and glaciers, with white farmhouses and dark wooden
huts, speaking of some social intercourse, not a dwelling
broke the savage magnificence of the rocky barriers which
hemmed in the Ta-fjord. For six or seven miles the steamer
found itsway,now on one side,now on the other,wherever there
seemed least chance of the vessel being imperilled by a shower
of stones or a displaced boulder. Clara Dennison had not left
Mrs. Vivyan's side. She found her intelligent and amusing,
the daughter of a Devonshire farmer, brought up amid the
tors  of Dartmoor, accustomed to ride about on her pony,
32 Tlie Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
unliarassed by care, until her marriage to the sub-engineer of
a Cornish mine. His leaving her for this Norwegian post,
just after the birth of their child, had first showed her how
light would be all privations, either for herself or the child,
if shared with him.
As they passed the last rocky bar, the end of the fjord
suddenly burst upon their view. A few low huts crowned
a rising knoll, already deep in the shadow of the surround¬
ing mountains. Among them stood a house whose air of
would-be superiority made it look only more hopelessly ugly.
' Oh !' burst from Clara's lips involuntarily; for, beautiful as
was the scene, the distant glaciers foretold how dreary would
be the home of the tender woman and little child through
the dark Norwegian winter.
'We are spending our winter in Norway too,' she said,
taking Mrs. Vivyan's hand in hers, and pressing it warmly.
' How often we shall think of you ! I hope you will be very
busy; and can you get plenty of firewood ?' She spoke
rapidly, not wishing them to see how sadly their lot im¬
pressed her.
' We have provided that,' replied Mr. Forsyth; ' we will
take as much care of her as your heart could desire. An
Englishman and a Scotchman together ought to be able to
make your countrywoman happy.'
' You will be mostly here, then,' said Clara, furtively wip¬
ing her eyes ; ' that will make it better.'
' I shall see them settled in, then go to the other mine, and
return for Christmas. Now look up-; do you see that cradle
coming down ?'
Clara looked where he pointed, twelve hundred feet above
their heads, straight up the face of the mountain, and saw
one cradle coming down and anotlier going up an iron tram¬
way, the weight of the one drawing the other to the top of
the ascent.
' If Captain Aasen could stay, I would take you to the
top in tlie next empty cradle, to see the mine. Should you
be afraid to go ?'
' Not a bit, if you were not afraid to take me.'
' You would have courage for anything, I think,' he said,
rather sadly. ' Every atom of machinery, all the necessaries
for mining, had to be carried, step by step, up the face of
that precipice ; it is something to boast of, when one thinks
of the rolling stones and falling earth we had to contend
with.'
' I always wish I had been a man, that I might have been
Mixing the Cliristmas Pudding. 33
an engineer,' replied Clara, laughing; ' I cannot imagine a
more interesting life.'
' It has its hardships,' said lie, as the steamer stopped, and
all was bustle for the departure. Their goods were brought
on deck, and Mrs. Vivyan was welcomed by a grave though
sweet-looking peasant woman, in a manner which added no
cheerfulness to her first impressions. With hearty good
wishes, Clara and her sister shook hands with their new-
made friends, and their last sight, before re-passing the rocky
gate, was of Mrs. Vivyan with her two companions, waving
their handkerchiefs, and cheering to the retreating boat.
' Amina,' said Clara to her sister,' what can we send them
for Christmas ?'
11.
' Can you come and dine with us this evening ?' said the
sweet voice of Mrs. Lorimer, the English chaplain's wife at
Christiania, to the two sisters. They were all standing among
the piles of frozen game which lay along the market¬
place.
' We shall be delighted to come; I wanted so much to see
you,' said Clara.    ' Have you a receipt for a plum-pudding ?'
' Plum-pudding ?'
' Yes.    I wish to send one to Allesund.'
' To whom ?    Norwegians don't like them.'
' But this is for English people;' and Clara told the story
of their meeting with the Vivyans, and her wish to send
them this English token of friendship.
' Go and buy all the materials,' said Mrs. Lorimer, entering
heart and soul into the plan, ' and bring them up to me.
Just the thing to send. They are not poor people, but they
will be delighted at being remembered. We can make the
pudding this morning, and have it ready for you to take with
you at night.'
Though it was early in November, winter had already set
in. The last English steamer of the season had broken its
way out through the ice of the fjord, now thickening every
day as Christmas approached. Frost lay on all the double
windows, and the ground, thinly coated with snow, was as
hard as iron; but the crisp, clear air was like champagne,
motion and life were enjoyment. Clara went on her mission
without a doubt of success. Alas for the difficulties awaiting
a purchaser in a new country ! Sugar was easily got, not so
plums, which are here only used for soup, or for some un-
No. 37.—January 1878. C
34 1^^>^^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
eatable compound called fruit jelly. In vain she asked for
raisins, of course new currants were brought; jirunes, when
French plums were produced; figs, thinking of Devonshire,
when lo ! a drum of Turkey figs appeared. At last, on going
behind the counter with the good-tempered but bewildered
shopman, and opening every drawer in succession, she found
what she wanted. Spice was not hard to come by, though
she could name neither nutmeg nor all-spice, but the candied
peel! That was a ])ostr, and what would a Christmas pud¬
ding be without it ?
' What kind of fooding is it to be ?' asked the wretched
shopman. ' Flour and suet, milk and sugar, eggs and raisins,
currants and spice, and this stuff that I never heard of. By
all tlie gods of Parnassus,'—he had been the best Greek
scholar of the year, this same grocer,—' you ought to be ill
till Christmas comes round again, after eating this mixture !'
Clara laughed. Her search was useless this time; the jars
held everything but the right one. The boxes and tins were
all biscuits and jams, tapioca and sago, or dried herrings and
reindeer tongues. Pickles there were in plenty, and he
offered her a piece of Windsor soap. ' Conserve', suggested
her sister, and he at once pounced upon ' Turkish Delight.'
This was a shade nearer; Clara drew a lemon, which he
took for a pomegranate, and said they didn't grow in Norway.
At last she spied an orange. ' This, or like this, conserve in
sugar,'—whereupon he brought her a plate with sugar, think¬
ing she wished to eat the orange. Good grocer Hauseu, now
fairly at a loss, pointed to the confectioner opposite, and said
perhaps she could help. Tliere Clara went, and fovind her
candied peel, wondering at her own stupidity in not having
gone there at first; and finally, with her hard-won spoils, she
reached the Lorimers' house.
' Let me introduce Miss Brent,' said her hostess, as a
pretty dark-eyed girl entered the room. ' She came over
by the last steamer, and is staying awhile with us.'
' May I help to mix this wonderful pudding ?' said she,
and her pleasant expression won Clara's heart.
' Who is she 1' she asked, when left alone with Mrs.
Lorimer.
' An orphan and a governess,' was the reply; ' she is tired
of England, and comes here for a change; isn't she pretty ?
I wish we could have kept her for our little folks, but she is
already engaged to go to a situation in Allesund.'
The pudding was now duly mixed, and Mr. Lorimer
declared they must all stir it.
Mixing the Christmas Pudding. 35
' But M-hat are we to boil it in ? Something in which it
can travel,' said his wife.
' A saucepan with a lid and no handle,' said Miss Brent;
' are there no such things in Norway ?'
' We must try;' and putting on their bonnets and hashliks
(good sensible things, ladies, for cold climates), they set forth
on this second quest.
The crockery-store produced nothing. ' A covered basin
for a pooding, a pooding to travel three weeks;' the master
had never heard of such slpooding,' it would be mouldy before
it got there; English were strange people.'
They went to the tinsmith's, but the saucepans all had
handles, and the unreasonable man would not take one off;
they might find something at the oilman's opposite; and sure
enough they did, a nice little saucepan, with no handle, but
with a tight-fitting lid. This being well buttered, and the
pudding put in, the household gathered round the table, and
good Mr. Lorimer stirred the spoon with a will, saying,
' May the Vivyans enjoy the eating as much as we have done
the making of this ; and may it be a message to them of the
bond that knits us all together in One whose birth makes our
Christmas joy.'
All stirred in turn, and pretty Miss Brent looked at Clara
Dennison with tears sparkling in her bright eyes. The cloth
was tied on, and all witnessed the placing of the saucepan
in the boiler where it would spend the next six hours.
There were, in Christiania, no parties like the Lorimers';
when people have no thought save that of making others
happy, they generally succeed. There were the Dennisons,
stray travellers, the lonely governess, two young men who
had no friends except these kind hosts, and a few others to
whom fortune had been more lavish of brains and cheerful
dispositions than of money. Music and talk were going on,
when there came a knock at the door. All turned as it
opened, and there stood a girl, in the Hardanger costume,
with snow-white head-dress, shading just such a face as one
sees on the steamers in that beautiful fjord ; in dainty linen
chemise, with silver ornaments fastening wrist and collar,
shoes and wliite stockings, pretty short woollen skirt, and
the superb white embroidered apron on which the Norwegian
peasant-women expend so much time. She walked through
the group of guests, straight up to where Clara stood, and witli
a graceful curtsey, presented a parcel rolled in fine linen. Not
till she had opened it, and disclosed ' The Pudding,' did
Clara look again at the messenger, and recognise Mrs. Lorimer.
36 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' And now, how to send it ? The steamers have stopped ;
if I could get it to Captain Aaseu at Allesund, he would
find some way of sending it.'
' I am going to AUesund, I can take it to Captain Aasen,'
said Miss Brent.
' Promise not to eat it by the way,' said her host; ' people
are put to sad straits in Norway sometimes. I know that
on my only trip up the country I could get no meat for three
days, and should soon have turned cannibal and eaten my
wife,'—putting his hands on her shoulders,—' especially if
she had been as well-dressed as she is just now.'
To Miss Brent the pudding was consigned, on promise of
abstinence, even if threatened by famine; and now we must
bid it farewell, till its time comes for being eaten.
III.
Christmas morning rose clear and cold on the Ta-fjord.
The mountains looked like giants clothed in white, the huts
on the knoll might have been hillocks of snow. Mrs. Vivyan
was early astir, flitting from room to room like a tiny butter¬
fly, as she plied her household tasks. For her Christmas
feast, she had clotted cream and bilberry-tart; fermenty,
because Mr. Forsyth liked it, and tlie corn was easily got;
shortbread and bannocks, a haggis, and a nice piece of roast
beef; everything, in short, that she could think of, except
a plum-pudding.
' What can I do for you ?' said a hearty voice; and Mr.
Forsyth stood in the doorway. ' This cold is as sharp as a
knife; no wind, luckily, or we should be cut in two; and
thank Heaven, we have wood in plenty,' putting log after log
into the stove, till the room was warm as a toast.
' A merry Christmas to my little woman!' said Vivyan,
entering, and clasping his wife's slender figure in his burly
arms; then holding her out at arm's length, he placed a box
in her hands, which she opened, and found to contain a brooch.
' Not much use, eh, in this outlandish place ?' as his eyes
brightened at her praise of its beauty,' but we shan't be here
all our days, and it will remind us of our Norway Christmas.'
In trotted Little Alice, in a new scarlet frock, to the no
small delight of the girl promoted to be her nurse. And
amid these simple joys of their wild home, Forsyth sat down,
and tried to enter into the spirit of the day. He praised the
fermenty and the shortbread; but as he watched the bright
little wife doing her simple honours, waiting on the husband
Mixing the Christmas Pudding. 37
so well pleased to be waited on, a mingled pang of sorrow
and anger rose to his heart, shutting out all gentler Christmas
thoughts. There rose sad memories of a May morning last
year, when ^he walked out to meet the girl who had laid
her hand in his, with the look that tells a woman's sweetest
secret—that she loved, and knew that she was beloved. He
recollected each step taken down that Devonshire lane, not
that he had been conscious of the silvery mists rolling off
Dartmoor, the music of the torrent, or the whispering of the
young leaves. His thoughts had all been hers, and, in his
foolish ardour, he had asked her to share his exile, and she
had shrunk from its hardships. He was poor, and had yet
his up-hiU way to make; but, with the dogged determination
of the Scot, he knew that nought but death should stay his
career. But she—she loved luxury, society; she would have
taken him rich and well-to-do, but not now, with his heart
a well of unfathomed love for her, and his frame in its
youthful pride of manhood. Could it be true that she was
not worthy of him ? that she would let him wait on, and
return, rich, perhaps, but young and fresh no longer, to find
her worn and worldly, perhaps married for money, a tribe of
children round her, and sordid cares and anxieties filling her
heart ? Could it be ? And in spite of all, would come
surging up thoughts of that May morning, and the spring¬
tide of her beauty, and his own youth—and he must love
her still.
' Who in the world can this be ?' said Vivyan, standing at
the window.
' Visitors !' cried his wife.
Forsyth joined them, and exclaimed, ' Why, its Aasen!
but who can he have brought with him ?'
They all turned out to welcome the captain. ' A merry
Christmas !' he shouted, flourishing a package he held. In
the bustle no one noticed the deadly paleness of Forsyth, as
he leaned against the door-post. With Captain Aasen was
a lady, so muffled up that no one could see whether she were
old or young, tiU, throwing back her bashlik, the rosy face
and brilliant eyes, framed in soft furs, revealed that not only
had Miss Brent found out the captain, but that she had
brought the pudding herself.
A little by-play ensued. From pale, Forsyth turned red,
and seemed debating with himself whether to rush into the
house, or run down and meet the new-comers. He grasped
his collar, smoothed his long, light beard, and the two
reached the threshold.     The Vivyans greeted the captain.
38 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
two little hands were put out, a pair of brown eyes sought
his, and when a sweet voice whispered ' Archie,' he forgot all
else, folded the little figure in his arms, and murmured, 'Lucy,
Lucy! this is a Christmas day I do not deserve.'
' Well, if that is not a kind thought! A real English plum-
pudding ! And picture-books for you, Alice, and the Graphic,
and no end of Christmas numbers for father and me, and
something for you. Captain Aasen!'
' A little story about Norway, I declare !' said the captain,
amazed; ' and I believe I'm in it, and my steamer, and
Hellesylt, and the tales I told her on the voyage here, and
the Ta-fjord, and all.'
' What made you change your mind, Lucy ?' Forsyth was
saying.
' My mother is dead, Archie. T could not leave her,—
but then—I could not help it.' He now noticed her deep
mourning for the first time.
In the early summer, Archibald Forsyth and Lucy Brent
were married at the consul's house in Christiania, where the
Union Jack was their altar-cloth. Mr. Lorimer, as he tied
the knot, hoped that they might be half as happy as he and
his wife. Lucy had withstood all entreaties for an earlier
union.
' We scarcely know each other as yet, and could not have
a better opportunity of finding out each other's tempers.
Besides, I must learn housekeeping from Mrs. Vivyan, so,
like a prudent Scotchman, you must do as I wish.'
He consented, and she helped Mrs. Vivyan all the week,
and on Sunday they held a school for the children in the
huts. They had pleasant evenings of reading, and perhaps
spent a happier winter than often falls to the lot of human
beings in more genial climates.
And when Clara Dennison heard all about it in a letter
from Mrs. Vivyan, she felt that a happier thought had never
occurred to her than ' Mixing the Christmas Pudding.'
C. Ray.
^ ^Ijort Account of tfje ffitrls' JrienDlg Societg.
By an Associate.
Many of our readers have doubtless heard of the Girls'
Friendly Society—a Society which endeavours to provide
for each of its members the help and blessing of Christian
friendship and sympathy.
Gil-Is' Friendly Society. 39
Isolation is one of the most crushing trials that young
women who work for their bread have to meet, and it is that
evil which this Society seeks first of all to remove. It has
often been said, that there is amongst women a striking lack
of the power of combination for a given purpose, an apparent
absence of the capacity for sinking minor differences for the
sake of a common end. The intention of the Girls' Friendly
Society is to supply this lack—to call out this latent power.
It aims at being a kind of Freemasonry amongst women, of
which the sign-manual shall be Purity, and the hand held
out shall be Fellowship. In fact, this Society of ours seeks
to be to women what the order of Fi'eemasons is to men—a
bond of union in the scattered and divided world in which
we live. Our object is not merely that girls should be en¬
couraged to pay into a savings club, subscribe to a library,
or attend a class for religious instruction, but that they
should become united to a Society which provides its
members with all these aids to a virtuous life; so that a girl
who belongs to it need never feel isolated in a strange place,
for wherever she goes, there will be an associate ready to
take her by the hand, to whom she can always turn for helj»
and sympathy. Exposed as young girls often are to sad
trials and temptations, it may be a safeguard to them to feel
that their career is watched with hope, that they are ex¬
pected to do well, and that some one takes an interest in
them.
The Society has been formed for the benefit of all girls
who have to work for their bread, whether they are at home,
in service, or employed in shops, factories, or mills. It is
just at the time when girls are leaving the public and
Sunday schools, and entering upon a life of independence,
that they most need help, losing, as they often do, not only
the good influences of home, but also the spiritual advantages
that may be derived from the care and friendly help of
ministers and teachers. When a girl leaves home, the ladies
can tell, by the lists of the Society, whether there is any
associate in the place where the member is going; and if
there is, they can write and ask her to befriend the girl in
any way she can, subject, of com-se, to the employer's ap¬
proval.
It may often happen that an associate may be able to do
scarcely anything at first for the member commended to her
care; still the mere fact of knowing where the girl is, may
prove useful some day, even when least expected. Again,
an associate may do much good by making known the mem-
40 The Ladies' Edinbtirgli. Magazine.
bers under her care to the nearest minister of the denomi¬
nation to which they belong, who may often be glad of such
a link between himself and a class more inaccessible than
any other to his parochial ministrations.
To give the girls a friendly word occasionally, and to be a
referee for them at all times, is the principal duty of an
associate with regard to members in service. Let it be
distinctly understood, that no interference with the preroga¬
tives of employers is intended or tolerated by our Society.
No one with any tact would be inclined to trespass on the
natural privilege of an employer, that of being her servant's
best friend, or to indulge an idle curiosity by encouraging
the member to gossip about her mistress's family and con¬
cerns. It is for this reason that the promoters of the Associa¬
tion seek as much as possible to admit as associates only
those ladies whose refinement of mind and position in society
place them above the suspicion of such petty motives.
Many mistresses of families have themselves joined the
Society, in order that it may form a much-needed link
between themselves and their servants. But it is not always
the fate of servants to have a friendly and considerate
mistress. In large establishments young servants are too
often neglected; and even where this is not the case, the
mistress may not always be able to befriend the girl after
she leaves her. But the associates of the Girls' Friendly
Society can follow her career, passing her on from one
associate to another; stretching out kindly hands to help
her on the journey of life, and to remind her of one perfect
Friend whose ' love never faileth.'
Both associates and members in Scotland are bound by
the same rules, which are these :—
1. To ask God's blessing daily, morning and evening;
and on Thursday, to pray especially for a blessing on the
Society.
2. To read at least one verse of God's Holy "Word every
day.
3. If possible, to attend Divine service at least once every
Sunday.
4. To try and avoid reading all worthless books, magazines,
and papers.
5. To endeavour to speak no evil of others.
6. To dress simply, according to station, avoiding useless
finery and exaggerated fashions.
In England, where the Society has been working vigorously
for some years past, there is scarcely any large town which
Girls Friendly Society. 4^
does not possess some associates. Over thirty homes and
lodging-houses are now open for members out of place, where
they are received at from 3d. to 6d. a night, generally, how¬
ever, finding their own board. There are great numbers of
free registries, and 33 Lady Registrars; indeed, every asso¬
ciate who does her duty is a Lady Registrar on a small scale.
The associates in England now number over 4000, and there
are, at least, 140 branches.
The Girls' Friendly Society for Scotland, which is as yet
in its infancy, was only started in 1875, but it has been very
well received here. In Scotland there are now 86 associates,
and upwards of 350 members. Three branch associations
are regularly started, and two more are soon to be estab¬
lished. A lending library has been opened in Edinburgh in
connection with it, which will, we are sure, prove a valuable
institution, affording as it does the means of recreation as
well as of instruction to the members.
Another innocent pleasure is provided for the members
in many places, by half-yearly social gatherings. By these
means the girls not only become better acquainted with the
associates, but also have the advantage of being introduced
to other young girls, who, like themselves, are seeking to
lead an honest, godly, and sober life. Girls must have
friends of some sort, and it may often be a great safeguard
to increase their opportunities of forming intimacies, which,
if not actually useful, are at least harmless.
One of the rules of the Society in England would be
utterly out of the question in Scotland, for obvious reasons ;
and that is, that all associates should belong to the Estab¬
lished Church, although no such restriction exists, even
there, for members. It is here established on a perfectly
unsectarian basis, as may be seen by the names of tlie
clergymen under whose auspices it was first begun. They
were as follows:—
The Rev. W. Lindsay Alexander, D.D.
,,     ,,      Horatius Bonar, D.D.
,,      ,,     Professor Cliarteris, D.D.
,,   Right Rev. H. Cotterill, D.D., Bishop of Edinburgh.
,,   Rev. James MacGregor, D.D., St Cuthbert's.
,,     ,,     Daniel Sandford, LL.D.
No sectarian teaching is tolerated by the Society, and the
associates are not allowed to interfere in any way with the
religious convictions of the members entrusted to their care.
Tliis is a fact we wish distinctly stated wherever the Society
is mentioned; for in some parts of the country where ecclesi-
42 Tlic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
astical feeling is very strong, we fear that associates who
differ in creed from the majority of those around them may
occasionally be suspected of wishing to use the Society as a
means of propagating their opinions. Time and tact will
suffice to silence this calumny. There are always some well-
meaning persons who look coldly on every new attempt at
social improvement that takes a form to which they are not
accustomed. But, as time goes on, the benefits of this excel¬
lent Society will become better known and more fully appre¬
ciated, and people will no longer wonder at Presbyterians—
Established, Free, and U. P.—working together with each
other, with Scotch Episcopalians, and even with Roman
Catholics, as is the case in the newly-formed branch of this
Society in Inverness, which includes associates of aU the
denominations we have enumerated. Men of the most varied
shades of thought meet on platforms and in committee rooms
to discuss plans for social and moral improvement—as, for
instance, the Good Templars and Freemasons : why should
not the ladies of our land work together in a friendly and
Christian spirit for the benefit of their poorer sisters ? As
we have already said, tact and caution will no doubt be re¬
quired at first, while our Society is on its trial before the
world ; but from what we have seen of the way in which
this work is carried on, we feel sure that our countrywomen
will not be found wanting in this respect.
Those who desire further information are requested to
apply to Miss Campbell Swinton, Kimmerghame, Dunse, or
Miss Dundas, Dunira, Crieff, who are both Hon. Secretaries.
We ask for help on all sides. Let those who can do so
give their time. Some who cannot give time may be able
to give money, or at any rate to make our cause known to
others; and those who can do neither, can at least remember
us in their prayers, praying that He who is the great Head
of the Church would teach us, amidst the divisions and
separations of this present life, how we may treat and most
wisely minister one to another as members of one body in
Him. Sydney Philips.
Greek. 43
6 r r f it.
Greek ! Greek ! Greek .'
Till the brain begins to swim ;
Greek! Greek ! Greek !
Till the eyes are heavy and dim ;
Declensions, ' Tablet of Cebes,'
' Dialogues,' verbs, paradigme,
Till over ruTrrw we fall asleep.
And conjugate on in a dream.
Greek! Greek ! Greek !
From weary chime to chime ;
Greek ! Greek ! Greek !
Absorbeth all our time ;
Notes of lectures profound
On the ' Wolfian Theory,' too.
Till the heart is sick, and the brain benumb'd
"With the loads we have to do.
Greek ! Greek ! Greek !
Through the dull December light;
And Greek ! Greek ! Greek !
Though the weather be frosty and bright;
And skaters with skates in their hands
Pass us exultingly by.
As at half-past two with careworn looks
To the lecture-room we hie.
Oh ! but for one short week
(A fortnight would be best),—
No leisure have we, for music or work.
And scarcely time for rest;
A little talking would ease our hearts.
But no ! we must not speak ;
Each playful word must remain unheard.
For—it would hinder our Greek !
With fingers inky and cramped,
With hair all rough and on end,
A lady sat in unlady-like rags.
Which she had no time to mend.
Greek ! Greek ! Greek !
And with voice of dolorous pitch,—
(Would that its tone the Professor could reach !)—
She sang of the sorrows of Greek.
M.aBr]T7]<i.
44 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
©e^jates of tlje Hatites' (JHtiinfturg!) Hitcrarg ^octetg.
Our debates this year have not been less lively than usual; indeed,
probably owing to the lighter subjects chosen for discussion, they have
been more generally entertaining, and a larger number of members
than formerly have taken part in them. The January debate was an
exception, dealing with the profound and difficult question of the
supposed opposition of Darwinism to Christianity. The evolution
hypothesis, supported by the negative, was not considered in itself
necessarily opposed to C hristianity by either the mover or the seconder
of the aflBrmative, but the theory as held by Darwin, which seemed in
their opinion to leave no room for a distinctive divine element in
man. The voting, as influenced by this restriction of the discussion
to Darwin's theory, gave a majority of one to the afiirmative, i.e.
against Darwin. The February debate on the political question,
' Would it be beneficial to Europe if the power of Russia were
extended over Turkey ?' was remarkable for a unanimity in the
voting, which left the mover and seconder in favour of Russia in a
minority by themselves, though several members declined to vote.
On the one side it was urged that the Turks by their sacred laws were
unfitted to govern any but Mohammedans, and that other nations, who
might have protected the Christian subjects of the Porte, had left all the
task to the Russians ; also, that a nation so great as Russia could only
be temporarily excluded from the freedom of the seas which wash her
coasts ; but the current of feeling seemed to be, not liking for the
Turk, but jealousy of the Russian, and much anxiety about India,
recalling, perhaps. Lord Salisbury's remark that Eastern distances are
apt to be studied in maps on too small a scale. The March debate,
' Does Daniel Deronda sustain the reputation of its author?' which
produced a lively discussion, was carried in the negative by a large
majority, notwithstanding a particularly well-expressed speech without
notes on the other side. In April some of the best-written and most
interesting papers we have ever had were read on the question, ' Is
it desirable that our Government should send out another Arctic
Expedition ? ' suggesting the thought that in no country but our own
could such sympathy with nautical afi"airs, and such familiarity with
the history of the explorations of the seas, be found in a gathering of
ladies. The time of the meeting had been so taken up by business
that no discussion was possible ; so the papers were re-read and the
votes taken in May, when it was found that a majority of our ladies
were ready to risk their countrymen in another search for the North
Pole.
The June debate was a real discussion on the benefits of travel, as
compared with the superior mental discipline of a home life. The
papers, especially perhaps those taking the more difficult defence of a
home life, were bright and original, and the after discussion showed
that the question was well understood by those who took part in it.
In July, descriptions of pictures by several members present took the
place of a debate, and the papers were much approved of. The Octo¬
ber debate, 'Is it desirable for women to take part in field sports ?'*
was one of the liveliest of the year, being a real practical question to
many present. The mover and seconder in favour of field sports for
those ladies whose tastes lay that way, and who were strong enough
* See p. 24.
Solution of Double Acrostic. 45
to enjoy them, advocated fishing and hunting, but drew the line at
shooting, as needing too much practice, and being too violent an
exercise. The mover of the negative, while disapproving of all field
sports for ladies, considered them allowable for gentlemen who could
not otherwise be easily amused ; but some of her supporters were of
opinion that she had no logical resting-place, and advanced the theory
that all field sports were in their essence wrong. The voting, which
probably showed the influence of town life, and might have gone
otherwise in the country, gave a majority of thirteen out of twenty-
five against field sports. The November debate, owing to the business
before the meeting, was adjourned to December, when we had an
interesting literary debate upon the relative importance of the Anglo-
Saxon and Norman elements in the English language and literature.
Two difi"ereiit aspects of our rich and many-sided English were well
brought out in the speeches and papers, which were rather descriptive
of different qualities of the same language than directly antagonistic.
The voting gave a large majority in favour of the Norman and other
grafts upon the ancient Saxon root.
While we may congratulate ourselves on the increasing interest of
our debates, and especially on so many of our younger members
taking a spirited and intelligent part in them, it may be well to notice
here a tendency in the after discussion to let the meeting disintegrate
into little knots, and the argument dissipate into small talk, adverse
to the brief expression of our own ideas and careful listening to the
ideas of others, which we aim at. Though we have had some fluent
and excellent speaking without notes, and though, especially in reply,
such speaking has special point, we are still, from the experience of
last year, of opinion that, for most of our subjects, our usual practice
of having at least two good written papers is best. They give, we
think, closer reasoning and more orderly information than even very
good extemporaneous speaking, unless where it rises into oratory.
The debates have lately suflered from the length of time taken up
by the increasing business required by the magazine ; we therefore
hope that arrangements may be made this year to meet this diflBculty.
""' Ex Cathedra.
SOLUTION OF DOUBLE ACEOSTIC.
No. 12.
Acrostic.    Farewell.
a   altorff f
c   candelabra    a
R RIVER R
0 ORACLE E
S SNOW W
T TONGaB E
1 IDOL L
C CABAL L
Correct answers received from ' B' and ' M. C  B '
/T.T--^'i?^'^^ ^- "^^ ^®^^' 1^ ^°**e« Crescent) and 'Message Girl'
(Miss M S. Seton, St. Bennet's, Greenhill Gardens) having sent in
an equal number of correct solutions, the prize has been divided
between them.
46 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
©ur ILi&rars Cable.
A Knight of To-Day. By L. T. Meade. London ;
John F. Shaw & Co.
Well-written throughout, and with sustained interest from beginning
to end, we find difficulty in laying this book down before it is finished.
The scene is laid in the city of London, which is particularly well
described. Eden Court is, we fear, no over-drawn picture of its
homes for the poor. It is a tale of strong contrasts. On the one
hand we have Robert Archer, the hero 'knight of to-day,'sanA'peur e;
ians reproche, fighting single-handed against evil in some of its most
hopeless forms; on the other, Jeremy Jones, ostensibly a hard-work¬
ing clerk in a respectable mercantile house, in reality a grinding
money-lender and receiver of stolen goods, trading on the misery of
his fellow-creatures. Robert Archer is truly ' not an ordinary man;'
his life summed up in the maxim, 'Do the duty nearest you,' he
works not for money, but for the cause of truth and right, spending
life and strength in going down to the depths after sinking souls.
One of his good works is educating (after a peculiar fashion, we must
allow) the two orphan nieces of old Jeremy Jones, whose father had
onc« befriended him. Helen Holworthy, the elder of the two, is a
noble creature, pure, single-minded, calm, and brave, living unhurt
in the midst of evil. The interest of the book culminates in a severe
mental struggle she meets in deciding which of two duties is binding
upon her; when her faith is nearly eclipsed, as that of Robert Archer
is entirely, for a time, by the same trial. To unfold more of the plot
would be to lessen the interest of intending readers, of whom we hope
there are many. The minor characters in the book have each their
distinct individuality ; Mrs. Connor, the long-suffering landlady,
Caleb Keyes, ' a werry poor cove,' and Jim Randolph, ' who never
yet broke his word to living man, far less to God.' We must express
our sense of relief at being spared any glowing description of the
physical perfections of the hero, such as many novels of the day in¬
dulge in. There seems to us a little confusion in the abrupt transi¬
tions from one time to another in the earlier chapters, and the illus¬
trations are quite unworthy of their place ; the only one which is
tolerably good is that of Helen in St. Andrew Undershaft, with little
Jessie Dale upon her knee.
Transcaucasia and Ararat. By James Bryce, D.C.L. London :
Macmillan. 1877.
One of the pleasantest books of travel we have seen for long ; the
ground is comparatively untrodden, though both historically and
geographically of high interest. The author knows both what to
omit and what to tell, and the book is admirably put together, con¬
trasting with some other recent popular travels by a complete absence
of egotism and brag. Indeed, we hardly realize, from the quiet way
in which it is told, what a feat of mountaineering was the solitary
ascent of an unknown mountain like Ararat, 17,000 feet high. As
Dr. Bryce travelled over the scene of the present war in Asia just
before it broke out, and assures us that he is an independent witness,
starting with rather a prejudice against Russia, his conclusions from
his personal observations are mark-worthy. Of Transcaucasia, re¬
cently acquired by Russia, he says that the Russians, ' by creating
security, have made it possible for foreign capital and enterprise to
flow into the country.    No doubt there is a good deal of corruption,
Question Series. 47
a good deal of over-government, and bureaucratic pedantiy. But the
laws are mild and equal for all subjects ; and as there is no disaffec¬
tion, I do not think there can be much oppression.' But over the
Turkish border, he says, you find ' anarchy, plus the tax-gatherer.
Nothing is done for the people or by the people, while everything is
done to prevent one half of them from protecting themselves.
Government is a device for squeezing, with enormous waste in the
process, a certain sura of money out of the poorest class, to be spent
most of it on the Sultan's harem and palaces, and the rest on iron¬
clads and rifles.' The Mohammedan population in Asia Minor he
considers almost as unhappy and oppressed as the Christian. But he
thinks that the acquisition by Russia of Constantinople or any large
territory, either in Asia or Europe, would be a misfortune both to
Russia and these countries themselves. ' Russia is altogether too
imperfectly civilized and enlightened to make the further extension
of her power a benefit. For the moment, of course, it would be
preferable to the misrule of the Porte; but, in the long run, it might
prevent the growth of something better. Nor do the Christian
subjects of Turkey, Greeks or Armenians, wish for her success except
as a means of coercing the Porte. Better the Czar, they say with
one voice, than a continuance of present evils ; but rather give us, if
it be possible, a reformed Turkey, bitted, so to speak, and spurred
by Western riders, with as large a measure as may be of local
independence.'
Question Series.
I. History.—Give a short account of the causes which led to the
Wars of the Roses.
II. English Literature.—Give as many allusions as you can to
Chaucer's poetry in the works of later poets.
Answers, not to exceed twenty printed lines, are invited ; to be
sent in by 15th February, addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh
Magazine, care of Messrs. Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
The best answer to each question will be inserted in the magazine,
and prizes are offered at the close of the year for the greatest number
of good answers in each department.
iSoofe (SxdimxQt Column.
C. C. offers Homsr, Euripides, M'Clintock's First Book of Latin,
Colenso's Arithmetic, Milner's Universal Geography, Morell's Grammar
and Analysis, Collier's Grammar of the English Language, Chambers's
Etymology, Armstrong's English Composition, Oliphant's Interesting
Extracts, Scrymgeour's Readings in Literature and Science, Fables de
Florian, Racine's Works. In exchange she desires any of the works
of Professor Morley, Morris and Skeat's Early English, Minto's
Characteristics, Herbert Spencer, Edgeworth, Currie, and Shirreff On
Education.—2 London Street.
Sitrag j^otes.
The Aberdeen Ladies' Educational Association, which was
formed in the course of last summer, commenced operations early in
November.    It seems constituted in a somewhat unusual way, inas-
48 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
mncli as the president, vice-president, and secretary are gentlemen,
and the only lady office-bearer is the treasurer. The executive
committee consists of ladies and gentlemen in about equal numbers.
The classes for this winter are three in number : English Literature
—Rev. James Danson; Latin Literature—Professor Black; Astronomy
—Professor Fuller. The first-mentioned class is, we understand, the
popular one. Each course in Aberdeen is to consist of twenty lectures,
one lecture being delivered weekly in each class. A voluntary
monthly oral examination is held, for which an additional hour is
given. No mention is made of any certificate. [We should be in¬
clined to consider the above programme as deficient from various
points of view, and some of the subjects selected as certainly not
the best for a beginning. Local circumstances may, however, have
rendered a broader and more thorough scheme impracticable ; and
we welcome the present scheme in tlie hope that it may lead to some¬
thing better.]
ScHOLASTiCA wishes much to know what subjects are most useful
for a professional certificate. Suppose a young lady of eighteen, who is
going to be a governess, and who has had the usual school education,
desires to study for a winter in Edinburgh in order to gain a
Local Pass or Honours Certificate, what is the best group of subjects
for her to select ? When there is no music, and when the student
has neither been in France nor in Germany, what group of subjects
would best make up for these shortcomings ? [We invite replies for
insertion in next month's notes.—Eds.]
Chloe would be glad to hear of any entertaining German books.
Is there any really light literature in that language? She finds the
Thirty Years' War dull, though she is too shy to say so except in a
stray note. Chloe thinks French stories are very amusing ; but then
there are so few which a young lady may read. Will any one kindly
tell her of some unexceptionable ones ?
Notices to Corrrspontients, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the 15th of the preceding month.
Writers willing to undertake papers in the present series of ' Our
Female Novelists,' are requested to communicate at once with the
Editors. A suflicient number of papers for the series entitled ' Where
shall we go ?' having been received, no additional articles need be
sent.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The Prize offered for the best paper appearing during the last
year in the series of ' Our Female Novelists,' has been awarded to
Enna, for her article on Miss Bnrney in March 1877.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held at 5 Heriot Row, on Saturday, 5th January 1878, at 11
o'clock. Debate — 'Is a thorough English education attainable
without a knowledge of Latin ?'
Our Female Novelists. 49
©ur Jctnale flobeltst5»
XIII.
MISS SEWARD AND MES. SHERWOOD.
Miss Seward, h. 1747—rf. 1809.
Mrs. Sherwood, h. 1775—d. 1850.
It is a great honour to he a literary woman ; and one who
can lay claim to this title ought to avoid as much as possible
the pursuits of ordinary life, and the use of ordinary language.
Such, throughout her career, was the evident, if not the
avowed motto of Anna Seward.
'All men,' writes Mr. Constable in his Memorials,^ 'are ready to
make generous allowance for the ungraceful motions of one who has
lost a limb,—it may be in the service of his country,—for in such a
case the artificial member is a substitute, and not a voluntary addi¬
tion ; but to walk by preference on stilts from the cradle to the grave,
however easy the process may become, cannot be so comfortable for
the elevated pilgrim as a more natural mode of progression, nor will
lie long command the wondering admiration of spectators, however
dexterous and surprising his performance.'
Sir Walter Scott, though he allowed that Miss Seward
held a high rank in the annals of British literature, yet felt
acutely the ' pedantic affectations of her epistolary style,' and
bewailed that ' sound sense and vigorous ability had un¬
fortunately condescended to an absurd disguise.' Thus,
instead of simply saying, ' I have got a frank,' she used this
phrase: ' I have succeeded in securing senatorial freedom for
our correspondence;' and to inform her correspondent of a
second marriage, she writes thus: ' I hear with concern that
Hymen is lighting his torch with the sprays of a cypress
wreath.'
Sir Walter Scott visited Miss Seward, at her residence at
Lichfield, in the year 1807. In spite of her advanced years
at that period, we are told that the regularity of her features,
the fire and expression of her countenance, gave her the
appearance of beauty, and almost of youth.    Her eyes were
1 Archibald Constnhle and 7(i> Literary Correnpondents: A Memorial
hij hi.i Son, Tliomas Constable.    Edinburgh, 1873.
No. 38.—February 1878. jj
so The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
auburn, of the precise shade and hue of her hair, and had
great expression. In reciting they seemed to flash fire.
Her tone of voice was melodious, and well suited to reading.
She did not sing, but was fond of music. She had a great
command of literary anecdote, a quick perception both of
the serious and the ludicrous, just observation, and original
taste, all of which rendered her society delightial. Of very
quick sensibilities, she allowed her feelings to carry her too
far, was much in favour of the florid style in writing, and
thus aimed at a complete departure from ordinary language.
Born in 1747, she was the daughter of the Ilev. Thomas
Seward, rector of Eyam in Derbyshire, prebendary of Salis¬
bury, and canon residentiary, and finally Bishop of Lichfield.
Her mother was the daughter of the head-master of the
school at Lichfield, who was the preceptor of Johnson, and of
other eminent literary characters. Mr. Seward was poetical,
and early introduced his daughter to the study of Milton and
Shakspere. Later, however, finding what a decided literary
bent her mind had taken, he was not sufficiently free from
the prejudice then existing against learned ladies to permit
her to indulge this taste. She submitted to this parental
discipline with the utmost sweetness, and practised for
many years the difficult self-denial it entailed upon her.
How many pangs this occasioned, those only can guess who
have been similarly situated. Though for a time shut out
from her favourite pursuits, she still enjoyed a pleasure
which has never been forbidden to women—namely, the
society of literary men. Lichfield, whither her father re¬
moved in 1754, was the birthplace of Johnson and Garrick,
and the residence of a number of well-educated clergy who
were attached to its cathedral. Here jNIr. Seward became
Bishop; and his daughter continued, even after his death, to
reside in the episcopal palace. The celebrated Dr. Darwin
also lived at Lichfield, and speedily discovered and encouraged
Miss Seward's talents. She afterwards claimed the author¬
ship of the first fifty lines in his Botanic Garden, written
out of compliment to him, but published by him without
acknowledgmen t.
The acuteness of her feelings appears distinctly in her
corresjDondence on the occasion of her sister's death. Miss
Sarah Seward had been engaged to j\Ir. Porter, a merchant
in Leghorn, and died in 17G4 after a very short illness. The
feelings of Anna on afterwards entering her sister's room
were overpowering. She was consoled in some measure by
the society of Miss Honora Sneyd, who resided with her
Our Female Novelists. 5 r
after her sister's death, and afterwards became Mrs. Edge-
worth.    At this period she thus writes of her pursuits:
' You inquire after our studies. We have been lately engaged in
exploring the inestimable treasure which had, during so many ages,
lain concealed in the darkness of the Erse language. Macpherson
has kindly and ably drawn aside the curtain. . . . There is a daring
spirit in this work resembling that of the sacred writings ; a great
blaze of imagination, but it is the random fire of the ruder ages.'
After her sister's death. Miss Seward, prompted by filial
duty, rejected all matrimonial offers. She was now more at
liberty, however, to pursue her favourite studies, and the
literary society of Lichfield continued to be an unfailing
source of pleasure to her. Dr. Darwin, Mr. Day, and Mr.
Edgeworth formed part of this society. Dr. Johnson, too,
was of the circle, but met with small appreciation from our
authoress. Scott asserts that this was owing to his low
birth; but we suspect that his inadequate estimate of the
genius of ]\Iilton and of Gray had more to do with this
prejudice. In two far from complimentary sonnets dedicated
to his memory. Miss Seward ascribes his low opinion of
Milton to envy, and concludes with the following couplet:
' A radiant course did Johnson's glory run ;
But large the spots that darkened on its sun.'
Among her distinguished acquaintances, we may name Mr.
]\Iundy, the author of several beautiful poems ; Mr. Crome,
Avho wrote the descriptive ode entitled Lcvjcsdone Hill, and
many others. With some of the literary women of the day
she also exchanged visits. After a visit to Mrs. Hannah
More at Cowslip Green, in August 1791, she writes some
glowing stanzas, which conclude with the following lines :
* O may your virtue wake the just desire
To live like you, and be what we admire!'
Her verses to Mrs. Siddons, in the same high-flown strain,
speak of the
' Beauty and grandeur, tenderness and force,
Silence that speaks, and eloquence divine '
of that celebrated lady. In a poem addressed to the Ladies
of LlangoUen, Lady Eleanor Butler and Miss Ponsonby, she
thus exalts a life of literary friendship :
' Then rose the fairy palace of the vale,
Then bloom'd around it the Arcadian bowers ;
Screen'd from the storms of winter, cold and pale,
Screen'd from the fervours of the sultry hours.
Circling the lawny crescent, soon they rose
To letter'd ease devote, and friendship's blest repose.'
5i8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
hospital; D'Argenton lives and flourishes. Probably he has
even a grand success with that newspaper of his. As for
Darwin's survival of the fittest, that theory seems to be
unknown in this land of LAttre. Brave, good, strong-hearted
Mere Jacques dies, and the poor, weakly Fetit Chose, who
does not know how to take care of himself, survives. To be
sure, like the heir of all the Eussias, Mere Jacques bequeaths
his brother a bride.
And if this is true of the earlier works of Alphonse
Daudet, it is still more so of Ze Nahab, his last production.
A crash of horrors, thus an enemy described it; but an
admirer could scarcely say otherwise. This is not the case
with Eugenie Grandei of Balzac, nor is it with his Ursulc
Mirouet. Neither is it so with Lm Fetite Fadette, nor Lea
Maitres Sonneurs of George Sand. And yet many of botli
authors' were best avoided by the young reader.
Besides this, there are several writers whose books are
both amusing and worth reading. There is Cherbuliez, who
may be called the novelist of the police court, so intricate
are his plots, so inevitable his situations. There is Gustave
Droz of the Cahier Bleu; there is Octave Feuillet, with his
Roman du Jeune LLomme paiLvre. There are plenty of others ;
but I forbear to mention more. But it has been truly said,
that tliey who dip into French literature of the present day
dip as it were into an ocean. H. A. Duff.
I'Per angusta ad augusta.' *
As one pursued by hated foes runs down
A narrow street and seeks an outlet there,
But tall grey houses rise up everywhere.
And meet his gaze with unrelenting frown.
Urged by his mighty need, he knocks and waits
At a closed door, while nearer through the air
The cruel shouts surge on, until despair
Well-nigh has seized him, then—ah, see ! the gates
Fly open now, a brighter vision smiles
On the poor hunted soul, and joyous sounds
Of welcome reach us: we can tell no more ;
We have not stepped across the magic bounds
Of that grim threshold ;—still the street beguiles
Us, and we linger on outside the door.
Beatkix L. Tollemache.
' The motto is taken from an old doorway at Chur.
Our Female Novelists. 53
specimens she has given of unaffected English. To show
the manner of her juvenile epistles, we quote the following,
which, it strikes us, might be suitable for translation into
Latin at a University examination:
* If we delight in umbrageous vales, verdant fields, and crystal
■waters, we feel the delight arise with treble poignance when we find
them at the foot of rugged rocks, and encircled by barren mountains.'
This is quite Shaksperian; it reminds us of the stanzas
spoken by Pyramus in the Midsummer Night's Dream.
Miss Seward was herself a severe critic of literary style.
That of Addison, generally thought faultless, she accuses
both of inelegance and redundancy, and prophesies that
Johnson's style will, in the future, invariably have the
preference over Addison's. Had Miss Seward applied the
prophetic lens to the future of her own works, what would
have been the result ? Her expectations in this respect were
probably as stilted as her own compositions. And in one
respect her works occupy a very elevated position with re¬
gard to others,—viz., they generally adorn the highest shelves
in the library. But that which intrinsic merit can only
partially attain, is often secured by the aid of external
circumstances; and as long as Johnson, Darwin, Garrick,
and Scott are remembered, the name of Anna Seward will
Temain as a link in the chain of literary friendships by which
these choice spirits were bound together.
One of the members of this circle at Lichfield was a Mr.
George Butt. He was a descendant of the ancient family
of Butt or de Butt, who had come in witli the Conqueror.
He was the father of an authoress of a very different stamp
from Miss Seward, namely Mrs. Sherwood. In the auto¬
biography of the latter distinguished lady, we find Miss
Seward described as one of the queens of society in Lichfield,
a woman such as we read of in romances, a very Circe, who,
though to all appearance possessed of no magic spell, yet
bore away the palm of admiration from the young and beau¬
tiful. Mrs. Sherwood adds that she fascinated even those
who condemned her conduct. We may well imagine how
even the smallest semblance of coquetry would appear un¬
pardonable to such a woman as the authoress of the Faircliild
Family.
Mary Martha Butt was born in 1775, at the rectory of
Stanford in Worcestershire. Unfortunately the only procur¬
able biography of her is one written by her own hand, and
is full of the records of personal failings, such as another
54 The Ladies' Ediiibiirgh Magazhie.
writer would either not have seen, or have omitted. Of her
early childhood she writes, that had she been born ' in the
noblest or richest family in England, she could not have
entered life under happier auspices, with regard both to
the intellectual and the beautiful.' Her literary and ac¬
complished father and her sensitive and high-principled
mother both exercised the very liighest influence over
her childish years. As a child, she had such robust
health that her father used playfull)^ to name her Hygeia.
Being of a placid disposition, she afforded no indication
of the talent for which she was afterwards distinguished.
This is amusingly illustrated by the following story. When
scarcely two years old, she was taken to visit at the
palace at Lichfield; Miss Seward, Mr. Lovel Edgeworth,
and the elder Dr. Darwin were of the company. Mr. Edge-
worth, looking intently at the young Hygeia, paid some
compliments to her father on her well-nurtured animal
nature, and then, patting his own forehead, remarked, ' But
you may depend upon it, Mr. Butt, she wants it here.'
Partly in consequence of this remark, and fortunately, per¬
haps, for her, her parents, up to her sixth year, thought
little of her intellectual ability, and left her mind to develope
itself.   When she was in her fifth year, a hideous old bachelor,
whom she calls Mr. B y, came to dine with her father;
and on the young girl being brought in after dinner, he
placed her on his knee, and asked her if she would be his
wife. The child, too timid to say no, said she would have
him in six years, and wondered at the laughter this occa¬
sioned. When the six years had elapsed, he did not fail
to re-demand her, and she had some difficulty in obtaining
a respite. She was in her sixth year when she first began
to make stories; but not being able to write, she used to
follow her mother with a slate and pencil, and beg her to
write them down. The admiring parent afterwards copied
these juvenile effusions in pen and ink, and kept them by
her. It was the fashion at that time for children to wear
iron collars strapped over the shoulders to a backboard. To
this she was subjected from her sixth to her thirteenth year;
yet, in spite of such hardships, combined Avith a restriction
to the plainest fare, she declares that she was a very happy
child. One of the many good influences which surrounded
her was the conversation of her father and mother. This
was always of a very elevated character, and the children
were never allowed to interrupt it. She also read a great
deal with her brother, with whom BoUiison Crusoe was a
0?i7' Female Novelists. 55
very favourite book. Mr. Butt, suspecting that both Mary
and Marten were going to be geniuses, shut them up one
morning in his study, with the command that each of them
should write a story. The children were never informed which
of the stories was pronounced to be the best. When about
fifteen years old, she was sent to the Abbey School at Bead¬
ing, kept by two French ladies. Her answer to the French
master, when he inquired after her attainments, is amusing:
' "Eh lien! Mademoiselle," ho said, "have you any knowledge of
French? " "No, sir," I answered. " Are you much acquainted with
history ? " And he went on from one thing to another, asking me
questions and always receiving a negative. At length, smiling, he
said, "Tell me. Mademoiselle, then, what you do know." I stam¬
mered, "Latin—Virgil," and finished off with a regular flood of tears.
At this he laughed outright, and immediately set me down in his
class, and gave me lessons for every day.'
Her earliest work, the Traditions, was written in 1794,
while on a visit with her father to Lord Valentia. It was
her habit to write in her own room, and then put up the
manuscript in one of the cases of the dressing-table. But
one day her father, coming into the room and finding the
manuscript, was so much delighted with it that he took it
and showed it to others. These friends specially admired
the ingenious outline of the story, in spite of the slight
blunder made in allowing the hero to have two wives exist¬
ing at the same time. Putting this aside, however, the
story is remarkable as the work of a girl of seventeen. So
enchanted was her father with it, that, in spite of persuasion
to the contrary, he had it published by subscription for the
benefit of a friend in distress ; and so Miss Butt stood before
the public as an authoress before she had completed her
nineteenth year. In the autumn of the same year she began
her second book, Margarita. While this was in progress,
Mrs. Eadclift'e's Mysteries of Udolpho was being read aloud
by way of insx^iration. The character of Canon Bernardo in
Margarita was universally recognised to be drawn from her
father. He died, however, before the book was completed,
and at first she had not the heart to go on with it. The
first thing she wrote on resuming her story, was the death
of Canon Bernardo. During the following summer, her
brother came to spend the long vacation at home; he taught
her botany and Greek, the latter of which she continued to
study until she had read the first six books of Homer.
she now led an ideal life of seclusion from the world, of
whicli she still remained comparatively ignorant.    Her love
56 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
for beautiful scenery and for other quiet pleasures was the
means of raising her gradually above the keen sorrow which
she felt on losing her father. The novel of Margarita was
sold for forty pounds, and her own verdict upon it is, that
if she gained nothing else by the exercise, she certainly
acquired much command of language. She always retained
an afiection for it, as having been begun in her father's study.
In 1802 she finislied Susan Ch^ey, which holds a place in
literature as the first book written without vulgarity or pro¬
vincialisms, for the use of j^oor people. It was so popular
that it went through very numerous editions, pirated and
otherwise, before the year 181G, when the copyright was
returned to the authoress.
"While resident with her mother in Bath, where she enjoyed
the friendshi]3 of the philosophical Miss Hamilton, INIrs.
Schimmelpenninck, and others, she became engaged to her
cousin Henry Sherwood, to whom she was married in 1803.
Mr. Sherwood had in 1797 experienced all the hardships of
poverty and exile. He had actually begged his way through
France and Germany to Bremen, whence lie had taken ship
to England, and arrived in a such a wretched condition that
even his nearest friends did not recognise him. He was, at
the time of his marriage, a captain in the 53d Eegiment, which
was soon afterwards ordered to India.
During her residence in India, Mrs. Sherwood founded a
barrack school, which she personally superintended; she also
adopted several British children who had lost their parents.
The loss of two of her own children, for which she found com¬
fort in the ministrations of Henry ]\Iartyn, throws a tender
mournfulness over her life in India. "VVe cannot but feel,
on reading this record, that, as her daughter says,' her sor¬
rowful times w^ere often the sweetest, not only in the present,
but to memory.'
After their return from India, Mr. and Mrs. Sherwood
lived for some time at "Worcester, but Twickenham Avas their
final abode; here Mrs. Sherwood died in 1850, in the
presence of two of her daughters.
In addition to the W'orks already mentioned, she wrote
the Lady of the Manor, Henry Milncr, and the Fairchilcl
Family, besides a very large number of smaller tales for
the young. During her last days on earth, it was her habit
to write a penny tract daily, and we cannot but think
that perhaps she might have lived longer had she not thus
unnecessarily taxed her failing powers.
The leading feature in Mrs. Sherwood's character was her
A  Valentine. 57
affection for the young. For them all lier books were
written; to form their morals after the liighest possible
standard, to teach an implicit faith in the Bible, and a con¬
stant shrinking from all that might savour of w^orldliness;
such are the aims she sets before her in all her writings.
AVe cannot but fear, however, that by constantly dwelling on
such themes, she may end by rendering them unpalatable,
and that her unceasing allusions to, and illustrations of,
human depravity, may produce a morbid state of sensibility
in minds of a timid nature. It must therefore ever be a
matter of deliberation, to what class of young people we
may recommend her writings, wliich are still popular. To
the physically and mentally strong they may form an anti¬
dote to arrogance and high-mindedness; to the timid, on the
other hand, the moral tonic which they contain may be too
severe. This caution appears the more necessary when we
consider the interesting character of Mrs. Sherwood's writ¬
ings ; it is her profound sympathy with the young that gives
them such a charm. By almost no author have the sorrows
and joys of childhood been so feelingly and exliaustively
treated, and by none liave the faults of children been more
clearly pointed out and more impartially dealt with.
J. Menzies.
^ Falentine.
Golden hair, golden hair, crown of my queen,
Where is the gold that can equal its sheen ?
Jasper, and jacinth, and amber may shine;
All are outdone by my proud Valentine I
Golden hair, golden hair, crocuses peep,
Striving a glint of your radiance to keep;
Daffodils droop, and pale primroses pine.
What can seem fair beside my Valentine ?
Golden hair, golden hair, when comes tlie day
Gold turns to silver, and roses decay;
Untarnished still shall this love be of mine,
If you will take it now, dear Valentine !
H. A. Duff.
58 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
.Stubtcs from SfjaJtspere,
I.
THOUGHTS ON EOMEO AND JULIET.
'Amor condusse noi ad una morte.'—Dante.
This is one of the most beautiful of Shakspere's creations.
With a reverent awe of its extreme beauty, one shrinks from
dissecting it; and yet, perhaps, it is easier to analyze Eomeo
and Juliet, owing to the unity of idea which characterizes it,
than to grasp the leading ideas of those plays which turn less
exclusively upon love.
Sad as the story is, there are few plays which awaken
more pleasurable emotions in the reader. No doubt this is
partly to be accounted for by the consummate skill with
which the pathetic is held in subjection to the beautiful, and
is not allowed to act upon us beyond the bounds of pleasure.
Wordsworth ascribes this in no small degree to ' continual
and regular impulses of pleasurable surprise derived from
the metrical arrangement.' But we venture to think that
much of our pleasure in reading it is derived from the
pleasure which Shakspere himself took in his work, and
from the way in which he seized on the story, and threw
himself into it with the full force of his vehement nature;
so that all that best expresses the feelings of the human
heart at the sublimest moments of its existence, when ' even
the senses themselves are elevated into soul,' ^ ^\■ill be for
ever associated with the Veronese lovers.
The charnel-house itself, beautified by his magic touch,
becomes no longer merely
' A grave.    Oh no ! a lanthorn ;
For here lies Juliet, and her beavity makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.'
It was no new story invented by Shakspere, but an old
legend often told in prose and verse before; but when told
by others, it is simply a tragic tale of a pair of unfortunate
lovers. In Shakspere's hands it loses much of its harshness,
teaches a great moral lesson, and becomes the universal
story of all who have loved truly and deeply.
How wonderfully Italian it is! Who, while reading it,
feel themselves in England ? It transports our thoughts to
the hot, dusty glare of an Italian thoroughfare, with groups
of excited people; the passionate southern blood boiling
in their veins, ready every moment for a fray,—all colour,
1 Schlegel.
Studies from Shakspere. 59
noise, life, and movement, and a cloudless Italian sky over
all. The scene changes, and we are in the orcliard ; the sky
is of a deeper shade, the trees cast long shadows on the dewy
grass, and the silvery leaves of the olives glance in the
moonbeams; the roses give out their sweetest perfume, and
the nightingale warbles the song that poets never tire of
praising. Or again. Friar Laurence's appearance suggests
the smooth, close-shaven green of the convent garden, with
here and there a dark cypress, pointing heavenwards, stand¬
ing out in gloomy relief against a cloudless sky.
There are various theories as to the origin of the story.
Douce ^ would have us believe that he can trace its source to a
Greek romance by Xenophon, Ephesius, in which the heroine
Anthea takes a sleeping potion to avoid a compulsory marriage.
Simrok,^ though he discards this theory, seeks its source
in a period scarcely less remote. According to him, Pyramus
and Thisbe, Hero and Leander, Tristan and Isolde, are all
different developments of the same myth, the leading idea
in them all being the same,—namely, that lovers who have
emancipated themselves from conventional restraints, and
set the world at defiance, are driven to desperation by an
error which arises out of their love itself, and leads them to
put an end to their own existence.
Without going back as far as these learned writers, we
find many versions of the story current in Italy, in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Writers of great authority, amongst whom we may mention
Gervinus, have thought that Masuccio's Mariotto and Gian-
nozza was the probable source whence Luigi da Porto derived
his charming tale of La Giulietta, published in 1530. Ban-
dello's novel on the same subject was published in 1554.
Erom these various sources, Pierre Boisteau, compiled a French
version of the story, which was translated into English by
Paynter in his Palace of Pleasure, published in 15G7.
Arthur Brooke's poem appeared in 1562, whilst Groto's
Hadriana, an Italian poem, on a somewhat similar subject,
which in many minor details corresponds strangely with
Shakspere's jjlay, was published in 1578. Though Arthur
Brooke's poem is the undoubted source whence Shakspere
took the story and many details, yet Professor Pace-Sanfelice
has shown that it is quite possible that he may have been
also acquainted with Luigi da Porto's Giulietta, and even
with Groto's Hadriana.    Shakspere certainly knew French,
^ Illustrations of Shaksj^ere, ii. p. 198,
- Quellen des Shakspere, i. p. 144.
6o The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
and it is not impossible that he may have known a little
Italian, Avhich was by no means an unusual knowledge in
England at that time. Mrs. Cowden Clarke states that it is
possible that Shakspere visited Italy in 1592, when we lose
all trace of his proceedings for some time; but there is no
evidence in support of this conjecture, save the intimate
acquamtance with the manners and customs of that country
displayed in some of his writings. Professor Pace-Sanfelice
thinks that Shakspere had read Dante's Divina Commedia.
He tries to prove the identity of the earthquake mentioned
by the nurse in Act i. Scene lir.,
' 'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,'
with the earthquake mentioned in the 12th Canto of the
Inferno :
' Qual e quella ruina, che nel fianco
Di qua da Trento 1' Adice percosse,
O per tremuoto o per sostegno manco.'
Now this rock fell in 1310, and the traditional date assigned
to the death of Eomeo and Juliet is 1303, and even the
great earthquake which destroyed part of Verona in 1298
Avould not tally with the nurse's eleven years; so it seems
much more likely that an allusion was intended to the
earthquake of 1580, which was severely felt in London, and
which most of the audience would remember. This fixes
the date of the first production of Eomeo and Juliet about
the year 1591, and though some writers have assigned it
a later date, and even Gervinus ^ thinks that it was not
written till 159G, yet most critics seem now agreed that it
was probably written before 1593.^
The first writer who records these events as historical, is
Girolamo della Corte, in his Istoria di Verojia ; but as it was
not published till 1504, long after the tale had become
famous through novelists and poets, we can scarcely place
niuch reliance on his testimony. History is almost silent
Avith respect to the struggles loetween Capulets and Mon¬
tagues; indeed, the contemporary chronicles record that
hoth ]\Iontecclii and Cappelletti Avere Ghibellines. Dante
classes the two families together, and commemorates their
sufferings in the Ghibelline cause in the famous passage in
the P'urgatorio, Canto vi.:— '
' Vieni a veder Montecchi e Cappelletti,
Monaldi e Filippeschi uom senza cura
Color gia tristi e costor con sospetti.'
■^ Gervinus, Sliakspere, vol. ii. p. 1.
^ See Furnivall's Introduction to Leopold Shakspere, p. xxx.
Studies from Shakspere. 6i
If the events related in this tragedy had really taken place,
we scarcely think that Dante w^ould have omitted all
mention of such dramatic incidents in the great poem
which immortalizes so many similar stories; and we fear
that if Komeo and Juliet had ever really existed, nothing
could have saved them from a place in that terrible wood
in the seventh circle of the Inferno, amongst the ' violenti
contro loro stessi;' for we know that Dante was at Verona ^
on a visit to Bartolomeo della Scala that very year (1303).
This is the first of Shakspere's plays in which his de¬
scriptions of love strike us as being the result of personal
experience, and not merely of sympathy with the feelings
of others. It is remarkalDle as illustrating a transition
phase in his mind. It was not the earliest stage of all; for
then Shakspere would not have been able to conceive of
Eomeo as inconstant to Eosaline, or to imagine that in many
instances, as a living writer justly remarks:
' First love, though it peri.sh from life, only goes.
Like the primrose that falls, to make way for the rose.'—Lytton.
Nor was it the most advanced period of Shakspere's life; for
then his characters would have reasoned more before they
acted, and felt more remorse and compunction afterwards.
But what strikes us most of all is that this is the first
play in whicli we find Shakspere as a philosopher lighting
upon a great truth, and gradually developing it throughout
the play. We see the first indication of this leading idea
in Triar Laurence's opening speech, in Act ll. Scene ill.
Here the Friar, who throughout the play takes the place of
the chorus in the Greek drama, tells us didactically, without
any special application, that everything, both in human
nature and in the external world, contains the elements of
good and evil,—' Our own deeds are our doomsmen,' ^ and
decide which of these universal principles is to predominate.
Love itself is no exception to this rule, for though the lovers
emancipate themselves from the control of all laws save those
of love, yet in love itself lie the elements of retribution ; in
love originates the error that occasions self-destruction. Like
Friar Laurence's plant, and many of nature's products, love
contains medicine and poison, and its effect depends on the
way in which it is used. Under the control of reason and
conscience, it proves the greatest blessing of life; but, like all
earthly pleasures, it should be ' drunk sparingly, and, as it
were, from the palm of the hand;' ^ for ' those who bow down
J Lombardi's Notes to Paradiso, Canto xviii.
" Owen Meredith. ' Hyperion, by Longfellow.
62 TJie Ladies EdinburgJi. Magazine.
upon their knees to drink of these bright streams that water
life,' may find too late that the nourishment of life misapplied,
may l^ecome the canker that destroys it. Again, in Act II.
Scene vi., when Komeo in a moment of wild rapture dares
love-devouring death to do his worst, the Friar warns him
solemnly that excess defeats its own object even in love.
It either destroys the lovers, who like fire and powder
perish in an embrace,—fit image of this ill-starred couple,—
or, worse still, love, if carried to excess, is its own murderer,
producing satiety, even as he who feeds immoderately on
honey after a time loathes its very sweetness. Lastly, he
again recurs to the same image, sternly and reproachfully,
when Eomeo abandons himself to needless despair, and is
with difficulty prevented from laying violent hands on
himself at the news of his banishment from Verona. He
reminds him how in so doing he sins in a threefold way,
corresponding to the three parts of man's being—body,
soul, and spirit. He shames his ' shape' by digressing from
the valour of a man and indulging in womanish tears. His
love is but perjury, if by slaying himself he injure Juliet,
whom he has sworn to cherish, and whose life is bound up
with his. Even his ' wit' or intellect is turned into a curse,
if, like the powder of ' an unskilled soldier,' it becomes the
instrument used in destroying the life it was granted by
heaven in order to preserve.
Juliet's character is a difficult one to analyze, inasmuch
as she only lived in her love. Shakspere in this character
has shown that love, though only one of the many motives
which sway a man's heart and influence his actions, may
be to a woman
' Her liglit, lier life, her very breath,
With no alternative but death.'—Longfellow.
Yet, like a true woman, her love itself is less selfish than
a man's would be. It is less exclusive, less jealous than
Eomeo's. He would keep Juliet all to himself; he envies
the very glove on her hand; when banished, the thought
that tortures him most is that others may approach her,
while he is excluded from her presence:
' Every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing
Lives here in heaven, and may look on her,
But Romeo may not.'
We look in vain for any indication of a similar feeling on
Juliet's part.    Woman-like, she Avould prefer that all should
Studies from Shakspere. 63
love where she loved, and worship where she worshipped;
she says:
' Take him and cnt him oat in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night.' 1
Juliet's love adds strength to her nature, developes her
character. It rouses her from her girlish confidence in the
sincerity and sympathy of others, and she finds that, in
the real difficulties of life, she must stand alone, and
assert her independence of the commonplace minds of
those around her.
Komeo's love, on the other hand, makes him dependent
and self-engrossed. His first thought after Tybalt's death
is not of the grief he has caused Juliet in slaying one who
was dear to her, but what she would think of him. He
asks eagerly:
' Doth she not think me an old murtherer ?'
' What says
My conceal'd lady to our cancelled love ? '
No arrangement of a practical nature emanates from Eomeo.
It is Juliet who plans the secret marriage, and who after¬
wards makes arrangements for a meeting. Her love takes
.such entire possession of her whole being, that it is difficult
to imagine her existing at all without it; but it is an un¬
selfish, ennobling love that strengthens and purifies her.
She reminds us of some delicate flower that blossoms sud¬
denly on feeling the first rays of the sun, and withers as
suddenly when its influence is removed.
To understand Komeo's character, we must try and realize
his earlier life, which would seem to have been lonely. He
j)ossessed an intense longing for sympathy, but where was
he to find it ? His romantic, sentimental nature could have
had but little in common with his relations, engrossed in
their petty squabbles; nor would he have dared to expose
the mysteries of his inner life to Mercutio's coarse sarcasm,
or Benvolio's commonplace remarks. This deep-seated want
in Eomeo's nature made liim turn to Eosaline, hoping to
find a beauty of soul to correspond with her o;itward attrac¬
tions, but in vain. Then followed IJank despair; yet all this
time he was not really in love with her, but with the idea
which she represented to him, and with the attributes with
which his fancy endowed her. We see clearly that his feel-
' This monologue is omitted in the Ist quarto, published 1597.
I
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. AA7
his eyes to see if they could find the object of their talk.
Xannette saw the two figures as they came in sight; Eobert
she knew at once, but her curiosity was roused as to what
his brother would be like. She saw he was a medium
height, that he was dressed in naval uniform; but as they
approached, she withdrew from her prominent position.
' There she is !' exclaimed Eobert, pointing to the spot
where Nannette had been; but she had disappeared from
their view.
As they came near, she once more approached the gate
and greeted Robert with a bright glad smile. Women know
when they are looking their best, and Nannette felt that such
was her case that evening.
' Good evening. Miss Graeme,' Eobert said, advancing and
holding out his hand. ' I have brought my brother to make
your acquaintance. Jack, let me introduce you to Miss
Graeme.'
jSTannette held out her hand with equal frankness to the
sailor, raising her eyes to his with some words of welcome
on her lips.
She turned once more to her first friend.
' Something very strange has happened,' she said;  ' but
you must come and be introdiiced to my aunt.    Do you
know, she thinks that in a kind of way you belong to xis.'
' I am very glad to hear it,' said Eobert with an air of
amusement; ' but how do you mean ? Are we relations ? or
is there some mystic tie between us ?'
'You should not laugh at me,' she answered gravely.
' Perhaps Aunt Elsie is wrong, and you do not belong to us
at all; only the name was the same, and so we thought it
might be.'
' Shall we go at once to your aunt and try and prove our
identity ?' said Jack.
He had been watching his brother and Nannette. She
was by no means the rustic maiden he had pictured to him¬
self as likely to have enchained his brother's fancy. He
could not but admire her, and, with an inherent love of
novelty and fun, he followed the pair up the gravel walk,
hoping that the acquaintance they were forming might serve
for some pleasant hours' companionship whilst he was in that
part of the country.
At the door Nannette once more paused.
' You must be very gentle with Aunt Elsie,' she   said.
' Oh, how much I wish that what she thinks may be true,
and that you really are her Eobert Elwes!'
Studies from Shakspcrc. 65
' Well, Juliet, I will be with thee to-night.
Let's see for means,'—
the apothecary's shop became for him the only object of
interest in the universe, and the very depth of his emotion
would have imparted a minute correctness to his memory,
and have added intensity to his powers of observation; for
do we not often remark in real life, that the smallest details
of the objects which have been round people in any great
sorrow, seem burnt into their minds for ever ?
' Strange that the mind, when fraught
With a passion so intense.
One would think that it well
Might drown all life in the eye,
That it should, by being so overwrought.
Suddenly strike on a sharper sense.
For a shell, a flower, little things
Which else would have been passed by.'^
It is a relief to turn to Friar Laurence's calm, peaceful
character after the passionate natures we have been exa¬
mining. He and his philosophy form, as it were, the
background of the ]3lay, the cool, refreshing shade after the
burning glare of passion. He is supposed to belong to the
Franciscan order, and Knight says of him: ' The good friar
of the play, in his kindliness, his learning, and his inclination
to mix with, and perhaps control, the affairs of the world,
is no unapt representation of this distinguished order in their
best days.' We cannot help thinldng, though, that the lovers
might have fared better if their counsellor had been less of
a theorist, and more of a man of the world. He seems to
have watched them throughout rather in the way a naturalist
might follow the movements of new specimens of an in¬
teresting race, to see if they accorded with liis preconceived
theories. We are not very sure that his readiness to suggest
the expedient of the powder may not partly have proceeded
from delight in the opportunity for a new scientific experi¬
ment. Yet we cannot but admire the calm dignity of Friar
Laurence's demeanour, in whatever circumstances he may
be placed. With a truly philosophic love of unity and
power of detecting analogies, he has grasped the great truth
that the warfare between good and evil is a ' border warfare,'
that everything in nature may be turned by man either to
good or evil.
The minor characters are for the most part Italian to the
backbone. Fiery Tybalt, ever longing for a fray; merry
Mercutio, jesting even with his latest breath; and above all,
^ Tennvson, Maud.
No. 38.—February 1878. * -p
66 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Capulet, with his peppery temper, warm heart, childish love
of trifles, and inconsistent disposition, are all admirable
specimens of the southern nature.
Juliet's mother is not an attractive character. She turns
coldly from her daughter at the moment when her sympathy
is most needed, coolly suggests poisoning Eomeo, and dele¬
gates her place in the household to the active, intrig-uing
nurse, who is the real head of the establishment. The nurse's
character strikes us as being the least Italian. She is a
regular garrulous old Englishwoman. Gervinus thinks that
she owes her origin to Arthur Brooke, others have sought
for her prototype in the nurse in Groto's Hadriana. Be that
as it may, she is a delightful element in the play, and always
comes in with some very unromantic remark, just after we
have been transported to the most ideal regions of unearthly
bliss, and recalls us somewhat roughly to the material world.
Peter, too, serves the same purpose, and perhaps few touches
in the play are finer than his dialogue with the musicians,
coming to relieve our overwrought feelings after we have
witnessed the touching grief of the bereaved parents, and
have listened to the solemn consolations of divine truth from
the lips of Friar Laurence.
The mixture of the ludicrous and the sublime which we
find in this and in almost all Shakspere's plays, can hardly
be called incongruous. In real life the sublime can seldom
be found without a touch of the ridiculous, nor is the ludi¬
crous often quite devoid of an undercurrent of pathos, even
where it is least expected. The sense of the ludicrous is
as real and universal a part of human nature as the capacity
for suffering, and, like it, must be appealed to in a work of
art that aims at universal acceptance.
The clown and the jester are a no less important part of
the great drama of human existence than the star-crossed
lovers or the solemn teacher of great truths. Nay, more,
they too have their lesson to teach us. The thoughtless
and vulgar jests of Peter and the miisicians in the very
presence of death, bring before us more forcibly than any
amount of moralizing, how the great stream of human exist¬
ence rolls ceaselessly on, heedless of the individual life,
whose very extinction is by some only regarded with pro¬
fessional interest.
In some versions of the story, Juliet wakes before Eomeo
had ceased to breathe; and in the acting edition, Garrick
introduced sixty lines of commonplace dialogue between
Eomeo and Juliet in the tomb; but his efforts to improve
Studies from Shakspere. 6"/
Shakspere were not attended with success, and the play
with his additions ' failed,' we are told, ' to attract an elegant
audience.' In order to appreciate fully the superiority of
Shakspere's ending, we need only compare with it the same
passage in the Italian novels. BandeUo makes Eomeo
indulge in a long moralizing speech when Juliet wakes, in
which he wonders if any human being ever united so much
joy and grief before,—^joy at her being alive, grief that he
must die and leave her.
In Luigi da Porto's tale,^ Juliet speaks as follows:
' Must thou, then, Signer mio, die in my presence and on my ac¬
count ? And will Heaven suffer me to survive thee, though for ever
so short a time ? Misera me ! Would that I could sacritice my life
for thee, and die alone!'
To which the youth answered with a faint voice:
' If my fidelity and love were dear to thee, speme mia, I entreat
thee that after my death thou hate not thy life. Live, if for no other
purpose, to think sometimes of him who, vanquished by thy beauty,
dies for thy sake before thine eyes.'
To which the lady answered:
' Since thou diest on account of my feigned death, what ought I
not to do for thy real one ? '
and so on. How does this bear comparison with that
beautiful close, in which the lovers are spared the torture of
a protracted farewell, and after a scene of mingled rapture
and despair the whole ends ' with a long, deep sigh, like the
breeze of the evening' ? -
Yes, it is better that their last farewell should be that
beautiful parting in Act iii. Scene v., when, in the midst of
tlieir misfortunes, they snatch at tire brief joy of a short
meeting, and, forgetting the sorrow hanging over their
heads, they see only themselves in the universe, and in the
deep calm of their mutual love they can enjoy the sweet
sights and sounds in the fair world around them, till at
length at the approach of day Juliet is roused from happy
forgetfulness to apprehension for her husband's safety.
After the exquisite womanly tenderness she displays in
this scene, we feel almost inclined to exclaim with Eomeo,
that,
' Come what sorrow can.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy.'
Sad  as their self-chosen death is, it nevertheless loses
much of its sting from the depth of the love that occasions
^Original Story of Romeo and Juliet, p. 57. ' Coleridge.
68 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and sanctifies it, and from the healing influence it exerts over
the wretched disputes of those around. Their 'rash and
unadvised contract,' purified by their sorrow, becomes the
foundation of a lasting peace. It is true, the guilty hatred
indulged in by the parents brings terrible suffering to their
innocent children, yet this suftering is not in vain. The
lovers' death does what their life could never have done: it
reconciles the bitter enemies whose uncurbed passions might
have caused grief and misery to generations yet unborn.
The impression left on our minds as we close the book, is
that, to use the Friar's words, 'a greater Power than we
can contradict' has been working throughout, in the un¬
looked-for contingencies that determined their fate. 'It
thwarted their intents,' but not in vain,—all was tending
towards the fulfilment of a great purpose.
Sidney Philips.
If 'tis not love, 0 then what is't I feel ?
If love it be, by Heav'n, how strange a thing !
If good, why hath the effect so sharp a sting ?
If guilty, how can torment work me weal ?
If by my will I suffer, why these tears ?
If 'gainst my will, laments of what avail ?
0 living death!    0 griefs delicious wail!
If I consent not, still thy power appears ;
And if I do consent, 'tis wrong to mourn.
Amid such varying winds, with fragile boat,
I find myself at sea without a guide;
No wisdom for my freight, but aU afloat
With error; by my will uncertain torn ;
In summer chill'd, fever'd in winter-tide.
C. Pay.
Let Tliem Alone. 6g
aLet STfjem Slone.
letter v.
From the Eev. F. J. Eeyxolds to his Sister.
Friday, April 20.
Dearest Helex,—I have had all your letters. The one
of yesterday was a real companion to me for the long even¬
ing. I have also had one from dear old Beilby, which has
greatly cheered me. I begin to feel some hopes of myself
and my position now, and am engaged in laying out my
work so as to do it with some method, which Beilby always
said I wanted. I will give you an outline of my intentions
presently.
I am most thankful that dear mother is the better for Dr.
Lyon's last prescription. Thank her for her note, and kind
intention of helping me Avith the alterations of my house.
Also thank my father for his promise of £50 for a horse. I
am glad you think I am 'promising' in the letter-writing
way, though I must own I think I am somewhat more than
' promising'—viz. performing at a very great rate. And yet
I can see you are not satisfied even now. You say I have
only told you the ' outsides of things !' Unreasonable girl,
I cannot say everything at once! Besides, I cannot tell you
everything I feel and fear and hope, which is what I suppose
you would call the insides of things; and I think you know
me well enough, from what I say to guess much of Avhat
must perforce be left unsaid. I thank you for telling me
about Clara; I wanted to know that she was well, and I
rejoice for your sake that you have her within reach again....
Well, since I last wrote much has happened. In the
first place, there has been a Sunday, and I have extended
my experiences of my parish for good and ill. The church
is easy for the voice, and I was not so tired as I have
sometimes been at Priorsworthy. I had an overwhelming
congregation—the women all in smart bonnets, the men all
in broadcloth. Perhaps curiosity brought many of them
there; few knelt, and none made the responses. I have an
octogenarian clerk, a wonderfully hale old fellow, with a
deep bass voice, who seems to consider himself quite in
authority over me, and nudges and shoves me this way and
that, and tells me hoio things arc done !    He looks upon the
70 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
responses as his perquisite, and insists on giving out the
psalms and on singing them too, throwing his heavy bass
into the treble part. It is a bore to have to annoy an old
man, but I must put a stop to all that next Sunday. They
sing the psalms to the most wonderful ri-fol-de-rol tunes
you ever heard; I shall make you laugh by giving you some
specimens some day. As to my schools, the children are
pretty w^ell taught in common things, but in religious matters
their ignorance is dense. This ignorance, I fear, pervades
all generations alike. If I ask any of the elder people
whether they are Church people, and they mean they are,
they say patronizingly, 'Oh ay! we wos always brout up
wiv' it; we've nout to say agin the Church.' If they are
lax, they say, ' Well, we just goes where we can get the
most good.' As I go by I hear the women say to one another,
• See ye, there's the young priest;' or, ' There gans hoor new
priest;' but I find I must not infer from this that they have
any idea what a priest is, or that my position is in any way
different from that of Foggin the blacksmith, Avho rants at
the Methodist Chapel. So you have settled that Mr. Slade's
name is Nahum—after Tate and Brady—very likely.
Yes, I will send mother a sketch of my church and par¬
sonage—perhaps in this letter, if I can get them done in
time. Now I must tell you my plans. Next week I begin
my daily service at half-past seven in the morning. On
saints' days I shall have a little ten minutes' sermon. Evei;j'"
day two hours in my schools, and three or four hours' regular
parish visiting. Twice a week a little service, if I can get
rooms for it, at my two outlying villages, Foley Bridge and
Sarsfield, which are too far off for the old and infirm to come
to church. The early morning and the v.hole of the evening
I shall devote to reading (when I am not writing to you!).
Hard reading in the evening is the only way not to feel my
solitude unbearable; I must own it depresses me at present,
and in any unoccupied moment I grow full of ghostly fancies.
... I mean to set to work at the Fathers in the original,
and, if you like, will make notes of my studies for you, which
will be something like having you for my pupil once more.
I tried to begin last night, but found my thoughts wander
grievously; the room seemed to fiU with faces ... one face in
particular never will let me rest. Not yours, Helen; would
I had your dear face, in its own true self, wdth its dear, wise
look, to help me on! Then I think my mind would settle
and be at peace.
Saturday, 1\d.—I have my sermons to finish, so cannot
Let Them Alone. 71
write much. I send mother in a separate parcel a sketch
of my church, done yesterday in a high wind. Explain to
her that the tower is in reality upright, otherwise she will
think it is coming down on my head some day; also don't
let her think all the building is green and mouldy, for that
is only because it began to rain just as I was doing the ivy,
and the green ran all about the walls.
You ask me if I have yet seen any one who seems likely
to be companionable to me.     I answer briefly, none.    Do
not think I shall be dull; I can make companions of my
old people and my school-children, companions of my books,
of my trees and cabbages—but in the sense you mean, none.
In the first place, the neighbourhood is very much scattered,
the land being chiefly in very large farms, some of them held
by what must be called gentlemen farmers—solid, sensible,
rough, long-headed men, and hospitable, too, by all that I
hear; I trust I shall get on with them very well, only they
won't be companions in your and my sense.    So much for the
lay half of society; now as to the clerical moiety.    Slade I
have described to you, and such as he is, he seems to be the
most promising of any of the clergy in the neighbourhood.
These  great,  straggling,  out-of-the-world   parishes,  poorly
endowed, seldom get into the hands of gentlemen, and no
wonder.    A man may vegetate in them all the days of his
life, and never rub his mind against that of one of his equals.
They are mostly held by a class of men who have never
been at a University, and are nearly guiltless of reading—
men without private means, and unable to mend matters;
so they leave them as they find them, or worse.    Thus cause
and consequence react on one another for evermore.    One of
my neighbouring brother clergy, tired, poor fellow, of starv¬
ing alone, got a helpless wife to starve with him.    Another,
—and I fear his case is not uncommon,r-^i|ed of his own
society, took to the bottle, and of course iSBft more alone
than ever.    One or two more, and respectable men in their
way, associate altogether with the farmer class.    These, of
course, are crude and hearsay remarks; don't give them more
weight than they are worth.    I believe our archdeacon, who
lives at Cruckton, some twenty miles off, is a very delight¬
ful person, as well as an excellent Churchman; and it is a
comfort to know that there- is such a person within twenty
miles; but then . . . you don't expect to find a corwpamon in
such a ' bright, particular star ' as that, shining at so great a
distance.
I have seen no more of Slade, except that we met in an
72 TJie Ladies' EditibiirgJi Magazine.
07nniu77i-gatherum shop one day, where I was ordering wooden
clogs for children, and he was ordering candles, and we
saluted one another loftily. I have seen our squire, Mr.
Benson, a kmd, jolly old man, once or twice; and the other
day, on calling at Lydwood (his place), I made some acquaint¬
ance with his two sons. I take it they are both what one
might call unsatisfactory, but I felt rather inclined to like
them. The elder is a weak, amiable feUow, twenty-three
or twenty-four, I should think, who has had bad health, and
never could stick to books or anything else. Luckily he
has not to work for his bread, and his ideas of xDublic duty
go no farther than the militia, of which he is an ornament;
while his leisure, eleven months out of the twelve, is devoted
to field sports. Jach Benson, he is called by all; not even a
shopkeeper understands whom you mean if you speak of Mr.
John Benson. His brother Walter is a much brighter genius,
but a good deal of a scapegrace ; he is intended for the bar,
and, I suppose, intends reading for it, but by all accounts it
seems doubtful if he will ever get beyond the intention. Of
these two, Jack met me with a good deal of weak kindness,
Walter with a sliy defiance, as if he suspected I might be
a mass of sermons embodied.... So much for my neighbours,
and so much for my letter, for I am sure it is long enough.
—Your loving brother, . F. J. E.
LETTER VI.  " ^
The Eev. N. Slade to his Father, the Eev. Joshua Slade.
'" '• '     Illingham Rectory,
April 26, 1849.
My dear Father,—You reproach me, and Avitli justice,
for not havin"^'ritten for some weeks. I have no good
excuse to givejBpP'therefore will attempt none. I have 7iot
been unusuall;^Dusy, and any reasons I might give for my
silence would only resolve themselves into disinclination for
the process of writing. I am extremely well, and the Millers
are much as usual. The rector was very suffering last
week; but I think the cold weather accounts for that, and
the return of sunshine has done him good. The parcel of
books never arrived till three days ago, and where the mis¬
take has been I cannot conjecture—however, they adorn my
shelves at last. You ask if I find myself improving in the
power of preaching extempore, and I think I may say I do.
I only wish I had cultivated the gift earlier, and not gone
on with tlie cold formality of penned sermons.    I find the
Let Tlicin Alone. 73
labour of preparation far greater in my present plan than in my
former one; but it is a labour of love, and I would not give
unto my Heavenly Master of that which costs me nothing.
I have nearly got over all nervousness, and at times can
quite forget myself, and give up heart and soul and voice
to the one object of delivering the message entrusted to me.
May our Father in heaven perfect His own gift in me, and
make it the means of bringing His true gospel to the hearts
of many!
The great event here—in fact, I think the only event since
I wrote last—has been the arrival of Mr. Eeynolds, old Mr.
Worthing's successor in the district of St. Saviour's. I have
not seen much of him—only as nmch as can be seen in one
morning visit—for I was out when he returned my call, and
when Mr. Benson invited him to meet me at dinner last
week, he returned answer that he did not dine out on Friday.
The report I heard of him, and mentioned to you, is only too
true; he is a red-hot Tractarian, far advanced on the journey
from Oxford to Eome; so, as you may imagine, I anticipate
little comfort or advantage in his society. He is a very young
man, apparently not more than twenty-five, very good looking,
and, I should fancy, clever. His manner with me was ex¬
tremely reserved; yet something made me feel that this was
not natural to him, and that he was consciously on his guard.
He has been for abouf'two years one of the eight or ten
curates in that hotbed of semi-Eomanism, Priorsworthy,
which is enough, I suppose, to account for his taste for
crucifixes, candlesticks, pictures of the saints, monograms,
etc. I had occasion to go into his church the other day
about a register, and found it already bedizened with all this
trumpery, and heard that he had ordered surplices for six
singing boys, and set on foot a plan for puttincj plain-coloured
glass into the chancel, on purpose to darkeS^^it! And so I
fear he will darken the true light of the word, and give
stones to hungry souls that are asking for bread. . . . Stokoe,
the poor old clerk, told me half-crying that the new
parson was changing everything, giving out the psalms him¬
self, drowning his (Stokoe's) voice in the responses by making
the school children read them out, stopping the bass fiddle,
preaching in his surplice, and now beginning to ' fash wi' the
service every day in the week.' He seems even to have acted
a scene in the church the first day, when Stokoe was there
with him, falling on his knees before the Communion table
and burying his face, and so deadly pale w^hen he rose tliat
the impression left on the old man was that he was ' not
74 The Ladies' Edinhirgh Magazine.
right somehow.' I could hardly help smiling at some of
poor Stokoe's grievances, and was obliged to stop him before
the catalogue was run out. I grieve, however, much for
these follies, and yet more for the fearful errors of Avhich
they are the signs and the accompaniment. I foresee
offences, discomforts, and divisions, and that the difficulties
of my own ministry will be much increased, but with God's
help I will take the trial as a call to increased earnestness
and fervour in His service. I have been prolix on this sub¬
ject, as I know it will concern you. Mr. Eeynolds is the
younger son of Sir Francis Eeynolds, a baronet of good family
in ——shire. He is an Oxford man, but of course jmiior to
me, and I do not think our common University wiU be much of
a bond of imion. I have been busy on the two tracts, of which
I mentioned to you the subjects, and they are nearly finished.
I will send you the Mss. I think I had better have them
printed at once in two forms—one ordinary type, and the
other large for the aged.    B 's hymns are very much
liked here, and I have many applications for copies. Our
missionary sermon was last Sunday. I had to preach it
myself, having failed in getting ]\lr. Digby. I had little
time for preparation, and ascended the pulpit under a sense
of discouragement; but as my subject unfolded before me, I
was conscious of a fervour and an energy seldom before felt,
and I trust I was enabled to bear my testimony with accept¬
ance. The collection was over £15. I am sorry to hear
you have had another touch of gout, but hope it is passing
off. My love and duty to my mother and Aunt Llary.—
Your affectionate son, N. Slade.
[L. C. G.]
{To Jc continued.)
Ifjcre s|)all Ine go?
VI.—A  QUIET   HAVEK
Lodgings being scarce at the place we shall go to, we cannot
give its fuU address, unless our readers will promise not to
go there in July 1878,
According to our present plan, we shall, early in next
July, steam down the Clyde on, we will hope, such an even¬
ing as we have sometimes experienced there; with sea of
grey lead, sky deepening from light to dark blue, a sun
setting in the glory of settled red behind the Arran hills.
Where shall we go? 75
Let us remain on deck till those hills are passed, as they lie
' like sleeping giants aboon sweet Eothesay Bay.' Then, if
we are wise, we shall go below, and try to fall asleep before
we meet the ocean swell as the steamer passes Ailsa Craig,
lying black in the moonlight.
iSText morning will see us coasting under cliffs with a back-
gi'ound of blue hills, and bright patchwork of fields sloping
from them to the sea. By eight o'clock we shall cast anchor
in a bay still lovelier than even Eothesay in the gloaming
last night, and, passing the quaint old quay, we shall reach a
station where a miniature railway train waits to take us a
ten-mile journey overland. An unsophisticated little train
it is, stopping politely, report says, to take up anybody who
runs across the fields and catches the driver's eye. Our final
destination is a cluster of about twenty irregularly-built
whitewashed cottages, and a ruinous old barn. Ours is the
farthest cottage, and is of a lavender hue, some dye having
got into the whitewash. A pebbly shore in front, with the
sea lapping to our very doors. Beyond, a curving bay, with
an old weather-beaten house on one promontory, a narrow
isthnnis, then an island with a fort on it at the other. Be¬
yond that strip of down, to the east, lies another bay, with a
picturesque sleepy old town nestling in the corner. West¬
wards we see fields backed by hills, while right in front we
have the Fort Island, the sea, and the horizon, seldom blurred
by the smoke of a passing steamer.
And our lavender lodgings! Eooms about the size of
horse stalls, comfortable because clean. We are supposing,
of course, that July 1878 is to be so fine we shall not depend
upon indoor comforts. But if it should happen to rain now
and then (and it may, of course), why, then, we shall have a
little time to mend our clothes. We have sometimes sighed
for a rainy day in this our beloved retreat, to put our gar¬
ments in repair. But we will not set out with a precon¬
ceived bad opinion of St. Swithin this year. We shall hope
for fine weather, and to be out all day long, ' doing nothing.'
Nothing 1 only think of that, you who plan a foreign tour.
The multitude of churches and pictures you will have to see,
the waterfalls you will be driven to, the mountains you will
have to climlj! The journeys you A\'ill have to make, in heat
and dust and bustle, while we—think of it!—are doing
nothing, and have nothing to do!—nothing, that is, but to
boat or float, bathe, swim, saunter, read, as we please and
when we please, cool, collected, contented, Avhile you are .
jumbling up names, places, and scenery in your poor brains,
^6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
remembering Eome as somebody once did—only as 'the
place where we bought the bad stockings !' You may not
own it, but you will often say in your wearied, worried
hearts, ' If this be pleasure, give me duty.' We pity you,
broiling in a deep Alpine valley, oppressed by the tremen¬
dous overshadowing mountains, while we draw in at every
breath tire briny deliciousness of the sea, with abundance of
space to breathe it in; no mountains to frown down|upon us,
the ripple and the sparkle, the ' endless laughter' of the
ocean to gladden eyes and ears.
' Chacun a son goM'—ours is ' doing nothing'—i.e. nothing
but what we like. We like paddling idly about the bay,
looking down into the clear water, believing in the existence
of water-folk, having a nice time of it down in those shim¬
mering green depths—Why not ? Surely all that water was
not created solely for the herrings and mackerel to swim in?
Then we can pretend to fish, and lie back in the boat gazing
into the blue above us, listening to the lap, lapping of the
wavelets as they toss our Lurline on the heaving tide.
Whenever the sea is tempting, Ave shall bathe, undressing in
our own room, lounging on the beach, skimming shells into
the w^ater till the waves look irresistible ! Or when the tide is
out, we shall follow it, teazing the crabs, dabbling after sea¬
weeds, hunting shrimps for tea. Then we can set up for
geologists, and go chijDping away at fossils along the Eonald-
way rocks, looking mighty wise, or fancying we do, over the
strange variety of stones and boulders. Or let botany be our
play, and the fields around will be a pleasant play-ground.
Or let us as naturalists try to learn about the wondrous sea
creatures of these shores, where one of the greatest naturalists
of our day strolled and studied.
Should we tire of our peaceful haven and bay, let us ex¬
plore the clefts and gullies of Langness. There the swirling
tide runs its swift' race,' as the people call it; and a danger¬
ous race it is to get into in one's boat: even on the calmest
summer day, when all else is glassy still, it curls and frets
round the fatal rocks of the Ness.
Let us at times ramble inlands to the wild little glens
with their heathery banks, their ferns, and blue-bells. Or
by way of excitement, we have the sleepiest old town to go
shopping in, within a mile of Derbyhaven. Its centrepiece
is an old castle, which we can explore, -worrying the keeper
with questions about its grim legends. There are two streets,
a quay, and a market-place; in the latter, two fishermen and
a brown retriever are always to be seen, all three asleep.    In
WJiere sJiall we go? "jj
one of the two streets is a shop, but never within the memory
of the oldest inliabitant has it been known to have anything
anybody asked for in it. How it pays its rent is an unsolved
riddle.
In our own haven we have some talkative neighbours.
A low wall runs between them and the sea. On this they
lean their elbows and talk, and ask questions, while we lean
our elbows on our wall, and answer them. Kindly, honest
folk, they will wish us a fair passage, and a happy return
when we depart. The only harm in them is their bad taste
in dogs; the place is overrun with white mongrels. The
curs! how they bark at us, till our own wise beasts gently
but firmly shake the venom out of them; after which opera¬
tion we Avalk on the beach and kick the pebbles about,
without being assailed by the whole currish colony.
If we want an excursion, let us picnic up our favourite
glen, with grey crags towering above the river, like mimic
Ehine castles. The ivy is ashamed of the grimness of these
natural fortresses, judging by the way it clasps them in its
green mantle. Other lesser streams we have, too, that flow
on:
Clear and cool, clear and cool,
By laughing shallow, and dreaming pool;
Cool and clear, cool and clear.
By shilling shingle and foaming weir.
Some day, when we can emerge from our dreaming mood,
we will climb the grand headland behind which we have
watched the sun setting of an evening. From it we can see
our haven lying like a speck in the east, while westwards
we can trace the outline of the mountains of Mourne, and
between them and us the herring fleet sails out for its nightly
harvest. Far beneath lies the sea, with the white sea-mews
hovering and wailing round the sheer precipices. These
cliffs can be reached by water, and then their stee]oness and
height is overpowering in grandeur. If we feel inclined for
a hill ramble, we have only to struggle up the highest of
those hiUs which form the background of our picture, as the
sea does its frame. From the rounded top we can see our
own little kingdom spread below us, with its mountain range,
its treeless but beautiful plains, and across its ever-varying
sea we can on the far horizon see the mountains of England
Scotland, Ireland, and Wales.
As for the pace at which our lazy days will fly, we shall
one day, while sitting on the beach, watch the clumsy brown
luggers rounding Fort Island, and dropping anchor in our
78 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
bay; and while listening to the shout of the fishermen and the
grinding of the anchor chain, we shall see the men hauling
down the sails and sculling shorewards in overloaded punts,
to stretch their brown nets on the green and sandy downs.
Then will it flash upon us, "' Why, it's Saturday, and the
herring boats are in!' Sunday usually follows Saturday,
—a fact we really might have forgotten but for these
same luggers resting in the bay, and nets drying on the
links.
If the Sundays be fine, they will be the pleasantest and
dreamiest of all the days. We shall rise early, for nothing
disturbs one's peace like being in a hurry, so we shall ' take
it easy' on our walk to church. Let us hope the tide may
be out, so that it will not be rippling and lapping, and
tempting us to give up church, and spend another morning
Avithin sound of its soft murmur. Our walk lies through
the rich corn-fields and open stretches of pasture, where
horses are enjoying their Sundaj" rest, and cattle munching
and meditating, gazing up at us with soft brown eyes; sheep
strolling lazily out of our path, looking reproachfully at us
as they return to their incessant cropping.
We have time enough to sit on all the stiles, watching
the birds and beasts, and listening to the whirr of the grass¬
hoppers in the dykes. And so, in due time, we shall arrive
at the white church among its grassy mounds, where the
indefatigable sheep are grazing too. There are some spas¬
modic attempts at bell-ringing by men in badly-fitting suits
of blue, their Sunday best. The women are inside the church,
not caring, as the men do, to dawdle among the sheep on
the grave mounds till! the parson comes. We, too, go in,
and take our favourite seat. The clergyman comes in ; at
once the bell will stop, and men come clamping in; a wheezy
organ will strike up, and the service Avill begin, a sleek-
headed and hard-voiced old clerk doing his utmost to mar
the melody of the beautiful English Church service. A stray
lamb will possibly peer in, with a dismal ba-a, answered
by a motherly sheep, to whom the lamb Avill frisk off. The
burr and drone of the wild bee, the song of the birds, will
come mingling in with the clergyman's deep voice, and the
prayers and psalms of the scanty congregation.
Perhaps our eyes may wander round the damp walls of this
dear old church, and fix upon the quaint tablets to the memory
of the dead. Who, we have wondered, was that 'Julius
Cfesar, a virtuous youth, famed for academical learning,' who
lived some time in the last century.    His monument, witli
Where shall we go ? 79
some others, belongs to the family of tlie Christians, owners
of the gaunt old house that guards our bay. From another
time-worn stone the clerk has been clearing off the mould,
so we shall see on it 'Margaret, 15.' She, too, abode in
that grey-slated house of the Christians. Did she ever sit,
this long-forgotten young girl, in this same seat, listening
to the grand, simple words now in our ears, looking, perhaps,
from the unglazed window near to her half - obliterated
memorial stone, upon purple hill and blue sky ?
But the word is spoken of the ' peace that passeth all
understanding;' we are recalled from our wandering thoughts
by the shuffling feet of the blue-coated congregation. "VVe
follow them, and shall walk back the same way as we came.
In the afternoon we will find a quiet place to lie in, among
the bracken of the downs, close to the cold, grey stones of
the sea. We shall pretend to read, but in reality shall do
little else but watch enviously the sea-mews fioating and
heaving on the heaving, sparkling sea.
Suppose Sunday to be wet—what shall we do ? In that
case we shall not add to the congregation of the church in
the fields, but betake ourselves to the one in the sleepy old
town. The road is good, but we may probably have a stout
battle with the winds, and listen to the waves as they come
grinding up the beach with a ' shivering shock.' Or we
have the alternative of the College Chapel; the reader of
Eric will know that our haven is in its near neighbourhood.
Among the grassy hillocks of that church in the fields, Eric's
friend and his brother, Russel and Vernor, lie buried. In
the evening, if we wish it, we can join a little knot of wor¬
shippers who meet next door to us in a school chapel. A
master from Eric's college comes over to read the service
to the old folks who cannot walk to the parish church. Do
you care to study honest, weather-lined old fences ? We do ;
so we shall watch the old men in blue coats, with their well-
thumbed books, as they come slowly in, and the bright-eyed
though bent old women in Sunday shawls, with their books
wrapped in their Sunday handkerchiel's.
The school children stare at us, and we at the old people,
wondering what they have to be so thankful for, so much
of thankfulness is there in the tone of their reverent though
quavering responses. Thankful ? Yes, for a leaky cottage,
a good herring season. Thankful, too, for having tided over
many a bad one, and thankful for nearness to that
' Port after stormy seas,
Ease after v/arre, deathe after life;'
o
8o TIic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
for to the aged and God-fearing poor, death means a Sabbath
of which they talk calmly, nay joyously.
Service over, the pe6ple will file slowly out into the fresh
evening air ; they«-will limp back to their hearths, while we
shall lean upon'our "sea-wall, and feel ashamed of not being
half thankful-'enough for the manifold blessings and enjoy¬
ments of our dives.
The stormnvill have ceased, the wind calmed down; the
waves will still be roaring off the Ness rocks, thundering in
upon the beach below us with their wild ocean music. The
moon will look out hurriedly from behind the scudding
clouds, shining down with a weird-like effect on the gradually-
calming waters of our bay.
■ And on that bay, beautiful alike in sunshine and in storm,,
we hope to find ourselves in July.
E. V. Lynne.
^eace anli ©ootiixiill; or, STixio C|jristmas !£&es.
paet I.—the eiest.
' Papa and uncle must be reconciled now,' she whispered
wistfully.
' Of course they must; we won't allow any more disagree¬
ments,' he answered cheerfully.
The speakers, a very handsome youth and maiden, were
standing hand in hand under the mistletoe, but so absorbed
in conversation as to be unaware of the suggestive situation.
' That visit of yours to London was most oj)portune, Ursula;
for we might have lived here all our lives and never known
each other, thanks to that ridiculous family feud,' he con¬
tinued.
' It was very curious that you should be the first gentle¬
man introduced to me at the first party I went to, and that
I should not know you to be my cousin for so long after,'
she answered.
' Not so strange as it appears; Eeid is such a common
name, and perhaps you never even knew you had a cousin
like me. I found you out first, but Ursula ]More is a more
striking cognomen than William Eeid. I think we may
thank the old grey cob for falling on her head so opportunely
at that ditch, for without her agency matters would not have
gone so smoothly. I could not have retained my incognito
in your father's house, and he would never have received me
Peace and Good-jsill; or. Two Christinas Eves.       8i
in my own character. I don't think he dislikes me, even
after he disc6vered that the disinterested stranger who had
sprained his arm catching his horse was his obnoxious
nephew.'
' It seems to have been all planned, for was it not
unusual your coming to Southshire to hunt ?^you never did
so before.'
He smiled. ' That was not exactly accidental, for I had
discovered where you lived, and who you were by that time ;
but I am glad to say I did not know it was your respected
father whom I picked out of the ditch. I shall never forget
your face, Ursula, as you stood on the door-steps, when you
saw who your father Avas bringing in; it was such a delight¬
ful combination of joy, anxiety, and surprise.'
' No wonder' You have no idea what objects you were ;
and I thought you must both be nearly killed, or you would
never be leaving the hunt so early.'
'Well, we do seem to have been made for each other,
Ursula, for all those overpowering obstacles have been swept
away in a few months, and by the simplest means ; and,
after spending three weeks under your father's roof, I had
little difficulty in persuading him to let you come here
now. I am sure, when our fathers meet under such pleasant
auspices,' glancing with a smile at Ursula's downcast and
blushing face, 'they will become as great friends as once
they were bitter enemies.'
' I hope so, indeed; but do you think that Lady Anne will
be pleased with poor little, insignificant me ?'
' My dear old mother! she loves you already, and has long
Avished for a daughter. I have far greater fears of not being
acceptable to your father; you know, as the laird, he has
always looked down on the merchant's son, although he con¬
descended to marry his sister.'
' But, you know, you are Lady Anne's son, as well as my
poor mother's nephew,' said Ursula naively.
' He may say, " The grandson of a thousand earls, you are
not one to be desired." I believe, if my father had ten times
the wealth he has, and had raised himself to higher honours
than even an M.P., your father would still regard him as
little better than a tradesman! I rather honour him for it;
I think money is made far too much of in modern society.'
' Yes; but your father has other things to recommend him
besides his wealth. He is a very clever man, so even papa
allows, and was very well educated; so was my dear mother.
The disagreements between papa and uncle vexed lier dread-
No. 38,—Fedruary 187P. v
82 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
fully, she loved them both so much. I was a very little
thing when she died, but I remember her telling me I must
always be a little peacemaker. I think this—our—friend¬
ship would have pleased her very much,' she added shyly.
Gazing earnestly at her, he replied, ' Everybody ought to
be pleased,' thinking only of her, and not of what he was
inferring, and rejoicing inwardly that she resembled her
beautiful hourgcoisc mother, and not her highly-aristocratic
but raw-boned Aunts More. ' I suppose it was your father's
second marriage that did the most of the mischief,' he con¬
tinued.
'Oh no! you do mamma injustice!' slie cried warmly.
* She is not at all the popular idea of a step-mother; she has
always been so nice and kind, and I am sure she loves me
nearly as much as her own boys. It was she that persuaded
papa to let me come here.'
'Then, what our respected parents could have found to
quarrel about, I don't understand!'
' I understand it very well,' she said softly, and paused,
afraid of offending her companion by what she might say
of his father.
' Do try to make me understand it too, dearest. All I
know is, that your father was very kind to mine once, but
that, in consequence, he seemed to consider he had a right
to control his actions ever afterwards, and took all the credit
to himself for my father's unusual prosperity; and you know
that is galling to a man who prides himself on being self-
made.'
' Yes; but, you know, it was true, in a measure; for unless
he had got the start that papa gave liim, he might have
remained all his life in Wogsal, an unimportant merchant
like his father.'
' I don't think so. He would never have stuck there; he
would have carved out a career for himself, somehow. But
not the less grateful is he for my uncle's helping hand ; he
always acknowledges that from him he got his start in life,'
said the son of the successful man decisively, adding, ' But
even the feeling of patronage on the one side, and obligation
on the otlier, could not have caused such bitterness.'
' Politics helped it a great deal. Your father is a Liberal
now, but he was a great Eadical when he was a young
man, before he had property; and when he came home from
America he was worse than ever: he made even my mother
ano-ry with his sweeping denunciations of everything old.
Every one who differed from him in opinion was behind
Peace and Goodiuill; or, Tzuo Christmas Eves.       83
the age, and required to have their ideas enlarged—'    She
paused.
' He must have been very objectionable,' acloiowledged his
son frankly, thinking what a firebrand this rising young man
must have been in the laird's old-fashioned household.
Ursula smiled. ' Eemeniber, I am giving our view of the
subject; what I have heard all my life as reasons for not
knowing your family. I have never heard your side of the
question.'
'You will get it presently. But what else conduced to
hostilities ?'
' A number of trifles. Papa thought him very unfeeling
at the death of one of my baby brothers; and he did not
think he paid my mother proper respect. When he came
home the second time, he settled in London without coming
to see them at all.'
' But considering how uncomfortable his last visit had made
them, I do not wonder at his not repeating it.    What else ?'
' He never asked them to his marriage.'
'I know his marriage was a great offence, but I never
knew  why.     Was   there  not  some  good  reason  for  the
omission ?'
' The excuse given was, that it would l)e only a matter of
form, as, of course, they would never think of coming all the
way from Scotland for it.'
' And might not that be true ?' he asked.
' Yes; but it would have been kinder, more judicious at
least, to have asked them.    Don't you think so ?'
' Certainly,' he answered; but he could not help remem¬
bering his father's frequent speech, that Mr. More had never
forgiven him for marrying Lady Anne, because he could not
take the credit of having introduced her to him.
' When my poor mother was dying, he never came to see
her, or even to her funeral; and the very day of her death
we saw in the newspapers that Lady Anne Eeid had given a
grand/eiJe,' continued Ursula sorrowfully.
' But he never knew she was so ill. He had no idea she
was gone. You must not think so hardly of my father.
The letters were delayed. He was as shocked as any one
when he knew what had occurred that day. He has often
said that he regretted much not having gone at once to see
his sister, but he v/as greatly occupied, and was never told
that she desired his presence. As to the funeral, my father
has his own ideas on that subject, and never goes to one if
he can avoid it.'
84 The Ladies Edinbwgh Magazine.
' Yes, it is his ideas that always run against ours. Papa
has such a reverence for old customs.'
'And my father reverences nothing simply because it is
old; but he is not hard-hearted, and he was very fond of his
sister, and truly mourned her sudden death.'
' But oh ' it was not sudden; she had been ill for weeks
and months, and all the time of her suffering, even to the
hour of her death, he was feasting and rejoicing. Can you
wonder that, when his tardy letter of condolence did arrive,
with his refusal to attend the funeral, papa did not believe
his protestations, and wrote the sharp letter that broke off
all intercourse ?'
' It was very unfortimate, but you see much may be ex¬
plained ; and you must ever be welcome to my father as his
dear sister's only child; while, as your mother's nephew, I
hojDe to gain your father's favour in time. I have no fear
myself; we shall reconcile everybody, darling, and be, oh ! so
happy ourselves.'
' This disunion and dispeace has been such a grief to me;
and lately, since you have come to live here, it has been so
much worse, for I am always being reminded of it by some¬
thing unpleasant occurring.'
' It is very r;nfortunate, as I said before ; but now all will
be altered, and you will rejoice that we are so near. I think
it was a very plucky thing of the governor coming back to
his native village in this way, Avhere every one remembered
him very different. It is not a thing I would have done
myself, but I can't help admiring it all the same. It made
your father still more angry ?'
'Yes; but it was very trying for poor papa. He had
always been first, and never expected to find a rival at home.
He never thought uncle woiild care to return, except to
annoy him. Indeed, it seemed to us as if uncle only bought
the Castle in order to make you the great people even here,
and us the small. The Castle folk quite overshadow us now,
and we are counted second-rate; no one who has the entree
there cares about our modest entertainments. It was very
different when we were the only resident heritoi'S, and the
public had to trust to us alone for all the pleasures it got;
for the Castle was only occupied for a Aveek or two in as
many years. You need not smile. It seems snobbish to
notice such a trifle; but it is both difficult and painful to
learn to play second fiddle at papa's age, especially—' She
paused embai-rassed.
' When one has to do it to one's pet enemy,' supplied Mr.
Peace and Goodivill; or, Two Christmas Eves.       85
Eeid. ' I understand the situation perfectly, but I do not
see that any rivalry need exist noio', putting the emphasis
on the last word.
Ursula only blushed in answer.
' jNIust you go to-morrow, dearest ?' he asked.
' Yes, indeed I must; I could not be away on Christmas
day.    Papa and mamma and the boys would miss me so.'
' I will call to-morrow or next day, and hear my fate from
them.    I have no fear of my own people.'
At this moment a group of merry young people burst
into the room, headed by a plain-looking but very vivacious
girl of fifteen or sixteen, who exclaimed,' Found at last, and
with Miss More under the mistletoe ! Fie, for shame, sober
Cousin William!    I am shocked at you, I am.'
In her excitement Lady Edith allowed her own careless
footsteps to approach so near the mystic circle that her
cousin drew her in and saluted her, to her intense indigna¬
tion. But when her partner seemed disposed to attempt the
same with Ursula, William drew her quickly, almost angrily
aside, and proposed a return to the ball-room.
' We are going to dance here,' said Edith, ' it is much
cooler and nicer. I don't care how many more estates uncle
buys in the country, a house-warming is such fun ! I am
enjoying myself splendidly. I hope you are also, ]\Iiss
More ?'
' Oh yes, certainly,' said Ursula with a guilty start.
' Here comes the man to play. Don't let us lose time;'
and Edith set the example by whirling away.
After one round, Ursula said she was tired, and sat down
on one of the deep window seats, while William went for
another partner. Seated there in a blissful dream, with the
words, ' Peace and goodwill towards men,' ringing in her
ears, Ursula wondered what she had done to be so blessed.
The crown of her joy was that lier happiness would bring
peace and goodwill to both families, and that she would
fulfil her mother's last injunctions, and be still a little peace¬
maker.
She went away early the next morning, and was a little
disappointed that the day passed without a visit from
William. He did not come till late in the following after¬
noon, reeling that this delay did not augur well for their
hopes, she had wandered down to the end of the avenue,
and was looking towards Cleaves, when she saw his figure
in the distance. His slow and listless gait did not betoken
a messenger of good tidings, and although he hastened his
86 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
footsteps when he saAv who was waiting for him, and met
her with a smile, yet her first glance at his grave, preoccupied
face sent a chill to her heart. She could not restrain her
anxiety, and, seeing he did not speak at first, whispered,' I
am sure there is something wrong. Your father objects to
me?'
' Indeed, no—you wrong him; but my mother has some
strange notions about cousins marrying.'
' Lady Anne ?'
' The person upon whose sympathy I depended; I confess
it vexed me unwarrantably when she led the opposition.
But don't fear, sweet one; we shall soon talk her out of
such nonsense. When she sees we are firm, and can't live
without one another, she will never risk my life's happiness
for a mere scruple.'
' Does she think it wrong for any cousins to marry, or only
us ?' asked Ursula, feeling all her hope and courage oozing
away, for this was an objection that neither time nor patience
could overcome; nothing could change the mournful fact
that cousins they were, and cousins they must always remain,
if they were not allowed to be anything nearer.
' She does not think it wrong, only injudicious; she has
a craze on the subject, and attributes all domestic afflictions
to the pernicious habit of cousins marrying. My being an
only son, and all your brothers and sisters dying young, and
the fact that consumption is on both sides of the house,
although the instances of it are rare, causes our case to be
a particularly bad one in her eyes. But don't cry, dearest;
when she sees my happiness is involved, she will come
round, never fear,' he added tenderly, and folded her in
his arms.
Each word was a knell to her faithful heart, and she
could not restrain her tears.
' You won't mind waiting for a little; it will all come right
in the end, I feel confident,' he continued.
She could not share liis confidence; her heart felt dull
and heavy as lead, and all his kind words and attempts at
argument only showed her the more forcibly how hopeless
was their love. They walked so slowly and stopped so often,
that it was dusk ere they reached the house.
' What do you mean to do ?' asked Ursula suddenly.
'I mean to see your father, and explain everything to
him, and obtain his permission for us to be formally engaged.'
' But he will never give it, as long as your people object.'
' We shall  see;   I'll give  my worcl to have  smoothed
Peace and Goodwill; oj', Ttvo Christinas Eves.      8/
away all obstacles before I ask anything more; but a
formal engagement would strengthen our position im¬
mensely. However, in case of accidents, let us plight our
troth now.' So saying, he drew a diamond ring from his
little finger, and put it on her fourth one, and took possession
of a band of WTOught gold she wore as a guard, to replace
it. ' As long as you keep that ring, I shall know you still
love me, and remember that is the only thing I fear. No
opposition can separate us; it may delay our happiness, but
as long as we stand firm to one another, we must gain our
own way in the end.' So reasoned the young man, who had
never been denied anything in his life.
But the girl, with deeper intuition, if with less knowledge,
saw an impenetrable barrier rising between them in Lady
Anne's opinion. ' But your mother's wishes; you could
never go against them,' she said sadly enough.
' My mother only wishes my happiness. Cousins marry
every day. When she realizes I won't marry any one else,
she will prefer me marrying a cousin to not marrying at all.
I go to fight for you,—will you not arm me for the combat,
as the knights of old used to be armed by their fair ladies ?
Give me something to nerve my courage and render eloquent
my tongue,—a hearty, hopeful " speed well," at least.'
In vain he took her limp, cold hand in his, and tried to
warm it"; in vain he attempted to raise her drooping spirits
by his bright, cheering words: all hope had died within her
when she heard the nature of Lady Anne's objections, and
could not be revived again even by his tenderness.
In silence and tears she led the way into the house, and,
seeing her father alone in the library, she ushered in her
lover with an indistinct announcement of his identity.
Instead of going to her own room, she remained in the fire-
lit hall, for she feared William might go without seeing her,
and in her present nervous state she thought if she missed
him now they might never meet again. She drew a high-
backed oak chair, which had been a family possession for
centuries, in front of the blazing wood, and as she leant her
head on the hard carving, she wondered, with a strange,
new-born sympathy, how many throbbing brains and aching
hearts among her ancestors had sought repose in this same
chair. What mattered now what tears they had shed, what
pangs they had suffered? Would it be so with her a
hundred years hence ? It matters not, indeed, if the suffer¬
ing does the work for which it is sent, and the sorrow drives
us to God, and not from Him; but, alas ! for the wasted pain
88 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
that only hardens the lieart instead of softening it, and
alienates us still more from our loving Saviour,—that may
none of us have to bear.
The brightness of the fire had died out before Ursula's
lover reappeared. With an exclamation about the careless¬
ness of servants, Mr. More returned to the library for a lamp;
but although William's face revealed no tales, the last words
of the discussion which reached her ears were not of a re¬
assuring nature. ' Do not build false hopes on the possibility
of my changing; whatever other people may see fit to do,
I never alter my opinion,' was uttered in her father's most
decisive tones. She rose up hastily, feeling she must go to
him to comfort and be comforted, and in an instant he was
by her side.
'You here still, dearest,' he cried joyfully; and they were
standing hand in hand when her father returned.
He looked displeased, and said coldly, 'llemember, my
decision is final.'
William simply bowed, and, turning to Ursula, said,' If
you are not afraid of the cold, come out on the terrace for
a moment. I will not detain her long, I promise you,' he
added to her father, who made no objection. After washing
him a courteous good-night, he wrapped her up in an extra
shawl, and they went out together out of their short-lived
paradise into the coldness and darkness of the world.
' I knew it was hopeless,' she said drearily.
' But it is not hopeless; nothing is hopeless as long as we
live and love one another. Your father very naturally re¬
fused his consent to our engagement; but he was most kind,
and said quite flattering things of me personally.'
' And what was his final decision ?' she asked, trembling.
'" That he would never allow his daughter to enter a family
where she was not welcome," which was quite right and
proper. I would never ask you to accept a position unworthy
of you, or where you M^ere not valued as you ought to be.
Now, dear, for time and patience; they mend all ills. I said
nothing to your father about writing, for I meant to write
whether I had permission or not, and you must answer my
letters; remember it will be the only consolation I have.
Our cousinship is fortunate on that account; we have a right
to correspond if we choose. I said I would not keep you,
and I feel you shivering, even under that thick shawl.
Good-bye, sweetheart, good-bye.'
So they parted. NONO.
{To Ic continued.)
Greek. 89
^ r f c It.
Greek! Greek! Greek !
We return to it with delight;
Greek! Greek ! Greek !
By day and by candle light.
We go to our Ladies' Classroom
Through snow and the pouring rain;
But we are so intent on learning.
We never turn back again.
Greek ! Greek! Greek !
Our Professor is eager to tell
How freely we ought to speak
The language he loves so well.
He discourses on things around us.
And hopes we will soon reply;
But though Ave attentively listen.
An answer we cannot yet try.
Greek! Greek! Greek!
Our lessons are well prepared,
Our sentences neatly Avritten,
No trouble nor time is spared.
On a bright and frosty morning,
When our friends Lawn Tennis play,
AVe feel no wish to join them,
AVe are better employed than tliey.
Greek! Greek ! Greek !
We love the sound of the word,
AVhen twice a week, at half-past two,
Our Professor's voice is heard.
We study the grand old poets
In six feet Iambic verse.
And go through many a chorus
Of lines that are hard and terse.
Greek ! Greek ! Greek!
It takes up half our day;
We are all tlie better for it,
We do not want time for play !
But as we think of the knowledge
We have gained through all the week.
We deem those hours the pleasantest
Which we have spent on Greek.
90 The Ladies^ Edinbnrs^h Ma<razinc.
©MX Hibrara ^ailc.
The Vicak of Morwenstow.    By J. Baring Gould, M.A.
London : King & Co.
This is the record of a life which, in its quaint originality and power,
well deserves to be remembered. His biographer says of Robert
Stephen Hawker : ' He did not belong to this century, or this country.
His mind and character pertained to the Middle Ages, and to the
East.'
Originality is a great and noble gift wheresoever we meet with it.
In the present instance its manifestations are not always particularly
admirable in themselves, yet we prize them because they reveal such
depths of intense reality. Mr. Hawker had in his nature a vein of
eccentricity, to iise no stronger word, side by side with intellectual
gifts of a very high order. He was before all things a poet ; he
possessed in all its purity that rare harmony of thought and language
which constitutes poetry of the highest order. Though he did not
write much, and can only claim to be considered as a lesser poet, yet
the quality of his verse is so choice, and it possesses such a svibtle
charm of melody, that we think it will live embalmed in the odour
of its own sweetness. His Song of the Wctitern Men is well known ;
and there are many short poems scattered through this volume which
are simply perfect.
One of his most marked characteristics was a sense of humour,
which led him as a boy into many a strange and wild frolic. Keen
and ready was the edge of his wit. Once at a public meeting, where
feeling about church matters ran high, a young man was vehemently
protesting that he at least would never suffer himself to be priest-
ridden. Mr. Hawker wrote something in his pocket-book, tore out
the leaf, and handed it up to him.    It contained these words :
' Thou ridden ne'er shalt be
By prophet or by priest ;
Balaam is dead, and none but he
Would have thee for his beast.'
He was terribly in earnest in his beliefs. To him all on one side was
black as night, all on the other bright with the liglit of heaven ; so
he threw himself witli all the force of his powerful nature into the
questions of the day—if not always wisely, yet with a weight of con¬
viction which could not fail to make a deep impression. There was
in him a strong tendencj' to mysticism, which is curiously in opposi¬
tion to the prevailing tone of thought of the day; but it is good for
iis to be reminded that it is possible to view things as he did. He
lived in a perpetual allegory. To him the visible world was but a kind
of parable, full of symbols of the unseen ; and the abstract ideas witli
which his mind was familiar became clothed with tradition, legend,
and visionary lore. All his life he passed by the Severn Sea, in a
remote parish on the north coast of Cornwall. There he toiled for
his people, taught them, loved them, fought for them, did them
good, if not in their way, then in his own ; but he does seem to have
won his way straight into their hearts. In this short notice we can¬
not enter into the painful circumstances attending his death ; but we
may liope that all who read his life will form a kindly judgment of
the grand old man.
Oitr Library Table. ■ 91
Hints to Nurses. By Rachel Williams and Alice Fisher.
Edinburgh : Maclachlan & Stewart.
The little volume comes to fill a vacant place among the many
excellent manuals already existing on the subject of professional
nursing ; it aims not so much at giving instruction to those who have
already made some progress, as at assisting the beginner to learn her
business, not mechanically, but intelligently. With this object tho
writers distinctly explain such details as every good nurse is supposed
to know, but which are exactly things which are unfamiliar, and
therefore puzzling at first to the majority of probationers ; such, for
instance, as the meaning of ordinary medical terms, and the reasons
why some simple mode of treatment must be managed in one way
and not another. Throughout, the exjilanations are intended in no
way to take the place of the practical hospital instruction, but to
supplement it and make it more intelligible and profitable. In¬
cidentally the book accomplishes another desirable end, that of
helping any one who thinks of adopting the jirofession of nursing
to form a definite idea of the duties and work involved in hospital
training; and to any such person we would commend especially the
study of the first three chapters, and also chapter twenty (on ward
duties), for the excellent advice and practical good sense conveyed
in them. After this introduction follow short but full and clear
chapters on the framework of the body, explanatory of the ordinary
diseases from which it suffers, and the injuries to which it is liable,
with the terms used in connection with them, and the sort of treat¬
ment used generally for their relief, added to which are practical
remarks as to what would be the nurse's probable functions in such
cases. The same plan is carried out in the sections on the digestive
organs, the circulation, the nervous system, the surgical treatment of
various cases, and nursing duties connected with it; and some space
is devoted to describing the ' antiseptic' system of treatment for
wounds and other injuries. Many mothers of families would bo glad
of the information contained in the two chapters on ' fevers' and
'disinfectants,' about which so much ignorance exists, while the
few simple recipes for cooking for tho sick will doubtless be useful
both in and out of hospital. We can only hope the book will be as
much used as it deserves to be, not only for the valuable teaching so
clearly given in it, but for'the tone of the whole—earnest, practical,
and steady, which should encourage a similar tone among those who
study it attentively.
On Poetic Inteepbetation of Natuue. By J. C. Sliairp, LL.D.
Edinburgh : D. Douglas.
Anything that is published under Principal Shairp's name, natu¬
rally leads us to look forward to pleasure in reading it; but it is not
often that we have the satisfaction of going through a book with
unmixed enjoyment, which is only marred by the fact that there is
not more of it to read. It is possible that many people may disagree
with the writer's ideas both on Nature and Poetry, but it will argue
little for their general intelligence if their special theories blind
them to his large-minded way of treating his great subjects, and tho
rare union of clear judgment with warm and tender appreciation
which shows itself in every page of this book. In the deluge of
poetic criticism and writing on Nature which pours out at present,
and is so often either misty and incomprehensible or cold and dull,
92 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
liow mvich we owe to a writer who clears our minds on both subjects,
and helps us to perceive their true relation and value ! The plan of
the book is first to put before us distinctly what Principal Shairp
means by 'Nature'and 'Poetry'—those much misused words, and
his view of the poet's function in expressing the highest and most
intense of human emotions. Having thus cleared the way, he takes
111) I'is special subject, the manner in which the poetic imagination
has worked and should work on ' that great sum of appearance '
which we call Nature ; he points out some of the principal ways in
wliich poets can deal with the subject, and these distinctions greatly
help us to appreciate the changes and growth of naturalistic feeling.
After these general views come special illustrations, in which we have
a sort of outline of the course poets have actually followed in
touching on Nature. Principal Shairp has already spoken of the
Fossil poetry p)reservod in language and mythology, he now sketches
the princiiial features of the Nature poetry of the great singers in
Judea, Greece, and Rome, and then carries us at a bound on to our
own English and Scotch, lieginning with Chaucer, revelling in his
delicious spring landscapes, and passing on to Wordsworth's calm and
high Nature musing. Space would fail us to do anything like justice
to the mingled discrimination and appreciation of these short studies
of the different poets thus passed under review ; it is hard to select
any for particular notice when all are so good, but perhaps the
section which includes Burns and the Ballads is the most vivid, and
in itself poetic. One feels a hesitation in criticising the Scotch of
such an authority, but is a ' saugli tree' an alder and not a willow l
All the concluding part of the book leads up to the chapters on
^V'ordsworth, whose poetry is treated as the culmination of so much
that had preceded it; so his development and change of ideas is
dwelt upon with an evident pleasure and sympathy that must com¬
mend this part of the work to all his admirers, and may help those
others who, as yet, are less familiar with him. Principal Shairp
makes a tantalizing suggestion as to continuing these studies in
Nature poetry among the other poets of the century, and after this
volume we can only sincerely hope he may be induced to carry out
the idea, which would be so greatly to the advantage of the reading
public.
Green Pastures. By William Black, Piccadilly.
London : J. Macmillan & Co. 1877.
Mr. Black's new heroine resembles the English scenery in which
we first meet her. Lady Silvia wins us by the quiet sweetness
of her manner, tender as the green hedgerows among which she
drives. Her charms are veiled by her shyness, as the landscape is
shrouded in mist, which nevertheless lends a nameless grace of its
own. She is given to tears, but they fall as softly as the rain on her
own 'green jiastures ;' and when the shower is over, her smile is as
the sun breaking through the rain-clouds. Like English skies, she is
oftener grave than gay. Suddenly, when her horizon seems to be
darkening. Lady Silvia leaves her husband and home, and sails off to
America with the four old friends who shared the Stranfjc Adventures
of a Phaeton. Then follows the guide-book part of the story : a very
pleasant part it is. Descriptions of tours are apt to be wearisome,
but Mr. 131ack makes the jokes of the party, even to Lady Silvia's
one pun, so amusing that we are forced to laugh at them. So vivid
is the description  that we sail  in fancy through Ciinadian waters.
0217' Library Table. 93
listening through the mists for Hendrick Hudson's voice, and gazing
in wonder at Niagara. Even the long Pullman's car journey to Bell
von Rosen's ranch is not tedious, leading us through forest and
prairie blazing with sunflowers and Michaelmas daisies, where the
beautiful sunrises and sunsets break the endless monotony of these
rolling plains. On reaching America, New York looks so like Paris
that the party think they have made some strange mistake. Before
they land, the likeness to Dunoon convinces Bell that she sees the
Afjluia waiting to take them down the Clyde. In short, when they
see anything that reminds them of home, they play at being there
till they believe and make us 'half believe it's true.' Bell has to
endure much teasing about the ranch left her by her uncle. They
treat her as a rough farmer who needs to be ' civilized ;' this the
'ranchwoman,' as Queen Tita calls her, answers with stolid com¬
posure, but in a way which at times startles Lady Silvia's gentle
propriety. The whole book is so pleasantly written that we forgive
Silvia's weaknesses, and only long for such a trip in such congenial
company. We are glad the story ends well for Lady Silvia, and
when, at the end of the third volume, we return with the author to
spend Christmas in Surrey, we do not feel we have had a line too
much of his new guide-book to America.
The Breaking of the Stokm.    By Friedrich Si^ielhagen.
Translated by S. and E. Stephenson.
If half of the characters and a good third of the plot could be cut
out of this novel, the result would be both a clever and amusing
story.    As it is, it is curiously unequal, some of the characters being
particularly vivid and well drawn, but overjjowered by the crowd of
other figures ffir less natural.     The whole leaves an impression of
confusion, from the intricacy of a plot which it would require the
brains  of   a  German  financier  fully  to  unravel.     Evidently  the
author's object is to show the demoralization produced in Germany
by the wild rush of speculation which followed the close of the late
war; but so many other interests come in, that this special lesson
loses much of its impressiveness.    There is a financial storm, and a
literal one; and the latter is much the more interesting, as indeed it
should be, occupying as it does nearly the whole of the last volume.
Elsa and Reinhold, the hero and heroine proper, are an interesting
young couple, and the wooing of the highly-born young lady ' by the
gallant merchant captain' is prettily told ; but when we have four
more pairs of lovers, and a good deal of stray love-making besides, it
becomes too much of a good thing !    It is really a pity that the whole
is not more satisfactory ; for if some of the characters are unnatural,
such as Giraldi, the typical Italian adventurer, some of the others are
charming and very amusing, especially Meta, the bright little chatter¬
box, always falling in love.     ' Last time it was at the Opera, in the
front row of the stalls.   Papa said he was a pickpocket; but papa sees
pickpockets everywhere, and destroys one's illusions.'    Meta thinks
she 'couldbe faithful to a man till death, or even after it, if he made
a point of it!'    Her time comes at last, and her lover is a capital
contrast to herself,—the quaint, hard-working sculptor Justus, who
looks at all people as models for the patriotic monuments over whicli
he labours, making fun of them all the time.    Another clever sketch
is 'Aunt Rikchen,' the voluble, fussy old lady with her spectacles at
the extreme end of her nose, always saying that 'she understands
nothing, of course,' yet much aggrieved that she is not consulted by
94 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
everybody. A good many of the characters have obviously to be
swept off by the storm (which is powerfully described, by the way)
to conclude the story at all, and of course the hero goes about
rescuing people. But, among some absurdities, there is a j)retty scene
where Elsa goes to see after her betrothed in the seaside village
where he lives, and from whence he has gone out into the storm; and
all the women are so interested in her, and all tell her ' the same
thing, almost as if they had agreed beforehand, that the Captain
would be all right, though the storm was bad: for he knew what he
was about, and the six men who were with him knew what they
were about.' The translators may be congratulated on the particu¬
larly easy and spirited style of their English version of this novel.
 0 
(Question Scries,
II.
I. History.—Mention, with dates and particulars, three kings of
England and three of Scotland who met with violent deaths.
II. English Literature.—Explain the principles of Anglo-Saxon
verse ; give examples, and traces of its influence in later writings.
Answers, not to exceed twenty printed lines, are invited ; to be
sent in by 15th March, addressed. Editors, Ladies' EdinhurgJi
Magazine, care of Messrs. Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Tlie best answer to each question will be inserted in the magazine,
and prizes are offered at the close of the year for the greatest number
of good answers in each department.
 0 
33ooit (!Bxc|)ansc Column,   ,
M. I. U.—I have a copy of Plato (Smith's) with notes, in good
condition ; also Present Dag Thoughts, by A. K. H. B. I shall be glad
to exchange these for other books. Communications may be ad¬
dressed to the Editors.
 0 
.Strag i^otcs,
K. L. gained in the last Edinburgh University Local Examination
upwards of seventy marks for French, but failed in Botany. She
wishes to know whether, in the event of gaining this year seventy in
Botany, she will be entitled to a place in the i^rize list, or whether
the interval of a year will prevent this ? She also wishes to know if
.she may go up for examination in Drawing this year, and whether, if
she should pass, any recognition of her having done so would be
added to lier certificate ?
A Distressed Traveller going to Italy asks. What is the best,
most portable, most efficacious, and cheapest Disinfectant ? [An
important question.    AVlio can heliJ her ?—Eds.]
Two replies have reached us for ' Scholastica,' so good that we
insert both;—
Vecchiarella says :—A lady who has had ordinary school educa¬
tion, and wishes to gain a Local Certificate quickly, should take
English Literature and French for an ordinary Pass. If she aims
at Honours and insertion of her name in the Rugby Calendar, the
case is different. French remains the easiest subject, but the
' Honours' English Paper  is hard.     Logic is the best  subject for
Stray Notes. 95
Scholastica, being a definite science. It can be mastered in a single
session, and is better adapted to grown-up students than subjects
requiring more memory than thought. Vecchiarella thinks that a
lady who has not been abroad, and is no musician, would do well to
qualify herself as a thorough English governess for both boys and
girls. English Literature and Latin, to which she may add Mathe¬
matics or Logic, would be her best subjects. The Class Certificate of
the Professor of the Theory and Practice of Education, when added
to the Local Certificate, is of inestimable value to a teacher, and may
be gained by working in the class of the Ladies' Educational Associa¬
tion, taught by Professor Laurie.
In answer to Scholastica, I should advise the young lady of
■eighteen, provided previous training has laid a foundation upon
which to work, to make up for the lack of Music and Conversational
French and German by taking an Honour Certificate in English
Literature, Latin, and Mathematics. The Honour Certificate will
entitle her to have her name placed on the RugJiy Calendar for lady-
teachers, and her choice of subjects will make her a desirable gover¬
ness for young boys as well as girls. Should Latin and Mathematics
be too much for one winter's work, let her take up one of these and
perfect her grammatical knowledge of French or German. Speaking
from experience, I should not advise any one to attempt more than
three subjects, unless one at least is already so thoroughly acquired
that special preparation is unnecessary. And it is well to bear in
mind, also, that high marks in two subjects are more valuable than
mediocrity in three. Contra Costa.
A Spinster Aunt advises Chloe and all young people to be careful
what French tales they read. Sacs et Parchemiiif; (Jules Sandeau) is
charming. Madame G. Reybaud is always a safe writer. Her PetUx
Couvents de Paris, Cadet de Colobrieres, Mademoiselle de Malepeire, and
Clementine may be recommended. Formerly one could say the same
of Octave Feuillet; his Roman d'lin Jevne IJomme pauvre, Bellali, and
La Petite Comtesse are excellent, but his later works are better left
alone. Let no one rush into modern French stories till they have
read the matchless Eugenie Grandet and La RecJierchc de VAhs(du of
Honore de Balzac. Two very characteristic Proverhes of A. de Musset
are readable, and give a good idea of his style : Un Caprice and R
faui (pCune porte suit ovverte ou fermee. [Other correspondents add
Emile Souvestre and Jules Verne as safe writers, and La Tulipe
Noire of Dumas, Dosia, and Le Roi des Montagn-es, the only safe ones
of About.]
Patience thinks Chloe will find Marlitt's Die Zweite Fran and
Hacklander's Filrst nrid Cavalier much more amusing than the Thirty
Years' War. [We hope, however, she will persevere with the
latter!—Eds.]
Glasgow Association for Higher Education of Women.—On
14th January was begun the second series of lectures,—viz., Astro¬
nomy, Philosophy, Physiology, and French Literature, the lecturers
being Professors Grant, E. Caird, M'Kendrick, and Monsieur
Lacaille. Astronomy excepted, these are a continuation of the work
begun before Christmas, Professors Veitch and Young having pre¬
ceded Professors Caird and M'Kendrick. The lectures, delivered
in the University, are attended by more than 200 students, ninety-
three being in the Logic class, of whom the greater proportion took
part  in  the  work,   essay writing,   and  examinations.     There  are
96 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
tutorial classes, well attended, for Latin, Mathematics, and Theory
of Music. On 15th January, classes on the model of those in St.
George's Hall, Edinburgh, were opened for the benefit of ladies in
the West of Scotland, either as a help to private study or in prepara¬
tion for the Local Examinations. Bursaries will be oflfered to the
latter, the competition being open to students either resident or
corresponding members; extra prizes will be allotted for competition
only to 'correspondents.' The Association is making arrangements
for affiliation to an English College, for higher examinations and
Certificates in Music. [VVe gladly welcome this spread of our St.
George's Hall plan, wishing it all success.—Eds.]
An Inquieeb would be glad to know precisely what is mea,nt by
an Edinburgh University Certificate ? Is it the same sort of thing as
an English Local Certificate ? IMust candidates go to Edinburgh for
examination ? ['An Inquirer ' does not word her query with enough
precision for us to feel sure to what certificate she refers. University
Local Examinations have been instituted in Edinburgh on the same
model as those conducted elsewhere ; but there is also a Higher Certi¬
ficate for women only, which has this peculiarity, that it is a monoply—
we use the word with no invidious intention—of the students of the
Ladies' Educational Association. This certificate can only be held by
candidates who already have taken the Local Pass Certificate of some
University. Examinations take place in Edinburgh in April and m
October.]
 0 
]!(fotices to Corrcsponlimts, ttc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinhuryh Magazme, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writers name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. ,    ■    , i    i     j     c
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be m the hands ot
the Editors by the first of the month.
Writers willing to undertake papers in the present series of Our
Female Novelists,' are requested to communicate at once with the
Editors.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held at 4 Oxford Terrace, on Saturday, 2d February 1878, at 11
o'clock. Debate—'Have the servants of the present day really
deteriorated as a class from former times ]'
PIANOFORTES, HARMONIUMS, AND AMERICAN ORGANS.
LARGE CHOICE—BEST QUALITIES—MODERATE PRICES. .
Intending Purchasers sbould on no account fx anywhere else until they have
compared Qualities and Prices at
HENRY     M'INTOSH'S,
FiioM Paterson & Sons',
ISO    GEORGE    STREET,   West End.    ISO.
THE    EDINBURGH    MUSIC    LIBRARY.
Terms of Subscription on application.
Old- Female Novelists. 97
©iir JcmaU |lotifUsts.
XIV.
THE MISSES LEE.—MES. ELIZABETH HAMILTON.
Sophia Lee, h. 1750—rf. 1824.
Hakkiet Lee, h. 176G—d. 18,"j1.
Elizabeth Hamilton, h. 1758—d. 1816.
Of the three names, all famous in their day, that stand at
the head of this page, the last is probably now the best
remembered. Between the sister authoresses of the Can-
Urhury Talcs, writing chiefly for the amusement of the
leisure hours of lives spent in school-keeping in Bath, and
the Scottish lady, best known as the ornament of Edinburgh
society in its palmy days at the beginning of this century,
there is no link but that of common authorship, and a
common claim to be remembered in the lists of contem¬
poraneous novelists. But when, on reading these lists, we
find these names brought near by the accident of birth, we
stop gladly to consider them for a little time in turn.
And first, kt us acknowledge the difficulty we find in
making a just estimate of the writers and writings of the
past. It is easy to give our opinion of a modern novel;
we know at once what to think of it, both the style and
the manner of thought being familiar to us, and we have
only to decide whether the matter interests us or not. But
when the novels of another generation are disinterred from
the library shelves,—when the dust is shaken from the leaves,
and the open title-page bears upon it the date of another
century and the name of a long-forgotten firm,—then it
depends upon the mood of the reader whether a certain
charm of antiquity shall add to, or an irreverent scorn of
out-of-date stories shall take from, the interest the author
hoped to awaken. "We confess to a pleasure in reading the
yellowing pages, and finding the mind marching to the
measured style, and the ears growing familiar with the just
reflections and virtuous sentiments of the Henriettas and
Emilys, the Cecilias and Evelinas, the great-grandmother
heroines of these half-forgotten novels. But, doubtless, the
unfamiliarity of the words makes it difficult for us to judge
of the real value of the things expressed; and, on the other
No. 39.—March 1878. q
98 The Ladies EdinburgJi. Magazine,
hand, the startling plainness with which disagreeable subjects
are sometimes handled may strike us tlie more forcibly from
its very contrast to the graceful sentimentalities of the
general dialogue.
Of such incongruities the Canterhury Tales are full, and
on the merits of these tales the literary reputation of the
Misses Lee seems chiefly to rest. The facts of their lives,
as known to us, are soon told. Sophia, the eldest sister,
was early called to manage a motherless household. Her
father had gone upon the stage,—with what success we are
not told; so it was but natural that his daughter's first
literary venture should take the form of a drama. The
Chapter of Accidents, a comedy, produced at the Haymarket
Theatre in 1779, was very well received. Mr. Lee dying
soon after, the sisters removed to Bath, where, with the
profits of Sophia's comedy, they established a young ladies'
seminary in 1787. Harriet must have been then too young
to take a very active part in tuition; but the school was a
great success. In 1784 Sophia published her first novel or,
more correctly, historical romance. The Recess: A Tale of
Other Times, was a story of the days of Queen Elizabeth,
and a second volume was immediately called for. In 1797
Harriet Lee first came before the public with the first volume
of the Canterhury Tales. In the preface, written for a later
edition of these stories, she thus explains the plan and origin
of the book: ' The outline of the work was exclusively mine,
and afforded me a convenient prospect of pursuing or dis¬
continuing it, as circumstances might permit. I wrote the
four first stories with great ardour and rapidity, chiefly to
indulge the pleasure I always found in writing, yet, it must
be owned, not without a latent and (author-like) an increas¬
ing hope that I might be fortunate enough to please the
public. The stories were printed in one volume as soon as
finished; and my hope was not disappointed, since the
success of my work was such as to render a continuation
desirable. For this, however,' she continues, ' I was not
altogether prepared; but a previous arrangement, made
between my eldest sister and myself, afforded an auxiliary
whose acknowledged talents left nothing to fear from the
coalition but that the second party miglit, as is often the
case in coalitions, entirely supersede the preceding one.'
This modest fear was not, we think, realized. Sophia
Lee's contributions to the Canterliory Tales (' a title chosen
merely as being a proverbial phrase for gossiping long stories,
certainly with no thought of blending them with the recol-
Oitr Female Novelists. 99
lection of our great English classic') form the smaller part
of the work, and though original, and in some parts strikingly
picturesque, are certainly not more interesting than those "by
her sister.
The plan of the collection of tales was somewhat similar
to that of Chaucer. A party of coach travellers find them¬
selves storm-stayed at Canterbury, and, to beguile the time,
propose to tell each other stories. The lot falls first on an
Englishman, described as ' the traveller,' and after him a Poet,
a Frenchman, an Old Woman, a Young Lady, an Offtcer,
and a Clergyman amuse the company in turn. The stories
are all sufficiently wild and romantic ; but the Old Woman's
tale of ' Lothaire' is a real ghostly legend of crusading days,
of a skeleton monk and a proud and guilty baron. Indeed,
most of the first series have their scenes chiefly laid in foreign
countries and romantic times. The Young Lady's tale "of
' The Two Emilys,' and the Clergyman's tale of ' Pembroke,'
were the contribution of Sophia Lee. They are both striking
stories, full of incident and adventures, sometimes rather
startlingly improbable. The interest is well sustained,
especially in 'The Two Emilys;' and one almost forgets, in
pity for the gentle heroine, from how many of the painful
scenes and circumstances through which she has to pass, a
small portion of common sense or straightforwardness might
have saved her.
In the second series the fancy of fellow-travellers is
abandoned, and we are left to imagine the when and where
of the narration. But the first collection having proved so
popular, more tales were quickly produced. A German, a
Scotsman, a Landlady, a Friend, and a Wife are pressed into
the service. The German's tale of ' Kruitzner ' is by many
considered the most powerful and original of all. Lord
Byron, when a boy of fourteen, read it, and says of it: 'It
made a deep impression upon me, and may indeed be said
to contain the germ of much that I have since written.' He
aftervvards dramatized it under the title of Werner; or, The
Inheritance. It is a wild and gloomy story of the days of
the Thirty Years' War, and of a Bohemian nobleman, who,
after a rebellious and wicked youth, and manhood of exile
and disgrace, at last regains his rank, only to find that it has
been assured to him by a murder committed by his own
son. The father's despair at finding the inheritance of vice
which has so descended, and the calm and defiant acknow¬
ledgment of Conrad that he has murdered the baron, are
powerfully described.    The utterly unnecessary crime of the
lOO TJic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
count in robbing his enemy of money is, we think, well
introduced, with all the train of horrors that come after it.
It must be remembered, in judging tales like these, that
at the time they were written the idea of adapting stories
to the countries and condition of the narrators was almost
unknown to writers of fiction. They were eagerly read, and
deserved in great measure the popularity they obtained. In
their own line of romantic fiction, they still keep their own
peculiar place, and in originality and genius are far above
most of their successors.
No other important works have been left by the sisters.
Some small dramatic attempts fell rather fiat when put on
the stage; and a short tale by Sophia, called the Life of a
Lover, requires no special mention. After long and respected
lives, they rest together in Clifton Church,—Sophia dying
in 1824, but Harriet not till the comparatively recent date
of 1851.
"We have not been able to do more than give the outline
of their lives and the names of their works. Of the latter
we may safely say, that the lovers of exciting fiction might
spend their time better over these forgotten Canterlury Tales,
than over half the sensational literature of the present day.
More interesting, because more our own, is the other
authoress, of whose life and writings we now offer a sketch.
Elizabeth Hamilton Avas born at Belfast on July 25, 1758.
Her father was a merchant in that town, and (as was pro¬
bably also her mother, whose maiden name was Mackay) of
Scotch extraction. He traced his descent from the Hamiltons
of Woodhall, a family who, as his daughter tells us in her
Autohiographical Fragments, ' not only boast of being one of
the first of the Saxon families established in Scotland, but of
being the stock whence all the branches that have been
ennobled in these kingdoms, in France, and in Germany
have sprung.' Her great-grandfather, the Laird of Woodhall
of the day, like other lairds of the same sturdy and gallant
race, was a zealous Covenanter, and, despairing of liberty of
conscience in Scotland, emigrated with his family across the
Irish Sea to found a new home in Ulster.
His son Charles, grandfather of our authoress, returned to
Scotland when brighter days had dawned; but various family
changes and misfortunes combined to bring his grandson
again to Ireland, where family connections encouraged him
to hope for success in business. He settled in Belfast, made
a happy marriage, and all his affairs were prospering when
he was attacked by typhus fever, and  died, leaving three
I
Our Female Novelists. lor
children, Katherine, Charles, and Elizabeth, the latter then
only a year old. The widowed mother seems to have been
a sensible and spirited woman. Her daughter speaks admir¬
ingly of her beauty and grace, and of the perfect love and con¬
fidence between her parents, of which the memory had come
down to her; for the little Elizabeth was to have only a
dim memory of either of her own parents, though others as
kind and true were to fill their places. Her father's sister,
who had been long settled in Scotland, came forward with
lier husband and begged to adopt the child as her own, and,
after some reluctance on the mother's part, the plan was
carried out. To the kind care, therefore, of this aunt and
uncle the little girl was committed in 1762. Mr. Marshall
was a farmer in Stirlingshire, and it was to a very quiet and
secluded home that Elizabeth Hamilton was taken; but
there were some points about the situation of both Mr. and
Mrs. Marshall that made life with them different from the
life of an ordinary farm. Mrs. Marshall had been, in early
youth, engagedto the eldest son of a baronet, when the sudden
death of her father and the poverty into which the family
was plunged, put an end to her prospects. 'With talents of a
superior order, and with an education such as few Scotch
ladies could at that time boast of, my aunt,' writes Mrs.
Hamilton, ' ought not to have experienced any difficulty in
the attainment of independence. But for talents and ac¬
complishments there was at that period no resource, nothing
upon which they could be employed to advantage. She was
therefore glad to ol)tain protection in the house of a distant
relation, and to repay this protection by those exertions for
which she was eminently fitted by a superior education.'
Her niece describes the struggles with family pride, always
so strong in Scotland, before she ceased to be wounded by
many small trials she met with in this life of dependence,
till at last, having ' obtained this conquest over herself and
over all the prejudices of her education, she could bring
herself to listen to the addresses of a man born, as Mr.
Marshall was, in a very inferior station.' But her expecta¬
tion of a peaceful and happy home with him was not dis¬
appointed, ' for, in the thirty-two years that she afterwards
lived with him, never did her heart experience even a momen¬
tary pang of vexation, sorrow, or regret.'
In Mr. Stewart, the upright farmer-factor of Gowan Brae,
' whose father was an honest man, and who was, therefore,
not ashamed of his origin, and in the dead wife who was
born in a higher station, and bred to higher views than her
102 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
daughters had any right to, and yet had no pride, and
treated all who were wortliy of her notice with kindness,'
we think the readers of the Cottagers of Glenlurnie may find
a picture of the beloved uncle and aunt to whom Elizabeth
Hamilton performed a daughter's part.
Under the care of this kind couple, the years passed
happily in the quiet farmhouse. In 1767 Mrs. Hamilton
died, and then Elizabeth saw her own family no more for
several years. She was an active child, fond of outdoor
sports, fond also of reading. Blind Harry was a favourite
book, and Wallace the hero of her childish fancy, living as
she did on the Carse of Stirling, the scene of his great
exploits. At eight years old she was sent to a school in
Stirling, and as the distance was too great for a daily walk,
she was boarded in town from Monday to Saturday. With
Saturday evening came old Lochaber, the steady horse, to
take the little girl home and make the last night of the week
a little festival in the farmhouse. Sunday brought its own
duties and tasks. Mr. Marshall attended an Episcopalian
Chapel, his wife went to the Parisli Church, so that the
child early learned the opinions as to latitude in worship
which she always retained. She speaks in her Letters on
Education of the many tasks and recitations her aunt im¬
posed on her, and, though thinking some of them unnecessary,
she dwells with gratitude on the tender care which strove to
bring her up in religion and virtue. When in her thirteenth
year, she passed through an important mental crisis. Having
left school, she was studying at home, when some one, ' an
intimate of the family,' tried to shake her religious belief.
The child, quick to see the ridiculous, grew confused and
half-sceptical under this ' friend's ' witty arguments. Her
belief in her aunt's sincerity and wisdom left her a hope for
the truth of the Bible, so that she determined to read it
through for herself, and, having done so, came to the con¬
clusion that, after all, it was genuine and inspired. Soon
after this another good influence was brought to bear on her.
A visit of some months to Glasgow and Edinburgh had in¬
troduced her to fresh studies and new friendships. But
dearer than any friendship, and more important than any
study, was the visit of her brother Charles, who was hence¬
forth to be her friend, her oracle, her almost idol, as long as
life lasted. Their correspondence was thenceforward one of
the greatest pleasures of her life, and when he went to India
in 1772, a cadet in the East India Company's service, he
carried with him the best part of his little sister's heart.
i
Ojir Female Novelists. 103
For him and for her unknown sister, she cherished in her quiet
home at Ingram's Crook the greatest admiration and love ;
in all her lonely studies her hope was to make herself worthy
to be their companion and friend. But so general was the
dislike to what was then considered the over-education of
girls, that even the sensible axmt advised Elizabeth not to
display any superior knowledge, lest she should be thought
pedantic; and it was only by stealth that she read Lord
Ivames' Elements of Criticism, hiding it behind a chair
cushion whenever she heard a footstep. Writing she also
carried on secretly for her own amusement, but without any
thought of publication, although her Journal of a Highland.
Tour was sent by an admiring friend to a local magazine.
A cheerful, lively girl, enthusiastic in words and ways, the
very quiet life she led had no power to damp her spirits, and
time spent in studies and writing, in household matters and
in pleasant day-dreams, flowed past evenly and happily during
these years of girlhood.
In 1778, six months spent in Ireland changed her dim
ideas of her sister into a happy reality. She writes to her
brother of their meeting:
' It is now above three months that I have had the felicity of
enjoying the company of the dearest of sisters, the kindest of friends,
and, laying all partiality aside, the most amiable and sensible com¬
panion I have ever met with. VVe want nothing but the company of
our dear Charles to make us truly happy.'
The friendship thus begun only went on deepening to the
end of life. Her sister, who became Mrs. Blake, seems to
have been early left a widow; and the tender affection
between them, strengthened by common sorrow and loss,
lasted henceforth unbroken. Mrs. Marshall's death in 1786
made it Elizabeth Hamilton's duty to cheer her uncle's lone¬
liness. For the first six years after this date she hardly
ever left home without him, making a point of quietly refus¬
ing all invitations for herself alone. That she sometimes
wished for the pleasures of cultivated society, her letters to
her brother show, but they show also how cheerfully she deter¬
mined to make the best of what life had given her. There
is a hint in her biography of a disappointment she suffered
at this time, some hope which was not fulfilled, a sorrow
which shaded for a time, though it could not darken her life.
Castle-building remained her great solace, and long afterwards,
in a letter written when youthful romance must be supposed
to have gone by, she defends the habit, declaring that she
owes to it' three-fourths of her sense and half of her virtue.'
104 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
But her literary life was now to begin, for in 1783 she
sent her first voluntary contribution to the press in the
shape of an essay printed in the Lounger, one of the perio¬
dicals of the day. A country young lady tells in pleasant
and graceful style some of her experiences in society, and
complains of the cold reception she meets with from certain
fashionable friends, who do not recognise her at home when
she is no longer under brilliant protection in an Edinburgh
ballroom. It is well written, after the model of papers in
the Spectator.
The return of Charles Hamilton from India, in the follow¬
ing year, made a joyful change in the life at Ingram's Crook,
and a long winter passed quickly in his company. The
young soldier had been entrusted with an important work
on which to employ his five years' furlough,—no less than
the translation from the Persian of the Hedaya, or Code
of Mussulman Laws. Warren Hastings had planned this
translation, and Mr. Hamilton was a warm adherent of his
generous patron; so that when in 1788 he had to go to
London, and was accompanied by his sister, it was in the
circle that gathered round the great Governor, that Elizabeth
Hamilton first enjoyed to the full the pleasures of literary
friendships. During that visit, while she listened with
eager ears to the pleasant and witty sayings of others, she
found with surprise that her own quiet words were thought
worth hearing. She returned to Stirlingshire alone, leaving
her brother at work; but, although she did not foresee it,
her days of solitude were almost over. In the following
autumn the sudden death of her good uncle sadly removed
the motive of separation, and the next two years, spent by
the brother and both sisters in London, were perhaps the
brightest of Elizabeth's life. They came too soon, however,
to an end. Cliarles Hamilton, having finished his work of
translation, was about to return to India witli the brightest
prospects. He had taken leave of his sisters, and Elizabeth
had returned sad and lonely to the forsaken home at Ingram's
Crook, a long winter before her, and the fear of many years
of separation, when a worse sorrow befell her. Eapid con¬
sumption suddenly attacked Mr. Hamilton, and before the
ship sailed which sliould have taken him to India, the sisters
had laid their brother in his grave.
After his death, their first thought w^as to retire together
to some place where they could find quiet and peace, and it
was in the seclusion of different English villages that j\Iiss
Hamilton began to write her first publislied book. Letters of
Our Female Novelists. 105
a Hincloo Eajdh, itself a memorial of her dear brother's cha¬
racter and life. It was from him that she had gathered the
materials for it; she paints herself in ' Charlotte,' and in
' Percy' we find a touching picture of him whose memory
lives beyond death.
Half reluctant to prefix her name, and doubtful altogether
if the interest would extend beyond herself, she was persuaded
to publish the Hindoo Bajdh in 1796, and its success was
such as to encourage her to make further attempts. She
accordingly began at once to write Memoirs of Modern Philo¬
sophers, a novel in three volumes, which was published in
1800, passing at once through two editions, and making a
considerable sensation at the time. It was a satire on the
philosophical ideas of the day; and that the follies of 'Bridget-
ina,' the heroine, were not overdrawn is evident, as one
young lady wrote thanking the authoress for pointing out
the absurdities which she recognised in herself
The sisters had now settled in Bath, attracted first by the
hope of benefit from the waters, but induced to remain by
the pleasant circle they found there. In 1801 the Austen
family came to Bath, and we may wonder if the youthful
Jane Austen and more mature Elizabeth Hamilton ever
knew each other. Surely in so small a circle they must at
least have met.
In 1801 Miss Hamilton published her Letters on Education.
Then, after some pleasant months of wandering in Wales and
Westmoreland, in the winter of 1802 she arrived in Edin¬
burgh. The first number of the Edinburgh Revievj appeared
in that October, and Miss Hamilton, like the rest of literary
Scotland, was much interested in it and the knot of young
lawyers who were its bold projectors. She seems to have
had a loyal love for Edinburgh, and found its society superior
in many respects to what she had ever met with; and her
appreciation was amply returned, her Monday reunions being
attended by the most notable people in Edinburgh, who were
eager to claim her friendship and enjoy her society.
Her pen did not lie idle. In 1803 she published the
Memoirs of Agrippina, a study in Eoman biography founded
entirely on classical authorities. In 1804 she received a
literary pension from the king, and in this year she also
entered for a short time on a new office. Eor six months
she lived as superintendent in a nobleman's family, to help
in arranging the education of his motherless children. This
emf)loyment suggested Letters to the Daughter of a Nobleman,
published in 1806.
lo6 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
On returning to Edinburgh, she assumed the style of Mrs.
Hamilton, by which she is best known. She now wrote the
Cottagers of Glenlmrnie, her most popular book. Her shortest
work of fiction, it is yet that on which her reputation as a
novelist chiefly rests, and to it we turn for examples of her
style of writing and manner of thought. ' Mr. Stewart' we
have already supposed to represent her uncle. We need
not retrace the well-known story. The book made a great
sensation in its day, and though its account of the dirt and
laisser faire habits of the cottagers was resented by many as
a libel on the Scotch peasantry, there is little doubt that it
was justified by fact. Mrs. Hamilton had lived too long
among cotters to make any great mistake in describing
them ; and if she points out their faults, she is as ready to
own their many virtues. The deathbed of poor John
MacClarty is a fine picture of resignation and faith; the
account of his simple funeral shows that she knew what
warm hearts might live in rough and untidy homes, and the
interest of the simple story is enhanced by the easy, pleasant
style.
Her useful and valuable life was now drawing to a close.
A little book of Exercises on Religious Knovjledge appeared in
1809, a volume of essays in 1812, and another small work
on education in 1815 ; but these were her last writings.
Eepeated attacks of illness warned her friends that they
could not look to have her long with them, and at last,
liaving gone to England in hope of prolonging health, she
died at Harrowgate on the 23d July 1816.
She had many friends and many comforts, and was the
first to own that her life, though darkened by one great
sorrow, had been lightened by unnumbered blessings. Her
own words may best speak for her in closing this short
record of her life :
' My lot lias indeed fallen in pleasant places. My life has been a
series of blessings and of enjoyment; my sorrows have been few ;
and though, from the keenness of my feelings, they have been severe,
they have borne no proportion to my pleasures.
' In the society of my dearest brother my sympathies and faculties
were first called forth, and in losing him I thought I had lost them for
ever. Blessed be God, this has not been the case ! Since losing
liim, I liave enjoyed the happiness of living in a very superior society,
of forming intimacies witli many of the best, the wisest, and the
worthiest of human characters. I have commenced many friendships,
which I hope and trust will neither cease in this world nor in the
next, but which will continue to form a part of my happiness when
all imperfection shall have been done away.'
M. B.
Joseph Cook's Monday Lectures. 107
Sosfp!} (JToofe's iHontiau 3Lccturc5.
' God  is one, as we meet him in the Old Testament and
the Oldest, in the New and the Newest.    There are four
Testaments—an Oldest and an Old, a New and a Newest.
The Oldest Testament is the Nature of Things; the Newest is
Christ's continued life in the present influences of the Holy
Spirit.    The   Oldest  and  Newest  are unwritten;  the Old
and the New are written.    But the voices of the four are
one.'    This may be said to be the central thought of Joseph
Cook's philosophy of religion, as we find it evolved in these
very remarkable Monday Lectures.    In other words, so far
from the unwritten record of nature and of liuman experience
contradicting the written record of the Scriptures, each can
be scientifically shown to be simply the correlative of the
other,  the  ever-progressing   revelation  of   one   God,  who
through them all remains the same, ' without variableness or
shadow of turning.'    In order to prove this position, Mr.
Cook takes up, one after another, the  great doctrines of
Christianity, and endeavours to show not only that they are
not  contradicted by the essential  nature of things, or by
the records of our experience as a race, but that they are
rendered necessary by the first and proved by the second.
Without the written record of the BiVjle we could not, he
tells us, know the/ac^s of revelation, but we could know the
necessity for just such facts.    ' Old man and blind,' he says,
' Michael Angelo in the Vatican used to stand before the
Torso, the  famous  fragment  of a statue, made,   possibly,
by one of the most skilled chisels of antiquity, and with his
fingers upon the mutilated lines  he would tell his pupils
how the entire figure must have been formed when it was
whole. . . . Eeligious science with the dim torch of reason,
and not illuminated by revelation, is a blind Michael Angelo
standing before the Torso of the religious universe, and feel¬
ing blindly along fragmentary lines.    Although the head of
the statue is infinitely beyond our touch or sight  in  the
infinities and the eternities above us, and although its feet
stand on adamant, lower than thought can reach with its
plummet, we  do  know, in  the  universality   of law,  that
the  lines we touch  in  our blindness in  natural  religion
would, if completed according to the plan which is tangible
to us, be revealed religion and nothing less.'    It is a bold
lo8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and all-embracing proposition, striking at the foundations
not of one stronghold of infidelity only, or two, or three, but
undermining all,—a position which, once secured, renders
tlie Christian fortress absolutely impregnable. But is it a
position which it is possible to maintain ? Mr. Cook thinks
it is, and it seems to me impossible to follow his clear, strong
argument without finding oneself obliged to relegate to the
region of ' self-evident truth ' much w^hich one has been
accustomed to accept (if accepted at all) on the sole authority
of revelation. Consistently with the boldness of his position,
Mr. Cook not only does not fear criticism, but claims it for
religious science. ' How,' he says, ' is religious science ever
to become a stalwart oak, throwing out its boughs in every
direction vigorously and graciously, and in no fear of
tempests, unless it contend with all the shocks of criticism
that beat on philosophy, and law, and literature ? Eeligious
science must take her chances according to the law of the
survival of the fittest.' All he asks for her is, that she
should be as fairly treated according to the scientific method
as our philosophy, law, and literature; that if we do not in
these expurgate facts which do not please us, neither should
we expurgate them from the science of religion. Grant,
he says, to this science only the same fair-play, the same reve¬
rence for facts, the same caution of induction, the same
refusal to accept mere foregone conclusions as to possi¬
bilities and suitabilities in place of calm scientific investiga¬
tion of what is, and the religion of the Bible does not fear to
take its stand on the same platform with all other science,
and to abide by the result. Hence, while himself a believer
in inspiration, ]\Ir. Cook is not afraid to say, ' Cliristianity
would stand on the basis of revelation,—that is, on the self-
manifestation of God in His works, including the facts of the
New Testament history,—even if the doctrine of inspiration
were all thrown to the winds.' While, however, he thus
maintains that Christianity has no need to be buttressed by
any theory of inspiration, he is too true to the scientific
method to overlook the evidence of the fact of Inspiration.
It is a fact not needed to prove the truth of Christianity, but
it is one, nevertheless, of which he considers we have ample
scientific evidence,—i.e., there is much in the Bible Avhich
cannot scientifically be accounted for without it. He thus
stands midway, as it were, between the ordinary combatants
on this subject. To the one army of alarmed defenders of
inspiration he says: ' Be at peace. Christianity does not
stand or fall on the issues of this combat.'    To its assailants,
Joseph Cook's Monday Lectures. 109
on the other hand, he says: Look at the fads of the case.
Can you account for them all in any other way—for ' the
astounding fact that the Bible is the only book in the world
that will bear full and permanent translation into life,' for
the absolute loinnowedness from error of its inculcation, ibr
the fulfilment of its plainly-prophetic passages ?
In dealing with the various antichristiau theories of the
present day, the position which Mr. Cook mainly assumes
is not that what they assert is false, but that what they
deny is true; in other words, that in general they are true
as far as they go, but that they do not go far enougli.
Cliristianity includes all that is true in them, but goes far
beyond them. Error is much oftener one side of truth—
false because one-sided—than falsehood pure and simple.
Let us take as an example what he says of Pantheism and
Materialism:
' As light fills and yet transcends the rainbow, so God fills and yet
transcends all natural law. According to scientific Theism, we are
equally sure of the divine immanency in all nature, and of the
divine transcendency beyond it. Pantheism, however, with im¬
measurably narrower horizons, asserts that natural law and God are
one ; and thus at its best it teaches but one-half the truth—namely,
the divine immanency and not the divine transcendency. Christian
Theism, in the name of the scientific method, teaches both. While
you are ready to admit that every pulsation of the colours even in
the rainbow is light, you yet remember well that all the pulsations
taken together do not constitute the whole of light. Solar radiance
billows away to all points of the compass; your bow is bent above
only one quarter of the horizon. So scientific Theism supposes that
the whole universe, or finite existence in its widest range, is filled by
the Infinite Omnipresent Will as the bow is filled with light, and this
in such a sense that we may say that natural law is God, who was,
and is, and is to come. . . . But beyond all that, Christian Theism
afiirms that God, knowable but unfathomable, incomprehensible but
not inapprehensible, billows away beyond all that we call infinities
and eternities as light beyond the rainbow.'
In like manner, in dealing with many of the prevalent
tendencies within Theism, Mr. Cook takes up mainly the
same position. What you say is true, he says, as far as it
goes; your theory accounts for certain facts in the case, but
does it cover aW? If not, we must look for a wider theory,
which, while including the facts upon which your theory
rests, will also cover those which it fails to reach. Thus, in
dealing with the mystery of the Trinity, he says to Unita¬
rians : You have got hold of a great truth : ' The first of all
the religious truths of exact research is, that the Lord our
God is one God.'   This truth I hold as firmly as you do.    My
110 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
theory includes yours, but it covers also facts which yours
leaves iinaccounted for. You look ' through but a single
window vividly, and see from it, well, only God the Father.
. . . There are wants of life, however, which no one quarter
of the sky taken alone can meet. . . . There is another and
a wider belief in the Divine Unity, a window that has the
sun all the day. . . . Sunlight, rainbow, heat—one solar
radiance. Father, Son, Holy Ghost—one God. As the
rainbow shows what light is when unfolded, so Christ
reveals the nature of God.'
So, in dealing with the doctrine of the Atonement, he says:
' It is just as evident that what has once been cannot be
made not to have been, as that every change must have a
cause.' The past is irreversible. What, then, is to wash Lady
Macbeth's red ri^ht hand ? All other theories of reconcilia-
tion to God fail to cover this fact of a guilty irreversible past:
' Christianity, with the Atonement as its central truth,
matches the nature of tilings, and turns exactly in the wards
of the human soul. It has, as a theory of religious truth, a
scientific beauty absolutely beyond all comment.' With his
usual candour, Mr. Cook at once admits, however, tliat on
this point orthodoxy has to blame lierself for a looseness of
expression which lias served to mislead many. ' That word
guilt,' he says, ' is a fog, unless you remember that behind it
lie two meanings. Guilt signifies—first, personal blame-
worthiness ; second, obligation to render satisfaction to
violated law. In the former sense, guilt cannot be trans¬
ferred from person to person; in the latter, it can.' On a
forgetfulness of this distinction hangs much of the difficulty
which the Christian doctrine of the Atonement carries with
it to many minds, and to such Mr. Cook's clear statement of
the true bearings of the doctrine in his two lectures on ' The
Atonement,' and in a preceding lecture on ' Theodore Parker
on Adoration,' will be of immense value.
On one point—and, so far as I remember, on only one—
Ave have felt that Mr. Cook's conclusion is not justified by
his premises. It is where he attempts to maintain the
doctrine of eternal reprobation, on the ground that, ' under
irreversible natural law, character tends to a final perma¬
nence, good or bad.' Unquestionably it does so tend, and
unquestionably, also, the fact that it does so would, were
the law left to work itself out, make 'eternal sin'—and
if eternal sin, then also eternal punishment, for ' under irre¬
versible natural law there can be no blessedness without
holiness'—not  only  a  terrible  possibility, but  a  terrible
i
Joseph Cook's Monday Lectures. 111
certainty for us all. But if we believe, as Mr. Cook does,
that for some of us, at least, the law has not been left to
work itself out, but has been met and vanquished, that
there is 'a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,
to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself,' then can he
legitimately appeal to this confessedly vanquished law as
making certain the reprobation of others ?
It is of course impossible in a short review, such as the
present, to attempt to take up in detail Mr. Cook's views on
tlie many all-important questions with which these very re¬
markable lectures deal. I have tried to select a few typical
ones, in order, as fairly as may be, to exemplify his method
of proving by strict scientific treatment that the doctrines
of Christianity are no ' after-thought,' but lie deep in the
eternal nature of things; that ' tlie plan of redemption is no
insertion into the universe to correct mistakes, but a part of
the perfect plan of Him who was, and is, and is to come.'
Clear and forcible in argument, exhibiting a rare analogical
faculty, interspersed with brilliant imagery, and not unfre-
([uently with bursts of living eloquence, these lectures can
hardly fail to be a power in the seething world of thought
of these unsettled and restless days. With his rare fearless¬
ness and candour, Mr. Cook is the very man to take a worthy
place m the forefront of the battle with the unbelief of
' science falsely so called,' not by undervaluing science, but
by forcing such science to convict herself of want of science,
and to bow the knee before a science which has defeated her',
because wider, and truer, and more scientific than herself
Most error is simple one-sidedness ; trutli is the unity of all.
' Wliat if under the dome of St. Peter's there were but four
windows ? What if children were brought up to look out
yonder upon the Apennines, and there upon the Mediterranean
and there upon the Coliseum, and here upon St. Onofrio's oak'
under which Tasso sang ? If children were brought up before
these windows and did not pass from one to the other they
might possibly think that the outlook from each one was 'italy
And so It is; but it is only part of Italy. We are poor
children, brought up some of us before the window of science
some of us before the window of art, some of us before the
window of politics, some of us before the window of biblical
inculcation ; and we say in petulant tones to each other, each
at his accustomed window, " This is Italy." What is Italy ?
Sweep off the dome and answer, "There is but one skv and
that and all beneath it is Italy!"'
Jeanie Morison.
112, TJic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Efje (!Bnti of tJjc jFcutJ:
A TRUE STORY OF ICELAND IN 1017.
Flosi, the enemy of Njal, was the leader of a band who burnt his
house and killed all the men of the family except Kari, Njal's son-in-
law, who escaped. Kari in the course of years avenged their deaths
by slaying an equal number of Flosi's men ; but at last, on his return
from Italy, he was wrecked under the mountain where Flosi dwelt.
An autumn gale and a darkening night,
O'er mountainous waves the foam flies white;
Sivift are, clouds in a windy sky—
The ship is battered and tempest-toss'd,
And ever she drifts on the Iceland coast;
List to the sea-gull's hungry cry.
The white waves break on the mariners' dread,
The terrible island, Ingulfs Head;
Cruel is death on our native shore—■
And straight above on the upland fells
Our mortal enemy, Flosi, dwells.
Cruel arc foes that were friends lefore.
Kari looks at the sea and the land,
' For good or for ill is the end at hand ;'
Waves vnll laugh at the mariner's skill—
The ship is shattered and melts away,
The crew come forth from the stinging spray.
Tlie sea may spare lohat the foe may spill.
' Many a time have I thought to slay
Him we shall meet at home to-day ;'
Fierce are the storms that men can raise.
' Sworn to revenge and not to spare,
Dreamt of my home in a fiery glare.'
When ivill it die—that bitterest blaze ?
' Well may ye deem my sword is good.
Softened in flame and hardened in blood !' *
Ashes are black where oyice vms home—
' Life for life has this conquering brand
Counted my dead out of Flosi's band.'
Ever shall murderers meet their doom..
' The feud is fought to the bitter end,
And yet we may meet as friend meets friend;'
The homeless ivinds are abroad alone.
* When Flosi is told that, contrary to his expectations, Kari had
Where shall ivego? 113
' And yet he may only thank the wave
That spares his foe for a bloodier grave.'
'Tis quiet below the sculptured stone.
' We fear no foe nor any fate,
Let us then knock at Flosi's gate;'
Hark to the luind on the upland fell—
' We are worn-out men and the night is blind,
We'll prove the mettle of Flosi's mind.'
Hark to the dash of the thunderous swell.
Flosi came to the wind-shook door,
' What voice is that in the tempest's roar ?'
Oh fires vjithin are bright and warm—
'Who stands so dark against the snow ?'
' Kari it is, thy deadliest foe.'
Holdfast the doors against the storm.
' Thou com'st unarmed, a shipwrecked guest,
Kari, avenger, come thou blest.'
Cruellest storms at last will cease—
' Eevenge is past, and love shall live ;
Ah, doubt not, but the dead forgive.'
Under the grass mounds all is peace.
E. J. 0.
-0—
SEfjere s|)all toe so ?
VII.—NOEWAY.
Vistas of snowy mountains,
Torrents of feathery spray,
Land where the summer sunset
Ne'er shuts the eye of day !
Land of far-spreading forest,
The tall and slender pine.
The graceful birch tree bending
As if to kiss the brine.
' Where shall we go ?' or rather,' Where shall / go ?' For I
am a lonely being. I am a bachelor, of the misanthropic type ;
with regard to temperament, I may be classed under the two
heads of phlegmatic and melancholic. The former of these
two characters shows itself in my highly-developed hatred of
exertion.    I thus act habitually on the motto,' Never do a
escaped from the burning hall, 'Had he any weapon?'he asked.
' He had his sword, Lifeluller,' said Geirmund, ' and both edges were
blue with flame. Bardr said that it must be softened. But Kari
answered that he would harden it in the blood of the sons of Sigfus
and the other burners.'—Burnt Njal.
No. 39.—March 1878. H
114 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
thing yourself if you can possibly have it done for you.'
The latter, viz. the melancholic type of character, makes my
conduct in like manner a living embodiment of the maxim,
'Never be satisfied with anything that is done for you; the
more services are rendered you, the greater disposition to
grumble should you exhibit. Never look at the bright side
of things, if the dark side be visible; and rather rake up
some harassing memory, or some anxious care, than yield to
unlimited cheerfulness.' Though I observe these maxims
faithfully, yet withal I do so involuntarily; and it is a desire
to break the chain of habit which so trammels me at home
that prompts me anxiously to put the question, 'Where
shall I go ?•
But to ask this question of the empty air will not suffice;
I must break through my customary reserve, and address
some human being on the subject. Now that I think of it,
I remember that I have a bowing acquaintance with a lady,
who every summer pays a visit to some distant and secluded
nook. The pleasure-grounds of Europe are now so well
known to her, that I believe she intends next summer to
begin the exploration of Asia. That I should never attempt
to do, for the heat would render me still more inactive than
I already am. I shall venture to call on tliis lady for the
purpose of asking her advice; after the interview I shall
report the result.
She received me most graciously. I could see that her
thoughts were in the Arctic regions, for she was working an
iceberg in crewel-work for a fire-screen. 'How delicious,'
she remarked, ' when suffering from the overheated state
of our rooms, to see an iceberg, even in crewel-work, stand¬
ing between us and the flaming liearth !'
She has given me two alternatives—Iceland and Norway.
What I call melancholy and want of energy, she calls the
satiety of over-civilisation. ' Can you not try,' she said, ' to
live for a short time as if you were in the ninth, instead of
the nineteenth century ? Men at that period roasted what
they took in hunting; self-help was the only servant, nature
the only master. Poetry sprang up spontaneously from the
inspiration of grand and natural surroundings; men seemed
what they were, and were not ashamed of toil.'
' Climate !' I suggested.
' Ah, yes !' she replied, ' it was ozone that did it; a large
proportion of health-giving ozone. To give you an idea,' she
added, ' of what may be achieved in such a climate, I shall
I
Where shall zi>e cro? w
^>
tell you a little about one of my tourist expeditions in Ice¬
land. The conditions of travel in that island are—climate,
most bracing; accommodation for travellers, none; but, to
counterbalance this, hospitality, great. In Norway, on the
other hand, instead of superlative want or supply, we have
a medium in all thincrs which relate to climate and culture.
Iceland, when compared with Norway in these respects, is
like a genius compared with an ordinary man. Every¬
thing in the genius is great; his great merits are counter¬
balanced by glaring defects. Norway, -on the other hand,
has a moderately bracing climate, and a moderate amount of
comfort prepared for the traveller. When we return, how¬
ever, to the natural features of the country, Norway is so
grand and so infinitely varied that she may be compared with
all countries, and yet resembles none. Look on this picture
first, and judge whether you find it tempting.
' One fine summer day about noon, I was reclining on a
green slope, eating crowberries, and gazing at the prospect,
while my piebald pony was grazing near me without gazing
at the prospect. It was a curious stretch of lava that we
had ridden over; the rocks, like black coals burnt to ashes,
had such fantastic shapes, in some places taking the form
of serpent-like coils. AH the vegetation which could subsist
here w\as the almost colourless moss, which seems to have no
more vitality than dead stone can supply ; here and there a
little tuft of saxifrage and a stray twig of dwarf birch manage
to find sufficient sustenance. But now we are passing into
a less desolate region. Beyond the tract of pale greenish-
yellow moss, whence the rock peeps here and there in
grotesque forms and rough stretches, we see the deep blue
ocean that laves the hallowed shores of Isafold, and to-day
the air is so clear that the distant peak of Snsefell Jokull
is clearly seen across the Faxafjord. Scarcely a cloud is
visible, and the snowy mountains are drawn in outline, as
with the finest pencil, over the horizon. We now pass along
a desolate stony valley, where the so-called dead sulphur
mines are to be seen,—white patches upon the hillside, below
which sulphur used formerly to be found. Hence we pass to
an open space between hills, called the kettle, from its being
so like one in shape. Crossing a low ridge, we approach the
regions of sulphur. No sooner do we begin to descend than
a strong sulphureous steam is perceived,—streams rolling
over yellow beds, sulphureous vapour rising from hidden
caldrons and rocky fissures—such are the weird sights we
now find before us.    Such, then, is the scenery of Iceland;
Il6 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
let us now see what are its comforts and luxuries. The iron
house, formerly tenanted by the managers of the mines, has
been shattered by the wind. So we ride on to the church,
about a mile distant, crossing a bog amid drizzling rain. The
owner of the adjoining farmhouse readily admits us into
the churcli, which proves to be anything but a sacred edifice.
Almost every pew is converted into a wardrobe for some
article of clothing; large trunks are standing near the altar,
and bags of beans, pillows, and mattresses are lying about
in dire confusion. We are rather damp, and are glad to
remove our wet riding garments, and have some coffee, with
the bread and ham we have brought with us. I have my
cork mattress supplemented by a bag of beans put under the
pillow, and slumber peacefully, in spite of the noise made
by the wind rattling the shutters outside.
' Now,' said my fair counsellor, when she had finished this
part of her narration, 'can anything be better fitted to check
the satiety of over-civilisation than such an experience as
this ? How thankful it makes one even for the most
ordinary comforts! A feeling of dryness; a roof to cover
you, though it be but that of a desecrated and draughty
church,—the whole situation cannot fail to arouse the most
phlegmatic to energy, and to inspire with a feeling of clieer-
ful contentment even the most gloomily disposed. Lest,
however, you should think it too trying a leap to go back at
once to such primitive ways, suppose you try half-civilisation
first, and visit Norway to begin with. By way of introduc¬
tion, let me read to you the beginning of the diary of two
ladies who visited Norway in the vain hope of either finding
or making life as primitive there as it is in Iceland. This is
the day-dream; after that will come the reality, which to
you may perhaps be the more pleasing, but the two ■will
show the contrast:
' " Ye who thirst for information
Brought from many a clime and nation,
Calling all mankind your brothers.
Wish to know about the others,
Good for you it is to read a
Tale of Gudrun and Astrida.
Let me say, for preparation,
They abliorred civilisation,
Whicli with railways and with steamers
Breaks the peace of happy dreamers,
Pressing crowds of common mortals
In at nature's hallowed portals,
To behold her grandest features,
As if they were a common creature's.
I
Where shall we go? 117
Not for such those regions lonely,
Meant for choicest spirits only.
Who by quaint and simple travel,
Nature's deepest thoughts unravel,
Comfort's hackneyed cry despising,
To more true enjoyment rising,
Point the way to life most real.
Vigorous action, thought ideal.
Mediaeval was Astrida
In each thought and inclination.
How she loved the early Vikings,
How she doted on their nation.
How she longed in truth to visit
Realms where fancy oft had revelled,
And in regions once termed regal
Find a Harold or an Egil.
Gudrun, too, in fields elysian
Longed to gaze, with poet's vision,
On wild nature unmolested,
And by tourists uninfested.
Pity that where paradises
Bring us ever new surprises.
Their unworthy human native
Makes us so vituperative.
Oh, you craven, crouching slave, you !—
Porter at the Scandinavia !'
Dolt and idiot, brainless dreamer—
You have made us miss the steamer.
By j'our conduct, slow and lazy,
You have almost driven us crazy.
But we two, of wit inventive.
Find our loss a mere incentive
To devise a route more splendid.
And by greater joys attended,
Than the common route frequenters
Ever find in their adventures.
Changeless be the spirit daring.
Changeless, too, the manly bearing
Of the Norseman independent.
Of the Vikings fit descendant.
Changeless, then, the mode of roving.
As of walking, hunting, loving.
Let us, then, once more go forth
Like the ancients of the North.
See ! the blessed steeds are ready
Harnessed to the nimble carrioles ;
Boxes, then, are strapped on tightly.
And we soon are flying lightly.
O'er the steep and stony causeway,
Right into the heart of Norway.
Forth into the unknown steering.
Unprotected, yet unfearing.
Shun no hardship, fear no danger,
Which to nature brings us nearer."
1 An inn in Bergen.
118 TJie Ladies Edinbiirgli Magazine.
' So much for the expectation ; a few extracts from the
prose journal will show how far it was realized. Is the
scenery, as we hoped to find it, unsurpassed ? Is the mode
of travelling as ideal as it seemed ? What of the accommo¬
dation to be found on the road ? These questions will now
be answered, each in its turn.
' First, the scenery: " After driving for several hours over
a most romantic road, we aj^proached the head of a magnifi¬
cent mountain pass. On either side of the road we must
descend, a lofty cataract fell foaming down with deafening
noise. It seemed incredible that we could descend such a
steep decli\'ity, almost a precipice. Looking down, we be¬
held the road lying in zig-zag lines, like so many straight
planks laid together horizontally. We alighted and ^^•alked
down, while the drivers led the horses. It was a magnificent
scene; at one abrupt turn of the road we came close to one
of the waterfalls, at the next turn to the other; and all the
while we looked inquiringly into the deep dark valley through
which we were about to ]ias3. At the foot of the descent, the
scene was even more awful than it had seemed from above.
Before us was a great wall of rock, smooth and shining as
steel, bending forward aa if about to fall upon us; and at its
foot were scattered great masses of debris from huge boulders
which had been loosened from the cliffs, and had tumbled
into the valley beneath. The bed of the river was of white
rock and gravel; and the quantity of white stones strewn
about in all directions, and contrasting strongly with the
dark rocky walls, could not fail to bring to our recollection
a picture of the valley of the shadow of death, which was all
strewn with dead men's bones and horrible things. For¬
tunately for us, the road was also white of hue, which made
it easily distinguishable in the growing darkness. We pro¬
ceeded at a great pace, occasionally stoj)ping for a few
minutes to rest the horses."
' Second, accommodation : " It was about 10 p.m., according
to us, when we stopped at the door of the inn at the foot of
this valley, and at the head of a branch of the Sognefjord.
Time, however, has not yet provided itself with a gun in
Norway, and is consequently at the mercy of the stations,
each of which has a different version of it. Next day,
accordingly, we found that we were supposed to have arrived
here at 11.30 p.m. This may account for some of the
phenomena attending our reception. The house was all
dark ; our driver went round to the back door and knocked;
presently a light was seen moving along the passage.    The
Where shall luego? 119
landlord came to the door in a dishevelled and hopelessly
sleepy condition; his better half, however, with her attendant
2nge, hastened to prepare our night quarters. On my ventur¬
ing to ask for food, the landlord's look of blank dismay was
quite a warning. So we had recourse to our own small stock
of provisions, and slept in joyful hope of the welcome entrance
of coffee at seven the next morning. After a day's residence
at tliis romantic spot, we cross the head of the Sognefjord in
a small steamer. This is a bold, fresh, vigorous fjord; its
shores are not overloaded, like those of the Nordfjord, with a
superabundance of vegetation, but are chiefly composed of
bare massive rocks, at the feet of which are bounding billows
laden with sea breezes. At last we reach our landing-place
and go ashore with a crowd of walking students, attentive
couples, and miscellaneous tourists. Our luggage is all
huddled into one stol-cart, in which one of us drives up to
the hotel, while the other walks. During the drive numerous
articles have to be held firmly to prevent their falling off'. At
last the driver lias to hold his sack of corn with one arm while
he drives with the other, and yet he succeeds in dropping it.
Here we are well accommodated in an annexe. Our second
station after this afforded a fine specimen of true Norwegian
customs. About 3 p.m. we reached Maristuen,where we agreed
to pass the night. This is a primitive place, high among the
hills, with abundance of fresh mountain air. Hay-making is
going on most briskly. Whether it be the engrossing nature
of this occupation or the repulsiveness of our appearance, we
cannot tell; some reason there must be why the natives are
so scared that it is almost impossible to catch one when we
want anything. Bells there are none ; so that it is only by
going through the kitchen, out at the back door, and into an
outhouse that any one can be found. And even then they
look precisely as if they dwelt on an oasis of contentment in
the midst of a desert of stupidity; so that it is well-nigh
hopeless, even knowing the language as we do, to make them
understand our wishes. Dinner, however, is to them a self-
evident necessity, and is provided both in good time and of
good quality. One more station, and I have done with the
accommodation. Maristuen stands on the edge of a lonely
mountain tarn, more Scotch than Norwegian in character.
Its only recommendation as an inn is the milk, which is
very good ; otherwise w^e must live on air rather extensively,
unless the large hunches of black bread and questionable
cheese can recommend themselves as inviting. I must
own, however, that at most of the stations on our route, a
120 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magasiite.
very good dinner could be had at less than half an hour's
notice."
' Third, mode of travelling: " To sit, or rather recline, at
ease in a carriole, with a willing pony that hardly needs
driving, to carry you on over good roads, with ever new and
delightful prospects opening up before you,—this, indeed, is
paradise. But this paradise, alas ! has its drawbacks. These
are, for the most part, the drivers. Norwegian drivers, or
skyds, as they are called, are of four kinds. First, little boys
of five or six years of age; second, heavy girls of about
twenty ; third, and best (of which we had but two the whole
time), intelligent young men; fourth, and worst, dirty and
deaf old men, who insist on driving themselves.
'" Of the first kind our experience was quite pleasant but
for one circumstance. The small boy of six had not been
able to see that our baggage was properly strapped on behind
the carrioles before starting. Consequently, several times
during the drive, we had either to alight and pull with might
and main at the straps ourselves, or to call men out of
adjoining houses and fields for that purpose. With the
second kind, namely the girls, we found that they invariably
talked very fast and very incessantly, merely to show their
superior knowledge of Norsk ; they weighed the carriole
down most uncomfortably behind ; and when they resumed
their seat after walking up a hill, they never failed to knock
off our hats while doing so. Of the third kind, the intelli¬
gent young men, we would gladly have had more than one
repetition, but this was a vain hope. The last of this kind
told us many stories of the ancient kings of Norway, and
pointed out their former dwellings, until we felt we were
really travelling over hallowed ground, sacred to the prowess
and unfailing energy of the hardy Norseman of bygone days.
'" Of the fourth kind, viz. the skauth af gomul,^ the recol¬
lection is quite trying even now. Seating himself upon the
luggage behind my carriole, he called out to my companion,
'Eeise Du !' She, happy in being her own driver, preceded
us. The skauth then clutched the back of my seat, and with
huge grimy hands held the whip and bridle close to my poor
ribs, one on either side, causing my flesh to creep. I be¬
sought him to allow me to drive, but in vain; the ponies
were his own, and he must be careful of them. Oh, how he
spoiled the landscape and the pleasure, and made me even
regret the infant driver of the preceding stage ! But when
he left me all of a sudden, and quite unexpectedly transferred
' Superannuated goblin.
Where shall zve gof 121
himself to the carriole of my companion, I could have died
of laughing. Much as I pitied her, the relief to myself was
so great, and the sight of the skauth clinging to her carriole
as he had done to mine so ridiculous, that I could not but
laugh in solitary amusement. After all, the fifth kind of
driver is the best, namely oneself." ^
' You observe, then,' remarked my fair counsellor, on finish¬
ing these extracts from the journal,' how these ladies only
half got rid of civilisation, and sighed for its total absence.
But the half comfort which only disgusted them may appear
inviting to those who require chairs, tables, and other luxuries
Avherever they go. The medium to be found in these tilings
by the traveller in Norway may be a good preparation for
the total absence of comforts in Iceland, and thus prevent
tlie shock which might be felt on going to the latter island
with mind and body totally uninured to hardship. To take,
again, the parallel of a man of genius and a man of talent,
we gain ideas from the man of talent which will enable us
afterwards to appreciate the genius without being shocked or
frightened away by his peculiarities.'
I have well weighed the advice given me in tliis interview.
By taking various precautions which my lady friend seems
to have overlooked, I think I can manage to see Norway with
tolerable comfort. Yes, certainly I shall go there in summer;
and if I return alive and with favourable impressions of the
tour, shall I visit Iceland next year ? Well, I think not; I
shall leave that to the ladies.
TO   MUSIC.
FROM THE GERMAN OF SOHOBER.
Thou Sacred Art! in many a bitter hour,
When life's dark shadows veiled all my way,
The beams of Love, created by thj' power,
Thou sent'st to lead my twilight into day.
Oft has the Breath my soul receives from thee
(Life-giving flow from harmony divine)
My burdened heart again to rise set free,
While Hope's blest vision thou didst render mine.
Joan Soott.
' As only one driver is generally needed for each carriole, it is best
to travel with a good-natured friend who will take the encumbrance,
and always offer yourself to take the horses' provender, which does no
harm on the top of your box. The above-mentioned skauth at the end
of a second stage jumped up behind me, saying the ' three-winter '
{i.e. three-year-old horse) had had enough of him ; and we all agreed
with that precocious animal.—Astrida.
122 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
A TALE TOLD IN LETTERS.
LETTER VII.
The Eev. E. J. Eeynolds to the Eev. E. Bkilby.
April 26.
My dear Beii.by,—Having left it some days unacknow¬
ledged, you will perhaps hardly believe what a blessing your
letter was to me. Many blessings be yours for it. Even
before it came the cloud was a little lightened, and I was
beginning to feel that even if my coming here were a mistake,
it need not be a fatal or final one. But your letter brought
dayliglit into the matter.
What an irresolute fellow I am to be so at the mercy of
every change of feeling—a reed shaken with the wind!
What kind of a prop shall I make for all these souls tliat
have to lean upon me ! Well, you shall have no more in
this strain; ' as iron sharpeneth iron,' so you have sharpened
me. ... I quite agree with you that hard, resolute work,
with or against the grain, must be the corrective of over-
thinking; and, thank God, hope and the power of work have
come back to me. ... I need them, for the burdens of the
sole charge are almost too much for my back.
I began my daily service on Monday, and the first three
days a good many labouring men came; but to-day they
have all dropped off: perhaps tlieir curiosity is satisfied.
Several old women wov.ld come, but one is afraid of the cold,
and another of the distance, and a third always ' gets the
cramps' if she sits long, etc. ... I have some of the drollest
specimens of old womanhood you ever saw. . . . The school
children, of course, come; but tlie mistress sulks, because it
breaks into her arrangements; and the master sends the
boys in charge of a monitor and takes his leisure, and the
consequence is disorder, and when I tell him I must have
his attendance, I expect I shall bring him down upon me
like all the rest. . . . My churchwardens make violeut
opposition to the little alterations I have made and am
proposing to make in the church. Happily the time for
re-election is near at hand, when, please Heaven, I shall get
some better ones. Two little girls have been taken from
scliool on account of their mothers' objections to me and
Let Than Alone. 123
my ways. They were the sweetest children I ever saw in
any rank of life, and it was a positive pleasure to me to have
them in my Bible class ; looking up with their large, serious
eyes, they made me feel the words, ' of such is the kingdom
of heaven.' But they are gone—the sweetest voices are
gone from my choir, and the angel faces from my class—
gone off to the ranter's chapel! I daresay many more of
my children will be taken away, for I find that terrible body
' the mothers' are much displeased at the daily service.
They say they 'can't want' their children half an hour
earlier than usual in the mornings, and they can't see the
good ' 0' all that church gaunin' and stoof. The owd priest
niver fashed ou wi' owt 0' that, an' surely if we keep the
Sabbath days it's eneugh ; an' the Lord knows as there must be
washin' and cleanin', an' the bairns must help their parents.'
This is the substance of two or three lectures I have had
from the mothers of my flock. Well, patience, patience!
nothing else will manage men, much less women! As to
my choir, I shall get it on a better footing, I hope, soon, and
keep the treble to the boys only. I have been tiying to get
some young men together to learn part singing, and they
seem fairly inclined to come, but as for our harmony! No
one knows anything of music, and we have no instrument;
so I have at once to teacli the theory and the practice, to
lead the bass, the tenor, and even the treble. Meantime, all
the old men and lasses wlio have hitherto formed the choir
have struck work. I asked them to go on till the young
beginners were ready to take their places, putting it as
flatteringly as I could; but no, they were huffed, and all
deserted in a body, except one old man, the most cracky of
them all, so I expect next Sunday he and I will have to
perform a hymn by ourselves.
I mean to try and get Tap some cricket. It is quite
unknown here, but there are plenty of sturdy lads who look
as if they were made to handle bats and balls. My own
little field,/ffw^e de, mieux, may be made into the ground,
and I must try and get the co-operation of Slade and the
young Bensons, the squire's sons. I must break off, though
this is a very unworthy return for your truly brotherly letter.
It is the day on which I have settled to go to Foley Bridge,
one of my outlying hamlets four miles off, where I am going
to try the plan of holding a cottage service. I must be off.
Farewell.   Your affectionate F. J. E.
If I don't write often enough, go to Helen for news of me.
She keeps me hard at it.
124 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
LETTEK V]I[.
Rev. F. J. Eeynolds to Miss Reynolds.
Feast of St. Philip and St, Jamex.
A pleasant May morning to you, dearest Helen, and I
trust it has broken more brightly to you than it has done to
me. I have just come back from service, at which there was
nobody but tlie children and one old man. I had taken my
ten minutes' Saints'-day sermon with me; but it would have
seemed like a farce to have preached it, so I put it back
into my pocket. I found your letter on my breakfast table,
and it has been like a gleam of home sun to me. While I
think of it, thank mamma and my father for the cheque, and
ask them whether I am at liberty to spend it as I like. I
think it would be very premature yet to do anything to iny
house, and I do not want a horse, for T can walk; but I
greatly want some money to spend upon my church, especi¬
ally for beginning a fund for a small organ, and to that, if
they agree, I shall appropriate it. . . . Vou were quite right,
dear child, and acted with your usual judgment in not letting
Clara write. Of course she meant it kindly, thinking to
comfort a poor fellow of a cousin two hundred miles off' at
his lonely fireside; but she does not know what it would
have been to me. It would simply have been the undoing
of all that I have done, the break-up of the calm that I have
at last attained by dint of working hard all my waking hours
and never trusting myself to look back. No, she knows
nothing about it, and that is the source of my greatest thank¬
fulness. Some day, perhaps, I shall ask her for her friend¬
ship—some day be able to look upon her handwriting, but
not yet. . . . (Evening). Oh! Helen, I am full, full to over¬
flowing, with parish cares, difficulties, and perplexities; but
as I have been grinding at them all day, and want to write
to you for solace and recreation, I shall leave them alone and
tell you about something more amusing. Thursday, the day I
wrote to you last, I dined at Mr. Benson's and had my first
introduction to society here. It was a droll beginning
enough. We were fourteen at dinner, and as there were
only four ladies,—Mrs. Benson, her daughter, young Mrs.
Rivers, and two elderly ladies of the neighbourhood,—aU we
young men and bachelors were packed together at the bottom
of the table. On my right hand, however, sat a big-wig, Mr.
Childers, a squire of no small consequence in his own and
his neighbours' estimation, and master of the hounds.    He
Let Them Alone. " 125
was much interested in his dinner, looked pityingly at me
now and then for my (supposed) want of appetite, and made
a few remarks for my benefit on the dishes, but kept the
bulk of his conversation for worthier people.    On my left
sat  Walter, the scapegrace, whom his ill-luck had placed
between me and Slade, and I was amused to see how uncom¬
fortable he looked.    After glancing from one to the other
of us, I suppose to see which was the least objectionable,
and finding little to clioose, he at last resolved to brave it
out, and, opening fire upon me, he began a regular rattle upon
his favourite topics, the turf and racing men, interweaving
his conversation with anecdotes that were far from choice.
I answered as shortly as courtesy would allow; but my want
of interest seemed to put his back up, and he still went on.
I glanced across his back at Slade, hoping that, as an older
man and an older acquaintance, he would undertake to put
him down ; but Slade was quite abstracted, and sat looking
down, his nose into his plate, the whole time.    So away went
Walter with his wild talk, until at last I told him, as I did
not mean to listen to any more of that, eitlier he or I must
leave the table, and he should choose.    This sliamed him,
and, after a slight sneer and an attempt at a repartee, which
broke down, he gave in, and was quiet and apologetic the
rest of the dinner.    Strange that all the time I feel as if
there  was  some  good  in  that  Walter.    Opposite me sat
Jack, and my liking for him was increased by observing
his  kindly manner towards all  about him, one of whom
was a deaf lady,  who insisted  on knowing  all that  was
going  on; while  his  other  neighbour  was  Mr.   Childers'
son, a  lad  of nineteen,  rather  more  helpless  than  Jack
himself.
As I don't drink wine, and the after-dinner talk was not
much in my way, I soon went up-stairs. IVIrs. Benson was
nodding in her elbow-chair ; Mrs. Elvers had gone to see her
baby, and another lady had accompanied her. There was
nothing left for it but the deaf lady. She drew herself up
very stiff as I approached; I fancied she did not like the cut of
my waistcoat, and I thought she was much deafer to me than
she was to Jack Benson. I soon found she was an ardent
admirer of Mr. Miller and of Slade. I asked her if she knew
my church. ' I used to do so,' she answered very stiffly;' but
I should think your church does not know itself now, if all
that I hear be true.' ' What do you hear, madam, may I
ask ?' 'I hear that from a place of worship it has become
a theatre . . . the theatre where one young gentleman ex-
126 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
hibits himself and airs his new notions.' ' Tliese are
rather hard words, madam,' said I, more amused than ang^3^
' What else ?' ' What else ! I liear that the windows have
been shut up to darken it, and candles lighted to light it
up again, which I take to be tolerably typical of the whole
business.'
' Will you explain ?' ' Yes. There was an old-fashioned
thing in the Church of England called faith. We used to
think that that was the best light to walk by and get to
heaven, but our pastors and masters are darkening that for
us, and giving us a rush-light glimmer of rites and cere¬
monies and traditions, and Heaven knows what of their
own instead ! In my day, we thought if a man was called a
clergyman it was a very respectable title; but now he must
needs be called an Anglo-Catholic priest. But I beg your
pardon for my freedom; I am only an old woman and have
no right to any opinion,' etc. She went on for some time
in this strain, while I was unable to make any reply, because
slie only lieard what she chose. Meantime Mrs. Elvers had
come back, and when the old lady's tirade was over, she
beckoned to me with her eyes to come and sit by her. ' So
you've fallen into Mrs. Wimpole's clutches,' she said, ' and
she has dealt witli you severely. She's very odd, isn't she ?
but she is not so bad as she seems. If she takes a prejudice
against any one, which she can do with or without the
smallest grounds, she puts no measure to her language; but
if you put up with her and bear it once or twice, she is very
likely to turn straight round and be your friend for ever.
She's a clever woman and well worth having for a friend;
however, you've no chance against Mr. Slade: he's everything
with her.'
I was having a pleasant chat with Mrs. Elvers when the
rest of the gentlemen came up. My host came towards me
in the most jovial way, and began cutting his jokes on my
want of conviviality and my preference for ladies' conversa¬
tion. He was somewhat too jovial, and I saw his daughter
glance uneasily at him; perhaps this is his wont. At this
moment Walter came up and took Mrs. Elvers off to a
distant oriel window, and began making some whispering
confidences to her; and I, thinking I should relish my good
host's conversation more at another time, made off, and took
up with Slade, who was placing the pieces on a chess-board
and looking round for somebody to play with him. I don't
play, and nobody seemed forthcoming; so we got into con¬
versation, and persevered in it, too, though it was very up-
Let Than Alone. 127
liill work. He was not disinclined to talk, not even on
parish matters; but there is an air of conscious superiority
about him, a sense of bringing out his dicta from the depths
of a vast experience, a pitying, just tolerant manner towards
me that I find infinitely oppressive. Verily I believe he
doesn't think I am a Christian! Now, I have nothing of
the same feeling about him. I think him thoroughly mis¬
taken in his views, but I believe him to be so excellent a
man that I would most gladly overcome his prejudice and
see whether we could not pull together on some points. I
tried to broach the cricket question, but he looked excessively
grave and murmured something about its leading to idleness
and drinking (the very things that it is to put a check upon '),
and would give no clear answer whatever. In short, excellent
or not, he is thoroughly disagreeable. The fellow has an
inimitable set of teeth, and, I must do him the justice to say,
doesn't display them, but he has a pleasant smile when he
does smile. He left early, and I could see that, though he
accepts their hospitality, he does not think much of the
Bensons, or, indeed, of any of the party, unless it be old Mrs.
AVimpole. Well, so much for my unsocial social evening,
the only one since I came here that I have not spent alone.
I got home about eleven, not much exhilarated.
On Saturday I called again at the rectory, having business
there, and was again much pleased and attracted by old Mr.
Aliller. He looks like Melanctlion grown old, and his
manner is charming in its genuine courtesy. I don't make
much progress with Mrs. Miller, though I fancy I could get
round her if I tried. She is certainly prejudiced against me,
and looked at me as severely as so plump and comely an old
lady could. She did not purr so much as before, but talked
in short, broken sentences, occasionally turning up her eyes
to the ceiling. I have discovered that her great aim in life
is to keep Slade's feet dry, and that all the stockings are for
him! Now good-bye. I am very glad Beilby has been
over, and that you are likely to see more of him. Certainly
read him as much of my letters as you like. He is my second
self, and I should be glad that he knew every detail of my
affairs, but it would be too much to write him a ditto, ditto of
my volumes to you. Life is too short to support two such
correspondences. Love to my father and mother. Your
loving F. J. E.
128 TJic Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
LETTER IX.
The Eev. F. J. E. Reynolds to Miss Reynolds.
Monday, May 8.
Dearest Helen and most exorbitant of Correspondents,
—As it is hard to make time for long letters, I will adopt
the plan you suggest, of writing a little bit every day and
sending off' the budget when it looks big enough. I have
gone on quietly since I wrote last, sticking tolerably close to
the plan I have laid down, including my reading in the
evening. No more gaiety since the dinner at Mr. Benson's,
but I am engaged to dine on Wednesday this week with
Mr. and Mrs. Cliilders.
I have made acquaintance with a parishioner, who interests
me extremely.    Three mornings last week I observed at my
eight  o'clock  service  a  very  delicate-looking  young girl,
apparently of the humblest class.    She sat near the door,
and the first two days disappeared before I had come out of
the vestry.    On the third morning I overtook her, and found
that she walked with a crutch, though very expeditiously.
She had a most wistful, anxious expression of face, and
seemed more inclined to avoid me than to make acquaintance.
I asked her name.     Margaret Scott.    Did she belong to
lUingham ?    Yes; but she had been out in service several
years, and then had fallen ill and been in hospital two years,
on and off, and was only just come back to live with her
aunt.    Was she only just out of the hospital ?   No ; she had
been out eight or nine months.    Discharged incurable ?    No ;
she had been cured; her lameness was from a subsequent
accident.    Where had she been living, then, since she left
hospital ?    At this question she became so confused and
agitated that I hastened to turn it off, and asked her whether
I should come to see her at her aunt's.    She said, ' If you
please, sir,' but without any warmth.    I then asked her if
she liked the daily service, and she answered,' Deed, I diuna
ken, sir, but I tliowt I'd try if I could get any comfort by
it; I thowt I'd maybe hear some'at good.'    ' And didn't you
hear something good ?'    ' Ay, ay, sir,' she replied in a tone
of despondency that went to my heart; ' it's all good, it's all
vara reet, but I doubt comfort's not for such as me.'    The
last words were more addressed to herself than to me, and
by this time we had reached her aunt's door and she seemed
glad to get away.    She made a sort of curtsey, turned upon
me for a moment the saddest pair of eyes I ever saw, and
Avent in without another word.    I went home wondering
Let Them Alone. 129
what the poor young thing could have upon her mind, and
framing words of comfort to meet every case that I could
conjecture. The next day she was not at church, and I went
to call. Her aunt was out washing, and I found her alone.
A terrible fit of coughing prevented her from speaking for
several minutes, and when it was over she seemed so embar¬
rassed, and looked about so nervously, as if for some one to
break the Ute-a-Ute, that I felt awkward too. I began to
talk to her, but I found all my carefully-prepared ideas desert
me in the presence of this great unknown sorrow. . . . Was
it the ordinary tale of folly and sin ? But no; as I looked
into her face, so refined and sensitive for one of her class, I
felt instinctively that it could not be that. "Was it her
lameness and dependent condition ? I hazarded a question
in this direction, when a strange smile came over her face,
and she said, ' Oh no, sir, that's the Lord's will!'
' But, Margaret, you can have had no trouble of any kind
tliat is not the Lord's will.'
' Deed, sir, but I have ! Don't think I'll charge it on the
Almighty, for all I've been half-mad sometimes, and have
said wicked words, and cursed the day I was born. Oh, sir,
but it was my own fault; it was none of Crod's will that I
have done as I have done, and He's cast me off, and He
doesn't hear me when I pray.'
She became violently agitated, and all attempts to induce
her to open her mind were in vain. I spoke to her, as you
may suppose, of the remedy for all sorrow and all guilt, and
at last she was so far quieted as to consent to kneel down
and repeat a prayer with me. After this she sat down,
crying more quietly, when, as ill-luck would have it, there
was a clatter at the door, and she sprang up, making some
frightened exclamation about her aunt finding her crying,
and being angry with her for 'taking on' so much. She
was trying to clear her face when her aunt bustled in. She
threw a glance half angry, half pitying on poor Margaret,
and began to talk to me loud and fast, by w^ay, I suppose, of
giving a more cheerful turn to my visit. Under cover of
this Margaret left the room, but at the same moment two
hulking lads came in for their dinner, so I had to beat a
retreat unenlightened. On Saturday I was again on my
way to the house, when I met Mrs. Barren the aunt, and
walked some way with her that I might question her about
Margaret. It was as sad a history as ever I listened to, but
I must sum it up very briefly for you; it can be no breach
of confidence, I think, to tell it to you, so far off, to whom
No. 39.—March 1878. j
130 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the actors in it will be no more than the characters in a
story. Margaret was left an orphan very early, and brought
up by this aunt until she went to service. She was a good
girl and a good scholar, but rather ' taken up with romances,
and finery, and things as only quality has any business with.'
She was engaged to a very respectable young mechanic in
Norwich, and they w^ere to be married as soon as they had
saved money enough between them to live upon. Then
came Margaret's long illness, which swallowed up her sav¬
ings ; but the young man, protesting that lie would wait no
longer, and that he had enough for both, it was settled they
were to marry as soon as her liealth was quite restored.
She left the hospital nearly strong, and but a few months
were to intervene, when, unfortunately, while staying with
a relation in the country, the girl fell into a silly flirtation
with some one a good deal above her in station, and her head
was turned. Mrs. Barren thinks she never meant to give
up her engagement, but she delighted in plaguing her lover
by telling him of her conquest, and that she could be a lady
if she chose. All this and more, till the poor young man,
maddened with jealousy, fell ill. He kept it to himself as
long as he could, but at length, thinking himself in danger,
he wrote entreating her to come to him at his mother's house.
She thought it a ruse to get her away from her admirer, and
took no notice; till at last, hearing from a third person that
his illness was really serious, she took fright and set off, full
of penitence. On arriving, she w'as told by his mother to go
up to his room, and there she found him stretched on his
bed—dead,—a lock of her hair and her last bantering letter
to him in his hand. On the table there lay a sheet of paper,
on which he had been trying to write to her, but had only
succeeded in scratching a few blurred sentences, telling her
that she had broken his heart, but that he died forgiving her.
Poor Margaret tried to turn and leave the room, but, fainting
as she reached the door, she staggered and fell down the
steep stairs; hence the injury to her back and limbs, wdiich
will make her a cripple for life. . . . The sad details of the
poor girl's story are not known at lUingliam; they only
know that her lover is dead, and her greatest dread is that
the whole circumstances should be known by her neighbours
and acquaintances. She keeps entirely to herself, never
leaving home except to go to church, and has charged her
aunt, as she values her own soul, to keep her secret. This I
believe the good woman has faithfully done, only venturing,
rightly, to make an exception in my case.    For, as she says.
The Lost Piece. 131
what is the use of sending for a doctor and not telling him
where the pains lie ? So, you see, there is a tragedy even in
Illiugham. God send I be of some help here. ... I am just
going to write a note to Slade about the cricket, and see if I
can bring him to a definite answer.— Your loving
F. J. K.
{To he continiLed.)
[L. C. G.]
2rf)c Hast ^tccc.
To E. B. H.
' Rejoice with me ; for I have found the piece which I had lost.'—
S. Luke xv. 9.
Will it be really so ?
Shall we some day
Get back the things we thought
Gone for alway ?
Find our lost treasures, dear,
Count our lost sheep,
Gather what blossomed, while
We were asleep ?
Joys that we once have had,
Love that w^as ours,
Hopes that we scoffed and scorned
In the past hours ;—
Hands that we might have held.
Hearts that we lack.
Chances we miss on earth.
Will they come back ?
Will they ? Ah ! who can tell
What we shall find,
When the great golden gates
Close in behind ?—•
Crowns, palms, and seraph songs,—
/ shall rejoice
If I may hear, at last,
One angel's voice!
H. A. Duff.
Trevalyn, July 24, 1877.
132 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazme.
Peace anti 6oolih)ill; or, W^^ ©iiristmas 1£ljes.
Part II.—THE LAST.
A SAD time followed for the little peacemaker and her true
lover. It seemed as if no cause of estrangement had before
existed between the families, as each father declared that
the long-wished-for peace and friendliness would be estab¬
lished, if only the wilful young people would obey their
parents and give each other up. That, of course, they could
not do; but they did not press for a recognised engagement;
they were contented to know each other's heart, to meet
occasionally, and write often. Mr. More had great pleasure
in informing all his friends that James Eeid's son had wished
to marry his daughter, but tliat he had refused his consent,
not desiring to be more nearly connected with the family,
although he had no objection to the young man personally,
except that he was his father's son. This naturally enraged
Mr. Eeid, but he hoped by ignoring the subject to wear out
his son's patience. He sent him to London as soon as
possible, hoping that absence, and the society of fairer, nobler,
livelier, and richer damsels would obliterate the impression
his cousin had made on his heart. His ambition would
never have tolerated so poor a match for his son as almost
penniless and untitled Ursula More; but he was thankful
for Lady Anne's crotchet about cousins marrying, which gave
him a valid and more dignified objection to the lady than
her want of money or position would have been. In some
rare instances absence does make the heart grow fonder, and
the society of others only makes us realize more vividly the
superiority of the absent one; in this uncommon case were
our lovers—the less they saw of each other, the more they
pined to meet.
Affairs were brought to a climax by Ursula's refusing to
marry a perfectly eligible suitor, for no reason but that she
had no heart to bestow. Taxed with still hankering after
the man whose family despised her, she did not deny it; but
when ordered to give up and have no further communica¬
tion with him, she gently but decidedly refused. Had this
happened in a former generation, the rebellious maiden
would have been locked up and fed on bread and water, but
that would have been less cruel than tlie constant badgering
to which she was subjected.    She was reminded daily that
Peace and Goodwill; or, Two Christmas Eves.     133
had she been Lady Edith, the cousinship would have been
no objection. Every low trait in her uncle's character was
raked up and imputed to his son. She was reproached
hourly for her disobedience, and taunted for her want of
proper pride, and even maidenly modesty—the most cutting
censure that can be directed against a pure and liigh-minded
woman.
At last her letters from William, which had been ignored
all this time, were seized and sent unopened to Mr. Eeid,
with a complaint that his son was carrying on a clandestine
corx'espondence, and a request that he would exercise his
authority and put a stop to it. This made Mr. Eeid per¬
fectly fui'ioiis, and he said it was time to end this folly; so
he ordered his son to write a formal denial of all pretensions
to the lady's hand, not only for the present, but for all future
time. He was amazed and indignant when William calmly
refused, and said it was what no man had a right to demand
from another. He was told that his present conduct was
disrespectful to his mother and her opinions, and that if he
honoured her he must give up his own way in this matter.
Unmoved, he declared that even his love for his mother
should not make him false to his plighted word, or induce
him to forfeit his manhood's right of choosing his own bride.
Mr. Eeid's threat of stopping his allowance unless he sub¬
mitted only made matters worse, and he would not even
promise to give up the correspondence; so the stormy meet¬
ing between father and son concluded by the former forbid¬
ding the latter to enter his doors till all was at an ^id
between him and Ursula. Lady Anne was more accustomed
to the independence accorded to the sons of men of fortune,
and was horrified at the plebeian strictness of her husband
towards their son ; she insisted on a provision from absolute
want being given him, but nothing more could she gain.
The fathers took to writing injudicious letters to each other,
both believing that the culprits must have secret friends at
home, or they would not have dared to defy parental authority
in tliis manner. It ended in Mr. More declaring that his curse
would follow his daughter if she ever married her cousin.
The little peacemaker saw herself regarded as a firebrand
who caused dissension in families, banished a well-beloved
son from his father's home and heart, and deprived a dying
mother of the society of her only child; for Lady Anne was
declared by competent authorities to be wasting away with
that consumption she had so feared to transfer to another
generation.    Even Ursula's step-mother, who had always be-
134 ^'^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
friended her cause, said now it would be better to give up
her love, as nothing could come of it but misery. They
never seemed to think of her at all when they so calmly
decided that it would be better to give up her life's happi¬
ness. She had but one life to live, and must she give up all
its brightness—not to secure their happiness or even comfort,
but as a martyr to their pride, prejudice, and ill temper ?
She might have sacrificed herself, but William she could not
sacrifice, and this kept her firm.
The weary and painful struggle had already lasted three
years, and no one had gained an inch. It was pitiful to see
the look of care on Ursula's young face, to notice the hollow
cheek, sunken eye, and listless step, telling of hopeless
sorrow and many tears. A life scarcely commenced was
blighted already. ' Oh, the pity of it, lago, the pity of it!'
But no one had any pity ; they thought only of themselves
and of what was due to them, and not of what might be due
to others.
December was drawing towards a close, when Mr. More
came in suddenly and said to Ursula, 'Lady Anne starts for the
Continent immediately, and wishes to see you before she goes;
so I said you would come to-morrow.   Will you ride or drive ?'
' I will drive there and walk back,' said Ursula in a fever
of excitement and hope at this strange summons. What
did it mean ? Was William ill ? Did the approach of death
give Lady Anne clearer views about earthly matters ? Her
aunt had always liked her, was she to be forgiven for being
a cousin, and was she sent for to be told so ? These and
such-like surmises occupied her all night. Her father drove
her himself to Cleaves Castle next day, but told her nothing
to solve the mystery, except that he had met Lady Anne out
driving, and that she had begged him, as a favour to a dying
woman, to allow Ursula to bid her good-bye. She found
Lady Anne looking old and worn and faded, a shadow of her
former self, but her greeting was as affectionate as in the old
days. After speaking for a little on indifferent subjects, she
handed a note to Ursula, saying, ' I sent for you to give you
this.    Eead it, dear.'
It was from William, and like himself, brave and loving,
telling little of his own sufferings, except in being separated
from his own true love, commiserating her for all the
troubles he had brought upon her, and yet foretelling a bright
future for both, somehow. He was at a German University,
where he managed to live on the pittance allowed him by
his father.    He often found an opportunity of comforting
i
Peace and Goodzuill; or, Two Christinas Eves.     135
Ursula with a letter, sent through a friend, after open corre¬
spondence was forbidden them; but it was long since she
had heard from him, and the sight of the dear writing, and
the power her love gave her of reading between the lines a
very different story to that told by the hopeful, courageous
writer, quite overcame her, and she burst into tears and
sobbed as if her heart would break.
Lady Anne bent over her, saying gently, ' My poor child,
how you must have suffered ! My dear boy too, and I also.
I would have begged and prayed, and never rested till I had
gained my husband's consent to your marriage, had I not
feared to bring worse evil on you both. I must have seemed
cruel, but it was all in kindness I did it. Can you forgive
me for having to cause you this sorrow ? I have suffered in
this separation and alienation more than I can tell'
' But now you will be able to see your son; going abroad
will give you that pleasure,' said Ursula eagerly, looking up
through her tears.
Lady Anne shook her head. 'No, dear, that makes no
difference; his father refuses to receive him under any roof
of his, whether at home or abroad, as long as your engage¬
ment lasts, and you know how firm and loyal William is.
I greatly fear I shall never see my dear boy again.'
Ursula saw tears streaming over Lady Anne's wasted
cheeks as she turned aside her head. She could not bear it,
and cried out passionately,' If it was not for William's sake, I
would have given up long ago. He loves me; he could never
be happy without me, he says.'    She looked at Lady Anne.
' All men say so when they are in love, and think so at the
moment,' said the elder lady sadly.
' It is not selfishness on my part; my love is the only con¬
solation he has, and all he fears in the future is my ceasing
to care for him. / cannot wound him; I must stand by
him as long as he wishes. If I thought it would be best for
him, I should not hesitate to sacrifice myself, but—' She
looked again wistfuUy at Lady Anne.
' You need not fear, dear; as long as William has a chance
of winning you, he will never give you up,' said his mother
with a sad, fond smile.
' But if he had no hope of winning me, you think he could
forget me and be happy with some one else ?' said Ursula
anxiously, watching her aunt's lips as if for the fiat of life or
death.
Lady Anne paused, and gave a pitying glance at the
young face by her side.
136 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Ursula struggled to be calm and to speak quietly. ' You
think in your heart that he would forget me, if I gave him up ?'
Lady Anne answered at last, slowly and with evident
effort, ' It would only be man's nature if he did: they are
more reasonable than we are; so when hope is dead, they con¬
sole themselves more readily than we can do. But you, too,
my child, must not think you will never love again because
you have had a girlish affection for William. You will find
some one else to suit you better in every way, and with
whom a connection would bring comfort and happiness, in¬
stead of dispeace and remorse, for I know you could not be
happy without your parents' blessing on your union.'
' And that we could never have, I suppose,' said Ursula,
scarcely knowing what she said, paralyzed by the thought
that he might be happy without her, and that she might be
doing him an injury by not setting him free from the words
spoken three years ago, on that very day, in that very place
—words so sweet she would not have had them unsaid in
spite of all the subsequent suffering.
' Never,' said Lady Anne firmly; ' you must not buoy
yourself up with any hopes of that kind. You know your
father's mind; and for myself, my conscience would not
allow me to sanction a union fraught with such perils.'
' I will think over what you have told me, I cannot say
more now ; I may come back to-morrow if I have anything
further to say. I thank you so much for giving me this;'
and she pressed the letter to her lips.
' No one can feel for you more than I do,' said Lady Anne,
kissing her; ' and I know you will do what is right for my
dear boy, and for us all.'
' I will try,' said Ursula humbly; 'all I desire is his
happiness.'
She refused the offer of the carriage pressed on her by her
aunt, saying truly that she preferred the walk, and almost
hurried away. She wished to be alone to think, to get rid
of the dreadful supposition that Lady Anne's words had
suggested, viz. the possibility of giving up William, and that
this course would be best for him, for all but herself. Going
calmly over the events of the last three years, what had time
done for them ? Had it realized their hope that in time their
relatives would relent ? If they were ever united, it must be
under her father's curse and without his mother's blessing.
Where were the ' Peace and Groodwill' to the establishment of
which they had looked forward so confidently ? How had
the little peacemaker sped on her mission 1   Were not father
Peace and Goodivill; or, Tivo Christmas Eves.     137
and  uncle  more  bitterly  estranged than ever, her cousin
banished, her aunt dying lonely and desolate,—all through
her, and in order that she might enjoy the name of a love
that could never be more than a dream ?    Could her con¬
stancy be mere selfish obstinacy ?    If William could be so
easily consoled as his mother imagined, it must be so.    All
the sacrifice would be hers,—every one else would be happy ;
Lady Anne would have her son  restored to her; William
would return to the comforts of his home and be consoled in
time ; her father would be happy in getting his own way;
her step-mother would be saved the constant fret and worry.
And her own mother, would she look down from heaven and
rejoice too over her child's broken heart, for that she felt
would be the price to be paid,—only one poor heart crushed
to make many light and cheerful ?    Then she remembered
her mother telling her she must never think of her own wishes,
but be a little peacemaker always.    Her father's naturally
impatient temper had been so irritated by the opposition and
worry of the last three years, as to have become a serious trial
to himself and to every one connected with him.    Would not
her mother grieve to know how little comfort Ursula had
been to him ?    How far from ' Peace and Goodwill' would
this Christmas find them!    How different from that happy
Christmas  eve was this one!    Yet she would  always  be
thankful for that happy half-hour in lier life ; it is something
to have even one perfectly happy half-hour to remember.
Could it be that peace was to be secured through pain and
sorrow, and the renunciation of all that made life dear, in¬
stead of, as she once thought, through the joy and triumph of
happy love ?    And, if this was the case, would she shrink
from the sacrifice ?
' Mother,' she cried in the bitterness of her spirit, ' do you,
too, require me to do this hard thing ? Do you not care for
my happiness ?    Give me a sign to tell me what to do ?'
But no sign came, only the words of her dying mother
rang in her ears,' to think of others before herself, to be a
little peacemaker always.'
' I will do it,' she cried, ' even this hard and cruel thing.
God forgive me if I am mistaken, and have betrayed a fond
and constant heart.    He knows I have done it for the best.'
Without pausing to reconsider her decision, she wrote a
note to William that night, telling him that, seeing their
friends would never give their consent, she thought it better
for both parties to give up all thoughts of being anything
but cousins; so she sent him back his ring, and req^uested
138 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
him not to write again, as it would only cause unnecessary
pain to them both.
That was all, a short formal letter; but he must never
guess what it cost her to write it, he must never know her
heart was breaking. She said nothing at home, but the next
day she took the packet to Lady Anne and told her what
was in it, and asked her to send or give it to her son, for there
was now no reason why he should not join them at once.
' Bravest, noblest, dearest girl I' cried Lady Anne,' you will
have your reward for this some day.'
But to Ursula's troubled mind it seemed that her present
reward would be a broken heart, perhaps an early grave.
A blank period followed of much petting and kindness
from every one, but of bitter sorrow, such as Ursula had
never felt before, for William never answered her letter or
wrote to her again. He did not send back her ring; but,
doubtless, he thought such a trifle not worth sending. She
had told him not to write, but she never expected he would
take his dismissal without an expostulation, and, indeed, was
steeling her heart to resist his prayers and arguments. Vain
labour! She got one note from his mother, saying she was
much better and enjoying dear William's society; but no
message from himself. This silence was broken by an event
that proved to Ursula it was possible to be more miserable
than she was already.
News came that William was ill of Eoman fever, followed
immediately by a telegraphic summons to her to come as
soon as possible, for he was worse, and wished to see her.
Her father, now all affection and care for her, offered to start
at once and take her direct to Lady Anne. They had a sad
and hurried journey, travelling night and day; but the way
was long, and when they reached the Piazza di Spagna, he
was already dead and buried.
' When it was to be for so short a time, why not have let
us be happy together ?' was Ursula's first rebellious thought.
' Where was the need to torture that noble spirit, to mis¬
interpret his motives, to restrain his actions, and to render
his short life miserable, in order to prepare for a possible
future, when his future was already provided for by his
Father in heaven ?'
But calmer, happier thoughts soon came, and with the effort
to comfort otliers she found peace herself She felt thankful
that she had had the strength to give up her lover without
waiting for him to be taken from her, that through her his
last days at least had been peaceful, and that he had had
Peace and Goodivill; or, Tzvo Christmas Eves.     139
every care and comfort  that wealth  and  affection   could
bestow.
He left her his undying love, and wished her to be told,
that although he had never parted with her ring, and was
angry at first with her for sending back his, he now saw she
had been right. After all, death brought thera nearer to¬
gether than life could have done. There could be no more
separations, but a happy anticipation of meeting beyond the
grave. Nothing could come between them any more; their
love was their own now; no one could meddle with it, or try
to spoil it, or cause its decay,—death had consecrated it theirs
for ever.
Ursula, indeed, had reason to rejoice ; she need never fear
that her love might become a sin, or a humiliation; she might
cherish his memory to her latest breath, and no one could
blame her; as she was his first and last love, so would he be
hers.
All were ready now to acknowledge his worth and to do
him justice, when neither praise nor blame could affect him
any longer. All felt more or less regret for the harshness
shown him, and all were anxious to explain their conduct.
Mr. More was glad he had always liked his nephew, and had
declared openly he had no objection to him personally; and
he spoke so feelingly about him, and praised so delicately
his character, that both father and mother were gratified, and
the reconciliation so long delayed was at last effected over
the open grave.
Mr. Reid did not long survive his son, and left the bulk
of his fortune and Cleaves Castle to his niece, after establish¬
ing beds in hospitals, and bursaries in colleges, in memory
of the son whose life he had so embittered and saddened.
The fragile Lady Anne still survives, and Ursula lives with
her as the daughter she would fain have been ; and any bitter
thoughts she might have indulged in are soothed when she
looks on that gentle lady, who ever reproaches herself for
trying to be wiser than Providence. Ursula has not married,
and says she never will. Her aunt thinks it her duty to re¬
monstrate with her occasionally on the subject, and to point
out all the advantages to be gained by a sensible marriage ;
but I think she loves her all the better for remaining true
and faithful to her dear boy, so long sleeping peacefully far
away. NoNO.
140 The Ladies^ EdinburgJi Magazme.
Efje Partition of tfic !£art!j.
FROM THE GERMAN OF SCHILLER.
' There ! take the world.'    Thus Jupiter enthroned
Cried unto man.    ' There, take it; it is yours,
To portion brotherly, and to be owned
Long as eternity endures.'
All hands bestir to seize the proffered treasure.
Both old and young now hurry to and fro,
Of grain and fruit the farmer gleans full measure.
Through wood and dell the huntsmen go.
Much as his store will hold the merchant seeketh,
The abbot chooses old and fiery wine.
Bridges and street the monarch bars and speaketh :
* A tithe of everything is mine.'
At last, too late, when all had been divided.
From region far away the poet came,
To find, alas! that each one M-as provided,
That nought was left for him to claim.
"a'
' Now, w^oe is me, who live to sing thy praises,
That I, thy faithful son, am passed alone.'
Loudly lie thus his plaintive voice upraises,
And throws himself 'neath Jove's high throne.
o
' If in the land of dreams thy footstep wended,'
Eeplied the god, ' then wherefore blamest me ?
Where didst thou linger when my gifts were 'spended ?'
' I was,' the poet said, ' with thee.
' My vision hung upon thy face enraptured,
To heavenly harmony an ear I lent,
Forgive the spirit wliich entranced and captured,
Its Earth within thy radiance blent.'
' But what to do ?' said Jove.   ' All hath been given.
Nor harvest, hunt, nor market now are mine;
But if thou car'st with me to share my Heaven,
Whene'er thou com'st it shall be thine.'
DUM^.
Oiw Library Table. 141
©ur iLifirarg STatile, '
Life of the Pkince Consokt.   Vol. III.    By Theodore Martin.
London : Smith & Elder.
The third instalment of Mr. Theodore Marthi's work lias a peculiar
interest at the present crisis. It includes the two years of the Prince
Consort's life from 1854 to 185(5, and therefore comj^rises the whole
period of the Crimean war. From the importance of the events and
the Prince's intimate connection with them during those two years,
the biographer has necessarily gone more into detail than in the pre¬
ceding volumes, and therefore, as he admits in his preface, he may
perhaps be charged with having occasionally exchanged the sphere of
the biographer for that of the historian. It is true that in this volume
we do temporarily lose sight of the Prince's personality behind the
crowd of public events, the struggles of parties, the efforts of dip¬
lomacy, and the varying fortunes of war ; but, nevertheless, so close
was Prince Albert's relation to these things, and, as we see, so great,
although so unobtrusive, was his influence upon them, that they form
essential features in the representation of this part of his life. As to
whether there is an undue preponderance of these elements in the
book, this will be decided by the amount of public interest in these
questions; and now that the thoughts of the nation are forcibly turned
to the East again, tliere is no doubt that the Prince's views on the
whole Eastern Question will be eagerly studied. We wonder—as we
follow his keen and clear comments on the events of these two stirring
years—what he would say now ! But although these great political
subjects occupy a large space, they by no means exhaust the interest
of the volume. Other matters in their turn illustrate not less clearly
the Prince's character and work. Next to the nature and extent of
his influence on the leading minds of his time, scarcely recognised
till now,—perhaps the most predominant impression left by the history
of his life at this period,—is that of his untiring activity, combined
with the wide range of his labours and sympathies. This is shown in
numberless letters, notes, and memoranda on every possible subject,
from the gravest political and civil interests—not only of Englaiid,
but of the world—to the shooting at Balmoral and the gardens at
Osborne.
It in no way detracts from the acknowledged value of his thoughts
and opinions, as here given, to say that, to the nation, that part of the
book is most interesting, where the Queen takes up the thread of the
story and gives it in her own words. Read by the light of subsequent
events, there is a peculiar attraction in Her Majesty's account of her
visit to Paris with the Prince, and their intercourse with the Emperor
and Empress. The same may be said of the letters which they ex¬
changed at the close of the war. Especially may we claim admiration
for the letter in which Her Majesty makes clear to the French Emperor
the diff'erence between a despot, however well-intentioned, and a con¬
stitutional sovereign, uniting in her language the perfection of frank
courtesy to the proud style of a great monarch. Surely among the
good results of this publication, may be reckoned that of making
Queen Victoria better known to her subjects.
1143 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
(Question Scries.
III.
I. Ilixtorij.—Contrast the attitude of Wolsey towards the Parlia¬
ment of England with that of Cromwell.
II. English LiteraUu-e.—Give an analysis of Gray's ode, The Descent
of Odin ; explain the allusions to northern mythology.
Answers, not to exceed twenty printed lines, to be sent in by loth
April, addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, care of
Messrs. Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. The best
answer to each question will be inserted in the magazine, and prizes
are offered at the close of the year for the greatest number in each
department. N.B.—The name and address of the sender must be
written on each paper, besides her iiom de plume. The latter only will
appear in the magazine. We warn correspondents against running
time too short. The 15th is the latest possible day; an accidental
delay in delivery may exclude a good answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO JANUARY SERIES.
Tlie two best.—History: M. B. English Literature: Rediviva.
Also very good in both : Dim-Sighted.
I. Causes of the Wars of the Roses.—The unpopular measures of
Lollard persecution, interference with elections, disenfranchisement
of voters, and the long wars, had caused a growing discontent with
the weak government of Henry VI., which, at the end of the French
wars, culminated with the rebellion of the populace under Cade.
They took London, executed Lord Say, and only dispersed on being
promised free pardons. Cade refused the pardon, but on his death
Somerset was again placed at the head of affairs. The king now
became quite imbecile, when Parliament elected the Duke of York,
his nearest relative. Protector, and imprisoned Somerset in the
Tower. On Henry's recovery, Somerset again came into power, but,
on a recurrence of the king's malady, York was re-elected Protector.
On the king's recovery, a temporary reconciliation took place between
the two parties; but York, whose hopes of succeeding Henry had
been quenched by the birth of an heir to the throne, and whose
ambition and love of power had been fired while Protector, raised his
standard at Ludlovv, and advanced his claims to the crown, as being
descended by his mother from Lionel of Clarence, second son of
Edward III., and by his father from Edmund Langley, fourth son of
that king, while Henry VI. was descended from John of Gaunt,
third son of Edward III. In Henry's favour were long and undis¬
turbed possession and a legal title by free vote of Parliament, but
the long and shameful misgovernment told fatally against him. The
Wars of the Roses began when the Yorkist standard was raised at
Ludlow, 1455, and ended at Bosworth, 1485. M. B.
II. Allusions to Chaucer.—1. Spenser : ' That renowned Poet,
Dan Chaucer, well of English undefiled,' etc. 2. Denliam : ' Old
Chaucer, like the morning star. To us discovers day from afar,' etc.
3. Drayton's Elegy: ' That noble Chaucer in those former times.
That first enriched our English with his rhymes, And was tlie first of
ours that ever brake Into the muse's treasure,' etc.    4. Ben Jonsou:
I
Stray Notes. 143
' My Shakspere rise, I will not lodge thee by Chaucer or Spenser,
or bid Beaumont lie a little further to make thee a room ; Thou art a
monument without a tomb.' 5. Mrs. Browning: ' And Chaucer with
his infantine familiar grasp of things divine, That mark upon his lips
is wine.'—' And if Chaucer had not travelled Through a forest by a
well. He had never dreamt nor marvelled at those ladies fair and fell
Who lived smiling without loving, in their inland citadel.' 6. Words¬
worth : ' Sweet is the holiness of youth; so felt Time-honoured Chaucer,
speaking through the lay, By which the Prioress beguiled the way '
{Sonnet to Edward VI.). Besides these are given thirty-eight other
quotations—from Gower, James I. of Scotland, Spenser, Deschamps,
Anonymous, Drayton, Milton, Skelton, Waller, Smart, to Southerne,
Chatterton, Akenside, Morris, Tennyson, two from Dunbar, Bishop
Hall, Addison, Yelden, Gay, Wordsworth, three from Tickell and
Pope, five from Dryden.—Rediviva.
Strag i^otcs.
K. L. will, for seventy marks in any subject, be entitled to a Prize this
year, but not to a Bursary. She may certainly take drawing this
year, and its value will be added to her Certificate. These and all
such details she is advised to study in the Report, sold by Mr. Thin,
Bookseller, South Bridge, Edinburgh ; price 6id. post free.
A Distressed Traveller.—We hear of nothing better than Condy's
Fluid, which has its disadvantage in the liability of glass bottles to be
broken, and the peculiarly bad stain left by the fluid. But it is the
best possible disinfectant.
Viva asks how soon one could learn Greek enough to read the New
Testament ? Is the advantage of doing so as great as one supposes it
to be 1 What is the easiest Greek grammar and first reading-book ]
Viva would learn by herself, with occasional help from a friend.
Some people tell her that a little Greek may be misleading, and there¬
fore worse than useless ; others, that only scholars can find any interest
in the Greek Testament. [We promise a fuller answer as soon as
space permits, and meantime recommend to Viva, Smith's Initia
Grxca as grammar, and Frost's Anakcta Grxca Minora as first
reading-book.—Eds.]
An Old Hand sends the following names for Chloe of French
storybooks :—Line faihlesse de Mlnerve, Clairede Chaudeiieux ; Daniel
de Kerfona, Ernest Daudet; Le Sacrifice de Julia, Ernest Billaudel;
Les Epreuves de Raissa, La Maison de Maure-t, and Les Koumiassiiie,
by Henri Greville. To these add Frangois Coppee's new play, Le
Fassant. This is an excellent list, but An Old Hand reiterates the
caution to Chloe and her friends to know something of an author and
his books before ordering them, and to avoid all the works of
Alphonse Daudet, brilliant and fashionable as he is.
A Spinster Aunt begs us to correct two mistakes in her list of
French books. For Petits read Anciens Convents de Paris ; for Clemen¬
tine, Cltmence; both works by Madame Charles Reybaud. [The
mistakes are ours, not hers.]
Une Francaise, assez mal renseignee, du reste, k cause de son
eloignment de Paris, et de son manque de temps pour se tenir au
courant des ceuvres du jour, indique cependant, a Chloe comma
lecture interessante pour les jeunespersonnes. La Mosaique de Prosper
144 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Merimee, ' Les Ouvrages' du General A. de Gondrecourt, ouvrages
remarquables par leur finesse, leur interet, et leiir moralite.
NoNO also recommends to Chloe Nadige and Alba, by Louis Enault;
and Un Mariaije Frangais, by Madame Jenkin, as amusing and
unexceptionable.
The members of the Edinburgh Ladies' Literary Society will be glad
to hear that not long since one of their most distinguished members,
Miss A. W. Buckland, inaugurated the winter session of the Institute
at Penzance, by delivering a lecture there upon ' The Early History
of Bread Stuffs.' Of this lecture the local paper remarks that 'it
showed great research, and the subject was cleverly handled.' Miss
Buckland has been mainly instrumental in calling attention to, and
obtaining relief for, the distress of the Cornish miners. She explained
that she had chosen this subject in connection with the proposal to
give work to the unemployed, by cultivating the waste lands of
Cornwall.
ScHOLASTiCA perfectly understands that the Certificate of the
Professor of Education must be a tirst-rate recommendation for any
governess. But is a theoretical knowledge of the philosophy of
teaching in itself a thing of real practical value ? She would also like
to know how the practising class is managed ? Who are taught ? Do
the lady students themselves teach, or do they merely look on ?
Will any of Professor Laurie's pupils give some account of their
personal experiences ? [We shall be very glad to insert information
on these points.—Eds.]
A Querist.-—Who were the Ladies of Llangollen, and why did they
go there ? I have seen a curious print of them, after a drawing by
Lady Leighton, which represents two quaint old women with cropped
hair, dressed in greatcoats. They sit at a table littered with miscel¬
laneous articles, in a room like a curiosity shop.
Pellegrina, seeing how much useful information Chloe's question
has elicited on the subject of French books, asks if anybody will
kindly supply names and authors of Italian novels and general litera¬
ture ? She has read Alargherila Pusferla, and would like something
of the same kind.
A Governess asks the probable cost of a winter in Edinburgh,
boarding in a quiet family. Would £50 include all expenses, save
dress I
Noticts to Correspondents, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies Ediid/uryh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous coiu-
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the month.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held at 4 Oxford Terrace, on Saturday, 2d March 1878, at 11
o'clock. Debate—' Do educational prizes and competitions tend to
lower the moral character ?'
Our Female Novelists. 145
©ur jFentale i^obelists,
XV.
MRS. TROLLOPE.
Mrs. Trollope, 6. 1787—rf. 1863.
Mrs. Trollope writes of her departure from Cincinnati with
her son and daughters in 1830 : 'The only regret was that
we had ever entered it.' Yet some gratitude is due from her
to America, as it may be said to have given rise to her literary
career. Out of her three years in the New World, she spent
two at Cincinnati, and it is there that her passionate antipathy
to the Americans and their ways seems to reach its climax.
This antipathy gave energy, at the age of forty, to literary
powers which, hitherto dormant, were destined to continue
their activity for the rest of her life. We have at least
thirty works from her pen, a few of them reminiscences of
foreign travel, but by far the greater part novels. Between
the years 1832-44 she published twenty-three books.
Although she speaks of having seen the tropical sun, and of
having been nearly round the world, it is only the results of
her travels in Europe and in America that have been given
to the public.
The facts of Frances Trollope's life are soon told. She was
born in 1787, and married in 1809 to Mr. Anthony Trollope,
a barrister. They lived during part of their married life at
Harrow, and the husband died at Bruges in 1835, she pro¬
bably being with him at the time, as the taste for foreign
travel seems to have been more hers than his. During her
stay in America, and again in a tour in Germany in 1833,
it is only for a short time that we find him joining and
accompanying her. The last few years of her life she spent
at Florence. Of her mind and heart we can only form an
idea from her best-known works.
There is, inherent in our human nature, an element, which
delights in the expression of strong feelings in strong
language. Had Dr. Johnson been required to state why he
loved ' a good hater,' he would probably have said, that as
all persons of any force of character whatever, must have
strong dislikes, any expression of such feelings attracts men
with an instinctive sympathetic force to the speaker.
Mrs. Trollope was certainly ' a good hater,' and much of
No. 40.—April 1878. jj
146 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
her popularity is owing probably to her capacities in this
respect. This strong ' hatred' of certain persons and things
gave vitality to her works when first they were written ; and
as it seems to have continued in unabated force to the end
of her life, so it is, even now, the most noticeable feature in
her books when we return to them again.
The unconscious mental attraction to a good hater must
proceed partly from our assurance that this power of hating
what is bad is only the converse side of an equally strong
power of loving what is good, and that, in fact, his devotion
to what is good, noble, and true, according to his own standard,
—no matter how mistaken that standard may be,—is the real
source of the unmeasured hatred and abuse of all that seems
to contradict or oppose it.
Of this temper and spirit are all reformers made, and
among reformers we may certainly class satirists. Their
reforms are wrought by language, not by acts, and their
legitimate weapons are therefore harshness and caricature.
They are great exactly in proportion to the success with which
they use these weapons in the cause of truth and right, and
in spreading these sentiments of love for the good, and
repulsion from the bad, among their fellow-men.
One of the greatest and most popular of our satirists,
whose life reached its close in the same year as that of Mrs.
Trollope (in 1863), was a striking example of the force of
this union of hatred with love. In this lay the secret charm
by which he moved the masses, and so often drew tears, even
while speaking through the mask of comedy. In him, it is
true, the love of mankind was stronger than the love of right
in the abstract, and his sorrow was oftener caused by the
power of men to hurt one another than by their actual
wrong-doing; still love and hate met strongly in William
Thackeray.
It is but just to allow to Mrs. Trollope, in spite of many
faults as a writer, the same deep-laid reasons for loving and
hating; she loves whatever she thinks to be true, lovely, and
of good report, and her ideas are mostly based on English
life, ways, and manners as they existed in the first half of
the present century: she has but small tolerance for any¬
thing beyond. England is a monarchy, therefore she
detests republics ; it is not as a nation puritanical in creed,
therefore she abhors Puritanism; it shines in social and
domestic life, therefore to her everything contrary to Englisli
manners is in bad taste. These principles, and the satires
to which they gave rise, are especially embodied in three of
Our Female Novelists. 147
her books,—The Domestic Manners of the Americans, the
Vicar of Wrexhill, published in 1835, and Widow Barnahy,
in 1839, the two last named being perhaps the cleverest,
though not the most pleasing of her novels. In these, and
perhaps in all Mrs. Trollope's books, there are often deeper
and truer lessons conveyed by the secondary characters and
minor events, than by the central figures and scenes which
she intended should mainly absorb our interest and fix our
attention.
As we have already said, her standards were English
throughout; and English civilisation, like that of all other
nations, is not merely an outward expression of an inner life,
but has a natural tendency to react on each generation, and
so to modify the future civilisation of the country. Each
age educates that which is to succeed it; social changes are
therefore matters of course: they are signs of a healtliy
growth in national life. This, conservatives of Mrs. Trollope's
stamp are inclined to ignore when they treat their own form
of social civilisation as one in which any change must be
for the worse, and further, as an infallible standard by
which to judge the manners and morals of all Christendom.
This is idolatry, degrading to its object. Could we thus
stereotype, in a world of change, any form of national life,
and deprive it of all spirit of progress, it would become
hollow and artificial, incapable of representing faithfully the
inner life of a great nation. All strugglings and strivings
after change and progress were abhorrent to Frances Trollope,
because, as she deemed, out of them arose her bugbear of
republicanism ; they militated against her ideal of well-bred
repose. _ Yet she is not sensible of the inconsistency with
which, in her pleasant account of a three months' tour in
Belgium and Germany, she thus speaks of the ' graceful, easy,
benevolent sort of intercourse between all ranks, which, alas !
is impossible now in England, divided against herself; not so
in the days that are gone, when every description of our
manners gives as delightful a picture of the tie that united
us all.' When this golden age was supposed to have existed
in England, we cannot say; probably in Mrs. Trollope's
imagination alone. England has never equalled Continental
nations in ' easy, graceful intercourse;' and were she ever to
do so, it could only be by so total a change of habits, customs
(and climate !), that she would hardly be recognisable as the
England of Mrs. Trollope's adoration. There are others who
find in German modes of life much of the revolutionary tone
and spirit so unreservedly condemned by her in America.
148 77/1? Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
On her way to Memphis, she writes with disgust of her
steamboat journey on ' the huge and turbid Mississippi,'
where nearly all the gentlemen ' were generals, colonels, or
majors,' describing with horror' the total want of all the usual
courtesies of the table, the voracious rapidity with which the
viands were seized and devoured, the frightful manner of
feeding with their knives.' She was en route for Cincinnati,
where she wished to see her son settled in business, though
this plan was abandoned, on account of the bad effects of the
climate on her own health and that of her family.
Of life at Cincinnati she says—' Till I was without them, I
was in no degree aware of the many pleasurable sensations,
derived from the elegancies and refinements enjoyed by the
middle classes in Europe.' Yet, in common fairness, she
might have recollected her own previous remark, that, ' thirty
years before, the aboriginal forest occupied the ground where
Cincinnati now stands.'
Her last words of parting from the Americans are these:
' If refinement once creeps in among them, if they once learn
to cling to the graces, the honours, the chivalry of life, then
we shall say farewell to American equality, and welcome to
European fellowship one of the finest countries on the earth.'
In her day, and looking from her peculiar point of view, it
would perhaps be too much to expect of her that she should
recognise, under an exterior so jarring to her own sense of the
beautiful, the best parts of American character, which, albeit
they may never enable an American citizen to become ' part
of a noble whole,' in her sense of the words, may yet fit him,
under higher guidance, for a place in that citizenship whose
order and blessedness cannot be conceived of as consisting in
a republican equality; but that, as ' one star differeth from
another star in glory,' all, being judged by no mere human
standard, shall find, in taking their true level and their right
place, an eternal fitness and joy. Perhaps it is from a passing
glimpse of this truth that she says, ' I do not think that they
can believe in personal equality, when Washington's word
outweighed that of thousands.' After reaching British
ground, on her way to Niagara, ' some boys and girls made
bows and curtseys as we passed.' This little touch of long-
unknown civility produced great effect. ' See these dear
children, mamma, do they not look English ? How I love
them !' When, however, she comes before that' high altar'
of God,—grand natural scenery,—her soul is too much ab¬
sorbed by that Presence to admit lesser thoughts. Thus at
Niagara, when
Our Female Novelists. 149
* You enter the hotel, you see behind the hall an open space sur¬
rounded by galleries. In an instant you feel that from thence the
wonder is visible. I trembled like a fool; and my girls clung to me,
trembling too. I believe the waiter took us up-stairs, where, at one
glance, I saw all that I had wished for, hoped for, dreamed of. I wept
with a strange mixture of pleasure and of pain.'
In Mrs. Trollope's Belgium and Western Germany, all is
sunny and without drawbacks. Pleasant it is to travel with
her over ground more or less familiar to us all; she is so
full of historical associations and romantic allusions, as she
explores the recesses of old Belgian towns, thinking, truly
enough, that it is a mistake wholly to neglect the ' cities of
the plain' in our admiration of mountains. She is probably
right in her observations on the disappointment so often ex¬
perienced on the subject of Ehine scenery. The tourist, she
thinks, grounds his expectations on the descriptions of those
who have wandered lovingly through every dingle and bushy
dell on its banks, while he rushes through the country with
a panoramic view of the Rhine in his hand, one finger pressed
in nervous eagerness on some famous promontory, and his
thumb on a noted castle, he all the time in a state of feverish
agitation, dreading lest the panting engine should bear him
out of reach before he can get a peep at either. Such was
her idea of a Rhine steamer, the most rapid way of travelling
known to her. What would she say of a Continental trip by
railway ?
Of her novels, too numerous for more detailed notice, we
select, as types of her style, the Vicar of Wrexhill, Widow
Barnahy, and The Ward. In each of these the central
figure is a villain or a monster, who, as hero or heroine, gives
the name to the story. This unpleasant personage is always
surrounded by good and charming people, who serve as a
foil to bring the moral hideousness into strong relief. Mrs.
Trollope's treatment of her knave or hypocrite differs from
that of George Eliot, who vindictively hunts him down till
she sometimes induces an involuntary reaction in his favour.
Mrs. Trollope, without any tragic climax, simply defeats his
schemes, and lets him drop out of sight, assuring you that he
has been treated better than he deserves. She sketches
girlhood well; one might think her girls were portraits of
her own at home. They come upon us with a pleasant
freshness, especially at first sight, though apt afterwards to
lose their brightness and get entangled in engagements, or
our attention is forcibly drawn off them to the repulsive hero
or heroine. There is generally some one character of the
ragged, racy, or whimsical type in each of her groups.    He
150 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
is not always prominent; but he rules the fortunes, makes
or mars the plot, and often acts the good fairy who puts all
things straight, and brings the right people together at last.
Should he be wrong-headed or of perverse spirit, there is, of
course, a tine area for mischief. Thus, in the Vicar of
WrexMll, Sir Gilbert Harrington is so angry at the will left
by his friend the Squire, that he refuses to act with the
widow as co-executor, thus bringing about his own prophecy
that she will marry within the year, by leaving the field
open to the despicable ' Vicar.'
In Widow Barnaby, good Miss Betsy Compton, in her
fear that Agnes may be a little like her Aunt Barnaby, per¬
mits the girl to become a ' fair shadow'—a foil to show off
the widow's red paint. Agnes is compelled for economy's
sake to wear out the weeds, while the widow arrays herself
in all the colours of the rainbow. Of dear Aunt Betsy's little
crooked figure and kind pale face we see no more, till at the
end of the story she acts the fairy godmother's part, changes
poor Cinderella's rags for the finest raiment, and sends her
off with the prince in a coach and six.
The Ward is a prettier story than either of these. Old
Mr. Thorpe is drawn with much pathos, his lonely grief, his
high-bred courtesy, his kindly relations with the old servants,
who adore him. After years of solitude, he thinks he can,
in a Christmas visit of a fortnight, discern who of all his
kindred is most worthy to be his heir, believing, as he has
long done, in the death of his only son. The odious being on
whom his choice falls, is a little olive-hued, sharp-eyed niece,
who, with all her womanly instincts depraved into selfish
cunning, plays upon her generous old uncle's most sacred
feelings till she manoeuvres herself into heirship, which only
brings her duplicity and meanness into a stronger light, and
to a more condign punishment, on the re-appearance of the
long-lost son. It is in complete accordance with her
favourite plan, that Mrs. Trollope makes Sophia Martin the
instrument of her own chastisement, by tricking into a mar¬
riage with her, a man as detestable as she is herself. The
ponderous Welsh squire and his daughters are amusingly
described, but Major and Mrs. Heathcote are the most
charming point in the book. It is refreshing to meet with
a step-mother in fiction, so truly loveable, so fondly loved,
and her gallant and simple-hearted Major is thoroughly
worthy of such a treasure.
Here is a pretty bit of woodland winter scenery, with
Florence Heathcote for its nymph:
For Palm Sunday. 151
' It was that rare perfection of hoar-frost which, now and then in
our vapoury land, turns every tiny twig into a separate jewel, making
silver filigree look heavy, and ivory carving coarse. The sun was
high enough to illuminate one side of the fair show, while the other
seemed to sleep in breathless stillness under a delicate veil of shadow.
Florence clasped her hands together, and exclaimed " Oh ! " with all
the breath her rapture and the frost had left her. Then her spirits
sent her, with a light step, along the crisp and tempting path, under
the trees.'
So she runs, pretty creature, through the glittering woods,
till she meets her fate in the shape of the young Sir Charles
Temple, who falls in love with the fair vision at first sight.
At the close of the book there is a grand cowp de theatre, in
which the long-lost Cornelius Thorpe discloses his identity
to the same group of relations as had formerly been assembled
at his father's invitation. He rectifies his father's grand
mistake, and it is impossible to bestow pity on Sophia Martin.
Mrs. Trollope's books may not be of the highest kind, nor
her satire of the first order, but she has a certain power of
describing what she really saw, and her novels will bear and
repay careful reading, as they are the result of real insight
into character. As to the Americans, though her book gave
great offence at first, there were not wanting some minds
candid and generous enough to recognise the truth of her
strictures, and to benefit by them.
In The Ward and some of her later works, we see less of
impulsive writing and more self-restraint, the work therefore
being finer, having the signs of ' sublime suppression of
herself.' Even when depicting, with considerable force, the
worse parts of our human nature, there is an originality in
her books which may well serve to introduce us, to use a
favourite quotation of hers, 'to fresh woods, and pastures
new.' K.
jFor ^alm Suntiag.
To Francis.
We do not know what Life may mean,—this twisted, tangled skein ;
But by and by the Master-Hand shall draw it straight and plain:
The shadows that we cast before, behind us shall be thrown,—
And they, who wear the palm below, above shall wear the crown !
We do not know what Love implies,—that sweetest, saddest gift;
But presently the glare shall fade, the heavy clouds shall lift.—
If under foot the road is rough, the sky is clear above ;—
And they who love through life on earth, in heaven shall live in Love'
H. A. Duff.
London, Pahi Sunday 1877
152 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
* Is tfje STfjeorg of lEbolutton necessarils opposett
to Cfjristianitg?'
(Originally read hefore the Ladies^ Dehating Society, and
published hy request)
The chief difficulty in replying to this question, lies in the
diversity of the views held by evolutionists. It is difficult
to define their theory in few words; all we can do is to define
our own use of the terms. Christianity is the revelation
God has made of Himself as a Father, by sending His Son to
declare both his Fatherly love for us, and the filial love we
are permitted to give Him. One Divine Person sent another
Divine Person with a message to all mankind; all hopes of
happiness are based on due reception of that Messenger and
message. The book on which Christians depend for their
knowledge of God, begins with a brief account of the origin
of created life, God being set forth as the Author and the
Giver of all good things. Christians, therefore, believe that
it is of great consequence that they should know some main
facts about their own creation,—e.g., that they are superior to
the brutes, by the especial will of God. Were not this the
case, many statements in Scripture—nay, the Scriptures
themselves—would be superfluous and false.
Evolutionists hold that, a germ-principle of life being im¬
parted at the first, there was no need of a Creator's further
interference, the force of this vital principle being sufficient
to make it develope itself into higher organisms. This, they
plead, gives a grander idea of God than the popular one ; in
short, to quote one of them, ' it is a low conception of Him
to imagine that He perpetually interferes with the working
out of His own laws.' Darwin speaks of 'the possibility
of the divine ordination of each variation,' i.e. of organic
life, as a tenable view. ' God never interfered after the first
act of creation,' say the evolutionists; Christians say He did,
and that the Bible is the record of His interference.
The Scripture account, so far from contradicting, supports
the view that the inferior forms of organic life were developed
from lower to higher. Genesis i. to verse 25 shows this
gradual rise in the scale, therefore Christians can accept the
evolution theory so far. But are evolutionists content to stop
here ? As a general rule they would answer ' No,' and from
this point they and the inspired record part company.    They
' Is the Theory of Evolution opposed to Christianity V   153
look upon man as the most perfect of animal organisms, the
highest development of this life-principle, growing naturally
out of the order next below it. They state that this gradual
evolution of one organism out of another was wrought by
the process termed ' natural selection,' of which they think
there is scientific proof, the more moderate agreeing that the
Creator was so far concerned with and interested in the
work as to give, possibly, a kind of general guidance, or at
least assent to the natural processes, till in the course of ages
there appeared the creature called man, of whom the Bible
predicates that he was made a little lower than the angels ;
the evolutionists, that he is a little higher than the apes.
Is this all ?   Will they be content to stop here ?
The extreme partisans, and by far the most prominent
leaders and teachers of the school, go on to deny the need of
a personal Creator, confessing that they ignore the existence
of ' the supernatural,' whether at the beginning, middle, or
end of creation. The real point at issue is, are these extreme
views a mere excrescence, a parasitic growth, to be got rid of
at pleasure ? or are they a living branch of the stem, the
legitimate conclusion of a valid syllogism ?
To orthodox believers, of course, the difficulty is the crea¬
tion of the soul. Let us grant that man's body may have
been developed,under Almightysuperintendence, from which¬
ever order of monkey may be assigned as his direct ancestor;
but how did this developed man-monkey become possessed
of a soul ? Was that acquisition possible, under the theory
of natural selection, ' supernatural interference' being with¬
held ? It seems to us, that while extreme evolutionists are
perfectly willing to give a plain negative answer to this
query, the more moderate evade it; let us take the extreme
first. Professor Haeckel kindly assures us that 'the soul
of man, just as the soul of animals, is a purely mechanical
activity, the sum of molecular phenomena of motion in the
particles of the brain;' and again,' the widely-spread dogma
of the freedom of the will is, from a scientific point of
view, altogether untenable; every physiologist who scien¬
tifically investigates the activity of the will, must of necessity
arrive at the conclusion that in reality the, will is never free,
but is always determined by external or internal influences.'
If this be really the conclusion to which evolution leads
us, we are of course left without a God, without personality
as human beings, without life here worthy of the name, and
without hope of a life to come. Professor Haeckel goes on
to speak of the first development of this (so-called) soul:
154 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' In the time when man, first developing out of the monkey
state, began for the first time to think moi-e closely about
himself, and about the origin of the world around him!' His
meditations seem to have ended in his becoming possessed
of a soul; and Mr. St. John INIivart, from whom we quote,
sarcastically adds, that it might be interesting, even now,
to catch a monkey in the Regent's Park, thinking ' loosely'
about itself and the world, and photograph its aspect so
occupied. We cordially agree, hoping that it might be pos¬
sible to discern the reverse process, by which an atheist
might meditate himself back into an ape, if the apes wUl
admit him into their company. As far as we know, they
have never turned round on their Creator and said ' there
is no God,' though the Bible mentions certain animals who
have done so.
We may then take Professor Haeckel as the type of the
extreme class, who affirm that there is no difference between
man and the rest of animated creation. But of course his
views are capable of infinite modifications, and we are pre¬
pared to be eagerly met by the assurance that they by no
means form a necessary part of the theory which he professes
to uphold. We are bound, therefore, to give full weight to
all that can be said on this side. Any argument can be
carried ad absurdum, and a truth ' run to seed' is the basis of
every heresy. When, however, such momentous issues hang
on the growth and spread of erroneous theories, surely the
teachers of any new doctrine must be prepared for all con¬
clusions that can be drawn from their principles ; and upon
Mr. Darwin and his school, therefore, must rest the onus of
answering the charge brought against the modern evolution¬
ists, viz. that they are afraid to face the legitimate deductions
from their own theory—that, in short, they rest in unscientific
theism, when they should press boldly forward to scientific
atheism. Is it unfair to say of evolutionists on the whole,
that they aim at spreading the notion among men, that God
is, by the fact of His own greatness, so infinitely above His
creation, that, having once imparted to it the life-principle.
He never again ' interfered ' with its development; that even
if there be a Great First Cause, He is impersonal, unknow¬
able ; that as all attempts to teach or reason about Him are
futile, theology is a dream, theologians impostors or dupes ?
We cannot feel that we are overstating the views of the more
distinguished evolutionists, as gathered from their own
writings ; and we contend, therefore, that those who refuse to
go to such lengths are bound to declare plainly the exact
' Is the Theory of Evohition opposed to Christianity V   155
point at which they stop, and accept the inspired record of
Genesis, especially on the subject of the human soul.
We are glad to have had the question stated in its present
form—' Is evolution necessarily opposed to Christianity ?'
rather than,' Is it opposed to Genesis ?' For Genesis might
be accepted by a Jew or a Unitarian; but can a Christian refuse
to accept this book ? We think not, inasmuch as it is a
revelation of Christ in its own measure, as every part of
Holy Scripture must be, to have a place in the canon at all.
To believe in Christ, a man must believe in the unity of
Scripture; he cannot read the New Testament without refer¬
ence to the Old; he cannot grasp—we say it boldly—the sense
and meaning of the Old in its various divisions, if he cuts off
Genesis. We have always held it to be an unfair evasion of
questions like the present to say,' Scripture and science are,
after all, so distinct and separate, we need not try to reconcile
them.' If this be true, it is so only in a very limited sense.
Science and Revelation both emanate from a common centre
of truth and light; they will therefore vindicate each other,
if not in time, in eternity. If Scripture does not teach,
neither does it contradict science. Eevelation deals with
and uses the facts and laws of the visible creation only so far
as these are concerned with the invisible and supernatural
world, which is beyond time and sense, and into which
science alone never entered, and never can. Science is
accessible to intelligent human beings, because it can be
reached by their natural senses and reasoning powers. God
could have revealed scientific truth, but preferred to leave
the boundless stores of that treasure chamber to be an inex¬
haustible fund of delight to the intellects he had made
adequate to the task. Is there in this view of the matter no
suggestion of the personal fatherhood of the Creator pro¬
viding thus for the legitimate use of every faculty He has
conferred ? What shall we say of children who turn, so to
speak, a father's gifts into weapons against himself? Accord¬
ing to this theory of revelation and science, we see that man
alone, of aU God's creation, forms a link between two worlds.
The mediaeval poet-philosopher thus beautifully expresses the
Christian's idea of his own body :
'II corpo dentro al quale io facea ombra.'
Can the evolutionist view his own body thus ?
Not unless he accept the Christian account of its creation.
We have said that Gen. i. 1-25 supports the theory that
higher forms of organic life were developed from lower, till
IS6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
man is spoken of; then, the Bible informs us,' God inUr-
feredl—not in the sense of adding to or departing from His
original plan, but simply that a higher stage of the work
called forth a fresh manifestation of Almighty power. As
to the language of inspiration, we suppose that no thought¬
ful educated person of the present day thinks that the
Scriptures were given by verbal dictation. Yet, to make
them in any way valuable or reliable, there must be an
acceptance, in some sense, even of the letter. Let an ac¬
count be ever so metaphorical, there must be a correspond¬
ence between the actual fact and tlie metaphor employed.
Metaphor (?j /ierapoga) thus signifies a meaning conveyed or
transferred from one word or phrase to another. If the
figure of speech be so misapplied as not to correspond with the
underlying truth to be conveyed, it is no more a metaphor,
but a lie. Now, in Gen. i. 25, it is impossible to regard as acci¬
dental the remarkable change of metaphor on the appearance
of man. In place of, ' Let there be,' ' Let the earth bring
forth,' etc., there is—let us reverently own it—consultation,
and then a result: ' God made man in His own image;' and
again, in chap, ii., God ' breathed into his nostrils the breath
of life.' The metaphors,' God said,'' God made,' merely bind
us to believe that there was volition of omnipotent will,
followed by immediate result, just as would ensue from the
word or act of an earthly father or king. As to the neces¬
sity for metaphorical language, is not human speech, after
all, when it deals with the things that are not seen, a mere
adaptation to meet the necessity of a case ? Even in speak¬
ing of the visible and tangible, the most eloquent teacher
knows more than he can put into words. Surely, then, we
may predicate of the Infinite, the Unseen, that there is more
in them than the most majestic human language can con¬
vey to us. Once let us own this, and we can then perceive
how the All-wise Teacher has conveyed His infinite truths
to us in the form which best suited their vastness, and our
limited capacity for appreciating them. Men who will not
hear of an unseen world will, of course, endure no form of
words whatsoever which tells of its existence. Yet we may
well ask, with our own glorious poet:
' Why should witlesse man so much misweene
That nothing is, save that which he hath seene ? '
From Genesis we learn that God's last act of creation
was the linking together of the visible and invisible, by the
divinely-breathed spirit of man.    According to our view, we
' Is the Theory of Evolution opposed to Christianity ?'   157
see, in the change of metaphor already referred to, a remark¬
able coincidence with the real point at issue—the point at
which the natural creation received its supernatural element,
the ' living soul.' This was the link between the visible and
invisible worlds, and was effected by the vnZiJLa, the ' breath
of God.' God moved the writer of the record to convey the
underlying facts to us in the metaphor best calculated to
give to finite beings the true idea of His power, His love,
and His fatherly claims upon us. The man who believes
this can accept Genesis as it stands; we do not see how
the man who does not believe it can accept Christianity.
Evolutionists are bound to explain to us at what point the
monkey ' became a living sovil,' and if not by supernatural
' interference,' then how ? They are bound to show that
their theory accords equally well with the metaphors used in
Scripture, or to reject the Bible, not as metaphor, but as
falsehood ; there is no alternative.
We, who do accept Genesis, find, on reading a little further,
that the first recorded instance of sin and confusion entering
this fair world, was when a woman put forth her hand in
disobedience, wishing to be wise above what was revealed to
her. She is the mother of our race, and even were we to
grant the whole story to be allegorical, is there no mine of
valuable truth concealed there ? The spirit this woman
transmitted to her descendants survives still in every pos¬
sible form of heresy, whereby men dream that they may be
wise, intelligent, happy, holy, without the ' interference of
God.' Eve surely has established herself as the mother of
all bipeds who think to be wise above what God has spoken,
and who,' professing to be wise, become fools,' with all the
fearful possibilities to which King David and the Apostle
Paul alike refer. Whether Professor Haeckel and ])is adher¬
ents have or have not satisfactorily proved their mother an
ape, they have furnished abundant evidence of her liaving
been in disposition pretty much like Eve; they and the
Bible seem to be at one on this point. Their spirit and
temper in handling unseen verities, go further to prove the
authenticity of Genesis than they would perhaps like to
allow.
We think, then, that if the evolution theory cannot
embrace the revealed account of the creation of the human
soul, it is opposed to Christianity. But we turn now to
reconsider the assertions made by evolutionists as to the
' non-interference' of God. What they precisely mean by
this, they perhaps do not clearly define; but the idea per-
158 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazme.
meates their writings from first to last: God is too great to
condescend to small details, therefore He leaves us to take
care of ourselves.    Now, even granting that we could dis¬
pense with Genesis and accept some more scientific state¬
ment of creation in its place, what portion of the Bible will
be left to us if we eliminate the fatherhood of God ?    On
that central fact Scripture turns, on it Christianity hangs.
It is impossible to conceive how a man can logically doubt
the ' interference' of God in the production of the soul, and
yet believe that He interfered in a more stupendous miracle,—
the crowning act of creation, and the inaugural one, if we may
so call it, of redemption,—the birth of Jesus Christ.    This
is the centre-point of all Divine interference with man—the
cradle of a liuman infant.    Can we believe in this, and say
that anything is  too great or too small for a place in the
Father's heart ?   The mission of Jesus was to make known
a Father.    The moment we thus name God, we deal no
longer with an abstract, but with a concrete idea.    Godhead,
fatherhood, are abstract; but a God, a Father, are personal
at once, and can be apprehended as persons, no matter how
infinite.    We go on to perceive how the intuitions we have
as  rational beings, will  aid  us  in receiving revelation of
invisible  truths, through outward and visible things, thus
bringing  the  two  worlds, natural and spiritual, into  the
exact relation designed by their Maker when He created us
with body and  soul.     Personal  responsibility, individual
free-will, what are  these ?     An atheist  may  consistently
deny them, but to us they are great necessary truths, laws
of that higher being which we took from the ' breath of God.'
We feel that to deny our own personality would lead us on
to denial of the personality, and consequently the   father¬
hood, of God; a right acknowledgment of our own indivi¬
duality helps us to understand His.    So St. Paul argues by
magnificent induction from the finite to the infinite : ' What
man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him?  even so (o'Jrw %ai) the things of God none
knoweth, but the Spirit of God.'^    Not that these 'things
of God' are unknowable or unknown; on the contrary, the
apostle has just assured us they are revealed to us by His
Spirit.    Our human experience is here appealed to  as  a
help  in  understanding  what  revelation  tells  us  of God.
Each of us dwells apart in a spirit-world of his own, where
the dearest cannot enter, where by far the most of our life is
1 1 Cor. ii. 11. The apostle's argument being—as we have our in¬
dividuality, God has His.
' Is the TJieory of Evolution opposed to Christianity ?'   159
spent alone with God.   This hospes comesque corporis knoweth
its own bitterness; a stranger doth not intermeddle with its
joy; when it goes forth from its companion body, it will
return  alone to  God.    'Whither,'  says the Hebrew  poet,
' shall I go from Thy Spirit ? whither shall I flee from Thy
presence ?    If I ascend up into heaven, Thou art there; if I
make my bed in hell, behold, Thou art there.'    The very
universality of this fatherhood might drift us into pantheism,
were it not for the human experience, that the derived life
of  the child is yet a separate existence from that of the
father,  each  retaining   distinct  personality  and   free-will.
To  Christians,  then,  the   Bible story of the fall gives to
Imman free-will its proper place in human history from the
tirst, showing that though marriage had fused two human
lives into one, in the closest union man's spirit on earth can
know, yet that each soul remains responsible to its Maker
for its own acts, and that no external agency of man or
devn can force a human being into sin.    Even were the
whole story allegorical, it would matter comparatively little,
so long as the mighty underlying truths were revealed to us
thereby.    From this moment the need is shown of a personal
deliverer of our race, who should have power to undo what
man had done; so here Scripture becomes the record  oi
the education of the world for the moment when ' a second
Adam to the fight, and to the rescue came.'    As a father
pitieth his children, God pitied us; as a wise father educates
his children, it may be by painful methods. He used a stern
schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, and that was Law,—not
the mere code given to one nation, but the great law of right
and wrong, stamped on His whole human family by means
of conscience.    The dark  chronicles  of heathendom serve
to tell us what men become who do not like to retain God
in their knowledge; and they further show us how every
nation has in its mythology kept up the strange instinctive
yearning for a father, honouring their false gods with this
dim appreciation of fatherhood, so that God has been
' Father of all in every age,
By every clime adored,
By saint, by savage, or by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.'
Never did St. Paul show more forcibly his knowledge of
liuman nature, than wlien he quoted their own national
poetry on this subject to a Greek audience.
But when we turn to the Bible records, the chronicles of
God's chosen people, how truly do we recognise the Father's
l6o Tlie Ladies' Editibtirgh Magazhie.
hand and heart in the whole plan of Scripture! He knew
we could not learn from abstractions; so unseen and awful as
He is, He reveals Himself as the strong rock of Israel, the
verypresent help in trouble. And again,He makes every event
on record among the Jews subserve His purpose of preparing
the world for Jesus; while every character of note in Jewish,
and not a few in Gentile history are living types of Him, in
one aspect or another, by person, position, office, or relation
to the national welfare. If men contend that God never
' interfered,' whatever the phrase may mean, with man,
how can they accept records which would have no meaning
apart from the central fact that God made His dealings with
one chosen nation the means of training the world for His
Son ? ' For Thy people Israel didst Thou make Thine own
people for ever; and Thou, Lord, becamest their God.'^ These
are the words of the man most honoured of all Old Testament
types, in being permitted to present in his own person, offices,
and acts more aspects of the Eedeemer than any other ; and
that to him was granted some mysterious foreknowledge of
his relation to the Coming One, we may infer from the re¬
markable verse 17 of the same chapter (marginal reading):
' Thou hast looked upon me according to the order of the man
from above, 0 Lord God.'
Of this man from above we will only say, ' How can those
who reject as scientifically impossible the story of Eden,
accept that of Bethlehem ?' Extreme evolutionists consist¬
ently reject both as fabulous. The moderate accept the
greater miracle on the authority of a record which claims to
be the word of God; but they cannot accept—so they say—the
lesser, because a record which makes a similar claim is not
reliable. Where does their respect for Scripture begin and
end ? They seriously think that the Book of Genesis professes
to state in outline the course of creation, and gives us a
spurious account of the fact most indispensable for man to
know, viz. the divine gift of his responsibility and free-will,
without which he would not have needed redemption, and
would not have had a Eedeemer. They think that the infinite
greatness of God is honoured by considering and speaking of
Him as of some earthly potentate too mighty to concern
himself with trifling details. That men who have searched
into the minutite of this visible creation, its order, fitness, and
beauty, should not have learnt at least that their estimate of
great and small is by no means that of the Almighty, seems
strange to us; but we glance at one phase of the teaching
1 1 Chron; xvii. 22.
Helios. l6l
which God's own Son gave us on the subject of personal
Fatherly care: ' Not a sparrow falls to the ground without
your Father. Fear not, ye are of more value than many
sparrows;' of bodily wants: ' Your Heavenly Father
knoweth that ye have need of all these things;' of Him
whom evolutionists seek to honour by placing Him afar off
as unknowable: ' As Thou, Father, art in me, and 1 in Thee,
that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe
that Thou hast sent me.' These words alone should silence
for ever all assertions of the impersonality or non-intervention
of God.
Those evolutionists who declare such extreme tenets to
be unnecessary additions to their theory, are bound, in
mercy to the ignorant souls they may mislead, to state unre¬
servedly their real sentiments on these points, otherwise
their system must produce rationalists, pantheists, atheists,
but never Christians. The Christian, seeing in his own soul
the link between spirit and matter, knows that this was done
in preparation for a still more stupendous act—the union
of things human with things divine in the person of the
Mediator, the true /jnekri;, by whom God shall finally recon¬
cile all things unto Himself. If it be difficult to accept the
whole Bible, to accept the half is more difficult still; therefore,
in attacks on the Old Testament, we see insidious attempts
to shake our faith in Christianity. We have often turned
sadly from works put forth by writers of this school to a
parable—fable if they will—spoken by Him whom we
believe to have taken our humanity to His Father's throne,
of a prince whose fellow-citizens hated him, and sent a
message after him, saying, ' We will not have this MA>f to
L. DUNDAS.
The great, rounded drops of weeping
On the sun's dark eyelids hung,
And the gleam of a roguish twinkle
Was gath'ring the gloom among,
As he, when the storm was ended,
And his boyish frolic and wild,
Penitent, peeped through the vapours,
Shy, as a petulant child.
The brook and the quiet willow
Laughed at his comical air.
But the maiden fern sighed softly,
And shook his tears from her hair.
DuM^.
No. 40.—Apeil 1878. L
l62 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Roman's Influntce as btcioeli fig Etoo ^oets.
Now and then we have the good fortune, in the world of
literature, to find some one idea treated by two strong minds,
and then there is a great interest in comparing the results of
their meditations upon it; but still more interesting is it to
find, under widely different circumstances, the same idea
taken up by two men, separated by a long interval of time,
each prominent as a poet and a leader of the minds of the
men of his age.
Such an idea we find dealt with by both our great
Elizabethan and Victorian poets; and in Shakspere's Love's
Lahotirs Lost and Tennyson's Princess we see the result of
their feelings upon their common subject, expressed, of
course, differently, according to the difference of minds,
circumstances, and all the interval between the sixteenth
and the nineteenth centuries. The idea on which both
stories turn is the notion which has so often haunted the
minds both of men and womeu,—the fancy that to be in
close relation with each other is no help, but rather a hin¬
drance to their complete development, and that, therefore, if
anything great is to be effected, the less they see of each other
the better ; in fact, their judgment reverses the old principle,
' It is not good that the man should be alone.' It seems as
if, in every false and unnatural condition of society, men
inevitably revert to this idea, almost in proportion to the
degree in which right and true feelings are outraged by the
vicious state of things then existing. When, for instance, men
are brutal and tyrannical, what wonder that fine and delicate
natures, like Verena in Sintram, try to slip away from contact
with them into peace and quiet! And then, again, when
women are, to use Ida's phrase of bitter scorn, only fit
' To flaunt, to dress, to dance, to thrum,'
is it any wonder, either, that strong and earnest men turn
away disgusted from such mere playthings ? Then comes
in the question, 'How is all this to be remedied?' Is it better
that the strong and wise should leave the weak and foolish
to become still more weak and foolish ? the sweet and tender
give up the coarse and rough to grow rougher and coarser,
while the superior natures shelter themselves from the chance
of contamination in refined seclusion ? or shall they, mingling
with the lower, try to lift them to a higher level ?    Certainly
Womaiis Influence as vieived by Two Poets.        163
there is a danger that these higher natures, being unequal to
the task, may be themselves drawn down. Doubtless in the
Middle Ages many a lady was as rough and coarse as her
lord, and the fop and fine lady come naturally together;
still it is a very poor prospect for society at large if it is to
be deprived of the help of its best members, whether men or
women. In neither of the stories before us is the idea pre¬
sented of total seclusion for life, as in a convent. In both
cases the separation is only for a period of three years, but
for this time the sexes are to be completely divided; and
the reasons assigned for this measure in each story, illustrate
well the difference of the ideas held as to women's position
in society in Shakspere's days and in our own. In his story,
the four men shut themselves from women's society as from
some pleasant indulgence, some disturbing influence, agree¬
able, but foolish, which would hinder their high aspirations,
something to be classed among
' The stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.'
Well would it be if we could, even now-a-days, deny the
uncomfortable measure of truth in this representation of the
effects of female society! Tennyson's heroine avoids men
for reasons exactly opposite to those which would have
occurred to a writer of Elizabeth's day. Ida complains of
tyranny and oppression, the upward struggles of the woman
forcibly repressed by the man's jealousy or indifference, her
development checked, her education neglected, assuming,
therefore, that she ought to be something different from
what she is. The princess endeavours to escape from all
this misusage and its consequences:
' Six thousand years of fear have made ye that
From which I would redeem you,'
indicating thus ideas, wishes, aspirations, belonging properly
to these days, and not at all suited to the sixteenth century.
Yet, one-sided and partial as they are, it is not possible to
overlook the truth which they contain. Of course, we must
not strain too closely the parallel between the poem and play,
cast in such different forms; the lively rattle of the comedy,
full of quips and sharp retorts (though interspersed with
some heavy scenes), is very different to the softly-flowing
verse, the dreamy ' medley' of fantastic visions, in The.
Princess. Love's Labours Lost reflects, with an allowable
amount of comic exaggeration, the ways and manners of the
time; it represents, under a French name, the brilliant
society of the fashionable Elizabethan world, full of aff'ecta-
164 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
tion and absurdity, but with noble spirits and good, warm
hearts under all the nonsense. Here we have samples, hardly
caricatured, of the fine talk of the day, all stuffed with con¬
ceits and puns, bad enough at times, words all twisted and
tortured,' frightened out of their right senses,' and plenty of
verbal sparring matches. It must have been fatiguing to
keep up such conversation; but everybody, doubtless, had
their wits about them, so as to be ready if drawn into the
fray. Slow-witted folks, we fancy, held their tongues alto¬
gether in this society, which, possibly, was no penance to
themselves or other people. It would be a great saving of
trouble at a London party if a few of the clever ones did
the talking, and the rest listened and applauded the best
performer!
The play represents, also, the quaint diversions, the dis¬
guises, the masques, shows, and interludes which formed so
large a part of the amusements of those days; the formal
dances, the hunting parties in the royal deer parks, and,
through it all, the curious mixture of ceremony with freedom
in the manners of the most polished people. Shakspere
holds up to ridicule the little follies of the times, such as
the painted faces and dyed hair of the ladies (not obsolete
yet, unluckily, in spite of ' progress'), with a sort of good-
natured mockery, something akin to Leech's sketches of the
modern English girl, not a bit of bitterness troubling his
amusement at these good creatures who were making them¬
selves absurd. He keeps mostly on the surface at this time,
barely indicating that there are depths and grave questions
under all the superficialities with which he plays.
In The, Princess, on the other hand, we obviously have no
picture of Victorian. England and its manners, except in the
pretty introduction and conclusion; but none the less is the
poem a representation of its own time, dealing entirely with
questions of the nineteenth century, or perhaps, more truly,
with old questions put forward in nineteenth-century fashion.
What is woman's vocation ? what are her capabilities ? might
not training develope her powers to equal those of man ? what
should she do, and not do ? has she fair play, and whose is
the fault if she has it not? All these questions, and many
more connected with them, find expression in Tlie Princess,
with various answers given by types of mind, ranging from
the prince, with his high hopes, to the old king, Gama,
with his petty querulousness. ^Here, too, we find reflected
that restless energy, that impatience of conventionalities
and of things as they are, "wdiich, proving themselves either
Woman's Influence as viewed by Two Poets.        165
curses or blessings to the individual man or woman, are
working so strongly in our modern society. In parts of the
poem, the contrast between the tone of the thought and the
fanciful form in which it is expressed jars upon one, as if a
thoughtful lecturer, full of wise counsel for the difficulties of
daily life, should masquerade as a fairy godmother. Still,
in thought and feeling, it belongs as completely to our day
as Lov&s Labours Lost to that of Elizabeth. When all these
differences between the play and the poem are acknowledged,
let us set them on one side for the moment, and, taking the
points which they have in common, let us glance at the two
stories, beginning with Shakspere's, which, it may be re¬
marked in passing, has no other known source than his own
imagination. The king of Navarre, Ferdinand by name, is
inspired with the wish to be famous throughout the world
for his attainments as a student, his court is to be a little
Academe, and great honour and glory is to be the result.
With this idea he persuades three of his friends to pledge
themselves with him to a three years' course of severe study,
strict fasting, and rigid seclusion from women's society, under
all sorts of pains and penalties, not only to themselves if
they break the rules, but also to any woman who ventures
to come near them. This fine arrangement is barely made
when the princess of France, with a whole train of ladies,
arrives as ambassadress from her father, and puts the king
into a difficulty; for the enthusiastic student appears to have
made no provision for the management of his kingdom while
he is improving his mind. He compromises the matter by
visiting her encampment, though shutting her out of his
house, and then human nature proves too strong for ambitious
resolutions,—the would-be hermits are soon deeply in love,
while the ladies enjoy the situation, and make great fun for
themselves out of it. Of course, no one likes to own to
having so soon been false to his professions ; and at last all
the gallants are wooing secretly, longing to throw their vows
to the winds, and only restrained by fear of their fellows.
This can hardly last long, and there is a discovery of their
common feelings, when, after some bickerings and reproaches,
Berowne, the cleverest of the set, and their real leader, con¬
clusively proves to them that they have been aU wrong, and
that women's society is, so far from being a hindrance, the
greatest possible assistance in the pursuit of knowledge,—
nay, quite indispensable !—upon which the rest of the com¬
pany agree to live like other human beings, and to devote
themselves to winning the French maidens.    But this is not
166 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
quite so easy, as the ladies do not believe in the sincerity of
this sudden affection, and give their lovers a great deal of
trouble, turning all their attentions into ridicule, till at
length, convinced of the reality of their professions, they
take another tone and advise a year's penance for the broken
vows, promising to make their suitors happy after this is
over; so that, though ' love's labour' is thus ' lost' for the
time, it attains its object in the end.
The story of The, Princess is better known, though it is not
one of Tennyson's most popular poems, except for the ex¬
quisite songs, ' Tears, idle tears,' ' Swallow, swallow flying
south,' and the rest. Here the sex of the reformer is reversed.
Princess Ida, thinking w^omanhood in general oppressed and
deprived of legitimate rights and advantages, sets to work to
raise it, and, having obtained one of her father's palaces,
organizes there a woman's college on a grand scale, in which
the maiden students are to have all advantages of study
and general culture free from the intrusion of any man
whatever; for over her gates the princess writes, ' Let no
man enter in on pain of death,' and the inmates bind them¬
selves with solemn promises not to exchange a word with a
man during their three years' term of residence. But the
princess has been betrothed in her childhood, and as she
now declines to fulfil the engagement, her betrothed prince,
the dreamy hero of the story, comes to seek her, and with
his two friends penetrates in woman's dress into the college.
Here, after a few adventures, they are betrayed, and Ida
wrathfully ejects them, more determined than ever against
her lover; and the more pressure is brought to bear on her
by her relations, the more she is confirmed in her obstinacy.
At length the matter is decided by a tournament between
Ida's brothers and the prince and his followers, in which
the latter are defeated, and the prince nearly killed. Some
of Ida's defenders being also hurt, she comes down to bring
them into her halls, arguing in truly feminine fashion that,
as her rules were broken already, she might as well break
them a little more in a good cause. Once down among the
woimded men, her woman's nature reasserts itself, and the
sight of her lover apparently dying overcomes her altogether.
She takes him home with the rest, pity leads to love, and in
her tender ministrations among the sick, she finds the mistake
of the proud isolation which she has striven so hard to pre¬
serve ; she recognises the prince as her natural helper and
companion, and so they are united at last, his two friends
also finding brides among the late collegians.    The idea of
Woman's Iiiflimice as viewed by Two Poets.        167
the story requires that the prince should be thoroughly
equal to the princess; but in spite of his wise words, his
gallantry in rescuing Ida from the river, his courage in fight,
and his deep and constant love for his affianced bride, he is
but a shadowy man after all, which spoils one's pleasure in
the climax of their adventures, otherwise so beautiful.
Comparing the two stories together, Ida's ambitious plans
make the ideas of the King of Navarre look very insignifi¬
cant: his object is merely the glorification of himself and
his little circle ; she thinks of the condition of the whole of
her sex, and goes to work, mistakenly perhaps, but with a
largeness of idea quite foreign to the older story. Yet do
we not feel, mingled with her high motives, a touch of the
same conceit which urges on the king to his attempt, the
wish to be something above other people who only live and
love in a mere natural way ? She says, looking down from
the serene heights to which she fancies she has attained,
' As girls were once, as we ourselves have been :
We had our dreams ;'
and at the close she owns that she had 'failed in sweet
humility.' But she is tremendously in earnest; the fun
that seems to bubble up irresistibly from the light heart of
our other princess is quite^ out of Ida's power, possibly, too,
out of Tennyson's, who can far better make us cry than
laugh. Like so many other women, Ida only sees things
from her own point of view, and so is swept away by her
misdirected enthusiasm, though she works hard and spares
herself no trouble for what she believes to be for the good
of her sex.
It must be admitted that Shakspere's princess and her
ladies have much less trouble than Tennyson's prince and
his friends. There is no need for the fair maidens to smuggle
themselves into the king's palace in disguise; they simply
appear, and all defences of oaths, barriers, etc., go down at
once. In fact, they have apparently no great desire to make
conquests, and are much more inspired by fun and mischief
than by love in their treatment of the votaries of study.
Only 'Navarre and his book-men,' as the princess styles
them, present very attractive objects for that queer perversity,
not quite confined to women, which always wants what is
strictly forbidden. Now, the students are so determined,
and make such proud pretensions, that no merely human
girls could help enjoying the spectacle when ' Love is still
the lord of all.'    Such liking as they cherish for their suitors
168 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
is pretty well masked under their tricks and merriment, and
only allowed to show itself when everything is getting
sobered down at the close.
The climax of the struggle between love and self-culture,
which in The, Princess only comes in at the end of the story,
in Love's Labour's Lost is brought on in the middle, or, indeed,
is virtually over sooner, only it is not confessed. It costs the
students very little to give up the fine projects only designed
for their own glory, though each dislikes owning that he has
been false to his vows. Once they have all become equally
involved in the ' sweet perjurj^' they have no further shame
in following the same course ; their trouble only comes from
the difficulty of making the desired impression on the sharp-
wdtted maidens, who with womanly self-possession make
game of their admirers. These young gentlemen never seem
to regret in the least the interruption to plans which had
been taken up with so much parade; they seem rather to
enjoy it than otherwise, and when all are proved false to
their vows, Berowne coolly philosophizes thus :
* Young blood doth not obey an old decree ;
We cannot cross the cause why we were born,
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.' ^
Very different to Ida's indignant and passionate determina¬
tion not to give in to the prince, yet in practice she comes
to the same conclusion as Berowne. Both proceedings are
quite natural; the king and his fellows retract easily, because
they are only half in earnest: Ida has flung herself entirely
into her scheme, and it is pain and grief to her to come
back; also the king has scarcely begun to put his idea into
practice: Ida's system is fairly established, and she has the
pain of seeing all her work crumbling round her. There
seem to have been some disloyal spirits about her, even
when all was apparently going well, some who
' Murmured that their May
Was passing : what was learning unto tliem ?
They wished to marry; they could rule a house.
Men hated learned women ; '''
girlish versions of Berowne, with his common-sense criticisms
of the king's projects:
' Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within these three years' space.'
' Love's Labour's Lost, Act iv. Scene iii.
^ 21te Princess, Bk. ii.
Woman's InJliLcnce as viewed by Two Poets.        169
' Study me how to please the eye indeed,
By fixing it upon a fairer eye.^
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows,
But like of each thing that in season grows ;
[" Nous avons change tout cela ! "]
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.'
Certainly he w^as a sharper critic than the gentle Melissa,
wlio hit
' All we saw with shafts
Of gentle satire, kin to charity
That harmed not.'
Perhaps the princess's young ladies were not very sorry
when the college became a temporary hospital for wounded
knights, and they either went home or stayed taking care
of these interesting invalids.
In both stories, the person who breaks into the studious
seclusion has a good right to do so,—the prince from his early
contract to Ida, the French princess from her father's em¬
bassy,—else we could not sympathize with the intrusion. Ida,
however, would not have been so weak-minded as the King
of Navarre: any number of ambassadors might have come
to her gates before she would have received or gone out to
them; but the king walks straight upon his fate, a rash
proceeding for so susceptible a hero. In each case love, and
love only, is strong enough to break down the artificial
barriers which have been so carefully built up; yet the power
of the passion manifests itself differently in each, and the
processes are worth noting. In Love's Labour's Lost, every¬
thing that concerns the feelings is simple and straightforward
as an old fairy tale; the heroes fall in love at first sight, the
power of beauty carries all before it,—or, if not beauty, at
least the fascination exerted by some plain women; for
Eosaline's jokes about her dark face imply a want of regular
beauty, which makes her laugh at Berowne's exaggerated
praise. ' I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.' ' Any¬
thing like ?' asks the princess. ' Much in the letters, nothing
in the praise,' ^ quaintly answers Eosaline. ' Beauteous as
ink,' Maria says saucily enough. Yet the sophisticated,
critical Berowne is the most completely bewitched of all
the lovers, and it is very curious to compare these hints
about Eosaline with the descriptions of that dark and hateful
^ Love's Labour's Lost, Act i. Scene i.        ^ Ihid., Act v. Scene ii.
I/O The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
syren shadowed forth in the second division of Shakspere's
sonnets; certain expressions are repeated almost word for
word about this ' black beauty,' which was come to change
people's ideas as to what was really fair. Between the dark
and the fair faces, the whole affair proceeds swiftly and
irresistibly, and not all the ladies' tricks and mischiefs seem
to give the least discouragement to the lovers, who, when de¬
feated in all points, are all the more drawn to the laughing
conquerors.
Love works in exactly the opposite way with Tennyson's
heroine; it is not strength but weakness which conquers her,
nor can we explain the matter by referring it to the difference
between men and women. As long as the prince is capable
of striving to win her, Ida resists him resolutely; only in
his utter helplessness does her heart turn to him at all, and
then love grows out of pity and the interest of nursing him
back to life—in fact, she helps him till she loves him. It
would not always turn out thus; not every man is strong
enough to stand being laughed at as Eosaline laughs at
Berowne, nor is every woman instinctively drawn towards
sickness and sufi'ering, though most women would be sorry
for the sufferer. But however the feeling is produced, the
result is curiously alike in both cases, the men and women
are shaken out of their affectations and fall back on the
simple human nature which they had despised. Hear
Berowne when all his jests and gibes fail him:
' Here stand I, lady, dart thy skill at me,
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout,
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance,
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit.
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
Oh, never will I trust to speeclies penned,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue.
Nor never come in visor to my friend.
Nor woo in rhyme like a blind harper's song.
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce aft'ectation.
Figures pedantical, these summer flies
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them.' ^
Contrast with this the princess' utterance of her new feelings :
'From mine arms she rose
Glowing all over noble shame, and all
Her falser self slipped from her like a robe,
And left her woman.
' Love's Labour s Lost, Act v. Scene ii.
Woman s Influence as viewed by Two Poets.        171
She said
Brokenly, that she knew it, she had faUed
In sweet humility, had failed in all;
That all her labour was but as a block
Left in the quarry.
Much had she learnt in little time ; in part
It was ill counsel had misled the girl
To vex true hearts; yet was she but a girl.
" Ah, fool, and made myself a queen of farce !
When comes another such ?    Never, I think.
Till the sun drop dead from the signs."    Her voice
Choked, and her head sank on her hands,
And her great heart through all the faultful past
Went sorrowing, in a pause I dared not break.' 1
It would have been a great pity in either story if the good
impulses which helped to prompt the wild vows had been
allowed to be wasted, but this is avoided. The young king
who desired knowledge is sent to meditate and consider, and
test his excitable feelings, thus learning to know himself.
His jesting companion, on the contrary, is put to active
service to try the worth of his wit in scenes of real misery;
like Ida on this point, the sick folks are to cure his faults.
The other two have merely a year's waiting to endure. Nor
is Ida to be thwarted in her desire of being useful to her
sex, for her prince holds that the woman's cause being man's,
he is therefore bound to work with her for their common
object.
In both play and poem there is a passage expressing what
is, or should be, the natural effect of woman's influence, and
there is no better example of the difference of tone between
the two poets,—Shakspere, in this case, bright and whimsical,
a dash of extravagance and humour pervading his apparently
sober utterances; Tennyson, tender and deeply earnest. To
the one, the woman is half an idol, half a plaything, inspiring
the man by the mere power of her beauty,—she is the prize,
the object of his struggles and efforts; to the other, she is
the man's companion, the second self xoitli whom he toils
and struggles for some higher object.    Thus Shakspere:
' Now for not looking on a woman's face.
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes
And study too, the causer of your vow.
For where is any author in the world
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye ?
Oh, we have made a vow to study, lords.
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
^ The Princess, Bk. vii.
172 The Ladies^ Edinbu7'gh Magazine.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beauty's tutors have enriched you with ]
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain ;
And therefore finding heavy practisers.
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil:
But love, first learned in a lady's eyes.
Lives not alone immured within the brain;
But, with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought through every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye ;
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind,
A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd.
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails;
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste ;
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire ;
They are the books, the arts, the academies.
That show, contain, and nourish all the world,
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.''
And Tennyson:
' " The woman's cause is man's ; they rise or sink
Together, dwarfed or godlike, bond or free ;
For woman is not undeveloped man.
But diverse : could we make her as the man,
Sweet Love were slain; his dearest bond is this,
Not like to like, but like in difference.
Yet in the long years, liker must they grow ;
The man be more of woman, she of man;
He gain in sweetness, and in moral height,
Nor lose the wrestling thews that throw the world;
She, mental breadth, nor fail in childward care,
Nor lose the childlike in the larger mind;
Till at the last she set herself to man.
Like perfect music unto noble words;
And so those twain upon the skirts of Time
Sit side by side, full summ'd in all their powers,
Dispensing harvest, sowing the To be,
Self-reverent each, and reverencing each,
Distinct in individualities,
But like each other, even as those who love.
Then comes the statelier Eden back to man.
Then reign the world's great bridals, chaste and calm,
Then springs the coming race of human kind.
1 Love's Labour's Lost, Act iv. Scene iii.
Woman's Injluence as viewed by Two Poets.        173
May those things be ! "    Sighing she spoke, " I fear
They will not."    " Dear, but let us type them now
In our own lives, and this proud watchword rest
Of equal ; seeing either sex alone
Is half itself, and in triie marriage lies
Nor equal, nor unequal; each fulfils
Defect in each, and always thought in thought,
Purpose in purpose, will in will, they grow
The single pure and perfect animal.
The two-celled heart beating, with one full stroke,
Life."'i
Each of these passages contains the gist of the whole work
in which it is found, and by contrasting them we see which
presents the higher idea. Yet, is not one conception the
natural sequence of the other, after all ? Unless the prize
loses all value when it is won, unless the inspirer sinks into
the household drudge, the ideal of the Elizabethan poet must
develope into the still fairer one of the Victorian. It did so
develope in Shakspere's mind. In Brutus's Portia, to give
but one example, we see to what a lofty point he had raised
his conception of a possible union between man and woman,
so that no fatal discrepancy exists between our two poets;
and with one more contrast between them, let us close our
study. Each is brooding over an English landscape,—one
in the fresh spring, the other in mellow harvest time:
' When daisies pied and violets blue.
And lady smocks all silver white.
And cuckoo buds of yellow hue
Do paint the meadows with delight,
The cuckoo then, on every tree.
Mocks married men, for thus sings he, " Cuckoo ! "
When shepherds pipe on oaten straws,
And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks.
When turtles tread, and rooks and daws.
And maidens bleach their summer smocks,
The cuckoo then, on every tree.
Mocks married men, for thus sings he, " Cuckoo." ' "-
' Turning, saw
The happy valley, half in light, and half
Far shadowing from the west, a land of peace;
Grey halls alone among their massive groves.
Trim hamlets; here and there a rustic tower
Half lost in breadths of hop and breadths of wheat.
The shimmering glimpses of a stream, the seas;
A^red sail or a white, and, far beyond.
Imagined more than seen, the skirts of France.''
Constance O'Brien.
' The Princess, Bk. vii.      - Love's Labour's Lost, Act v. Scene iii.
^ The Princess, Conclusion.
1/4 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
net I^fjcm alone:
A TALE TOLD IN" LETTEES.
LETTER X.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to his Sister.
Tuesday, May 9.
This is a true and faithful copy of the note which the Eev.
r. J. Eeynolds wrote yesterday to the Eev. N. Slade:—
Illingham Parsonage, May 8.
My dear Sir,—In a few words we exchanged the other
evening at Mr. Benson's, on the   subject  of getting up  a
cricket match among the young men of our parishes, you ex¬
pressed yourself, to my regret, not very well inclined to the
scheme, or, at all events, uncertain of any good result from
it.    You did not, however, speak so decidedly as to preclude
my hoping that you may be willing to reconsider the matter
at my request.    I think that the young men and boys of
this place are greatly in want of a rational, manly amuse¬
ment which may tend to keep them out' of mischief.     I
think also that the mixing with their superiors, which it will
involve, may help to civilise them, and perhaps strengthen
our influence over that part of our flock.    I have seen much
good result from such gatherings of rich and poor in the
parish where I have hitherto worked.    I feel that, without
your help, I can do little towards the plan, and I therefore
most earnestly hope for your advice and co-operation.—Wait¬
ing for your reply.   I may as well mention that the field near
my house will do very well, after a little preparation for the
purpose, and that I have got promises   of help from Mr.
Benson's sons, who will also bring other gentlemen into the
scheme.   Also, I have some willing recruits among the sous
of my most respectable farmers.    Make my compliments to
Mr. and Mrs. Miller, and believe me to remain, dear sir, very
truly yours, E. J. Eeynolds.
And this is the Eev. N. Slade's reply:—
Illingham Rectory, May 9.
My dear Sir,—I am sorry if I expressed myself the other
night in a way which you thought inconclusive, and that
Let Them Alone. 175
appeared to leave any room for ' reconsideration.' It is not
the first time that subjects of this nature have come before
me, and, in spite of your ingenious arguments and the weight
of your experience, I must state my convictions, that no
spiritual good is to be gained through the medium of a worldly
amusement, and that the influence of a pastor over his flock
is not likely to be strengthened (to any good result) by their
meeting him on equal terms in pursuits which are foreign to,
if not decidedly inconsistent with, his sacred calling. /, too,
have seen clergymen in the cricket field. I know how soon,
in the excitement of the game, the demeanour that befits a
minister of the gospel is cast aside, and how inevitably the
respect that should be his is lost with it. You are very good
to think my advice and co-operation of so much importance,
but it seems to me that you have already taken many steps
without waiting to secure either the one or the other. I
must decline taking any part in your scheme; and hoping
you may be guided to a right conclusion, I remain, faithfully
yours, N. Slade.
There, Helen! there's a snubbing ! Is it not candid of me
to send it on to you ? Who could have thought the fellow
could have been so sarcastic ? I wonder whether my letter
was presumptuous, unbefitting my years and our relative
amount of experience. One thing I do think, that I have
been too hasty in broaching the scheme so soon after my
arrival, but I must go on with it now. I must see Jack
Benson about it this afternoon if I can. I am angry with
that Puritan Slade, and perhaps mostly because his letter
has such an air of having got the best of it. It is the same
thing that irritates me in his manner.
But I must go back to tell you about poor Margaret Scott.
The thought of her makes my own vexations seem light
indeed. She was at church again yesterday morning, still
looking up with the same wistful, unsatisfied look in her
eyes, as if she was seeking for rest and finding none. In
the afternoon (after I had done writing to you, and sent my
note to Slade) I went to see her. I thought she seemed more
glad to see me than before, and yet she fenced off the one
subject that was uppermost in both our thoughts as long as
she possibly could, talking about her aunt's hard-working,
thrifty ways, telling me about two little children she has taken
in to teach, etc. At last I got to the subject of her own life, and
after some time, putting on an air of candour, she said, 'I'll tell
ye what it is, sir, as has brought me down so low.'    And then
176 The Ladies' Edinburgh Mamzine.
ij'" -"-"^-.b'
she went on to tell me, blushing, that she was to have been
married this month, and that the young man she was pro¬
mised to was dead, and that she had no one to care for her
now, and was come back a cripple, to be a burden on those
who had little for themselves. 'Ay, Margaret,' I said, 'these
are great sorrows, but they are common sorrows. If this were
all, you would not have told me the other day that the trouble
was of your own making, and that it was not by God's will
you had done as you had done. Do not try and deceive me,
my poor girl—/ know all. I know the worst you have done,
and yet I'll be your friend if you will let me.'
But at the words 'Iknow all' a look of fear and anger came
into her face, and she sprang up so violently—forgetting her
lameness—that she was forced to fall back into her seat in
an agony. ' What!' she cried,' how did ye ken ? Do they
all ken ? Am I the talk 0' the toon ? Did she tell ye ?'
' Yes, Margaret, your aunt told me; but she has told no one
else, neither will I. Your secret is quite safe.' On this her
face relaxed its fierceness, and she fell into a violent fit of
weeping. I talked long, and tried to put things in a truer
light for her. She will have no comfort till she gets over
this morbid dread of the world's knowing. What is that in
comparison of the real evil, the guilt, and the sorrow ?
I have been working hard with my choir the last few
days. I have hired a harmonium till I can get my organ,
and one of my pupil-teachers is learning to play it. I shall
have my boys in surplices in a week or two. The old clerk,
being deposed from the singing and ' giving oot,' has struck
work altogether—in short, resigned, thinking to punish me;
but I am heartily glad. I must try and regain his friendship
in other ways. I wonder whether he is too much offended
to mend my boots.
Wednesday.—A morning after the usual pattern—church,
school, sermon writing, and a visit to Margaret Scott. Her
state of mind is very strange. She is well instructed, not
irreligious, but seems unable to find any help and guidance
in what she believes and knows. I think she still keeps
something back from me. I have taught her about the
church's power to bind and to loose, but that the absolution
cannot be given till after full confession and reparation as
far as it is possible. I think there is some bitter feeling
between her and the young man's mother that hinders her
from genuine penitence.
This afternoon I had a visit from Jack and Walter Benson,
the former very full of the cricket subject.    He wishes me
Let Them Alone. 177
to get forward with it, and proposes to send some workmen
to-morrow to level the ground, etc. Walter said he was
sorry he could not assist me in the plan at present, as he
was called on business to London—in short, he was going to
read hard till the summer vacation. He was come, he said,
to wish me good-bye, and after a short visit, in which he
seemed embarrassed by the presence of Jack, he took leave.
Jack stayed on and on; I thought he never would go. He
sauntered all round my room, looked at everything, and
wondered at most things,—wondered I had no lishing-tackle,
wondered I could sit in such an uncomfortable chair, won¬
dered why anybody should read The Fathers (knew a clergy¬
man must know his Bible well, of course), wondered how I
could write two sermons a week, wondered whether anything
could ever have made hivi do it, concluded to the contrary.
' I never liked books,' summed up poor Jack, tapping his
forehead, as if to show me how little there was behind it,
which, indeed, required no demonstration. ' Walter, now, is
very clever. Walter could do whatever he liked.' With
that he sat down and faced me, and I perceived that he had
something on his mind to say to me, and that that something
was about Walter. Tlie upshot of it was, that Walter, for
the tenth or twentieth time, had been giving his father great
trouble; that the old gentleman had just paid his debts,
and sworn that it should be the last time he would do so;
that there had been a great row, and Walter's going to London
to read, meant that he was going to keep out of the way till
the air was cool again. ' And I wish you would come and
see my father,' said Jack,' for he's terribly upset. Emily
can do the most with him of us all, but she's gone, and
mother's poorly. You would know what to say to him; he
likes you. I'm such a stupid fellow, you see, I always say the
wrong thing when he's angry; so mostly I hold my tongue,
and just try to help him a little about the place, seeing to
the stables and the keepers, and so on.' I promised to call
to-morrow, and Jack wrung my hand warmly and went.
Thursday.—Last evening was my dinner with Mr. and
Mrs. Childers. Everything handsome and substantial—not
much style. Host pompous, good-natured, prosy, rather a
bore; hostess stout, smooth-tongued, civil to a fault. Lots
of people, some staying in the house, some come for the
evening; young ladies ad lib., music, dancing. It seemed to
me that a good deal of attention was misplaced on my un¬
worthy self, and I fear I gave some offence by declining to
dance, saying that I never did so.    ' Oh, I understand,' said
No. 40.—April 1878. M
1/8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
my hostess,' not in a public room,—quite right in a clergy¬
man; but /icre, just in a family party, as it were. And we
are short of young men, and it would be so kind of you if
you would stand up with one of my daughters and make up
this quadrille.' However, I bowed myself out of it, and took
refuge with Mrs. Wimpole, who was close by, listening to
Mrs. C. with the whole power of such ears as she has, and
with all the acuteness of her shortsighted glasses. It was
the first time I had come across her since her lecture. She
bowed stiffly to me; but I held out my hand, on which she
gave me a sharp scrutiny through her glasses, apparently
was satisfied, and shook my hand kindly.
' You don't like this sort of thing ?' she said with a comic
expression, looking at me keenly. ' That's a pity, for there
are more invitations coming your way; several more ladies
desirous to fete you.    H'm !'
' Indeed, then, Mrs. Wimpole, I am afraid they are taking
more trouble about me than I am worth; I'm of no use at
all in a party like this,'
' You don't dance ?'
' No; nor play, nor sing except in church.'
' Nor play cards ?'
' No.'
' Nor make love ?'
' Least of all.'
' Well, well, if that be true, you'll soon be allowed to be
in peace again. You didn't expect us to be so sophisticated
here, near the world's end—^eh ? You expected a homely,
primitive race, didn't you ?'
' Indeed, Mrs. Wimpole, I expected to find—wliat I had
always heard—that the shire squires were a kind, manly,
honest, hospitable set; and such, in my very short experience,
I must confess I have found them.'
' Yes, yes, so they are,—so they are; but the ways of the
world are known even here. Seen much more of Mr. Slade ?
Like him ?'
' No, I have seen very little of him; I hardly know
whether we shall become intimate.'
' Ah, your respective work is so heavy, it keeps you apart,
no doubt. You could not meet now and then for a little
discussion, a little theological reading ?'
I knew she was quizzing, but I thought it no harm to be
candid, so I said, ' Hardly, perhaps ; but it is not the vjeiglit
of our work so much as the dissimilarity of our views con¬
cerning it that is likely to keep us apart.    You are aware,
Let Them Alone. 1/9
probably, that Mr. Slade and myself differ considerably in
our opinions ?'
' Oh ! ah ! I beg your pardon. I forgot I was talking to
a Tractarian. The new lights are too strong for old eyes.
There was an old book we used to think a good deal of in
my day, called the Bible. D'ye know it ? It's dull reading,
no doubt, after the legends of the saints and martyrs. Dis¬
couraging, too,—it used to tell us that the way to heaven
was along a narrow road, and through much tribulation; but
I fancy there are short cuts now-a-days.'
I could have told her that I thought the shortest cuts of
all had been discovered by litr friends of the Low Church,
who think a man may be a sinner one moment, and a saint
the next, but I forbore. I told her gravely that I knew the
book she referred to very well, and should be happy to pass
an examination in it at her pleasure.
' What! catechize a father confessor! And, by the bye,
how goes on the confessional ? Do the village maidens take
to it kindly ? And how are the dear little boys in surplices ?
They put on sanctity, of course, with their white garments ;
and the sight of so much purity must have a marked in¬
fluence in the work of conversion ?'
'Mrs. Wimpole, I cannot discuss these subjects nor
answer so many questions here,. The music and dancing are
distracting. If you will do me the honour of paying me a
visit in my study at lUingham, I shall be happy to try and
give you every satisfaction.'
' I will take you at your word,' she said, nodding kindly
as she prepared to go. 'But take my advice, cultivate
Slade; he's worth it. He's a Christian, a gentleman, a true
pastor, a firm friend. He was asked here to-night, but he
would not come. He's more consistent than you; for, agree¬
ing with you in thinking dancing wrong, he won't sanction
it by his presence.'
' I don't think dancing wrong,' I began vehemently, but
she was gone. Perverse woman ' Yet there is something I
like in her. I might have told her I had made one eftbrt to
' cultivate Slade,' with very ill success. Before the party
broke up, I had received two more invitations from lady-
heads of houses, couched in the most pressing terms ; but I
declined them both, one being on a Friday, and the other a
choir-practising night; and I must own I was not sorry for
the excuses. Oh dear! I have been writing too long, and
hardly left time for my call at Sydwood.
Friday.—I went to see Mr. Benson yesterday, according
l8o The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to promise. He was very kind, and won upon me much.
Poor old man! He looked harassed and ill, but was evi¬
dently quite inclined to talk about his troubles. He took
me into the gardens, put his arm through mine, and walked
me up and down, now pointing out his improvements, now
discussing his family cares.
' There's Jack,' he said, ' good fellow,—kind, good son,—
never gave me an hour's uneasiness by any fault of his own;
but then he's an ass ! He'll never take his right place in
the neighbourhood when I am gone. Nobody thinks any¬
thing of what Jack says or does! As to Walter, there
never was a nobler fellow spoiled ! I have spoiled him my¬
self; I know I have. I never could deny him anything;
and now he'll break my heart. Your father must be a happy
man. I've heard of your brother,—clever man, steady, going
into Parliament; and I know you. I've not known you
long, but God bless you: I see what you are,' etc. So the
simple, kind gentleman went on; and I hope I did him
good, if it was only by being a good listener.
I saw Margaret Scott again to-day. She is more open
with me now she knows that I know her secret, but her
passionate grief, her bitter self-accusation, make our con¬
versations most distressing. She talks wdldly at times ; and
I fear her mind will lose its balance. ' Yes, I know it was
my fault,' she will say, ' but I was young and silly. I
meant no such very great ill. Why was I not told in time ?
Ah, but I was told, and I wouldn't go, just for wilfulness !
Oh, sir, is God really good, and couldn't He have put it in
a poor creature's heart to go sooner ? Oh that I could hae
heard one word from liis lips, and that he could have looked
in my face and seen how I loved him! And that woman
with her hard, cruel look; why did she make me go up¬
stairs and find it all out for myself ? I see her every night
glaring at me with her great eyes. And yet, she was his
mother; an' I was the death of him, as ye may say. She's
a right to hate me ; and I believe if she could do me an ill
turn in this warld or the next, she'd do it!'
Poor Margaret! One thing I am certain of, that she can't
last long. This friglitful tension of mind and her cruel cough
must wear her out before long. God grant that she may see
the truth before she goes! Mrs. Barron appears to think I
ought to have cured her by this time ; she looks discontent¬
edly at me when she sees her niece in the old bursts of grief.
She is a good old woman, and, I think, has a personal liking
to me ; but in Church principles, if she can be said to have
Let Them Alone. l8i
any, she is a decided Sladeite. Her house stands upon our
border land, and she has often been in the habit of going to
his church, which is nearer to her than her own. ' And
deed, sir,' she says,' he is a fine preacher. He does tell it
oot plainly !'
Saturday.—No time to-day for writing. This budget must
go off; it will cost many stamps. I have had another visit
from Jack, and he is so keen about the cricket that we have
fixed our first meeting for next Wednesday. And he has
promised to bring a good train at his heels. This first at¬
tempt will be purely educational, of course. Jack has written
to Milverley for all the necessaries. I think a letter from
you becomes due. Good-bye. Thank father and mother
for agreeing to my wish about the money. It will do all I
want at present in the chancel.—Your loving F. J. E.
LETTER XI.
The Eev. K Slade to the Eev. Joshua Slade.
Illingham Rectory, May 18.
My dear Father,—I am truly thankful to hear such
excellent accounts from home as your letter brings. The
fine weather has reached us even here and cheered us up a
little. Mr. Miller is the better for it; but his state, I fear, is
very precarious, and he himself thinks that his time is nearly
come. He awaits his summons in a heavenly frame of mind.
His affection for me seems to have redoubled, and he is most
considerate in not wishing to tie me ; but duty and inclina¬
tion both lead me the same way, and I spend all my spare
time by his couch. His eyesight is very nearly gone, and
reading, his only pleasure, is denied him. I read much to
him, chiefly at night, when he is sleepless and nervous. I
am often with him till one or two. He begs me to go to
bed, is sure I work too hard, and that three or four hours'
reading at night, after preaching, prayer meeting, or house-
to-house visiting, will wear me out. Dear old man, he has
forgotten what it is to have strong lungs,—mine, thank God
for it, stand all this work easily,—and then what means and
appliances I have for comfort under his roof. I should be
a dastardly soldier of the Cross, indeed, if I complained of
work among all these luxuries ; may I only not abuse them !
Sometimes, if I have had a harder day's work than usual,
Mrs. Miller attempts to read instead of me; but naturally a
bad reader, she is made so much worse by being fat and
182 77^1? Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
sleepy, by the difficulties about the light and her spectacles,
and when all is done, boggles so over the hard passages that
I see it is rather a pain to her husband to listen to her. He
cannot be irritable, but the nervous twitchings of his face
show me how he suffers; and were I dropping with fatigue,
I am glad to take the book from Mrs. Miller and send the
kind old lady off to bed. I tell you all this that you, and
especially mother, may be lenient to me for being such a
bad correspondent. I have really not time for letters, except
business ones, which are many. I have been requested to
make a tour this autumn as deputation for the Church
Missionary Society, and that for the Conversion of the Jews;
but in Mr. Miller's critical state it could not be thought of,
and I have declined. The bishop has given notice of a con¬
firmation this summer, and I am beginning to organize the
classes. Mr. Miller consulted me seriously the other day
as to whether he should have an additional curate, and pro¬
fessed himself quite ready to give me this help; but I said
no,—not as long as I was strong and well. I don't see much
of Mr. Eeynolds,—partly for the same reason that I don't
write,—because I have not time for sociability, but still more
because I feel certain that the less we have to do with each
other the better for our good understanding. I am at this
moment feeling most seriously annoyed with liim, and must
very briefly tell you why. At a dinner at Mr. Benson's not
very long ago, he broached to me a scheme for introducing
cricket among our labouring men. I disapproved and
declined help, for reasons which you know.    You remember
the sickening I had of parish cricket at Y , not that I
even joined it myself. Well, some days after, I received a
letter from him, forcing the subject on me again, hoping I
had reconsidered it, pretending to think I had not spoken
decidedly, and telling me of the wonderful good effected by
cricket in his experience (I should think he knew a good
deal about it at school, and thought it an excellent thing).
He professed great anxiety for my help, but, at the same
time, had been taking all his measures and ripening his plans
without caring what I thought. Of course I wrote back to
him, declining help, and giving him a little bit of my mind,
and, equally of course, he went on all the same. All this
would be no particular affair of mine; but they fixed their
first meeting for yesterday, Wednesday,—the day of my
prayer meeting and Bible class,—and were at it from five
o'clock to seven or later, my class coming on always at six.
I cannot but look on this as premeditated annoyance.    Six
Let TJiem Alone. 183
of my young men, whom, after long and painful efforts, I had
succeeded in making regular at my class, and four of whom,
I trusted, were sincerely in earnest about their souls, had
deserted, and were in the cricket field; and Heaven knows
if I shall ever be able to get them back again.    I may change
the day of the meeting if they persevere in taking Wednes¬
day, but that wiU not restore what has been undone.    But
besides this personal vexation, I am thoroughly grieved at
the way Keynolds is going on, and the mischief and error
he is introducing here.    From what little I gather by report
of his sermons, they appear to be mere morality, enlivened
with discussions upon rites and ceremonies—little of gospel
truth about them.    A parishioner of mine told me to-day
that the discourse of last Sunday evening was all upon the
value of incense,.    Then he is pressing private confession on
the consciences especially of the younger and weaker of his
flock; and there is one poor young girl, whose history is a
very sad one, over whose mind, I fear, he is acquiring a most
dangerous influence.    A relative with whom she lives, and
whom I know well, spoke to me the  other day on the
subject;   and  I  gathered from  her account that  he  was
urging confession and acts of penance.    Though at the risk
of intruding into another man's province, I could not resist
giving her a word of warning, and entreating her to en¬
deavour to fix her unhappy niece's mind on her Saviour
alone, and on His free grace.    She begged I would come and
see the girl, but this I refused.    I have since questioned
with myself wliether I was right.    Is it, can it be right to
let a soul possibly be lost for the sake of a matter of clerical
etiquette ?   The changes in Reynolds' church and services
seem to be complete.    Surphces and chanting have taken
the place of the old-fashioned hymns; and the old people
complain they can't understand a word of the psalms now.
Saints' days, vigils, and fasts are all to be observed, and I
suspect the result of thus puzzling the parishioners will be a
grand secession into the ranks of dissent.   Meantime, whether
it be a thing to rejoice at or not, I hardly know, Mr. Eeynolds
is  certainly  making himself excessively  disliked  by  the
poorer classes; and some of the most educated are beginning
to  cry Popery.     The neighbouring gentry seem  to have
taken him up, and as, in spite of his assumed strictness, he
goes to dancing parties, he will probably be popular enough.
But I must end: I seem to be growing bitter; but it is in
the contemplation of evil springing up under my very eyes,
which I am powerless to hinder.    I have left no space for
184
77^1? Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
other matters, but there is no news.—With kindest love to
my mother.    Your affectionate son, N. Slade.
{To he continued.)
[L. C. G.]
2rf)e (glassoin Association for tfje l^igi^er ([duration
of aSEomen,
A SHORT account of the work begun last year in Glasgow
may, it is hoped, be acceptable to our readers:—
Before 1877, the ladies of Glasgow had often been lectured
by various professors; but the different courses had no con¬
nection one with another, they were entirely voluntary, and
not upon any system. As, however, there was an evident
desire for further study, several ladies felt encouraged to
make fresh efforts in this direction. This first desire for
more systematic teaching was stimulated by the success
attained elsewhere, and by the visit of two ladies,—one from
Edinburgh, and the other from St. Andrews,—who came to
Glasgow during the meeting of the British Association in
August 1876. Acting upon their hints, it was resolved by
the Ladies of Glasgow to follow the example set in other
University towns, and to organize a Society, whose object
should be to institute a yearly course of lectures for women.
This resulted, in 1877, in the formation of 'The Glasgow
Association for the Higher Education of Women.'
The plan of this Association is, in some respects, the same
as that of Edinburgh,—viz., an Honorary President (the
Princess Louise), two acting Presidents, and the same number
of Treasurers and Secretaries. It differs from the Edinburgh
Society in that it is not bound to accept as lecturers only
Professors of the LTniversity, or their assistants, but is free to
make its own choice, subject to the approval of a committee
of Professors. The Association is supported by the yearly
contributions of the Associates (which form a kind of guarantee
fund, upon which to fall back in case of need), and by the
attendance fees of the various classes.
Though the Society had been founded in the spring of last
year, the classes could not begin until the winter; accordingly
the 15th of November was fixed upon as the day when the
opening lectures should be delivered.
Glasgow Association for Higher Education of Women.   185
With great eagerness and some little anxiety, the friends
of the movement awaited the coming of that day; but a
scheme started with such eagerness, and prosecuted with
such energy and zeal, could not fail to prove a complete
success, and such indeed it was. The lectures before Christmas
were attended by two hundred students; those after Christmas
by two hundred and fifty, showing an increase of one-quarter
of the original number.
It was amusing to watch the ladies collecting on the
opening day, coming up the avenue of the College and cross¬
ing the quadrangle, singly, or in groups,— some timidly, as
if not quite sure what they were undertaking; others more
boldly, note-book in hand, and seemingly determined to
overcome all difficulties on the road to knowledge ; others,
again, with a resigned air, as if saying to themselves, ' The
fates have decreed that we should learn, therefore we shall
learn.'
Logic was the most popular of all the classes in the first
course ; it was taught by Professor Veitch, and attended by
upwards of seventy-five students. The classroom was an
interesting sight, with its sea of heads bent down over the
note-books, in which eager hands were diligently endeavouring
to write something which should be intelligible and available
for after use,—no easy task for those unaccustomed to taking
notes. Here and there might some one be seen in great dis¬
tress over the penknife, always wanted and never forthcoming,
or the gold pencil-case, which, when about to be used, is
invariably found destitute of leads.
In this class, twenty-four students obtained certificates,
after having passed an examination on the work gone through
during the course, and having also written essays on the
subject of ' Consciousness.' These essays were pronounced
at hast on a level with those of the professor's ordinary class,
and it was rumoured that some surprise was felt at the
power shown by the ladies, of grasping the ideas presented
to them in the lectures. Perhaps those who were thus
astonished had not made sufficient allowance for the amount
of what may be called 'instinctive logic' in the female
mind.
Besides Logic, there were, before Christmas, two other
classes: French Literature, taught by M. Lacaille; and
Natural History, by Professor Young. These were ended
about the middle of December, and the new course began
on the 14th of January. It comprehended four subjects:
Physiology, taught by Professor M'Kendrick ; ]\Ioral Philo-
186 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
sophy, by Professor E. Caird; Astronomy, by Professor
Grant; and M. Lacaille's French class continued. A certain
falling off in the number of the French students might
suggest that it would perhaps be better next year to take up
two languages than to continue the same throughout the
winter. Some of those who attended the first course this
year were probably misled by the popular fallacy, that only
a little ' rubbing up' is necessary to perfect the French,
learnt a few years ago, and perhaps half-forgotten ; and that,
for this polishing process, the teaching of one session would
suffice.
But to make up for this falling off, there was an increased
attendance in Physiology, which numbered upwards of a
hundred and forty students. This class being so large, was
ultimately divided into two, the Professor having kindly
offered to undertake the double work. The other lectures
were also well attended, and the Professors all seemed satis¬
fied with the diligence and perseverance of their students.
And truly a persevering spirit was very necessary; for, as
if willing to try the ladies' determination to the uttermost,
the bad weather, for which Glasgow is famous (or infamous),
was exceptionally bad on the lecture days. If there was one
foggy day in the week, it was sure to be a Monday or Wed¬
nesday ; and if it had refrained from raining on other days,
it was certain to be pouring on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Waterproofs, indeed, were in such constant requisition, that
it was even whispered the ladies had assumed their blue
cloaks as an academic distinction from the red gowns of the
students.
The lectures are now over for this year, but it is to be
hoped that those who have once begun attending them, will
continue to do so when they are reopened next winter.
In connection with the Association, there are three tutorial
classes still at work (Latin, Dr. Colville; Mathematics, Mr.
Alexander; Theory of Music, Dr. Peace); these also have
been very successful, and attended by a fair number of pupils.
Some complaints have been made of the rapidity with which
the subjects were gone over, as well as of the amount of
preparation this necessitated, and it has been alleged that
pupils so taught will not be as well grounded as they might
have been, had less been attempted in the same time. Most
of the students, however, consider such complaints to be
entirely unfounded.
In the Latin class especially, the instructor, while naturally
anxious to teach his pupils as much as  he could during
Glasgow Association for Higher Education of Women.  187
the time they remained with him, proceeded as steadily as
possible, being very particular that one lesson should be
perfectly understood by all the class before taking up another.
Constant repetitions were held to ensure the remembrance of
what had been already learnt, and woe betide that hapless
individual who inadvertently declined castra as a feminine
singular, or vdus as an adjective of the second declension !
In the Theory of Music class a good deal of instruction
was given, but not more than the pupils were able to take
in; any who could not do so failed from want of previous
preparation, which is always necessary on a subject of this
kind. The course consists of sixteen lectures only; therefore,
if anything is to be taught at all, the pupils must come with
groundwork done already. The best thanks of those who
attended this class are due to Dr. Peace for the trouble he
has taken in smoothing their way to a knowledge of so
difficult a subject as the Theory of Music.
In Mathematics, too, the attendance has been good and
persevering, though this, of course, of all subjects, entails a
large amount of hard work.
Taken as a whole, the Educational Association of Glasgow
may be considered to have done its work with complete
success, and may rank among the most important movements
of the day, influencing for good all those who are in any
way connected with it.
It cannot be denied that the ladies of the Association have
met with some opposition in their work, but this was only
to be expected, and is scarcely to be regretted. Had the
movement escaped censure, it might have been supposed to
be beneath public notice and unworthy of criticism; as
things are, this Society must prove a formidable opponent to
those who unreasonably object to the higher education of
women. This movement will, most of all, benefit young
girls who, having left school, with its routine of lessons
unappreciated, perhaps, at the time, though regretted after¬
wards, learn before long that education, far from ending with
their school days, is then, in its truest sense, but beginning.
It is to be hoped that the "Women of Glasgow will show
their appreciation of the educational advantages they enjoy,
and acknowledge the debt of gratitude owing to those who
have voluntarily devoted both time and strength to the
furtherance of this scheme for their higher education.
M. E. M.
188 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
^oung Poets*
All in the sunny valleys, around Parnassus hill.
We gather weeds and wild-flowers, and wreathe them as we
will.
Apollo and the muses twine laurels on the height,
But here we weave our daisy chains with ever new delight.
The waters of the Helicon are ' awsome' in their flow,
But here the tiny streamlets tinkle bravely as they go.
We listen to their music, we breathe the perfumed air,
Oh, nature in these valleys is sweet and passing fair!
And  often, from the heights above, snatches of wondrous
song
Are borne with a stately swell on floating clouds along.
Our hearts leap up within us as at the trumpet's sound.
When echoes of that loftier strain fall on the daisied ground !
And so we haunt the valleys, around Parnassus hill.
Plucking the daisies at its foot, and singing as we will;
But  still we  strive to hear  the  song-giants, and men of
might
Sing now, as in the olden time, upon Parnassus height !
H. L. E.
©ur Hibrarg ^Table.
Pontius Pilate : A Drama ; and Other Poems. By Jeanie Morison.
London : Daldy, Isbister, & Co. 1878.
This authoress has already published a collection of poems, entitled
Snatches of Song. These, though remarkable for sweetness and poetic
feeling, give no hint of the writer's power to produce a drama such as
this. The interest is well sustained throughout the piece; indeed, so
great is the power shown in depicting striking characters and stirring
events, that we are carried away by the story. The eventful dawning
of Christianity is painted for us in fresh and vivid colours, and we
praise the graphic pen that has made it ours once more. The lyrics
are beautiful and simple, and Procla, especially in her touching death
scene, forms the chief interest of the poem. With regard to the
character of Pilate, hypercritics might perhaps inquire whether such
excessive remorse was natural to one who had signed an unlimited
number of death-warrants, and whether the darkness of soul that
marked his end was in keeping with the spirit which had led him, at
Question Series. 189
least, to o.«I- ' What is truth ?' But, apart from such questionings
which learned theologians alone can answer, we want at the present
day feeling rather than speculation, and this want is amply supplied
by the drama now before us.
Notes on Fish and Fishing.    By J. J. Manley, M.A.    London :
Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington.    1877.
If there be any among the readers of this magazine who consider
fishing to be cruel sport, we have only to say, 'Read this book, and
you will change your opinion.' If there be any who say it is not a
lady-like amusement, nor one in which intelligent people can take
part, we have only to repeat the same piece of advice. The remarks
contained in this volume are all based both on a thorough study of
ichthyology and also of the literature of fishing. The two opening
chapters, devoted respectively to these two branches of the subject,
afi"ord most interesting and various information on the habits and
natural history of fish themselves, as well as on the very numerous
books which have appeared at intervals throughout many centuries
on the subject of fishing as a sport. The good effects of this amuse¬
ment have been so great, that the author upholds it as the best means
of recreation after the exhaustion of mental toil. It involves far less
violent exercise than Alpine climbing, and tends to induce a habit of
quiet observation, and, above all, to exercise the moral character in
the virtue of patience, as Washington Irving says ' there is certainly
something in angling that tends to produce a gentleness of spirit and
a pure serenity of mind.' After remarking that angling is an art
worthy of the attention even of the highest order of minds, our author
mentions, among the names of noted anglers, those of Sir Humphrey
Davy, Archdeacon Paley, Sir P. Chantrey, Brinsley Sheridan, Pro¬
fessor Wilson, and others. Not a few ladies who are expert salmon-
fishers are also mentioned. But it is the trout rod which Mr. Manley
thinks specially adapted for sportswomen. Edmund Waller has, in
one of his poems, immortalized ladies who practised the ' gentle art'
of angling. Though fishing may not be one of the rights which the
women of the present day are most anxious to claim, yet it is one
which will be yielded to them without hesitation, and which will
afford them more healthful recreation than law or physic, or even
than a course of study for a degree.
(2^uestion Scries.
I. Historjj.—Who was the last king crowned at Scone ? State briefly
the circumstances which led to the coronation.
II. EngliaJi Literature.—Give an account of the origin of the title
and office of Poet-Laureate.    Who first held it in England ?
Answers to be sent in by May loth, addressed, ' Qu. C, care of
Miss Walker, 6 Lonsdale Terrace,' this change of address being found
necessary to avoid confusion. The best answer to each question will
be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of the
year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magazine. We advise a pseudonym,
not initials, which are perplexing when many have the same.    As
190 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
compression into twenty lines seems to embarrass our younger
correspondents, we have agreed that History may have twenty-four,
Literature twenty-six, as quotations occupy space ; but these limits
must not be passed. Twelve words go to a line. We warn corre¬
spondents against running time too short. The 15th is the latest
possible day; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO FEBRUARY SERIES.
The two best.—History:'B. Literature: GLxmBEi.. Also in History:
M. B., very good; M. W. Bretwalda, Nelly Bly, Spider, May-
Fly, and M. H. L., good. In Literature: R. C. W., excellent; B.,
good; M. H. L., pretty good ; Rediviva, too late and too long.
I. Kings op Enoland who met with Violent Deaths.—1. William
II., surnamed Rufus, was killed during a hunt in the New Forest in
1100, by an arrow shot by Sir Walter Tyrrel. Rumour at the time
ascribed his death not to accident, but design. 2. Edward II. died
by violence in Berkeley Castle on 18th January 1327. His wife,
Isabella of France, and her lover Mortimer, had assumed the regency
of the kingdom in the name of his son, Edward III., and it was by
their orders that he was murdered. 3. Charles I. was beheaded at
Whitehall, 30th January 1649, by order of the ' High Court of
Justice,' a body consisting of 150 members, taken mostly from the
army and the existing Parliament, under the presidency of John
Bradshaw, an eminent lawyer. Scotland.—1. Alexander III., who
has been called 'the Alfred of Scotland,' died on the 16th March
1286 by a fall over a cliff at Kinghorn, where his horse stumbled in
the darkness. 2. James I., the poet-king of Scotland, was murdered
in a vault of the Blackfriars Monastery at Perth, on the 20th Febru¬
ary 1437. He was stabbed by Sir Robert Graham, uncle of the Earl
of Strathearn, in revenge for an imprisonment he had suffered, and
the Earl of Athole and his son, Sir Robert Stewart, were involved in
the plot. 3. James III. was stabbed as he lay wounded in a cottage
after the battle of Sauchie Burn, where he had met an army of his
subjects revolting from his misgovernment on 18th June 1488. The
murderer was dressed as a priest, and killed the king in the act of
confession. B.
II. Anglo-Saxon poetry in form consisted of short staccato sentences,
containing generally about the same number of syllables, but with no
such rigid system of quantity as is found in ancient poetry. It is
difficult, now that the pronunciation of the language is lost, to trace
in it rhythm or metre, but both may have been formerly brought out
by the reciter or singer. The chief characteristic of this poetry is
alliteration,—that is, a rhyme occurring not at the end of the line, but
at different intervals in the verse, and often limited to a single
letter occurring at the beginning of two following words, but some¬
times giving a fuller echo, like a modern rhyme. Evidently, however,
neither the alliteration nor the assonance were guided by such strict
rules as are observed in the old Norse poetry, which somewhat re¬
sembles the Anglo-Saxon, though very superior to it both in style
and matter, with one exception. The Anglo-Saxons excelled in
religious poetry, and some of their hymns are really beautiful. In
the following example the alliteration is marked :—' Tha se  IFisdom
Stray Notes. 191
eft, TFord Ziord onleak, 5ang .soth cvidas, And thus .<elfa cwaeth,'—i.e.,
' Then did Wisdom again. Word hard unlock. Sang sooth sayings.
And thus herself quoth.' The poetry was periphrastic in style,—i.e.,
giving the same ideas in various ways,—and it abounded in metaphor.
For instance, we find the idea of crossing the sea expressed in four
ways in one verse : ' Over rolling waters, over the ganet's bath, over
the water's throng, over the whales' domain.' This school of poetry,
already declining at the time of the Norman conquest, was almost
forgotten for centuries. It was left to modern poets, as Tennyson,
Morris, Rossetti, and others, to recall the melodious effects produced
by studied alliteration in good Saxon-English. Claribel.
In  the  series for March, the  contrast  is between  Wolsey  and
Thomas Cromwell.
Strag i^otes.
Those who are interested in the higher education of women cannot
but see cause for rejoicing in the issue of the convocation of the
London University on Tuesday the loth January.    By a majority of
110, the University was empowered to grant degrees to women in all
the Faculties alike.    Gentlemen who are interested in other Faculties
besides the medical one, had ample opportunity of putting their veto
upon the 'arrogant claims of ambitious women.'   But the list of those
in the minority has been found to consist chiefly of the names of
medical men; and of such men there were even one or two who spoke
in favour of the charter, and tried to combat the strong prejudice
entertained against it by Sir William Jenner.    The Daily News, a few
days before, had some sensible remarks on the subject, thinking it
highly  desirable,  for  many reasons,  that women  should have  an
opportunity given them of showing what they can do.    It deprecated
the slipshod manner in which girls had been educated a few years ago,
while their brothers were handed over to first-class teachers in the
University, and concluded by showing how a woman's life in many
instances offers more leisure for study than a man's.    No residence is
required in order to pass the examinations in this University, so that
ladies may carry on their studies without any interruption of their
domestic life.    While the women of Britain can only praise that
liberality of spirit which has supplied their education with such a
perfect test, it remains for them to justifj' that liberality by showing
that its ground of decision was not a mistaken one.
C. B. thus answers A Querist.—Among the romances of last
century, we name the Ladies of LlaiyoUen. About the year 17C5, the
quiet Welsh folk were startled by the arrival of a couple of youths,
who, like ' Bessy Bell and Mary Gray,' began building a picturesque
but solid dwelling in the most retired corner of the lovely vale. No
sooner was it completed, than, to the further amazement of the
mountaineers, the boyish proprietors transformed themselves into
elegant and accomplished women, being no other than Lady Eleanor
Butler, of the noble house of Ormonde, and the Hon. Miss Ponsonby.
Many were the surmises as to the reason of their flight from Ireland,
and from their friends, to whom the proceedings and the retreat of the
fair hermits remained for some little time a mystery. For more than
fifty years they lived in unbroken harmony, doing much good, and
greatly beloved by their poor neighbours.     The only occasion on
192 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magasitie.
which they are known to have left the vale was a visit to Liverpool,
to see Mrs. Siddons as Lady Macbeth. It is said that, on the occasion
of their appearance in the dress circle of the theatre, in greatcoats
and high Welsh hats, the Ladies of Llangollen divided the interest of
the night with the great Queen of Tragedy. In their retirement they
kept up a correspondence with many of the first literary characters of
the age. Miss Sevvard was their intimate friend, and has left us a
pleasant picture of their home and surroundings. Captain Basil Hall,
too, paid them a visit in their old age, and states that, seeing them
first at a distance, he took them for a couple of crazy sailors, till a
nearer approach showed two refined and accomplished women. They
died between 1822 and 1826. [We refer our readers to the Percy Anec¬
dotes, vol. XX., for further details of the recluses. Their motive seems to
have been a whimsically romantic wish to shun society, especially that
of men. They probably have had many would-be imitators, and we
can scarcely doubt that Miss Edgeworth's story of IJAmie Inconnue
was written to warn sentimental damsels of the probable failure of
such romances. The process by which poor Angelina is desUlusionnee,
the hard reality of Llanwaetur when she hoped for Llangollen, is to
us one of Miss Edgeworth's cleverest hits.—Eds.]
A. D. recommends to Pellegrina—Racconti di mm donna, recently
published by Barbera, Florence ; Genio ed Amore and Bianca
Romoaldi, by Signorina Guerini. These last are very easy and can
scarcely be called novels. [We also recommend all Cesare Cantu's
novels.]
We have received intelligence of the successful termination of the
second series of lectures delivered in the University of Glasgow in
connection with the Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of
Women. These lectures were on—Philosophy, by Professor Caird ;
Physiology, Professor M'Kendrick ; French Literature, M. Lacaille ;
and Astronomy, Professor Grant. This last course is to be continued
till the middle of April, as also the tutorial classes for Mathematics,
Latin, and Theory of Music. Correspondence classes for the Local
Examinations will go on till the middle of June. The aggregate
attendance was 261, showing an increase of sixty-one since Christmas.
Viva, Scholastica, An Elder Sister.—We hope to answer in our
next.
Notices to Corresponlimts, tit.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinhuryh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held at 5 St. Colme Street, on Saturday, 6th April 1878, at 11
o'clock.    Debate—' Is Chaucer a greater poet than Spenser ]'
I
/;/ Memoriam. 193
In fSemoriam.
H.M.S.' EURYDICE,' Maecii 24, 1878.
' EuRYDiCE !' Oh bitter tone !
A very name of death,
Of broken hearts, and hopes o'erthrown
In that fierce tempest's breath.
One moment's cry on Heaven's great Name,
The good ship's masts were bowed;
One moment more—that ship became
Their coffin and their shroud.
Yet died the brave as a fool doth die ?
Nay,—duty's stern decree
Bids true hearts give up willingly
Their lives by laud or sea.
Brave men on land, who mourn the dead
In that wild ocean blast.
The path that duty bids you tread,
Press firmly to the last.
And we, whom gentler womanhood
Bids share less stirring task.
Be tliis, ' She hath done wiiat she could,'
The highest praise we ask.
Thus play we well such destined parts
As in Life's drama fall,
That the great Euler of all hearts
May in His judgment call
Say to the souls that overcome :
' For you, I have above.
In many mansions of one home—
One God—one Life—one Love.'
L. D.
No. 41.—May 1878.
N
194 l^f''^ Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
©ur JJ^emale J^oijeltsts,
xvi.
MES. BEUNTON.
h. 1778—rf. 1818.
In Lord Carlisle's well-known lines on a picture of ' A Lady
Eeading a Novel,' which, while paying a graceful compli¬
ment to Miss Austen, light with so dainty a touch on the
special  characteristic  of more  than  one female writer,—
' Brunton's high moral' is guessed at as perhaps engrossing
the  fair reader's attention.    This lady was the author of
only two complete tales, and of one published in an uncom¬
pleted form after her death.    They may be said to have
owed their popularity entirely to their own merits, and not
in anj' degree to such secondary causes as often help to
launch a book successfully.    They maintained this favour
in the estimation of more than her own generation,—one of
them, at least, being republished among Colburn and Bentley's
Standard Novels so late as  1832.    We may be proud to
claim the writer as a Scotswoman and an Edinburgh lady;
and, fortunately for our purpose, in spite of her occupying
an entirely private station and leading a very uneventful
life, more information is at our service about Mrs. Bruntou
than is usually attainable in the case of such quiet, incon¬
spicuous lives.    This is to be found in a Memoir written
with much good taste by the husband by whom she was too
early lost, and prefixed to the latest edition of Discipline.
It leaves, indeed, many particulars to be guessed at, passing
very lightly over any notice of her early years, which we
cannot help thinking were not very happy ones.    She came
of gentle blood on both sides of the house, her father being
Colonel  Thomas  Balfour  of Elwick, in Orkney, and her
mother the niece and orphan ward of the Earl of Ligonier.
We cannot but speculate whether it was a true love match
which carried the lively and fashionable young lady away
from London and all its attractions to such a terra incognita
as the island of Burra; whether her friends remonstrated
with her for what is called' marrying to disoblige her family;'
or whether she deprived them of the opportunity of express¬
ing any opinion by a trip to Gretna Green.    However this
may be, she exchanged London for Burra, and there, in 1778,
Oiir Female Novelists. 195
her only daughter Mary was born.    "We do not know whether
Mrs. Balfour ever looked back regretfully to the scenes she
had quitted, but, fortunately for herself and her child, she
was as rich in ' resources' as the renowned Mrs. Elton, and
more disposed to make a good use of them.    We fear that
her union was but an ill-assorted one, for we are told that
Mary suffered from early unkindness, and she entertained
in after life grateful recollections of the loving care of some
aunts, her father's sisters, as having been very beneficial to
her.    It was, however, under her mother's tuition, and in
remote Orkney, that she became a very fair musician, an
excellent scholar in French and Italian; and having that
turn  for reading which conduces, more than any special
talent in boy or girl, to the attainment of general cultivation,
she grew up in her quiet  home as sweet a specimen of
intelligent, unaffected  girlhood   as one could wish to see.
She was sent to school in Edinburgh for a short time, but
seems to have had little or no systematic guidance in self-
culture.    Probably her friends were satisfied to see the girl
' fond of her book,' and left her to wander at her own sweet
will in the realms of poetry and fiction.    Training in the
prosaic duties of life came to her early enough, for at sixteen
she was called to the headship of her father's house, whether
on account of Mrs. Balfour's ill-health or absence from home
is not stated; and ' the details of housekeeping in Orkney
are,' says the Memoir, ' of so exhausting a kind' as to leave
her, during the next four years, with scant time for her
favourite employments.    But from what has been said of
Mary Balfour's tastes, we may feel sure that intellectual
recreation would sweeten homely toil.    If she mended the
household napery, knitted her brother's stockings, or sewed
her seam with Shakspere or Milton lying open beside her, or-
turned her wheel to the rhythm of Petrarch's sonnets, or of
some  quaint old ballad, ' what for no ?'    Or perhaps  her
fireside musings and lonely rambles on the shore of her
island home were not wholly fancy free, and influenced her
in a choice which was soon to be put before her.    When she
was about twenty, her godmother, Viscountess Wentworth,
whose first husband had been Mrs. Balfour's brother. Lord
Ligonier, was urgent that Mary should come and live with
her in London.    A dazzling prospect, surely, for the Orkney
maiden, and one likely to allure any girl of her age.    But
an influence had come into Mary's life, how or when we are
not told, which drew her powerfully in another direction.
Like her mother before her, she turned her back on the gay
ig6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
world, gave her hand to the man who had won her heart,
the Eev. William Bruntou, and instead of being introduced
into fashionable society by her noble relative, she became
mistress of the humble manse of Bolton in East Lothian,—
'for love wUl still be lord of all.' Her husband must have
been a man of more than ordinary cultivation, quite able to
appreciate the tastes of his young wife, and to direct her in
more systematic and solid reading than she had been accus¬
tomed to. Perhaps he thought, and with justice too, that
there had been a superabundance, in her case, of novels and
poetry, and viewed them witli some professional disapproval;
for history and moral philosophy now occupied her morning
hours, and in the evening her husband read aloud ' works of
criticism and belles-lettres.' She was a keen observer and
lover of Nature, and it is curious that the tame and unin¬
teresting scenery of her new home awakened in her a desire
to learn to draw, which had lain dormant in the more
picturesque home of her childhood. There seem to have been
no children born at the manse ; but something of a mother's
responsibilities and pleasures came to Mrs. Brunton in the
charge of two little wards, relatives of her husband, sent to
his care from India. After six years spent in this quiet life
of everyday duties, the minister removed his family to
Edinburgh, on his appointment to the charge of the Tron
Church parish. They soon formed new and agreeable ac¬
quaintances, and entered, with great zest, into society which
they were both able thoroughly to appreciate. To the rather
commonplace folks among whom she had lived in East
Lothian, Mrs. Brunton had seemed to be merely a prudent,
sensible young hoi;sewife, and her talk about books was
chiefly reserved for her husband's ear. But in Edinburgh
she at once took her place in a society remarkable for its
brilliancy at that time, even in circles below the highest,
where her own bright wit and conversational powers soon
made her a favourite. She often urged her husband to begin
some literary work, and appealed one day to a friend to
undertake its publication. He assured her that his aid
should certainly be forthcoming, but added that he would
still more gladly publish anything she might write. This
seems to have put the notion of authorship into her head for
the first time, and she began, imknown to any one, and with
hardly any real design of publishing, to write the story en¬
titled Self-Control. It was considerably advanced before
even her husband heard of it, and his pleasure encouraged
her greatly to proceed.    Some of the criticisms he proffered.
Our Female Novelists, igj
she accepted, others she rejected. She felt herself unskilled
in the construction of a plot,—lier story, like Topsy, 'growed,'
—' and she paid far more regard,' says Mr. Brunton, ' to its
moral usefulness than to its literary character.' It was
published anonymously in 1810, and dedicated to Joanna
Baillie, who was only known to Mrs. Brunton through her
works. A pleasant friendship thus arose between the two
countrywomen.
JNIiss Baillie wrote through the publishers to acknowledge
the compliment, criticising with considerable freedom the
work of her unknown admirer. Mrs. Brunton's reply is
charming in its frankness, in its absence of all vanity, and
in the graceful playfulness of its style. Though agreeing
in the main with many of Miss Baillie's strictures, Mrs.
Brunton explains why she cannot make all the use of them
she would have wished,—they would have involved too
much alteration: ' Laura must remain obstinate, or what
would become of the second volume ?' She modestly pleads
her inexperience as accounting for the imperfection of her
book artistically considered: ' Till I began Self-Control, I
had never in my life written anything but a letter or a
recipe. ... I was so ignorant of the art on which I was
entering that I formed scarcely any plan for my tale. I
merely intended to show the power of the religious principle
in bestowing self-command, and to bear testimony against a
maxim as immoral as indelicate, " that a reformed rake
makes the best husband."'
The heroine of this book is a very noble and well-drawn
character. She has given her heart to one whom she deemed
worthy of her regard, and suddenly discovers that honourable
marriage is the last thing he has intended. She turns from
him in horror; and though the affection once given cannot
be uprooted without severe pain, she is resolute, even when
he professes penitence and promises entire reformation, in
refusing to listen or to unite her fate to one who could ever
have made such a proposal, or whose life is what she finds
his to have been. She goes to London with her father to
look after some money matters; and there are some ad¬
mirably-described scenes of her experiences in a Holborn
lodging, where the landlady's sentimental daughter tries to
strike up a friendship with her. Hargreave finds her out,
and forces himself into her society; and his addresses, now
paid in earnest, are encouraged by her father, whom she has
never dared to inform of his baseness, knowing what the
terrible code of honour of that day would involve.    But she
198 TJic Ladies' EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
persists in her rejection of them, and soon discovers that his
courses are unchanged for the better; and the gradual altera¬
tion of her girlish love into detestation of his character and
of his unmanly persecution is very well described. Her father's
death leaves her friendless and poor, and she has an unhappy
time of it under the nominal care of a capricious and violent
aunt, with whom she deals, however, with good sense, spirit,
and unfailing patience. The latter part of the book is
certainly wildly improbable. Laura is on the eve of mar¬
riage to a worthy suitor, when she is abducted by Hargreave's
instrumentality and carried oif to America! But, after a
series of adventures startling enough to satisfy the most
inordinate appetite for sensation, she makes her way home
again, Hargreave puts an end to himself, and De Courcy and
his bride live happy ever after. All this sounds very foolish;
but though the events are absurd, the writing is not, and
there is much to admire in the whole story.
A second edition was called for in about a month; and by
the following spring Mrs. Brunton found herself credited
generally with the authorship. She writes to her one
intimate friend of the praise and the censure her book
received, and very charming the letters are for the candour
they display, and the openness of the writer in admitting un¬
favourable criticism, united with a reasonable persistence in
maintaining her own opinion on some points. She is too
clever not to detect the contradictory nature of some of the
criticisms, and sees at a glance how impossible it is that
they should all be true; but she seems to have gathered, on
the whole, a very just idea of the defects in this her iirst
attempt, and to have profited by the lesson on the next
occasion. She admits that the story 'is defective ... is
disjointed . . . wants unity,' particularly in the second
volume; but from some of her critics she stoutly defends
herself: ' The faults found with the incidents are at least
four times as numerous as the incidents themselves,' not¬
withstanding which,' the book is read and bought . . . there
is not a copy to be had in either Edinburgh or London.'
A year after this, the minister's wife who had so narrowly
missed the life of a London lady, paid her first visit to that
w^orld of wonders. She must have been a delightful com¬
panion, whether travelling or by the domestic hearth; and
her letters describe new scenes and interests with all the
brightness which a lively mind can throw over the most
everyday experiences. She never felt reluctance at leaving
home at any time, for, as she reminds her sister-in-law, ' /
Oiir Female Novelists. 199
have no Maries and Thomases. ... I carry all that makes
the soul of home with me. ... I delight in travelling, yet
can be happy at home; I enjoy company, yet prefer retire¬
ment ; I can look with rapture on the glorious features of
nature,—the dark lake, the rugged mountain, the roaring
cataract,—yet can gaze with no small pleasure on the con¬
tents of a haberdasher's windows.' Her disposition is kindly
towards all, though her full power of affection is only stirred
into active exercise by the positive existence of the ties of
kindred or friendship : ' Yet I think I could willingly serve
any one, provided I were allowed to tell him plainly that I
thought him a rogue or a fool, if that happened to be my
opinion for the time.'
Her second novel, Discipline, was begun towards the end
of 1812. She endeavoured to profit by those criticisms which
had commended themselves to her own good sense, drew out
a plan of her story, and gave a much longer time to its com-'
position than its predecessor had received. While thus
engaged, that era dawned in literatxire—the publication of
Waverley, and Mrs. Brunton, lighting upon it by chance,
and with no particular anticipation, fell at once under the
spell of the Wizard of the North,' and sat up,' writes her
husband,' until she had finished the whole.' A good deal of
the scene of her own story was laid in the same Perthshire
Highlands; and she was very near cancelling a large part of
the book lest she should seem to be trenching upon ground
which a master hand had made his own. Her husband dis¬
suaded her from what was a wholly unnecessary sacrifice;
but she seems from that time forward to have worked under
a certain sense of discouragement, in which, perhaps, slightly-
failing health began to have a share. She certainly did not
feel comfortable in the trammels she had put on; and Dis¬
cipline, though better constructed, is not quite so lively and
spirited as its predecessor, of whose composition she always
speaks as pastime, while her new attempt is work. It reached
a conclusion at last. She writes to her friend: ' Ellen is at
an end. She was finished at three o'clock one morning, and
I waked Mr. B. out of his first sleep to hear of her wedding;'
and then she sets the subject aside with, ' Have you finished
Waverley f What think you of the scenes at Carlisle ? I
assure you, that in my opinion they are absolutely matchless.'
A few months after, she is sending a copy of Discipline to a
friend, and laments that it has ' ventured unconsciously' on
the ground trodden by the author she so heartily admires,
and adds that there is no doubt that the book which has so
200 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
fascinated her ' is from the pen of Scott.' To some fraternal
criticism, she makes answer that the great purpose of her
writing at all is 'to procure admission for the religion of
a sound mind, and of the Bible where it cannot find access
in any other form.' In another letter, addressed also to her
brother, she claims an exclusive property in this line of
authorship, and, we think, with some justice. There are
scores of tales now-a-days which seek to show the effect on
character for good or ill, according to the governing principle,
of the changes and chances of everyday life ; and Jane
Austen is commonly pointed to as the founder of this school.
Mary Brunton, we think, is much more the model which
has been followed by many subsequent female writers,
whether consciously or not. Her lesson is conveyed, as she
herself remarks, with all the directness of Miss Edgeworth,
—a writer in the same line, but at how much lower a level as
to the moral she enforces. '" Honesty is the best policy ;"
" A penny saved is a penny got," ' as Mrs. Brunton says,
' seem the texts which she has embellished witli her shrewd
observation and exquisite painting of character.'
The heroine of Discipline is less interesting in herself than
Laura Montreville, or else she seems so from the autobio¬
graphical form which the author has adopted. She does not
meet with such extraordinary adventures as her predecessor;
the worst is her temporary incarceration in a lunatic asylum,
and that perhaps was not so utterly impossible in Mrs. Brun-
ton's day as in our own. Ellen Percy's spoilt childhood is
excellently described, and so is her career as a beautiful,
wealthy, motherless girl, influenced occasionally for good
by the counsel and holy character of a friend of her dead
mother, but more often by a scheming and sycophantic com¬
panion of her own age. Her father's death, her own reverse
of fortune, and the hard experiences consequent thereon, are
the discipline which moulds Ellen into the happy wife whose
felicity disturbed the slumbers of good Dr. Brunton. The
beginning of the tale strikes us as the best, though the
Highland part of it is evidently written con amore.
She began to plan another story, Emmeline; but it is now,
we believe, out of print, and we have only the rough outline,
given in the Memoir, from which to judge of it. It made
slow progress,—journeys, illness, social obligations, and,
perhaps, a good deal of time spent over the fascinating pages
of Guy Majinering, Tales of My Landlord, Boh Boy, etc., inter¬
fered with her own literary work. She refers in almost
every letter to her endless delight in her favourite author's
Oicr Female Novelists. 201
books, and to that secret which was known to everybody.
The desultory nature of her education in early life had, per¬
haps, prevented her acquiring the power of application to a
task for which she was not in the vein, though exceedingly
quick in any study to which she was inclined.    She  was
particularly fond of languages, and during her early married
life took up the then unusual study of German; in 1817
she resumed an attempt begun several years previously to
add Gaelic to her acquirements.    Her second story, and the
letters written about the time of its conception, show what
an attraction Highland scenery, character, habits, and his¬
tory had for her, and how unconscious she was until Waverley
came out, of the formidable rival in that field.    Had her
health and life  been prolonged, she would very probably
have ventured on the same ground again, and with a success
all her own, but it was otherwise ordained.   In the summer of
1818, there came to the hitherto childless couple the hope
that they should ere long ' embrace a son.'    Mrs. Brunton
was then in her fortieth year, and she faced all the possi¬
bilities of the case with calm fortitude, making all needful
preparations in silence and in secret, and abstaining from
dwelling on her forebodings to husband or I'riends.    In her
last letter to her sister-in-law, she speaks plainly of ' the
change   I  must probably undergo,' and  her  anticipations
proved correct.    Early in December she gave birth to a still¬
born son, and hopes were at first entertained that her life
would be spared.    She was, however, attacked by fever, and
died a fortnight after.    The Memoir of the bereaved husband
is dated only three months later.    He gives, with excellent
taste and reticence, a few particulars which show how sin¬
cere, practical, and all-pervading was the religious principle
which guided her in all she undertook.    She  took  great
pleasure in investigating, with such help as she could com¬
mand, the evidences of Christian faith; and Butler's Analogy,
and Paley's Horce Paulina}, were studied again and again.
Among her favourite books of a different class were the
Whole Duty of Man, Jeremy Taylor's Holy Living, Ijaxter's
Sahits Rest, the Book of Common Prayer, and Bishop Wilson
On the Lord's Supper.
Dr. Brunton estimates very justly, we think, both her
merits as a novelist and the amount of success they had
achieved at the time he wrote. ' The excellence of her
mind,' he considers,' consisted more in the general harmony
of its faculties, than in the extraordinary strength of any
one.'    Her imagination he characterizes rather as vivid and
202 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
distinct than as peculiarly inventive. ' Her taste had not
been very early cultivated, but it grew so rapidly with the
slightest guidance that any defect was obviously the fault
not of nature, but of misdirection. Her judgment was both
quick and steady, and her discrimination between sophistry
and sound argument was almost intuitive.' This conjugal
criticism is not unduly favourable, but we have something
of objection to add to it on the score of the disagreeable
motif she has chosen for two out of her three tales, the last
of which is unfinished. We do not say that such subjects
ought to be altogether avoided by the novelist, or that there
is anything to blame in the views expressed by our authoress,
but there certainly is a freedom in dealing with the hopes
and designs of a wdcked man which is objectionable to the
greater refinement of the present day. That refinement may
often be only external; and many a book coming from a
lady's pen, lying on ladies' tables, and seen even in the hands
of youthful readers, may be more really harmful by its sug¬
gestion or palliation of evil than Mrs. Brunton's plain-spoken
pages ; but their being open to this criticism probably ac¬
counts in some degree for the early wane of their popularity.
In extenuation of tliis fault, we must repeat that Mrs.
Brunton never, so far as we remember, fails to draw a sound
lesson from these unpleasing topics; and we must bear in
mind that she lived not in the most refined circles, and in a
plain-speaking generation, wliich called sins of all sorts by
their own ugly names, and tliought Tom Jones and Clarissa
Harlowe improving reading for young ladies. Had Mary
Brunton lived to write more, and to profit by sound criticism,
she would, we think, have won a high place among female
novelists. A. D.
Spring Song.
Now that the woods with music sweet are ringing,
And from the earth some flow'rets fair are springing.
Sing, Traveller, for joy!
E'en though the road be lonely as of old.
And still some winds beat pitiless and cold,
Sing, Traveller, for joy!
Some truth thou'st gained since last the buds were stirred.
Some ground passed o'er since last these songs were heard:
Sing, Traveller, for joy!
Joan Scott.
Studies frotn Shakspere. 203
Stutiics from Stiakspere,
11.
'AS YOU LIKE it;
Few of Shakspere's dramas are brighter than As You Like it,
and yet few teach deeper moral lessons or exhibit a truer
estimate of character.
The play before us, though it undoubtedly belongs to
Shakspere's second period, forms a link between the first
and the third. Although never rising into the tragic
grandeur of the plays whose publication immediately
followed it, yet there is a mournful under-current in its
happiest scenes, a shade of melancholy in its blithest strains,
which seems to give a foretaste of Hamlet, while in the free
forest life of Arden, where they pass the fleeting time as care¬
lessly as ever they did in the golden world, we catch a faint
echo of the pastoral scenes of Love's Labour s Lost.
Touchstone and Audrey are an improved edition of Armado
and Jaquenetta. Rosaline and Rosalind are alike as well in
name as in character, although there is a depth and knowledge
of the world discernible in the later creations of the poet
which the earlier did not possess.
Students of Shakspere's history tell us that this play,
though not entered in the Stationers' registers till 1600,
was probably written in 1599, after Shakspere had returned
from his visit to London, and was again established in
Stratford, in the midst of homely scenes and a quiet country
life.
The plot of the play is founded on Lodge's ' Rosalynde' in
Eupliues' Golden Legacy, whilst Lodge himself borrowed
somewhat from the old poem of Gamelyn, which has some¬
times been attributed to Chaucer. The characters of Jaques,
Touchstone, and Audrey are entirely Shakspere's creation,
and have no prototypes in Lodge's novel.
It seems to us as if in this drama Shakspere had been
seeking to recall the earlier, brighter days when he wrote
Love's Labour's Lost. The forest scenes, the tricks played by
the girls on their lovers, aU seem like an effort to recall the
past, but in vain.    He cannot quite
' Set his soul to the same key,
As the remembered harmony.'^
^ Longfellow.
204 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
There is no Paradise for those who have tasted the knowledge
of good and evil. Instead of the ardent youths with their
high aims and ascetic vows, we have Oliver with his base
jealousy and murderous intents; Jaques, who, like the cuttle¬
fish, lives in an inky stream of his own creation, and sees all
things through the medium of his envenomed imagination;
the usurping duke, with his tyrannical caprices; and his exiled
brother, who is after all a man of thought, not of action, who
makes no effort to recover his lost dukedom or to return to
the duties of his high station, but lets the time slip by care¬
lessly, and loses and neglects the creeping hours, moralizing
over his life instead of living it, and thereby showing that,
even while writing As You Like it, the poet had an embryo
Hamlet already latent in his brain, ready to be usliered forth
upon the stage.
A strong contrast is presented to us in ' Orlando,' whose
character seems designed to show us how adversity strengthens
a man, and teaches him that greatest lesson of life, to know
himself and his own shortcomings (Act iii. Scene ii.). The
moral of this play is not difficult to find, if we look upon it
as the work of one who has returned, after years of absence,
to the haunts of his youth, with that superadded insight
which enables him to read the true lesson taught by the
manifestations of nature which surround him.
It is the knowledge of the human heart, which he has
gained in the crowded city, that enables him to find
* Tongues in the trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones.'
The philosophy taught by As You Like if, seems to us to be
that those whose hearts are oppressed with the sorrows of
life, and perplexed by its many problems, will find the best
solution of all their difficulties in contact with nature, and in
seeking to learn the lessons revealed in
' The works of God untouched by man.'
What a lesson for many in this century, when the evils of
social life liave increased tenfold since Shakspere's day,
owing to the incessant excitement in which we live ! Nor is
the warning unheeded. Thousands of the jaded inhabitants
of our great cities escape each year for a short period, not
indeed to the forest glades of Arden, but to the moors of
Scotland, the glaciers of Switzerland, or the rivers of Xorway,
or even to humbler scenes on less ambitious expeditions, such
as have been described by writers in this little periodical, in.
Studies from Shakspere. 205
the series entitled ' Where shall we go ?' where, even if the
life be rough, they escape the painted pomp of an over-
refined age, and feel
' But the penalty of Adam,
The season's difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,'
instead of the ingratitude of man, the unreality of seeming
friendship, and the folly of much that is called love, and
where the trifling exertion required to provide the mere
necessaries of life is just sufficient to fill up the time.
As You like it contains the germ of that teaching which,
two centuries later, was to find its prophet at Eydal Mount.
The mantle of him who read sermons in stones, rested with
double virtue upon him to whom ' the least of things seemed
infinite,'and 'the meanest flower that blows can give thoughts
.... too deep for tears.'
But solitude and reflection produce different effects on
different natures. You can find good in everything, or bad
in everything, as you like it. ' We receive but what we
give,' and outward things affect us only by means of our own
inner subjectivity. He that is frivolous will be frivolous
still in the midst of elevating surroundings ; he who is not
at peace with himself cannot hope to experience the soothing
calm produced by lovely scenery.
Thus we see that Jaques cannot escape from sad reflec¬
tions upon the evils of society; for, carrying as he does a
worldly spirit with him into solititde, his thought evaporates
in mere sentiment: he can see similes, but fails to learn the
true lesson of the exile's life.    To him it is only a subject
for wonder that men can be such fools as to give up wealth
and ease for the sake, of loyal attachment to a fallen cause.
It is  true that he himself has  followed his master into
banishment, but then he has done so on grounds entirely
different from those upon which Amiens and Adam have
acted.    He adhered to his master when in misfortune, from
the same reason which made him long to don Touchstone's
motley, and sent him at the end of the play to join the usurp¬
ing duke who had turned hermit—namely, a diseased love of
trying new experiences.    His life had been spent in seeking
pleasure, which he has failed to find; for his was a nature
capable of higher things, hence his melancholy and restless¬
ness.    He must try everything, know everything, and feel
everything; and from each new experience he turns away
after a short time, equally disgusted, having failed to find
2o6 TJie L adics' EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
the kernel, and being too clever to rest contented with the
mere husk.
Jaques' history seems to us to be summed up in these
lines of Faust:
' Vom Himmel fordert er die schonsten Sterne
Und von der Erde jede hochste Lust,
Und alle Niili nnd alle Feme
Befriedigt nicht die tiefbewegte Brust.'
We cannot think that, after Jaques has heard and learnt
M'hat he can from the hermits, he will be much attracted by
their life, which would ill suit his restless nature.
Dr. Johnson cannot help wishing that Shakspere had
given us the moral of the play in the conversation between
the usurper and the hermit which led to the conversion of
the former, and we can easily imagine how tlie worthy
doctor would have enjoyed ' pointing the moral' in a long
conversation in the style of Easselas; but we cannot help
doubting 'whether he would have adorned the tale,' or
whether the great moralist's improved As You Like it would
have fared better than did Garrick's improved edition of
Romeo and Jvliet, to which we alluded in a former paper.
Touchstone is a delightful creation; he is undoubtedly
slightly cracked, but then the very cracks in his brain are
cliinks which let in the light. As Jaques' wisdom often
borders on folly, so Touchstone's folly contains a certain
proportion of wisdom in his fun with Corin the shepherd; and
William is inimitable, and his devotion to Celia certainly
attracts us to the strange man of motley. Touchstone's
criticism of Orlando's verses in Act ill. Scene ii., shows that
Shakspere had noticed how easily seven-syllabled lines
degenerate into doggerel, and is quoted in proof of this
tendency, as a warning to young versifiers, in Hood's Rules
of Rhyme.
Adam's cliaracter is chiefly interesting (if we may trust
Stratford tradition) as being the part which Shakspere him¬
self used to play. If true, this would seem to indicate that
lie attached great importance to the way in which even the
minor parts of his plays were acted.
Eosalind's character almost defies analysis; as well might
Ave strive to analyze the changing prismatic colours in the
dew-drop, as seek to portray the main characteristics of a
woman like Eosalind. There is a freshness about her that
is quite indescribable. She is one of Shakspei'e's loveliest
creations.    Her woman's heart beats no less strongly under
Studies from Shakspere. 207
the doublet and hose she is forced to assume than when in
her own maiden guise, and almost every word she says
betrays her. The way in which she delights in teasing
Orlando is essentially womanly, for there are many women
who seem to take an unaccountable pleasure in causing pain
to those they love, for the sake of healing it afterwards.
Rosalind's happiness when she finds Orlando again is so
deep that she can afford to jest with it, and so she follows
the impulse which leads her to mystify him, and learn the
depth of his love for her, and the extent of her power over
him. Still even so it is difficult to account for her continu¬
ing her disguise long after all necessity for its use had passed
away, unless we agree with Touchstone when he says,
' We that are lovers do run into strange capers ; but as all is mortal
in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.'
Rosalind's first exclamation when she hears that Orlando
is in the forest, is delightfully natural:
' Alas the day ! what shall I do with my doublet and hose?'
Till then she has not thought much of her disguise, except
as a frolic; but the moment she hears of Orlando's approach,
she is shamefaced at the thought of meeting him thus
strangely attired. Perhaps she feels a momentary pang of
fear lest he should love her less in her disguise, and should
declare, like Sir Hubert in the Romaunt of the Page:
' My love, so please you, shall requite
No woman whether dark or bright,
Unwomaned if she be.
No casque shall hide her woman's tear ;
It shall have room to trickle clear
Behind her woman's veil.'
It is possibly some such fear lest Orlando should think
' That womanhood is proved the best
By golden brooch and glossy vest
The mincing ladies wear,' 1
that causes Rosalind's tears in Scene iv. Act ill.
How angry she is with herself for falling in love! She is
always railing against love and lovers. ' Love,' she tells
Orlando, 'is a madness, and deserves a dark house and a
whip;' and yet the subject is ever on her lips. She delights
in talking of love, whether with any reference to herself or not.
Whether she is speaking to Celia, to Phoebe, or to Orlando,
1 E. B. Browning.
2o8 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
she always turns the conversation in the same direction; for
it is uppermost in her thoughts, and being ' a woman, when
she thinks she must speak.' Evidently it is not only the
' sight/ but the talking of lovers that ' feedeth those in
love.'
The contrast between the two cousins comes out strongly
in the love scenes. Eosalind delights in concealing her
identity from Orlando and in torturing him in various ways.
That she may see visible proofs of the strength of his love
for her, she makes him assure her of his aifection over and
over again. Celia, on the other hand, who is no coquette,
surrenders at once to Oliver's affection; she is as witty as
Eosalind in bandying words with her and Touchstone, but
in Oliver's presence she is tongue-tied and dumb. Her stiff
' Good sir, go with us,' is very different to the flow of wit
with which Eosalind greets her lover on every occasion.
Celia's love is 'quickly won,' and yet maj^be she will
' prove more true than those that have more cunning to be
strange.' Though thrown into the shade by her more brilliant
cousin, as her father justly remarks, there is no jealousy in
her disposition; she would rather see Eosalind shine than
shine herself. Her love for Eosalind is the leading motive
of her life, and she stands out, even amongst Shakspere's
many wonderful creations, as the ideal of an unselfish,
devoted woman. Much, doubtless, of the ridicule sometimes
heaped on women's friendships by the stronger sex, is not
wholly undeserved; for when we remember the capricious
nature, and possibly the trivial origin, of some of these
attachments, we cannot wonder that the shafts of wits and
the sneers of moralists should have been occasionally
directed towards them. But Shakspere looked deeper into
the human heart; he saw nothing to raise a smile in the
affection that caused Celia and Eosalind to go, like ' Juno's ^
swans,' or rather, as commentators would have it, Venus's
swans, 'coupled and inseparable.' Surely many women
must rejoice in their secret hearts that our greatest English
poet has shown the world in Celia and Eosalind how
touching and beautiful women's friendship for each other
can sometimes be.
It is amusing to contrast the perfect simplicity of the
exiled princesses with the airs and graces of the real
shepherdess. The false romance that falls in love with an
idea, is seldom better rebuked than in Phoebe's absurd con¬
duct. Her quotation from Marlowe's Hero and Leander,
1 Juno's swans, Clarendon Press Notes, p. 95.
Studies Jrom SJiakspere. 209
which  was not published till 1598, fixes the date of the
play at least as late as 1599.
Orlando's character is firm and manly: he turns away at
once from the shallow sentimentalism of Jaques' philosophy;
and his affection for Eosalind is strong and deep, though the
verses in which he describes it are feeble. Yet, as it is always
better to live poetry than to write it, we cannot wonder that
Eosalind, who knew how to appreciate a good man's love,
should have felt at once, that this man was, unlike the
effeminate courtiers by whom she was surrounded, one who
could fill the blank in her existence and be a support to her
through life. Though he might sometimes be-rhyme her in
halting numbers, and might lack some of the graces of
manner to which she was accustomed, yet there was none of
the affectation she so much despised about the honest
wrestler; and though he could not always hold his own with
her in repartee, yet she knows that she can depend on his
promise, and that he can overthrow her enemies. We cannot
believe that Orlando was ever really deceived as to Eosalind's
identity, after Oliver told him of Ganymede's fainting tit.
What else can he mean by the ' greater wonders than these'
to which he alludes. Act v. Scene ll. ? Besides, he must have
heard Oliver address her as ' sister;' but he enters willingly
into the sport, and is contented to put off the recognition
and to let it take place how and when Eosalind pleases.
Celia certainly deserves a better husband than Oliver,
with any amount of whitewashing, can ever have been;
still, we cannot agree with those who think that it is hardly
moral to bestow such happiness on one who had proved so
unworthy. Shakspere had a firm belief in the power of
repentance {Eamlet, Act ill. Scene in.). Then, too, there is a
delicate allusion to the repentant sinner in Hymen's words:
* Then is there mirth in heaven,
When earthly things made even
At one together.'
Not merely a bare forgiveness, but the best of all earthly
blessings is in store for the returning prodigal, be he cruel as
Oliver, false as Proteus, or depraved as Angelo. ' L'innocence
et le repentir menent dgalement au ciel.'
Thus the play ends in peace and happiness,—no jarrin
notes, no bloody encounter, as there was in  the original
novel,'—but all is harmony and bliss. As You Like it to be.
1 Vide Preface to Clarendon Press, As You Like it, p. 32; for toad-
stone, vide p. 99.
No. 41.—Mat 1878.     ; 0
&
2IO 77/1? Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
These happy results are not attained without some sorrow,
it is true; but then the adversity through which the cha¬
racters of this drama pass, brings with it the precious jewel ^
of patience, the sure antidote to all the poisons of after life,
and sympathy, the true talisman against the seductions of the
high position to which the heroes and heroines are restored.
This allusion to the mediteval superstitions connected with
the toadstone is interesting, showing how Shakspere used
everything that he came across in the world that to him
seemed a stage, even as his stage to many of us has become
a world.
The comparison of the world to a stage was no new
thought, but one of the many ideas which the great poet
has made current coin by the impress of his genius. It will
ever be remembered by the multitude as Shakspere's thought;
but fewer will remember that it was the motto of the Globe
Theatre, and fewer still that the thought owes its origin to
Pythagoras. One of Shakspere's most eminent contempo¬
raries. Bishop Hall, who was sometimes called the ' English
Seneca/ brings out the same idea in his meditations :
' The world is a stage; every man is an actor, and plays his part
here either in a comedy or a tragedy. The good man is a comedian,
which, however he begins, ends merrily; but the wicked man acts a
tragedy, and therefore ever ends in horror. Thou seest a wicked
man vaunt himself on this stage, stay till the last act, and look to his
end (as David did), and see whether that be peace. Thou wouldst
make strange tragedies if thou wouldst have but one act.'
The rich poetry in which this play abounds is scarcely
surpassed by any of Shakspere's dramas. The whole play
leaves on the mind an impression of peace and beauty. It
is a world and a life scarcely, perhaps, as we find it, but as
we like it; the very scenery partakes of the enchantment of
the poet's mind, and the forest of Ardennes brings forth
palms and olives, and shepherds and shepherdesses, such as
never trod on this earth, linger in its recesses.
As Sir Philip Sidney, writing in 1581, eighteen years
before the publication of As You Like, it, justly remarks:
' The poet, . . . lifted up with the vigour of his own invention,
doth grow in effect into another nature, in making things
either better than nature bringeth forth or quite anew,—
forms such as never were in nature, as the heroes, demigods,
Cyclops, chimeras, furies, and such like; and he goeth hand
1 The stone found in the brains of a newly killed toad was supposed
to be an antidote against poison, and was sometimes swallowed medi¬
cinally, sometimes set in rings and amulets as a charm.
Outpost Duty. 211
in hand with nature, not enclosed within the narrow warrant
of her gifts, but freely ranging within the zodiac of his own
wit. Nature never set forth the earth in so rich tapestry as
divers poets have done; neither with so pleasant rivers,
fruitful trees, sweet-smelling flowers, nor whatsoever else
may make the too-much loved earth more lovely. Her
world is brazen, the poets only deliver a golden.'
In that golden world dwell all Shakspere's creations; and
as we catch the distant sound of Eosalind's merry laughter
in the groves of that Arcadian forest, let us not seek to point
out the discrepancies between art and nature ; rather let us,
like the author we have just quoted;
' Give thanks to the Heavenly Maker of that maker, who,
having made man to His own likeness, set him beyond and
over all the work of that second nature; which in nothing
he showeth so much as in poetry, when with the force of a
divine breath he bringeth forth things surpassing her doings.' ^
Sidney Philips.
©utpost Butg,
On the hearth the fire-light is warm and low;
He sets his face to the ice and snow.
Whither God sends him he will go.
They speed to the battle-field, brave and gay;
They pass him by on their onward way;
Where God placeth him, he will stay.
Well, by the sheltered hearth to rest—
For some, God willeth a quiet nest;
And what God wiUeth is ever best.
And well to struggle in eager fight,
To sweep the foe from the leaguered height;
For what God biddeth, it must be right.
And well—alone on the bare bleak hill,
To watch the shadows come creeping chill;
God's will is best—it is God's will!
^ Defence of Poesie.
E.
212 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
ILet Efjcm ^lonc:
A TALE TOLD IN LETTERS.
LETTER XII.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to Miss Eeynolds.
Illingham Paksonage, May 18.
Dearest Helen,—I have fallen astern in my journalizing,
the reason whereof is work, work, work. I wiU not trouble
you with the details of it — some is satisfactory, more
disheartening. Our first lesson in cricket went off well
yesterday evening. The young fellows took to it mightily,
and laughed good-humouredly at their own awkward attempts.
Jack was a host. Old Mr. Benson called in the afternoon, and
sat some time with me. He told me he had had a kind and
dutiful letter from Walter, and read me some parts of it. I
ventured to ask whether he could rely on its being altogether
sincere. ' Yes,' said the old gentleman, ' he means it—he
means it at the moment, but Heaven knows how long he will
keep in one mind! You see he promises to give up the turf;
but while he is always meeting racing men at his club, who
shall answer for him ?' I have had a more august visit still.
On Tuesday a carriage stopped at my humble door, and caused
great commotion in the household. ' Mrs. Wimpole' was
announced, and came rustling in, in a stiff black silk, into
my study, which was all in confusion and unmeet for so
dignified a presence. However, she seemed to consider it
quite an adventure, and gazed round my den as at the lair
of some strange animal. I do not believe the smallest
detail was lost upon her. She was very friendly and forbore
sarcasm, and we had a good downright serious conversation,
in which she showed much shrewdness, much thought-
fulness, and a good deal of reading. She asked to see my
church, and I took her there; and now I saw her bracing
herself up for an encounter, after having been so unusually
pacific all this time. The soft, cool, coloured light looked
so beautiful as we went in out of the glare; it seemed to calm
her, and her satire died away upon her tongue. However,
of course, she was not going to give in. When we came out,
she said the scenic effect was very good, and she only wanted
to know whether the acting was as good as the mise-en-scme,
Let Them Alone. 213
etc. . . . Then she got again on the subject of Slade. I
am tired of being cross-questioned about Slade, and told her
plainly I could not get on with him. ' Pity,' she said ; ' but
Slade \'.s stiff! You should have seen Mr. Miller in his best
days—all young men loved him; he would have kept you
straight if anybody could;' and with that she took her
leave.
Friday, 19ih.—Mother wants to know whether I am really
comfortable in my household, and whether my old woman
knows how to cook. Oh dear, yes ! only I wish she was not
quite so fond of it. She has been in this very morning
blowing me up because I don't have banquets on a Friday.
' Well, Mary, I don't interfere with your dinner; so surely
you might leave mine alone.' "Deed sir, an' I wad say
nowt about it the day, if only ye wad eat what I send in of
ither days; but mak' things as nice as I wull, ye'll hardly
touch owt, an' I's sure I lie awake at neet thinking how I
could contrive somethin' ye might fancy. I wur always
reckoned a good han' at puddins, but 'deed here they mostly
goes out as they comes in.' ' Indeed, Mary, your cooking is
excellent, and I thrive upon it; but do go now, or I shall
never finish my sermon;' on which she departed slightly
offended. But you must not fancy the case is as she states;
this is only a burst of professional zeal which I am sure
Mamma will appreciate.
I have seen Margaret Scott nearly every day, and think
I am making way with her. She evidently looks with
pleasure to my visits now; and I have got her to undertake
a regular though simple course of reading. Her mind is so
undisciplined that it must be line upon line, precept upon
precept, with her.
There is a confirmation coming on towards the autumn,
which will give me much more work. I find it used to be
the custom of old Mr. Miller and my predecessor to hold
their classes all together in the large schoolroom of the old
parish. I don't fancy Slade and I shall manage any such
conjunction, but at all events the proposal must come from
him, not from me.
Saturday, 2Qth.—I have an invitation this morning from
Mr. Villiers to stay with him the week after next, from
Monday till Thursday. I accept with pleasure; I shall be
so glad to see an old friend again, and there are a thousand
things I wish to talk to him about.
To-day being a holiday, I had the schoolmaster up with me
all the morning, and we were putting our heads together,
214 "^he Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
planning a fresh distribution of the school hours, lessons,
etc. (he acknowledged himself it wanted revision), and also
making plans for getting up a village library. Put me down
a list of any books that occur to you as suitable for this
purpose. Heigh-ho! I feel I am getting thoroughly into
harness—something to think about and worry over all day
long! Not like the old Priorsworthy life, where so much
of the thinking was done for you by a wiser head. I felt
to-day as if I must be stiffening and growing old; and being
in the fields in the afternoon, it came across me to try if I had
the old power of jumping left. There was a tempting hedge
a few paces off. I took a run, went clean over it, and enjoyed
om moment of triumph! But there was unluckily a parishioner
on the other side. I came down almost ujyon an old woman
who was picking up sticks, and her look of astonishment at
seeing her pastor make such a descent upon her beat all I
ever saw. One short exclamation, however, was all the vent
she allowed her feelings, and then, collecting herself with
true shire phlegm, she began, ' Weel sir, ye're just the
person as I was wantin' to see ; but I never lookit to see ye
come that gate.' I tried to explain and apologize, but
unfortunately got into such a fit of laughing that I am
afraid I only damaged my case. Now, Helen, you must no
longer interrupt my sermon, for it is not nearly finished. I
preached last Sunday on prayer: 'Let my prayer be set
forth as the incense,' etc.; and finding I had but half got
to the end of my subject, I am at work upon it again. I
shall send this budget off, short as it is.—Best love.
r. j. E.
LETTER XIII. (journal).
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to Miss Eeynolds.
Monday, May 22.
Dearest Helen,—I had your welcome letter this morning,
and am most thankful to hear so good an account of mother
and all. Glad, too, to hear something of Frank; he is a most
undutiful elder brother, and never gives me a scrape of a
pen himself, but I suppose the cares of the nation are upon
him. Wonder whether he finds them half so heavy as I do
those of one small parish! I am delighted that you all get
to like Beilby more and more. If there is a good fellow
breathing, it is he ; you never can be wrong in reading him
my letters.
So you are interested in Margaret.    I knew you would
Let Them Alone. 215
be, and, as I said before, as she is no more to you than a
person in a book, I think there can be no harm in repeating
her story to you. I had a satisfactory talk with her to-day,
and fewer bursts of bitterness than usual; but I was rather
vexed with Mrs. Barren, who would sit in the room, keeping
her eyes upon me, and every now and then putting in some
irrelevant pious remark or quotation. 'Weel, it's God's
doings, and I tell her she maun just submit! Vain is the
help of man ! Put not your trust in priestses nor in any
child of man ! His ways is past findin' oot. Sweeter than
honey and the honeycomb,' etc. This is so different from
her former tone with me, that I think some Methodist
preacher must have been giving her a screed of his doctrine,
and advising her against me.
More invitations have come in for me, to dinner, dances,
and what not; but I think I shall manage to get off almost
all of them. Besides their objections, my neighbours all
live so far off (pardon the bull!) that I could not visit them
all without the greatest loss of time.
Thursday, 25th.—A hole in my journal, but there has
been nothing to say and very much to do. Our cricket
went off very well yesterday, and we had several more
recruits—young men whom I did not know, from Slade's
parish. Jack Benson is growing quite bright under the
excitement of drilling his awkward squad ; the good fellow
is happy, too, at Walter's efforts at reformation and his father's
comparatively lightened heart.
Fridmj.—Oh, Helen, I am in a scrape! I find I have
given dire offence to Slade, not only with going on with my
cricket against his wish, but by having selected Wednesday
of all evenings in the week. It seems that he has always
been in the habit on that evening of holding a prayer meeting
or some such thing, and I fear many of my recruits from his
parish are deserters from this. Thus much I learnt this
morning from some of my people, and immediately wrote to
Slade expressing my regret, and offering to change my day.
I received back the coldest of replies, begging that I would
not trouble myself, as he had already made arrangements for
changing the day of his meeting, but adding that, with
regard to the young men, he feared the irregularity of two
weeks would have undone the work of years. I don't quite
know what he means by that, but I am truly sorry to have
annoyed him thus, and I mean to call on him in the after¬
noon and explain all personally.
I have been getting my garden into order, and sent to
2i6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Norwich for flower seeds. It is late, but so is the season.
My ground is pretty, and some large ash and sycamore trees
in the field close by give it shade and snugness. When I
have got it quite gay, I shall let all my people come and
walk in it. The young girls shall gather the flowers, and the
old women shall help themselves to pot herbs ; and so perhaps
I may bring in a taste for gardening, which is greatly
wanted. It is true they have always had the example of
the rectory garden, which is beautiful, but then it has not
been thrown open as mine is to be !
Satiorday, 27th.—I made my call on Slade yesterday, and
found him in his study. Poor fellow, he was evidently
getting up his extempore sermon, and I must have been a
great interruption to his meditations; so that altogether I
was not surprised at finding him a little more frosty than
usual. Having shaken hands and given me a chair, he left
me to open the proceedings; and I began to explain how
completely I had been in ignorance of his arrangements
when I began my cricketing. He bowed and seemed to wish
to have no more said about it, but had not the air of believing
me. After that, we talked about the confirmation classes,
and fully agreed that we had better hold them quite
independently of one another in our respective schoolrooms.
I should like to have gone to see Mr. Miller, but Slade
Avas evidently determined I should not, and gave out
that he was too ill to see any one ; and so our interview came
to an end. Good-night, dear Helen. I must take this
volume of my memoirs with me to Conder Hall, in hopes of
having something to make it more worth sending.
CoNDEE, Hall, May 30th.
Here I am in gay life and luxury again. Such a contrast
to my grubby little den, and old Mary ' doing for' me ! Here
I have a smart gentleman pottering after me at all hours of
the day, and at my disposal I have horses, dogs, carriages,
fishing-rods, billiard tables, and musical young ladies. Of
all these luxuries, I have chosen a horse, and I have had a
luad gallop over the moors this morning. Mr. Villiers is
most kind, and it is a great enjoyment talking to one who
knows all my own people, and takes a real genuine interest
in all that concerns me. Another great good has befallen
me here. I have made acquaintance with our archdeacon,
who is one of the guests. I loved him at once,—his reception
of me was so winningly kind, and his look so charming,
fun twinkling about his mouth, and the sweetest expression
Lei Them Alone. 217
in his light-blue eyes. His talk is fascinating, and his
powers of sympathy such that he can throw himself with
equal ease into anybody's interests, from old Villiers' stables
and kennels down to the picture-books of the little lame
boy at the lodge. The Misses Villiers adore him, and it is
who shall walk nearest to him, who shall sing to him, who
shall pour out his tea, etc., all day long.
Wednesday, ilst.—I have found out to-day that the arch¬
deacon dearly loves a horse, and when I announced my
intention of riding out again over the moors, he said he
would come with me; so Villiers mounted us both famously,
and a rare gallop we had. I have not felt the Lebensfreude
so keen within me for many many months. I forgot all my
cares, my parish vanished away. I was no longer a parson,
I was a man! I was a living being, and life was very sweet
—tlie earth wide and glorious below me, and heaven free and
fresh above me. Such is the power of motion. As I dis¬
mounted, my dreams fled; the thought of to-morrow came
over me, when I should be once more grinding at my school,
at my sermons, at my cottage visiting, and hearing the end¬
less complaints of weary men and women.    God forgive me,
I sickened at the thought!    I looked back If such
is to be the result of a blessed holiday, this must be the last.
. . . When we got back to the house, we found nobody
there, all having gone out on some excursion or other; so we
turned into the garden, and walked up and down together,
and had much talk, to me most valuable. Oh! if I had
this man within easy distance of me, and had him for my
friend, I think I should have very little left to wish for.
How I wish you were here, my Nelly !—a wish that, I assure
you, is shared by many. You would so enjoy the place with
its wide moorland views and blue distances, and you and the
Misses Villiers would be fast friends. They are nice simple
girls, throwing their hearts into everything they do. I must
not lose this post. Farewell. Kiss mother for me. Your
loving
F. J. R.
LETTER  XIV.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to Miss PiEYNOLDS.
Tuexday, June 6.
Deakest Helen,—Great arrears of work have stopped my
journalizing, and a great vexation has taken up my thoughts.
One of the first things I did on returning from Conder was
2i8 TJic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to call on Margaret Scott. I had brought some fresh books
for her, lent me by Mrs. Villiers. The door was opened to
my knock by Mrs. Barron, and I saw directly that something
was wrong. She did not seem to like to look me in the
face, and, standing in the doorway, and making no move for
me to come in, told me that Margaret was in bed and too
ill to see me. I said I thought Margaret would be glad to
see me, however ill she was; and if I found she was imable
to bear talking, I would not stay a minute. On wliich I
was told that the doctor had ordered her to be kept quite
quiet, and would I please to come another day. I was
extremely mystified, because of the change in Mrs. Barren's
manner. Under old circumstances, she would have had me
into the kitchen, however ill her niece was, and have talked
to me by the hour,—in fact, till I cut her short. However,
there was no help for it, so away I went. Shortly after, I
happened to meet the doctor. He is a little, bustling,
good-natured, consequential fellow, and always ready to tallv.
So I asked him about Margaret; and he told me she had
had a great shock to her mind and feelings, and he doubted
if she would ever get over it ' A shock ! Of what nature ?'
said I. ' Sir,' said he, ' you are probably acquainted with
some of the melancholy passages of her history. Tlie mother
of the young man whom she was to have married came over
here on Monday evening last, and made her way to the
house (a very violent woman she appears to be), and a scene
took place which resulted in Margaret's having a severe
hysterical fit. I was sent for. I found her laboui^iug nnder
great cerebral excitement; I feared brain fever. I sent her
to bed, recommended quiet as far as might be possible, and
prescribed'— ' I have no doubt, Mr. Cradock, you did all
that was right; but can you tell me any more fully what
passed at the interview you speak of ? Did you hear ?'
' I heard, sir, what everybody in lUingham has heard now,
that the old woman charges Margaret with having been the
cause of her son's' death. The poor fellow, they say, died of
a broken heart (we don't recognise such a thing in the pro¬
fession); any way, he fretted himself into an illness,—jealous,
I fancy, on account of some lightness of conduct on her part,—
and the old woman has never forgiven it. Until now, she
did not know what had become of Margaret; but having
learned that she was living quietly at this place, she resolved
to come and reproach her, and let everybody know her, as
she said, for what she was. Finding her with some good
books about her, and teaching some little children, she seems
L et Them A lone. 219
to have become more maddened against her than ever. " Ah !
you set up for being a saint, do you, you hussey ? But I'll
let a' your neighbours know what a hypocrite they've got
among them, wi' her tracts and her pious ways!" So Mrs.
Barron described her harangue to me. And at this j^oint
all the children ran away frightened, and Margaret fell at
the old woman's feet and implored her to have mercy upon
her, and not to take away her character among her neigh¬
bours. But the implacable old hag only cursed her as she
lay there, and went away, and took up her quarters at the
public-house, and was as good as her word. Then, as I said
before, they sent for me'— 'I understand, Mr. Cradock.
And is it your orders that she should not see any one,, for I
have just been denied admittance ?' ' No, sir; I have not
positively forbidden her to see any one. The presence of
one whose conversation might be soothing to her, would
probably be beneficial; and, indeed, Mr. Slade has been most
attentive and kind in going there daily since this unhappy
occurrence.' Now the light had broken in upon me at last;
and after a few more remarks, I wished Mr. Cradock good
morning and passed on. I felt bitterly grieved for Mar¬
garet ; but I cannot deny that I felt very angry, too. I
made up my mind, however, to cool on the matter that day.
Saturday morning, I called again; and after knocking a
long time, the door was opened by a little girl, who said
Mrs. Barron was out (which I believe was not true), and
that Margaret could not see me. I went away, and looking
up at Margaret's open window, what should I see through it
but Mr. Slade's head,—he apparently sitting by the bed, and
bending over it in earnest conversation! Away I went
home; but my thoughts wandered sadly as I tried to fix
them on my sermon. It was so hard to me to see my way
through this matter. I resolved to write to Slade, and, tak¬
ing pen and paper, began: ' Dear Sir,—May I ask if it is by
your desire that I am shut out from the door of one of my
parishioners, who has been my constant charge till now ?'
But this sounded too angry, so I tore it up. I began again :
' Dear Sir,—I am much obliged to you for kindly supplying
my place, in my absence, at the bedside of one of my
parishioners in a time of great trouble.' But this was
hypocritical; I was not obliged to him. I tore that up too.
I finally wrote: ' Dear Sir,—I have returned home, and am
distressed to find that a parishioner in whom I take great
interest, Margaret Scott, is in much additional trouble. I
understand you have been so kind as to visit her in my
220 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
absence, and should be much obliged if you would give me
some account of the circumstances that have arisen, that on
resuming my visits I may know how matters stand. I
remain,' etc. ' There !' I thought,' that, without showing any
ill humour, will be a hint to him to discontinue his visits;
and when he ceases to come, Mrs. Barron will soon be glad
enough to see me again.' In the evening came this answer:
' Dear Sir,—I feel I owe you an explanation of the circum¬
stances under which I ventured to visit one of your flock.'
Then followed some of the details which you know; and then:
' It was at Mrs. Barren's urgent request that I went to see
her niece. You were away; and I felt that the necessity of
the case justified the step. I trust I have been enabled to
be of use. If you desire it, my visits shall now cease, not¬
withstanding that both women appear to desire my further
ministrations. I leave the matter entirely to your judgment
and feeling, and remain,' etc. What a regular Slade note!
And yet it is hard to say why it is disagreeable. It is calm,
courteous, and reasonable, and yet, somehow, there is the old
air of assuming to be always right. On Sunday evening I
wrote one line to Margaret, and sent it by old Mary, desiring
lier to give it to the girl herself. I said: ' Dear Margaret
Scott,—I intend to call to-morrow after service, and beg
that, if you are at all able to see any one, you will let me be
admitted. I am truly sorry for your fresh troubles.—Yours,
r. J. E.' Accordingly, yesterday morning I was shown up.
Margaret lay dressed upon the bed. She looked a melancholy
wreck, and turned on me the most piteous eyes as I entered.
There was a great embarrassment in her manner, however,
and she never looked me in the face again. I saw her try¬
ing to hide the tract she was reading, but I had seen its
title, ' Have you found the Way ?' I took no notice of
this, of course, nor of Slade's visits, but went direct to the
subject of her new trials, on which I learned little more
than I liave already told you; but I saw that poor Margaret
had been within an inch of madness. The pitiless old
wretch, it appears, still comes every day; and as she cannot
get into the house, she stands and storms under the window,
and the girl trembles at the very sound of her voice. While
I was talking, Mrs. Barron came to the bedroom door, and,
hearing voices, called out to her niece, ' Margot, is Mr. Slade
there ? If he is, I'll not come in.' ' No, aunt, no; it's Mr.
Eeynolds,' said poor Margaret, turning very red. On which
I opened the door, and said, ' Pray come in, Mrs. Barron;
we've nearly finished our talk.'   Mrs. Barron came in, look-
Let Them Alone, 221
ing awkward and out of humour. 'Weel, sir,' she said,
' ye'll have heard, likely, 0' all this fashious wark. I's had
Margot a'most dyin' on my hands, and me havin' nobody to
consult wi'. An' so ye see, sir, I took the liberty o' axing
Mr. Slade to step in, and he was partickler kind; and when
ye called, sir, she was too bad to see any one, an' Mr. Cradock,
he said she was to be kep' quiet an''— ' The second time I
called, Mrs. Barron,' said I, ' Margaret was not too ill to see
some one, for Mr. Slade was here. However, I don't wish
you to enter into this,—I am glad you had him to turn to.
What w'e have now to do is to consider how we can do the
best for Margaret, and how we can prevent this person from
molesting her any more.' Mrs. Barron broke in by asking
me if I did not think it a hard thing that all this ' fash'
should come to her door, when she had always tried to live
quietly, and to make no talk, and had taken in her niece out
of kindness, and now to find her the talk of the place ? And
poor Margaret, in great distress, declared she would go away
from lUingham as soon as ever she could put foot to the
ground again, and her aunt should never hear of her, nor be
' fashed' with her any more, at the same time owning her
past kindness. I put a stop to all this as soon as I could,
and took Mrs. Barron down-stairs. I think she thought I
did not sympathize with her enough, or something put her
out of humour, for she began to launch out into the praises
of Slade. ' An' he did do Margot good, an' he did put up a
beautiful prayer, extemporary, for her conversion—that did
he. Howsumever, it hadn't pleased the Lord to answer it
yet, for she was as benighted as ever, puir thing, and couldn't
settle her mind to submit to the Lord's will ony way. An'
would I be offended if Mr. Slade came again ?' ' Offended !
Certainly not, if Margaret wishes it.' ' She do wish it,' said
Mrs. Barron; and I soon after took my leave, and wrote a
line to Slade in answer to his, begging him to do as he
thought best. I could have no objection to his visiting
Margaret as a friend, though, of course, I did not intend to
surrender my own charge of her.
Evening.—I was surprised to-day by having a little girl
shown in to speak to me. It was little Mary Winship, one
of my old pets. She came to tell me that Grace was very-
ill, and wanted me to go and see her, and her mother had
sent her to see if I would be so kind. Of course I went
directly. I found the poor child wasted away to a shadow,
with her large eyes looking larger and more jjathetic than
ever.    They lighted up when I went in, in a way that went
222 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to my heart. The poor mother was sitting broken-hearted
by her child's bed, and had quite forgotten all her enmity to
me. She thanked me warmly for coming, and said Grace
had been thinking of nothing but seeing me, and she would
not cross her. I found Grace was quite sure she should die,
and she wanted me to ' tell her about heaven, as I did in the
schule.'—Your loving F. J. E.
o
[L. C. G.]
{To he continued.)
Cocfeatoo's Crtetr:
BEING A bird's-eye VIEW OF CREATION.
Cockatoo sat on his perch in the Countess of Newington's
drawing-room. The countess was not at home; she had
just driven out with three savants, to criticise the re-arrange¬
ments of the British Museum. She was a wealthy yoimg
widow, rather pretty, very fashionable, extremely whimsical,
and deeply blue. Near cockatoo was jackdaw, another of
the countess's whims. They always sat together, and often
talked to each other when tliere was no better company
present.
' But, Master Cockatoo, I cannot understand it.'
' That is because you are only a jackdaw, and your cog¬
nitive faculties—I mean the grey matter of your brain—must
be imperfectly developed. I shall try to make it plainer.
Very long ago, millions of millions of millions of years ago,
this world took its place in the universe. You understand
that ?'
' I don't understand where it came from.'
' It was originally in a nebulous state, but through conge¬
lation and rotation assumed the form of an oblate spheroid
of solid matter. But, since its solidification, many changes
have taken place. Fire, air, and water have been biisy in
altering the features of the earth.'
' How came fire, air, and water to think of doing that ?'
' Cosmical force, you stupid ! But that is not the point toi
which I wish to direct your very limited powers of attention.,
When the elements had been long enough at work, life came!
amongst them.'
As cockatoo made a pause, jackdaw thought some remark:
Cockatoo's Creed. 223
was expected from him, and hazarded, ' Indeed !    Why did
it come ?'
' Because it chose to do so! You have surely heard of
the theory of " spontaneous generation " ?'
' Yes,' said jackdaw hastily, thinking the word had some¬
thing to do with the food daily brought him by Jenny.
' There was thus a new modifying agent brought to bear
upon the earth (as well as something capable of being modi¬
fied by external circumstances) when life awoke.'
' When had this life gone to sleep ?'
' Never.    It awoke out of nothingness !'
' But I don't see how it got into nothingness.'
' It is your business to be able to see ; and if you cannot
do that, I cannot help you. Let us grant, at least, that life
appeared. The earliest life was, of course, of a very simple
type—mere gelatinous sacs floating in the great ocean. There
is now considerable difference between plants and animals.'
' Of course.    I can see thaV, said jackdaw scornfully.
' Of course you do now, when their differences are de¬
veloped so wonderfully; but allow me to tell you, that in
these early times you would have found considerable diffi¬
culty in seeing either the one or the other. And even now,
if you were able to tell me any real genetic difference be¬
tween the spore or germ of the Vaucheria Clavata, one of
the Alg£e, with its vibrating filaments, and the young
Medusaj, or the embryogenic cells of swimming Ascidians
then '—
' If I could, what then ?'
'Then I should think you are much cleverer than you
appear! Let me impress upon you that there is no abrupt
transition from one kingdom to the other. There is, how¬
ever, a choice of divergent roads from the typal Ascidian. Dr.
Primus insists on two distinct creations, but Dr. Secundus
says that there was only one, and that the differences de¬
veloped in opposite directions from the parent stock. Hence
plants may be called the negative divergence, and animals
the positive divergence. I strongly hold by this second
opinion, as only by it can we discover the unity of creation,
and I like a complete chain.'
'Do you? Well, I dorCV, said jackdaw emphatically,
shaking his chain.
' You are too material, jackdaw.'
'I thought you were talking of the developments of
matter.    However, I'll abstract, if you like,' said he roguishly.
' Whenever this development takes a permanent hold in
224 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the animal direction, it becomes capable of further advance¬
ment in the same line. You know Newton's first law of
motion ?'
' I know the Countess of Newington's,' said jackdaw,
again wofully regarding his chain.
Cockatoo, filled with a righteous desire to banish some
of the frivolity from the mind of his companion, took no
notice of this remark, and continued, ' Every body remains
at rest, or continues its uniform motion in a straight line,
unless compelled by some external force to change its state.
There was nothing, then, present to compel either to change
its state ; and so the development went on, in a straight line
in the animal direction, and in a divergent straight line in
the vegetable direction. We first get hold of the " animal"
in the Ascidian.    Don't you see ?    There is our ancestor.'
' Where ?' said jackdaw, looking round.
' In my mind's eye. And, mark you, that was our common
ancestor!'
' Indeed !   Very- common ?'
' The common ancestor of jackdaws, monkeys, men, and
cockatoos!' pausing upon the climax, and ignoring jack¬
daw's impertinent remarks.
' But why are they not all like their ancestor still, and
like each other ?'
' That is what I explained to you last night, when you
pretended you were awake. You see you had no right to be
angry when I suggested that you were asleep.'
' You didn't catch me napping. But it would take one to
be more than wide awake to understand all you say. As
for calling it an explanation !'
' I said it was tlie work of Natural Selection.'
'" Natural Selection ?"    Who is he ?'
' Who is he ? It is no being. It is higher than all being.
It is another cosmical force,' said cockatoo, dropping his
voice to a whisper. ' Life spread: circumstances varied in
the struggle for life; the strongest won, the strongest became
types. Types spread: new competitions and new develop¬
ments went on, until life became the varied unity you now
see.'
' I see,' said jackdaw, afraid of making a more suggestive
answer, in case of leading cockatoo on.
' Some of these varieties chose to remain in the sea, and
went on developing varied instruments of comfort and pro¬
tection. Some prefei'red to live on land and develop legs;
while others, disliking at the same time the heavy medium
Cockatoo's Creed. 225
of water and the grovelling habits of land animals, betook
themselves to the tops of trees, and, finding their ambition
and comfort alike suggestive, developed their anterior pair
of lateral muscles into wings; and the race of birds became
the noblest, the most aspiring of the mundane tribfes.'
'Very good,' said jackdaw.    He knew what birds were,
and felt there was a mutual compliment.
' Competition and development did good work among
birds, too, doubly advanced by the noble quality of taste.'
' What kind of taste ?—fresh-worm or unearthed beetle ?'
' Esthetic!' thundered the cockatoo, and jackdaw wriggled
about and meekly bowed his head. ' The conception of
beauty in the mind of birds has been accepted as a universal
standard of taste, though I must confess the superior genius
of the other sex. Our sex was content to take things as
they were; but the females loved beauty, admired plumage
and colour, and glancing tints and elegant outline; and their
rival courtiers struggled to satisfy them, until they became
gorgeous in all the colours of the rainbow. You may see a
proof of this—whenever the females have a plain taste, the
males are plainly attired !'
' Don't you think, on the other hand, the females  may
have acquired a plain taste, because they had  never seen
any gayer husbands ?'
' Don't be a fool!'
And jackdaw tried not to be one, saying, ' Very well.'
' I owe this snowy coat and handsome crest to admiration.'
' But I admire your crest, and I cannot grow one.'
' Because your admiration would rather make mine grow
than yours. The love and the admiration of the opposite
sex has been spent for ages on my tuft; and though I am
at present shut out of congenial society, I recall past days,
and oft repeat softly to myself the voices of other years,
" Pretty Cockatoo." These foolish men think that I repeat
all their silly words mechanically, their vanity causing a
suffusion on their well-grown, well-furrowed brain. As if it
could be possible that the grand faculty of articulate speech
could be given to any being short of sufticient brain to use
it. We know more than they think we do : they do not
understand the pineal gland. It is true we are only on one
step of the mighty " ladder of the universe,"—there is more
above than below us. We have seen our error in contemn¬
ing the earth, and have descended to it in order to rise.
We have feet; it only remains to us by gradual disuse to
lose our wings, or rather to develope them into hands.'
No. 41.—May 1878. p
226 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
' I should not like that. I can do very well without hands,
but I could not do at all without wings.'
' Nonsense !' screamed cockatoo. ' Wings are all very
well as a mere means of locomotion ; but if they take the
place of hands ? Bah ! four pair of wings are not worth one
hand. What is man but a hand ? How can he make altera¬
tions of day and night, of summer and winter, of music and
silence, of fragrance and flavour ? Whereby does he control
our wills, but with the hand. If you have any sense, do not
speak disrespectfully of the hand. Whenever we attain
hands, our feathers will disappear.'
' Ah, how cold it will be !' shivered jack.
' The hand will clothe us in raiment softer than feathers,
and warmer than down. Yes! The first great step after
developing a hand, is to give up all natural clothing. Quad¬
rupeds must lay off their fur, and birds their plumage,
before they step into the circle of the human. We have seen
some monkeys in the act of doing so.'
' But human beings have their coverings too !'
' Yes; but don't you see the difference ? They can vary
their coverings at ivill. That is the key to my system. . The
great talent, the great power that comes with the hand, is
voluntary variability. Don't you notice that they can
change their externals daily—nay, hourly ? It is through the
absence of all natural covering that they gain this power of
any covering, the highest visible development of life. Volun¬
tary variability, voluntary variability, voluntary variability
—only think of that, jackdaw ; it will make a man of you.'
' Which—the thinking, or the variability ?'
' Both; though, after all, I hardly think you are one of
" the coming race." I am afraid you will be swamped by
numbers of more earnest competitors in the struggle for life.
There is generally a residue left on each stage to keep up
the variety at their own level, and I very much fear you will
not be able to attain to anything higher than a jackdaw. I
aim at nothing short of humanity, and hope to attain it in
perhaps a couple of thousands of millions of years. And
then the delightful thought is, that new developments of life
will then have taken place, to suggest new aspirations to my
ambitious spirit; and we shall all have everything that we
are capable of desiring. As I intend to take a high position
in humanity, I cannot be sufficiently grateful to the ancestor
who traced out this path to me, in which I am. How
dreadful it would have been to have entered humanity
straight out of monkeydom !'
Cockatoo's Creed. 227
' It seems very much the same to me how you get in.'
'That is because you are only a jackdaw. Is it nothing,
think you, to make a good start in life, to enter at once into
refined society ?    Look at my nose !'
Jackdaw did so; in fact, he very seldom took his eyes off
that prominent feature.
' I have not studied life in vain. The nose is the making
of the man. What kind of man is courted and admired by
our hostess ? What kind of men make their mark upon the
world and rule in political affairs ? Men with prominent,
well-outlined noses. Mine is a type !' And waddling back
to the farther end of his perch, he half closed his eyes, to
regard more easily his favourite organ.
' I am quite content with what I have,' said jackdaw after
a short silence.
' Perhaps; for you are a bird, though you are a jack¬
daw. But these stupid monkeys, I had enough of their
grimaces down in No-man's-land, where I was born. Do you
know what sort of men they make ? Do you know what
sort of men they make ?' repeated he, raising his voice into a
shriek; then, seeing no answer was forthcoming, he lowered
it into a confidential whisper and said, ' Niggers !'
' Niggers ! what is that ?'
' Bah! not know what niggers are ? But then you are
only a jackdaw, and have never travelled out of this little
island. Niggers are black men, and black is always the
lowest grade in things, for it is the absence of all colour; but
white is the highest, for it has all the colours melted into
one,' said cockatoo, bridling and squinting at his own snowy
coat.
' I think black does very well for a colour,' said jackdaw,
pluming his wing. ' When the suu shines on it, there are all
the other colours in it, too, like the rainbow. Besides, for
common wear it does not show the dust so much as white.'
Cockatoo was about to answer bitingly, but his acquired
politeness made him pause, the contrast being too forcible
for even a cockatoo to plume himself upon. ' That was not
the point I was about to notice. It is true that Uaclc in the
human skin appears a remnant of natural covering, and
certainly interferes with the full exercise of voluntary
variability. But the niggers also retain the receding forehead,
flat faces, snub noses, open nostrils, and thick lips of the
monkeys. And when they do rub white, in lapse of time,
they are only common white people ; they cannot get their
noses into refined society.'
228 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Perhaps that is why I never met them.'
' Perhaps,' said cockatoo dryly. ' But besides that dis¬
advantage, you know monkeys cannot talk as we do; and
when they develope into niggers, they only begin to speak
like babies, and don't know the difference of the simplest
parts of speech. And even when they have got on as far
as common white people, they are not ready to begin
grammar, are afraid of the sting of spelling-bees, and drop
their h's. Further, the joints that represent hands in the
quadrumana become very clumsy in the nigger. You never
know which is a nigger's foot or hand, unless you measure
which comes nearest his head. But our wings develope into
slender hands, white and delicate.'
' That is a piece of your theory I do not enjoy. I would
not object to having hands if I could keep my wings too.'
'Ah, jacky! It would suit your cleptomania too well, if
you had both hands to steal and wings to flee withal.
Habits stick to us. I suspect when we are men you'll turn
out a thief, and I the Lord Chief Justice to send you for a
trip beyond the seas. My crest has been a well-considered
selection. It has pointed for ages to the learned wig. In
these changed times, if such a thing should happen, then
you'll remember me.'
' But I cannot understand how we ourselves will become
people.    We don't live for millions of years !'
' You are only a jackdaw. As if that mattered in the least!
When existent energy will have been communicated through
the entire entelechy of each genus, the identity of the whole
with its redintegrating parts will be proved'—
' I do not understand you.'
' Very likely not. I did not undertake to give you under¬
standing. I only promised to put before you some facts
concerning the theory of the universe.'
' Where did you get them all ? Out of the library
books ?'
' Books ? No ! Books are a sign of limitation, of beggary,
at least of borrowing, perhaps of stealing. No, I have
evolved it all out of the depths of my own inner conscious¬
ness.'
' Is that your digestion ?'
' No! You would not understand me if I were to explain
to yoii what it was. I do not think you have as yet any
perception wherewith to apprehend it. I have thought
much, and I have inherited more. We inherit the cultiva¬
tion  of all  our ancestors, and even their very life.    How
Cockatoo's Creed. 229
otherwise would it be, do you think, with men ? If they did
not, how could they write such books as the Water Babies
or the M4moires d'un Ane ? How could Darwin feel and
think all that passed through his grandfather's brain, and
develope it in his own ? Ah yes, it is all clear to me ; I can
throw myself back into any past life in my own line, and
also forward, through desire, in any radiating line into many
future possibilities of life. One's pace increases as one's
desire is single and one's road is straight. The straight
road from our point into humanity, I have already told you,
" Gain your hands and cast your feathers !" '
' But if you say we must get rid of all natural covering,
why is it that men often have so much on their faces ?'
' They are not the highest possibilities, though they are
the highest seen realities.'
' As the women have no hair upon their faces, are they
not higher than the men ?'
' Eight for once, jacky,—iron sharpeneth wood. And do
you not observe the consistency of my theory ? Their more
complete destitution of natural covering gives them greater
power of voluntary variability. Do you not notice our
hostess and her friends ? It is the women that appear in
tints and patterns, varied night by night and day by day,
and every hour of the day ; while the men, like magpies or
water-wagtails, preserve their sober blacks and whites, or at
best change occasionally into dingy greys. A few that
appear sometimes in scarlet, must, I suppose, be developing
into women. It is the women that are the gorgeous birds
in this stage. And do you not see how often their figures
change, their complexion is altered, and their hair—that last
remnant of nature's robing—varies in tint as well as in out¬
line and quantity ? Though circumstances over which I
have no control have prevented me making as thorough an
investigation as I would like, I have a well-grounded belief
that in most cases it is altogether moveable, and merely
retained, along with earrings, as a remembrance of their
barbaric descent. Our hostess preserves a dead silence on
that head ; but if I am right in my conjecture, it follows a
fortiori that women have attained a very much higher plat¬
form than men, and may look forward to a more rapid
development. Statistical returns prove their greater per¬
sistence in life. More men are born than women, but more
women are alive than men. This can point forward only to
one result—a higher type of development, aided by numerical
superiority, will at last swamp men out of existence, or leave
230 TJie Ladies^ Ediiihurgh Magazine.
them stranded as typal residues. Then will women reign
as the highest created race, in spite of the present apparent
superiority of the bearded sex. It can only remain to them
to become angels, or some higher type of life, with still more
power of voluntary variability. I have already had more
than one glimpse into such a higher sphere. Women have
dropped what we call natural covering, but they must learn
to drop the very covering of their flesh. Don't you remem¬
ber ? But, to be sure, you are always asleep at the shnces.
Well, there I have seen spirits put on a covering of flesh and
put it off at will, revealing their presence only by their
actions. They can vary all things indefinitely, and I recog¬
nised that they had attained a higher power of voluntary
variability, and all its subordinate results. And these
spirits were all once women, old or young. They bring
messages from the unseen, unrobed world in which they
dwell.    Can you follow ?'
' How far ?' said jackdaw, measuring cockatoo's tether
witli his eye.
'You are a most uncomfortable fool, jackdaw,' said
cockatoo bitterly.
But here the countess, having discarded the savants,
entered tete-d-tete with her new French milliner, and
cockatoo silently gazed and eagerly listened, drawing new
inferences and developing new ideas.
Jackdaw required a good sleep after so much exertion.
Charlotte Carmichael.
©nig in ©reams.
Only in dreams, my love, only in dreams :
We two may meet again here, so it seems;
Death hath claimed thee, my love,—life still is mine.
Why could not Fate us the same fate assign ?
Yet still be brave, my love, yet still be brave :
Faith must be stronger than death or the grave;
And when are ended all life's sorry schemes.
Love shall meet Love again, where are no dreams!
H. A. Duff.
Notes on the Exhibition of the R.S.A. 231
l^otcs on tl)e €x|)i&itt0n of tfje a^.S.^.
1878.
We must as usual say a few words on our Picture Exhibition,
and space prevents our doing more than naming a few of the
pictures that pleased or displeased us most. As to the
merits or shortcomings of the Exhibition as a whole, we have
seen better, and in Edinburgh we certainly have seen worse.
We are glad to notice a great increase of lady exhibitors,
many of our favourites being the work of female artists.
Such was ' Guarding the Crag,'—5. North Octagon,—a small
hill landscape, with two long-horned goats defending their
castle. The look past the grey cliff into soft sunlit distance,
and the growth of juniper and withered fern, are given with
great feeling. 16. ' Eydal Water,' Tucker; beautiful in its
glassy calm, so characteristic of this small hill-girt lake.
19. 'The Bride of Lammermoor,'W. E. Lockhart; we do not
like this, Eavenswood's figure wants height and dignity, and
in Lucy's ghastly face is a look of crime and shame, rather
than of oppressed innocence. Lady Ashton is only like an
impertinent and meddlesome waiting-maid, as she stands
behind Lucy's chair, arrayed in an unpleasant cinnamon
gown, with scarlet bows, and a scarlet fan at her side. Our
ideal Lady Ashton was a more dignified and better-dressed
personage. 30. ' Water Lilies,' J. C. Noble, is mis-named;
there is but one blossom to be seen in a badly-drawn garden
tank, while one ill-favoured and ill-dressed damsel seems
likely to tumble in as she tries to pluck it. 37. ' On the
Derwent,' J. Handbidge; quiet and pretty. Knowing and
loving the spot, we liked the picture. 47. ' Thunderstorm
on the Prairie,' J. M'Whirter; this is very striking, the sea¬
like horizon line contrasting with the violent jagged effects
of the storm-clouds. 60. Is exquisite,' A Calm Sunset on the
Eirth,' J. Cassie; the delicate grey of the islets, and the
glassy sea, equally true and lovely. 67. 'Moonlight at
Moulinearn,' W. H. Paton; requires to be looked at more
than once. The shadows are too inky, but the fir tree heads
are wonderfully thrown out by the sky, and there is a
shimmer and dance of the moonlit water that delights us.
95. ' And our mouth shall show forth Thy praise,' Scott;
a clumsy girl in brown, with a hat too small for her, in a
brown pew, book in hand. The preceding versicle would
have been a better name for the piece, as, though the young
232 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Ma<razine.
A'"  -"-"■a'-
woman's hymn-book is open, her mouth is resolutely shut.
97. 'The Last Furrow,' Farquharson, ought to have been
pretty, but the artist is fond of purple haze of a woolly
texture. 99. 'Gullane Bay,' Vallance, has, like several sea-
pieces, much briny, breezy freshness. 112. 'A Widow,'
Alma Tadema; terrible, from its rendering of simple facts.
A Hindoo corpse, in the mummy cerements; beside it the
nude crouching figure, seen through veiling black gauze, of
her whose ' sun has gone down while it is yet day,' an
Oriental widow, consigned to a life which might make the
suttee desirable. All, even to the faces of the singing
attendants, gives the effect of death without a future—rayless,
hopeless death.
126. 'Which Hand will you take ?' Archer; a dear little
girl, making the collie dog guess which of the hands
behind her holds the coveted oat-cake. The dog's gentle¬
ness with the child, and eagerness for the gift, contrast
prettily with the demure fun of the little maid, with her
jaunty bunch of rowan berries in her hat. 181. 'On the
Beach, Largo,' Porteous; the tone of tlie sea and the soft
headlands beyond, very good. 101. ' Early Summer among
the Whins,' Calvert. This and other stiidies have strengthened
our conviction, that artists need not make the interest of
their canvas depend on reproducing either whins or heather
in blossom. To see these and other lovelinesses, people
must, like Mohammed, ' go to the mountain,' for it cannot
come to them.
In the Great Eoom.—207. ' The Spirit of Twilight,' Sir K
Paton; we do not care for this, the idea seems taken from
Shelley. We hope it is only in our great artist's fancy that
such spirits haunt the twilight. The wandering poet is
positively weighed down by the embrace of the ponderous
figure who has passed her substantial arms round his neck.
Her fine head of hair, yellow and Men crepe, flies on the
breeze; her gossamer wings would scarce carry a plump
pigeon, far less so massive a being. We seem to recognise
her from former works of the painter, but she surely is
growing stouter and should not fly by twilight.
229. 'Alone,' Stanton; 246. 'Finis,' M'Lean. These
being private property, we tried to discover their merits or
their meaning, and confess our failure. The first represents
a stout young woman in a dark-brown, fashionably-trimmed
gown, lying huddled up against a trunk with railway label
on its handle. The room is dingy, a brown moreen-curtained
four - poster in the background.    We cannot pronounce on
Notes on the Exhibition of the R.S.A. 233
the lady's beauty, for she cries and hides her face on the
trunk ; an elaborate chignon is all we see of her. Is she ' a
governess perforce,' just arrived with her one box in an un¬
congenial situation ? She had better make the best of it,
wash her face, and go down to tea. Is she the widow startled
by the arrival of that box without its owner ? We tried to
sympathize, but could not get further than a little curiosity,
and a wish that she would stop crying and open the box.
In ' Finis,' a sallow young lady, in sickly colours, lies in an
easy-chair with a look of grief and a dirty green book in her
lap. There is no apparent cause for sorrow, unless it be that,
having finished one novel, she is too lazy to get up and
fetch another. We could not be sympathetic here, and felt
inclined to echo bluff King Hal's advice to the nuns. 260.
W. H. Paton, is, as far as the mere picture goes, a better
effort to work upon our feelings ; a deer forest in Highland
sunset, red-deer straying among the roofless huts of evicted
cotters. Though the mist is cotton-woolly, there is a lovely
middle distance. 261. Carries on the idea,'Decay of the
Forest,' by the same hand. The snaky writhing tree stems
are scarcely natural and very unpleasant; the receding
mountain perspective is good, a stream of watery sunshine
from a cloud rift making the cliffs glint with sickly light.
To the sentiment of both pictures we object entirely. Iled-
deer may be worthier occupants than cotters, as none who
really know Highland huts and their inmates will dispute.
There are cases where ' eviction' is kindness to men per¬
petuating a state far below that of the beasts that perish.
At a time when the question of tenant-right stirs evil passions
to a pitch that results in deeds that shame a Christian nation,
surely those who lead popular feeling should know better
than to degTade Art into a vehicle for the expression of mere
sentiment on matters requiring such calm thought and clear
judgment.
Sam Bough's pictures are very striking. 308. 'Ulleswater;'
excellent in river perspective, but too spotty in light and
.shadow,—a fault even worse in 880. The ' Avon near Bristol.'
817.' Tam 0' Shanter ;' very clever. 1048.' Billowness, Fife;'
delicious with its surges and hovering sea-birds. 1079. A
pretty snow-piece. 395. ' Bylaff Glen, Isle of Man ;' the
(juiet stream rippling into sunshine out of its dark coppice,
must surely be one of the bits we learnt to love from the
author of' Where shall we go?' in our February issue. 319.
'The Summer of 1877,' Smart; and 38-5. 'Piain in Sligachan,'
Chalmers, are both painfully suggestive of the despairing
234 The Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
state of Art and Nature under the ' Scottish sky' last
summer. 234. 'Horse-chestnut Blossoms,' J. H. Lorimer ; a
charming study. Better still, 434. ' Daftbdowndillies,' Laura
A. Tadema. One longs to bury one's face in the dewy, fragrant,
golden mass. 376. Hume ; dear, rosy, wind-blown fisher
children ' Picking up after a Storm,' a soft, surging ground-
swell breaking behind them.
We leave many unnoticed to speak of the portraits.
There are fewer than usual of the be-muslined and be¬
jewelled ladies, singly or in family groups ; fewer, too, of the
lint-topped, mulberry-pawed babies, painted we presume for
the delight of ' the mothers proud that bore them,' and the
profit of the rising artists who are paid for immortalizing
their charms.
There are some ugly and ungraceful portraits, but the
ladies have mercifully taken in general to dark gowns. 317.
Macnee's portrait of Lord Mure, is excellent; still more so
Ouless' of Professor Eamsay. Otto Leyde has improved in
flesh tints, though even now he never gives us a really rosy,
healthy-looking child. Of one group, a young mother with
her two children, he should, we think, have made a prettier
picture. A simpler toilette would have given more ease and
grace to one sitting alone with her babies. Clouds of muslin
and lace, pearl necldace, and intrusive bracelet with brilliants
in the clasp, remind us of the Vicar of Wakefield's wife
when she begged the painter ' not to be too frugal of his
diamonds in her stomacher and hair.' These children show
a consciousness that ' mamma is dressed,' and so are they.
We stand beside one portrait more,—spirited, graceful,
full of poetic feeling. Firm, lithe, and active, this little
face and figure will linger in the recollection of the many
who have gatliered round it throughout tliis season, associ¬
ating its child-beauty with a dark and mournful tale. We
could hardly close our brief notice without some reference
to this unsolved mystery, knowing that all who were cog¬
nizant of the circumstances—and who in the artist world is
not ?—must needs have shared in our own sensation when the
terrible event of the night of February 22d was made known in
our city. Even after the lapse of some time, a glance at this
scarce-finished and beautiful portrait stirs again a sensation
akin to tliat with which we ever read that tragic poem, La
Toilette cle Constance, susfgesting the same bitter contrast
between life, sense of power, and joyous vitality, to be
exchanged in one brief half-hour for a premature and violent
death.    As with the radiant girl in her laughing beauty:
o
Our Library Table. 235
' Adieu bal—plaisir—amour—
On disait : Pauvre Constance !
Et Ton dansait, jusqu'au jour
Chez I'ambassadeur de France,'
SO with the artist in the high tide of manhood, of success, of
hope.
Again we turn to look at his last work, wondering if the
fair boy so full of promise will, when those curved rosebud
lips and dewy brilliant eyes change to the severer lineaments
of manhood, ever look back with fond regret to the time
when his own picturesque childish features gave their last
employment to the artist eye and hand so soon to close and
stiffen in death, and whether the child will ever live to see
the unveiling of the mystery that now shrouds the untimely
fate of the lamented G. Paul Chalmers.
©ur ^.tbrarg ^aftle,
A Thousand Miles up the Nile.    By Amelia B. Edwards.
Longmans, Green, & Co.
' Cui Bono ?' A Nile Novel.   By George Fleming.   Macmillan «fc Co.
To those who ' do their Nile vicariously, through the medium of
Mudie,' as Miss Edwards puts it, this volume will be invaluable.
It needs perhaps some resolution to embark in a book of 721 pages,
when the Times alone daily brings us as much matter as a three
volume novel. And yet it is well worth while to make the effort.
The wonderful river casts its glamour over us as we read ; and we
realize something of the charm of floating onwards day by day, witli
no anxieties about weather, and gradually becoming absorbed in a
new world of gorgeous colouring, a mysterious past of unfathomable
antiquitj"^; the only incidents a sand-storm, shooting a cataract, or
catching glimpses of the simple life of the peoj^le, which reproduces
so remarkably the features of past ages.
Miss Edwards paints like an artist, as she is, nor with the pen only ;
the illustrations to the book are as choice as they are numerous.
Her word pictures, too, are most exquisitely touched ; every epithet
tells, and the tender beauty of her descriptions leaves a marked
impression on one's memory. Perhaps it is not possible for an
ordinary reader to take a very keen interest in Egyptian antiquities,
unless he has been specially drawn in that direction ; and even the
actual visitors to the Nile are apt to find the perpetual succession of
temples pall upon them. Not so Miss Edwards. ' I could have
breakfasted, dined, supped upon temples,' she says ; ' I went over
them all. I took notes of them all. I sketched them every one.'
And her enthusiasm and genuine interest do carry the reader along
with her to a great extent, though a little judicious skipping may be
prescribed. No one can fail to carry away, for instance, a vivid
impression of the four great Colossi of Aboo Simbel, keeping majestic
guard over the portico of the rock-hewn temple, defaced, half buried
in sand as they are, still instinct with a solemn power and grandeur.
236 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Still more attractive does the narrative become when the travellers
themselves take rank as discoverers ; and we share their feelings
when we read how the sticks of four of the party disappeared in a
crevice of the rock, and how, through an ingenious train of reasoning,
backed by the exertions of a large body of natives, a small chamber
hewn in the rock was at length laid bare, adorned with paintings
fresh and brilliant as on the day they were executed.
Are these time-olden associations of the Nile enhanced by being
made the background to a modern drama of modern hopes and fears \
We doubt it. There is something in the atmosphere of that change¬
less nature, of that history so distant that it wins to itself something
of the soothing power of nature, iltterly at variance with the restlesal
Cui Bono spirit of the nineteenth centiiry, with that self-contem¬
plation which sees in every combination of nature or art but a
reflection of its own unsatisfied yearnings. What place is there
under a palm tree, by the green old Nile, for a man of whom it is
said : ' He had tastes and opinions, the one as settled as the others
were fluctuating ; but his most intimate friend had never heard him
give expression to a belief.' Will not the men who, in the mighty
monuments of Egypt, have left us such stupendous proofs of their
beliefs, rise up to condemn this shallow, dilettante philosophy ? And
wliat rest or charm can we hope to find in any scene, when the
reflections suggested by it are such as these on the palm tree ?
' To me they seem like Heine's songs, endless delicate variations
on the old, old theme—the desire for what is not. Each stem shoots
into the air like a wish ; and the waving leaves a-top seem to droop
earthward again with a sigh over the unattainable.'
Yet the book is full of beauties. It is a poem breathing through¬
out a tone of dreamy lotus-eating fascination ; and it is only wlien
we ask ourselves whither it is all tending that we realize that the
key-note to the whole is a refined and sensuous self-indulgence.
Paul Knox the Pitman.    By J. B. Harwood.    Richard Bentley
& Son.
This is a book of very unequal merit when examined in detail, but
on the whole there is more to praise than to find fault with. The
scene is laid in a bleak moorland parish, traversed by a main line of
railroad, and studded over with coal-pits. The opening incident is
a terrible collision on the line, very powerfully described, and the
heroine of the story is a tiny child picked unhurt out of the wreck
with none to own her, and growing up to womanhood among the
rough collier folk who rescue her. She has adventures enough in
the course of the story to satisfy the most inordinate appetite for
sensation, and their number is rather a blemish to more sober
people's eyes, who care for proportion and artistic construction in a
novel as well as in a poem or a picture. Besides surviving a rail¬
way smash, this young lady is rescued from falling down a disused
pit-shaft, is dug out of another colliery in which an explosion has
taken place, is swept down a flooded river and saved from a revolving
mill wheel just in time, and is finally discovered to be somebody's
long-lost heiress. For the commonplace love-story part of the book
there is nothing to be said; but the bleak country, the swarming life
above ground and below, the rugged northern pitmen, are admirably
well described by one who can appreciate their virtues and deal
truly and tenderly with their defects.    There is a truth and pathos
Question Series. 237
in the portrait of poor Joe, the overwrought drudge, the railway
pointsman who causes the accident, which reminds us of some of Mrs.
Gaskell's writing ; and Paul Knox, though an idealized pitman, is a
very noble and, we believe, possible development. The interest falls
off where the author ventures upon scenes of higher life than the
collier's village and the schoolmaster's house, and we think more
might have been made of the pit accident by one who can sympathize
so well with brave hearts, so heroic in the hour of peril, and so reck¬
less when danger seems far off; but on the whole, we can cordially
recommend Paul Knox and his comrades to our readers' attention.
Question .Series.
I. HisHorj/.—Give an account of the events which led to the battle
of Flodden.
II. To what period should we assign the beginning of EDglinh
Literature ?    Give reasons.
Answers to reach the Editors by loth June, addressed, ' Qu. C,
care of Miss Walker, 6 Lonsdale Terrace.' History not to exceed
twenty-four. Literature twenty-six printed lines—twelve words to a
line. The best answer to each question will be printed in the
magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of the year for the
greatest number in each department. Answers to be written on one
side of the paper only. We warn correspondents against running
tmie too short. The loth is the latest day on which the Editors can
receive any ; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO MARCH SERIES.
None have exactly hit the point in History: Wolsey desired power
should be vested in the Church, Cromwell in the King, and tliis
influenced their attitude towards Parliament. Of the answers,—B
the best ; M. B., M. W., May-Fly, and Spider, very good ; Redi-
viVA and M. H. L., too long. Literature: Claeibel, best, but B.
runs her hard ; M. H. L., too long; Rediviva, well compressed, but
inferior in style to Claribel and B.
I. Wolsey, the favourite of Henry VIII., feared the calling of
Parliament, lest it should exert its constitutional rights and resist''the
encroachments of the monarchy. He therefore sought earnestly to
keep the nation at peace, and thus to avoid the necessity of assembling
the Houses to vote for subsidies, which would be required in case of
war. When war with France was actually declared, still following
his policy of Ignoring Parliament, he attempted to obtain funds by a
forced loan exacted from the whole kingdom. This proving unsuc¬
cessful, heat last summoned Parliament and demanded a property
tax of 20 per cent. Disappointed by receiving only half of what
he asked, and finding that his attempt to overawe the House of
Commons was unsuccessful, he fell back on the system of voluntary
benevolences, but was again defeated. A partisan of absolute
monarchy, he fell when the king's favour was withdrawn.
Cromwell took a different course. Warned by the failure and fall
of his master, Wolsey, he  determined not to avoid the calling of
238 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Parliaments, but to fill them with members who should be subservient
to the king. This he managed in the case of the House of Lords by
the suppression of mitred abbots and creation of many new peerages,
and by the election of a House of Commons largely composed of
nominees of the Royal Council. The oppressive measures passed by
him had thus the sanction of law ; but his revival of the constitutional
form of government, though for a time misused, was at least valuable
as preserving the tradition of English freedom, and leaving open the
way for the ultimate fall of despotism. Wolsej' ignored, Cromwell
ruled over, the Parliament of England. B.
II. Translated by Grey from a Latin version of a poem in the
Norse, Elder Edda, of great, indeed unknown antiquity. It
begins by telling of an evil dream of Balder's, which none of the Asa
(or gods) could interpret. So Odin goes to seek a solution from a
long dead prophetess in the halls of Hela or death. Having passed
the dog or wolf who guards them, and who lives on the lives of dead
men, he finds them decked to receive some honoured guest. The
benches are set, the mead is brewed, and the prophetess, roused
unwillingly from her long death-sleep, tells Odin that it is Balder
himself who is expected. He should die by the unwitting hand of
Hoder, the blind god (or fate), guided by the malignant Loki. But
Vali (a name from the root meaning choice, implying freedom),
Rinda's son, should finally overcome Hoder and avenge Balder.
Odin next asks a question concerning some weeping virgins, probably
alluding to the great lamentations over the death of Balder, which,
but for the obdviracy of one 'giant witch,' would have won his release
from Hela. But this question relating to the future, reveals Odin's
divinity to the angry prophetess. He accuses her of belonging to the
evil giant race, and she dismisses him to ' boast at home ' till (here
the translator misses the taunt) the terrible day when the power of
the gods shall fail, Loki shall burst his chains, and the reign shall
return of night and chaos. Thus Odin hears that neither Balder's
divinit}', nor his goodness, nor the love all bore him, could save him
from the foredoomed death, whence he would rise, however, at last,
and, reconciled with Hoder (fate), reign in the new world beyond the
grave. Claribel.
We cannot undertake to return unsuccessful answers. Writers
had better keep a duplicate copy.
Answer to Viva.—In answer to Viva's question in our March
issue, six months of not very hard study would enable the learner
to read easy Greek dialogues, and of course our familiarity with the
English Version makes the Testament the vei'y easiest of all reading.
It is more difiicult to answer the second part of her query, because
people attach such different meanings to ' a little ' knowledge. A
smattering, by which we mean superficial knowledge, may be mislead¬
ing, and feeds self-conceit; but a little, honestly and accurately learnt,
and used as far as it will go, is the first step to much, even if time or
opportunity will not allow the learner to go further. At the present
day so many great and interesting questions turn on the subject of
Holy Scripture, especially the New Testament, that we constantly
Stray Notes. 239
come upon them in various departments of literature. The relative
value of each Codex ; how far Versions are reliable ; the need of
revision ; the legitimate field for criticism, and so on,—questions such
as these may easily become deeply interesting to Viva and her young
friends, if they will acquire the knowledge for intelligent appreciation
of books which deal with these subjects. We should like to recom¬
mend Hammond's Ouilines of Textual Criticism, Clarendon Press
Series ; and Words nf the New Testament, Milligan and Roberts, T.
and T. Clark, Edinburgh. We believe that a world of thought and
interest has been opened to young students by these two little books.
A little Greek knowledge is required for both.
ScHOLASTiCA is answered by One of Professor Laurie's
Stddents.—The governess starting with theoretical knowledge of the
science of education, has at least these advantages over one who has
neither theory nor practice. She knows what to do, and why she
does it. She knows why, of so many lessons in her own childhood,
she recollected so very little; and of her mistakes, she can form
stepping-stones to better methods of teaching others. She will go to
her work with broader views of its infinite importance, and a keener
eye for the little things which make up its sum. She may still have
to serve an apprenticeship to the practical application of the rules of
method, but it will be shorter and more beneficial to her pupils than
if she were groping in the dark for the right way. It ought, how¬
ever, to be understood that the Lectures presuppose some previous
philosophical or logical training, and that such preparation is almost
essential to real progi-ess. There is unfortunately no practising'
class in which students themselves can teach. They have permission
to attend the public schools, and thus can study method by observa¬
tion. These visits form valuable illustrations of the lectures, but
they do not supply all that is necessary; and it is to be hoped that
Professor Laurie's wish of providing his students with opportunities
for practical teaching may soon be realized.
An Elder Sister asks for the title of a book at once simple and
practical upon medicine and surgery. She wishes to have somethincr
that would, m case of sudden illness or accident in a large family"
tell her 'what to do till the doctor comes.' [We have taken the
opinion of a lady of much experience and skill in the matter • she
recommends The Book of Medical Information and Advice, by Dr
Warburton Begbie, published by Nelson & Sons, Paternoster Row
price 2s. 6d.—Eds.] '
A  Governess.—We  have  tried  to  get information for you  in
answer to the question of board for the winter in our March issue
But all who try to answer you say your terms are rather va-nie
Board alone might be had for £50 (supposing you found 'the quiet
family ), but   all expenses ' is rather indefinite.
A Sketoher, who knows a little of flower-painting, asks for
information about the china painting now becoming fashionable—is
it diffacult ? [Not if you know how to draw correctly. Otherwise
let A Sketcher beware ; for the popular notion that ignorance of
drawing is best atoned for by boldness, is even less applicable to
decorative art than to blottesque landscapes. It is quite a true
description of painting on china to say, in the words of a pupil of the
Sevres School of Design, ' La peinture sur porcelaine n'est qu'une
savante ebauche ; ' it is and must be for ever a sketch when compared
with  ordinary flower-painting;   but then it must be scientific, not
240 Tlie Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
ignorant sketching. There are many different methods and schools.
That of Sevres is, as all know, the most artistic ; partly because the
pupils go through a very long and careful art education, and partly
because of the influence of its traditions. The Sevres method is
']>einttire a essence,' and turpentine is the medium employed. Very
few colours are used, and this materially lessens one great difficulty,
i.e. the change of certain colours in baking. This, though em¬
barrassing at first, is not so great a mystery as it seems. You soon
learn that grey stands for green, and that pale brown is rose pink.]
A Busy Bee asks, ' What is the Society or institution called the
Working Ladies' Guild ?' She has heard from a distance vague
reports of its wonderful usefulness and activity ; but she would wish
to know further its aims and objects, the time and place of its opera¬
tions, its rules and terms of membershii), and any other particulars.
[We are glad to insert this question. If information should reach
us from 'a competent hand,' more voluminous than can be com¬
pressed into a Stray Note, we could arrange space for a short Article
upon so interesting a subject, if timely notice were given us of the
probable date of its appearance.—Eds.]
We are glad to announce that the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational
Association decided, at the Council meeting of 8th April, that the
study of Harmony and the Theory of Music shall be one of their
subjects during the ensuing session, should it be found practicable to
make the necessary arrangements for such a class.
An interesting report has just been forwarded to us of the pro¬
ceedings of the Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of
Women. It will be interesting to many of our readers to be able,
through the jjublication of this Report, to compare the system with
our own, and mark the similarities and divergences of the two. We
may hope that our Edinburgh Ladies will not suffer themselves to be
distanced in the study and practice of music by their Glasgow sisters.
Notices to Corrrsponlicnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinhmih Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
It is proposed to issue a series of papers on 'Country Subjects and
Pursuits.' Articles are already promised on Fishing, Hunting, and
Curling. Ladies willing to write in this series should communicate
at once with the Editors.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held at 5 St. Colme Street, on Saturday, 4th May 1878, at ]1
o'clock. Debate—' Is the Wagner Theory of Music and the Drama
correct ?'
Our Female Novelists. 241
©ur jFrmale flobcUsts.
XVII.
M E S.   0 P I E.
h. 1769—rf. 1853.
In the ranks of authorship, where lady writers often fare as
intruders or imitators, it is pleasing to find womanly genius
honourably placed, as softening by a style essentially feminine
the generally masculine character of modern English litera¬
ture.    Such is the acknowledged position and influence of
the Female Novelist of our present notice.
Amelia Alderson, the only child of her parents, James
Alderson, M.D., and Amelia Briggs, was born in Norwich,
12th November 1769. Of Norman descent, according to a
maternal pedigree traced beyond the reign of Edward I., she
was also connected by her father's family, the Aldersons of
Lowestoft, with distinguished members of the different
learned professions. Her mother, ' brought an orphan babe
from India's plain,' after the premature deaths of both
parents there, was never of strong constitution, lived a
retired life, and died at the age of thirty-eight, leaving
Amelia to the guardianship of him who was henceforth her
dearest friend and companion, her father. He was a man of
superior mental endowments as well as benevolence of heart;
and proud of his daughter's talents, he delighted in their
cultivation by personal instruction and intercourse with
the clever and learned circles in which he moved.
Placed thus, at fifteen, at the head of her father's table,
and introduced into very gay society, which even at that
age she was well fitted to adorn, the position was trying, if
not dangerous, to the ardent girl, deprived of a mother's
restraining influence. How deeply she deplored the loss is
evinced not merely in expressions of sorrow, but by her life¬
long cherishing of the early lessons of one whose loving
wisdom made reproof most gentle. A sonnet to her mother's
memory, published among Verses ivritten at Cramer, vias
Amelia's earliest attempt at poetry, connecting the thought
of her parent's presence with scenes which she loved to re¬
visit till the close of her life. In her need of a steady female
friend older than herself, she found one of a thousand in
Mrs. John Taylor, whose society, valued by Sir James
Mackintosh as his favourite attraction to Norwich when on
circuit, became a dear and beneficial companionship for the
young authoress.
No. 42.—June 1878. q
242 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Her prominent characteristic was, however, attachment to
her father, and her tastes and opinions were moulded on his.
The political agitations in England excited by the French
devolution stirring Dr. Alderson's sympathies with social
reforms (so called), his daughter became interested in the
same cause; and hence we find her, on her first visit to
London in 1794, attending the state trials for high treason,
and drawn into political fellowship with minds otherwise
uncongenial to her own. Good sense and moral rectitude
must have been her only safeguards in a society where Hol-
croft and Godwin were numbered among her professed
admirers, and where the atmosphere was poisoned by Horace
Walpole's ' pliilosophizing serpents, the.Paines, the Tookes,
and the Woolstonecrofts.'
A singular predilection for frequenting courts of justice,
dating from early days, when the eagerness of the young
listener at Norwich Assizes was gratified by a seat on the
bench, distinguished her through life, till obliged to make
her last visit in a sedan chair. Though latterly associated
with motives of philanthropy, this passion for the dramas
of real life was, by herself, ascribed to curiosity and love
of excitement, which almost conquered fatigue, as on the
occasion of the last forensic triumph of the great Erskine
before he became Lord Chancellor, when, after waiting in
court all night till dawn, she was back by 7.30 A.M. to hear
him plead. Another peculiarity was an interest in the
insane, which attracted her chUdish steps to the gates of
Bedlam with offerings of flowers and pence for the inmates;
the 'world of woe' in one poor man's countenance being
afterwards portrayed in one of the touching scenes of Father
and DaugJiter.
An early love of the drama produced at eigliteen a play
called Adelaide, to be acted by herself and friends, and pro¬
bably led to her first association in London with Mrs.
Inchbald and the different members of the Kemble family.
She became the intimate friend of Mrs. Siddons, to whom
her deep attachment was touchingly proved, many years
afterwards, by a flood of tears on suddenly beholding a cast
of her face taken after death. Another interest of those
first London visits was intercourse with distinguished
foreigners, of whom the Due d'Aiguillon and Count de Lally
Tollendal were specially favoured with marks of the young
poetess' approving sympathy.
Perfect health, unbroken spirits, talents and accomplish¬
ments of a high order, with immense capacity for enjoyment,
,   Our Female Novelists. 243
speedily involved their possessor in a social vortex, of which
glowing descriptions were regularly sent to her father, and to
her friend Mrs.Taylor, during each spring's absence in London.
With her poetic gifts was united a genius for music, particu¬
larly exercised in that rare art of ballad-singing so justly
appreciated by our great lyrist Sir Walter; and the fame of
Miss Alderson's rendering of her own compositions is evident
from her having had the honour of singing them to the
Prince Eegent. Young, gay, and popular, she must have
appeared a very charming creature on an eventful evening of
her life, when among a small party impatient for her arrival
was the unconscious arbiter of her destiny :—
' The evening was wearing away, and still she did not come. At
length the door was flung open, and she entered bright and smiling,
dressed in a robe of bine, her neck and arms bare, and on her head
a small bonnet placed in somewhat coqnettish style, sideways, and
snrmonnted by a plume of three white feathers. Her beautiful hair
hung in rich waving tresses over her shoulders, her face was kindling
with pleasure at sight of her old friends, and her whole appearance
WMs animated and glowing. At the time she came in, Opie was
sitting on a sofa beside Mr. F., who had been saying from time to
time, " Amelia is coming ; Amelia will surely come. Why is she not
here ? " and whose eyes were turned in her direction. He was inter¬
rupted by his companion eagerly exclaiming, " Who is that? who is
that ?" and hastily rising, he pressed forward to the fair object whose
sudden appearance had so impressed him. He was evidently smitten,
charmed at first sight, and, as she says, "almost from my first
arrival, Mr. Opie became my avowed lover." '
Such was Amelia Alderson as she captivated John Opie,
whose ' love at first sight' proving as persistent as it was
well founded, ultimately won its reward, and the young
poetess gave her hand to the painter in Marylebone Church
on 8th May 1798. Despite Allan Cunningham's remark in
his JAve^ of the Painters, that Opie ' looked like an inspired
peasant,' and Mrs. Inchbald's allusion to a ' total absence of
artificial manner as at once his adornment and deformity,'
Mr. Opie's social popularity was great among large circles of
learned and fashionable friends, to whom his wife did the
honours of their house with the distinguishing tact and
sweetness of manner of an accomplished hostess. A
worshipper of his art, the zeal and diligence with which he
worked drew the comment from his fellow-artist, Northcote,
' that while others painted to live, he lived to paint;' and
incessantly engaged in his painting-room during daylight, he
loved to spend his evenings in reading, conversing, or study¬
ing art with his wife, rather than in those gay scenes which
attracted her, preferring, when he did go  out, an opera or
244 The Ladies Edinburgli Magazine.
select dinner party to a fashionable crowd. This was the
one difference in an otherwise perfect union, as naively con¬
fessed by Mrs. Opie herselfto Mrs. Taylor:—
' I have led a most happy and delightful life since my return, and
in the whole two months have not been out more than four times ;
so spouse and I had no squabbles about visiting, and that is the only
thing we ever quarrel about. If I would stay at home for ever, I
believe he would be merry from morning to night, and be a lover
more than a husband.'
Hating idleness as his heU noire of all the vices, with a
sense of the value of time and the duty of employing every
moment, which Mrs. Opie constantly referred to and acted
upon in after life, the busy painter could with difficulty be
persuaded to interrupt his work for any absence from home,
and, often as she visited Norwicli, addressed to his wife lover¬
like pleadings for her return. With the exception of one
bright week's stay at Southill, the seat of Mr. Whitbread, in
company with the Countess of Kosslyn and Wilkie, then in
his first fame, the one great pleasure of this kind which they
shared was a visit to Paris in 1805, of which Mrs. Opie
contributed her Reminiscences to Taifs Magazine in 1831.
From their nucleus of interest, the Louvre, for the study of
its chefs d'ceuvre, recently acquired by conquest, they made
acquaintance with the Paris of that changeful era; and
following Mrs. Opie from the Boulevards, where she sat and
sang ' Fall, tyrants, fall!' we may behold her fix her admiring
gaze on the countenance of Napoleon as he reviewed his
troops in the Place du Carrousel, all unconscious of the
historical contradiction of her acts of sympathy. Among
the distinguished persons then in Paris, she met Kosciusko
and Generals Moreau and Massena, paid frequent visits to
the atelier of David, and enjoyed the wifely triumph of seeing
her' political idol,' Charles James Fox, sit to her husband for
his portrait with a result ' worthy the artist, the owner, and
the original.'
Mr. Opie's appreciation of his wife's talents made him
anxious that slie should employ them in writing, encouraging
her by sympathy and example to use her pen as he wielded
his pencil, till both worked together in industrious harmony.
Previous to her marriage, she had published an anonymous
novel called the Dangers of Coquetry, withovit attracting
notice ; but the appearance of the Father and Daughter in
1801 was greeted with a welcome confirmed by eight
editions, and translations into all the European languages.
Following  a volume of poems in  1802, criticised by  Dr.
Our Female Novelists. 245
Brown in the Edinburgh Review as ' amonjr the best in our
opuscular poetry,' came Adeline Mowbray, the second volume
of which evoked the reviewer's praise of being ' perhaps the
most pathetic and the most natural in its pathos of any
fictitious narrative in the language;' and in 1806 appeared
Simple Tales, at once acknowledged as proving their writer's
power to represent ' admirably everything that is amiable,
generous, and gentle.'
In the flush of her success, the authoress was performing
arduous duties as a wife, by her sanguine temperament
sustaining her husband through a season of unremunerative
effort, the shadows of which were deepened by the despond¬
ency of genius over the non-fulfilment of its aspirations.
Like every true artist, his ideal was an excelsior, to be sought
ever ' further up the height,' as his comforter writes:—
' During the nine years that I was his wife, I never saw him
satisfied with any one of his productions ; and often, very often, have
I seen him enter my sitting-room, and, throwing himself in an agony
of despondency on the sofa, exclaim, " I never, never shall be a
painter as long as I live ! "'
Busied with household cares, her indefatigable spirits
supported them both, till the tide of fortune flowed again;
but the ' sour cup of prosperity' came too late to the
painter's hand, now nerveless to grasp it. Eeaching the
climax of his career in the delivery of a series of lectures
as Professor of Painting to the Royal Academy, he fell a
victim to his labours, and after a trying illness of some
weeks, throughout which he was devotedly nursed by his
wife and sister, died 9th April 1807. As if in fulfilment
of his prophecy to his sister at the funeral of Sir Joshua
Reynolds,' Ay, girl, and I too shall be buried in St. Paul's !'
the remains of the disciple were laid by the side of the great
master there.
Returning to be the sunshine of her father's home, till it
was also darkened by sorrow, the new-made widow pursued
her literary career in the preparation of a memoir of her
husband, which was prefixed to his Lectures on Painting,
published in 1809. In the following spring she resumed
her annual visits to London, and was once more caught in
its whirl of gaieties. Strong in its varied attractions to a
mind like hers, she owns,' It is a world to see! I dearly love
to get a peep at it now and tlien;' so acquiring a knowledge
of human nature, which largely influenced her character and
writings. In 1812 she published another novel, Temper,
and in 1813, Tales of Real Life, less marked by pathos of
246 T!ie Ladies' Edinburgh Magasine.
style, and aiming more at useful morality; and after each
period of toil and excitement, it was her favourite refresh¬
ment to ' wash off the dirt of London in the sea of Cromer;
to write poetry on the shore, and to live over again every
scene there that memory loves.' Her most brilliant London
season was that of 1814, when the presence in the capital of
the Emperor of Kussia, King of Prussia, and hosts of foreign
celebrities caused a social furore, of which her letters paint
the glories in dazzling colours. Blue evenings at Lydia
White's, and pink at Lady Cork's, succeed dinners at
which the wit and eloquence of Sheridan, Erskine, and
' the ever - welcome Sydney Smith' shine alongside the
learning of Humboldt, Spurzheim, and her own Edinburgh
Eeviewer, Dr. Brown. At the soirees of Madame de Stael,
she admires the ' ever ready repartee aud almost unrivalled
eloquence ' of that hostess of 'excelling genius and winning
manners,' describes the tones of Lord Byron's voice as
* always so fascinating' that she ' could not help attending
to them'* even in Greekf and gives a most amusing account
of a party disappointed of General Blucher till he was at last
announced, and' in strutted Lady Caroline Lamb in a cocked
hat and greatcoat.'
From this ' wilderness of pleasure,' Mrs. Opie was sum¬
moned home by an event which, arresting her in mid-career
of gaiety, and piercing her heart with sympathetic grief,
marked her character indelibly, and altered the whole course
of her life. This was the unexpected death of Mr. John
Gurney, a member of that estimable family of her earliest,
and, to the last, closest friends. Separated in London from
Elizabeth Ery by the religious restrictions of her marriage
within the Quaker community, Mrs. Opie had resumed her
intercourse with the Gurneys at Earlham on returning to
live with her father, and became specially attached to a
younger sister Priscilla, who, equally lovely in mind and
person, died in 1821. To her influence and tliat of her
brother, Joseph John Gurney, is ascribed the'gradual change
of sentiment' which led Mrs. Opie to join the Friends after
having worshipped with them eleven years from this period
of which she writes, ' In 1814 I left the Unitarians,' though
she had not strictly belonged to them. The heroine of her
next work, Valentine's Eve, published in 1816, doubtless
expresses her own growing faith in the support of religious
principle, wlien she says:—
' Some suppose that morality can stand alone without the aid of
religion, and even fancy that republican firmness will enable us to
Our Female Novelists. 247
bear affliction ; but / feel that the only refuge in sorrow and in trial
is the Rock of Ages and the promises of the gospel.'
This same year was memorable for a meeting in London
with Sir Walter Scott, when, in addition to his confession
that he had cried over her Father and Daughter ' more than
he ever cried over such things,' its authoress describes herself
as favoured with a specimen of his two manners, humorous
and earnest:—
' I know not what led to the subject, but he gave us a most
animated description of a cockney's hunting in the Highlands. I
think the person was a militia officer, and his terror when he found
himself going full gallop up and down crags, steeps, and declivities,
of which he had before no idea, was pictured with a living spirit
which I cannot do justice to. . . . I ventured to ask him why,
with such dramatic power, he had never tried the drama 1 . . . He
owned that he had once serious thoughts of writing a tragedy on the
same subject as had been so ably treated by his friend Joanna
Baillie, . . . which, had he gone on with, he should have had no love
in it. His hero should have been the uncle of the heroine, a sort of
misanthrope, with only one affection in his heart—love for his niece,
like a solitary gleam of sunshine gilding the dark tower of some
ruined and lonely dwelling ! Never shall I, never can I, forget the
fine expression of his lifted eye as he uttered this ! The whole face
became elevated in its character, and even the features acquired a
dignity and grace from the power of genius.'
How true it is that genius alone can appreciate genius!
In the absence of the great man himself, during her brief
visit to Edinburgh in the following autumn, Mrs. Opie was
delighted at being seated opposite his portrait by Eaeburn,
in the house of Constable, her host. Shortly after visiting
her friendly critic, Mr. Hayley, she published in 1818 her
Tales of the Heart, of which White Lies touched a subject
largely dealt with in her later work on Lying in all its
Branches (1823), widely read and popular in America. In
1822 her last novel, Madeline, appeared, its projected successor
being interrupted by domestic affliction and never finished.
After an unavailing visit to London for medical advice in
1821 had made it sadly evident that Dr. Alderson's life
must henceforth be the patient's, and no longer the physician's,
his daughter's ministries were unwearied as his nurse. She
delighted to read to him, to sing to him, and even in his
sleep, to sketch his features, according to a favourite practice
of drawing her friends. Above all, she sought for him, as
for herself, the patience and comfort of the Scriptures, and
with him rejoiced in the ' good hope through grace' in wliich
he died, Oct. 1825. Just before his death, she had with his
full approval become a member of the Society of Friends,
248 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
thus deciding hesitations and difficulties, of which the
adoption of the plain langtiage would seem to have been not
the least considered, by a step which she never afterwards
regretted. Her hours of spiritual conflict and self-examina^
tion she found happier than those of worldly enjoyment:—
' I am in snch deep waters that I almost feared to take up my pen,
and yet I would not exchange this sitting at the foot of the cross for
all the gay pleasures I once experienced. . . . My practice every
night is to examine all my actions and sift all my motives during the
day for all that I have said or done. I make sad discoveries by that
means of my own sinfulness ; but I am truly thankful that this
power has been given me, and lay my head on my pillow with much
gratitude.'
Newton's Cardiplwnia, and Chalmers' Horce Sahhaticcc
became her favourite manuals, and she daily read the Bible
aloud to her servants. Of the depth and sincerity of her
piety, her life was the witness in its minutest details, small
duties being especial favourites:—
' Tai toujnnrs attache une importance extreme a ce quon appelle vulgaire-
ment, des petites choses ; des attentions delicates quand elks sont persis-
tentes, prouvent la constante occupation de la pense'e. " Take care of
the pence, and the j)ounds will take care of themselves," says the
proverb ; and it is applicable to everything, I think, and particvilarly
to human conduct and the formation of character. Take care of
indulging in little selfishnesses, learn to consider others in trifles, be
careful to fulfil the minor social duties ; and the mind so disciplined
will find it easier to fulfil the greater social duties, and the character
will not exhibit that trying inconsistency which one sees in great and
often in pious persons.'
She was a true Christian in her forgiveness of injuries and
a power of being easily pleased, which she regarded as ' one
of the surest sources of happiness.'
It was natural that her secession from the gay world
should be deplored by former associates; and how sincere
must have been the personal regard which could outlive a
transition so incomprehensible, is apparent in letters from
the Countess of Cork and Lady Charleville, the former
beginning:—
' Si V02IS eles heureuie, je ve suis pas maThenreiise . . . but pray, pray,
pray, do not put on the bonnet; teach us your pure morals, and come
to me and be my love in a dove-coloured garb and simple headdress;'
and the latter concluding:
' Viens nous voir—fen serai trop enchantee ; ton cceur n'est point change',
el je suis sure que ta costume ne te rendra pas moins interessante pour tes
amis.^
But the  crowning   tribute  Avas  Mr.   Southey's   in   his
Colloquies:—
Our Female Novelists. :?49
' I have another woman in my mind's eye—one who has been the
liveliest of the lively, the gayest of the gay, admired for her talents by
those who knew her only in her writings, and esteemed for her worth
by those who were acquainted with her in the relations of private life ;
one who, having grown up in the laxest sect of semi-Christians, felt
the necessity of vital religion while attending upon her father with
dutiful affection during the long and painful infirmities of his old
age ; and who has now joined a sect distinguished from all others
by its formalities and enthusiasm, because it was among its members
that she first found the lively faith for which her soul thirsted. She
has assumed the garb and even the shibboleth of the sect, not losing
in the change her warmth of heart and cheerfulness of spirit, nor
gaining by it any increase of sincerity and frankness ; for with these
nature had endued her, and society, even that of the great, had not
corrupted them. The resolution, the activity, the genius, the bene¬
volence, which are required for such a work, are to be found in her ;
and were she present in person, as she is in imagination, I would
say to her, " Thou art the woman ! " '
This beautiful and touching eulogium, which moved its
subject to tears for her unworthiness, was written as a
summons to her to join Mrs. Fry in reforming the internal
management of hospitals and prisons, a work afterwards
initiated by Mrs. S. Gurney and other ladies in the organiza¬
tion of a small society of Nursing Sisters, on the plan of
Mr. Fliedner's establishment at Kaiserswerth. To such works
of benevolence Mrs. Oj)ie's life was henceforth mainly
devoted, in the spirit of Horace Walpole's remark to Hannah
More/Your heart is always aching for others, and your head
for yourself.' Much of her time was given to visiting the
sick poor, the workhouse, the school, the jail; and every
philanthropic object had her earnest support. Peculiarly
interested in the Anti-Slavery and National Bible Societies,
she always attended their meetings, and her visits to London
became associated with the May conferences of the Friends.
Aiming at the promotion of a purity of thought and speech
in regard to others, strikingly practised by herself, she
published in 1828, Detraction Displayed, of which Arch¬
deacon Wrangham wrote that he did not believe ' the Greek
alphabet and its Alphas and Betas ever accomplished a
more valuable service since the days of Cadmus, its reputed
inventor.    So far do morals outgo mere literature.'
In 1829 Mrs. Opie revisited Paris for some months, and
again in the following year was drawn thither by an anxious
interest in the Eevolution of Three Days as nearly affecting
dear friends. During a protracted stay, she lived in habits
of intimacy with the families of Cuvier and her ' lifelong
hero Lafayette,' resumed her visits to David, at whose
studio she met Lady Morgan, found a kind friend in tlie
250 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Duchesse de Broglie, was feted with the venerable Comtesse
de Genlis, and received en familh by Queen Marie Am^lie,
declaring that were she not (as she hoped) ' too old to have
her head turned, it might have been turned by all the atten¬
tions and flattery she received.'
While on a tour among her husband's relations in Corn¬
wall, shortly after returning to England, she was attracted
by the ' rocky wonder' to spend two days and nights on St.
Michael's Mount, described in the poetic Sketches published
with her Lays for the Dead in 1833. In the same year she
writes of meeting Dr. Chalmers at Earlham, ' Such simplicity
with such true Christian humility, I never saw before, united
to such genius and learning;' while, in its turn, his journal
describes the surprise and interest of recognising in the
Amelia whom he was requested by Joseph John to lead out
from the drawing-room to the dining-room,
' One of the most distinguished of our literary women, whose works
thirty years ago I read with great delight—no less a person than the
celebrated Mrs. Opie, authoress of the most exquisite feminine tales,
and for which I used to place her by the side of Miss Edgeworth. . . .
We had much conversation, and drew greatly together, walking and
talking with each other on the beautiful lawn after dinner. She has
had access into all kinds of society, and her conversation is all the
more rich and interesting. ... I felt my new acquaintance to be one
of the great acquisitions of my present journey ; and this union
of rank, and opulence, and literature, and polish of mind, with plain¬
ness of manners, forms one of the great charms of the society in this
house.'
In the beginning of this year Mrs. Opie had written from
Penzance,' My health is perfect, and I need the sorrows of
my friends to sober my spirits;' but a few months afterwards
the ' tabernacle was shaken,' and the immortal spirit received
the first intimation of the frailty of its mortal tenement.
After a suffering winter, hope revived with spring, and the
verdict learned in London of Sir Benjamin Brodie, that there
was ' no radical disease,' so that a long-projected journey to
Scotland could be carried out in the autumn. On reaching
Edinburgh, her exclamation is, ' Oh, that beautiful and
sublime castle and I'ock, on which I gaze from my sitting-
room window, how I delight to see them again!' and her
interesting tour in -the Aberdeenshire, Perthshire, and
Western Highlands,and the land of Scott, is gratefullysummed
up as a ' sort of epitome of human life,' uninterruptedly
cheerful in its varied experiences to a mind ' kept in perfect
peace.' The last of her long journeys on the Continent
in 1835, concludes similarly with the thankful record of her
return, ' all good things more endeared to me than ever!'
Our Female Novelists. 251
Henceforth, domiciled in excellent apartments in Lady's
Lane till the purchase of her Castle Meadow house procured
the' pleasant cradle for reposing age,' the worshipped Lares of
her solitary home were her husband's pictures, six of which
formed subjects of her Lays for the Bead. ' Eeflecting the
bright, heart-warming radiance of the past,' these portraits
recalled ' in form and habit as they lived,' her ' honoured
ancestor,' Augustine Briggs, M.P. for Norwich, a loyal cavalier
in the service of Charles I. ; her friend, the beautiful Mrs.
Twiss, a ' gift of bridal love ' from the painter; her French
teacher, the Eev. John Bruckner; her father, Dr. Alderson ;
her cousin and ' gay childhood's darling,' 0. Woodhouse;
and her husband, two of whose great works, the ' Secret
Correspondence,' or ' Love-Letter,' and the ' Sliepherd Boy,'
after Gainsborough, also adorned her walls. A host of other
celebrities of world-wide fame, who had been her friends,
crowded this unique gallery; and there, too, more attractive
than all, hung her own youthful portrait. Sitting beneath
it, her delight in directing the attention of others to those
treasures of which she was so proud must have struck many
so addressed, as it did Edward Irving on being questioned
as to what he thought of her pictures after he had paid his
respects to her,' I thought nought 0' the paintings ; it was the
bonnie livin' picture I saw.'
Dressed in her Quaker cap of fine lawn and grey gown of
rich silk or satin, with white muslin handkerchief thickly
iblded across the bust, her shapely hands covered with black
mitts, and small feet peeping beneath the short skirts, an
erect carriage giving dignity to the emhonpoint of her figure,
and tlie expressive radiance of her countenance kindling in
the upward glance of the fine eye, the gentle beams of sym-
patliy, or the mantling blush of ' hearing her own praises,'
Amelia Opie must have realized a very leau id4al of old age.
"What wonder that sympathy like hers drew the young around
her to listen spell-bound, while her eventful past lived again
and moved before them in life-like descriptions, yet more
fascinating in their conversational power than her exercise
of the gifts of authorship ! Delighting in flowers, her
sitting-room was always decorated with them ; and a like
passion for colours set several prisms in frames on a pole in
the window, which it was a favourite amusement to turn in
all directions, so as to throw the varying reflections now on
the ceiling or pictures, and again on the faces of visitors
sitting by. A radiant centre of life in the midst of light and
warmth and fragrance, her mornings were occupied in the
252 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
reception of the numerous friends within visiting distance,
and the duties of correspondence with the absent. Of the
extent of the latter, this is her own estimate, and Mrs. S. C.
Hall's as to the quality:—
' Were writing even an effort to me, I should not now be alive,
but must have been ahxolunioit e'pidsee; and it might have been
inserted in the bills of mortality, " Dead of letter-writing, A. Opie."
My maid and I were calculating the other day how many letters I
wrote in the year, and it is not less than six in a day besides notes.'
' It was delightful at iill times to receive her letters, her feelings
were so well expressed, her criticisms (she hardly ever wrote of what
she did not admire) were so overiiowing with kindness. She felt so
much pleasure in giving praise that she never appeared to be happy
until she had poured forth all she thought to those who she well knew
wonld sympathize witli her.'
Frequent absences from home, though curtailed in dis¬
tance and duration, varied tlie latter years of her life. She
attended in London the Anti-Slavery Convention of 1840,
and, as Haydon's diary notes, 'A. Opie sat — a delightful
creature,' was painted in his commemorative picture among
the ' honest heads, such a number of which (he said) had
never been seen together before.' In the following year,
O'Connell ' in his might and majesty ' again stirred her
anti-slavery enthusiasm; she dined repeatedly with Lord
Brougham, breakfasted with Lockhart, ' always charming in
her eyes,' and was received by the Duke and Duchess of
Sussex, who showed her their collection of Bibles in all
languages. In 1848 she had a touching interview with the
ex-Queen Marie Amelie at Claremont, who urged with her
adieux, ' Ecrivez encore, 4crivez toujours !' Her note of the
prorogation of Parliament in 1841 is interesting:—
' I was at the House of Lords. The Queen's reading was more
perfect than ever, and her quiet self-possession, her grace and dignity,
are beyond praise. She wore a circlet of diamonds only—no crown,
and she looked so well. It was pretty to see Prince Albert hand her
up and down the throne, and lead her in and out. There were
seventy-six peeresses.    It was a fine sight altogether.'
Her last visit to London, 1851, was particularly enjoyed,
thouuh tinned with the sad consciousness of farewell. She
was one of the few aged and infirm persons admitted to the
Great Exhibition in her chair, an hour before the general
public; and being greeted by a very old acquaintance. Miss
Berry of Eichmond, similarly conveyed, she playfully pro¬
posed to the ci-devant wit and belie a chair race ! Few,
indeed, of her contemporaries now survived, and each
advancing step was on a path strewn with signs of life's
autumn,  ' thick  as   leaves  in  ValLambrosa.'    The last of
Our Female Novelists. 253
many deep shadows had been cast by the death of her
revered and beloved friend Bishop Stanley; and the warn¬
ings of more frequent illness made her sensible that she too
was ' on the wing.' On returning from her last fortnight at
Cromer in September 1852, where rooms on the ground
floor had permitted her to lie in bed and 'see the billows
as they rolled,' Mrs. Opie was carried up-stairs in her own
house at Norwich not to descend again. Keenly alive as
ever to what passed in the outer world, and full of sympathy
with all that touched her friends, she was deeply interested
by a visit in October 1853 from Mrs. Fry's grandson. Lieu¬
tenant Cresswell, with news of the discovery of the north¬
west passage, though not of Sir John Franklin. This was
on the eve of the last fatal seizure which conquered her
strong constitution after six weeks of suffering, borne with a
patience and fortitude that sealed the testimony of her
Christian life. Thinking ' more of her mercies than of her
trials,' she endured unto the end, and so passed away, 2d
December 1853. A small slab, with her name and her
father's, marks their grave in the Friends' Burial-Ground at
Norwich.
As a writer, her style may compare witli Mackenzie's, the
tender and the touching being her forte; and over her works
of ' deep-wrought grief' have been shed tears more precious
than any tribute of learned criticism. The reviewer's
estimate of her mind as ' more adapted to seize situations
than to combine incidents,' makes us think of a gifted actress
who can by a single look or attitude, give a degree of life to
some moral truth or liistorical fact beyond the power of
poetic narrative to inspire. This dramatic genius Mrs. Opie
possessed in no common degree, and used it as the child of
nature and the servant of truth.
The varied picturesqueness of her long life, has a charm as
great as the lessons of beneficent usefulness which it teaches.
Divided into the four epochs of youth, married life, widow¬
hood, and solitary old age, we can hardly say which most
interests us; and whether as the young and brilliant
debutante, the earnest artist's wife and woman of letters,
the devoted daughter, or the gentle old Quakeress, the image
of Amelia Opie rises before us as that of
' A perfect woman, nobly planned
To warn, to comfort, and command ;
And yet a spirit still, and bright.
With something of angelic light.'
Helen C. Eeid.
254 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
ILtiitx from (JHliinburgf).
BY ' A BIRD OF PASSAGE.'
Edinburgh.
Dear Samuel,—In my last letter I described this illustrious
city to you, and told how I had visited the chief places of
amusement. Now I shall try to tell you something about
the inhabitants. According to the nursery maxim, ' Ladies
first, and gentlemen afterwards,' I shall begin with the fair
sex. Had I been writing to you some years ago, I should
most likely have discussed their personal appearance, or
remarked upon their dress and manners ; but, thanks to
modern views, I have come to a better way of thinking, and
have learnt that these are mere trifles.
A remarkable poet once remarked that ' a thing of beauty
is a joy for ever,' and there I quite agree with him; but
then our idea of beauty changes. The chignon, for instance,
as long as it was the fashion, was considered 'a thing of
beauty.' If not, why was it universally adopted by ladies ?
Yet it is not' a joy for ever.' Why ? Because the fashion
changed, and caprice considered it no longer 'a thing of
beauty.' Shirt-ruffles, crinolines, patches on the cheek, and
knee-breeches—all were once considered ' things of beauty,'
but for the same reason did not become 'joys for ever.' So
it is now with pretty faces and graceful figures; they were
once considered ' things of beauty,' but now I am told tliis
enlightened city no longer maintains such old-fashioned
notions. What now is considered ' the thing of beauty'
about the female inhabitant is her mental capacity. Men
have ceased to admire the outside of the fair ca.put; tliey
prefer to speculate as to what is inside. One day I
happened to remark to a lady citizen upon the beauty of a
girl passing, but the look of disdain that she turned upon
me so shrivelled me up that I only heard the last words of
her sentence, which were, ' That person (this, I have heard, is
ladies' slang for what a gentleman would call a cad) was
expelled from our University classes because she would not
read more than eleven hours a day, and was plucked three
times in ten languages, and twice in philosophy and con-
chology.' I did not ask for any explanation of this state¬
ment, and only gasped, ' Did you pass in—the—the—ten
languages, and in the con—chol—ogy ?'    She turned round
Letter from Edinburgh. 255
in wrath, and, laughing scientifically, answered, ' I hope so;
why, these are only the preliminaries !' I then wished her
good-bye and myself at a distance. Being old-fashioned and
countrified, I found it rather difficult to admire the ' mental
capacity' of the people I met, and sometimes caught myself
lost in the contemplation of the outside beauty, instead of
speculating on the beautiful mechanism and wondrous
capacity concealed underneath the 'golden locks.' This
reminds me of a story of a Glasgow missionary who left a
few tracts with a young lady one morning. Calling at the
same house some days after, he was much disconcerted on
observing the tracts doing duty as curl-papers on the head
of the damsel. ' Weel, my lassie,' he remarked,' I see ye
liae used the tracts I left wi' ye; but ye hae putten' them
on the wrang side o' yer head, my woman.'
I am afraid, like the tracts, I often get on the ' wrang side
o' the head,' and find myself among the raven tresses, or
counting * the silver threads among the gold,' instead of
attending to the thread of discourse by which the young
savante is enchaining her audience as she pours forth her
volumes of learning, and exhibits the power of her gigantic
brain.
I wished to see something of society, so I begged a lady I
knew slightly to procure a pass for me into the 'Ladies'
House of Commons.'
I daresay you will remember that years ago ladies used
to gather together, on various pretexts, to gossip about their
neighbours, and pick to pieces their dress, manners, faces,
domestic economy, etc., all in a friendly innocent way.
They still gather together, not to pick to pieces their neigh¬
bours'dress or manners, but their ideas and arguments, convic¬
tions, hobbies, and sometimes their literary productions. The
Ladies' House of Commons is their licensed place for doing so.
I easily secured a pass, and also the protection of a
member, under whose wing I thought it safe to remain as
much as possible; for I felt myself a stranger,' alike unknow¬
ing and unknown.'
I need not describe to you how we panted and puffed up
the steep Edinburgh streets, or how we at last arrived at
the portal of the Ladies' House of Parliament, or how I
quaked. I only remember that the door was fiung open,
a lady chirruped a kindly welcome, and I found myself
seated in a C.C., better known as a comfortable corner.
As you know, I have had a weakness for C.C.'s ever since
I was a baby, and it was my luck to get one on this occasion;
256 The Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
so I felt comfortable both in body and mind. Fairly settled,
I glanced timidly around me, and saw ladies' to right of me,'
ladies ' to left of me,' and ladies seated round a large table
in the middle of the room. Now, I daresay, you know
that besides having a partiality for comfortable corners,
I have another eccentricity; and that is, whenever I see a
new face, I immediately associate it in my mind with the
face of some animal. I have heard it said that people all
resemble some one of the inferior animals. In some the
likeness is startling, in others scarcely traceable. I myself
have seen people so like owls that I never could look at
them without thinking of those ominous birds, and would
not have been the least siirprised if they had said, ' Titwhit,
titwhit, titwhoo,' instead of' How d' ye do ?' Others resemble
foxes, and small faces with large eyes remind me always of
antelopes. But to return to my subject. I did not know the
names of the ladies before me ; so, following my eccentricity,
I distinguished them in my mind as they reminded me of
different birds.
At the foot of the table two ladies at once attracted my
attention, one in an arm-chair, who reminded me of ' Jenny
Wren,' the other of the ' Secretary Bird.' They seemed to
have already set their energies to work. On the left-hand
side sat a young lady, evidently the ' whip' of the House, as
I noticed that she attacked all the M.P.'s who came straggling
in behind time, and marked them down late. Ah ! how
well I remember being fined at school for the same offence,
and 'they had my sympathy!' She also, I noticed, kept
her eye on the 'opposite benches' (I am told opposite is
the feminine of opposition), and occasionally with elevated
eyebrows and uplifted finger pronounced the word ' Hush !'
very much in the way our mother used to do in the family
pew in church, when we threatened to become demonstrative.
On the right-hand side sat a lady whom I shall call the
Eaven. At the opposite end of the table sat a lady pointed
out to me as Lychnis Campestris,-iand at her right hand
was seated another M.P., Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum.
Some one said that was her nom de pbime. I supposed they
meant her maiden name; but before I could examine any
more, I was attracted by the rattle of money, and saw the
Kaven making a slight commotion with shillings and pence
at her end of the table. I concluded that perhaps she was
handing over a small remuneration to each M.P. for her
trouble in coming so far out of town; and not feeling above
a threepenny bit, I edged  forward on my chair, but my
Letter from Edinburgh. 257
chaperone whispered that it was payment for the 'magazine.'^
A whole crowd of questions rushed to my lips as to whether
there was much powder in the magazine, and whether it was
under my chair, and if it was quite safe so near the fire, and
whether it was cannon or rifles they used, when my atten¬
tion was arrested by seeing the Secretary bird stand up and
proceed to read out of a book.   They called it ' the minutes,'
but to me it seemed hours.    When she finished, a figure
rose up between me and the light, and I heard a voice say,
' I move that business be curtailed and more time be given
to the debate.'    She then went on to explain that it was
exhaustive of brain energy, and bad for the nervous system
of the debaters, to have to listen to what was done at their
last meeting,  besides  being  wearisome   to  visitors.     She
would have gone on, no doubt, to say ' tliat sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof,' and that it was like giving a boy
a whipping twice over—the first to remind him of the sore¬
ness of his last chastisement, and the second for his present
crime; but I became oblivious to her remarks just then, for
my eyes suddenly rested upon a lady at her side, and ' oh !
her form was fair to see, and kind and gentle was her e'e.'
I could not speculate as to her mental capacity, the ' out¬
ward man' was too fascinating.   When T recovered from my
fit of admiration, the speaker was about to give out head
No. 4 of her discourse, when she was unceremoniously stopped
by the  Secretary bird,  whose  feathers were considerably
ruffled, and  evidently she had received a  peck  on   some
tender point.    I soon perceived that the tender point was
business.    Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum had moved ' that
business should be curtailed,' and the Secretary bird felt it
personal, because ' business' was specially under her wing.
Jenny Wren also seemed all in a flutter ; I suppose it was
out of sympathy.    The Secretary bird rose and pointed out
that Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum was radically wrong
and rebelliously inclined, and was making new rules instead
of obeying the old ones.    Chrysanthemum   doubted   that
there was a rule with regard to the length of time to be
occupied   with   business,   whereupon  the   Secretary  bird
quoted the old rule; but Chrysanthemum objected that it
was only a negative rule (I did not know what kind of a
^ [We are happy to state the alarm was groundless. To obviate
risks of explosion, the mjtgazine is seldom opened, and never paid
for at the meetings. The ' jingle ' was probably caused by pay¬
ment of subscriptions ; so timid visitors may be at ease in their
corners.—Eds.]
No. 42.—June 1878. jj
258 TIic Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
rule that is ; I supposed that it might be ill-spelt or some¬
thing). She was going to say something else, when she was
abruptly stopped by Jenny Wren. The ' Fair Ladye' then
rose and said what Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum had
tried to say. I was surprised tliat Jenny Wren did not
interrupt her too, but I was told that she was a historian's
daughter. The Secretary bird now became exasperated, and
made a desperate peck at her adversary across the table, by
which she altogether upset, not herself, but her argument.
She saw she could no longer defend her protege ' business,'
so she made a thrust home by accusing the ' Fair Ladye' of
being behind time. The ' Fair Ladye' rose to defend her¬
self, but my attention was called away to the opposite
benches, Avhere an M.P. was screwing up her courage to
speak, and the operation seemed a painful one. At last she
rose, all blushes, and ' begged to move' something which was
inaudible to me. The ladies at the table immediately put
their veto upon it with loud cries of ' Oh, no, no, no !' and the
fair speaker sat down greatly moved, though, strange to say,
she had not another move to make. I saw at once that she
was not ' a historian's daughter,' and I inwardly resolved,
that if ever I became an M.P., I should make my father a
historian, just as fathers try to make their sons professors ;
for I never yet knew a clever boy who was not destined for
a professor.
But a change came over the colour of my dream. Jenny
Wren fluttered off her perch, and the Secretary bird folded
her wings. I thought of what I had heard of the magazine,
and felt ' now's the time, and now's the hour, we see the
front of battle lour.' I anxiously awaited the explosion, and
thought of asking, like the Irishman, for the ' entrance out,'
when my fears were soothed by my neighbour, who explained
that the debate was now coming on, and that there was no
danger.
THE DEBATE.
The subject was, ' Whether servants as a class have
deteriorated from those of former times ?'
I cannot, dear Sam, give you the speeches in this debate
fully, nor in the words of the speakers; so I shall just tell
you in my words what I remember of them.
Lychnis Campestris rose, manuscript in hand, and poured
forth a lament over the dear sweet Betties of former days.
I cannot tell you the half of it, but it was not without
pathos, and I felt kinder towards old Betties after it than I
Letter from Edinburgh. 259
had ever done before. She finished amidst applause. A
majestic figure then erected itself suddenly out of a chair.
I was taken aback, for till then it had been to me nothing
but a sealskin jacket and the back of a head. I had not
speculated as to what was on the other side, as the hero in a
well-known novel did when he found himself at the back of
a handsome pair of shoulders and well-poised head. The
owner of the sealskin addressed the house with a voice of
command. Her manner was cultured and gentlemanly.
She stood with her head erect, and with her hands she care¬
lessly flung back her sealskin already mentioned. Had it
been the 'inferior animal' (that is the new name for men,
you know), he would, no doubt, have thrust them into his
pockets.
She began by remarking that there was such a thing as
the 'golden age,' but that she had come to the conclusion
that it was moveable. Every generation had a different
'golden age' to which it regretfully looked back. The
servants of a 'golden age,' of course, were treasures of
servants. She believed that Pharaoh had a golden age,
when all butlers were saints; but his butler was a sadly
degenerate creature compared with them. Some one later
on in history thought Pharaoh's age golden, and only wished
Ms butler was as easily put up with as Pharaoh's was. So
now we think our servants imps of darkness, but look back
on our grandmother's Thomas and Betty as angels of light.
She further remarked that people were often unfair in their
comparisons. They compared the giddy housemaid and
young cook in their own newly-set-up establishment with
Aunt Caroline's Thomas and Betty, aged respectively seventy-
three and seventy - seven, forgetting that Thomas and
Betty were exceptions; and if they had not been genuine
and exceptional articles, they would never have been retained
by Aunt Caroline, but turned off for drinking or pilfering
years before. She then related an anecdote of an ancestor,
illustrative of the fact that the servitors of our forefathers
were not so delightful when ungilded by the lapse of time.
Her grandfather, several times removed, had occasion to
engage a butler, and their mutual engagement was, that
they should never get drunk at the same time. All went
well at first; John was never drunk, and his master was
quite satisfied. At last John came and announced that he
was about to leave. His master asked his reasons for
leaving. John referred to the terms of his engagement.
' Why,' said his  master, ' I have never found you drunk.'
26o The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Just so/ retorted John; ' you have never given me the
chance.'
She then went on to say that if ladies would adopt the
rule of never engaging a servant unless they could bring a
good character iiom their last situation, and prove that
they had been there not less than two or three years, much
would be done to correct the evils among servants. At the
same time she added that we should not be too hard on the
young domestic who, anxious to see the world, engaged as
housemaid during the winter to a family in the south of
England, and then sought a situation in Edinburgh for the
summer season. This to me seemed rather out of joint with
her former remarks; for if nobody would engage a servant
Mho had not been two or three years in her last situation, it
would be very hard on the young enterprising domestic
who liked to spend the cold months in Brighton, and the
warm season in Scotland; for if every lady wished a two or
three years' stayer-on in places, then there would be no one
to befriend the wanderer. It reminds me of a story of a
judge who was trying a boy for loitering on the streets.
The boy defended himself by declaring that he was merely
standing on the pavement. ' Weel,' replied the judge,' you
were then blocking up the way,' adding, ' Supposing every¬
body were to stand on the street, how could anybody get
by ?' The culprit took the liberty of remarking that it
would then be ' all serene, for there would be nobody lett to
want by.' For the moment I was so lost in my own thoughts
that I forgot to listen to the speaker, and when I looked up
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum was holding forth smis
manuscript.
She pointed out that servants had not degenerated so
much, but that the state of society had changed. She
seemed to doubt that the servants of former times were so
charming as some thought they were, and quoted from
Chaucer to show that the servants of the 14th century, at
least, were no sweeter to their masters than the servants of
the 19th century are to theirs. She tlien went on to sl)0w
why the servants of the present day are inferior as a class;
the reason is because now-a-days the ' supply is not equal
to the demand.' In former times there was nothing for
young women to do but to become domestic servants ; now
there were factories, and shops, and offices. I mentally
added, they might also choose the medical profession, or
stand at the har, or go to the bar, just as taste or fancy
drove them,   I followed her so far with interest; but a bustle
Letter from Edinburgh. 261
at the door attracted my attention, and I caught the last
glimpse of several M.P.'s taking their departure. Then a
pretty face under a still prettier bonnet arrested my eye,
and i woke up suddenly to find myself not only slipping off"
my chair, but behind the age, and relapsing once more into
ray old countrified ideas of beauty. I glanced hurriedly at
Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum, and she was still speaking.
The clock struck one, and she suddenly subsided into her
chair. I thought of the statue in Stirling which, we used to
be told in our childhood, always stepped down when it heard
the clock strike one.
Another lady rose, manuscript in hand, and began to read,
but I was unable to follow her; for it so happens that
one o'clock, besides being the death-warrant of Chrysanthe¬
mum's oratory, has the honour to be my lunch time, and I
was occupied with the pangs of hunger. I only glanced at
her manuscript, and seeing it bulked some twenty pages or
so, followed the plan of professors and examiners, generally
speaking, and, concluding she must be some head girl, awarded
the paper 90 per cent., first class, and a bursary. The M.P.'s
evidently were as capable of lunching as I was, and one by
one made for the door. I cast an appealing look at my
chaperone, but she was drinking in eagerly the words
of the speaker, and I felt to disturb her with my ' carnal
desires.' At last she folded up the manuscript and sat
down. The Secretary bird then rose and denounced ' servants'
registers.' She said that they were pernicious institutions,
whose only interest was to instigate servants to leave their
situations; and that if ladies would join together to put down
registers and form some union among themselves for servant-
finding, she believed we should have better servants and
smaller wages. Her speech was received with applause, and
cries of' Hear, hear!' rang on all sides.
Several ladies now stood up, and I clutched my muff and
boa ready for departure, but my neiglibour whispered that
they were only giving their votes. I was glad they did not
press for my vote, for I could not have voted truthfully for
anything at that moment but luncheon. At last it was over,
and I found myself once more beside my chaperone on the
street, right side up and without damage, only a little shaken
in mind. We hastened away, but soon two M.P.'s overtook
us. I felt that my fate was sealed, and that I was undone,
when M.P. No. 1 tackled on to me. I was then too upset
in mind and weak in body to defend myself. She began
with  some  remarks  about the  weather,  and  I inwardly
262 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.'
remarked, 'Only preliminaries; the storm is coming shortly.'
She next asked me how I liked Edinburgh, and if I had been
to any places of amusement. I thought, ' Now she thinks I
shall put my foot in it; but I shall not,' and answered rapidly,
' Oh, yes ! I have been to Professor Laurie's class on " The
Tlieory of Education," Tait's Natural'Philosophy, Kelland's
Mathematics, and Eraser's Logic; and they were all so gay,
and festive, and instructive, and jolly. Besides, I went always
twice a week to the Philosophical Institute.' I paused,
rather out of breath, and was surprised to see that she
' smoled a smile,' and, with a twinkle in lier eye, she asked
if I had not been to the pantomime or the circus ? I still
suspected her, and made my ' yes' as inaudible as possible.
She then said that site had been to the pantomime six times
(my hair, wliich had been gradually rising till now, fell at
this announcement), and we began to discuss the actresses
and stage scenery, etc. That she was an M.P. was certain,
but evidently a very unorthodox one, since she could still take
an interest in such worldly vanities. She became so inte¬
resting that I forgot my lunch and aversion and everything,
and it was with a feeling of ' rending in twain' that I clasped
her hand to say good-bye. I think I actually asked her in
to lunch.
I must now, dear Sam, close this epistle, and hope you
will not be bored with this account of my wanderings, both
of mind and body, but be lenient to nie for 'Auld lang syne.'
—Ever yours, Bikd of Passage.
iFrom tl)c Italian of Carlo Jflarta jHaggt,
Weary, on Life's dull boundary I wait.
And view it pass like yonder rapid stream:
And the false hollow base, of Pleasure's dream
And past imaginings, 1 see too late.
But though repose it seem, I cannot tell
If yet my heart knows aught of solid Peace ;
For while from this sad world I seek release.
Some grief I feel to bid its charms farewell.
Be it frail Nature's weakness. Custom's power,
Each trifling link seems to extend my chain :
The feeblest tie has strength to overpower.
With gentle efforts, i;selessly I strain
To escape this thrall;—Hope's eyes, indignant lower,
That such weak pleadings Freedom should restrain.
Anon.
Let Them Alone. 263
ILct 2ri)cm Slonc:
A TALE TOLD IN LETTERS.
LETTER XV.
The Rev. F. J. Reynolds to Miss Reynolds.
Saturday, June 17.
Thanks to my dearest mother and my Nelly for their
letters; they are the sunshine of my life. If this letter goes
as usual to Nelly, it is only to save mother's eyes; for I
know Nelly will administer the contents (at discretion).
You ask ' how I have been getting on all this long time ?'
with a hint of a reproach in that last phrase! Well, my
gardening is getting on beautifully, my singers are improving,
my cricketing flourishes. For the rest, I am afraid I can
only tell you of the usual round of parish cares. Dear little
Grace Winship is dead. I buried her yesterday. I think
her deathbed has been the happiest scene I have been present
at since I came, and her funeral the most touching. Of
course I only speak of herself, when I speak of the happiness;
the grief of the mother was almost frantic, though hushed in
her presence, and the little twin sister seemed bewildered
and dazed with sorrow. If I spoke to her or took her little
cold hand in mine, she could only look stupidly at me and
say, ' Is Grace deein' ?—will she gan' awa' ?—will she really
gan' ?' over and over again. But Grace herself, she looked
like an angel; all pain had left her, and heaven seemed to
have begun. I learned far more at her bedside than I liave ever
taught. Neither the mother nor Mary came to the funeral.
I begged them not, for I knew they could not hold up. All
the school children came, and when the grave was filled up,
a little hoy, who had been in a passion of tears all the time,
could no longer contain himself, but came and threw himself
upon it in an agony, and had at last to be carried away by
force. He has been again to-day, crying and talking to
himself on the grave. He is a neighbour's child, and the twins
and he have been devoted to each other from infancy.
I must now tell you the latest chapter in Margaret Scott's
history. When I left on Monday week, I determined to let
several days pass before going again; I did not desire to
press my presence upon them against their will, and also I
264 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
wished in the meantime to see if I could do anything with
tlie old woman, Margaret's enemy. Two or three days I
called at her lodging without finding her in; it seems she is
taking the opportunity of transacting some other business in
the place besides that of wreaking vengeance on Margaret.
But last Saturday I caught her and had a long interview.
At first she tried to escape, but I had shut the door and
placed myself between her and it. Then she became defiant,
and dared me to meddle with her affairs; but finding that did
not answer, she turned sullen and silent, and I said my say,
not heeding her pretence of inattention. I saw that she was
listening to me, and by the changes that passed over her face
I saw that my words were not in vain. At last she burst
into tears and sobs, and faltered out broken words about his
being her only son, and a good son to her; and how hard it
was he should die so young all for a hussey who was not
worth his little finger, and then came protestations of her
own uprightness, and how she had not deserved this. What
I said in answer you may easily guess, and I think I made
her feel at last that she must show mercy if she would find
it. I told her of poor Margaret's bitter remorse, and of the
cruel way in which she was aggravating the sufferings of a
miserable fellow-creature. I showed her, too, how much I
felt for her own affliction; but I entreated her not to add
remorse to her already bitter cup, as she assuredly would if
slie persisted in her present course. Poor Margaret would
soon be in her grave, and what would be her feelings then ?
The soft womanly spot was reached at last. She wept long
and bitterly, and at last falling on her knees she said, and
with a very different accent now, ' Lord, have mercy on me
and forgive me, as I will forgive her!' I joined in her
prayer, and after a few more words asked her if I should go
and tell Margaret that she would come and see her. ' Do,
sir,' she said, ' if you tliink she'll see me,' and I went. Mar¬
garet looked troubled at the sight of me. I found Slade had
been there twice again, Mrs. Barron having sent for him and
intimated that I had no objection. I took no notice of her
half apologies, but went at once to the object of my visit.
Her eyes looked wild with fear when I spoke of bringing
Mrs. Inness to see her, but at last she took my assurance of
the change in her feelings. I thought it best to strike while
the iron was hot, so I went back at once and returned with
the old woman. Taking her up, I introduced her with a few
words to cover their first embarrassment, and then left them
alone together.    Sitting by myself down-stairs, I could not
Let Them Alone. 265
help overhearing parts of their talk. I heard Margaret's
pathetic voice telling her late enemy how truly she had loved
her son through all, and how she only liked to plague him a
bit, and think how she would make it up to him when she
was his wife. Then still more touchingly I heard her con¬
fessing how 'the devil had got hold of her' in that last
month, and she was carried away with vanity and nonsense,
and thinking she was going to be made a lady, though she
never cared for ' the other one' all through as she did for
John, and then she came to her senses and it was too late.
Here followed a burst of lamentation, and then the voices
grew hushed and gentle. About this time Mrs. Barron came
in with her washing-basket, and looked amazed to see me
sitting in her kitchen. With an awkward and conscious
curtsey, she said, ' I'll step up and tell Margaret, sir.' ' No,
no—stop!' I said, ' Mrs. Inness is up there.' ' Mistress
Inness:—an ye kent!—an ye allowed it! Mr. Slade, he
said I was to do all that lay i' my pooer to keep them frae
meeting again!'
'But you see 7'?;e done all in my power to make them
meet, and to make them meet as friends. Wait a bit; you'll see
it'll all be for the best!' In a few minutes down came Mrs.
Inness, tearful and crestfallen; she shook hands with the
astounded Mrs. Barron, and as she passed through the
kitchen curtseyed low to me, and went away, for I thought it
better not to stop her. I went up again to Margaret, who
met me with such a look of gratitude as would have been
worth far more labour. Taking my hand, she pressed it hard
between her own, and said, 'I'll die happier now.' I did
not stay long, for a violent fit of coughing came on, and I
thought she had had quite excitement enough for one day.
The next morning Mrs. Inness came to my house to tell me
she was going home again, and to thank me, as she put it, for
' making her such a different woman.'
I was at Barren's again one day in the beginning of this
Aveek, and saw Margaret alone. She was much calmer than I
had seen her yet. I think it is a very good thing for her that
the story is out and known, for now she will no longer live
in the dread of the discovery ... and yet I think there is
still something on her mind. She told me Mr. Slade had
been the day before, and was pleased to find her better; and
that she had told him of my bringing Mrs. Inness to her, and
tliat they were reconciled.
'And what did Mr. Slade say?' I asked. 'Well, sir, he
just said, " Blessed are the peacemakers," as if to himself like,
266 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and then he sat quiet a good bit and then he said, " Margaret,
I think I shall not come any more. I shall still be your
friend, and shall remember you in my prayers; but you will
not see me unless you expressly send for me yourself."'
' And how do you feel about it, Margaret ?' said I. ' Do
you like me to come, or shall I leave you too ?' ' Oh, sir,'
she said, looking round to make sure her aunt was not within
hearing,' I do like you to come, and more than ever after
what you've done for me. But to tell the truth, sir,' she
went on with the utmost simplicity, ' I's been fairly puzzled
M'i' the two on ye;' and then she went on to compare our
teaching in her homely language, but with no small share of
acuteness. ' Well, Margaret, I trust all will be clearer to you
soon, and meantime you must not think that our teaching
disagrees altogether. We teach you different parts, it may
be, of the same truths; but I cannot expect you to see the
exact point where they meet.' I said herein perhaps rather
what I felt ought to be than what is, being desirous above
all things that she should get no notions of professional
jealousy into her head. Mrs. Barron, I know, thinks we are
two doctors, each jealous for the honour of his own particular
remedy! I left much satisfied and comforted, and this
especially from Slade's remark which she had reported to me.
May it not be possible that we shall meet after all ? Since
this time Margaret has been growing weaker every day, but is
calmer, and looks forward without dread. I have been so
lengthy on this topic that I have neither time nor space for
any other. Good-night. I must give a last polish to my
sermon before going to bed. My reading has been much in¬
terrupted, and will be so next week, as I must give several
evenings to the confirmation classes.—Your own
F. J. K.
LETTER  XVI.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to his Sister.
June 26.
Dearest Nelly,—By this time I have no doubt you are
scolding me furiously. Your last letter I thought betrayed
that you had got near to the limit of your patience. What
can a fellow do ? Every morning I have said to myself, ' I
must write to Nelly this evening,' and every evening, between
work and fatigue, I have again remanded it till the morning.
Even now I must write shortly. I have written to Beilby
in the meantime, and indulged a vague hope that the conr
Let Them Alone. 267
tents might have got to you and stayed your appetite in
some degree, but this does not seem to have been the case.
The only event out of the common since I wrote last has
been a visit to Mrs. Wimpole. I went to dine with her last
Thursday, a party of fourteen. Of your acquaintance only
Jack Benson and Slade. Mrs. Wimpole is charming as a
hostess. I had a good deal of talk with her in the evening.
I have made two remarkable discoveries about Slade ! The
first is, that his name is not Nahum, Nehemiah, or Nebuchad¬
nezzar, but Ntvilh !—Neville Slade. You will think there
may be something romantic about him after all, especially
when I tell you the second thing, which is, that the poor
fellow is in love, and not prospering in his love. Probably
that is one great reason of his being so shut up. I did not
hear the young lady's name. Mrs. Wimpole evidently knows
all about it; but I, not being curious, and she no blab, I
cannot tell you much. She only let out that Slade had been
refused, but that his heart was in the same quarter still, that
the young lady liked somebody else, and had been heard to
declare that ' her husband should have a little more of the
devil in him than Mr. Slade !'
I should tell you with regard to the said Slade, that on
several occasions of our meeting since the events at Mrs.
Barron's which I described to you, he has been much more
cordial to me in manner, though as reserved as ever in con¬
versation. (Reserve is, I think, in truth the only atmosphere
in which a tolerably good understanding could be maintained
between us. To agree to differ is the utmost of my hopes !)
Yesterday, however, the iciness had come back, and in a
discussion on church matters after dinner between him, myself,
and Mr. Lang, another clergyman, he showed all the old self-
assertion. Mr. Miller, I fancy, is going fast down hill. Poor
Slade must have enough on his mind altogether.
I have been over to the Bensons several times.    I go
there when I want a little refreshment, some one to speak to
extra-parochially !   I always enjoy my visits, especially when
Mrs. Eivers is there.    I don't think I ever told you that her
husband is in the navy, and at present at sea.    During his
absence she lives partly at her father's liouse, and partly
with his people.    She often asks me about you.    Good-night.
—Your loving sleepy brother,
F. J. R.
[Several letters are here omitted, as containing nothing of fresh
interest.—Ed.s.]
2(58 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
LETTER XVII.
The Eev. N. Sla.de to the Eev. J. Slade.
August 8.
My dear Father,—I had thought you would have gathered
from what I said and omitted to say, in my letter of some
weeks back, that I had again tried my fortune and failed. It
is not a pleasant thing for a man to have to say straight out,
but say it I must to end your speculations. She refused me
point-blank. I am afraid it has been a great hindrance to
niQ throughout—first the hope, then the sorrow; not that my
hope ever was high, but the difference between a little hope
and none at all is— I know now what it is. If it has
occupied my thoughts too much and made me unfaithful in
my charge, may He forgive me who has made human hearts
what they are. What makes the trial harder to bear is,
that she is coming into the neighbourhood again soon. She
has left London already, I believe, and her father is to follow
her and take her on to Scotland, where he has taken a moor.
Meantime she is to stay with Mrs. Wimpole. Tlie latter I know
is my friend, but she can do no good. And now enough of
this. I have another great sorrow to tell you of. Dear Mr.
Miller is sinking, and cannot, I think, last many weeks. For
months he has been going steadily down hill. What a time
this is for me to lose my best friend ! When I look upon
his holy face, how I long to be in his place; but it is a faith¬
less longing. I must nerve myself to my work again. The
confirmation classes, in addition to all the usual routine and
Mr. Miller's illness, give me almost more than I can do. Mrs.
Miller is unnerved, and looks to me for everything.
You ask how the doings at St. Saviour's go on. There is
nothing new so far as I know. The archdeacon was over
here the other day, and spoke strongly, if not severely, to
lieynolds about some of his practices, but he seems inclined
to like the young man himself. There is no doubt he is clever,
and what people call' taking.' Would there were more ballast!
The bad effect of the garish services at his church is seen
now in tlie way even the soberest people of the place run
after them—many of them only to criticise, it is true ; but the
unsettling effect is the same. Many times in an evening our
old parish church is nearly deserted, for that is the time
when St. Saviour's is blazing with lights and sounding with
music (he has contrived to get an organ, and somebody to
play it).    Of course I am not vain enough to think that my
Let Than Alone. 269
people are to be held to me by my own poor gifts ; but I had
hoped they were enough instructed by this time to know the
substance from the tinsel. Yet let me not judge my brother.
I think I told you the story of a poor girl named Margaret
Scott, and how well I thought Eeynolds had behaved in that
affair. The girl is still living, but I never go to see her now.
I am summoned to Mr. Miller. Farewell, dear father. My
love to all.—Your dutiful and loving son, N. S.
P.S.—Aug 9. I forgot to send my letter yesterday. Mr.
Miller was so much worse I could not leave him for a
moment. The end cannot be far. Pray for us. Never did
my future appear so uncertain or so dreary before.
LKTTER XVJII.
The TiEV. F. J. Eeynolds to Miss Reynolds.
Aug. 11.
Dearest Nell,—I have just heard from Beilby, and he
says he is going to you for a day or two.   Give  him  my
warmest thanks for his letter, which was worth a dozen of
the one it was in answer to.    I am going over to Sydwod
this afternoon.    Mr. Benson called here himself yesterday
and asked me.    He was in great spirits, expecting Walter's
return   home,   the   said  Walter   being  quite  a  reformed
character.    He has really been reading this last term, and
has written often and kindly to his father.    Poor old Mr.
Miller is at the last; 1 have often called there lately, but of
course have never seen him. I am very sorry for poor Slade,
who I believe loves him like a son; and besides the great
personal loss he will have in him, there will be the loss of
the position he has held so long, unless, indeed, the bishop
gives him the living, and I think he ought to provide for so
hard-working a man as Slade is.    Would he were less of a
Puritan, and I should be more anxious to keep him as a
neighbour !   The poor fellow looks as white as a ghost, and
is more impenetrable than ever.
M. Scott is much the same; I think she wastes away by
degrees, but the change is scarcely visible from day to day.
Her mind is much calmer, and I think the light is breaking
in upon her. Mrs. Wimpole has asked me to dinner next
week, but I cannot go. I hear she is going to have a j'oung
lady staying with her, a ISIiss Aylmer. I wonder whether it
can be one of the Aylmers we used to know in Brook Street.
270 77^1? Ladies' EdiiibiwgJi Magazine.
It is not unlikely, for Mrs. Wiinpole's husband was a
barrister, and her London acquaintance appears to be much
in the law. The archdeacon was over here last week making
a round of calls, half friendly, half ministerial. He came to
my house of all others to ask for some luncheon ! What an
inhospitable dog you will think me when I say that, with
the exception of Jack Benson once or twice, and Walter
once, he is the only person in my own rank of life who has
eaten my bread since I came. I took it as a mark of
exceeding favour that he should choose me; but of course
old Mary is not accustomed to provide for august visitors,
and I knew she would be wroth if at half-past twelve I sent
orders for her to have luncheon for the archdeacon at a
quarter-past one. Nevertheless I put a bold face upon it,
and ringing for Bell, desired her to tell her aunt that such
was to be the case. A few minutes after came a knock at
the door, and I was summoned. ' Well, Mary ?' ' Well,
sir, an' if ye please what am I to do ? There's no cold meat,
for ye never will have a joint, an' all the scraps is gone into
a pie for wersels.' ' Well, send in the pie and get yourselves
something else.' ' Hout, sir, we've got wir dinner a'ready,
an' there's little on it left, for Bill he has that big a appetite.'
'Well, it's gone; so that won't do. What was I to have for my
dinner ?' 'I was gaun to the butcher's to get you a veal
cutlet.' ' And it will take too long if you go out for
anything? Let's see; do an omelette and some slices of bacon,
and send in cheese and bread and butter.' ' Hout, sir, what's
an omelette to set before an archdeacon, and him havin'
ridden twenty mile this mornin' ? A fine notion he'll tak
back 0' your housekeeping! But indeed I wish he did know
how ye starve yoursel', for maybe he'd mak ye listen to
reason. I'm forgetting a' my cookin' wi' just havin' nothin'
to do.' ' Come, come, we've no time for that; go and do as I
tell you.' So Mary went, looking very black; but when, a
few minutes after the time, luncheon was announced, behold
the cover was lifted up from a very handsome dish of beef¬
steak ! I showed no surprise, but helped the archdeacon,
who ate heartily and pronounced it excellent. Afterwards
I learnt that Mary, even when she came to me and had her
grumble, had already sent Bell out to the Anchor to borrmc
whatever might be ' doing ' in the kitchen, with this happy
result. Her summoning of me to council was only meant
by way of a wholesome lesson ! The archdeacon came to see
my church, did not quite like some of my arrangements, but
was most kind in all he said.    He also came into the school,
Let Them Alone. 271
where he seemed instinctively to know the nicest children,
and single them out for pats on the head and kind
words.
Au(j. 12.—I went yesterday for an afternoon potter about
the ground with the squire, but he insisted on keeping me
to dinner. Mrs. Eivers was there, and it was very pleasant.
Jack told me confidentially that lie was sure there is 'a
lady in the case ' with Walter; and indeed I should think
nothing is so likely to have steadied him as a genuine
affaire, de coeur. I trust he may really be changed, for
otherwise I should dread for any girl the prospect of being
his wife. The old squire gave me hints of the same thing,
and chuckled over it with great glee. ' But if it is so, it
can't be settled yet, for we've no notion who it is. Walter's
a very close fellow about things of that sort, though he's
such a rattle.'—Your affectionate brother, F. J. II.
P.S.—The great bell of the parish church is tolling, and I
have no doubt it is for Mr. Miller. His death will throw a
great gloom over the place, where he is much beloved. Old
Mary and Bell are in tears.
LETTER XIX.
Eev. F. J. Reynolds to his Sister.
Avgust 17.
Dearest Helen,—The good old rector is gone, and I have
attended his funeral to-day. Slade insisted on taking it
himself, and did it without breaking down; but I never saw a
man put such a constraint upon himself as he did. He was
ashy pale, and did not dare look up or look round, lest the
sight of the tearful faces round him should unman him. It
was a most touching scene. He was carried to the grave by
four young men, his former Sunday-school teachers, without
any parade or fuss; but all the village and half the neighbour¬
hood were there in mourning. Jack Benson cried as if his
heart would break. Slade, 1 believe, in accordance M'ith a
wish of the bishop's, expressed in anticipation of this event,
will stay on for some time. Old Mrs. Miller, who is very
infirm, leaves to-morrow and goes to a sister. Slade will
manage all business for her. Walter comes down in a day
or two. The rumours of the cholera become very serious,
and there is a great feeling of dread among the people of
this place, where it was very bad on its last visit.    I am
272
The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
trying to show my people how they ought to prepare for it,
both in mind and body.
Tuesday, Aug. 22. — I was interrupted the other day,
and have never found time to go on. Tlie confirmation took
place on Saturday at the old church. I am afraid I had' a
movement of wicked vanity, for I could not help thinking
how much nicer my little flock looked than Slade's, for all
my girls were in white. I heard yesterday evening that
Slade is going away for a fortnight at a moment's notice.
I sent this morning what I meant for a kind note, asking if
I could help him at all in the occasional week-day duty and so
on; but there came back a note colder and shorter than all the
old Slade-ite notes, merely announcing that he had provided
against all emergencies. Strange, I thought, that he sliould
go out of his way to seek more distant help when I am on
the very spot. I was pondering on this, and on the cause
of his violent and increasing prejudice against me, when a
strange incident that occurred yesterday flashed into my
mind, and seemed to throw a sudden light upon it. Let me
tell it you, for your woman's wit will best judge if there is
any connection. I was coming out of the house yesterday
morning, when I met a carriage driving up to my door.
Mrs. Wimpole put her head out, and said,' Mr. Eeynolds, are
you at leisure ? for I have brought a young friend to lionize
in Illingham. We want to see your church ; and then, if you
can go witli us to see the view from Maldon Hill, which
will look glorious to-day, we will put up the carriage and
walk. Let me introduce you to Miss Aylmer.' ' My dear,
this is Mr. Reynolds.' Then the young lady bent forward,
and it was indeed no other than pretty Mary Aylmer,
daughter of our friend the Q.C. We shook hands warmly,
and Mrs. Wirapole appeared delighted. I was not at all at
leisure, but of course I could do no less than offer to squire
them about, as they had come on purpose.
Mrs. Wimpole would, no doubt, at any other time have
gone to her pet Slade ; but so soon after the rector's deatli,
she would not think of disturbing him—so I went. We
saw my church, and were on our way through the village to
get to Maldon Hill, wlien Mrs. Wimpole stopped at a
cottage and said she was going in to see an old servant of
hers who was ill. ' And Mary dear, you won't mind taking
a turn with Mr. Reynolds for a few minutes, as he's an old
acquaintance.' So we walked up and down, and chatted
merrily; but I thought Miss Aylmer seemed a little pre¬
occupied, and even while she was laughing and talking, she
Maiden Margaret. 273
now and then looked nervously up and down the street.
"We were not very far from the rectory, and presently, round
a corner, came full upon Slade. He started violently, then
pulling off his hat passed us hurriedly, making no answer
to my ' How d'ye do ?' I saw the expression of his white
face as he looked at me for a moment; it was hatred. Then
he looked upwards, and seemed to put violent constraint
upon himself and was gone. I glanced at my companion; she
was chatting on, only with a manner a little more distrait
than before. Then Mrs. Wimpole came out, and we went
to the hill. I told her of our having met Slade, and that he
looked very ill. She said, ' Indeed! I believe he has felt
the rector's death very acutely,' and changed the conversa¬
tion. And now, Helen, my guess is, that Mary Aylmer is
Slade's love, that he knows she loves another, and that he
thinks that other is/.' This would explain the look, the
hurried departure, and the ungracious note. Poor fellow,
would that I could set his mind at rest, as far at least as I
myself am concerned; but he is off by this time, and after
all I can but conjecture. F. J. E.
[L. C. G.
{To he continued)
SUGGESTED BY A PHOTOGRAril.
Little Maiden Margaret,
AVliy so thoughtfully art set
'Mid the rocks, and reeds, and fern,
Like a nymph beside her urn ?
Whence the sweet and wistful glance
Shadowing all thy countenance ?
What deep truth dost thou pursue.
Musing thus in mood so new,
AVhile thy pensive seriousness
Doth an added charm express ?
Akin thou art to all bright things.
Swallows on their rapid wings.
Kittens frolicking at play,
Dewdrops on the heather spray,
No. 42.—Junk 1878.
2/4 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Blue-bells waving, blithe and free,—
Each and all is like to thee.
Yet, as thou art dreaming now.
Such a look is on thy brow
As Kilmeny might have worn
When i'rom fairy-land returning,
After seven years of sojourning,
Earthward she once more was borne.
Ah, how mournful, chill, and bare
Looked our world of toil and care
To her vision purified !
Longer might she not abide
Mid tlie turmoil and the din ;
So unseen she takes her flight
To the fairy regions bright.
Unalloyed by gloom and sin.
Is it so in very deed ?
In thy sadness may we read
Yearnings that like memories are
Of some purer sjAere afar ?
Hast thou scanned this mortal life.
All its pleasures, all its strife ?
Thou, a three years' denizen.
Hast surveyed the works of men,
Weighed their actions, great and small.
And art weary of them all ?
Sooth, our ways are all unmeet
For such coy and dainty feet.
Which of us might hope to be
Worthy playfellow to thee ?
Brains that think, and arms that toil.
Wield the sword, or plough the soil,—
All are stained with worldly dust,
Bear the marks of mire and rust.
But, 0 Maiden Margaret,
Prithee, linger with us yet!
All fair things are gone too soon :
Eoses, blushing bright at morn,
Wither 'neath the blaze of noon ;
Glowing tints, of sunset born.
Fade from purple into grey;
If thou too shouldst pass away,
A Riddle Unsolved. 275
Truly were we left forlorn!
Stay with us—our lives to bless
With a deeper tenderness;
Stay, for we would fain rejoice
In thy ringing bird-like voice,
Glances arch, inviting smiles,—
All the bright and fearless wiles
That are known to innocence.
Stay with us, that we may learn
Nobler motives to discern
Through thy pure-souled influence ;
Glimpses of sublimer things—
Airs, as shed by angels' wings
From a radiant atmosphere,
In whose depths Truth shineth clear.
Thou shalt raise us to thy height;
Baser objects shrink from sight
At the touch of thy soft hand;
Thou shalt bid us understand
What is true philosophy.
What that rare humility.
Choicest of all gifts divine,
Native-born in souls like thine.
Lift thine eyes, then, maiden fair.
Lay aside that thoughtful air;
Earth is no such barren place
Unto thee, by whose meek grace
'Tis refined and consecrate.
So, content thee with thy fate;
Hence with doubting and regret,
Smile again, sweet Margaret!
Alma Glex.
^ Eitilile mnsalijetr.
Dear Madame, or Sir, what is the most curious circumstance
which ever happened in your life ? or has any singular
incident ever occurred to you ? Perhaps you will say,' Mine
has been a very ordinary life, and nothing out of the common
course has occun-ed in it.' And yet, is there no episode in
your past to which your memory, when challenged, readily
276 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
reverts as exceptional, inexplicable ? Peradventure you
have seen a ghost! and apr(ypos of ghosts it is singular how
often, if the subject is broached, persons who say promptly,
' I don't believe in ghosts,' add,' After all, there was a queer
story,' etc.
This paper, however, has nothing to do with the super¬
natural. A nos moutons. A party being seated in the
twilight round a drawing-room fire one evening, it was
proposed by a young member of the circle, that each should
in turn record the most remarkable circumstance which had
ever befallen him or her.
The suggestion was received with demur on the part of
most present.
' You would require time for reflection,' said one.
' I am sure I can't say what is the most curious thing
that ever happened to me,' remarked another.
' I can fix, without hesitation,' observed a lady, ' on the
most singular circumstance of my life. To this day I regard
the affair as an unsolved riddle. You shall hear the story.
I shall like to hear you compare notes upon it.'
' Let us have it,' was the general request, which was thus
complied with:
' My parents in my early days were in comfortable
circumstances, though their income did not allow much
margin for superfluities; they lived quietly, and went com¬
paratively little into society. Every autumn, however, they
spent a few weeks paying a round of visits, chiefly among
relations, at which time my mother liked to be well dressed,
and she usually indulged in a few handsome things from a
dressmaker and milliner of undoubted fashion.
' Mrs. Core, so I will call her, was very near the top of the
tree in her profession, and I have heard my mother say,
when complaining a little of her charges, " I get very few
things from an expensive dressmaker, but those few I take
from one of whose style and good taste I am sure."
' When I was just entering my teens, we suffered some¬
what a reverse of circumstances, and my father was glad to
accept a consulship abroad. We removed to the scene of
his appointment, and it was not until my parents were both
gone, and after an absence of twelve years, that I again found
myself in England.
' In these days of telegrams and fast steamers, scarcely
any place can be called " out of the world," but at the time
I refer to it was otherwise. Persons who settled in distant
colonies, or even in many parts of Europe, were really in a
A Riddle Unsolved. 277
sort of banishment; news, both public and private, was stale
before it reached them, and ladies clung to obsolete fashions,
unaware of the changes which took place. One of the first
points which struck my feminine observation on landing in
England was, that my attire required remodelling. I had
invitations to pay a series of visits, and I felt naturally
desirous to be properly equipped before meeting relations
who had not seen me since I was a child. I had no one to
take me about in London, and the only dressmaker whom
I knew, even by name, was Mrs. Core. I referred to a
directory, found that she still carried on business, and
repaired to her house in E Street, Mayfair.
' The door was opened by a page in green livery, who
showed me up-stairs into a spacious and handsomely furnislied
front room, where the only signs of the business of its
owner was a costly silk dress and train, spread out upon a
damask covered couch, and a few airy specimens of millinery
displayed on the centre table. A glance at one of the large
mirrors showed me my own figure in, must I say it, dowdy
contrast to the finery around, and the thought passed through
my mind, " This person makes court costumes, and serves
countesses; she will think nothing of a moderate order from
a stranger. I might liave been better attended to at an
establishment of less pretension."
' My reflections were interrupted by the entrance of Mrs.
Core, an elderly woman, faultlessly dressed, as was indeed
matter of course, and whose manner combined great polite¬
ness with a certain air of conscious self-importance. " I am
half afraid, Mrs. Core," I began, " that you may be too busy
to execute a small order I should like to give. I have just
landed in England from abroad and want a few things."
' It might be fancy, occasioned by my morbid conscious¬
ness of being indifferently dressed, but I felt that Mrs. Core's
glance was slightly critical.
'" We are very busy. The London season is just coming on,"
she observed," and if you require the things in haste, madam,
I cannot promise them."
' Her tone, though discouraging, was perfectly civil, and I
did not feel that I had any right to be offended. On whom
should appearances make an impression if not on a dress¬
maker ? and she probably judged that I did not look like a
very profitable client, one for whom it would be worth while
to postpone other work.
'" I am sorry," I replied, " for I should like to have got
a dress or two from you.    Long ago you used occasionally, I
2/8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
believe, to supply my mother.    I don't know whether you
remember her name, Mrs. K ."
' There was a full stop for a moment; then the dress¬
maker said gravely, " Yes, I remember! I was sorry to
observe her death in the Times. I shall be happy, Miss
K , to attend to any order of yours."
'" But I do require the things in haste," I replied, " for I
wish, if possible, to leave London the beginning of next week,
and if you are too busy "—
'" I am not too busy to execute your order," was the
rejoinder.
* This change in her disposition towards me was pleasant, but
rather surprising, I had named my mother with diffidence,
doubtful whether she might remember her, and even if she
did so, whether the recollection might carry much weight;
for I was aware that my mother could not have been in any
sense an important customer. The mention of my family
name, however, seemed to have acted as a spell in my favour.
I hastened to take advantage of the tide.
'" I have been living abroad," I repeated, " and have not
seen any new fashions for a long while; and as I am about
to pay some visits, I wish to know what is worn."
'" Of course," assented the dressmaker, " I shall be most
happy to help you."
' We thereupon proceeded to business, and I ordered a
suitable morning and also an evening dress, taking the pre¬
caution to ask the price. It was more reasonable than I
anticipated. Having settled the dress question, Mrs. Core
intimated, though delicately, that neither my mantle nor my
bonnet were a la mode.
' I was aware of the fact, and selected, under her guidance,
both these articles. When, however, she proceeded to lay
before me some smaller pieces of millinery, in the shape of
lace and embroidery, I turned away my eyes saying, " Don't
tempt me too much, Mrs. Core; I must not be extravagant."
'"Do not be afraid,"said she,"your account shall not dis¬
tress you. Collars and cuffs have a great effect on dress,
and these I show you are the very newest fashion."
' It is hard to be strong-minded in the showroom of a court
milliner, besides which I was setting myself up, and was
prepared to stretch a point. Nevertheless, as I walked
away from the house, I felt some misgivings, and thought,
in spite of her reassuring speech, " I wonder what all these
things will come to ? She will run me up a pretty biU, I
suspect!"
A Riddle Unsolved. 279
* Punctually to the day promised, the dresses, etc., arrived.
They were such as I could not fail to regard with satisfac¬
tion. The account, as I had requested, accompanied them.
It was wonderfully moderate, so much so that I said to
myself, " Mrs. Core has charged me less than, I believe, I
should have had to pay to a third-class milliner for things
far inferior."
' I paid my visits, and my dress met with most gratifying
commendation. When I mentioned, in answer to compliments
on that score, that I had gone to Mrs. Core, the remark
usually followed, " Oh, she is a first-rate dressmaker; but do
you not find her horribly expensive ?" I could only say that
I had not found her so.
' Having been so successful once, I thought I could not do
better than have recourse to her again, when the advancing
season required a change of toilette. There was the same
desire manifested on her part to oblige me ; the same
punctuality in executing the order, with the assurance," Yov^
shall not be disappointed;" the same moderate charge. I
felt puzzled. There appeared to exist some reason why I was
to be treated with marked distinction, and I conclude that
she took it for granted I knew her motive, since she never
offered, nor seemed to think of offering the slightest explana¬
tion. "Why did you not fathom the mystery?" you may ask.
Well, the case did not appear then so strong as it does now;
I only saw her when I had business on hand; and in short,
one does not always say the right thing at the right moment.
More than once, however, a question was on my lips which
probably would have led to an understanding, when some little
interruption, as if decreed by fate, broke off the conversation.
For example, when I was ordering a winter dress, and asked
what it would cost if trimmed in a certain way, she replied,
" To you, so and so."
'" Do you charge me less than your other customers ?" I
inquired. Before she could reply, there was a loud double
knock at the street door, and " buttons" announced the
Countess of .
'" You will excuse me.   I must attend to her ladyship," said
Mrs. Core.    " I understand your directions. Miss K ,"
she added, " and you shall have your dress at the end of tliis
week."
' But now I have come to the really extraordinary part.
' One day I received a note from Mrs. Core, asking me, in
very respectful terms, to dine with her the following Sunday
at her private residence in St. John's Wood, her reason for
28o TJie Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
taking such a liberty (I quote her own words) being that she
wished to speak to me on business. She apologized for
asking me to come out on Sunday, but that was the only
day on which she was disengaged. Six o'clock was her
dinner hour; but I was requested, if that did not suit me, to
name the hour I preferred.
' An invitation to dine with my dressmaker was a novelty,
but, under the circumstances, I of course accepted; and at six
o'clock on a Sunday evening in summer, I found myself at a
small though pretty villa in the leafy district of St. John's
Wood.
' The door was opened by the page who, during the week,
did duty at the establishment in B Street; he ushered
me up-stairs into a neatly-furnished little drawing-room,
where my hostess stood to receive me. She acknowledged
my entrance by a curtsey, not a whit less formal than that
with which she was wont to meet her customers in the
showroom. I, however, offered a more friendly greeting ; we
were meeting, I felt, on this occasion on a footing of social
equality, after which, seated on either side of the hearth,
we sustained conversation on commonplace topics until
dinner was announced.
' The table was laid for two, with nice linen, plate, and
crystal; and the dinner was perfect in its way—in good taste,
that is, neither too much nor too little,—and the cooking
excellent. All this time Mrs. Core simply played the
attentive hostess. She made no allusion whatever to the
" business " referred to in her note. My curiosity meanwhile
was somewhat highly wrought.
' At length, when the page had quitted the room for the last
time and we were left with wine and dessert on the table,
Mrs. Core said, " I thought it best to let dinner be over, and
the boy out of the way, before I entered on the reason that
induced me to take what must have appeared so great a
liberty in asking you here this evening."
'" No liberty at all," I murmured.
'" I have been successful in business," pursued Mrs. Core;
" I have conducted it on prudent, I hope I may say conscien¬
tious principles, and I have found it answer iinancially. This
residence and all it contains is my own; and to say nothing
of floating capital, I have a considerable amount of savings in¬
vested in various securities. Such being the case, I have felt
it a duty to make my will. It would indeed have been wrong
for me to delay doing so, for it is not improbable that my life
may terminate suddenly.    I suff'er from heart complaint, and
A Riddle Unsolved. 281
a medical man told me some years ago that any agitation
might likely have a fatal effect; which opinion was repeated
very recently."
'" Oh, I hope you will have many years of life yet," I
observed, wondering what this preamble was to lead to.
'" That is as God pleases," rejoined the dressmaker quietly.
" I do not regard death with particular apprehension, and it
had better perhaps come suddenly than otherwise. But my
reason for troubling you with this detail, is that it may make
some difference to you to know that I have made my will
in your favour."
' " Mrs. Core ! " I exclaimed, " you astonish me. But
whatever may be your motive for this unexampled kindness,
I cannot possibly accept it. Your relations would have the
greatest cause for complaint."
'" No," she replied ; " I have no near relations. There are
none who will be wronged by my doing as I please with
my own."
'"But, my dear madam, do not think me ungrateful if I
ask what can be your reason for so favouring me ? I "— At
that critical moment, when the riddle would doubtless in her
next sentence have been solved, we were disturbed by a
bustle in the passage, the dining-room door abruptly opened,
and a maid-servant burst in.
'" Oh, Missus, Ma'am—the boy has swallowed poison !
Drops that cook "— Here she burst into frightened weeping.
Mrs. Core started up from table, " An emetic—an antidote ! "
she exclaimed as she made for the door. " Fetch a chemist,
a doctor, in-stant-ly." The last word was gasped rather than
spoken, a strange expression flitted across her i'ace; there was
a movement of her hand towards her left side, and she sank
in a heap on the floor.
' She never spoke again; the medical prediction that any
sudden agitation would have fatal consequences was verified.
The doctor whom with her last breath she had ordered to be
summoned for tlie page (who, after all, was not much the
worse), did all that could be done for her; but he soon pro¬
nounced that life was extinct.
' Her will proved to be as she had said, and it is owing to
that most singular testamentary disposition that I am the
possessor of the snug villa in St. John's Wood, where I have
had the pleasure of receiving visits from most of the present
circle. It was indeed a very nice little inheritance into
which T came. Besides the villa, with the furniture, plate,
and linen, there were about £3000 judiciously invested in
282 The Ladies' Edmbiirgh Magazine.
railway debentures and other safe securities. Her stock-
in-trade was required to meet her outstanding debts, but
it fully covered her liabilities. I sold the lease of the
premises in town, and by that and the sale of the fixtures
realized several hundreds more.
' And now can you offer any solution of the riddle ? How
are you inclined to interpret her conduct ?'
' My explanation,' said one of the party, ' is that she was
of a grateful disposition, and that your mother had been the
first to bring her into notice.'
' That is a very natural explanation, and occurred to
myself; but the difficulty in the way of accepting it is,
that my mother employed her, as far as I know, because Mrs.
Core was already well established; nor was my mother, in
her most prosperous days, in a position to bring a dressmaker
into fashion.'
' Your family had laid her under an obligation of some kind,
you may be sure,' remarked another, ' and she took it for
granted that you knew all about it.'
' I can find no better explanation,' replied Miss K.; ' and as
I was only a child at the time of my mother's connection
with her, many things may have occurred of which I knew
nothing. Certainly, however, my mother never seemed to
regard her except as a good dressmaker. The affair is an
enigma, and as the only persons who could supply the key
are gone, I fear it must remain an unsolved riddle.'
E. P. Eamsay Laye.
after WM.tx,
Thou little bird of happiness !
I hear thee with a sigh;
Two months ago no child of joy
Was half as glad as I.
And then the trees were bare and brown,
And now the trees are green;
But Nature never can restore
To me what once hath been.
A.
Our Library Table. 283
©ur ILibrarg Cable.
In My Indian Garden.    By Phil. Robinson.    London:
Sampson, Low, Marston, Searle, & Rivington.
We cordially recommend this charming little book to our readers.
Small and portable, it will serve admirably to wile away the hours of
a long journey, or the discomforts of ' the tiresome waiting at that
horrid junction;' it will just be the very book to take out, when
summer comes, to our favourite shady tree, or to the grassy hillside
nook where we love to lie among the golden broom beside the running
water. And pleasant would it be if we could have the owner of that
Indian garden to ramble with us, with his keen observation, his
minute philosophy of daily sights and sounds, his quaint fancy, and
wide reading, stored in a retentive memory, whence illustration and
apt quotation are poured forth in rich abundance. Within the grej^
boards of this little volume is a collection of word pictures which
reminds us of some dainty bit of mosaic or exquisite ivory carving, so
delicate is the touch, so pure the taste and skill with which the sub¬
jects are handled. The artist has not gone far afield to seek them,
though they do come from far away. It is rarely choice, or at least
it is the choice which springs from necessity, which takes us Britons
to India, and our author evidently looks back with all the fondness
of his countrymen to the homely scenes and daily ease of homo life.
But ' my mind to me a kingdom is,' he might truly say, and he can
study, describe, and amuse himself, in the intervals of drier work,
with the birds, beasts, flowers, and insects, and all the strange un¬
wonted aspects of the teeming life, animate and inanimate, in the
wondrous gorgeous land of his exile. The book is in four parts—
My Indian Garden, The Seasons, Among the Crops, and Under the
Trees, and from these different points of view the creatures that fly,
run, or creep, the fierce heat, the watery world of the rainy season,
the rank growth of vegetable and animal life, and the queer forlorn
wrecks of humanity, are sketched with a force, a reality and pic-
turesqueness, which remind us of Charles Kingsley's loving eye for
all the wonder and the glory of creation, with a mingling of humour,
of tender pathos, and quaint grace which are almost worthy of the
Esaays of Elia. What gem out of the collection shall we set here
before our readers' eyes, sending them eagerly to turn it over for
themselves 1 Here is the summing up in the case of the ever-intru¬
sive and hopelessly silly dak-bungalow fowl, the piece de resistance
of every meal in some shape or other : ' The value of life depends, I
fancy, upon the amount of game obtained for the candle burnt, or,
supposing pleasure to be a negative quantity, upon the amount of
unpleasantness avoided during life. And looking at it from either
point of view, I am inclined to think the value of life to a dak-bunga¬
low fowl must be very trifling. Like Japanese youth, it lives with
sudden death ever in prospect ; but the hara-kiri in the case of the
fowl is not an honourable termination of life, while the lively
apprehension of it unwholesomely sharpens its vigilance. It has,
moreover, nothing to live on and plenty of it; and this diet afi'ects
its physique, inasmuch as it prevents the increase of flesh, while the
constant  evasion of death  developes its muscles, the  thigh  bones
284 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
assuming vulturine dimensions. The feathers, by constant escapings
through small holes, become ragged and irregular, the tail is system¬
atically discarded as being dangerous and a handle to ill-wishers.
Death must therefore come upon some of them as a sharp cure for
life, il eat mort gueri. But to others it is the bitter end of a life of
perilous pleasures.' Does this pleasant writer ever grumble, we
wonder? Many who can bear great evils without a murmur, find
themselves completely overcome by some of the petty anno3'ances of
daily life. A creaking door, a smoky chimney, a dusty journey, our
neighbours' fidgets, can often, like the shower of rain in Faber's
little poem, ' make a Christian soul to sin.' It would be well if we
could all look upon the rubs and worries we must needs encounter in
the same cheery spirit as Phil. Robinson, and find in them food for
the quaint humour and graphic description with which he treats the
minor miseries (if we may call them so) which cannot be ignored, and
must be endured yearly in India, sub Jove pluvio. ' No one can pre¬
tend to ignore the insect invaders—the buUety beetles and maggoty
ants. Nobody can profess to do so. It is impossible to appear
unconscious of long-legged tei'rors that silently drop on your Lead,
or shiny nodular ones that rush at your face and neck with a buzz in
the steamy evenings in the rains. A tarantvila on the towel-horse,
especially if it is standing on tiptoe, is too palpable, and nobody can
pretend not to see it there. Spiders weighing an ounce, however
harmless, are too big and too puffy to be treated with complete
indiS'erence. Then there is a pestilent animal resembling a black
beetle with its head a good deal pulled off, having fish hooks at the
ends of its legs, with which it grips you, and will not let go. Centi¬
pedes, enjoying a luxury of legs (how strange that they are not
proud !), think nothing, a mere trifle at most, of leaving all their toes
sticking behind them when they run up your legs. It is an undecided
point whether the toes do not grcjw new centipedes ; at any rate, the
centipede grows new toes. Ridiculous round beetles tumble on their
backs, and scramble and slide about the dinner table till they get a
purchase on the cruet-stand, up which they climb in a deliberate and
solemn manner, and having reached the top, go forthwith headlong
into the mustard. Sometimes they get out again unperceived, but
an irregular track of mustard on the cloth, with a drop wherever the
beetle stopped to take breath, leads to the discovery of the wanderer
sitting among the salad and pretending to be a caper.' Mr. Edwin
Arnold, in his preface to this engaging little book, truly remarks
that though ' India may be hot, dusty, distant, and whatever else the
weary exile alleges when his liver goes wrong, she is never vulgar,'
and we hope with him that the beginning is here suggested of ' a new
field of Anglo-Indian literature.' We trust that we may have the
pleasure again of learning how the ' common objects ' of bungalow
life impress one who, amidst the dust and drouth of official life, has
found time and gifts to record them as they first struck him, in a
style which, with all its lightness of manner and material, has great
strength and value, like those fine webs of Dacca and Delhi with the
embroidered beetle-wings and feathers.
We regret to have to add one word of condemnation, the more so
as many an unsuspicious reader may enjoy the book without being
aware of the fault until it is pointed out. In one of the chapter
headings, an application is made of a passage in the Book of Daniel
which we can only term grossly irreverent.    Can it be (and from one
Question Series. 285
or two other slight indications to which this circumstance gives point,
we fear it) that this pleasant writer, with so much of Kingsley's power
and charm, has not like him attained any grasp of ' invisible things,'
through delight in and understanding of ' the things that are made ' ?
Even if it be sf), we should have thought that good taste alone would
have forbidden such a blameable use of words which others hold
sacred.
Historical Notices of S. Fillan's Crozier, etc.
By John Stuart, LL.D., Sec. Soc. Antiq. Scot.
It is with mingled pleasure and regret that we have received this
beautiful little addition to the records of tlie Scottish Antiquarian
Society, being the last of the lamented Dr. John Stuart's labours in
behalf of that Society, of which he was in life so distinguished and
valuable a member. Though only printed for private circulation,
this able and scholarly little record will probably be accessible to all
who are interested in such subjects. In no country, perhaps, are the
researches of the antiquarian more valuable to the historian than in
Scotland; so many by-paths of its history are opened up by an ac¬
quaintance with the ruins, the relics, and the religious shrines,
which, abounding in local and historical interest, must be visited
under able guidance in order that their importance may be
appreciated. Much curious information is condensed into a small
space in this record, showing the state of religious feeling in Scotland
in the days of the Bruce, and the quotations from old chronicles are
most interesting. The devotion of King Robert to S. Fillan seems
well accounted for by the vicinity of the saint's shrine to the scene
of the deadly combat with the M'Androssers; and the story is
touchingly told of the devout and prayerful preparation made by the
Bruce and his army before the battle of Bannockburn. The illustra¬
tions are beautifully executed, and all who knew and valued the
author will prize this last memorial of him whose death, while the
sheets, fresh from his hand, were passing through the press, is simply
stated on the last page.
Question Srries.
I. History.—"What were the chief rights confirmed to the nation by
Magna Charta ?
II. English Literature.—Write a paragraph on the form and scope of
the Sonnet.    To whom do we owe its introduction into English (
Answers to be sent in by 15th July, addressed, 'Qu. C, care of
Miss Walker, 37 Gillespie Crescent,'this change of address being found
necessary to avoid confusion. The best answer to each question will
be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of the
year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magazine. We advise a pseudonym,
not initials, which are perplexing when many have the same. As
compression into twenty lines seems to embarrass our younger
correspondents, we have agreed that History may have twenty-four,
Literature twenty-six, as quotations occupy space; but these limits
286 The Ladies^ Edinhirgh Magazhie.
must not be passed. Twelve words go to a line. We warn corre¬
spondents against running time too short. The 15th is the latest
possible day; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO APRIL SERIES.
We observe with great pleasure tlie improvement in all respects.
So many are deserving of praise, it has been difficult to select the
best. We give the first place in History to A Chylde, on account of
the terse clearness of her answer ; Midge being also excellent in the
same way; B. and Beetwalda, not far behind the first pair; May-
Fly, very good; Spider, Nono, good ; M. B. is too diffuse, though
good ; Rediviva, able, but wanders from her point; M. H. L. has,
we think, confused two questions together. In Literature: Midge,
best; B., also excellent; A Chylde runs them very close; NoNO
is scarcely inferior ; Bretwalda, R. C. W., very good; Rediviva,
clever, but too discursive ; M. H. L. hardly seems to have under¬
stood the question.
I. Charles Stuart, second British king of that name, was crowned
at Scone on New Year's day 1C51, two years after the death of his
father. The Scottish people were very indignant at the death of
Charles I.; for wlien they had given him up to Oliver Cromwell, after
he fled to them for protection at Newark, they had stipulated for his
safety and freedom. They therefore, immediately after hearing of
the death of the father, asked the son to come over to Scotland
and accept of the crown so long worn by his ancestors. The exiled
prince, however, had a great dislike to Presbyterianism, and sent
Montrose from Holland to try to gain Scotland for him without the
aid of the obnoxious Presbyterians. That undertaking failed,
Montrose being defeated and executed ; and Charles had to choose
between a hated religion with a kingdom, and freedom to worship
(or rather, strictly speaking, not to worship) as he pleased. Of course
he chose the former iilternative, consoling himself, no doubt, with
the reflection that promises were as easily broken as made. So
Charles came over from Holland, and the little town of Scone was
once again made famous by the coronation of a Scottish king.
A Chylde.
II. In former days it was the custom to present laurel wreaths
to graduates in rhetoric and versification, hence the title ' Poeta
Laureatus.' The king's laureate was therefore simply a graduated
rhetorician; and the form of office consisted in composing annually
an ode in honour of the king's birthday, or on any memorable
event. The earliest mention of any one holding the office is found
in the reign of Edward IV., when it was held by John Key. In IGiJO
the first patent of the office was granted, also a salary of £100, with a
tierce of canary wine ; but this was afterwards lessened to £27. In
the reign of George III. the custom of writing annual odes was
abolished, and now the title is simply honorary. Midge.
In order to prevent mistakes, we assure correspondents that
reference to books is permitted ; we are glad that they should be
able to refer to the proper authorities for anything they want to
know.    CopyitKj from any book we should certainly dislike ; and the
St7'ay Notes. 287
probability is, that an answer so given would not be a good one, as it
would not suit a question not founded upon the author's own view.
Terseness, strict adherence to the question, perception of its point,
and good style of expression, are the tests we apply to the answers.
N.B.—We beg to call attention to the changed address of (^v. C.
An Englishwoman Abroad kindly sends us the following informa¬
tion :—I think the distress of your ' Distressed Traveller' (see our
February issue) may be relieved by the information that Pota.iste
J'ermangana.'i is composed of the crystals, from the refuse of which
Condy's Fluid is made. In that form it can be carried in perfect
safety, and a 1 oz. bottle, price 2s. or 3s., will contain sufficient to
last for a long time. Five or six of the small crystals dissolved in a
tumbler of warm water will form a solution stronger than the usual
Condy's Fluid, consequently may be again diluted. Perhaps your
correspondent may be glad of the further information, that for dis¬
infecting or improving the air of a room, the liquid should be placed
in a plate or shallow dish, as the larger the surface exposed, the
greater the effect.
A Bu8Y Bee has been answered by a number of kind correspon¬
dents,—E. P. B., M. H. L., Annibal, and others,—all of whom say
that fullest information on every particular can be had on application,
enclosing a stamped envelope, to the Secretary, Miss Chapman, at
the office, 113 Gloucester Road, London. An explanatory report,
up to Christmas 1877, will be sent post free for three-halfpence.
77(6 Engluhwoman's Gazette (Hatchards, Piccadilly), a valuable
publication, contains in its May issue the paper drawn up by Lady
Mary Fielding on the actual work of the Society, and read by the
Duke of Argyll at a recent conversazione of the Guild, held at
1 Burlington Street. We hope, by the kindness of one of our own
contributors, to be enabled soon to insert for the benefit of our
readers an article setting forth still further the aims and hitherto
beneficial action of the Guild.
Further details may be acceptable to A Sketcher, whose query on
china painting appeared last month. Anna thus advises her :—If A
Sketc'her wishes to learn china painting without a master, let her
get the manual published by L'Echertier in Oxford Street. If she
will keep to monochrome work at first, she may get on very well
alone. Purple is the prettiest tint for monochrome ; it is like that
seen on old Dresden teacups, and this kind of work is more rewarding
than badly-executed coloured flowers. [We shall be happy to insert
any further questions or details on this subject, on which some of our
correspondents seem able to give excellent advice.—Eds.]
Nanine wishes to know who is the author of the beautiful French
ballad. La Toilette de Conslaiu-e. She read it long ago, and would be
glad to do so once more. [The poem, as terrible as it is beautiful, is
by Casimir de la Vigne, and will, we think, be found in any edition
of his works. We recommend to all admirers of the poem, JNIr.
Ruskin's striking comments (rt(ie Modern Painters, vol. iii. chap, xii..
Let Them Alone. 315
another; I trusted I might never know to whom. If it had
been some one far away, whose face I might never see, and
whose name I might never know, I think I could have borne
it; but it is one at my own door—Eeynolds.
I told you she was coming to the neighbourhood. Two
days after I was in the village, I overheard a woman say to
her neighbour,' Ah, they'll make a fine couple,' and a moment
after, turning a corner, came full upon the two. They seemed
quite at their ease, and he was just asking her if she remem¬
bered something or other. It must be an old thing, settled
before he came here; while I, poor fool, have been deluding
myself and dreaming my best years away. I am afraid I
hardly feel yet as a Christian should towards Eeynolds, for I
have been told over and over again that he has given out
that he did not intend to marry; he thought a clergyman
should have as few worldly ties as possible, etc. Hypocrite!
Mary has lately come of age, and into possession of her own
fortune, which has probably altered his view! I cannot be
mistaken, for under what other possible circumstances would
she have been seen walking alone with him in the village ?
Mrs. Wimpole, I think, might have given me some hint, and
saved me from at least tliis, trial. But I am ashamed of my
complainings. All is over, and I pray that I may be able
to forgive all.
There is no one here whom I know. I spend my days on
the beach, at a good distance from the general haunt. Some¬
times I take a boat. Direct to the P. 0. I will write again
in a few days. N. S.
LETTER XXII.
The Eev. N. Slade to his Father.
Aberystwith, Seipt. 2.
Deae Father, — The letter you enclosed, and which I
received this morning, was from the bishop, offering me
Illingham! It was most kindly couched. How little I
could once have thought that I should have hesitated on
such a point; but now I do hesitate. After what I have
told you, you can easily guess how painful the thought of
living on there must be to me. Most sincerely also do I
feel my unworthiness to succeed my valued and saint-like
friend. I have asked for a fortnight to deliberate. Give
me your advice and your prayers.—Your affectionate son,
N. S.
Our Female Novelists. 289
©ur Jfmalc 0oi)clists.
XVIII.
MARY WOLLSTONECEAFT  SHELLEY.
h. 1797—rf. 1851.
Old St. Pancras Churchyard is one of the many places over
which the advancing tide of London has remorselessly rolled,
changing what was once a quiet secluded spot into one of
the busiest thoroughfares of the great city. A network of
railways above ground and below, and a monster hotel, now
cover the place where once it lay.
All lovers of romantic spots must ever grieve that advanc¬
ing civilisation marches thus ruthlessly over so much
haunted ground. Perhaps, however, the knowledge of what
we have in this manner lost makes us all the more grateful
for what is left. We can still, almost within hearing of the
roar of London, meditate in the churchyard where Gray
wrote his Elegy, and under the very ' yew tree's shade'
where he may himself have sat; we may rest on the tomb
in the churchyard at Harrow where Byron passed so many
of his schoolboy hours; but the iron hand of progress has
swept away for ever the willow that shaded the grave of
Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin in old St. Pancras Churchyard,
and effaced the spot where her gifted young daughter lay
dreaming and reading in the long summer days, where she
met the poet Shelley, and where ' unhesitatingly she placed
her hand in his and linked her fortune with his own.'
The daughter of an extraordinary father, and perhaps still
more extraordinary mother, Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin
was born in London on the 30th August 1797. Of her girl¬
hood previous to her marriage there is not much to tell.
Outwardly there was nothing to distinguish it from the
ordinary life of girls in the middle class ; but from a little
account she gives of herself in a preface to Frankenstein,
and from touches here and there in her father's letters, we
can gather that she was a dreamy, romantic girl, with an
insatiable love of reading, which was rather repressed than
encouraged. Her father, writing of her at the age of fifteen,
says: ' Her desire of knowledge is great, and her perseverance
in everything she undertakes almost invincible.' Her mother
died at her birth. Her father, in spite of love for his first
wife, as passionate as his calm nature was capable of, soon
married again, and  her step-mother  was  harsh  and   un-
No. 43.—July 1878. j
290 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
congenial. Finding that he required more money than he
could make by liis writings to support a family establishment
formed without making a previous provision for the support
of it, her father became a bookseller. This family, for which
he had to write hard and work hard, consisted of five children
in all: Fanny, the daugliter of Mary Wollstonecraft before
her marriage with Godwin, and Mary, the subject of the
present memoir; two children by a previous marriage of
the second Mrs. Godwin, Charles and Jane Clairmont; and
William, the youngest, the only child of Godwin and his
second wife. Jane Clairmont was indulged by her mother,
while Fanny and Mary were checked and repressed. Mrs.
Godwin's idea was, that ' each child should be educated to
some definite duties, and with a view of filling some useful
place in life.' But it was found that ' Jane Clairmont's
mission was to have all the education and accomplishments
which their slender means would admit of, while household
drudgery was, from an early age, discovered to be the life-
work of Mary and Fanny Godwin.' Her father seems to
have deeply loved his children, and to have been much
interested in their mental growth; but, like many other
fathers, he had not, as he himself confesses, time to put his
theories into practice with regard to his own family; so all
the education Mary had till the time she left her father's
house with Slielley was self-gained. ' That she was after¬
wards a worthy intellectual companion to Shelley is in no
degree due to Mrs. Godwin, and little to her father's direct
teaching.'
Of herself she says:—
' It is not singular that, as the daughter of two persons of dis¬
tinguished literary celebrity, I should very early in life have thought
of writing. As a child I scribbled ; and my favourite pastime during
the hours given me for recreation was to " write stories." Still I had
a dearer pleasure than this, which was the formation of castles in the
air—the indulging in waking dreams. My dreams were at once
more fantastic and agreeable than my writings ; they were all my
own. I accoimted for them to nobody; they were my refuge when
annoyed, my dearest pleasure when free. It was beneath the trees
of the grounds belonging to our house, or on the bleak sides of the
woodless mountains near' (she is speaking of some time she spent in
Scotland), ' that my true compositions, the airy flights of my imagina¬
tion, were born and fostered.'
And SO her girlhood passed, spent chiefly in London,
varied once by a long visit to Scotland when it was found
that the growing girl required purer air than the house in
Skinner Street could afford. She is described when about
fifteen  as  being 'rather short, remarkably fair, and light-
Oiir Female Novelists. 291
haired, with brownish-grey eyes, a great forehead, striking
features, and a noticeable air of sedateness.'
Mary was only fourteen when Shelley first became known
to her father. The poet, like so many young men of the
time, was attracted by the writings of Godwin, and regarded
him as a very prophet of the great cause of truth and
liberty, and the progress of humanity. Some letters passed
between them, and in October 1812, SheUey and his wife
visited the Godwins in London; but Mary was then looked
upon as a child in her home, and Shelley seems to have
taken no particular notice of her. They did not meet again
until early in the summer of 1814. At this time Shelley
was wretched. He had discovered that the dream of his
youthful love was an illusion, that his wife was totally in¬
capable of understanding or half appreciating him, and for
long they had been living most unhappily together. The
exaggerated and keen sensibility of his poetic nature made
him feel every small trial with the greatest acuteness, and
family troubles and vexations, which by ordinary men might
have been forgotten, or thought lightly of, rubbed off in daily
intercourse with the outside world, were brooded on till they
became sorrows which it appeared to himself time could
never heal. That a separation between him and his wife
was impending when Shelley came to London is certain.
That it did not take place sooner is deeply to be deplored;
but it is at least some excuse for Mary Godwin that she
was not the first cause of the breach between him and
Harriet.
Mary, too, was not happy. Her home, as we have shown,
was ruled over by a step-mother, who, if not deliberately un¬
kind, was at least totally unsympathetic; and when seen with
a book in her hand, Mary was ' wont to hear from her that
her proper sphere was the storeroom.' Some of us can
perhaps recall such times in our own girlhood,—before the
days of girls' colleges and local examinations,—when to be
seen with a book was almost a crime, when we satisfied our
love of reading and craving for knowledge anywhere out of
sight, in some old lumber-room or underneath a favourite
tree. There we dreamed and read, and read and dreamed,
till fiction seemed more true than fact, and the poets and
philosophers of our books were the only realities, and the
people we lived among were shadows and dreams. Such a
girl can we picture Mary Godwin to have been. No wonder
that, when the poet of her dreams came to her in real life,
she thought him almost divine.
292 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
His youth, his loveliness, his sorrows, touched her heart.
Shelley found in her sympathy and intellectual appreciation;
to her he confided his griefs, his hopes, his plans for the well-
being of the human race: she listened, approved, advised.
They were congenial spirits,—simpatica, as the Italians say,
—and they had found each other. We can easily fancy that
they met for a time without any feeling of wrong on either
side, that they loved before they were aware of it. What
opened their eyes we are not told ; but Godwin's suspicions
which seem after a time to have been aroused, may have
hastened the climax. On the 28th July 1814, within three
months after they had met for this time, they left London
together. That Mary Godwin's act was unpardonable from
any point of view, is not to be denied ; still there are manifold
excuses to be made for her. Through the teaching of her
father, whom she deeply respected, and the writings of her
mother, whose memory she reverenced, she had become
familiarized with the idea that marriage was one of the
institutions which a nobler era of mankind would sweep
away, and in these ideas Shelley fully shared. Young and
ardent minds do not readily distinguish between theory and
practice, and it was not surprising if the visionary girl
confounded opinions that were meant to take effect in a state
of society altogether hypothetical, and actions done in
society as at present constituted. When we consider her
youth, her inexperience, her girlish trustfulness, her deep,
passionate love for Shelley, his almost overpowering attrac¬
tions, the fascination he exercised over all who knew him
personally, and, above all, the atmosphere of tliought in which
she had been brought up, we may, while fully.
' Owning lier weakness,
Her evil behaviour,'
without exceeding the limits of the ' charity which hopeth all
things,' mingle a feeling of tender pity with our heartfelt
condemnation of Mary Godwin's conduct.
The events of the next few weeks were afterwards given
to the world by Mrs. Shelley in the Six Weeks' Tour,
published by her among Shelley's prose writings after his
death. It is, however, as much her work as his, being
passages from their joint diary, begun the night they left
England together, and continued by one or other during all
their married life. They began their sentimental journey—
which has been called ' the strangest ever undertaken since
Adam and Eve went forth with all the world before them
where to choose'—by crossing from Dover to Calais in an
Our Female Novelists. 293
open boat, exposed to a violent storm. They then proceeded
through France to Geneva, and thence to Lucerne. At Paris
they bought an ass, on which they rode by turns, and in this
manner the earlier stages of the journey were performed.
At Lucerne the state of their purse warned them to think of
returning home, and choosing water conveyances, partly be¬
cause of their being cheapest, and partly because Shelley
was always happier in a boat than anywhere else, they went
down the Reuss and the Ehine, and found themselves again
in England on the 13th September.
Early in the following year Shelley's grandfather died, and,
his father coming into the property, settled on him £1000 a
year. They were now comfortably off, and went to live at
Bishopgate, near Windsor Forest. Here they remained until
May of the following year, and here their eldest child
William was born in January 1816. Their days were passed
under the oaks in Windsor Forest, or boating on the Thames,
in the thorough enjoyment of each other's society. In May
1816 they again went abroad, and when staying at the
Hotel Secheron,on the Lake of Geneva,made the acquaintance
of Lord Byron. Byron was then living near Diodati, a
beautiful old house with grounds sloping to the lake, and
surrounded by terraced vineyards. Here the Shelleys spent
much of their time, and we cannot help wishing that some
unseen Boswell had been present to record the conversations
of the poets. Byron was never altogether a favourite with
Mrs. Shelley; and yet, telling how she used to sit entranced
listening to their talk, she says that in after years the sound
of his voice moved her almost beyond endurance, and when
he ceased speaking, involuntarily she waited for a moment
for the other voice hushed for ever, which she half expected
to answer.
Frankenstdn, that weird, wild romance, Mrs. Shelley's
first literary work, was the offspring of this time. The story
of its origin is well known. How their imaginations had
been excited by ghost stories told by ' Monk' Lewis, who had
been paying a visit to Lord Byron ; how during a three days'
tliunderstorm Byron and the Shelleys agreed each to write a
ghost story; and how Mrs. Shelley's, the ^onA&v^xil Franken¬
stein, was the only one of the three ever completed. She
tells us how for days she could not think of a plot sufficiently
novel and startling, till at last the strange one she fixed upon
was suggested to her by a conversation between Shelley and
Byron on the subject of Dr. Darwin's experiments in the pro¬
duction of life.    To all lovers of the horrible in literature we
294 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
can recommend this tale, promising them a rich banquet.
Space will permit us to give only a very brief sketch of it here.
Frankenstein, the hero, picked up by a British captain
amidst the icebergs of the polar seas, tells his 'wild and
wondrous tale.' A native of Geneva, he had from early youth
loved to dabble in the occult sciences, and penetrated so far
into the mysteries of nature as to be able to create a living
being. The stages of his work are described with thrilling
horror, till at length, ' on a dreary night in November/ the
end of all his toil is achieved, and the hideous mass into
which he has breathed the breath of life lives and moves.
With unspeakable loathing, Frankenstein flies from the
gigantic monster he has created. In vain, however, does he
try to escape. The dreadful being follows him with fearful
malignance, murders his little brother, and at length makes
him promise to create for it a companion. Frankenstein
retires to a lonely island of the Orcades to execute his hated
task. While engaged in it the monster appears before him.
' As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost
extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation
of madness on my promise of creating another like to him,
and, trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which
I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on
whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with
a howl of despair and revenge withdrew.' Goaded to fury
by disappointment, the fiend commits crime, murders
Frankenstein's dearest friend, and strangles his bride on
their wedding night. The unhappy Frankenstein has now
but one object in view, to destroy the monster and at once
revenge his wrongs and rid the world of such a fiend. But
the creature eludes his grasp, and, leading him through the
greater part of Europe, down the Khone, through the
Mediterranean, on to the Black Sea, amidst the wilds of
Tartary and Russia, brings him at length to the ice-bound
shores of the polar seas. Frankenstein is finally within
sight of his victim, when the ice breaks up, and he is left on
a floating ice-raft. Eescued then by the captain of the
British vessel to whom he tells his story, he dies before the
ship sails for England. The monster appears, and, after
mourning over the dead body of his creator,' springs through
the cabin window, is borne away by the waves, and lost in
darkness and distance;' and so ends the tale.
On Frankenstein Mrs. Shelley's claim to literary distinc¬
tion chiefly rests. It is undoubtedly the best of all her
books; it has a force and an originality which  none of her
Our Female Novelists. 295
other writings possess; there is in it an echo of the tender
melancholy of her father's romantic tales, and a ring of
Shelley's wildest poetry. Both Godwin and Shelley thought
highly of the story, and it was reviewed and praised by Sir
Walter Scott in Blackvjood's Magazine.
On their return to England in September 1816, the poet
and his wife again settled near the Thames, this time at
Marlow in Buckinghamshire. Here their time was spent in
works of active benevolence among the poor lace-workers of
the neighbourhood, in the enjoyment of simple country
pleasures, and in reading, which formed the chief delight of
both. ' At home or travelling, before breakfast or waiting for
the mid-day meal, by the side of a stream or on the ascent
of a mountain, a book was never absent from the hands of
one or other.'
An event, which came as a shock to both of them, happened
in November 1816; Harriet, Shelley's first wife, drowned
herself in the Serpentine. A few weeks after, Shelley and
Mary were married very quietly in London. Innocent as
all Shelley's biographers assert he was of being the immediate
cause of this rash act, he yet could by no means have felt
guiltless, and the remorse he now endured affected his health
and spirits. Another source of grief was added in the
decision against him in Chancery, when, on account of his
opinions, he was declared unfit to have the charge of his and
Harriet's children. A fear alluded to in his Lines to William
Shelley seems to have haunted him and Mary, that their
boy might be taken from them like the others; so, for
safety and change of scene, they determined to go abroad,
and in March 1818 left England, to which SheUey was
destined never to return.
Four years of life in Italy followed,—a time which, when
Mrs. Shelley looked back upon it in her sad widowhood,
seemed to her full of golden days of 'pure and perfect
delight' indeed. The nameless charm which Italy exercises
over all poetical minds was fully felt by both the Shelleys.
The dreamy Venice, like no other place in the world in the
silence that pervades its ' watery streets;' Florence, the
beautiful in nature and in art; the half-populated Pisa; the
strange mixture of mediaeval civilisation with modern life,
which lingers in all the towns of Italy; the intoxicating
beauty of the environs of Naples, with its cloudless sky and
waveless sea; Rome, the enchantress,'the capital of a vanished
world,' with her streets, churches, pictures, fountains, and,
above all, her ruins ' graced with an immaculate charm that
296 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
cannot be effaced,' are all remarked on and described in the
letters of both husband and wife with the very enthusiasm
of delight. Their first winter abroad was spent at Milan,
Leghorn, the Baths of Lucca, Venice and its neighbourhood.
Home, and Naples. While at Este, near Naples, their little
daughter Clara died. This was a great trial to both father
and mother, to be followed by a still greater when their
eldest and best-beloved child William, a lovely boy three
years of age, died at Eome in the early summer of the next
year. After his loss they left Rome never to return, and for
the remainder of Shelley's life they lived in the north of
Italy, chiefly at Leghorn, Florence, and Pisa. In November
1819 the birth at Florence of another son, Percy Florence
Shelley, the present baronet, partly consoled them for the
loss of their other children. In January 1820 they removed
to Pisa, and while living there, for the first time in Italy,
went a good deal into society. They there made the acquaint¬
ance of Mr. Williams, who afterwards shared Shelley's sad
fate, and his wife ; also of Captain Trelawny, who in her
utmost need proved a kind friend to Mrs. Shelley. In Mr.
and Mrs. Gisborne, settled at Leghorn, they also found
pleasant and congenial friends. Mrs. Gisborne was an old
acquaintance of Godwin's, and a fast friendship sprang up
between her and his daughter. To her many of Mrs.
Shelley's letters are addressed. These letters, written with¬
out the remotest thought of after publication, are very
pleasant, giving mostly simple womanly accounts of her
daily life, of Shelley, of her child, and here and there little
bits of literary criticism or other remarks which display the
depth and culture of her mind.
Novel as their experience of society and a gay life was, it
seems often to have palled upon them both. In one of her
letters to Mrs. Gisborne, Mrs. Shelley says that she longs
for nothing so eagerly as ' some sea-girt isle, where with
Shelley, my babe, my books and horses, we might give the
rest to the winds.' This seems almost an echo of words
written to her by Shelley about a year before: ' My greatest
comfort would be utterly to desert all human society. I
would retire with you and our children to a solitary island
in the sea, would build a boat, and shut upon my retreat the
floodgates of the world.'
' This longing for solitude and love of the sea led them to
choose, in the summer of 1822, a residence on the Bay of
Spezzia near Lerici. The situation was wild, lonely, and
beautiful beyond expression.    The house Casa Magni, which
Our Female Novelists. 297
the Williamses shared with them, was on the very border of
the sea—a steep hill covered with dark pines and other forest
trees rose behind ; in front was a land-locked bay; there was
no entrance to it but by one footpath over the beach from
Lerici. Something in the solitude, perhaps. even in the
extreme beauty of the place, weighed on the sensitive mind
of Mrs. Slielley. From the time of their coming there, she
was oppressed by a deepening gloom, a coming shadow of she
knew not what, which darkened with foreboding and sadness
the last few months of her life with one whom she so
passionately loved. She attributed her depression to ill-
health, and tried to shake it off, but in vain; and when
Shelley left her, for what she thought would be only an
absence of a few days, to meet Leigh Hunt at Leghorn, her
fears, too soon so sadly to be realized, were redoubled.
Of Shelley's sad and sudden end, the story has been often
told. It was on the 8th July 1822 that he sailed from
Leghorn, on a calm, sultry afternoon. The sea was as smooth
as glass, the sky without a cloud. In a few hours a terrible
storm arose, a fury of wind, rain, thunder, and lightning; it
was six o'clock on a summer evening, and yet it became
almost dark. The tempest was as brief as it was violent; it
lasted but twenty minutes. When it ceased, the spirit of the
poet had passed away; all that was mortal in him had
' suffered a sea change,' and he was ' made one with nature.'
We rejoice to think that this generation is doing justice to
Shelley,' the most spiritual of the poets of the nineteenth
century;' that the harsh terms atheist and materialist are
no longer so unsparingly heaped upon him; that a deeper
study of the true tendency of all he wrote, and a better
understanding of the spirit of his poetry, has led us rather
to regard him as '" the eternal child," leaning with his heart
on that dove-like faith against which his erring intellect had
rebelled.'
Some days of agonizing suspense passed before the
bereaved wives knew the full bitterness of their fate. Mrs.
Shelley describes herself during that time as almost mad.
Captain Trelawny did all that lay in his power to comfort
and assist them, superintending the last sad rites that were
performed when the bodies were finally cast ashore. The
ashes of Shelley were preserved and brought to England;
his heart was buried at Eome, near the spot where his
loved child lay, in the place where he had said ' it might
make one in love with death to be buried in so sweet a
place.'
298      '       Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Mary Shelley was only four-and-twenty years of age when
the joy of her life was thus snatched away from her. It
seemed to her truly a grief too terrible to bear. Her deep
despondency, the utter abandonment of her misery, may be
guessed from passages like the following in her private
journal. The fragments of this diary read in some parts
almost like a prose version of In Memoriam :
'. . . I cannot grieve for you, beloved Shelley. I grieve for thy
friends, for the world, for thy child, most for myself, enthroned in
thy love, growing wiser and better beneath thy gentle influence,
taught by you the highest philosophy — your pupil, friend, lover,
wife, mother of your children. The glory of the dream is gone. I
am a cloud from which the light of svmset has passed. Give me
patience in the present struggle.    Meum cordiuni cor.    Good-night.
' " I would give
All that I am to be as thou now art;
But I am chained to time and cannot thence depart."'
Her boy alone was a source of interest and occupation to
her; for him she lived henceforth, and for his sake, the year
after Shelley's death, she left Italy, the land of her delights,
and the land of her deep sorrows. So much was all belong¬
ing to Italy mixed up with tender memories of the past, that
years after one word of the language was enough to bring
tears to her eyes. The gloom of her native climate struck
her on her return in painful contrast to the sunny skies she
had left; it was to her as a type of the life she had to look
forward to, compared to the sunny past that lay behind
Shelley's grave. But she fought bravely with herself, and
sought in literary pursuits an escape from her own brooding
thoughts. At first she lived in London near her father, who
was getting old, and who greatly enjoyed her society and
that of his little grandson. Shelley's father made an attempt
to obtain possession of the child; but, needless to say, his
offers of money instead of her sole remaining treasure were
indignantly refused. We must ever regret that through his
tyrannical influence the world was deprived of a work which
it still wants—a true story of Shelley's life. The one object
of his widow, after the care of her boy, was to give to the
world a life of her husband, and even before her return to
England she began to collect materials and to prepare for it.
But this cherished plan she was obliged to relinquish, on a
threat from Sir Timothy Shelley that, if she persisted in it,
all supplies would be withheld. Almost totally dependent
on him as she was, she had no choice left. What that life
would have been we shall never know. The work has been
done, and  may yet  be done  again and  again, by others
Our Female Novelists. 299
possessed of higher literary talents ; but no one can give us,
as his wife could have done, a transcript of that true high
mind, still 'longing to be right' even when most wrong,
which she of all people living knew so well, because she
loved him so truly.
Debarred from the greater work she so desired, she did all
that was possible, in editing his collected writings, with
short biographical notes appended to the poems. Some of
her remarks are touching and womanly in the extreme. For
instance, she says she reprints the notes on Queen Mat,
which she might with advantage have withheld, especially
as Shelley himself thought they should not be republished,
' not because they are models of reasoning or lessons of truth,
but hecause Shelley vjrote them.'
In a few years, when her little son was old enough to go
to school, she sent him to Harrow, and thither she removed,
that she might be near him. In her retired life there, she
devoted herself much to literature, and published several
novels. These were— Valperga, in 1823; The Last Man, 1824;
Perkin Warheek, 1830; Lodore, 1835; and Falkner, 19>Z'l.
None of these are equal in merit to Frankenstein, although
Tlie Last Man approaches it in style and in the horrible
originality of the plot. The details of the story, the onward
creeping approach of the plague that finally devastates the
whole known world, till but one human being, the last of his
race, is left to tell the tale, are worked out with a wildness
of imagination and a horror that is truly appalling. Apart
from the fact that' Mrs. Shelley wrote them,' there is nothing
in any of her novels except Frankenstein to make them live.
Her life, linked as it is with so many other great names, is much
more interesting than her writings. Nevertheless, they have
many merits. Although sentimental and melancholy, they
are never morbid, but, on the contrary, pure and elevated in
tone, and perfect in morality. She wrote besides two volumes
of RamUes in Germany and Italy, many short articles in
magazines and annuals. She contributed all the Spanish
and Italian lives to the Cabinet Cyclopaedia except Tasso and
Galileo, and much regretted that the former did not fall to
her share.
Contrary to what might have been expected from the
daughter of William Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft and
the wife of Shelley, she never came forward either in her
writings or otherwise as a holder of advanced views. Her
opinions, conveyed in such remarks as the following, are
singularly wise and calm: ' I believe we are sent here to
300 The Ladies EditiburgJi Magazine.
educate ourselves, and that self-denial and disappointment
and self-control are a part of our education, that it is not by
taking away all restraining law that our improvement is to
be achieved; and though many things need great amend¬
ment, I can by no means go so far as my friends would
have me.'
In 1844 Sir Timothy Shelley died, and her son succeeded
to the title. All restrictions as to the publishing of the
long-delayed life of her husband were now removed, and she
at once began again to think of accomplishing the object
nearest her heart. But her task was never completed ;
interruptions from failing health prevented her, her energy
gradually faded, and at last she died peacefully in London
on the 21st February 1851, in the fifty-fourth year of her
age. She lies beside her father and mother, both removed
thither from St. Pancras, in the sunny churchyard of
Bournemouth:
' Touch her not scornfully ;
Think of her mournfully,
Gently, and humanly ;
Not of the stains of her—
All that remains of her
Now is pure womanly.'
Such a life as Mary Shelley's, although not by any means
the highest attainable, and darkened as it is by the shadow
of her early sin, may yet serve as an example to many who
have a clearer faith and a brighter hope than she ever had.
' To be something great and good was,' she says, ' the precept
given me by my father; Shelley reiterated it,' and her sole
endeavour was to act upon this maxim. The ' perfectibility'
of the whole human race was the end, above all others, for
which she and Shelley longed, and of which they loved to
dream—the theme they were never weary of discussing. If
slie failed either in attaining a very high standard for her¬
self, or in materially raising those about her, it was not
because she did not strive earnestly after all that she
thought good and beautiful and true, but because all must
fail' who count themselves so needful for success.'
Her own words, almost the last in the published frag¬
ments of her diary, will serve to close this short memoir. If
there is in them something that chiUs and disappoints us,
it is because they are the words of one whose highest altar
was raised to duty alone: ' The great work of life goes
on. Death draws near. To be better after death tlian in
life is one's hope and endeavour ; to be so through self-
schooling.' F. G.
'Is Wagner's Theory of Mtisic and the Drama correct?' 301
'Is SEagner's Eljeorg of iliisic anli t!)c ©rama
correct ?'
[This paper was read at the Ladies' Literary Society. The answer
will be inserted next month.—Eds.]
' It will always be safe, except in the presence of really good
musicians,' says Dr. Haweis in his Music and Morals,^ ' to
sniff at Wagner and the music of the future.'
I hope the form of question will be borne in mind by my
hearers. I am not asked whether a much-abused man is
the best of all musicians and composers, nor whether I
personally like his compositions better than any others, nor
whether he has successfully reduced his theory to practice;
to each of these questions I should answer,' No !' But when
I am asked if his theory be correct as a theory, I will put
before you my reasons for thinking it so as clearly as I can.
In case there be any to whom he is little more than a
name, Richard Wagner, born 1813, is a composer who gives
astonishment, pleasure, disgust, rapture, to various audiences
in turn. Some fall into ecstasies, some into despair, some
fall asleep. His operas are so difiicult to put on the stage,
managers will hardly run the risk, especially as at one time
they were apt to be hissed off it again. There are numbers
who, unwilling to join tlie cry against him as a charlatan,
veiling his musical poverty under eccentricity, accord to him
the semi-comic respect an Irislmian once gave to the candi¬
date at a contested election. 'Vote for him; he's a jantleman !'
was the cry. ' He was cut out for one, but the divil ran
away with the patthern,' was the response; and in this vein
many reply to Mr. E. Dannreuther.
Now as to his theory. Are we right or wrong in linking
thus ' Music and the Drama' ? Great authorities, with
Schlegel at their head, contend that drama can only exist in
a degraded form as opera; some, on the other hand, insisting,
for the sake of music, that it should not be fettered by
dramatic laws.
Wagner says (and here I am wholly with him),' Art is one.'
For convenience' sake I use common forms, and speak of
' the arts' when I mean the different ways in which ideal
beauty reaches us through the channels of sense. In each
department of Art there must be certain fixed laws, only
applicable there ; but not the less one Ideal lies behind them
all (as in the beautiful Greek myth, they were all Daughters
1 P. 626.
302 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of the Day). Our mortal part acts as the prism, decomposing
and individualizing for us the separate hues; and as in the
rainbow we discern between every pure primary colour a
delicious overlapping belt where they intermingle, each
giving and gaining somewhat, and, while forming an
exquisite compound hue, conducting the eye onward, through
enharmonic intervals of light, to the next colour; so in the
arts are debateable grounds, where they mutually exchange
and borrow, and this explains the fact that a great artist
in one branch has generally (invariably) natural affinities
and predilections for a second.^ Michael Angelo scribbled
his rhymes on the edge of his cartoons, and many besides
Wagner have combined the musician and the poet.
Music, the heavenliest, is the youngest of all the Arts.
My belief is she had to wait for Christianity, not able to
unveil her secrets to man till the full revelation of the
Trinity. Having had a shorter career hitherto, she may
have more of ' a future ' than her sisters. We scarce look
forward with any interest to an ' Architecture,' a ' Painting,'
a ' Sculpture,' of the future ; to a ' Music,' I think we may,
and that in the very direction indicated by Wagner. He is
called a ' reformer of music;' this he denies. I like his
hearty way of owning goodness which he sees. We have
Beethoven, he says, and Mozart, and many more; and he
thinks you may go farther and fare worse if you try to
improve upon Beethoven. What, then, does he want to do ?
Simply to bring the whole emotional power of music to bear
upon the drama, and in so doing to give dramatic form to
the music, that the full strength of both may meet upon one
stage; this he says has never yet been done. To quote Dr.
Haweis, ' he wants to turn the whole stream of Beethoven's
music into the operatic channel.' ^
With this possibility in view, what is ' the Drama' ?
Derivation, of course, is the great aid to definition; the
defective old Greek verb hfaiLiiv, to move along. A story,
then, brought into movement before our eyes—tragic, comic,
mythic, historic, what you please—that is a drama. Tragedy
is its highest form, the rpdyog whla, goat-song, of the ancient
Greeks, the sacrificial being probably the best explanation.
Schlegel and other critics think we cannot surpass those
grand old Greek plays. Wagner agrees, and points out that
they, having   no musie, worked wonders  by attention  to
1 It may not be so with the mere artist, but with the TotmTi]; I think
it will.
^ Contemporary Review, May 1877.
'Is Wagner's Theory of Music and the Drama correct^ 303
rhythm, especially in their beautiful choruses. We have
music with all its emotional force, but need not therefore
discard rhythm.
' No music !' you will say. ' Why, the whh was a song.'
Of a sort, yes ; but what sort ? We may wish we could
have talked to men of old, listened to their poetry and
rhetoric; but I, at least, never wished to hear their music,
not even of the Chosen People—no, not the sweet singer of.
Israel, nor the song that was not sung by Babel's stream.
AVe probably chant the Psalms better ourselves; I hope so !
The drama is important in national life. Often a religious
solemnity, it has always been a powerful element in litera¬
ture. It perpetuates for a nation its own history, its own
legends, and many phases of its social life. It may exalt, or
fatally debase, morals and manners. If the stage is to be
constantly taken up with a trifling, low, debased style of art,
a depraving of public taste must be the unhappy result.
The materials of drama must then be good and well selected.
A poet must give or adapt a good story, a painter preside
over scenery (formerly left to the imagination, a board with
written description of what the spectators were to suppose
they saw being the device in Shakspere's days); we need
what is called ' dramatic situation.' A drama must not
be all action, nor all words; we combine both. Now comes
the casus helli. Are we to superadd music ? If we do, the
result is melodrama—an opera.
Hear Schlegel on the subject of opera: ' In the opera the
poetry is merely an accessory, the means of connecting the
different parts together, and it is almost buried under its
associates. The best prescription for the composition of an
opera is to give a poetical sketch, which may be afterwards
filled up and coloured by the other arts. This anarchy of
the arts' (mark the expression, I beg),' where music, dancing,
and decoration endeavour to surpass each other by the most
profuse display of dazzling charms, constitutes the very
essence of the opera. . . . The costume of the opera ought
to be dazzling and overladen with ornaments; and hence
many things which have been censured as unnatural, such
as heroes warbling and thrilling in the excess of despondency,
are perfectly justifiable. This fairy world is not peopled by
real men, but by a singular kind of singing creatures.
Neither is it any disadvantage to us that the opera is con¬
veyed in a language which is not generally understood; the
text is altogether lost in the nmsic, and the language the
most harmonious and musical which contains the  greatest
304 " The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
number of open vowels, and distinct accents for recitative, is
therefore the best.' 1
Schlegel thinks, then, opera is an anarchy of the Arts,
Sound versus Sense.    Listen now to Dr. Haweis:
' We have often expressed an opinion that opera is a defec¬
tive form of art. That music can only represent the emotions
of a drama, and not its incidents, is a truth enunciated alike
by Gliick, the first, and Eichard Wagner, the latest, of the
German opera writers. . . . Wagner, in extolling legendary
subjects as best fitted for the opera, observes that "music
does not stop at the exterior incidents, but expresses the
underlying emotion." . . . His admission is fatal to the very
existence of the opera. . . . We may say to Wagner, " The
music at the opera, in so far as it is acted, loses its power
of expressing the emotion of the action by becoming itself
the action, or, as he says, stopping at the exterior incident."
. . . The sphere of musical emotion is . . . distinct from
that of dramatic action.' ^
It is ingenious of Dr. Haweis to turn Wagner's arguments
against himself; but, though ingenious, it seems to me
unsound. He goes on: 'A situation can be 'expressed by
action and language; the emotion of the situation can he
expressed hy micsic? But music cannot express a situation;
we must not try to make it do so by making the actor sing.
People do not go about the world singing incidents; people
do not wail out melodious strains in the midst of consumptive
agonies.'
I take these two as fair types of objectors. Wagner says,
' music has opened to us a world of emotional expression
unknown to the ancients.' Use it dramatically. Let the poem
express the ' action,' the music the ' emotion ' it calls forth.
Otherwise, as we see, opera is a fascinating amusement,
utterly beneath drama, and not amenable, therefore, to
dramatic rule. And now of Opera, child of the sunny South
in name and origin, what shall we say ? Italian born, it
seems to need the depth and pathos of the sterner Teutonic
nature to bring it to full perfection. It is hard to say severe
things of an amusement which has given us such delight (to
myself as mucli as to any human being), but does it fulfil
any one condition of a good drama ? Why not ? (taking
Eossini as a kind of central type of Italian opera). Every¬
thing is sacrificed not to music, but to one part of it, melody.
1 Lectures on Dramatic Literature, vol. i. p. 69.    Schlegel's date,
1815.
'■^ Music and Morals, p. 234. ' This is all Wagner asks.
'Is Wagner s Theory of Music and the Drama correct?' 305
True, the loveliness of the melodies never will be surpassed,
human throats cannot warble us sweeter songs, but no suc¬
cession, of songs will make a drama. What of the frame¬
work ? Can you name a libretto you would read for pleasure ?
Semiramide? Lucia? Cosl Fan Tutte ? When a really fine story
got tortured into an opera, like ' Tilly Slowboy's' conversation
to the Baby, ' all the sense was struck out of it.' Where
strong emotion was called out at any point, there might be
a detached song of matchless beauty. I instance one in
Vaccaj's i2o??Mo e Giulietta,not a well-known opera, on a theme
used by many composers, ' Ah! se tu dormi svegliati,' words
and rhythm in perfect accord with the musical phrases; and
accompaniment rippling and flowing like a brook in Italian
moonlight, as the air rises in passionate emphasis, express¬
ing the whole character of the scene. Songs like these
Wagner likens to pearls of an unstrung necklace, and though
it may be true people do not' sing incidents,' yet, pace Dr.
Haweis, deep emotion can hardly find better expression than
when sung. We can say of many who sing under the influence
of strong or sublime feeling:
' Why, he hath told his story in his song.' ^
Fitting words to music brings out the true force of both.    I
must give an instance once more ; a dear old song of Winter's
in a forgotten opera, II Ratto di Proserpina :
' Paga fui, fu lieta un di
Ogni ben fu solo in me
Piu non posso dir cosi
Con me Cerere non e !'
Simple words, and the tune as simple, not half a dozen notes
in it; beginning in F minor, and half way through passing
on to the tonic major and closing there. I am not ashamed
of having cried over Madame Sontag's singing of that song !
I recollect but few examples of this expression of grief by
a very simple air in the major key ; perhaps its rarity helps
to make it pathetic. ' Che far6 senza Euridice' is an example,
and the Dead March in Saul, with the mighty sob of a nation
in its undertone.
Seventy years ago, a few years before Schlegel, it was
felt that Italian opera was destroying the dramatic taste of
the age. There is an amusing passage * in Corinne, where an
English, French, and Italian nobleman criticise drama. After
a few solemn words on Shakspere, Milord shuts his mouth.
The Prince Castel-Forte can hardly get in a word, overborne
' A. Smith's poems.
^ Corinne, Livre vii. chap. ii.    Date, 1807.
No. 43.—JCLY1878. U
306 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
by the Comte d' Erfeuil's witticisms on the opera.   Too long
to read in extenso, a few sentences will be most apposite :—
' La musique est tout chez eux, et la piece n'est rien. Si le second
acte a une meilleure musique que le premier, ils commencent par le
second acte ; si ce sont les deux premiers actes de deux pieces differ-
entes, ils jouent cea deux actes le meme jour . . . vos musiciens
fameux disposent en entier de vos poetes ; I'un lui declare qu'il ne
peut pas chanter s'il n'a dans son ariette le mot felicita; le tenor
demande la tomha ; et le troisieme chanteur ne peut faire des roulades
que sur le mot catene. II faut que le pauvre poete arrange ces gouts
divers comme il le peut avec la situation dramatique. Ce n'est pas
tout encore, il y a des virtuosos que ne veulent pas arriver de plain-
pied sur le theatre; il faut qu'ils se montrent d'abord dans un nuage,
(lu qu'ils descendent du haut de I'escalier d'un palais, pour produire
plus d'effet a leur entree. Quand I'ariette est cliantee, dans quelque
situation touchante ou violente que ce soit, I'acteur doit saluer pour
remercier des applaudissements qu'il obtient. L'autre jour, a Semir-
amis apres que le spectre de Ninus eut chante son ariette, I'acteur
qui le representait fit, en son costume d'ombre, une grande reverence
au parterre, ce qui diminua beaucoup I'effroi de I'apparition.'
Of course we have heard of a barn theatre, where Hamlet's
Ghost persisted in destroying the illusion by snuffing the
candles ; and at a spiritualist seance in London, the entreaty,
' Spirits is requested to speak up cos o' tlie Busses !' was in
the same M^ay a sedative to spectral alarms.
But in this manner, and for years after, were the unhappy
opera writers at the mercy of a set of egotistical performers,
each bent on showing off his or her peculiar vocalization;
and as managers knew that people flocked to the theatre to
hear one singer sing one song, they did what would best fill
the house. Madame Grisi's C in alt. would draw thousands,
and Mdlle. Jenny Lind could bring the ' house' down like
Samson with her magic ' shake,' so no matter about the
' dramatic situation.' One opera queen must ' shriek ' the
passion to shreds, and the other ' shake' it to tatters, or what
would the public do ?
So says Wagner:' ' A touchingly beautiful phrase suddenly
ends with the stereotyped cadenza, with the usual runs and
the inevitable forced note just before the close, with which
the singer all of a sudden leaves the person whom he or she
was addressing, and steps to the footlights, thus giving the
signal for applause to the claque!
There came a period of dramatizing all the novels of the
day; sorely did Sir W. Scott suffer in this process! Few,
comparatively, of these became popular in England; but
Italians, in their mania for Highland costume, hail the least
fragment of a Scotch background (Highland or Lowland) as
^ Music of the Future, p. 51.
'Is Wagners Theory of Music and the Drama correct?' 307
an excuse for turning out the whole corps dramatique in
kilts. Za Donna del Lago was a legitimate field, also La
Bella Fanciulla di Perth (which it diverted one to see
placarded up in Eavenna and Venice) ; but in Lucia di
Lammermoor the chorus are set down as ' Gli abitanti di
Lammermoor,' and these ' aborigines' appear in kilts which
would look as odd on the Lammermoors as on the Lagoons !
I am not sure that the Eev. Mr. Bide-the-Bent wholly escapes
the tartan. In LI Prigione d'Ediviborgo we have an operatic
LLeart of Mid-Lothian, the smugglers in kilts, their captain
singing' Sulla poppa del mio brig;' we recall Geordie Eobert-
son and Daddie Eatcliffe, and laugh ! Let devotees of' tunes'
say what they will, is this drama ? Like Mr. Swiveller's poor
little Marchioness, we have 'to make-believe very much'
before the orange peel and water gives the taste of wine !
After every sacrifice of truth and nature for the sake of
melody, will melody bear the strain ? The finest songs
palled, written as they so often were for some particular
star, witness our old music-books, ' as sung by ... at His
Majesty's Theatre . . .' When the singer died or left the
stage, the songs got down to quadrille bands, to hurdygurdies,
and the opera went to the rats and mice.
But, you say, ' have we no better operas ?' Yes ; but in
Germany. There we have Mozart, his Ldomeneo and Seraglio,
Nozze di Figaro and Zauherflote, and, best of all, Don Giovanni.
Porgi Amor, Dove sono, II mio tesoro, with their beautiful
orchestration, what simpler, sweeter melody can you wish ?
Weber, too, his delicious Oheron and Freyschiitz, like the
Tempest, transporting us to the world of faerie without ceas¬
ing tlie human interest; but greatest and best, Fidelio. Yet
it is Beethoven in chains; he throws himself into the mighty
Overture; but through the rest it is like watching a beautiful
yacht in a breeze without sea-room, a sense of always stopping
when you want to go on. Then, again, this and other fine
operas are spoilt ruthlessly by Italian singers who will not
sing the German words. In Leonora's delirium of hysteric
joy, ' 0 namenlose Freude ! Mein Mann auf meiner Brust!'
we have to listen to ' Destin destin, ormai felice'—you can
get the words in certainly, with accent going against the
music instead of with it, and lips closed where the words
should open them. Even Wagner is so treated, as one feels
in Lohengrin's song, ' Mein lieber Schwan ! ach ! diese letzte,
traur'ge Fahrt, wie gem hatt' ich sie dir gespart!' noble,
terse words done into,' Cigno gentil! questo cammin fatale a
me lo risparmiar voleva a te,' and so on.    If Wagner be
3o8   ' TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
right, and melody should grow out of verse, such transposition
of sound and sense should be impossible. He wishes it
should be ' nothing but an intensified version of the actual
sounds of rhythmical speech.' ^ He wishes words and melody
to belong to each other, and be supported by the orchestra in
such a way that the three cannot be fully understood without
this interdependence, the singer being like a man in a skiff,
the melody the boat which carries him, the orchestra the
waters which bear them both.
I have scarcely left time to glance at his works, and,
looking on him as a theorist on his trial, it by no means
follows that he has yet made good his own words. Like a
cragsman half way up a cliff, he may have found the
accessible track, but it remains to be seen whether he will
surmount the obstacles ahead of him. Of Bienzi I do not
know a word or a note, so will say nothing of it. One of his
idees fixes is, that myths and legends make better opera
subjects than history ; and why ? Because history is plain
chronicling of fact, while a nation's myths lie deep in its
past, expressing therefore what Italians would call the
ingcgno of a great people. Born of mystic yearning for the
unseen—that greatest instinct of our nature—and nurtured
by fancy and emotion, they gave scope for introducing the
marvellous, and unclose the doors of the spirit-world. There¬
fore they afford facilities for the writing of both poetry and
music too valuable to be passed by in melodrama.
The Flying Bidcliman was written about 1842-43, after a
tempestuous voyage, in which he found himself on the coast
of Norway. The wild legend of the man accursed and
redeemed by love stronger than death, is one after Wagner's
own heart, and the opera is beautiful, though not coming up
to his own ideal. Tannhduser (1843) is a well-known
legend of Thuringia, and I like his improvement upon the
medineval story by re-admitting the lost minstrel knight to
repentance and hope. I only know the libretto, and the
music in fragments; the part-singing is quite wonderful,
e.Kactly recalling his idea of the boat upborne on a stream.
Die Meistersinger (1868) I can quite believe to be" a kind of
humorous 'pendant to Tannliduser; it introduces us to a very
curious and interesting phase of musical history, the Choral
Unions of Germany in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
He is said to have paid a grateful tribute to Spohr, who was
his early benefactor, in the character of 'Veit Pogner.'
Perhaps my intense love of legends of the Holy Grail lends
^ Miisic of the Future, p. CG. '^ Dr. Haweia.
'Is Wagners Theory of Music and the Drama correct?' 309
force to my admiration of Lohengrin. The poem is exquisite,
with that appeal to the depths of our nature which the music
satisfies. We seem to see Earth's great drama played before
us : Elsa in her brief paradise, Eve-like, must know the
' whence' of her joy. ' If I tell you, it will kill you,' is the
spirit of Lohengrin's warning; ' If you do not, I die,' of her
response. Urged by the hand-like Ortrud, she grasps at the
knowledge that brings sorrow, and in an instant her cry of
' Der Schwan, der Schwan !' rings through us. Yet is there
an outlook through anguish. ' Mein Gatte,' sobs she; her
fairy Knight is her own still: in Love there is no death!
Of all these operas, Dr. Haweis says :^ ' Snatches there are
here and there of exquisite melody, broken up by part-
singing, with a wild burst of chorus when needful to fulfil
the dramatic occasion.' If people still think, after hearing
Senta's Song, the Sailors' Chorus, Elsa's Prayer, Elsa's
Brautgang, Lohengrin's Warning, and address to his Swan,
that Wagner cannot write melody or music, I am sorry for
them, but scarcely think the fault is chargeable on him.
His great work, the Tetralogie, or Nibdungen-Bing, is an
attempt to condense into four operas the great foundation
myths of German song. I beg here to express my utter
condemnation of the way in which he has departed from the
older legend, marring its purity and dishguring his own
work. I will go further, and confess that I think even in my
limited experience I perceive here and there, in Wagner's
treatment of subjects, too much of direct appeal to human
passion, and that he sins now and then against the perfect
taste which is certainly one of the outworks of perfect
purity. I do not attempt to palliate this fault, which mars
to so great an extent the poetry and literature of our age,
even when I recollect that PMdre keeps possession of the
stage, and that Grillparzer's terrible tragedy Die Ahnfrau
is, like the Walkiire, based upon a theme inadmissible to
my mind upon the public stage. As music is our noblest
earthly pleasure, and one which is closely allied to the higher
forms of religious worship, so it seems to me that to link
its mysterious emotional forces to words and scenes which
appeal to the baser parts of our nature—to write, in short,
a bad opera, is a worse blasphemy than to write a bad play.
In the Bheingold we are shown the green shimmering
depths, where the treasure lies hid from mortal eyes, and
where the Undines move and  sing.     Through  the weird
music, is the rush of that river whose very wavelets echo to
^ Contemporary Review, May 1877.
3IO The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
this prosaic age, the minstrel song of other times. In the
WaUdb'e, Briinnhild, daughter of Wotan, is represented as
forfeiting her immortality by her love for the hero Siegmund,
or, as she names him, Siegfried. The nobleness which pro¬
tects and shelters the unhappy Sieglind, her innocent rival,
cannot make us pardon the objectionable form of the story.
The scene between her and Wotan in conclusion is very
grand, when he concedes her prayer that only the bravest
of mankind shall win her. He concludes by kissing the
immortality from her eyelids, and laying her in the magic
sleep, guarded by fire, till Siegfried with the sword which
was Wotan's own gift to him, shall win his way through all
terrors of the fire-god.
Siegfried is Part iii., and of this both scenery and wild
music are magical, say those who have seen and heard them.
One song into which Wagner has put his whole power, is
that of Siegfried in the forest among the wild birds. He
conquers, but at the cost of life; and so we come to Part iv.,
the Gotterdammerung, or 'Twilight of the Gods.' It ends
with the destruction of their power and the overthrow of the
Walhalla. The elements of fire and water do their destroying
work, and the mysterious powers of the spirit-world retire
into the dusk of the past—their day is at an end.
For these splendid subjects, Wagner has written his own
poetry, reverting to old forms, and largely employing allitera¬
tion, as capable of being expressed in musical phrase;
whereas rhyme, as we have it, is wholly lost in music.
Is there, then, this crying need of change in our style of
melodramatic performance ? Are we content to think, like
Sclilegel, that opera being a low style of art, we had better
not waste our dramatic energies in improving it ? Or shall
we agree with Dr. Haweis, that, in spite of tlie grandeur of
Wagner's conceptions, he is trying to force music to do more
than it can do, and thereby cutting the ground from under
his own feet ?
At the risk of trespassing on your patience, I quote Edw.
Dannreuther once more :^
' The more we consider the matter, the more one's convic¬
tion grows, that if nobler and higher artistic tastes are to he
effectively engrafted upon a nation, there is but one way: raise
the quality and the character of theatrical performaiices.'
Beside this set the critique from the Saturday Review a few
years back, that if a manager happened to be at a loss for
the public entertainment, he had nothing to do but to dress
1 P. 78.
Is Wagners Theory of Music and the Drama correct?' 311
in striped calico, and dance up and down, singing a perfectly
meaningless song; he was certain to fiU his benches.
We do not wonder at the French dislike to Wagner.
Solomon wisely likened to' vinegar upon nitre' the man who
sang songs to a heavy heart. He might have added a
corollary on the man who gives his audience, no matter who
they may be, good music when they want bad. The
laughter-loving Frenchman wiU go to the theatre to see even
a tragedy, if it be based on the novel of the day—La Dame
aux Ga7ndlias, for instance. He likes to see people stab and
pistol and poison each other to such tunes as ' Parigi 6 cara,'
or ' Di Provenza il mar;' but he cannot follow into the depths
of the Ehine ; he hates the Walhalla and the Walkyria, and
all the rest of it. So with ourselves to some extent; if
people want ' Cherry Kipe,' they will not listen to the man
who sings Cherubini's Requiem to them. You can only try
to educate them up to the mark, with a judicious admixture
of ' Cherry Eipe' now and then.
Reform certainly seems to be needed somewhere. If
many great composers, like Beethoven and Mendelssohn,
were utterly to forswear opera writing because they would
not lower their powers to the exigencies of a libretto that
would satisfy the public, where would our musical stage be ?
It seems well worth while to try if a better cultivated taste
cannot be formed, before we abandon opera to the mercies of
the upper gallery.
It may be that Wagner and his admirers would seek to
lay upon the emotional power of music more than it can be
made rightly to perform; yet if I may be permitted to
recur to my former simile of prismatic hues of light, it seems
to me that he wishes in Melodrama to constitute the focus,
by which the divided hues of Art may be blended into one
enchanting whole.
And some of us, I trust, may live to see that Wagner was
on the right road to this discovery, and that his theory of
Music and the Drama is correct. L. D.
[Since writing the above, my attention has been kindly directed to
a notice (v. Musical Times, June 1878) of the increasing taste for
Wagner in Germany, and the recent approval of his operas at the
Stadt Theater at Leipzig. His scanty success in Germany is unfairly,
I think, urged against him. His operas are expensive to put on the
stage, and require first-rate performers ; but this is no argument
against his merits. My own experience is small, but I am assured by
a friend and able critic, that the tide of feeling in Germany is fairly
in his favour, even though pressure may be brought to bear, from the
opposite side, too strong for managers to ignore or resist.]
312 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
net ^fjem ^lone:
A TALE TOLD IN LETTERS.
LETTER XX.
From the Eev. E. J. Reynolds to his Sister.
August 25.
Dearest Nell,—I have another act of tragi-comedy going
on here to tell you, and I am sure you are longing to know
it. Truly the complication is strange. Yesterday I hired a
horse and rode out to Burnham, for I thought I could do no
less for old acquaintance' sake than call on Mary Aylmer. I
asked for Mrs. Wimpole and was told she was in the garden ;
so, giving my horse to the man, I set off to find her. Turning
into a shrubbery walk which is the way to her favourite
little flower garden, I saw two figures before me with their
backs to me; they were no other than Mary Aylmer and
Walter Benson, he talking earnestly with her hand in his,
she looking up at him with a proud admiring glance. ' So
this,' I said to myself, 'is poor Slade's rival! This is the hus¬
band " with a little more of the devil in him" whom she
has chosen for herself! Pray Heaven there may not be a
little too much of that ingredient!' I turned hastily away
into another path, and seeing Mrs. Wimpole in the distance,
made up to her. I could see by her walk and the cock of
her bonnet that she was out of humour, and she gave me
her left hand, as she always does in her grim moods. I
ventured to allude to what I had seen. ' Yes,' she grunted,
' I suppose it's about all settled. A great fool she is, I think,
not to take Slade. ... He kneAV her when she was with me
two years ago, and has been devoted to her ever since; and
for about as long, I believe, she has had a fancy for this
scapegrace. He's seen a great deal of her lately in London,
so that it has become serious. To tell the truth, when I
asked her here, I thought Master Walter was not coming for
several weeks, as I heard something about his going abroad,
and I wanted to see if I could not give poor Slade one more
chance. However, in the first five minutes' talk I had with
her, I saw there was no hope of that, and then three days
after this fellow turns up. Well, girls will settle their own
affairs I I trust he will be steady and prove worthy of her; it
is all his father can wish for him,—a sweet girl, money and
Let Them Alone. 313
prospects, for Mr. Aylmer will be ready to help him in his
profession. Here they come. Walter's a fascinating fellow,
I must own. Listen to his merry laugh. Perhaps, if I was
young again, I might do like Mary! Now, young people,
let us go in to luncheon.' Up they came, looking very happy
and confused, and we went in, Mrs. Wimpole and I keeping
up a hot fire of talk and disputation to cover their blushes.
When I came away, Walter followed me to the door, wrung
my hand very hard, and said, ' Wish me joy, old fellow.
I'm coming to see you very soon, and shall tell you all about
it.'
To-day I have been over to Sydwood to make my con¬
gratulations. The squire was running over with glee,
charmed with his future daughter-in-law, and naturally
much pleased with the other items, the ' money and prospects.'
I hope these have not counted for too much with Walter
himself, but one must not scan motives too narrowly. At
all events, all the effect upon him has been good so far.
Anrj. 28.—Walter came to see me to-day, and was in wild
spirits. He was quite affectionate to me, and declared I
should tie the knot. ' For you're the best fellow I know in
the shape of a parson. I believe your religion's no humbug,
and I used to think it was nothing but that in any of you.
I shall have to be serious now, for Mary's very much that
way inclined; but, hang it, it's very hard for a fellow like me
to get into harness of that sort, after being in such a precious
lot of scrapes as I've been in all my life, and not quite out
of some of them yet perhaps.' He added the last words half
to himself. I asked him what he meant, but he laughed it
off, saying, ' Why, wouldn't many people say I've j ust run
my head into the worst scrape of all ?' Finding him in
excellent disposition for the purpose, I took the opportunity
of giving him a good bit of my mind, both as to the past and
future. I laid it on strongly and did not spare, and he took
it all in very good part. He certainly is good-hearted and
lovable, but I do not feel confidence in him. A little
incident that occurred during this very visit rather troubles
me. After he had sat about an hour and a half, I got up
and said,' Now, Walter, if you won't go, I must leave you
here, for I have got some parishioners to go and see.' ' Oh,
hang it, let the parishioners take care of themselves for one
day! It isn't often that you get a fellow like me to listen to
your lecturing; I declare you're doing me good, and I shall
be a much greater trii;mph to your skill than a dozen
old women in   the rheumatics.'    ' Well,  come   again to-
314 l^fi^ Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
morrow, if you like; but I must at all events go and see one
person, Margaret Scott, a poor sick girl.' Walter started.
' Margaret Scott ?' he said hurriedly. ' Who is she ? How
came she here ?' 'Do you know anything of her ?' ' No, no;
I knew a person once of that name—that's all; it's a common
name, but who is she V So I told him her story, and when
I came to the tragic part of it, I saw he looked extremely
shocked and distressed. ' And is this the person you knew ?'
I asked him at the end, looking hard at him. ' No, no,' he
said, colouring; ' not at all, another person altogether,' and
then he took his leave. When I went to Margaret, I intended
to have casually mentioned his name, and perhaps his
engagement, as it appears to be no secret, but I found the
poor girl too ill for much conversation, or for anything of a
trifling kind.
Now good-night, dearest. I was greatly hoping to be able
to tix a time for you to come and see me, now that mother
is so much better and has Clara to go in and out; but with
this panic of cholera about, I cannot think of it. There are
one or two very bad cases at Morwick, as I hear from Mr.
Notts, a curate from thence who came over on Sunday to
take Slade's duty. F. J. K.
LETTER XXI.
The Eev. N. Slade to his Father.
Aberystwith, Aug. 29.
My dear Father,—I left Illingham a week ago, for I
found change absolutely necessary after the continual
strain of the last weeks. My duty was provided for three
Sundays, and I can get further help if I want it. I did not
leave any address with the servants, for I had not made
up my mind where to go, but desired that any letters for
me should be sent to you. You can forward to me here
those that look important. Mrs. Miller left the day after the
funeral. When she has fixed upon a house, I am to see
after packing and sending her things. Happily she is well
off. I think I must have told you, in my former hurried
note, of the dear old man's kind legacy to me. The time
may come when I shall be thankful for it; at present I care
for nothing. A secret was made plain to me the day before
I left, which makes the old wound a hundred times more
painful, though I hardly know why it should. I had long
suspected that the love I failed to gain had been given to
Let Them Alone. 315
another; I trusted I might never know to whom. If it had
been some one far away, whose face I might never see, and
whose name I might never know, I think I could have borne
it; but it is one at my own door—Eeynolds.
I told you she was coming to the neighbourhood. Two
days after I was in the village, I overheard a woman say to
her neighbour,' Ah, they'll make a fine couple,' and a moment
after, turning a corner, came full upon the two. They seemed
quite at their ease, and he was just asking her if she remem¬
bered something or other. It must be an old thing, settled
before he came here; while I, poor fool, have been deluding
myself and dreaming my best years away. I am afraid I
hardly feel yet as a Christian should towards Eeynolds, for I
have been told over and over again that he has given out
that he did not intend to marry; he thought a clergyman
should have as few worldly ties as possible, etc. Hypocrite!
Mary has lately come of age, and into possession of her own
fortune, which has probably altered his view! I cannot be
mistaken, for under what other possible circumstances would
she have been seen walking alone with him in the village ?
Mrs. Wimpole, I think, might have given me some hint, and
saved me from at least tliis, trial. But I am ashamed of my
complainings. All is over, and I pray that I may be able
to forgive all.
There is no one here whom I know. I spend my days on
the beach, at a good distance from the general haunt. Some¬
times I take a boat. Direct to the P. 0. I will write again
in a few days. N. S.
LETTER XXII.
The Eev. N. Slade to his Father.
Aberystwith, Seipt. 2.
Deae Father, — The letter you enclosed, and which I
received this morning, was from the bishop, offering me
Illingham! It was most kindly couched. How little I
could once have thought that I should have hesitated on
such a point; but now I do hesitate. After what I have
told you, you can easily guess how painful the thought of
living on there must be to me. Most sincerely also do I
feel my unworthiness to succeed my valued and saint-like
friend. I have asked for a fortnight to deliberate. Give
me your advice and your prayers.—Your affectionate son,
N. S.
3i6 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
LETTER  XXIII.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to his Sister.
Sept. 2.
Dearest Helen,—I am greatly distressed at news I have
heard to-day. Things are not going well at the Bensons'.
Mrs. Elvers and Jack came to me this morning in great
trouble, to tell me it has transpired that Walter is still
heavily in debt, and that he must have concealed much
when a few months ago his father believed he had cleared
him. It seems that a packet containing various letters,
addressed to him at his chambers in London, was forwarded
thence to Sydwood, and being unfortunately ill-directed, the
squire opened it. Still fancying, in a fit of absence, that the
letters were his own, he broke one of the seals, and the
letter proved to be from a money-lender, referring to trans¬
actions on a lar2:e scale. The old man in a ra<;e went on to
open the other letters, which also chiefly related to money
matters, and proved that Walter had been trading not only
on the chances of his father's death, but lately also on the
prospect of his own marriage. Eeckless fellow ! I believe
that through all he is attached to his father, and sincerely
loves Mary ; but one false step has led him to another, till he
has fairly gone down hill. He does not seem to have been
so successful as he expected in silencing his creditors, for
there were duns for a large amount among the letters, and
the pressure put upon him with regard to the largest seemed
to speak of some personal grudge. The old squire was still
at his work when Walter came unsuspectingly into the
library. I fancy the scene that followed was fearful, the
old man's rage at having been deceived, being only paralleled
by Walter's at having his letters broken into. I cannot guess
what will happen next. I begged Mrs. Elvers to send for
me on the instant if she thought I could be of the slightest
use.    Mary knew nothing about it when they came here.
Sept. 4.—I had scarcely written so far on Saturday afternoon
when Mrs. Elvers came back in the carriage and begged me to
go with her to Burnham to help to break the news to Mary and
her father, who came the night before. I went off with her
at once, but suggested that Mrs. Wimpole would be the right
person to tell Mary, who is like her own child. 'Well, we'll
see,' said Mrs. Elvers; ' but she is so violent when she is
roused, I hardly dare tell her! I offered to do that, and did
it; and then we three held a consultation, the end of which
was that I was told off for the yet harder service of telling
Let Than Alone. 317
Mary and her father.    It was a terrible  task.    I  would
gladly never have such another.    Poor Mr. Aylraer met me
heartily when I went in, and looked delighted to see me, but
lie must soon have read in my face that something was
wrong.    I hardly know how I managed to get out the story.
He looked very angry, and sat with  his lips  compressed,
white and stony.    Poor Mary was sent for, and between us
we made her aware of the truth.    She was fearfully cut up,
but I think her pride came to her help, and would not let
her betray  all  she  felt.    I  think  she would  have borne
anything for Walter, or any amount of poverty with him;
but to feel that he has deceived her, and that perhaps after
all his love has been mercenary—that must indeed  have
been bitter.     There were none of the Bensons at church,
yesterday.    I went over again to-day to Burnham to see if I
could be of any use.    I had much talk with Mr. Aylmer,
and even poor Mary seemed glad to speak to me.     How
fortunate it was that Mrs. Wimpole brought us together that
day at Maldon Hill, so that she is able to look upon me as a
friend, not merely as an acquaintance of long ago.    I then
went to Sydwood, and found all things in a terrible state of
discomfort—the old squire angry and  unreasonable, never
leaving his own room but at meals, and  then  alternately
storming  and   sulking;  Walter  bitter and  defiant,  never
joining  the  family, and  only just withheld, so far, by his •
mother and sister, from rushing off to London, or Heaven
knows where ; in which case it is but too probable he would
never have been heard of again.    As to poor Jack, he was
moping about the house, anxious to help everybody, but not
in the least knowing how to set about it.    I was shown in to
the ladies, and they exclaimed in one breath, ' Oh, thank
Heaven, you are come ! You are the only person who will be
able to do anything with Walter.    He is packing up his
things (went on Mrs. Benson), and says he will be off' this
evening, he will not tell us where.    What can he do ?    He
can't possibly go back to London and face his creditors.    He
won't ask his father for a penny in their present moods.
Mr. Aylmer won't help him ; we cannot expect it.    All that
will be at an end ; and my poor boy will go  on the world
penniless and despairing, and will do something that will
ruin him in body and soul.    Go to him, dear Mr. Eeynolds ;
implore him to remain, comfort him, show him he has a
friend left.    I have been down on my knees to him, but he
only says he will not stay to be a disgrace and a source of
contention to us all, and that it matters not what becomes of
3i8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
him now.' I went at once to his room, where I found him
half dressed, wild and haggard, storming about and pulling
everything out of the drawers, tearing up letters and mutter¬
ing to himself. I had knocked, but he was making too much
noise to hear me. He looked very angry when he saw me,
and with a fierce oath ordered me out. By dint of being
quiet and not caring for his violence, I came round him at
last, and went down and told his mother to order his horse,
for I was going to carry him off with me to Illingham.
' God reward you!' she exclaimed, and could say no more, and
I came off with my captive. He is now installed in my
spare room overhead, where he has been walking up and
down, in creaking boots, for two hours, and has helped to
give me a most desperate headache. I have been in to him
once or twice, but he won't talk to me, and refused to come
down to dinner. He has got papers and pens and ink lying
about, and I think is trying to write to Mary. Good-night,
Helen. "Would I had your cool hand upon my head, which
is burning, and I can hardly see out of my eyes. Don't tell
mother. F. J. E.
P.>S'.—Se'pt. 5.—I open my letter to tell you not to expect
to hear at any great length for some time to come. I shall
be very busy. There are some sick in Slade's parish whom
I must go and see, as there is no one else. No one knows
Slade's direction, but I have written to him at his father's.
It seems strange and unlike him to have gone off and left no
trace, as he has done. Walter seems contented to be here, or
rather does not talk of going, but he is in a miserable state
of mind. His suspense until he knows his fate from Mary
is terrible. I fear there is not a chance, but that she will
give him up; and then — he is capable of anything!
Good-bye.    I must write a line to Beilby.
[A letter from the Rev. F. J. Reynolds to the Rev. E. Beilby of
Sept. 5 is omitted, as containing only a short account of the
occurrences related in the last letter.—Ed.]
LETTER XXIV.
The Rev. F. J. Eeynolds to the Rev. E. Beilby.
Sept, 6.
Dear Beilby,—As I wrote yesterday, you will be surprised
to see my handwriting again so soon ; but I need help and
counsel. I am in a heap of troubles, and unwilling to write
home in detail about them for fear of alarming unnecessarily.
I must ask you to go over as often as you can and give them
Let Them Alone. 319
my news in such shape as you think best.    If it is bad, your
cheery voice and face will do something to take off the edge
of it.    I am knocked up with a headache of two days, which
makes my anxieties harder to bear.    I had a note from Mrs.
Elvers this morning, telling me that her father has heard
from Mr. Aylmer, and (as was inevitable) that all connection
between the two families must be at an end, and begging me
to make this known to Walter.    I went to his room and
found him in one of his violent moods.   A letter that he had
sent to Mary yesterday had been returned to him unopened,
in a cover directed by Mrs. Wimpole, with a few words to
say that Mr. and Miss Aylmer had left when it arrived.
She did not give their present address, and Walter is con¬
vinced that it is intended he is to be cast off unheard.    He
says he will not take his dismissal from any one but herself,
and, cost what it will, he will find out where she is, write to
her, and have her answer.   ' If she gives me up, time enough
then to think of the shortest exit out of this rotten old
world,' he said with a gloomy laugh.   I am glad of this delay,
for I think every day gained in his present state of mind is
a step towards saving him.    He will be buoyed up by a
grain of hope  till he hears  from  her, and by tliat time
perhaps calmer thoughts may have returned.    I think better
of him, too, now that I see the strength of his feeling.   He is
determined to leave my house and look out for a lodging at
hand, saying he will no longer be a burden to me.    I have
opposed the plan to the utmost, for I would rather have him
under my eye; and it will only be a greater burden to me to
have the charge of him in another house ; but I can't manage
him.
I have visited four cholera patients to-day—three in Slade's
parish, and one in my own. Most harrowing scenes; I
cannot write of them. You have seen something of the
frightful malady; send me any advice you can. Happily for
myself, I am not nervous, and that is half way to safety;
but it is trying to deal with so much terror and so much
cowardice as I see around me.—Yours ever, F. J. E.
Expect to hear again soon.
LETTER XXV.
The Eev. F. J. Eeynolds to the Eev. E. Beilby.
Seipt. 9.
Dear Beilby,—I could not write till now.     Work  and
trouble increase daily.    Nothing but cholera from morning
320 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to night—our lives in a perpetual horror ! Still no news
of Slade ; it is most extraordinary. He must be ill some¬
where.
My two women are at work all day long, preparing food
and slops, etc., for the sick. I take them usually myself, as
both Mary and Bell share greatly in the general panic.
The work is a blessing to them, turning their thoughts; but I
cannot force them to do more. Sometimes Walter comes
with me and helps to carry my supplies; but he never will
enter a house where a sufferer lies—not from physical, but
from moral cowardice: his mind is not fitted to bear the
spectacle. Mrs. Wimpole has sent me money and supplies
of flannel, etc., to use as I think best. The Bensons have
done the same, and Mrs. Eivers has offered to help in
visiting patients ; but this I have declined, for her own sake.
I don't think she is fit in health to go through it, and she
has a husband and a child. The doctor's assistant is prostrate
to-day.
I had your note this morning. Thanks for your hints, and
thanks for going over to see my mother. Keep on con¬
tinually going. I daren't write to any of them. You can
put it chiefly on stress of work.—Yours, F. J. E,
LETTER XXVI.
Sunday, Sept. 10.
Dear Beilby,—I seem to have a little leisure this afternoon,
so will take up my story where I left it. It has been the
most melancholy Sunday I ever passed— a mere handful of
people in church, and most of them in tears. I myself could
hardly get through.
I have learned something to-day which has distressed me,
though it was not quite unexpected. IVIy visits to Margaret
Scott have been few lately for want of time. To-day I met
the doctor, and after we had exchanged counsels about the
sick, he asked if I had heard what was all over the village
about Margaret Scott. ' No, what ?' ' Why, sir, about her
and Mr. Walter Benson. They say he was the person who
flirted with her, or worse, and was the cause of all the trouble.'
He went on to tell me that the knowing he was in the place
had affected her dreadfully, and that she showed a horror of
hearing his name; that she was, besides, very sensitive to all
the misery around her; and that, in short, he feared for her
mind. I went at once to see her, and found Mr. Cradock's
account fully  confirmed.    I am determined to  speak   to
From the German of Tiedge. 321
Walter; for this is probably the turning-point of his life :
if no impression for good is made now, who knows how it
may end ?
Two hours later. — I have just had it out with him
as gently as I could; but he was much excited, and
asked me whether I did not think a fellow had enough to
torment him without having flung in his teeth the conse¬
quences of a harmless bit of folly that nobody would have
thought anything of but for the result. He had but played
with the girl, he said, and was he to be made responsible for
all that had come of her giddiness and credulity ? I begged
him to consider what he was feeling for Mary Aylmer, and
by that to measure what the unfortunate young man, Mar¬
garet's lover, may have felt when he found or thought
himself deceived or cast off, and then he would not talk of it
so lightly. But the lightness was all assumed; I saw that
he did feel the position a good deal, and was trying to escape
from it. I trust his remorse may turn to penitence, but I
could make no way with him. There is the bell tolling for
another death, and at the same moment I am summoned
to a new sufferer. Where will it end !—Yours, dear Ned,
ever, F. J. R.
[L. C. G.]
{To he continued)
Jrom X\}t (German of ^Ttcligf.
Where art thou rushing in thy speed, 0 turbid wave ?
To some lone silent cave,
As if rich spoil were floated on the waters waste
In thine impetuous haste ?
I am the Wave of Life, and from my earliest source.
Have chafed with angry force,
Against the miry shallows of this world's dull stream ;
But now—I see the gleam
Of distant shining waters lave the peaceful shore,
Time's soil pollutes no more,
And go, in the clear deep of bright Eternity,
Myself to purify.
Anon.
No. 43.—July 1878. X
322 The Ladies Edmbiirgh Magazine.
a Jlttintsfjt ^libenture,
I SUPPOSE there is no doubt that winter is the proper season
for ghost stories. Let the place be a large darkly-furnished
room in some old country house; let the time be the twilight
of a short winter's day, when heavy mysterious shadows
gather in the farthest corners of the room, and creeping
nearer and nearer threaten to swallow one up in their gloom
the moment that the blaze of the flickering firelight dies out;
let there be all these favourable surroundings, and, speaking
for myself at least, I know that I should fall a ready victim
to the most incredible story of any kind of ghost or super¬
natural appearance. I do not even require to be told that
it was the first cousin or particular friend of the narrator
who heard the lady ghost rustling down the passage, or
saw her running along by the side of the carriage with her
head under her arm ; the external influences dispose me to
believe, and the charm is rather destroyed than heightened
by too good evidence of the truth of the story. Courage
and unshaken nerves are simply questions of place and cir¬
cumstances ; and I believe if the most strong-minded person
were sitting in a room hung with tapestry whilst listening to
a relation of horrors, he would not be able entirely to suppress
the feeling that the life-sized figure on the hangings at the
farther end of the room had ni(ived a little since the last
story was ended. But a midnight adventure told in broad
daylight on a sunny summer's afternoon seems shorn of half
its terrors.
Yet the story which haunts me most in the middle of the
night, when I lie awake and try to determine that I will not
think of ghostly terrors, comes to my mind at the same time
with such a breath of fragrant summer air, that I am
able to recall every detail of the pleasant July afternoon
when we sat out of doors listening to it as it was related to
us by the heroine of the adventure herself.
We were sjiending that summer on the West Coast of
Scotland, in an island Paradise as yet undiscovered by
tourists. A party of friends had driven over to visit us, and
our farmhouse not admitting of much company, we had
extemporized tea out of doors, and were sitting on the
smooth green grass in the shade of the ruined old castle
which was perched, like our farmhouse itself, on the top of a
hif^h cliff overhanging the inland sea.    Is there any other
A Midnight Adventitre. 323
place in the world so beautifvil, I wonder ? Do we anywhere
out of Scotland get the same lights and shades, the same soft
yet brilliant colouring which changes the bleak treeless hills
into giant mountains of some enchanted fairyland ? There
were hills on every side of us, not yet in their gorgeous
autumn colouring of purple heather and golden bracken, but
soft and mysterious, with little clouds veiling their summits,
and clothing their rugged sides with ever-changing shadows;
whilst here and there a bright gleam of sunshine lit up a
patch of green, and turned to gold the yellow seaweed cover¬
ing the rocks which stretched away at our feet as far as the
eye could reach. The sea was like a silver shield I'ar below
us, little white yachts sailed quietly and dreamily past us,
and the only sounds which broke the silence were the occa¬
sional splash of water as the tide rolled in over some big
brown stone, and the happy laughter and merry voices of
our children as they paddled in the water far below us, and
then ran about on the firm yellow sand to get their feet dried
in the warm sunshine.
' This would be a nice kind of place for a murder. You
could push a fellow gently over; and if it was high tide, he
would be pretty certain never to trouble you again, unless
you were haunted by his ghost,' remarked one of the party ;
and thereupon the hitherto lazy conversation took a turn, and
we talked in good earnest about ghosts and murders, until
all our imaginations were excited, and Mrs. Lennox, one of
our visitors, was at last encouraged to tell us the following
story of her own personal experience.
Mrs. Lennox was a little woman, rather under the
ordinary size; but there was nothing else remarkable about
her, except her large blue eyes, which every now and then,
at any sudden noise or movement, seemed to get a peculiar
startled expression. Even I, who did not know her well, was
struck by it at once, and determined that she nmst be very
nervous and delicate. I said she was encouraged to tell us
her story, for she was certaiidy very unwilling to do so when
her husband first alluded to it; but it was difficult to resist
our evident curiosity, and presently she began as follows:—
' I think you know that my husband and I were living
for some years in India, until my health failed, and he was
obliged to get an appointment at home. I never disliked
the climate; indeed, T had no reason to do so, for my husband's
work kept him for the most part of the year in the hills.
' There is always plenty of gaiety in a hill station during
the hot months; but I think I enjoyed myself still more
324 The Ladies Edinburgh Magaziiie.
when most of the people had gone back to the plains, and
we were left comparatively alone to enjoy the brilliant
November days, the dazzling view of the distant snows, and
the indescribable clearness of the air, which made it real
happiness to be merely living and breathing in it. There
were, of course, other peojjle left in the station; but our
house was on rather a solitary height, and when once we left
off coming down to the Mall (as the only flat road in the
station was called), we did not see much of our neighbours.
' I often wonder now how it happened that I was never
frightened at my loneliness. My husband was frequently
obliged to leave me for the whole day, and 1 remained com¬
fortably at home without being at all disturbed by the
thought that no one but native servants were within my
call. When I first went out to India with my mind full of
stories of the mutiny, I had a great horror of the natives ;
but one gets quite used to them in time, and certainly I
could not have read, worked, and gardened more securely in
any country village at home than I did there, where I knew
well enough that if any sudden emergency or danger should
arise, I should have only myself to rely on.
' Three years ago, when m)^ youngest little girl was a baby
only five weeks old. Captain Lennox found that his work
would oblige him to visit a place some twenty or thirty miles
beyond the station in the interior; and as he had a good deal
to do, he proposed staying there for two nights. Generally
I delighted in accompanying him upon these expeditions;
but this being out of the question under the present
circumstances, I was obliged to make up my mind to
two days' solitude. I cannot in the least account for
it, but even now I can feel the cold shudder whicli
crept over me when my husband told me of his projected
absence. I was not given to nervousness in those days, yet
from the first moment when I heard of his arrangements, I
had a fixed presentiment that some evil was going to befall
us. How else could I account for that sudden chill fear,
that unreasonable dread which filled my mind w-henever I
thought of this trip into the interior ? It never occurred to
my husband that I could possibly be afraid of being left in
my own house with my children and servants. I was
ashamed of saying so to him. I tried hard to prevent
giving the thought shape even in my own mind, to reason
myself out of my fears; but laugh at my own folly as I
might, a dull cold weight of misery rested always on my
spirit.    I was almost anxious for the days to pass, that I
A Miduig/it Adventure. 325
might know the worst at once. Even then I thought more
often of some accident which might happen to my husband
on his journey than of any possible danger to myself. How¬
ever, when the Tuesday morning fixed for his departure
arrived at last, and I saw the pony brought round to the
door, and my husband himself, all ready for a start, coming
in to say good-liye, my composure did give way a little. I
told him that I felt very nervous, and asked him if he could
not even then give up the trip altogether. If I hadn't been
so very much in earnest, I should have laughed, in spite of
my anxiety, at his look of bewildered astonishment when he
heard me make such a wild proposal. He had otlier people
depending upon him, and of course he must go. I knew that
quite as well as he did; I was only catching at any straw
which might save me from the approaching danger, even
whilst I felt sure it would be of no use. I repented my
words the moment after I had spoken them, when I saw how
disturbed my husband was at being obliged to leave me,
nervous and ill as he concluded I must be from my unwonted
excitement. At last I persuaded him that my fears were
only a passing fancy, and he rode off, promising, if possible,
to cut his work short and return on Wednesday night, or, if
not, to be home for certain early upon Thursday morning.
' I was very dull that first day, I remember, and strangely
unwilling to go to bed. I sat up reading very late; and
finally, when I hoped I was quite tired out, I went up-stairs
to my room, determined to hurry into bed as fast as possible.
Our house was a two-storeyed one, and my bedroom was at
the end of a rather long passage, which was lighted at the
opposite end by a large window. Like most Indian bed¬
rooms, it was large and bare, with two or three windows, and
doors in every corner of the room ; one of these led into my
husband's dressing-room, and another opened into the passage.
' I shall never forget the nervousness which crept over me
as I went from door to window, trying to make everything
as secure as possible, so as to escape all unnecessary creakings
and rattlings; it was only equalled by the feeling of profound
wide-awake misery which I experienced when the ayah had
departed, and I was left, with my baby sleeping quietly by
my side, to conjure up imaginary shapes in the dim flickering
twilight made by the little oil lamp, and to hear extraordinary
noises in every moaning of the wind and rattling of the
window sashes. You know how irrational one becomes when
once thoroughly nervous and excited; and even whilst I
believed my fears to be absurd, I fully resigned myself to a
326 The Ladies^ Ediiiburgh Maganinc.
night of misery. Contrary to all my expectations, however,
I soon fell into a quiet refreshing sleep. I was disturbed
less than usual during the night, and woke up the next
morning feeling so well and bright, I almost tegan to think
my grand presentiment was a delusion.
' Tliat day passed very quietly. I hoped my husband
Avould have come back in the evening, but at dinner-time I
had a note from him to say that he would be kept away by
his work until the following morning. It was a disappoint¬
ment, of course, but after all to-morrow morning did not
seem very far away; and so I went up-stairs to bed with calm
philosophy, feeling quite ashamed of the imaginary terrors 01
the preceding night. My peace of mind was not of very
long duration. Hardly had I laid my head upon the pillow
tlian once more an almost overpowering terror seized me. I
call it terror, for I do not know how else to describe the
extraordinary feeling which came over me—it was not fear ;
it was a depression unlike anything I had ever felt in my
life before, a sense that some unknown danger was impending
over me. I have told you before that I was then far from
being a nervous person, but from that moment I felt sure
that some evil intiuence was present in the room : nothing
could have shaken my conviction that that night was not to
pass as safely and uneventfully as usual.
' The total uncertainty I was in as to what danger could
possibly arise only added to my misery. I got up and threw
open the window ; it was a brilliant starlight night, the wind
had died away, not a leaf was stirring. Everything looked
as quiet and peaceful as usual, and, trying to reason myself
out of my fears, I went back to my bed and presently fell
into a broken sleep, from which I awoke with a violent start
and an impression that I had been disturbed by some loud
cry for help which was still ringing in my ears. Yet, when
1 collected my senses, everything remained perfectly quiet—
too quiet, indeed. The silence oppressed me. 1 longed for
any sound to break that dead, grave-like stillness; for any
token of human life, even the snoring of my fat old ayah,
would have been more pleasant to me at that moment than
the most delightful music. My nerves were in such a state
of tension, I could have lieard the faintest movement in the
house below; but all was still. I could have cried from sheer
pity for my own agonies of terror, but I was absolutely afraid
of breaking the spell of quiet by any movement.
' Listening thus intently, again I fell asleep. How long
that sleep lasted, I do not know.    It seemed a dreamless,
A Midnight Advenlttrc. 327
heavy slumber, more like unconsciousness than natural rest;
but it passed away at last, and I woke again with a sudden
feeling of being no longer alone—a feeling of eyes haunting
me, which I tried to shake off as the effects of some dream
which I had only to open my eyes to discover was utterly
untrue. Slowly I unclosed them. My heart stopped
])eating. No, I could not be awake; it must be some
horrible nightmare still like a spell upon me. There, at the
foot of my bed, a figure sat crouching,—an immoveable figure
draped in white, with a turban upon its head,—its dark eyes
intently fixed upon me, and a face so awful in its villany
that it seemed hardly credible that it could belong to a
human being. " I must be asleep," I thought to myself. I
know I must be asleep ; and yet my eyes were wide open,
and never surely was any dream so lifelike. I lay, it seemed
to me, for hours gazing on that horrible sight. I was
paralyzed, fixed by the Ixisilisk eyes which never wandered
from my face. Would the morning never come ? M'ould there
never be any end to this horror until I was dead from fright?
Then came an uncontrollable desire to laugh. Heaven help
me 1 I knew now what had happened; I was going mad.
With all the power of will in my possession, I tried to calm
myself. I closed my eyes to shut out the ghastly sight; but
when I opened them again, the figure was still there. I think
I must have made an involuntary movement, for at that
moment the eyes rolled wildly, and it began to move. It had
been perched on the farthest side of the large bedstead ; but
now, still keeping its crouching position, it began to crawl
slowly across the bed towards me.
' The human mind has no unlimited capacity, not even for
terror. I was past fear now. I was not conscious of any
feeling beyond a dull stupid wonder as to how long it would
take the monster to reach one particular stripe on the counter¬
pane. I noticed that it grasped in its long brown fingers a
knotted club, which seemed to me already stained with
blood, that it-was stealthily aiming this weapon for a blow ;
but, except that I knew a very few minutes would end it all
now, I did not care any more. I could not move, nor think, nor
cry for help ; but in another second the blood rushed back to
my heart with overwhelming power, almost suffocating me
with its wild throbbing ; every pulse in my body quivered,
rage and terror seized me, for I saw the aim with which that
club was directed. It was not at me. Had it been so, I
should have lain paralyzed to await my fate ; it was pointed
■with fiendish malignity at the little round head of my baby.
32S The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
lying so peacefully on a pillow by my side. Life and power
of motion had come back to me at last. The club was
already raised with murderous iutent, when an unearthly
shriek of terror broke from my lips, and with the instinct of
an animal defending its young at the expense of life itself,
unheeding all consequences to myself, I sprang like a wild
cat upon the ruffian. I do not know now how I could have
done it, except that for the moment I was mad, actually mad.
I can still hear the wild echo of my voice ringing through
tlie room, and the yell of fear and rage with which it was
answered. The creature, startled by the sudden onset,
retreated, lost his balance, and rolled off the bed. I was too
frenzied by fear to remember clearly what happened ; it
seems a confused and hideous dream. I had lost all control
over myself; I could not stop. I rushed at him again as he
was rising, and pursued him with wild cries down the
passage. He fled before me, and I can still feel the weights
which seemed fastened to my feet when I tried to follow
him, not knowing where I went or what I was doing, only
longing to be rid for ever of this nightmare of terror. ' The
passage seemed to be miles long; I could still think that we
were there for hours, not seconds, he rushing down in the
darkness, I in mad and objectless pursuit of the white
garments I could just distinguish fluttering before me. The
window at the farthest end of the passage was wide open,
and out of this the figure leaped ; I could see the form
distinctly as it was balanced for a moment on the window
ledge, then I remember no more. I believe I should have
followed through the window myself, but mercifully uncon¬
sciousness seized me; I fell heavily to the ground, and when
next I opened my eyes I was lying upon my own bed, the
sun was shining brightly into the room, and my husband
and the doctor were anxiously bending over me.
' I did not go mad, as I thought I should have done : I had
not even a brain fever; but my nerves were so completely
shattered that I could not bear to be left alone even for a
moment, and it was long before I was able to relate to my
husband all I have now been telling you. He would not
allow me to talk about it; indeed, there was little need for
me to do so. The servants, roused by my shrieks, had at
length (when all was quiet) ventured up-stairs, and found me
lying senseless at the head of the staircase. In the early
morning, when my husband came home, he was greeted with
the double intelligence that his wife had been found in a
fainting fit in the passage, and that a poor woman living in
Glasgozv Associatio7t for Higher Education.        329
his compound had been most brutally murdered. It was
not difficult to trace the murderer; dripping with blood, his
footsteps v/ere tracked to the foot of a ladder which had
been left leaning against tlie house, and ottered an easy
means of entering my husband's dressing-room. Blood
marked his progress into my room and down the passages.
How he had escaped all injury in Ids leap from the window
on the second storey of the house, it was impossible to under¬
stand ; but once on the track, energetic search was instituted,
and few hours had passed before the police brought into the
station a wretch well known to be in the habit of intoxicat¬
ing himself with bhang. It was in one of these mad fits
that he had committed an entirely purposeless murder, and
it was only through the mercy of Providence that I and my
child had been saved from becoming additional victims. He
was not considered accountable for his actions, and was
eventually condemned to imprisonment for life.
' I daresay you will not be surprised to hear that from that
night I could not bear to be surrounded by natives, and as
soon as I was able to move, the doctors recommended me to
return to England. I have at last succeeded in recovering a
fair proportion of nerves and courage, but even at this dis¬
tance of time I suffer for recalling so vividly the events of
that night of terror.' M. D.
V^z Hcport cf tf)e (glasgoto dissociation for tije
l^isiicr (JHliucation of SEomen.
Year 1877-78.
The Eeport issued in April by this Association contains a
review of the work of the past year, followed by a sketch of
the course chalked out for next session. Our readers have
had from time to time, in ' Stray Notes' in this magazine,
short notices of the proceedings of the Glasgow Association ;
we need therefore only allude in a few words to the various
subjects taken up in the Eeport. These are—1st. Lectures
delivered in the University, of which there were seven short
courses, with an aggregate attendance of 318 ladies (counting
only once those who attended more than one class) ; 2d.
Tutorial classes, of which three were held : aggregate attend¬
ance, 46; 3d. Bursaries, thirteen in number, of £J0 and £5
each, offered to girls going up for the University Local
Examinations; 4th. Correspondence classes in preparation
for the Local Examinations.    The programme arranged by
330 Tlie Ladies Edhiburgh Magazine.
the Association for next session comprises—1st. Seven or
more courses of lectures; 2d. Seven Tutorial classes; 3d.
Bursaries for the Local Examinations; 4th. Con'espondence
classes; 5th. E.xarainations in Theory and Practice of Music
by the London Society of Arts; 6th. Institution of an
Association Diploma; 7th. Formation of a Library of books
of reference.
For a first year, the work of the Association may be con¬
sidered fairly successful, although in some of its de]>artments,
e.cf. the Correspondence classes, its eftbrts must be looked
upon as chietly tentative. It has not been without diffi¬
culties to contend against, one of the greatest of which has
been to awaken to some extent the minds of the ladies of
Glasgow from the general, though not universal, apathy on
the subject of higher education, demonstrating to them the
use and advantage of serious study. Another and a grave
difficulty has been the want of preparation on the part of
many of the students, due to the insufficiency of the previous
training received. That tliere was no lack of capacity is
shown by the reports of the lecturers, all of whom speak
favourably of the natural abilities of their students; but in
many cases these abilities were much neutralized by want of
clue to the subjects taught, and want of the habit of exact
thought. The Association aims at establishing' for girls who
have left school, a systematic course of study,' which is cer¬
tainly a great desideratum. But so long as girls' education
is conducted in the desultory way which is too much the
case in many schools,—so long as parents will not see the
importance of keeping their daughters steadily at work, not
giving them a mere smattering of too many subjects, but a
thorough knowledge of a few, and from their earliest years
training them systematically to follow out a well-considered
course of study, which shall embrace not only showy accom¬
plishments, but subjects more solid and useful as discipline
for the mind,—so long will the work of the Association have
no firm foundation laid for it, nor will the University lectures
be appreciated and taken advantage of as they ought to be.
The shortness of the courses of lectures was a matter for
regret This, unfortunately, as Professor Veitch explained in
his speech at the Annual Meeting of the Association, is a
consequence of the heavy work devolving upon the Glasgow
Professors during the six months of the session. The large
number of students in their classes, and the system of double
lectures in each class, make it to most of them, however will¬
ing, a matter of great difficulty, and to some even of impossi-
Glasgow Association for Higher Edttcaiion.        331
bility, to find the necessary time for lectures to ladies. This
of course greatly limits the range of subjects for study; and
the Association has repeatedly been obliged to dispense
with some of those it was most desirous of having, and which
would be of the greatest use to tlie students. Tiie committee,
in arranging the lectures for the past session, tried as far as
possible to remedy the shortness of the courses, and the con¬
sequent temptation to desultorine&s in their students, by
providing that two courses on kindred subjects should
succeed each other,—e.(j.. Professor Young's lectures on the
Nervous System in the Animal Kingdom were followed by
Professor M'Kendrick's on the Physiology of the Nervous
System and the Senses; and Professor Veitch's lectures on
Psychology and L<Jgic, by Professor E. Caird's on floral
Philosophy, which was an expedient in some degree success¬
ful. In the coming session, however, this objection will be
in some measure removed, as several of the courses will
extend over the whole of the session.
The Tutorial classes for Latin and Mathematics, although
an entire novelty in Glasgow among giown-up students, were
fairly well attended; good work was done, and is yet being
carried on, inasmuch as the Latin class is being continued by
correspondence throughout the whole summer. It is intended
to extend considerably the system of Tutorial classes next
winter, and to conduct them with the distinct aim of
preparation for the Local Examinations, bringing them into
more complete unison with the Correspondence classes.
And as each tutor will imdertake the Correspondence class
of his own subject, keeping the lessons in it identical with
those of his viva voce class given at the same time, any
student in the Corres^wndence class coming to Glasgow can
continue her instruction orally, or any member of the viva
voce class by correspondence, in case of absence. The ob¬
jection which has been urged against the Tutorial classes, as
trenching upon the province of schools, is unfortunately with¬
out foundation;—unfortunately, because if the schools had
afforded in past years instruction in the subjects taken up
by these classes, there would have been no preparatory work
left for the Association to do; and students, instead of coming
to the classes to fill the blanks left in their secondary educa¬
tion by want of opfX)rtunity of study, would have been ready
at once to devote themselves, with intelligence and success,
to continuing their higher education in the College classes.
It is hoped that in a few years the schools will have so far
taken  up such studies  as those  of the present Tutorial
332 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
classes, as to relieve the Association altogether from the
necessity of providing preparatory instruction in any of the
University subjects.
The bursaries offered by the Association have already, it is
believed, had to some extent the desired effect of inducing
girls to go up for the Local Examinations, as the number of
candidates for examination is considerably greater this year
than last. Still it is much to be desired that these numbers
should be yet further augmented, and that the benefit of tlie
examinations should be extended to all classes of the com¬
munity. The Association will therefore endeavour next
session, by an increased list of bursaries, including some
specially intended for pupil teachers, to aid in bringing
about this result.
The introduction of the Society of Arts Examinations is a
new feature in musical education in Glasgow. Although
music is one of the voluntary subjects included in the Local
Examinations, the papers are so elementary as to form no
satisfactory criterion of musical knowledge. Nor are they of
such a nature as to form a certificate examination which
might be of use to ladies studying with a view to giving
instruction. It is very desii'able, both in the interests of
teachers and pupils, that such a test of proficiency in Practice
as well as in Theory of Music should exist, and that the study
of music as a science, not as a mere pastime, should be en¬
couraged. This would of course be best accomplished by the
Universities instituting a certificate in music for women, and
it is hoped that the advisability of this step may yet be con¬
sidered by them. But while awaiting their action, the
adoption of the Examinations of the Society of Arts may be
counted as a step in advance, both as providing a test of
knowledge, and as furnishing a very complete plan of study,
including some points too often neglected by teachers, such
as cultivation of the ear and facility in playing and singing
at sight.
On the whole, we think the committee of the Glasgow
Association for the Higher Education of Women may look
back with some degree of satisfaction on the work of its first
year; but very much remains to be done, and nmch steady
and patient work, both on the part of the committee and the
students, will be necessary before tlie object is attained which
the Association in its Keport proposes for its efforts,—viz.,' to
establish for girls who have left school a systematic course
of study, extending over several years, and opening to them
the whole round of a liberal education.' G.
Our Library Table. 333
©ur 3Librarg Oblc.
Thoughts and Experiences of a Charity Organizationist.   By J.
Hornsby Wright.    London : W. Hunt & Co., 12 Paternoster Row.
This volume shonld be welcomed by those who are at all interested
in any efforts made for the real good of the poor of this country, for
it is not concerned with speculations or theories, but with plain facts.
To anybody not hopelessly given over to the system, or rather no
system, of blindly-trusting almsgiving, this record of Mr. Wright's
e.xperiences will give help and encouragement, as well as a warning.
We wish that many of another class, the confiding almsgivers, could
be induced to read it, and have their eyes opened to some of the
mischief they are unconsciously doing ; but we fear the very name
will scare them away from the salutary perusal. The object of the
book is to give the results of many years' endeavours for the good of
the poor of a particular part of London ; and Mr. Wright applies the
knowledge gained by his labours to setting forth such particular points
in the system of charity as at present arranged, as seem to him tlie
most to require attention and amendment. It would hardly be too
sweeping to say that the whole system requires amendment; and here
we have indicated some (of course not all) of the causes which have
produced this evil state of things. Naturally the volume is not
cheerful reading, though there is often a ludicrous side to the
saddening stories which it contains ; but it is deeply interesting, and
brings us face to face with much that we dislike to remember, and yet
have no business tf) forget. Mr. Wright tells his stories graphically,
without any effort to strain the obvious moral thej"^ ought to bring
home ; he gives us fairly the two sides of the case, neither painting
only in black nor only in rose colour ; and he is always ready to make
full allowance for the excellent intentions and motives of those whose
practice seems to him to work infinite harm. His battle is not with
persons, nor with systems, only with that one great 'system of no
system' which refuses to let generosity be governed by justice and
wisdom, and is making and keeping hundreds of thousands of English
men and women simply b,eggars and paupers, from the cradle to the
grave. To those who shrink from aiding in such miserable work,
these 'Thoughts and Experiences' may be recommended, not as
offering solutions of half the difficulties of the subject, but as helping
to clear the path for such solution—as helping the reader, also, to form
a clearer notion as to what i.s being done, and what should be done,
towards removing this social curse of pauperism from the country to
which we belong. If it should also turn the reader to consider his
own deeds in the matter, so much the better for all concerned.
(Question Srrtes.
I. Histary.—Describe the events which led to the English Revolu¬
tion of 1688.
II. English Literature.—Write brief notes on any four of the women
introduced into Tennyson's Drtum of Fair Women. \_N.B.—Forty
lines allowed for this answer. 1
An.swers to be sent in by i5th August, addressed,'Qu. C, care of
Miss Walker, 37 Gillespie Crescent.' The best answer to each question
will be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of
the year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
334 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magaxiue. As compression into twenty
lines seems to embarrass our younger correspondents, wehave agreed
that History may have twenty-four. It will be seen that we have
allowed a longer space than the usual twenty-six lines, next month,
for the English Literature Answer, as it could not well be compressed,
but we shall be very critical of the style and composition of the
Answers. Twelve words go to a line. We warn correspondents
against running time too short. The loth is the latest possible day
on which the Editors can receive any ; an accidental delay in delivery
may exclude a good answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO MAY SERIES.
History, B. ; Literature, Claribel. Besides these, in History:
Heathee, almost equal to B. ; M. B., Midoe, May-Fly, Spider,
very good ; Rediviva, excellent, but always over the limits. Litera¬
ture: B., and Heather, excellent; Rediviva, Midge, very good.
I. Henry VIII. of England and Louis XII. of France having
gone to war with each other, it became of great importance to the
latter king to maintain and increase the ever smouldering jealousy
between Scotland and England, and the hereditary alliance between
Scotland and France. James IV. was already irritated against his
brother-in-law, Henry VIII., on various accounts. The capture, in
1511, of two Scottish ships, the Lion and the Jenny Piriven, under
a charge of pu'acy, and the death of their brave captain, Andrew
Barton, the reappearance on the border of the outlaw Heron, and
the detention of the legacy left to Queen Margaret by her father,
Henry VII., were things remembered and resented ; so that, in con¬
trast, the French king's large gifts and friendly overtures were eagerly
feceived and listened to. When, tlierefore, James saw Henry invad¬
ing France, and when his own chivalrous spirit was stirred by the
gift of a turquoise ring from the French queen, who begged him to
inarch for her sake three miles on English ground, he resolved at once
to take revenge for the insults his country had received, and to give
the best help he could to his ancient ally, by thus dealing a blow at
England in the absence of the king.
The Scottish Parliament reluctantly consented to the war, and, in
spite of their unwillingness, and the strange warning she received of
coming disaster, James IV. went his way to defeat and death on
Flodden Edge. B.
II. As the word English is underlined, and Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-
Norman literature thus excluded, we may consider our literature to
begin in the fourteenth century with Chaucer in verse and Sir John
Mandeville in prose. Before that date, Norman-French was chiefly
used for poetry, and Latin for chronicles and treatises. After Chaucer,
English was generally adopted, and rapidly improved as a literary
niedivim. We think that, but for the transcendent genius of Chaucer
compelling us to the study of his writings, the date of the beginning
of English Literature would have been advanced a hundred years.
English was in his time a curious unformed mixture of Saxon and
Norman-French, quite in a state of transition, and now almost a dead
language. But by the time of the invention of printing, at the end
of the fifteenth century, it had made a splendid advance from the
mixed dialect, which almost needs now to be translated, to fine old
English, which we can read to this day with ease and enjoyment.
Compare a sentence taken  hap-hazard out of the Ancren Ravle, a
Stray Notes. 335
treatise on the duties of nuns, dating from early in Chaucer's period,
with any chance paragraph of Malory's Morte Artur, a prose romance
■written in the reign of Edward IV. Here is the first: ' Heo (she)
grint greot (groats) tha cheofled (chatters). The two cheoken beod
the two grindstones, tlie tonge is the cleppe, loked leove 8\istrun at
oniver cheoken ne grinden never but soule node.' Here is Mallory :
' Then shee unwimpled her visage. And when hee saw her, hee said,
here have I found my louve and my ladye. And then was hee so
enamoured of her that he wist not whether Jie were on horseback or
on foot.' Claeibel.
 0 
Strap ijlotcs.
Aberdeen Ladies' Educationai, Association.—The classes in con¬
nection with this association were, as we mentioned at the beginning
of the session, three in number—Astronomy, by Professor Fuller ;
Latin Literature, by Professor Black;  and  English Literature, by
Rev. James Danson. All the courses were highly appreciated, and the
respective teachers were emphatically thanked at the close hy tluise uho
had attended.   The class of .\strouomy, as was to be expected, failed of
much of its value from the want of previous preparation on the jiart of
the pupils, who felt strongly how much they were losing in being unable
to follow so able a teacher as Professor Fuller.    Professor Black's
lectures were characterised by the care which the Professor took to
preserve proportion in treating of the different authors of whom he
necessarily took so brief a survey, and was felt to be most suggestive.
The Professor expre.ssed himself as having been much gratified and
somewhat surprised by the character of the work done in the chuss.
The nature of the subject, and the comparative preparedness of the^
pupils, tended to make the English Literature class responsive to the
energy and enthusiasm of the teacher, and the results were extremely
satisfactory.   There can, we think, be no doubt that a decided stirring
of literary and scientific interest must result from these classes ; but
there can be no security for the continuance of effort in Aberdeen, or
elsewhere, unless the great body of women awaken to that desire for
a thorough culture,  which will make  them  willing  and  eager  to
undergo the prolonged and systematic training necessary to secure it.
One hopeful sign in Aberdeen is, that the Local Examinations seem
taking on an active development, thus giving promise of the jirepara-
tory training hitherto so deficient, and which helps to create both
the desire and the ability to profit by the higher teaching. Next winter
the classes are again to be three in number—Chemi.stry, which is tQ
be taught in the College by Professor Brazier ; Greek Literature, by
Professor Geddes ; and English Literature, again by Mr. Danson.
We hope the Aberdeen reputation for combined caution and energy
will be maintained in connection with this as with other undertakings,
and that we shall see there before long a consistent and well-balanced
system of female education thoroughly worked out under the favour¬
able conditions of the place.
In prospect of the Meeting of the British Association at Dublin,
the following note may interest our readers. During his recent
sojourn in this country, the Prince Imperial of Austria visited,
among other places of interest, the Telescope Factory of Mr. Howard
Grubb in Dublin, where a telescope of gigantic dimensions is at
present being constructed for an observatory at Vienna. Soon after
Prince Rudolf's visit, we had an opportunity of going over the work
33*5 TJie Ladies Edinlnirgli Magazhie.
with Mr. Griibb, who most kindly took great pains in explaining the
mechanism of the telescope, and the varions tools and processes by
which the different parts of the instrument are brought to perfection.
This telescope was to be five years in bnilding. Only two years of
that time have expired, but Mr. Grubb is making great efforts to
have it completed by the month of August next, when the British
Association will hold its meetings in Dublin. If not the largest, it
is among the largest instruments of the kind ever constructed. The
telescope will be 35 feet long, and is to have a magnifying power of
3000 diameters, which will bring the moon, as it were, within 80
miles of the earth. A sight of one of the lenses seemed to convey
to an vinscientific observer, more than anything else, an idea of the
enormous proportions of the instrument. It is a disc 28 inches in
diameter, which measures 3 inches more than the telescope built five
or six years ago by Mr. Cook of York. Mr. Grubb informed us that
the man who prepared the glass for this lens had been two years at
work before he got a piece perfect enough in quality for the purpose.
The two lenses to be used in the telescope will cost £1200. The cost
of the instrument as a whole will be £8000. We saw, also, the steel
plates and framework for the revolving dome-shaped roof which is
to cover the telescope when erected in its place at Vienna. Ten or
twenty years ago Munich was the great emporium for telescopes, but
Mr. Grubb told us that he has orders for instruments to be sent to
several of the large cities in Germany, which shows that our country
is now taking a foremost place in this high class of manufacture.
floticfS ta Corrrspontirnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies:' Ed'nihurgTi Mnfjazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
It is proposed to issue a series of papers on ' Country Subjects and
Pursuits.' Articles are already promised on FLshing, Hunting,
Curling, and Keeping Poultry. Others might be written on the
Dairy, on Bees, Gardening, Country Walks, and on Swimming.
Any lady willing to contribute to this series is invited to communi¬
cate with the Editors, who will also be happy to receive suggestions
as to additional subjects.
There are still vacancies in our series of ' Female Novelists.' We
hope that some of our kind contributors may feel disposed to under¬
take Lady Blessington and Mary Howitt.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held at 5 St. Colme Street, on Saturday, 6th July 1878, at 11
o'clock. In place of the usual Debate, any member may give a
description, in prose or verse, of ' the most beautiful or impressive
sight she ever witnessed.'
Our Female Novelists. 337
©ur female 0o&eltsts.
XIX.
CATHARINE SINCLAIE.
&. 1800—(/. 18G4.
If the number of a novelist's works entitle him or her to
claim literary celebrity, few modern writers have a better
right than Catharine Sinclair to a conspicuous place among
her compeers. But by including her in this series as a
Scotswoman of some mark in her day, we by no means
intend it to be inferred that quantity irrespective of quality
is the gauge by which we estimate a writer's merits; and we
are very far from ranking this lady, the author of fifteen or
sixteen books, on the same level with her delightful country¬
woman, Miss Ferrier, the author of three, or of ' all-perfect
Austen' with her six. Miss Sinclair has a better proof of
the estimation of her own generation in the popularity which
her works achieved ; and though we are of opinion that that
popularity was greatly aided, if not originated, by adventi¬
tious circumstances, it must be taken also as a fair evidence
that she had really a considerable degree of talent, and
could address herself to many readers with a certainty of
commanding their attention. The nature and force of these
circumstances will be better understood if we look back a
little at the life of our author.
Her father was a Scottish laird of good descent. Sir John
Sinclair of Ulbster, in the county of Caithness. Born in a
station such as thousands occupy without distinguishinf^
themselves, he was throughout his life one of the most con°
spicuous men of his time, mainly by the force of unflagging
industry, undaunted perseverauce, and a certain many-sided°
ness of tastes which enabled him to devote himself energeti¬
cally to a great variety of subjects. Like most Scotsme'n of
his rank, he was educated for the bar; but succeeding early
to his estate, the legal knowledge he acquired must have
been turned to account principally in the way commended
to Darsie _ Latimer's attention by the worthy Mr. Saunders
Fairford, in teaching him how to keep and improve a fortune
rather than in amassing one. The subjects which come
naturally before a country gentleman and active member of
Parliament, were of course those to which Sir John's energy
No. 44.—August 1878. ^
338 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
was first directed; but his was no selfish or narrow sphere.
The improvement of his own estate only, was far from being
the limit of his aims and ideas, and the whole science of
agriculture, of the breeding of stock, of forestry and the
reclamation of land, owes much to the interest the worthy
baronet took in these, and in subjects more or less remotely
connected with them; earning diplomas from twenty-five .
learned Societies of various countries, and the thanks of
of twenty-two County Associations in the course of a long
life of honourable and patriotic exertion. A certain amount
of obtuseness as to the limits of his powers seems also to
have been a trait in good Sir John's character, as well as a
power of perseveringly boring others, which often enables
some men to obtain a hearing or the trial of an experiment
which would be denied to persons perhaps more really able,
but endowed with greater modesty and more easily rebuffed.
It is quite posS'ible to induce a large proportion of our
fellow-creatures to take us at our own valuation, or at least
not to contradict it very loudly, though they may smile at it
in private; so Sir John compiled a laborious and useful
Statisticetl History of Scotland, wrote pamphlets by the
score on an inconceivable variety of subjects, a tragedy, and
treatises on health and longevity, and no doubt thought his
opinions on things medical, political, scientific, and political
destined to enlighten posterity as much as those on agricul¬
ture and stock-farming, which really earned him a reputation.
He was twice married, his second wife being Diana,
daughter of Lord Macdonald of the Isles; and of this union
was born, in 1800, Catharine, the sixth daughter among
fifteen brothers and sisters. A large family will always be
called a fine family, says our beloved Miss Austen, when
there are heads, legs, and arms enough for the number; and
as there was no deficiency of parts either bodily or mental,
and an unusual allowance of inches among the Sinclairs, the
Caithness laird and his progeny were probably often so
described. They were a large-boned, long-limbed race, of a
strongly-marked Scottish cast of countenance which perpetu¬
ates itself, and with a close resemblance to one another.
They exceeded so much the average stature, that the joke
which Miss Ferrier puts into the mouth of Mr. M'Dow with
respect to his worthy father, was, we believe, originally said
of Sir John Sinclair,—namely, that he was possessed of ' six
and thirty foot of daughters.' They were a very happy and
iinited family, imbued from their earliest years with strong
religious principles, which they sincerely carried out in their
Our Female Novelists. 339
several walks of life. All but two of these brothers and
sisters have now passed into the Silent Land, leaving behind
them that ' memory of the ^ust' which is still fresh in the
remembrance of many who knew them.
Sir John's multifarious pursuits by no means set him at a
distance from his children or cut him off from them; on
the contrary, he claimed their assistance, and made them
sharers in his interests in a way which must equally have
conduced to their happiness and benefit. His immense
business correspondence and ventures in authorship must have
kept his pen in constant exercise, and several others also in
his large family. He was constantly requiring copies made
of long papers and letters, and a great deal of this sort of
labour devolved upon his daughter Catharine, who, from the
age of fourteen, acted as her father's secretary, and was
frequently busy in his service for six hours in a day. Sir
John's hobbies and subjects of county and parliamentary
interest can have had no attraction for the young girl; but
the strong sense of duty and warm family affection which
were marked characteristics among the Sinclairs, no doubt
made the drudgery easy to her ; and the steady discipline,
the mental training of real hard work carried on throughout
the years when the character is being moulded for life, which
are so grievously wasted by too many young women in her
station, must certainly have had their effect on one so con¬
scientious, so simply but deeply religious, as Catharitie
Sinclair. Perhaps the dry subjects on which her father kept
her pen employed to about the age of thirty-five, may have
checked the development of her imaginative powers, and
account in some degree for what we can only call the tedious-
ness of her books in every instance but one. The numerous
avocations of Sir John kept him constantly on the move,
but his large family lived chiefly in Edinburgh, for the sake
of the educational advantages as liberally afforded then as
now. The Canongate was his abode until about 1784, when
he removed to Charlotte Square; and there the younger
members of his family, including Catharine, were born. Her
mother and a step-sister, a good deal older than herself, early
implanted the fear which is the beginning of wisdom ; much
culture of mind and manners was bestowed by the varied
society in which her parents lived, both in Edinburgh and
after their removal to the neighbourhood of London in 1814;
and acquaintance with the important subjects in which she
was wont to assist her father, together with the industry
and thoroughness in which her services to him trained her,
340 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
all helped to form a very excellent and agreeable woman,
with tastes rather in advance of her day in some respects,
whose benevolence and efforts of well-considered charity in
her native city will keep her memory green long after her
thirty-seven volumes have sunk into utter oblivion.
Two children's books were all she published, until her
father's death, at the close of 1835, left his dutiful daughter
with more unoccupied time than she had ever known before.
Her first novel, Modern Accomplishments, was published in
the following year, like most of her books, ' with a purpose'—
to set forth her views upon female education. Novels and
their readers were in those days still under the ban of a
certain class of ' professing Christians,' to use a phrase of
Miss Sinclair's time still current in some circles; so she
solemnly excuses herself in her preface for * using fictitious
narrative in the elucidation of evangelical truth.' The
youthful reader of the present day would probably vote
the fictitious narrative to be as dull as any sermon, and we
must confess that such is our own opinion. The scene is
laid in Edinburgh; but it might as well have been placed
anywhere else, as there is no attempt to paint from nature,
or to make any real use of the actual characteristics of the
locale or its society. The story relates the efforts of two
worldly mothers to educate each a lovely daughter to shine
in fashionable society. The ladies are sisters, and there is a
considerable rivalry between them as to the success they are
likely to meet with, and the soundness of their respective
theories. Lady Fitz-Patrick has been a beauty, and ' piqued
herself on leading the " best-dressed life" in the world of
fashion . . . and the first object in life for herself and her
lovely daughter was to gain applause and admiration from
the surrounding world.' So Miss Elinor is brought forward
in society from her earliest years, and all the cultivation she
receives is with a view to her being admired as a beauty.
Lady Howard, never having been a beauty, 'early in life
determined to be " prodigiously clever."' There are many
good hits in the description of the blue-stocking lady, who
' patronized everybody,' and of the fussy turmoil of literary,
charitable, and social business in which she lives. ' If a
servant needed a place, if a friend wanted a house, or a shop
required customers, she was indefatigable, and covered her
chimney-piece with cards from singing-masters who required
scholars, and from decayed gentlewomen' who washed lace.
Her back drawing-room was a perfect repository for the sale
of paintings and pin-cushions, to gain a livelihood for various
Our Female Novelists. 341
deserving persons in distress; and it was reckoned quite a
service of danger to visit much at Lady Howard's, she had
so many charitable traps set to catch all the loose cash that
might  be straying in  her friends'  pockets.    ]\Iany who
entered the  house  with  a firm resolution of being quite
impregnable to  all assaults  on  their  benevolence,  found
themselves returning to their carriages afterwards most un¬
accountably laden with " the sweetest little poem in the world
by a poor blind cobbler," or a pair of rickety hand-screens
that had been painted by an old woman in her bed, or else
a dozen of tickets for the raffle of some poor man's watch,
which was to be generously returned to him by any one who
had the good fortune to win it.    If they successfully evaded
all these temptations, then they generally found themselves
pledged to employ for the rest of their lives some distressed
baker with a large family, whose bread was not much sourer
than other people's, or to be measured at some cheap shop
for a pair of shoes that it would be impossible ever to wear.'
But it is all too lengthy.    We grow weary as we travel
through page after page, though the condemnation is just
and the satire often pointed; and we contrast this tiresome
elaboration with the few masterly strokes with which Miss
Ferrier set before us the portraits of Mrs. Bluemits  and
Mrs. Fox, or Miss Edgeworth that of Lady Diana Chilling-
worth.     The   young ladies  approach  maturity, and each
parent is perfectly satisfied in looking forward to the result.
Lady Fitz-Patrick is certain that her daughter's symmetry
of features and elegance of accomplishments have only to be
seen to be appreciated.    ' As far as the hands and feet can
be  cultivated,  she   is  certainly  unrivalled,'  replies  Lady
Howard sarcastically; ' but my system comprehends rather
more than yours; and by the time I have finished reading all
the books on education that are now on the table, I hope to
have completed my new method, and that Matilda will have
some mind as well as manner before she goes into the world.'
Fortunately for this very praiseworthy aspiration, there is a
virtuous aunt who lives in a ' lovely retreat' only two miles
distant from Edinburgh.    "We do not for a moment dispute
the beauty of the environs of ' Scotia's darling seat'—we
only wish for a little discrimination, and of what artists call
keeping in the picture.    Miss Sinclair must, like the poet, have
' Forgot the clouded Forth,
The gloom that saddens heaven and earth ;
The bitter east, the misty summer.
And grey metropolis of the North,'
342 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and has planted clematis and verbenas, buddleas, jessamine,
and fuchsias, with a profusion which belongs rather to the
shores of Torbay or Penzance than to those of our Scottish
east coast. This may appear hypercritical, but the remark
is drawn forth by what we must consider a great fault in this
lady's writings—a total disregard of the real characteristics
of either the scenery or the society she professes to describe.
How much our pleasure is enhanced by the faithful painting
of the background in the tales of nearly every author of
repute, whether man or woman! Kingsley and Dickens,
Charlotte Bronte, Mrs. Gaskell, and George Eliot are as real
in the delineation of their mise en seine as of their characters;
whereas Miss Sinclair and other inferior writers are as con¬
tented with conventional forests and waterfalls as the
manager of a fifth-rate theatre.
The good aunt does her best to counteract the erroneous
principles on which her nieces are educated—with great
success, as far as Matilda is concerned, in spite of the dis¬
taste to religion which she must have run some risk of
engendering by her own long speeches on the subject,—
never less than a page of close print,—and by the constant
presence in her house of a repulsive Aunt Barbara, who acts
as a foil to Lady Olivia's excellences in her caricature of a
Christian profession. There is a great want of incident, the
conversations are wearisomely long, though stuffed full of
good advice and just reflections, and with, now and then, a
gleam of humour; as, for instance, when the pedantic Lady
Howard insists on airing her medical knowledge. Lady
Fitz-Patrick catches a cold and dies in an edifying manner,
thanks to Lady Olivia's ministrations, and the story comes
to an end,—we cannot say, winds up, when thread or plot
there is none,—leaving Elinor an admired and heartless
beauty, and Matilda a model of every virtue, watching over
the deathbed of her aunt, who, good woman, makes long and
sensible speeches even in articulo iiwrtis. The after lives of
these young ladies are the subject of Miss Sinclair's next
novel. Modern Society; but we have not been sufficiently
interested in them to follow up their history. We believe
that Elinor inherits the whole fortune of a certain ancle
iVMritage, on whose intentions much speculation Avas be¬
stowed by the worldly mothers in the former volume. She
gives herself airs towards every one, especially her rather
scantily-endowed cousin; but eventually some such discovery
is made as is not uncommon in novels—a later will turns up,
which places Matilda in possession of the u.ncle's legacy, and
Our Female Novelists. 343
Elinor's character is reformed by  a wholesale reverse ol
fortune.
Miss Sinclair's next publications tried a different line from
that of fiction. She was the frequent companion of her
brother Alexander in several journeys throughout England
and Scotland, undertaken for enjoyment's sake apparently;
and Hill and Valley, Sootloncl and the Scotch, SJictland and
the Shetlanders, give a minute description of the impression
made on her by scenes which she justly considers to be as
deserving of admiration for a beauty of their own, as
any of the foreign countries which tourists so often
know much better. They are written in the form of
letters to a ' dear cousin,' and were at one time, we believe,
considered valuable handbooks for home travellers. Those
of a younger generation who are unacquainted with them,
will perhaps be interested by dipping into them, and com¬
paring the present aspect of many familiar scenes with that
which they wore nearly forty years ago, when railway
travelling was a new experience to middle-aged people like
the author, and monster hotels unknown in the Highlands.
But they are as heavy in style as are the novels; the moral
reflections, stock anecdotes, and disquisitions on all manner
of irrelevant topics, are, to our minds, tedious to the last
degree; and it is strange that a lady so popular in society,
and so delightful to converse with, as Miss Sinclair is univer¬
sally said to have been by those who knew her, should not
acquit herself better in a style of writing in which ladies so
frequently excel. ' Lightness of touch' she seems to have
been incapable of. It is surely out of place to preface the
journal of a summer tour with tlie solemnly-breathed desire
' that the pen may fall from her hand before she writes a
page not devoted to sound religion and strict propriety;' and
in the motto prefixed to the said preface is probably to be
found the secret of her failure to please :
' Studious we strive, amend, improve, retouch;
Take much away, yet often leave too much.'
Here is a specimen of her incurable propensity for improv¬
ing the occasion. In describing a visit to Mount Stuart, she
mentions seeing, carved over a doorway ' this inscription,
written by Prince Charles Edward when in concealment on
the island of Bute:
" Henceforth this isle to the afflicted be
A place of refuge, as it was to me ;
The promises of blooming spring live here,
And all the blessings of the ripening year."
344 ^^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
How much these lines might have gained in interest if the
royal fugitive had only added any allusion to his being a
Christian!' Poor hunted Prince ! It seems to us rather an
unreasonable moment for demanding a confession of faith,
even if he were the author of the inscription. As he never
was in Bute at all, so far as we are aware, let us forbear to
condemn him. We wonder whether Miss Sinclair's blunder
is the fault of her cicerone, or is due to her own frequent
inaccuracy; for the lines are really, we believe, taken from
Dryden's alteration of the Tempest, and were carved there by
a Marquis of Bute, who thus gracefully expressed his grati¬
tude for the delicious air of the west coast, and who probably
took fitter occasions for confessing his orthodoxy.
Holiday House, a child's book, but the only one of this
lady's works which we think at all deserving of the temporary
popularity which they attained, and which to this day
enthralls many a youthful reader, was published in 1839,
and we shall reserve our remarks on it for the present.
Severe family afflictions and bereavements marked succeeding
years, and one or two religious works were among her publi¬
cations about this time. Modei~ti Flirtations \vas her next
novel, and it obtained a circulation, we believe, quite equal
to its predecessors. It is a much more ambitious tale,
dealing freely with such incidents as murder, actual and
attempted, abductions, arson, and melodramatic situations
too numerous to mention. As in all her other works, we are
introduced to none but the best society (socially considered),
and the various heroines are all miracles of loveliness. The
plot is extremely involved, and we fear that our hasty sketch
may fail to unravel all its strands. A quotation from the
Courant's ' Fashionable Intelligence' introduces us to a
gallant old Sir Arthur minus an arm,' reposing on his laurels
at the marine village of Portobello,' and inviting his nephew,
who turns out to be the demon of the piece (or one of them),
to dine with him. The young Hussar never fulfils liis
engagement. He disappears suddenly for the time from
Edinburgh, and Sir Arthur is disagreeably awakened one
night from his bed of laurels by shrieks and cries ft-om a
house opposite his own. He hastens to the rescue, and finds
a lovely lady with her throat cut and a child in a drugged
sleep at her side in one room, and an attendant who professes
to have heard none of the disturbance in another. If ladies
will introduce such incidents into their books, it is not too
much to ask for a little verisimilitude to real life in small
details.    Two mysterious gentlemen  afterwards visit   the
Our Female Novelists. 345
corpse, are not detained by the police, who indeed seem to
have resigned all arrangements into Sir Arthur's hands; a
magnificent coffin makes its appearance, and a letter enclos¬
ing a sum of money for the benefit of the child, whom Sir
Arthur has adopted, and promising a handsome allowance
for his education, and the possible acknowledgment at some
future day of his noble birth. The legal proceedings in the
case of the suspected Sarah Davenport are equally curious,
and we can only wonder how a lady of mature age, who, in
Edinburgh of all places, might surely have picked up a little
information on such points, should perpetrate blunders such
as we might expect to find in the first attempt at authorship
of a boarding-school miss. Sir Arthur, not long after, adds a
secretary to his manage, and his beautiful and unknown
ward, Henry, has several narrow escapes from poisoning and
other unpleasant accidents with which this gentleman is
connected. The secretary is also absent at times from his
duties, and such occasions are sure to coincide with the
persecution undergone by one of the lovely heroines from
the unacceptable addresses of a certain maniac cousin. This
objectionable suitor's appearances and disappearances are as
bewildering in their suddenness as those of the Cheshire Cat
in Wonderland. He is for ever dropping from a tree in the
young lady's path, bursting in her window as she is undress¬
ing for the night, jumping right over the glen at Eoslin in
pursuit of her, and eluding her rescuers with 'a hideous
maniacal yell.' The police are useless {N.B.—This may be a
touch of nature), and poor Miss Caroline's life is a burden to
her until, in the last chapter but one, the madman rushes out
of the room with a loaded pistol at his head, and she is able
comfortably to marry Henry, who turns out to be heir to
Lord Doncaster, and whose mother was murdered by this
disagreeable person at the beginning of the story. His last
act is to assassinate Sir Arthur's unpunctual guest, Captain
de Crespigny, who, by some unaccountable caprice at the
Horse Guards, is suffered, with his regiment, to remain at
Piershill Barracks for at least fifteen revolving years, and
whose flirtations, carried far beyond the usual pitch surely,
have broken the hearts and complicated the lives of half the
personages in the story. Yet, in spite of these and many
other absurdities, in spite also of the imreal,' stagey' type of
many of the characters,—e.g., an Abbe Mordaunt, uncle to
Henry's mother, Lord Doncaster's secretly - married wife,
' educated at S. Omer in all the dark superstitions of that
bigoted college,' who, when virtue is triumphant, hurries to
34^ TJie Ladies Edinburgli Magazine.
the Continent' to bury himself in the monastery of La Trappe,'
—in spite of all these defects, there is much that is clever and
well written in the book. The spendthrift young baronet.
Sir Patrick Dunbar, is not at all badly drawn; many of the
conversations are carried on with considerable spirit and
humour, and the baronet's sister Marian is really a pleasing-
character. There are pretty passages now and then, such as
the following: ' The Christian fellowship of a brother and
sister for each other is, perhaps, the purest and happiest of
all earthly attachments ; for there is not an hour of life, from
childhood to old age, in which they have not experienced the
same joys and the same sorrows, known every vicissitude of
existence together, acquired the same habits, wept for the
same sorrows, rejoiced in the same prosperity, and cherished
the same hopes. The affection of Clara and Eichard was not
the transient affection of two individuals thrown together by
the accident of birth, united by mere instinct, living in con¬
tact for convenience, and expecting to be separated by death;
but it was the deep, strong, heartfelt attachment of a Christian
family, linked together for mutual support in sunshine or
shadow, tenderly to support each other along tlie difficult path
of life, happy in the blessings that were given them now, and
happier still in the expectation of those yet to come in that
"new heaven and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness." '
Of Lord and Lady Harcourt, Miss Sinclair's next work, we
shall say nothing; and our opinion oi Beatrice is best summed
up by Mr. BurcheU's expressive comment (in Tlie Vicar of
Wakefidd) on the conversation of Miss Carolina Wilhelmina
Amelia Skeggs and her friend. It appears to have been
written in the wild delirium of that No-Popery fever which
befell Great Britain nearly thirty years ago, carrying even
sensible people into the utmost extravagances of thought and
language. Miss Sauclair, in a very lengthy preface, declares
that she has among her personal acquaintance ' those who
have left their heartbroken parents for ever, those who are
buried in foreign convents, those who have relinquished their
beautiful estates, those who are shut up in lunatic asylums,
and those who have died in such a fever of popish perplexity
that the doctors declared, had they lived, it would have
been in a state of mental derangement'! Several others of
the lady's books seem to owe their existence to these direful
experiences; we need not disinter the buried rubbish which
is apt to accumulate wheu the British mind suffers from one
of its periodical scares, in one generation, of French invasion,
in another, of Papal aggression.
Otir Female Novelists. 347
We have already mentioned Holiday House as the one of
her books which we can heartily praise.    Harry and Laura
Graham are two very natural and life-like little  people,
whose pranks and scrapes are probably drawn from the life
of her own merry young days.    The style, too, is far less
laboured and pretentious than in her novels, and there is
only a bearable amount of moralizing.    Sir Edward Graham
is a sort of sequel to the juvenile story, and is chiefly remark¬
able for the faults of inartistic construction, violent impro¬
babilities, and tipesome harangues, for the mere purpose of
letting the world know what Miss Catharine Sinclair thought
upon  suxih  and  such  subjects.    For  instan<je,  Mrs. Grey
comes up to London, and is sneeringly asked by a fine lady
cousin if she really means to be presented.    A real Mrs.
Grey, in or out of a book, would simply have replied that
such was her intention, but Miss Sinclair must needs deliver
her mind thus: ' I quite agree with your look, Emily, and
am ready to acknowledge that a country bumpkin like me
can add much less than nothing to the brilliancy of a court
. . .    While no one reverences more deeply than I do the
divinely-appointed authority of our  sovereign, that feeling
need not, perhaps, have taken my small insignificant self to
court; but I go this once, probably once iox all, because we
receive from the court an exampfe of every domestic virtue
that should adorn our humblest of homes, and that forms
the happiness of my fireside.    I go, therefore, to see a rare
union of the greatest external dignity with the purest private
excellence. Among all Miss Strickland's Queens, not excepting
good Queen Anne or good Queen Bess, we read of none who,
amidst refined tastes and intellectual enjoyments, held up
such a pattern to the wives and motliers of England, among
whom I go next Thursday, with -entire, disinterested, and
most respectful admiration, to offer my homage as much to
virtue as to rank.'   To the faults w-e liave already complained
of, we must add that of a habit of misquotation.    Dr. Eouth,
President of Magdalen to extreme old age, was once asked
what rule he would recommend to form a scholar.    ' Always
verify quotations,' was the old Don's instant reply.    If Miss
Sinclair had acted on this sensible advice, she would not
have ignored Hamlet's property in the well-known saying,
' Use every man after his desert,' misquoting the words, and
calling it   a proverb;   nor would  she  have talked  about
Byron's Last Man.   We  might multiply instances of such
inaccuracy.
With so much to censure, how then do we account for the
348 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
really large circulation of these novels ? We have already
alluded to secondary causes contributing to their success,
and these, we think, are among them. In a prefatory note to
her earliest novel. Miss Sinclair informs the public that her
revered father had always expressed the opinion that no
member of his family ought ever to publish anonymously;
so Modern Accomplishments came out with its author's name
a very few months after Sir John's death, and half the read¬
ing world seized upon it, to see what the daughter of so well
known a man had written. Then Miss Sinclair was Scotch,
and there was a fashionable furore for everything Scotch,
awakened first by the Waverley JVovels, and kept alive by
the impression made on thought and literature by Christopher
North, Cockburn, and many another name of note. The
scenes of all these books being laid in Scotland, a good many
people probably read them for that reason; and though the
persons and places as drawn by our author bear about as
much resemblance to the reality as ' gli abitanti di Lammer-
moor' in the opera of Lucia do to the East Lothian cottars,
the ordinary English mind, which knows less of Scotland
than it does of New Zealand, never found out the difference.
The moral tone of these novels was also a point in their
favour. All Clapham might read them and be edified.
They were largely circulated in America, and made their
way there, we shrewdly suspect, partly because they were
so very improving, so fashionable in England, and, what
republican America delights in, so full of lords and ladies!
Nor was this last recommendation without weight on this
side of the Atlantic. Few of Miss Sinclair's characters are
below the rank of a baronet, and when she does introduce
any one in humble life, she seems to be of Mr. Puff's opinion
in The Critic, and refuses to allow the aristocracy to mono¬
polize all the fine language. What says Mr. Haynes Bayley
of the change which the taste of novel readers had undergone
since the first quarter of this century ?
' 0 Hadcliffe, thou once wert the charmer
Of those who in tales took delight;
Thy heroes were warriors in armour.
Thy heroines were maidens in white !
But past are such terrible touches ;
Our lips with derision we curl,
Unless we can learn how the Duchess
Conversed with her cousin the Earl.'
After pouring forth these novels in rapid succession, Miss
Sinclair's attention became absorbed in other pursuits than
Our Female Novelists. 349
authorship.    In the notice of her contained in the volume
of Ken of the Time for 1856, the writer regrets the check
put upon her literary career by her becoming so completely
engaged in philanthropic and charitable schemes.    We can¬
not at all agree with him.    We think that she was far better
employed in the active works of benevolence which were so
dear to her, than in waiting any more second-rate fiction.   In
such works she certainly made a mark on her generation ;
she led the way for others to follow ; she laid foundations on
which useful superstructures have been raised, which will
preserve her name in honoured remembrance long after her
books are one and all forgotten.    She is thus afi'ectionately
described in middle life by one who knew her: ' She was
claimed by  all  circles, — the  literary,  the  scientific,  the
fashionable, the artistic, the religious,—her enlarged mind
and quick sympathies finding and giving pleasure wherever
she went.    Young and old greeted her advent with delight.
.   .   . Gifted with quietness, simplicity, and refinement of
manner, she had also a certain dignity and self-possession
that put vulgarity out of countenance and kept presumption
in awe.    She was endowed with a singularly sweet, soft, and
rather low voice; with a remarkable elegance and ease of
diction' (in respect of its costing her no trouble, we suppose;
for we regard her style as sententious and heavy),' a perfect
taste in  conversation, without loquacity.     She loved the
world because it was God's world, and the people thereof
because He had breathed into them the spirit of immortality.'
About the year 1840 there was a Government inquiry into
the working of the Scottish Poor Law, and most terrible
revelations were made as to the condition of the poor in
Edinburgh and other large towns.    Many of the facts which
came to light were perfectly appalling, and a thrill of pity
was felt by those classes whose happier circumstances had
never brought them in contact with the vast mass of helpless,
hopeless suffering at their very doors.    The voices of Dr.
Guthrie and others were raised in the cause of the children
of want, sufferers through parental sin and misery, and many
charitable agencies were set on foot about that time, which
certainly effected, in conjunction with better legislation, a
great improvement in the condition of the masses.   The large
heart and sound good sense of Catharine Sinclair must have
been deeply stirred by these movements.    She occupied a
leading position in Edinburgh society, and her time and
thoughts gradually became absorbed in originating sundry
practical schemes for the benefit of the working classes,
350 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
drawing in others to share her interest.    She was no mere
sentimentalist;   she knew  well  that  the truest  kindness
towards the poor is to help them to help themselves.    So
she set on foot Cooking Depots (to which idea Cookery
Schools, ]')ritish Workman Public-liouses, Coffee Stalls, etc.,
owe more, perhaps, than they know);  she established an
Industrial School in a wretched quarter of Edinburgh, which
did an immense deal of good ; she presented to the town its
first ornamental drinking fountain; she took a lively and
practical interest in the Volunteer movement, and in several
plans for the benefit of a very hard-worked class of her
town's-folk—the cnbmen.    ' Miss Catharine,' as her humble
friends called her, was thorough in all that she did', and
spared no personal trouble in doing acts of kindness.    But
none of these things interfered in any way \vitli her duties
to members of her family or to society.   Slie had; as we have
said, tastes which would have found freer play ten or fifteen
years later than when she lived.    Ladies had not then (at
least in Edinburgh) such opportunities as are common now
of hearing those who are qualified give, viva voce, the latest
results of scientific discovery, literary study, and geographical
research.   Miss Sinclair, at her own expense, and by her owit
sua:sestion, we believe, was one of the first to set on foot a series
of lectures in a ball engaged for the purpose, called, in playful
remembrance of the Sinclairs' Slamm Schloss, Ulbster Hall.
They were given, for the most part, by eminent members of
the society in which she lived—lawyers, authors, professors,
doctors of various faculties ; and several of them, by being-
expanded into books, had more than an ephemeral existence.
An interesting work on Surnames, by the late Cosmo Innes,
a learned antiquarian, had its origin, we believe, in one of
these lectures; so had Professor G. Wilson's charming Five
Gateivays  of Knoxdedgc,  and Dean  Eamsay's well-known
Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character.    The lectures
were most popular, and she had every reason to rejoice in
the success of her pleasant and novel idea.
With advancing years came a decline in health, which
awakened her friends' anxiety, and she had to bear for a con¬
siderable period being laid aside from all active exertion.
This must have been a hard trial to one who had led so busy
a life, but she was as thorough in the exercise of submission
as she had been in the discharge of activ'e duties. ' I am
doing my best,' she said,' by God's help, to profit by retire¬
ment and seclusion from the world.' She was not one to
suffer any dismay at the near approach of death, M'hich had
Retribution. 351
made many a gap in that once numerous family group, and
on August 6, 1864, she died in London, aged 63. By her
own desire she was buried in Edinburgh, and the crowds
which watched her carried to the grave were very genuine
mourners. We have unreservedly said that we do not
consider her literary work as ranking high of its kind; but
one thing is evident in all her books, that she held good
birth, talents, wealth, advantages of every kind, as a trust,
and her exemplary life bore witness to her belief. She may
not be a great author, but' having served her own generation
by the will of God, fell on sleep,' is a fit record of Catharine
Sinclair's Christian life and death. A. D.
Brtriljution.
TRANSLATION FROM GERMAN O-F UHLAND.
The vassal hath murdered the noble lord ;
The churl would fain wear his master's swoid.
He hath stricken him down in a lonely wood.
And sunk the body in Rhine's deep flood.
With helm and corslet of twisted rings.
Upon the war-horse anon he springs.
Over the bridge he would flee, but, lo !
The charger backs, refusing to go.
A touch of the golden spur, swift as a dream
The skill-less rider is plunged in the stream.
Boldly he swimmeth,—why must he drown ?
The iron panoply drags him down.
L. D.
352 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine,
' Is EHasner's STfjcorg of iHusic anti t|)e IBrama
correct ?'
II.
The ' Wagner theory of music and the drama' may thus be
briefly stated: ' Each art, when it reaches its culminating-
point alone, demands to be joined to a sister, as only in
combination can the highest art be found.' ^ ' Music must
henceforth forego part of its pretensions, and merge its
individuality in the great end of all the arts combined, the
music drama.'^ The musician is warned 'that even the
slightest moment of musical expression not necessary or
superfluous to his poetical basis, is disturbing and bad.'' On
the other hand, the dramatic poet is informed that such of
his productions as cannot be worked out musically do not
belong to the highest poetry.* Both these arts should be
aided by painting, which (including scenic arrangements) may
thus communicate the distinctness formerly her especial
privilege to the drama. And this drama ought to show
forth ' pure humanity' rather than the ' accidents of intel¬
lectual, moral, and historical developments;' * therefore the
subjects should be sought in the myths of simpler ages.
Wagner does not shrink from acknowledging the enormous
change involved by his assertions in the whole theory of Art.*
' Eevolution, not restoration, can give to us again the highest
art,' he writes. ' Music must no more attempt to fetter the
organic growth of the drama by imposing on it conditions
strange to its own nature. Henceforth the art of sound is to
be limited to its own sphere of intensifying the poet's con¬
ceptions by means of its ideal powers.' The 9th Symphony
of Beethoven is the last to be written; all progress is
denied to music except in the dramatic sphere. Eanked be¬
neath this new art is all music existing for itself,—what the
Germans call Absolute Music,—all the great symphonies, all
the sonata music, all the purely instrumental music, all, be it
said plainly, that has hitherto been held and felt to be not
only most noble but far most noble in music. Wagner tells
us Beethoven's Symphonies end by saying, ' Why, to what
purpose is all this?' to the hearer,—a why to which he supplies
^ Dannreuther. ^ Wagner, il/e««c of the Future.
' Wagner, Opcr und Drama. * Ibid.
* Ibid. ' Ibid.
'Is Wagners Theory of Music and tlie Drama correct?^ 353
the answer by requiring from music definite meaning, by
building it on a poetic basis. Eecited drama is also con¬
sidered as inferior to the combination art. The poet composer
remains alone, and superior ' as the true Erluser cler Welt;
and where the statesman despairs, the politician lets his
hands fall, the socialist wearies himself in devising fruitless
systems—yes, even the philosopher can only indicate, but
cannot explain,—it is the artist who can see with clear eyes
longed-for forms of the only truth required by humanity.' ^
After these tremendous expectations have been roused, we
are perhaps reminded of the mountain and mouse fable,
when the instrument for rescuing mankind turns out to be
the Opera—what has hitherto been thought a pretty though
conventional combination of, generally, the lighter sort of
music with a subordinate drama! And when we ask how
the new art is to be raised to this immeasurable height above
the confessedly inferior position of ordinary opera, we are
told, thus : that music, formerly the guiding power or end, is
henceforth to be only one of the means towards the union of
arts in poetic Opera. Music is sometimes called by that
party the ' handmaid of the drama,' and truly I believe
that Wagner so far fulfils his idea. Let Beethoven's music
be queen, and the best Wagner ever wrote is as a servant-
maid beside it.
Now we maintain that, in the mixed art of Opera, no art
can reach its highest perfection: the necessary, universally-
allowed compromise prevents this. The grandest painting is
not scene-painting; the noblest drama is not the sung opera,
but the spoken play. For as soon as your actors sing their
sentiments, even unmelodiously,-—as soon as you accompany
their speeches with an orchestra, even hidden under the
boards,—you take from the drama an element of truth and
force, you introduce tlie conventionalism, or, as some say,
absurdity, belonging to Opera. Those who used to be thriUed
with the awe and power of Mrs. Siddons' low whisper in
Lady Macbeth, were absorbed in the strength of her in¬
dividuality; her enunciation filled the mind; an orchestra
would have been intrusive; who would have wished her to
sing ? Above all, the liighest music can never, we maintain,
be music directly used as accompanying the words and
actions of a drama ; it must be free ; it may or may not be
inspired by a definite poetic idea, but it must not be chained
down to the words and gestures of an actor. Music can in¬
deed iieighten poetical emotion ; and incidental music intro-
' Wagner, Opcr und Drama.
No. 44.—August 1878. 2
354- The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
duced into a drama, as Midsummer NigMs Dream, Egmont,
Konig Manfred, Epidus, etc. etc.,—that is, music free, or
linked with lyric words only,—has great artistic advantages :
it aids the drama without conventionalizing it, while sacri¬
ficing none of its own powers. But we appeal to all those to
whom pure music is not an unknown tongue, when we ask if
the highest music, such as a great symphony, does not absorb
the whole faculties of the hearer ? We do not want its stu¬
pendous developments, its splendid mysteries, labelled with
meanings; we do not want mind and eye distracted by scene-
painting and acting from its unearthly glories. While listen¬
ing to the Eroica Symphonj-, we do not want to see the hero in
tin armour standing behind foot-lights; we are raised through
other means to, as we believe, a nobler so-rt of enjoyment.
But let us have Ojiera by all means, even if we allow, with
Schopenhauer, a deep thinker on art, that it ' is the product
of a somewhat barbaric idea of heightening enjoyment by the
accumulation of means, the simultaneousness of different im¬
pressions.' ^ In the necessary compromise, let music be some¬
times made subordinate to dramatic action. Tastes may be
allowed to differ; some people, especially those who are not
very' musical, may prefer such an opera. Let us enjoy it on its
own dramatic merits; it is the absurd pretensions claimed
for it that really excite one's indignation. But we may
believe that the Wagner opera is in some ways a wholesome
reaction against the inanities that are too common on the
operatic stage, without accepting his theories as sound even
when applied to an allowed inferior art; for out of the
needs of this ' greater third art' has grown the ' music of the
future.' It is especiallj^ against this development that we
protest, believing, as was to be expected, that this music,
existing only as a means, would prove less truly music than
when existing as an end. To quote Schopenhauer again: ' In
Opera, the drama ought never to forsake its subordinate place,
—tomakeitself the principal aftair.andmusicthemere medium
of its expression, wliich is a great mistake and a sheer per¬
version.' So we find in operas where music is dominant, that
we accept the absurdities easily under its excitement. For
instance, the' poignard' scene in the Huguenots, the reproach¬
ing chorus in Lucrezia, the drinking carousal in Eohcrto, and
far above all the ' quarrel' ensemble which closes an act of
Don Giovanni, are all full of true characteristic beauties which
give great enjoyment, both dramatic and musical, though not
tlie very greatest kind of enjoyment.
1 Wagner, Oper urul Drama.
'Is Wagnei-s Theory of Miisic and the Drama correetT 355
It appears that music and dramatic poetry, working by
different means, soon become antagonistic, for various reasons,
none of which seem successfully met in Wagner's operas.
One reason is, that music needs much time for its develop¬
ment, whereas dramatic speeches should be brief and con¬
densed to have their full power. Observe how words have
to be repeated in Masses, Oratorios, and songs when set to
fine music.    In Miserere Doriiine, Mozart
' Takes these two
Poor bounded words and makes them new.
Page after page of music turn,
And still they glow, and still they burn,
Eternal passion fraught and free,
Miserere Domine.'i
And, not to multiply instances, in Schumann's music to the
noble poetry of Goethe's Faust, in the final, perhaps grandest
chorus, we find two lines of verse repeated more than thirty
times.
Another reason for this antagonism is, that music, though
the intensest mode of expression, is also far the most limited.
The drama ranges over a wide field of subjects utterly
unsuited to music, unless to Wagner's music, which has to
' merge its individuality and forego its pretensions,' waiting,
as was said in one of our debate papers, ' like a servant-maid
to run little messages and express little thoughts.' We add a
short extract from this paper : ' If the hero rushes across the
stage and discharges a pistol, let there be no harmonious
expression of despair, but rather a shuffling sound of the
violins and then a loud report; if he appear suddenly, the
surprise of the heroine may be shown by little staccato notes
on the upper tones of the instrument: she must not break
into a simple love ditty, suitable only to the dawn of
civilisation.' Dramatic action knows no cadences, and pro¬
ceeds in accordance with no rhythmical movements ; therefore
he divests its exponent, music, of these adjuncts. But that is
not a pure devotion to music which only looks through her
to something else; and the truest musicians have found in
their art a realm in which to dwell. All the other arts, and
the drama with them, have come and done homage there ;
and that homage has been ratified by an ineffable charm, a
charm ' which has not been claimed, and will, we trust, never
1)6 broken by the Music of the Future.'
We  turn from   the   theory to   the   theorist.     Kichard
Wagner, poet, philosopher, dramatist, musician, etc. etc., is a
man of wide cultivation and versatile talent; indeed, he has
' M. Arnold's Poems.
356 The Ladies' EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
tiirted with all the Muses and been constant to none. His
powers were first shown in dramatic writings ; not till he was
grown up did he exhibit much musical aptitude. This is
significant, as great musical genius shows itself, we believe,
invariably very early in life. Before all things, Wagner is a
dramatic poet, not of the high creative order, but with the
strongest receptive faculties and fine dramatic instincts.
And the same versatility and intellectual grasp wdiich he
shows in philosophy and poetry, enables him to wield that
mighty instrument, the modern orchestra, which has fallen
into his hands, with great dramatic effect. He has announced
himself as the creator of the therefore previously non¬
existent ' German National Art,' and has written nine thick
volumes to prove that and other things, provoking the
suggestion that their motto ought to be,' Ich hin Ich und Icli
bin mcin Prophet.' What a contrast is this self-assertion to
the modesty of the greatest composers and artists, who were
wont to see before them a splendid ideal that their best
efforts fell short of! It is also new and strange that this
art seems unable to speak for itself, but requires a library of
treatises to speak for it. We are, however, naively told by
Hueffer {Music of the Future), that' it was by theorizing in
writing that Wagner for the first time became himself con¬
scious of the enormous bearing of his own artistic deeds on
the progress of music !'
But what has been the effect on the world of this aurora
of revolutionized Art, of this music to be spoken of in a
breath with Beethoven's ? Everywhere we find a clique of
admirers ; next a public who like some of his operas as they
have liked many operas before them; but lastly a large
party, especially of musicians, who protest against his
theories and far from enjoy his practices. Look at German
musical public opinion; take two instances where all that is
highest in music gravitates, and taste is allowed to be beyond
question,—the Gewandhaus Concerts at Leipzig, and the
Ehenish National Music Festivals; his music has hardly ever
a place in the programmes. The Tannhauser overture, one of
his very best efforts, is constantly heard at garden concerts,
but is not ranked with the great overtures of Beethoven,
Mendelssohn, Schumann, etc., in classical concerts. And of
the musicians, putting aside the two great pianists, who we
may allow to be of the family,—Liszt and Bulow,—who
acknowledges this stupendous musical genius ? Liszt,
indeed, strangest of men, and greatest of piano executants,
seems to be responsive to all sorts of music;  from a Bach
*/$• Wagners Theory of Music and the Drama correct?'' 357
fugue to a flippant valse, all lives in his memory, all is
emloraced in his sympathies, transmuted by his reflective
power. But how is it with the other most gifted and
cultivated musicians of the time — Eeinecke, and many
other good Leipzig musicians, Lachner, Brahms, Gade, Hiller,
Rubenstein, Joachim, Clara Schumann, etc.? While English
enthusiasts flocked to Bayreuth, German musicians were
conspicuous by their absence. And our English Wagnerites,
without ungraciously mentioning names, are they not, if
musicians, just not of the first rank, people who have reached
excellence rather by hard work than by inborn talent, or
who have taken to music as a secondary pursuit, who have
their philosophies and their theories, and are therefore apt to
be led by fashion, and to pass over the pure music writers
of our day, such as Lachner and Schumann ? We hear some¬
times that Beethoven was not appreciated at first, that even
good musicians condemned his music. No doubt it was
asked, and seems still an open question, whether Beethoven
would have written some things of his later period had not
long deafness caused him to miscalculate some tone effects.
But there was never anything the least similar to this clique
popularity from which musicians as a rule held aloof.
Beethoven, Haydn, Mozart, Weber, Mendelssohn, were
each in their turn acknowledged princes in the musical
world while they lived. 'Oh,' I hear some one say, 'you
should hear Wagner's music often enough, and then you
would like it.' This is a favourite Wagner argument; young
ladies, for instance, use it with their master, who is well able
tw gauge their shallow musical powers—their master, perhaps
a great conductor, who probably could write down such of
Wagner's pieces as his orchestra performs as originally
written. We allow, however, association and a strong
resolution to admire, will reconcile some hearers to strange
things.
We find, in fact, that though many are attracted to this
music who are clever, intellectual, poetical, and many also
who are wholly without musical education or aptitude, those
to whom music is a passion, who have received it as a gift,
who love it above all things, are often absolutely repelled by
the Wagnerian muse; and it is not obscurity, but rather
paucity of musical thought, a minus quality, that is com¬
plained of. Schletterer, Director of the Augsburg Conserva-
torium, considered in Germany a fine critic as well as
musician, thus writes ■} ' Wherein chiefly lies for so many
^ Translated in Choir newspaper.
358 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
hearers the peculiar charm, and for the followers of the
classical direction the weakness and repulsiveness, of
Wagner's music ? For the most part, probably, in its
harmonic treatment and peculiar modulation ; but also in its
formlessness and its extravagant instrumentation, exhausting
all means of effect. The ideal matter, the musical thought
and inspiration, are always only slight with AVagner. He is
a very skilful workman ; but what he gives is after all only
ingenious mosaic. The tone combinations which one meets
with him, have an inexplicable effect upon the laity, fear¬
fully exciting to the nerves, while they confound and fail to
satisfy the connoisseurs. Besides, often as you hear it said,
do not believe that Wagner has created so much that is new
in harmony, in imitation, and in instrumentation. Most of
his effects are found singly in older works. What makes
his compositions appear new, is the inartistic heaping up of
all conceivable means of effect; the startling, often ugly
combination of instruments, which only M-hen heard from a
cellar, as if from a distance, do not offend the finer ear; the
planless grouping in all keys ; the modulation never arriving
at repose, and reeling from one deceptive cadence to another;
and the continual use of augmented and diminished
chords.'
Of the music of the Ring der Niebelungen, Kalbeck, another
German critic of reputation, tells us that' the construction
of this, Wagner's ideal work, is based upon an orchestra
indefinitely sounding behind the recitatives recalling by the
Leit-motiven (identifying phrases), which belong to each
personage or thing, the desired idea. There are no less than
ninety such Leit-motiven in the book of the Trilogy;
and for those who hold this book, whether musicians or lay-
folk, there is no mysterious depth in the music. The orchestra,
lestlessly going from one "motive" to another, sometimes
giving one only, sometimes several, ingeniously welded
together, but lasting, on an average, only four bars each after
their first appearance, does the chief work of the drama. It
reminds you of the points of the story, reintroduces the
actors each time they appear, who themselves speak pretty
much alike in a sort of pathetic recitative, with little
distinction between them except those of dress and sex.'
But surely in the highest drama a hero should speak for
himself, not be spoken for by an orchestra. We are glad to
be encouraged by these German criticisms to own how tired
we get of these admired Lcit - motivc7i. Conceive from a
musical point of view a motive of four bars only ; it teazes the
'Is Wagtier's Theory of Music aud the Drama correct?' 359
ear without giviag time for pleasa«nt development; it is
doubtless meant to be only a reminder of what has been
heard before, and former musicians have occasionally availed
themselves of recurring phrases linked with certain operatic
ideas. But Wagner overdoes it, degrades his music into a
sort of catchword or cue, and assumes a certain dulness in
the listeners, who are supposed to be unable to recognise the
personages without a sort of clown's regulation ' Here we are
again.'
As to characteristic songs, Wagner, in obedience to the
theory, no longer allows us to expect them. Songs such
as Don Giovanni's drinking song, which sets a man before
us, or Agatha's love song in Freischutz, which sets a
woman before us, are quite condemned by it. He has
written much to prove that melody^ in the usual sense of the
word, is but an inferior time-marked music, founded on the
dance.^ His critics observe that he adopted that theory after
writing Rienzi, being then acute enough to know that in
melody he could do but little. So he started the idea of
the endless melody, though he would apparently have been
glad to have found melodies with beginnings and ends
in endless numbers like Mozart; for when, on rare occasions,
compared to the bulk of his works, a melody—a really
musical idea—occurs to him, it is apt to be worked to death.
But these happy moments are getting fewer; his music,
seldom rising into beauty, seems to decline farther from it,
the more it accords with the theory.
When we turn from the music to the poetry, we find that
Wagner has doubtless chosen in Lohengrin, the Flyimj
Dutchman, Tannhmiser, the Eing of the Niehehmgen, very
poetical subjects, and handled them with great poetic skill.
Still it is surely not ' pure humanity' that is especially set
forth in the enchanted mountains, man-swans, magical
secrets, etc., which are the paraphernalia of the old myths.
Heroes and heroines, worked on by magic spells and enchanted
drinks, must fail somewhat in dramatic, even if they retain
their poetic interest. In Rheingold there are no human beings
at all. In Parceval the only important female part is that of
the fiend, ' the primaeval she-devil;' and in all the Trilogy
the gods of Valhall, giants, dwarfs, Valkyrs, etc., fill most
1 In judging of this theory, that rhythm is but an accident of
a lower form of music, to be cast off in the highest, we should
remember that the physical basis of music is found to be in pro¬
portionate measured vibrations, i.e. in the rhythm which is the essence
of melody.
360 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
important roles. These seem rather realized fairy tales than
true dramas ; and their speU is evidently sometimes rudely
broken by poetry also being reluctant in its higher form to
unite with other arts. For instance, the forest depth is
exquisitely portrayed, the music is a tone background of
sound, as the leaves are of colour, to the figure of Sigurd,
grand and glorious, dominant over the evil dwarf. But enter
on this scene a Dragon, well made in London, and with
real nasty smoke coming out of his nostrils; we are not
impressed, and when the dragon begins to sing bass, all but
the true Wagnerites laugh. But the Dragon is terrible in the
Edda, and even in Morris' poem, and there is a Dragon in a
picture at Munich that makes your blood run cold. Such
things occur again and again, making the fatal step between
the sublime and the ridiculous, and showing that in blending
all arts you either impose on each strict limitations, or fall
into gross absurdities. Thor may roll his thunder above the
scene, but beware of letting him hang about the boards
' dangling his hammer like a carpenter out of work.' Let us
have a march for the Valkyrie,, the warrior maidens who
rode fire and air: it is a grand idea; but do not let them pass
painted over your scenic sky, and above all do not bring one
down rattling on the boards on a real circus horse, well
trained and very tame, very obviously incapable of any fiery
or aerial exploit.
Yet Wagner has true dramatic poM'er, and has done some
grand work; he has brought more of intellectual interest
into a popular amusement, he has given a cleverer form of
recreation to the cultivated classes, than the inferior operas
often on the stage. His music is sometimes very eftective,
and to those who understand it, he offers the interest of
watching the interweaving of the Leit-motivcn ; wliile to the
unmusical he gives a more or less susj^estive sound back-
ground to his dramas, which are written or adapted with
fine poetical instinct. These are good reasons for popularity,
besides the bad one on which the German critics much
insist—the intense sensual excitement given too often both
in music and situations. This is chiefly said of his later
operas, though none but the two first, perhaps, are free
from the taint, and niany ^^eople are unwholesomely attracted
by this bad quality. Tliis evil, however, is the natural
growth of the theory. Wagner has adopted the pessimist
philosophy of Schopenhauer, who has thought out the con¬
dition of man and the universe independent of revelation.
Schopenhauer   stigmatizes   life   as   a   ' cheat,  a  uselessly
'Is WagJters Theory of Music a7id the Drama correct?' 361
interrupting episode in the blissful repose of nothing.' He
finds in Art, however, the best alleviation to this misfortune
of living. The highest thing iu the universe (for to him
there is no God and no future life) is human volition, (the
will) made conscious through the intellect. It is the same
in essence, though not in degree, as the universe it con¬
templates. And this human volition finds its highest
expression in art, before the time when it and the brain
force of which it is the flower, are swept back into nothing¬
ness. There being no ideal above or beyond humanity,
Wagner accepts humanity as it is,—' pure humanity,' as he
calls it,—without its ' accidental, intellectual, moral, or
historical developments,' as the best subject for his art.
Therefore he finds the culmination of art not in the divine
unsullied music itself, but in its power of bringing home to
the hearer some definite feeling or passion of some human or
sub-human being. And for the music of the future this passion
need only be dramatic to fulfil the requirements of art. It
need not be beautiful—Tristram and Isolde over their
love philtres do not belong to the sphere of the beautiful; it
need not be pure; it may be monstrously immoral, and, as in
his story of Sigdind, without a hint of blame being attached
to the immorality; it need be only possible to human nature
when restrained neither by ' intellect nor morality.' And in
heightening emotional impressions of scenes which should
not be witnessed, and of stories which should not be told, there
music is to find her final, highest aim I—music, the purest
of the arts, incapable of evil unless introduced from without;
music, the divine art, in itself so elevating, so exalted above
all the soils of this lower world. ' Ad majorem gloriam Dei,'
wrote Haydn on his scores; and we feel the motto is true as
we leave the concert hall after such pure music as he wrote.
A German critic, writing of the voluptuousness and sensu¬
ality of Tristram and Isolde,, says : ' It is as though fire had
been flung about; we stifle in the corrupting atmosphere.
Bewildered, we leave the theatre, marvelling only that no bolt
is drawn down from heaven.'
Of course we may enjoy what is good in Wagner's plays
without endorsing what is bad, but I think it only fair to say
whither his theories not accidentally, but deliberately lead
him.
To conclude, we believe that the 'New German National
Art,' of which Wagner is supposed to be the creator, and
which may be less grandiloquently described as a more
dramatic and less musical form than usual of Opera, so far
362 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
from proving to be an enormous discovery and a world-saving
revelation, merely confirms by its effects the old view tliat
Opera is a compromise in which each art more or less sacri¬
fices its peculiar powers.
Wagner has chosen, especially in his later operas, to sacri¬
fice music, and, as he says, to ' limit its pretensions and
merge its individuality.' And it is against this limited and
dependent music that we protest; for we believe that
music is capable of absorbing all the mental and emotional
powers of the hearer, and therefore that the highest art can
never be attained by clipping her wings and subordinating
her free play to dramatic action. ' What are we to say,'
writes an English critic,' of this theory which denies to music
any voice of her own, which represents her only as the medium
for assisting the expression of words, as dependent entirely
on a defined intention as a basis ? It is difficult to know how
to reach the minds of people who are capable of such an
assertion. The very power and pride, the very raison d-etre
of music, is that it expresses that which words are powerless
to express, and which can be expressed in no other way.' ^
The arts are one, it is said; but we would reply that each
has her separate domain, where she can brook no equal rival,
though they are all indeed one in their aim—the revelation
of Beauty. E. J. 0.
Row me away to the sea!
Far from the land, where hearts are cold,
Where eyes are cruel, and lies are told.
Kow me away to the sea !
Away, away to the sea \
Though waves beat high, and splash the sky,
My heart beats wilder, God knows why.
Row me away to the sea !
Thou deep ajid boundless sea!
Far below thy restless wave,
Hearts can sleep in a quiet grave—
Was that a cry from the sea-gull's cave ?
Was it the winds of the sea ?
A. C.
^ Edinhnrgh Review, February 1876.
Lit Them Alone. ^6},
Hct 5:|)em alone:
A TALE TOLD IN LETTERS.
LETTER XXVII.
The Rev. F. J. Reynolds to the Rev. E. Beilby.
StpL 11.
Dear Beilby,—The disease is spreading fast, but I am
thankful to say I have just succeeded, after repeated efl'orts,
in getting two hospital nurses from Morwick, just in time,
for I am well-nigh don-e. The poor young doctor is dead;
so is my old clerk. Many are ill in Slade's parish. I have
written to him again at his father's, but there is no answer
yet. News from Sydwood that the poor old squire is struck
down with paralysis. Among so many troubles, one more
seems little ; but I am deeply grieved for the family. Walter,
still here, is in a miserable state—first gloomy, then violent,
now defiant, and now in d&spair. I have had to tell him
about his father. He looks for a letter from Mary to-moiTow,
having been secretly over to Burnham and bribed the servants
for her address, which they knew by Mrs. Wimpole having
forwarded letters.    Interrupted.
Vlth.—I had a letter from Mr. Aylmer this morning,
enclosing a few lines to Walter from Mary. All is at an end,
as was inevitable. In addition to other grounds of quarrel,
the story of Margaret Scott has reached them somehow,
probably exaggerated. I don't know the exact contents of
Mary's letter, but AValter is raving like a madman. I fancy
he will be off now almost immediately, but I will prevent it
if I can. I have been all yesterday and to-day visiting
sufferers in agony, and feel as if I had no heart or strength
left.
10 P.M.—Some impulse just now led me to go over to
Walter's lodgings, and I found him loading a pistol. He
turned savagely round upon me, saying, ' It was for myself;
but by Heaven, Reynolds, you shall have it if you interrupt
me,' levelling it at my head as he spoke. ' You daren't,
Walter,' said I, and his hand dropped. Half by persuasion,
half by force,. I got it from him, drew the charge, and
pocketed it. I could not induce him to come home with me,
try as I would; but I did not leave him till I had exacted a
solemn promise that he would not attempt his life this nicjM.
364 The Ladies Edinhirgh Magazine.
It has come to that! The people of the house have promised
to have an eye upon him. JVIore to-morrow, if possible.—
Yours, r. J. R.
LETTER XXVIII.
The Eev. F. J. Reynolds to the Rev. E. Beilby.
Se-pt. 13.
Dear Beilby,—Fresh horrors. The unhappy Walter is
attacked with cholera, and in the midst of his sufferings is
blaspheming and cursing the day he was born. Nothing so
fearful have I yet seen. I have been praying by his bedside
every moment that I could snatch this day. He tells me to
go and give him up, for he is lost body and soul; but I tell
him I will not give him up as long as he lives, for his soul
is my charge, and I must give account for it. Poor Margaret
is sinking fast. She has forgiven all, and I trust is herself
forgiven. My old Mary has knocked up, and I have been
obliged to get another Avoman in.    Called off.
\^th.—Walter is still raving like one possessed by an evil
spirit. I have passed a fearful morning by his side. I feel
ill myself—from overwork—nothing more, I think; but I
must write a few lines home, while I can.—Yours ever,
F. J. R.
letter xxix.
Sept. 14.
Dearest Helen,—I have neglected you lately; but you
know from Beilby how busy I have been, and I have written
to him instead of to you, as I wanted his advice in various
emergencies. I have had much anxiety about Walter Benson
among other things; then there are many sick, and Slade . . .
I was interrupted, and cannot write more. Perhaps some¬
body will send this for me. Love to dearest mother. Tell
Frank I—
F.S. by Mrs. Wimpole.
Dear Miss Reynolds,—I came over to Mr. Reynolds' house
to-day to bring some necessaries I had promised him for the
sick, and finding him attacked himself, I am staying to do
what I can for him. On his table this letter lay open, and a
cover by it directed to you. I feel I take no liberty in
adding a line, for your anxiety will be great. The doctor
says that Mr. Reynolds' attack is of the nature of cholera;
but coming upon a frame thoroughly exhausted from over-
Let Them Alone. 365
work, the case is peculiar. I am thankful to say he does not
consider it cinite, liopdcss. Mr. Eeynolds is insensible, and
has not recognised me. Mr. Slade, the curate of the neigh¬
bouring parish, returns to-day, and I shall go and meet him, to
prepare him for the state of affairs here. Be satisfied that
your brother will want for nothing that is in my power to
do. I have no words to tell you what he has been to all
here, under circumstances of peculiar difficulty and trial. I
promise that you shall hear every day from some one. You
will no doubt desire to come yourself to your brother's side,
and I have consulted the doctor as to whether he would
advise the step; but on hearing of the distance of your home,
he said decidedly that the crisis must be over, for life or
death, before you could possibly arrive. Should it please
God to spare your brother, you can then have the happiness
of nursing him in his progress to recovery. That it may be
so earnestly prays, your obedient servant,
Diana Wimpole.
letter xxx.
The Eev. N. Slade to his Father.
Illingham Par.sonage, Sept. 15.
My dear Father,—I write from jVIr. Eeynolds' bedside.
I only returned yesterday evening to scenes of distress and
suffering unspeakable. I am overwhelmed with all that has
happened, and hardly know how to write to you. Self-
rejjroach is my heaviest burden. I liave done, and left undone,
things in the last fev/ weeks which will humble me in the
remembrance to the last hour of my life. I think I wrote
to you last, just after receiving the bishop's letter. I asked
for a fortnight to consider, and having taken that reprieve,
and written to my substitute to take a third Sunday for me,
I felt free. I left Aberystwith, and went with a knapsack a
walking tour into the mountains, leaving no direction with
anybody. Certainly it was not pleasure that I sought, but
it was self-indulgence in as bad a shape, as I see now. It
was that I might indulge in solitude my own selfish regrets
and morbid imaginations; and with this I felt a sort of wild
unholy pleasure in forgetting and leaving behind me for the
time all my cares and duties, and going where no one could
find me. False and faithless I was, and the punishment
came. If man could not find me, God could. At a little
inn in the mountains I took up a two days' old copy of the
3^6 Tlic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Times, left by a former tourist, and there I read that the
cholera was raging in the north—in Morwick—in lUinghain !
Thirty deaths reported there,—how many among my own
people, sheep left without a shepherd ? I wrote at once to
my housekeeper to say I was coming, and to tell her to make
it known, and should have been here almost as soon as my
letter but for an accident to the coach on the road, which I
need not further describe. At Morwick, where I left the
railway, Mrs. Wimpole met me. I saw in her face, white
and reproachful, that all was as bad as had reached me. She
told me many particulars of those who had died, and that
Reynolds had attended my people night and day as faith¬
fully as his own, and was now lying at death's door, -worn
out in mind and body. My thoughts tlew to Mary, not, I
hope, quite selfishly; for it was pain, not joy. ' And Mary ?'
I stammered out. ' Mary,' said Mrs. Winipole, ' is far away
and well. She has had much to bear, but you do not know
what; you will learn all in time. Mr. Reynolds has been like
an angel of GoD to her and all of us.' She saw perplexity in
my face. ' What are you thinking of?' said she. ' Was slie
not engaged to him ?' 'To Mr. Reynolds ! Heavens, no I
What's the man dreaming of? Why, in the name of common
sense, did you go and hide yourself where no letters could find
you ?    She was engafied to Walter Benson !'
We had reached my door, and she put me down, and went
on herself to Reynolds, wlioni she was nursing, she said. It
was six in the evening; I went in, and found all the letters
which you had sent back here when you did not know where
I was. There were three from Reynolds, all imploring me
to return, kindly worded. Tliey gave me a fresh pang, for
the last notice I took of him was a rude repulse of his
proffered kindness, when I was leaving home, and he offered
to help with my duty. I went round among my sick and
dying, and then came on here, to the parsonage. I rang very
gently. The door was opened by two women all in tears, wlio
told me, in answer to my question, that they thought Mr.
Reynolds was dying. Oh ! how bitterly I regretted the hard,
unjust, cruel thoughts I had been cherishing of him while
away, thinking him my rival, he the while toiling to death
in doing mi/ work, comforting my love! I could only feel
thankful that he knew nothing of my thoughts, and yet how
I longed to press his liand and feel forgiven. Father, you
will wonder at my writing all tliis, I wlio am usually so
reserved and self-contained. I can only say it is a relief to
me.    There is a kind of guilt, truly, that needs confession ;
Let Tlicm Alone. 367
and you, my best friend, will understand it. . . . I went
into his bedroom. Mrs. Wimpole was sitting by him, bathing
his head. He was insensible, she said, and knew no one,
but sometimes talked wanderingly. She and I have been
up with him all night, and, except to go and see the other
sick, I have never left him. Among the sufferers by this
scourge, still hanging between life and death, is Walter
Benson ! He is in a lodging hard by, having quarrelled witli
his fatJier. Since I went away he has been engaged to ]\Iary,
and the engagement broken off again, fresli debts and irre¬
gularities of his having come to light. Thank God, my still
dear one is saved from such a fate. ... I have been to see
this unhapi^y man, but felt too much upset to be able (I fear)
to do him any good. His state is fearful. I think he was
delirious when I went in ; he was calling wildly for Eeynolds.
' Do you not know,' I said gently, ' that Eeynolds is ill, as ill
as you are, dying ?' ' Then I am lost,' he said, and turned
his head to the wall, and si)oke no more. Mrs. Winipole has
told me since I came back that the charge of this wretched
youth has been the hardest and heaviest of all poor Eeynolds'
burdens, that his solicitude has been unceasing, and his
influence alone has kept him hitherto from self-destruction.
And this is the man that I have so looked doM^n upon, think¬
ing him at best but a liot-headed boy, and turning coldly
from his efforts at a better understanding. ... I have just
been glancing round on poor Eeynolds' books and paj^ers,
strewn just as he left them yesterday morning. His Bil;)le is
lying open at Mark ix., and he has underscored the words,
' This kind can come forth by nothing but by prayer and
fasting.' I fancy he refers it to Walter. ... I can write
no more; my little time of leisure is over, and I must go my
rounds again. The number of cases is on the decrease, I am
most thankful to say. I shall not leave this house till Eeynolds
is better, or no more. It is an indescribable blessing having
Mrs. Wimpole, with her calm sense and unselfisli energy.—
Your loving son, N. S.
^^•'S—1 A.M.—I shall scribble on, to make the weary niglit
pass quicker, for there is little to do. ... As I went out, the
poor old housekeeper caught me, and detained me for half an
hour talking of her master and his devoted exertions for
those around him. It is her opinion that he has fairly
killed himself witli over-work and want of food and sleep;
and she says the doctor thinks so too. I'oor Eeynolds seems,
indeed, to have been sadly wanting in common prudence;
368 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
but he is young and inexperienced, and his nature is
excitable. Such men never know when duty calls upon
them to take some thought for self, if only for others' sake.
But who am /to arraign him of imprudence ?—I who through
my selfish sin heaped work and care upon him enough to
have turned the strongest brain! Oh, my God, why was I
not here ? N. S.
[A letter from Mrs. Wimpole to Miss Reynolds, of Sept. 15, is
omitted as containing nothing new.—Ed.]
LETTER XXXI.
Mrs. Wimpole to Miss Eeynolds.
Sept. 16.
My dear Miss Reynolds,—The doctor's opinion this
morning was that Mr. Eeyuolds was no worse,; but this
afternoon he certainly appears anxious at finding no
improvement. The stupor, with very slight intervals, has
continued ever since the day before yesterday; and the
doctor says that unless there is some appearance of an
attempt to rally soon, he fears he may sink. To-day or
to-morrow will decide the event; and God grant I may
have good news to tell you! You see that, without entering
into painful details, I have told you honestly the ve,r\) worst,
for I think it is the kindest course. Not only will you be
better prepared for whatever may happen, but, seeing that
I keep nothing back, your imagination will not picture to
you what may be worse than the reality. I think we have
taken every measure that can possibly be of service, including
the sending for a physician from Morwick, who has been
over to-day, and fully approved of our own doctor's treat¬
ment. Mr. Slade and I again sat up with your brother last
night. I am greatly relieved by his presence, and you
would, I am sure, be grateful could you see his extreme
anxiety to be helpful to Mr. Reynolds.
Evening (just before post time).— I have just been again
to our patient's bedside. Mr. Slade was kneeling by it,
praying silently. Seeing this, I did not advance, but wishing
to give you the last report, stood for a few minutes where I
could see and not be seen. I had the joy of seeing your
brother's eyes open; they fell wonderiugly and perplexed on
Mr. Slade; then recognition came into them, and a look
that I can never forget. Then the thin wasted hand on the
bed stole feebly down towards Mr. Slade's hand. Mr. Slade
grasped it fervently in both his, and a loud sob escaped him.
St. Katlwrinc. 369
Commanding himself, he then looked in your brother's face,
as if to ask him if he could do anything for him. ' The Holy
Sacrament,' Mr. Reynolds answered; 'there will be time
enough for that. Mary and Bell will come.' ' INIrs. Wiuipole
is here,' said Mr. Slade, and th^n I came forward. Your
brother's eyes sought mine with the same sweet, loving,
grateful look. ' God bless you both !' he whisj^ered, and
then closed his eyes and lay back exhausted. 1 am just
come back to send off my letter; and then we are all to
assemble in his room once more. I feel more hopeful than
I did. Though it is evident your brother thinks his end is
near, I augur better from the late change. His extreme
exhaustion possibly deceives himself. I could not resist
telling you all I have. You will take it kindly from an old
woman whose heart is very full, and who cannot feel towards
you as a stranger.—Yours faithfully,
Diana "VVimpole.
Pray assure Lady Eeynolds of my deep sympathy with
her in this affliction.
[L. C. G.]
{To he continued.)
Lady !    There are who ne'er to man reveal
How bitter is their life—how fraught with grief and ill,
But looking up, their daily tasks fulfil,
Though wounded sorely, as by sharpest steel;
So holy Katherine smiled upon her wheel.
These are the martyr spirits of the age,
Xo monk inscribes them on his storied page,
Xo limners quaint their tortures strange reveal;
But 'mid the palm-bearers, arrayed in white.
Places await them.    Meanwhile He, who passed before
By earth's rude pathway, entering through the door
And gate of death, into the realms of light.
Sends down the Comforter with power to heal
The bruised and broken on Life's iron wheel!
H. L. E.
No. 44.—August 1872. 2 A
37'^ The Ladies Edinbitrgh Magazine.
i^otcs on Wit farts !£x{)tl)ition of X878.
Paris in May and  June;  does not that call up a vision
of excessive heat, glare, and  dust ?    But the reality was
more like April in Scotland than anything else, alternating
showers  and  sunshine.    The day after our  arrival was a
regular downpour of rain, but our curiosity was not to be
restrained by sircli a trifle as the weather.    Desiring to keep
our minds unbiassed, we had tried to know nothing of the
wonders  to  be  seen,  but   had   only  partially  succeeded.
Having heard many fearful tales of the extortion practised
by cabmen on innocent travellers (only travellers' tales, by
the way), we went by omnibus to Trocadero.   The Exhibition
has already enriched Paris by a new word, which sounds
T. K. and is spelt tickets.    One has to provide oneself \vith
a T. K. before entering the Exhibition, so in the post offices,
omnibus stations, and everywhere else, you see   Vente de
tickets   plastered up.     Since the opening day, the  tickets
have been one franc every day but Sunday, when they are
reduced to half a franc.    Still more marvellous, you are not
charged anything further for any sight—a vast improvement
on the last Exhibition, when you had fifty centimes extra to
pay for everything you  particularly wished  to  see.    The
Trocadero Palace is beautiful, and consists of a dome-like
centre, with two high towers, and immense wings stretching
away in a semicircle of colonnades reminding one a little of
Eome.    From this palace the view is entrancing, even on a
wet day, and we  never  regretted  that our first sight was
from this point; yet it is scarcely a place we can conscien¬
tiously recommend as the best in which to spend a wet day.
One sees in front of one, the immense extent occupied by
the Exhibition grounds on both sides of the Seine; the river,
bridge, and road is boarded over, and the space between the
Trocadero and the principal building is laid out in lovely
gardens adorned with fountains and statues.    The masses of
fiowers were the most beautiful sight I think I ever saw—
banks of rhododendrons and azaleas of all colours, in full
blow, and packed as tightly together as in a bouquet; beds
of annuals in the same state of perfection; while the walks
were fringed with both rhododendrons and azaleas trained
like standard roses, each plant being apparently at its best
for bloom and beauty.
Although we were in the last week of May, workmen were
knocking about everywhere, wooden ca.ses were being carried
Notes on tJie Paris Exhibition of 1^"]%. 371
backwards and forwards, and nothing in the Trocadero was
finished. We had been surprised at being allowed to retain
our umbrellas; but when it dawned upon our bewildered senses
that we had half a mile at least to walk to reach the Exhibi¬
tion proper, through a sea of mud, in a torrent of rain, we
wondered no longer. After a little hesitation, we bravely
descended the long flight of wet steps, ploughed our way
through the soaking sand, and were rewarded by the view
when we looked back. A cascade of considerable height
and volume falls from the centre of the palace and ruslies
down a rapid into a basin, out of which a gilt horse, bull,
rhinoceros, and elephant are rising. Other gilt figures,
apparently representing the different nations of the earth,
are placed above the fall, which is not perceptible from the
palace. When the Exhibition was declared open, simultane¬
ously the water guslied out here, forming the fall and filling
the fountains. Tlie principal building is gigantic, and 1
thought it pretty and light-looking, but most people I con¬
sulted were of opinion ' there was no beauty in it.' Of
course it is low, and the narrow end faces the Trocadero ; so
you have no idea of its immense size till you have walked
through it. We heard of a man with a pedometer walking
seven miles within the walls in an afternoon, and calculating
he might have walked thirty without going over the same
ground twice. I cannot vouch for the truth of this state¬
ment, I simply tell the tale as it was told to me ! Colossal
female figures, representing the different countries, are
ranged in front of the building, and the eight flights of steps
along the terrace make the approach very handsome. The
view from here is also very pretty—quaint and curious
poMllons, principally restaurants and bazaars, are inter¬
spersed with fountains and statues and brilliant masses of
flowers, while above stretches the really fine and imposing
Palace of the Trocadero.
Einding that everything we asked for was a future
prospect, not a present fact, we said to ourselves, ' Old
England for ever!' and transported ourselves to the rrince
of Wales' Indian Collection. It occupies the right side of
the vestibule d'Jionneur, and seemed to be very popular, as
crowds were always I'ound every case. France has the left
wing of the entire building for herself, the rest of the world
the right, and each country a horizontal slice of that. The?
centre division is devoted to the beaux arts, and each
country has its pictures opposite its manufactures. England
with Landseer, Frith, Cooper, Davis, Sant, and M'Whirter,
372 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
etc. etc.,  makes  a  very  good  appearance, and this  even
French artists have had to allow.
Cashmeres and heathen idols conducted us to Jamaica,
where we saw very remarkable bonnets composed of lace
bark, some trimmed with parrot's wings and the flowers of
the sugar-cane, others touched up with lobster tails. At a
little distance they looked quite pretty and fashionable
' coiffures.' The only other noticeable article in Jamaica was a
nice-looking saddle, price four guineas. We turned round and
were dazzled by a balloon in coloured thread from Sir Peter
Coats, Paisley. Eeels of thread, both white and coloured,
made very pretty devices. There was one temple in chaste
colours quite lovely (English, I think), and pyramids,
columns, and monuments were quite common. We hurried
through fine modern furniture, only pausing before a carved
wood cabinet from Kirkcaldy, and were brought to a standstill
by lovely Venetian glass of British manufacture. Both Jenkin-
son and Millar have cases here filled with gems of painting
on glass and china, and glass cutting and engraving.
Behind the Indian Collection, and not very far from the
Kirkcaldy cabinet, is one of the most interesting objects in
the Exhibition. It is an exquisite piece of wood carving
some feet high, under a glass case. The workmanship is so
delicate that we thought at first it was part of the Indian
Museum, as in form it slightly resembles a temple ; but the
words, ' The Helicon Eount,' are inscribed on the base. A
paper alongside sets forth that it is the design and work of
an untaught Scotch peasant. Seeing an intelligent-looking
young man keeping watch over it, we asked if he was the
artist, Mr. Peter Cairns. He said he was, and that it had
occupied the last seven years of his life. He had been in
service at Dalkeith Palace, and had commenced it in his
leisure moments; but the idea had taken such possession of
his mind, he could not attend to his other work; so he left it,
and gave himself up heart and soul to attempt to realize the
dream of beauty which had bewitched his imagination. He
had never been taught even the rudiments of drawing, yet
the plan was his own design, and worked out in boxwood
with only a knife and a chisel. A general character is kept
up throughout, but there is great variety in the details.
There are conflicts between marine monsters and winged
animals, and all the fabulous half-human creatures of ancient
lore are to be seen on this nineteenth-century work of art.
Plights of steps lead up to the fountain, and all the carvings
on the lowest tier are fishes.    The water is supposed to flow
Notes on the Paris ExJiibition of 1878. 373
from the mouths of strange creatures; but it is impossible to
describe accurately such an intricate piece of workmanship
without having it before one. Every morsel is beautifully
finished, and the drawing seems perfectly correct; so am I
not right in saying that this is the wonder of the Exhibition,
although it comes from no farther away than Portobello ?
Canada, besides its snow shoes, skin boots, and furs of all
kinds, has been fired with ambition to emulate France in its
own department, and sends a case of ladies' toilettes. Next
come Australia's five tasteful little courts. The motto above
the portal,' Advance, Australia !' appears likely to fulfil itself,
for within are to be seen wax models of its many fruits,
emu muffs, opossum rugs, emu eggs set in silver, cat's-eye
ornaments, polished oyster shells, silk cocoons, snow-white
wool, and a trophy of its various native wines in decanters.
Queensland seems to pride itself more on its specimens of
ore and its pearls, and has adorned its court with pictures of
scenery. Victoria displays, besides gold, coal, biscuits, and
carriages, figures of settlers and aborigines, as large as life,
and fearful to behold, the savages looking as if they had
been stuffed, as well as the kangaroos and brilliant birds.
Western Australia and the Cape of Good Hope were mixed up
together in a strange way, and we saw something very like a
wool waggon in an unfinished part of Canada, also barrels and
bales of wool piled up like the hold of a ship with Australia
written on them. Perhaps they were to be transferred
ultimately to their proper place, or perhaps their proper
place was too small for them. Who can tell ? for I cannot.
New Zealand was either unrepresented or not ready, or I
missed her court in some unaccountable manner. So much
was unfinished when we went to Paris, that something new
was opened nearly every day. The 'paviU(m of the Prince of
Wales, which can be seen by order, enters from the Eue des
Etrangers. It struck us as very dark and sombre, the light
being from the top only, and through coloured glass. The
beautiful wrought-iron gates open into a small entrance hall
with mosaic pavement, out of which a staircase leads,
marked private. The first apartment is the dining hall; the
table is covered with gold plate and blue china, the mantel¬
piece is carved wood, and the walls are wainscoted with the
same wood and panelled with English tapestry. A likeness
of Her Majesty is above the fireplace. To the right is a tiny
drawing-room done up in pale blue satin, with a grotto off
it, filled with ferns, where water falls perpetually, and keeps
one cool with the refreshing sound.    To the left is a minute
374 -The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
library with a writing table, called, I believe, the Prince of
Wales' morning-room; behind this apartment, and opening
from it, is a small ante-room; behind the dining-room is a
long narrow slip of a room ; and behind the blue drawing-
room a dear little primrose room, the walls hiing with yellow
satin covered with transparent lace. The rooms all open out
of each other, French fashion, and must be cool, although not
bright; the walls being hung with satin or plush, or tapestry,
conduces to this effect, as well as the ' high art' undecided
colours of the carpets, many of which are of Persian patterns.
One received many surprises. In Eussia, for instance,
malachite was a matter of course ; and I may mention two
vases and a centrepiece of gigantic proportions, which were
sold for a sum as large as their size. One was not astonished
to see, likewise, velvet cloaks lined and trimmed with shining
sheepskin, queer boots and hats, rich peasant costumes, and
mucla leather; but the tasteful gold aod silver plate,—in
particular silver napkins on gold salvers, photographs on
silver plates.^the many cotton stuffs, the gorgeous silk
dresses, the letter weights with fruit imitated in stone, and
other pretty trities, were unexpected from barbaric Kussia.
They had also some tine pictures, and a piece of sculpture
of our Saviour, executed in white marble. The United
States was a disappointment; its contribution was small
and iminteresting; it had not even a new and wonderful
machine to make old Europe stare ! And its pictures were
the most unfinished and ugly productions possible even in
modern painting; only two landscapes passable.
Greece was prosaic with its specimens of polished marble,
and cotton plants, and minerals worked by a French company.
The only pretty things were the lace, and a white marble
staircase defended by Griffins. It and Denmark were also
mixed up in a funny way; only divided by a screen. Little
Denmark made a great show with its silver plate, its painted
wood, its exquisite fur curtains edged with penguin skins,
etc. Its pictures, too, were good; some of its landscapes most
beautiful, a snow scene and a green river in particular.
Holland I found the most amusing country in Europe. On
first entering its domains, I was attracted by a statue of
peculiarly pure and glistening white marble. I went quite
close, and never did I see such luminous stone before. I
wondered why it was placed there, with graceful statuettes
and packets of candles between them, when suddenly the
truth flashed upon me: it was made of candle wax; and to
make assurance doubly sure, an old Frenchman beside me, in
Notes on the Paris Exhibition of 1878. 375
defiance of the request not to touch, scraped the base with
his finger nail. The Dutch interiors, furnished with heavy
dark oak furniture and delft ornaments, with the figures in
national costumes as large as life, were very real, and just
what one sees in Holland to this day; while the peasants from
out-of-the-way provinces, in their fanciful dresses, represented
skating, buying and selling, enacting the old, old story, and
sitting at home at ease, and were very interesting and well worth
seeing, although one ran the risk of being crushed to death
in viewing them, the passage being so narrow, and people
pressing forward continually from both sides. However, this
was one of the new sights while we were in I'aris, and no
doubt the ardent curiosity regarding it would soon subside.
The Dutch pictures, too, were above par. One by Alida Stock,
of a flamingo beside some palms, we noticed immediately; the
bright pink colour of the bird,so difficult to get in painting, was
so vivid, and at the same time so soft and so true to nature, that
we were lost in admiration. Its companion painting, a man¬
darin duck under a pink rhododendron bush, was also very well
done, but was not such a striking work of art as the flamingo.
Belgium had its court of lace; its Spa wares and curious
insect jewellery, copied so faithfully from nature, one positively
shrank from them. It had also a large collection of fine
paintings. One by C. Verlat, dated Jerusalem, and entitled,
' Nous voulons Barabbas,' haunted us. The robber is being
carried off on men's shoulders, shouting and shaking his
broken fetters, while Christ, about to be led to execution, yet
casts a pitying glance at the deluded multitude. A little boy
with a dusty foot in the air is capering in front of Barabbas.
There is something very saddening and terribly suggestive in
the child's untliinking glee. Italy, of course, was lieautiful
with its mosaics and coral, its silver filigree and Venetian
glass. The lately-opened court of the latter was like fairy¬
land. On high hung many coloured chandeliers, on pedestals
stood graceful little statuettes in the pure transparent marble
that gives such life to Italian art; while around were spread
cups and saucers, vases and bottles, bracelets and necklaces,
and even flexible spun-glass neckties. The Italian paintings
disappointed us, but they had some pretty sculpture in the
centre corridor. Here, too, was an immense vase in. strange-
looking pottery from Sweden. Norway and Sweden had
nothing very striking anywhere, but I don't think their courts
were finished when we left. They had houses on the Rue des
Etrangers also, and their partitions were light varnished wood.
Japan had some lovely articles; tortoiseshell screens with
37^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
raised work in gold and silver; ivory work with raised hirds
and insects in gold, silver, and precious stones; much lacquer
work, silks, porcelain, beautiful embroidery, and very hideous
pictures.
The court of Persia was hung round with carpets, and had
boxes, trays, and a table of inlaid gold on ivory, and engraved
gold, silver, and copper vessels of all kinds.
The court of Siara had also inlaid articles, but more like
the ordinary Indian workboxes.
Peru's frontage was the portico of one of the temples of
the Incas; while v/ithin were big idols and very ancient-
looking pottery, and collections of beetles and butterflies.
Tunis had a brilliant little court, and so had Morocco, and
even Monaco displayed its simple wares among the other
independent kingdoms.
An important feature in this Exhibition was the GaleiHe
du Travail, along which we pass to reach France. A series of
Avorkshops where one saw the articles being made, and could
buy them; an Oriental making cashmere at a loom, while
another alongside was embroidering it; a party of Arabs
making the now well-known Algerian work; girls working-
lace on cushions, and making artificial flowers to rival
nature ; diamond - cutting going on under a glass house;
elephants' tusks being transformed into ivory articles; looms
making ribbons; artists painting on porcelain with a minute
furnace beside them to fire the work, were a few of the in¬
teresting sights to be seen there.
France comes out strong in mechanical toys, which
were really very amusing. They only worked in the after¬
noons. We were first attracted by a bird singing sweetly on
the top of a flower. Then we followed the crowd to the
swimming baths, where two beautiful young lady dolls, in
Parisian bathing costumes, were swimming vigorously; they
struck out well, and were so like frogs in their movements
that I suppose they were doing the correct thing. It was a
child's Paradise, dolls were everywhere, dolls gaixiening, dolls
at table, dolls at their toilettes, dolls promenading, dolls
sleeping, etc. As we passed a toy elephant with a number
of people on its back, we saw it move its head and then curl
its trunk all round, as is the manner of live elephants; and
the riders made movements with their heads and their limbs,
not constantly, but just now and again in the most natural
manner possible. There was a camel that got up and laid
down at intervals; but I think the most diverting spectacle
was the monkey's cage.    There was a monkey swinging, and
Notes on the Paris Exhibition of 1878. 377
two monkeys sitting on a branch with their arms twined
round each other's necks, and another monkey was ringing a
chime of bells, moving his arms and head like life; but when
a benevolent-looking monkey the size of your thumb suddenly
made an atrocious face at you, it was startling.    Another
little wretch had a mirror in his paws, which he moved up
and down, making faces at his own reflection.    Next a row
of cages  with real stuffed birds  in them, who sang  and
chirped and flapped their wings.    A regular pantomime was
enacted at the next corner—time, apparently midnight; scene,
roofs of houses, closed lattices, a row of chimney cans whirl¬
ing with the wind, and a cat contemplative, only moving its
head occasionally.    The top of a ladder appears, and a little
man with a guitar in his hand runs up it.    A lattice opens
softly, and a young lady is seen, who bows gracefully to the
serenader;  another on the opposite  side  opens  also, and
another damsel appears, who also bows.   With  less  care
another lattice is thrown open, and an ancient dame in night¬
cap  and spectacles  looks out; serenader  and first damsel
disappear, the irate dame shakes her finger at damsel number
two, who also vanishes, and the old lady shuts her window and
retires.    A moment's pause and the serenader appears again.
This time an attic window is thrown up violently, and an
old gentleman also in a nightcap looks out; the serenader
is not to be seen, so he glares all round and lets down
his window with a bang.    And then the play recommenced.
France, of course, excelled in ohjds de luxe.    One of the
novelties was the shark-skin articles; they looked like polished
grey and  green marble,  and  were  made   into  rings  and
bracelets, purses and card-cases, and such things.   They were
very pretty, and one had difficulty in believing they were
composed of part of the shrivelled musty skin displayed
alongside   for  effect.     The  tortoiseshell   articles,  and  the
ormulu, and the bronzes, and imitation bronzes could not be
equalled anywhere.   We admired particularly a bronze clock,
which  consisted  of   a  graceful   female  figure   holding   a
pendulum in her hand, the hours being  indicated on the
pedestal beneath her feet.    The diamonds and other jewels
were magnificent.   We saw a necklace like a point lace collar,
with tassels all composed of diamonds ; also a bracelet which
represented a bar of music.    It was composed of four gold
wires, and had  the key and notes marked in diamonds.
Eather a curiosity was an immense oyster shell with two
enormous pearls in it, a diamond bird hovering over it, and
sprays of diamonds all round.
378 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The French glass and crystal, too, was unsurpassed. The
first striking object was a crystal temple, supported on crystal
pillars, and surrounded by a thick crystal balustrade; and
when one saw a crystal chessboard, with crystal men, a
crystal tea-table, a crystal basin and ewer, one wondered if
crockery or anything but glass was necessary for household
purposes.
The French tapestry, too, was beautiful, and was more
artistic than many of the painted pictures. But that reminds
me I have very little space left for the pictures, and I must
not forget to notice Gustave Dore's bronze vase in the centre
corridor facing Porte Eapp. It was immense, round, with a
very narrow mouth, and had wreaths of flowers and Hying
birds over it, reminding one of his graceful and original
illustrations. There was an immense number of French
pictures, of course, and some very fine ones. There were
some curious effects of candle light, more like Rembrandt's
than the French school; many excellent portraits, one of a
middle-aged lady in modern dress, by Tony Eobert Fleury.
She is drawing on a glove, and has none of the detestable
self-consciousness of a portrait, but looks like a character in
liistory. J. L. Gerome has many wonderfully painted
pictures—one of a lion in his den, who has gone supperless to
bed, or whose supper has disagreed with him, his expression
is so fiendish ; his eyes are green, and glare at you, seeming to
emit sparks of iire.
Among many beautiful paintings, and many terrible ones,
with all the horrible details only too well painted, one
picture stands out in my memory. It is called ' L'amour et
la jeunesse,' and is the figure of a young girl with a cupid
on her shoulder. Slie has turned her head half round to
listen to his whisperings, and the child is gazing earnestly
into her eyes with such an eager innocent face as quite to
disarm suspicion. NoNO.
In Exm of £Ear.
A MAIDEN standing in a forest glade
Alone, beneath the interwoven shade
Of branches newly budding into life,
With not a thing to tell of sin or strife ;
But songs of birds and sunlight everywhere
Dispelling gloom and making all things fair;
Two Scenes suggested by the Prospect of War.     379
While each bird vied with each how best to sing
Its joyous welcome to the new-born spring !
She heeded not the universal bliss,
Her heart had Hovvn to other scenes than this ;
Kneeling in tearless agony of prayer,
' Almighty Father, save me from despair I
Protect my darling, bring him back once more;
And yet    .    .    .    Thy will be done !'
Still as before.
Bird answered bird in song—what could they tell
Of nation's feuds, of ' battles' deadly swell,'
And breakin" hearts at home ?    Each had its nest
To build, and in its ignorance was blest.
She rose at length, a light upon her face,
The victory of Faith achieved by grace !
' In danger's hour, Lord Jesus, be Thou near,
His hand to strengthen and his heart to cheer;
And if it be Thy will, oh let him come
In honoured safety back to love and home !
If not,'—she paused and said with failing breath,
' In all things make him " faithful unto death." '
II.
A soldier lying on a distant plain,
The battle ended, 'mid th' unnumbered slain.
Though War a ghastly pageant held below,
Peace reigned on high, the western heavens aglow
With lambent crimson melting into gold.
While softer tints veil-like the east enfold ;
The closing glories of an autumn day.
His fevered thoughts had wandered far away
To one who loved and prayed for him at home.
In hope of happy days that might not come !
And God in Heaven heard his heartfelt cry.
For strength for her to live—for him to die !
Her lot the hardest; for as death drew near,
Christ's soldier knew he had no cause to fear
In that dark vale with Jesus by his side.
O'er distant mountains rolled the sunset tide,
In waves of glory. ...    To the dying eyes.
It was the golden gate of Paradise !
C. M. L. F.
380 77/1? Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
©\\x Hibrarg ^able.
Medusa and Other Poems. By Lady Charlotte Elliot.
C. Kegan Paul & Co.
There is true poetical feeling in this volume, combined with varied
powers of expression. Lady Charlotte Elliot has a faultless ear for
rhythm ; and her verse flows onward most musically, sometimes
producing on us the effect of a murmuring stream on a hot day,
sometimes waking us up with a warmth of colour, a picturesque
command of language, which reminds us of the sunny south. A
little more concentration of expression and distinctness of thought
would occasionally be desirable. At times the ' languid sweetness '
seems almost to cloy upon the reader ; but it is very pleasant to meet
with a poet whose mission is not to teach or astonish the world, but
who simply sings to us a low soothing melody, to which we gladly
pause to listen. In the poem with which the book opens, the de¬
scription of the sleeping Medusa is given with much tragic force.
' The son of Metaneira' is a more pleasing subject, and it is handled
with a lavish wealth of language which is perhaps scarcely statuesque
enough for a Greek model. An exquisite little poem is * Loch
Maree ;' and ' Rosebud and Ragweed ' shows a rare power of sim¬
plicity never degenerating into childishness. It is a touching story
of two children, one delicately nurtured, the other a little waif from
one of our large towns, whose chance encounter costs the life of the
gentle-hearted maiden.
' In Rosalind's blue eyes
The tears began to rise.
To hear her new-found friend so sadly speak;
By love and pity swayed.
Her little arms she laid
Round Nell's brown neck, and kissed her burning cheek,'
and thereby caught the infection of the terrible fever, born of foul
water and overcrowded homes in the festering lanes of the great
city, which was consuming little Nell's life. We think that both
this poem and ' Loch Maree,' in their unadorned truth and pathos,
might be suitable for reading aloud at Mothers' meetings or to a class
of elder girls. Among the shorter poems, ' Rest in the Grave ' is a
tender and pitiful lament over a young girl who died with the
l^athetic incompleteness of beauty's promise on her pallid face.
Many of these lesser poems, such as 'Glamour,' or the unnamed
verses at the end, are thoroughly lyrical both in form and spirit, and
demand, and would well repay, a musical setting at the hands of
some one who could appreciate their pensive beauty.
The World Well Lost. By Mrs. Lynn Linton.
Chatto & Windus.
This book is, as its title implies, the story of two lovers who lose
the world for their love, sacrificing for that, social position and
material advantages. The idea of sacrifice recurs all through the
book, taking a pure and true form in the story of Arthur and
Muriel, the hero and heroine proper, but showing aspects more or
less false and debased in several of the other characters. The actual
plot is the weakest part of the book, being irritatingly unreal, yet it
is not difficult to forget this while watching the gradual unfolding of
the different characters.    Arthur Machell, the hero, is described as
Question Scries. 381
one of those iron-witted men who rule circumstances, and force
fortune to give them what they want. This force of character is
apparent in him from the first moment he appears, and we feel sure
that he will win his lady worthily, like a strong and gallant English¬
man, despite all opposition. Then his sweet bride, Muriel, is a very
fair and graceful figure, who holds fast to her love through all trial
■with a modest patience which is very touching. In contrast to Arthur
we have Wilfrid Machell, the eldest son of an impoverished family,
whose brave and unselfisli nature has been utterly perverted by a
miserable desire to replace his house in its old social position, and
who, therefore, sacrifices his whole life for money and marries an
heiress whom he thoroughly despises. This wedding, vividly con¬
trasted with the happy one of Muriel and Arthur, brings out the
despicable meanness of a manage de convenatice in a manner only too
painfully true. Another sufferer from misdirected ideas is Derwent
Smith, a high-spirited fellow from whom we expect much at the
beginning of the story, who yet, when he discovers that his father
has disgraced himself, gives up his family altogether for ■what he calls
'honour,' but what is really selfishness and pride. His mother, on
the other hand, loves her felon husband with such all-absorbing
passion, that, to shield him from dishonour, she sacrifices her
children's happiness and her own truth. Thus there is much in the
book which is sad—sad because so true, as it portrays several
characters, each with a great measure of beauty and nobleness, who
yet fail in doing right because they have false standards of duty, and
set other things higher than love and truth. But if the book does
give rise to some serious thought, there is also much in it which is
very bright and pleasant. Some of the minor characters are
capital, and there are many clever little touches, such as the
description of Mr. Oliphant, ' who lacked that spirit of organized
suspicion, called knowledge of the world.' The end of the story is
as bright as it is beautiful, showing us Arthur and Muriel united at
last; and we know that, as they have won each other, the ' World' is
to them, indeed, 'well lost.'
(Question StrifS.
I. History.—Add a brief note to each of the following, connecting
it with the Roman occupation of Britain : — Colchester, York,
Wallsend, Watling Street.
II. English Literature.—Add the author's name and a brief descrip¬
tive note to each of the following:—The King's Quhair; The School¬
master; Ralph Roister-Doister; The Castle of Otranto.
Answers to be sent in by 15th September, addressed,' Qu. C, care of
Miss Walker, 37 Gillespie Crescent.' The best answer to each question
will be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of
the year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magazine. History not to exceed
twenty-four. Literature twenty-six printed lines ; twelve ■words go
to a line. We warn correspondents against running time too short.
The loth is the latest possible day on which the Editors can receive
any answer; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
'382 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
ANSWERS TO JUNE SERIES.
So many are good, it has been difficult to decide. HUtonj: On the
whole, B. best, as stating her points most clearly ; almost equal, A
Chylde ; M. B., Midge, excellent; Bketwalda, Heather, very
good; Rediviva, Spider, May-Fly, good. Literature: Midge and
Heather run each other hard, Midge best, on account of terse
clearness, and due mention of Sir Th. Wyatt; next. Heather; B.,
excellent ; Rediviva, very good.
I. The chief rights confirmed to the nation by the Great Charter
were, (1) Security for Person and Property. No freeman henceforth
could be seized, imprisoned, or dispossessed of tenement or liberties,
outlawed, banished, or otherwise hurt, save by the legal judgment
of his peers or the law of the land. His property could not be
seized by the Crown officers without his consent while he lived, and
after his death it should be disposed of according to his will, or if
he died intestate, should belong to his heirs. (2) Freedom from
Arhitrari/ Taxation. No unlawful aids were to be levied either by
the king from the barons or by the barons from their vassals.
London and the other cities and burghs were not to be taxed without
the consent of the great council, and were secured in their ancient
liberties, while merchants were protected from arbitrary tolls and
impositions. (3) Puritif and Freedom of .Tnxtice. The Court of
Common Pleas was henceforth to be stationary at Westminster,
instead of moving with the king's movements, and was to be open to
all, and justice was to be no longer bought, refused, or delayed.
Circuits were appointed four times a year, and assizes were to be
held in proper counties. No freeman was to be tried on rumour
alone, but on the evidence of lawful witnesses, and fines were to be
legally regulated.
Such were some of the principal jjoints in the Great Charter wrung
from John by his powerful barons, who, in securing their own
liberties, were mindful of the rights of those beneath them. B.
II. The Sonnet is a short poem, containing one subject clearly and
perfectly worked out, which, according to Mr. Tomlinson, must go
on increasing in interest till it leads to an impressive close.
It must consist of fourteen lines only, divided into a quatrain and
a sestet, or in other words, a stanza of four lines rhyming alternately,
and one consisting of six distinct parts, generally containing three
rhymes. The endings of the lines must be so chosen as to present a
distinct vowel sound in each group, tliat the lines maj' be interwoven
without confusion.
Owing to the lightness and richness of the Italian and Spanish
languages, their poets liave been enabled to express every feeling and
fancy in the sonnet ; whereas, in the English language, there is such
a scarcity of rhymes that it has been found more suitable to ' the
graver and more contemplative subjects.'
In the sixteenth century this form of poetry was introduced into
England by the Earl of Surrey and Sir Thomas Wyatt, both of whom
excelled in it. Midge.
Strau 0otcs.
Edinburgh  University Local  Examinations. —Of   these   the
results seem most satisfactory.    A large number of candidates from a
Stray Notes. 383
3Tstance availed themselves by correspondence of the S. George's
Hall Preparatory Classes: and it was cjuite evident from their papers,
that this mode of instruction is completely successful. We are sorry
not to be able to speak more in detail of the results, as they were
not definitely known soon enough for our present issue ; but it was
evident to eye-witnesses, that this year shows a great advance in the
business-like and satisfactory manner in which the work is got
through. The lady students may well be grateful for the care and
kindness shown by the University authorities in all the arrangements
for their comfort, thus obviating as far as may be the strain and
fatigue of a prolonged examination.
Conversazione at the Ladies' Club.—A new feature of the
Edinburgh Local Examinations this year was a conversazione held
in the Ladies' Chib-room, Albert Buildings, to which the students
and teachers of the S. George's Hall Classes were invited, many
lady friends of ' Higher Education ' being also present. Over cups
of tea and ices, fellow-students, previously strangers to each other,
became quite friendly and confidential, and were soon discussing the
relative advantages and disadvantages of studying in the Edinburgh
classes or working by correspondence, and comparing notes more or
less cheerfully as to the manner in which they had answered the
questions in the all-important examination papers of the day. The
teachers and correspondents who through all the months of prepara¬
tion had been only names to each other, were able to converse
together; and an opportunity was afforded for the pupils to thank
the teachers for the pains taken in correcting their papers, and for
the teachers to compliment the pupils on the way in which their
work had been done. A looker-on might have easily distinguished,
by their v<mrkalunlf airs, second year students, triumphant over the
lesser evil of ' specials,' from those who, having ju.st struggled bravely
through the dangers of the ' Preliminary Subjects,' were still in many
cases fearful of having split against the dreaded rock 'Arithmetic'.'
These might be heard receiving comfort from sister sufferers of a
former year, who told gaily how few sums had ' passed ' them.
There might be seen the calmly confident student, sure at least of
having ' passed,' and not caring for anything beyond ; the humble
or perhaps lazy student, satisfied merely to ' scrape' thrfiugh ; the
anxious student, not content with simply passing, but eager to have
done well enough to gain a prize ; and the ambitious student, con¬
scious of having answered all the questions, and aspiring to a
bursary. But whether hopeful or despondent, upon every face the
anxious, careworn expression which preparation for an examination
is apt to produce, had given way to a general air of relief and
satisfaction.
It was a pleasant reunion of friends, all bound together by a
common interest, having been for months engaged in the same
studies, brought together from all parts of the United Kingdom for
the same end. All—scattered as they now are, enjoying, we hope, a
well-earned holiday—may look back to the afternoon of the 20th
June with a pleasant recollection of Edinburgh hospitality, and of
air hour spent in congenial intercourse ; while thanks are warmly
given to the lady Managers of the Club, not only for the arrange¬
ments of this pleasant meeting, but for the kind thoughtfulness by
which all studests from a distance were made honorary members of
the Club for the time of their visit to Edinburgh.
384 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Lily asks if any one can tell her whence comes the following
quotation :
' Wo die Tiig sind lang genug
Und die ^Niichte milde.'
It has been described to her as ' a simple hymn or ballad sung in
some cold northern region.'    Lily would like to know the poem and
its author.
Villa Rey has asked a question we are sorry to be unable to
answer, viz. the authorship of one of our finest Scottish paraphrases,
' 0 God of Bethel, by whose hand,' etc. We hope some kind
correspondent will be able to give the information, and we would
also suggest that a paper might, we think, be made most attractive
and interesting on the authorship and history of the fine religious
poems called the Paraphrases. Many of them are, in point of feeling
and composition, quite equal to any hymns from the land of Luther ;
and as we think their beauty and literary merits are hardly appre¬
ciated as they deserve, we should welcome a good paper on the
subject.
Thalatta asks, Can any one give her the source of the following
quotation :
' The tree
Seeks kindlier nurture from a soil enriched
By its own falling leaves ; and man is made
In heart and spirit from deciduous hopes
And things that seem to perish.'
The lines are quoted in the pretty novel TJirostleihwaite, no author's
name being given.
Working Ladies' Guild.—By the kindness of one of our con¬
tributors, a paper on this interesting subject will be inserted in our
September issue.
iEloticrs to Corrcsponlimts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladks' Edinhiinjh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
In the proposed series, ' Country Subjects and Pursuits,' articles
are already promised or received on Fishing, Hunting, Curling,
Keeping Poultry, and Sketching. We hope to receive communica¬
tions from any lady willing to contribute to this series.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
There will be no meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary
Society in August or September. The next meeting will be on
Saturday, 5th October, at 25 Great King Street. Debate, ' Does the
dress of men and women of the present day show evidence of de¬
velopment in refinement and good taste ?'
Our Female Novelists. 385
XX.
ANNE MARSH.
h. 1797—</. 1874.
It has often struck us, during the present series, while
considering the lives and commenting upon the works of
female writers of our fictitious literature, how invariably
the interest and romance of the career and of the books
seem to increase or diminish in an exact ratio of inverse
proportion the one to the other. This may seem a fanciful,
nay, a paradoxical idea; but M-e could adduce many instances,
and, the principle once conceded, illustrations of the fact and
solutions of the problem will readily occur to most of us.
A problem we call it advisedly, for at first sight one might
be tempted to think that, in order to tell a striking story,
and to tell it well, the narrator must have passed through
striking scenes, must have ' lived' incidents, and been, more¬
over, gifted with the power of looking through outward
events to the hidden springs of human pride and passion
which lie deep beneath. In short, it might seem that to sit
quietly at home, surrounded by the petty cares, duties, and
pleasures of ordinary home life, with little or no power of
varying the scene, though it might afford facilities for writing
books whose value depended upon calm and sober judgment
and critical accuracy, could never give fair play to the
exercise of a novelist's peculiar powers. Often, in our list of
authoresses, we have dwelt upon lives of women interesting
and charming in their day, associates of the leading wits and
great men of the period, with their own histories full of stir
and romance, e.g. Sydney Owenson and Mary Shelley. But
when we turn to their books, these are mere names, or at
best literary curiosities of bygone date, to be looked at with
interest much like that with which we survey our grand¬
mother's court dress or Sunday bonnet. Others in our list
have, from the extreme monotony of their lives, coupled with
the reticence that long shrouded our English authoresses
from public notice, completely succeeded in baffling the
efforts of biographers, for the simple reason that there was
nothing to say about their lives and homes that would
interest readers who yet hailed with delight each succeeding
No. 45.—September 1878. 9 „
386 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
announcement in publishers' lists of ' a new novel by the
author of .'
It would seem time, then, that the looker-on not only sees
most of the game of life, but has undoubted superiority over
the actual players in describing it.
No better illustration of our principle could be given, than
the life and works of her who is the subject of our present
sketch—Anne Caldwell, best known as Mrs. Marsh. Born
in the ranks of the English middle-class country gentry,
whose biographies, if written, might one and all be entitled,
' Annals of a Quiet Life,' in her case no such record was
even attempted. That she was the daughter of one country
gentleman and wife of another, is pretty nearly the sum
total of what we know of one so wholly unobtrusive.
Her father, James Caldwell, Esq. of Lindley Wood,
Staffordshire, was a squire of the old school, possessed of a
good estate, upon which he lived, educating his children
quietly and well. He had one son, James Stamford Cald¬
well, and four daughters; of these, Anne was the youngest.
Though not attaining to any great eminence, Mr. Caldwell
was a good and able lawyer, and for some years held the
office of Eecorder of Newcastle-under-Lyne, where his name
was long remembered with grateful respect.
Anne CaldweU was born within a year or two of the close
of the eighteenth century. What her education was we can
in some measure learn from her books; no desultory or
careless training, no frittering away of the seed-time of Life,
could have produced so fair a literary harvest as the series of
novels which in after life she continued to put forth through
a period of twenty-five years. Her talent for writing seems
to have developed slowly; we hear nothing of girlish attempts
either in prose or verse. She married early, exactly in her
own rank, her husband being the only son of William Marsh,
Esq. of Willy House, Farnham, Surrey, and Amelia Cuth-
bert, his wife, of Woodcote Hall in the same county. But
though her social position was unchanged, her marriage
brought her into contact with a much more varied circle, by
establishing her in a London home and giving her personal
knowledge of the great commercial and money-making class
so important in England.
Arthur ]\Iarsh, at the time of his marriage with Anne
Caldwell, was already a junior partner in the firm of Marsh,
Fauntleroy, Stracey, and Graham, whose bank in Berners
Street, of first-class reputation, had been established for
upwards of thirty years.    The young couple lived in London,
02ir Female Novelists. 387
and, with increase of children, and household cares, and the
claims of society, she had no leisure to devote to writing,
even had she been so inclined. We can trace in later years
the effects of her mental training at this time, when the
utter selfishness of extravagance seems to have been indelibly
imprinted on her mind. Not a few of the most powerful
scenes in her books turn upon the use and abuse of riches.
But whether she sketches the career of eager money-getting,
of penurious saving, or of thoughtless profusion, we are
invariably struck by the high principle, tlie generosity, and
perfect justice of her views upon the acquisition and disposal
of wealth.
A terrible ordeal was at hand. After some years of
prosperity and affluence came a reverse of fortune, as
unexpected as it must have been appalling to all in any way
concerned with the firm.
On 7th September 1824, while ordinary business was in
its usual train, the partners were thrown into consternation
by the appearance of Bow Street officers with a warrant for
the apprehension of Mr. H. Fauntleroy, on a charge of
extensive fraud. Mr. William Marsh, an old and infirm man,
fell down in a fit on hearing the intelligence, but slowly re¬
covering consciousness, and learning that a search for papers
would be necessary, he at once gave every possible facility
for the most rigorous investigation, hoping at least to save
the rest of the firm from being implicated in suspicions
which must be a death-blow to their hitherto respectable
banking career. Nor were his fears beyond the truth,
although at the moment of the arrest he was not aware to
what an extent the credit of his bank was involved, in con¬
sequence of ruinous speculations of which he was ignorant.
It was not, in fact, until the partners had paid a visit to
their unhappy colleague in Newgate, that the full horror of
his situation burst upon them, together with the extent of
their own liabilities in consequence of his proceedings,
whether the actual charge made against him—forging a
power of attornej' for tlie purpose of embezzling a large sum
—could be substantiated or not. But after this interview,
not a hope remained of saving themselves from ruin, and all
London was thunderstruck on reading the announcement in
the principal newspapers:
' The very unexpected situation in which we suddenly find our house
placed by the extraordinary conduct of our partner, Mr. Fauntleroy,
has determined us to suspend payment, as most just and becoming
to our friends generally.—Marsh, Stracey, and Graham.'
388 Tlie Ladies EdinbiwgJi Magazine.
The arrest took place on the evening of Thursday, 7th
September; and the event of the stoppage of the Berners
Street Bank was announced in Saturday's newspapers. We
quote from a contemporary record :
' On Monday morning the banking-house did not open, and the
consternation into which the west end of the town was thrown by the
circumstances surpasses anything that has occurred in the monied
world for many years. Upwards of a thousand tradespeople of various
descriptions in the surrounding district had kept their accounts at
this bank, and besides, most of the collectors of king's and other taxes
deposited their weekly receipts there for safety until the day of
j)aying in came round. The gentlemen of the firm themselves were
highly and extensively connected with their private friends, who felt
deeply for the sudden ruin brought upon them.'
For that and several succeeding days, during the winding
up of the concerns and final close of the business, it was
necessary to take the strongest possible measures against a
popular tumult, and to have the entrances to and exits from
Berners Street continually cleared by the police.
The trial came on almost immediately, and no breath of
suspicion rested on the integrity of the other partners. They
had been completely duped, and the case was made clear
against the accused by a paper in his own handwriting,
dated 1816, soon after the commission of the crime. This,
found in his repositories, was put in and used by the
prosecution against him, its existence undestroyed for so
many years suggesting the idea that he must have meditated
flight should detection ever seem imminent, and that this
' damning proof' of his own guilt would have been in that
case left behind him as a means of exonerating the other
members of the firm. Discovered in this manner, it answered
the same purpose. ' Was there ever,' said the Attorney-
General in his charge, ' a record of fraud more intelligible,
and more negligently guarded ?' In a few weeks all was
over. We need not dwell on the issue in those days of such
a charge when duly brought home to a prisoner. One in
such a position was widely connected by ties of business and
friendship with the leading members of society, and strenuous
were the efforts made to save him. But to the many petitions
for mercy, the answer from the Throne was invariably to the
effect, ' If this sentence were to be relaxed, all who have
ever been executed for breach of trust have suffered judicial
murder.' The royal words seem almost prophetic, and mark
an epoch in our domestic national history. This was the
last capital sentence for forgery; and that the revision and
improvement of our criminal code took place so soon after
Our Female Novelists. 389
this event, was probably mainly due to the attention of the
Government having been so strongly directed to the very
peculiar and distressing details of this trial and its con¬
sequences. To the same cause, also, we owe great improve¬
ment in the laws which regulate banking affairs; no such
fraud would be attempted in our day, because under the
better system of bank securities the author could not escape
immediate detection.
After this blasting of their prospects, Arthur Marsh and
his wife lived very quietly. We have heard it strongly
asserted, and as strongly denied, that Mrs. Marsh only took
to authorship from no liking to the task, but as a means of
supporting her family. The truth may perhaps lie between
these two extreme statements. Had she been absolutely
pressed by poverty, she would hardly have let ten years
elapse between the bank failure and her first publication;
but we may well believe that, as the expenses of her family
^increased, a wish to make better provision for their education
and settlement in life, added to a dawning consciousness of
her own powers, may have given her the first idea of thus
employing her pen for the future benefit of her children, even
though she was not in absolute distress for their maintenance.
She is not our only female novelist who was past thirty-five
when her first book appeared. Such writers are not of the
number to whom authorship is a necessity, as a vehicle for
self-expression; yet perhaps from them we may have works
not the less likely to be lasting that they are written from
the stores of a larger, richer experience, and with more of
the acquired self-control, rare indeed in young writers, but
which in every walk of life gives to those who can thus
' rule their own spirits' such increased power over other
minds.
In 1834 readers of all classes were attracted and charmed
by an anonymous volume containing two stories, The
Deforined and the Admiral's Daughter. This book, entitled
Two Old Men's Tales, is still considered one of her best; and
forty years later, we find in one of our leading critical
journals the following tribute: ' Xo book of its time pro¬
duced more irrepressible bursts of tears than The Deformed,
or more solemn, silent showers than the heartrending story
of the Admiral's Daughter' (Athencemn, October 1874).
While giving high praise to the stories, we do not agree in
this estimate. The subjects are both disagreeable, and in the
first about a dozen people are made stupid or wicked for the
sake of foil to the angelic  'Deformed,'  a young  marquis.
390 TJi'^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The wicked lady's - maid who poisons this amiable and
aftiicted being on the eve of his marriage, is justly hanged;
but that the family apothecary's wicked sister, who sells the
poison, knowing its destined use, should escape all molesta¬
tion save that of conscience, and that the still wickeder
step-mother, who thus clears the way to her own son's
succession, should be permitted to save the country a second
' rope' by going mad, hurts our sense of justice. The
Admiral's Dawjhtcr is a much higher type of story, painful
and tragic enough to draw tears from ' eyes unused to weep.'
And let us give the highest praise to Mrs. Marsh, that
neither here nor elsewhere in her books is there the slightest
attempt to make sin picturesque or vice attractive. The
terrible story of Inez, like that of Miriam in Mordaunt Hall,
stirs us to pity and sorrow, but contains no sentimental
palliation of guilt, no possible allurement to mislead young
footsteps along so deadly a path. Whatever difference of
opinion may exist as to the subject-matter, we wish manj^
novelists of a later date would learn of Mrs. Marsh the
difference between healthy and morbid use of such
materials.
Tales of the Woods and Fields, and the Triumplis of Time,
Avere pretty but slight sketches, adding little to her fame, fol¬
lowed in 1845 by Mount Sorel. We readily discern in this
book the effects of her father's teaching, the good old clmrch-
and-king principles in which the country squire had trained
his family. In strong antagonism are placed the haughty
aristocrat, poor as he is proud, and the democratic nouveaio
ricJie who has purchased the family estate; and to unite the
children of these two is the novelist's work. The story is an
autobiography narrated by the ' old man' Avho had in youth
been the heroine's unsuccessful lover, and the friend of the
man who supersedes him in her heart. Such a personage must
be permitted to moralize a little; and we are often glad to
have thus conveyed to us the workings of the authoress's
keen and thoughtful mind upon the social questions of the
day. As, for instance, when describing the position of an old
servant:
' Nothing degrades the man like contempt for the master he serves.
Nothing can ennoble the position but the habit of reverencing the
being to whom your time is devoted. If you can love him, still better;
but by all means respect him—respect him as a man if possible; resi^ect
him as a rank at all events ' {Mount Sorel, vol. ii.).
Father Darcy, her next book, is a tale of the Gunpowder
Plot, supposed to be discovered among the family papers at
Our Female Novelists. 391
Mount Sorel. At this time she also published a History of
tlie. Ecformation in France. Neither of these is of great
merit; but the next three years saw the production oiEmilia
Wymlham, Norman's Brid(je,SiQ.A Anrjda, not only considered
her best, but which in power and pathos yield to very few
novels in the language. It is perhaps to these three books
that we must turn for our most intimate knowledge of Anne
Marsh, and the result is gratifying to us and honourable to
her. Like picturesque views, the lights and shadows are in
strong contrast, the beauties and the faults lie side by side.
But while the faults are of style and composition only, the
beauties are those of a noble, womanly, and yet powerful
mind. Mrs. Marsh's defective writing appears in all her
books, greater or lesser. She has a style of her own, broken
into short pithy sentences and single lines; and these abrupt
phrases often give an indescribable sense of discomfort, even
of annoyance, in reading her stories. These 'spasmodic' utter¬
ances are evidently intended to be emphatic, but in reality
they greatly diminish the beauty of her most pathetic scenes.
Again, she has a careless way of scrambling to the end, as if
in a hurry to get rid of the characters, reminding us of IMr.
Sneer's mode of clearing the stage :
' Never mind, so as you get them off!
I'll answer for it, the audience won't care how.'
This defect occurs in several of her books, but quite mars
the conclusion of Angela; and further, she is careless in her
descriptions, especially of persons, suffering them to appear
with impossible variations of feature and complexion at
different points of their history. Thus a little child, with
hair cut straight across her forehead one day, entrances the
beholder by her floating golden curls on the next, and so on.
Emilia Wynclliam we might suppose to have been taken
from the ballad of ' Auld Eobin Gray.' The selfish spend¬
thrift father, the cold-hearted uncle, the harsh and jealous
mother-in-law, and the old faithful servant, are masterly
portraits; and to us, Emilia herself is the best of all Mrs.
Marsh's heroines. Parted from her young soldier lover by
the Peninsular war, destitute and homeless, the girl is forced
into a marriage with the old family lawyer, esteemed, but
totally unloved. The gradual turning of this pure and noble
heart from its early infatuation to res'pond to the husband's
apparently hopeless attachment, is a beautifully woven story,
true to nature in every point. Unlike the ' Auld Pobin' of
the song, Mr. Danby's despairing passion makes him anything
392 TJic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
but outwardly 'kind, kind' to his hapless wife; yet sterling
goodness draws their hearts together at last. When Emilia, a
few years later, meets the man she had believed to be killed
at Albuera, and striven to banish from her thoughts, she
sees him soured and spoiled by worldly ambition and an
uncongenial marriage:
' They met, and she was disappointed in him . . . she contrasted
the high and fashionable bearing of Colonel Lennox, his fine face and
beautiful, though somewhat hard, expression of countenance, his
indifference and unkindness to Lisa, with Mr. Danby's simple and
unpretending appearance — ungraceful and plain, it is true, but
instinct with the character of the man, with his intense though
misguided sensibility, and his devoted and single passion ; and there
was something in the truth and simplicity of the one, with all its
waywardness, contrasted with the polished but somewhat conventional
elegance of tlie other, which struck her forcibly, and in a far different
manner from that which the unhappy Mr. Danby imagined. " Look
upon this portrait and upon that." She had done so, and to her
own astonishment, she found that her strongest interest was with the
pale, discoloured picture of her husband.
' You have felt this, no doubt, in a gallery of art. The more florid
portrait, drawn by some modern hand, with all its fresh and beautiful
colouring, has been forsaken; and you have been led as by an
invincible attraction to some j)lain, pale, faded head, full of the
characters of trutli and simplicity, painted by a Rembrandt, and
hanging in a corner' {Emilia Wyndham, vol. ii.).
We might multiply quotations without giving any idea of
the beauty of this book. Norman's Bridge is scarcely less
interesting. Mrs. Marsh has a strong feeling for the peculiar
beauties of Scottish scenery and character, and the opening
scenes and descriptions of the Highland glen, and kirk, and
the old minister, are truthful and touching. Mr. Finn and
Michael Grant are both well-drawn, thorough types of the
self-made man, the one generous, the other grasping. Like
many persons in the middle class of English gentry, Mrs.
Marsh probably came little in contact with the nobility.
Lords and ladies often appear in her books—not that she ever
parades them, when not necessary to the story ; but though
often interesting, those great folks are not life-like. When
good, they are apt to be eccentric, like Lord Strathnaer, and
to shut themselves up in their country houses; and various
little mistakes are made about their titles and precedence.
Angela is a kind of sequel to the last named, one or two of the
principal characters appearing again; we are glad to prolong
our acquaintance with Joan Grant. All the episodes of
town and country life, and the various characters, are admir¬
ably well drawn; and but for the hasty and awkwardly-
managed conclusion, we should have been inclined to class
Our Female Novelists. 393
this as the best of her books. We must confess to having,
in general, small power of sympathy with the ' oppressed
governess' of fiction ; in fact, we generally find ourselves in
the case of pitying the employers rather than the employed.
Angela is a complete exception to this rule, a charming com¬
pound of sweetness and energy. There is not a line of
morbid sentiment in the book, and her trials in school¬
room and drawing-room are true to the life of forty years
ago, though we think that such treatment as Mrs. Usher-
wood's would hardly be attempted in the present generation.
Augusta Darby is a clever contrast to Angela, with her
spendthrift father and home where all elegance and comfort
are sacrificed to the racing stables, with the deteriorating
effects on the girl's own fine character.
We pass lightly over The, PrevisioTis of Lady Evelyn, a
pretty but slighter work, to her next group, published about
1850. Mordaimt Hall is a story prolonged over three
generations, giving first a sad exemplification of the baneful
effects of that school of thought to which our attention has
been ably directed by the biographer of Mary Shelley.^ A
beautiful girl is brought up in a wild romantic home by a
father whom she reveres, and who is amiable and worthy iu
all respects save one, that he has no religious principle on
which to rest all other teaching. The gradual moulding of
Miriam's mind under this fatal system is touchingly well
described, the father, wrapt in abstruse studies, failing to
perceive that what was theory to him was reduced to practice
by the untaught motherless child insensibly passing into
womanhood before his eyes.
' Not even her father had the slightest idea of the true state of her
mind, of the extent to which in the simplicity of her heart she carried
out, or the perfect sincerity with which she adhered to, the opinions
she had adopted. Men are often astonished when they see women, in
the generous honesty of their nature, prepared to act upon and to
carry to their extreraest consequences the notions and theories they
have themselves too carelessly suffered them to imbibe ' {Mordaunt
Hall, vol. i.).
In such a state of matters the catastrophe astonishes no
one ; but not the less natural or well depicted is the unhappy
father's despair on learning the practical development of his
own views in poor Miriam's case, and his horror at his own
failure to make her understand the terrible position in which
betrayal and desertion have left her.. He is dying, and can¬
not protect his darling from a cruel world; he cannot even
^ July No. of this magazine.
394 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
open her eyes to its righteous sentence. Nature and God's
outraged law speak to him of a trust he has betrayed, and
his last dying words cannot counteract the pernicious
teaching of a lifetime. Left alone by his death, Miriam
abandons her infant on the door-step of a wealthy country
house, and her suicide closes the first part of the story. We
are then made to follow up the fortunes of the little found¬
ling, adopted by a daughter of the house, and kindly yet not
judiciously reared, and therefore becoming the innocent
cause of much sorrow in his benefactress's family circle.
Mrs. Marsh excels in child portraiture, and the little
Gideon's troubles, with the pretty championship they evoke
in a tiny granddaughter who is a frequent inmate, are
charmingly told. Here is a pretty scene: Kitty Chandos,
aged three and upwards, is moved to baby compassion for
the ' poor little boy,' aged six, who lives in her kind invalid
Aunt Calantha's room, and may not go anywhere, or play
with anybody, even though her question, ' Is he a naughty
little boy ?' is always answered in the negative. But though
he may not go down to dessert, it strikes Kitty dessert may
come to him. She forthwith coaxes her nurse to put a rose-
coloured pocket to her evening frock, and then by vehement
coaxing of uncles, aunts, father, she achieves the filling of
this pocket with all portable and pocketable delicacies; and
then
' they sat on a cushion by the fire in Calantha's room, and ate the
dessert thus obtained together. There are pictures of our early
infancy which remain indelible when all else are forgotten ; to his
dying hour he never forgot that day when he sat upon a cushion by
her side, and the little creature in the white frock kept drawing forth
her treasures one after another to him, from that exquisitely beautiful
rose-coloured pocket, and sharing them with the most scrnpulous
regard to justice between them' (Mordaunt Hall, vol. ii.).
A dozen years later, when this pretty couple are rapidly
falling in love with each other, though we are sorry for Mr.
Chandos, we feel that he has himself to thank in a great
measure. His own uncertain and capricious treatment of
the orphan boy naturally tends to draw the attention and
pity of the generous little girl upon her ill-used playfellow.
Yet we cannot wish success to the attachment, and are glad
when Gideon considerately breaks a blood-vessel and dies,
leaving Kitty in a fair way of being consoled, we may hope.
One instance occurs of the carelessness in description to
which we have alluded. Miriam, in her lifetime, is a beauty
of gipsy type, brown, dark-eyed, dark-haired.    We have no
Our Female Novelists. 395
personal experience of ghostly apparitions, and cannot there¬
fore vouch for their ways ; but when, alter drowning herself,
she appears in a vision of the night to her heartless betrayer,
we are told of the wet golden locks and blue eyes, to our
astonishment.
Ldtice, Arnold appeared in a serial form. Though weak
in plot, there are clever bits of writing on the subject of
distressed needlewomen, on whose sufferings the interest
turns. The Wilmingtons is a novel full of thought and
power, written probably from the depths of her own painful
experience. The tale is but too common, luxury and
selfish extravagance leading to embarrassment, and then
to crime. _ The two Wilmingtons, Mr. Craiglethorpe, Caroline,
and Flavia, are well described, and it is singular in how
many passages of this striking story we find ourselves
remmded of later written books. Mr. Craiglethofpe, a
Baldassare in modern dress, recalls Romola; Mr. Wilmington,
in avoidance of the man he has injured, and fears to recognise'
Hcnrij Dunhar; while the trial—in those days involving
life—for the forged codicil to a will, has many points of
resemblance to a similar event in one of our best modern
novels. Time the Avenger, a sequel to the above, is greatly
inferior in merit; and from this date, 1854, we may class all
Mrs. Marsh's subsequent writings as falling far below those
of her past years. In this group we place Auhrcy, FMVcnscliffe,
Castle Avon, the Heiress of HaagUon, Evelyn Marston, and
the Eose of Ashurst. All of these are high in principle and
pure m tone, containing bits of picturesque and powerful
writing^, such as the child's disappearance in Castle Avon,
Alice Craven's death in Aulrey, the characters of Eandal
and Eleanor in Ravenscliffe; but not the less we feel that
while books like Emilia Wyndham and Mordannt Hall can
hardly be forgotten, this later series will perhaps not live
beyond the present generation.
If necessity had ever prompted Mrs. Marsh's pen such
necessity must have ceased in 1858. She then became, by
her brother's death, owner of Lindley Wood, and Lady of the
Manor. Her husband's death took place a few years pre¬
viously, at Eastbury Lodge, Hertfordshire, where they had
been living very quietly. On removing to her early home,
she resumed her maiden name, and was known as Mrs. Marsh
Caldwell until her death in 1874.
She had never laid aside her anonymous shield, though the
'author of Two Old Men's Tales' was well known. The
number and merit of her works certainly entitle her to a
39^ The Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
distinguished place among British Female Novelists. Her
books occupy an important half-way position between the old
and new schools. We see in them the avant coureurs of the
modern sensation novel; nor do we intend dispraise to Mrs.
Marsh in thus classing them. Between her and her imitators
the connection is that which exists between a well-written
play and a farce or extravaganza on the same plot. In the
one, events bring out characters ; in the other, the characters
are puppets set to produce startling effects. But in her later
stories, the tendency to heap up strange incidents and hurry
to unnatural conclusions, to make people speak or act as
they rarely do in real life, gives us cause to regret more than
the natural decay of an author's powers. The example of so
deservedly famed a writer must have contributed, more than
she knew or wished, to form a demand and supply a model
for the excitable style which has since been carried to such
extremes of folly and bad taste. Therefore, M'hile ranking
Mrs. Marsh at her second and third best, before ' the best' of
many of her successors, and by no means wishing her last
half dozen books unwritten, we do wish they had been
written with a care and thoughtfulness more worthy of the
author of Emilia Wyndliam.
L. D.
Aurora 33orraU5.
' La lumiere, c'est I'ombre de Dieu.'—Joubeet.
' And they saw ... as it were the body of heaven in His clearness.'
—Ex. xxiv. 10.
O WONDROUS visitant from northern climes.
Who but must gaze with awe-struck rapt delight.
As upward still the dazzling glory soars
Upon the breathless night!
To the far zenith mount the living rays,
That spread themselves abroad on every side
In one vast dome, whose pure effulgent light
Streams round us far and wide.
Lo ! all the southern heaven is aglow
With deepening tints of crimson and of rose ;
Such is the flush, on cloud-piled banks at even,
The Sim declining throws.
Aurora Borealis. 397
Meanwhile the North in cold clear splendour gleams.
Melting to green more soft than chrysophrase ;
'Mid the pale radiance see the faint stars shine
As through translucent haze.
Methinks I stand in space all limitless,
The centre of this great encircling sphere.
Where audibly the pulses of the world
Throb on the awakened ear.
Say, art thou sent to herald some fierce doom
Of war, some scourge of battle on the earth ?
Or dost thou warn us of wild tempest's shock,
Or earthquake's sullen birth ?
Or art thou rather such a sign in heaven
As shall presage the coming of the King ?
Is all that quivering brightness as the fringe
That to His robe doth cling ?
Sure to our feeble sense not all unmeet
Is such a token of His presence near;
And as the fitful flashes come and go,
Let us adore with fear.
Perchance along each pathway luminous
Some angel glides on messages of love ;
This is the golden stair, on which our prayers
Else to the courts above.
From eyes sin-darkened now the scales have fallen
That hide the inner heart of earth and sky ;
0 precious knowledge, touching all our lives
With sense of ecstasy I
If in a moment the familiar heavens
May be transfigured to our eager gaze,—
If thus the fleeting vision of an hour
May fill us with amaze,—
What shall it be, when no weak flesh shall veil
The unimagined blessedness in store.
Where endless glories wait at God's right hand.
Pleasures for evermore !
Alma Glen.
398 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
CHAPTER   I.
' Nannette I Nannette!  come in, child;  it is getting late,
and you will catch cold.'
' No fear, Aunt Elsie; the air is soft and warm, and the
sun has not long gone out of sight.'
Half an hour passed away, the light was becoming dim,
and Aunt Elsie looked at the clock.
' Nannette, child, you must come.'
' Coming, Aunt Elsie ; only five minutes more. I cannot
leave the garden yet.'
Aunt Elsie gave a sigh and went on with her knitting;
her niece sometimes proved an anxious charge.
Meanwhile, the object of her thoughts was in the garden,
wandering amongst the flowers, and ever and anon standing
at the garden gate gazing wistfully down the road that led
towards the sea.
' They will not come to-night,' she said to herself, and then
she paused once more at the gate.
How lovely was the landscape that lay before her! for a mile
a belt of luxuriant green fields,and then the sea,lying calm, blue,
smiling, lovely, but treacherous. The sun had not long gone
down, the sky was flecked with gold and rose, the whole scene
was bathed in dreamy uncertain light, Nannette not the least
lovely part of the whole. The soft summer air was coming
towards her in fitful puffs, blowing the hair from her brow
and bringing the bright warm colour to her face, her white
muslin dress serving only to show off the tall lithe figure,
the geraniums in her hair only enhancing the brilliancy of
her complexion. At the present moment a petulant expres¬
sion lingered about her pretty mouth, and her eyes still
gazed restlessly down the road.
' I suppose I must go home now, or Aunt Elsie will scold;
but why, when he promised, did they not come to-night ?'
With lingering steps she wandered up the garden walk to
the rose-covered .porch. She stopped once more before she
entered to turn and gaze, but the road lay white and dusty
before her as far as she could see—no one was in sight. She
caught impatiently at a spray of roses that was hanging
lower than the rest, but they were too tender for such a
rough grasp; and though she succeeded in breaking off the
spray, the blossoms lay at her feet, some few of the petals
Aunt Elsie : A Sketch. 399
resting on her hair and dress as they fell. She tossed the
branch from her and turned into the house.
' My dear Xannette, you are very late; you should remember
you are not strong, my child.'
' It was so warm, I could not leave the sunset, Aunt
Elsie.'
'You have grown fond of the sunset lately, Nannette.
I do not remember that you loved it so last summer.'
Nannette smiled to herself, but did not speak. She took
a book from the table and ensconced herself in the low
window-seat. She made a feint of reading at first; but by
degrees the gentle regular breathing of her aunt told her she
was asleep, and then the book dropped from her hands and
lay unopened on her lap.
She leant her head against the window, and let her eyes
and thoughts wander at their own sweet will. The twilight
was changing the face of nature, in the clear green sky the
first stars were coming out, down on this earth things were
losing their colour and identity. Bushes and trees seemed
to take the form of living things, the breeze as it gently
stirred their branches kept forming new and strange shapes
against the intense clearness of the sky. On the horizon a
streak of silver told of where the sea lay at rest. Nannette's
thoughts wandered to that same still sea from which she had
been rescued as a child, when in the homeward voyage from
India her father with his young wife had gone down°into its
then stormy depths. She had never missed them ; her aunt
had been everything to her. What would not Miss Grajme
have done for her favourite brother's child, even though he
had married an Italian girl, with whom she said she never
could have anything in common.
But though the mother had left her stamp upon the child,
in the dark eyes and hair, and affectionate fiery temper. Miss
Gramme forgave all such defects, and with a strange longing to
live near the grave of her brother, she had bought the cottage
on the coast in the south of England, and there for sixteen
years slie watched the seasons follow one another, all so
much the same, never a break in her monotonous life.
Her one interest was Nannette, watching her as she grew
from infant to child, from childhood into girlhood, and then
into first womanhood. The change had come almost imper¬
ceptibly, and Nannette was nearly eighteen now. Already she
was turning her restless gaze towards the world; her aunt
felt that already the cottage and its garden would never
satisfy the ardent, eager girl.    She was craving to taste the
400 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
pleasures of the world, of which she had seen so little ; her
ambition would not rest content within the cottage walls,
and the garden with the privet hedge.
Already, though her aunt knew it not, a new experience
had come in her life. Only ten days since, she had been
out walking on the sea-shore. She had climbed down the
rocks to gather some plant that attracted her attention. The
prize attained, she tried to climb from the ledge on which
she stood, but a few minutes proved the attempt fruitless.
She was a bold girl, but for a moment her heart failed as she
saw her position. The sea gently lapping the rock on which
she stood, creeping resolutely higher; no escape but to return
the way by which she came. The descent had been so easy,
she had never dreamt of danger; and yet the fact was quite
clear to her now, that unless she was saved within an hour,
the cold, cruel water would be lapping the rock as gently as
ever, a foot higher up than she now could reach.
She called loudly for help, but the coast was such a quiet
one that the chances of deliverance were very small.
At last her cries received an answer. She called again, and
the voice came nearer.    ' Where are you ?' she heard.
Again she called for help, and this time the answer was
close at hand.
' I see you. Stay where you are; there is no real danger,
now I am here. I must get at you by a way with surer
footing.'
Nannette could not see the speaker, but she was attracted
by the voice so full of confidence. The rock crumbled from
beneath her deliverer's feet, and fell over the ledge under
which she was standing.
Meanwhile Eobert Elwes had caught sight of Nannette,
and was fast approaching her from a nearer and safer way.
Ten minutes more, and she stood with him on the top of the
cliff.
' How shaU I ever thank you ?' she exclaimed fervently.
' I should have been dead in an hour. I should have been
lying down there, still and cold under the sea ; and I could
not die yet. I could not have left this happy, beautiful world.'
She shuddered and turned very white at the thought.
' You must sit down and rest for a few minutes, and I will
fetch you some water.    You have received a shock.'
'Don't leave me for a minute or two,' she pleaded with the
tears in her eyes.
' I must,' Eobert answered authoritatively. ' No harm can
happen to you.    Stay here till I return.'
Aunt Elsie : A Sketch. 401
His voice brought back her composure once more, she
sat down as he had bidden her, and he went in search of
water. In a few minutes he returned. She was sitting as
he had left her, her hat with its garland of wild-flowers
pushed back from her face; but a bright smile had superseded
her terror, and looking up gratefully as she took the cup of
water from his hand, she said :
' You must have thought me very foolish just now. Will
you forgive me, for I could not help it ?'
' I have to ask your forgiveness,' he answered,' for speaking
so authoritatively to you as I did. Will you prove it to me
by allowing me to walk home with you ?'
How far too sliort the way home seemed to him ! He was
fascinated, enslaved at once by the irresistible charm of
Xannette's manner. He watched with admiration as she
told him of her life, how dull it was, how she longed to be
allowed to fly out into the world. But Aunt Elsie was strict,
and said she was much happier and better where her lot had
been cast. She refused to own this, and in her pretty petulant
way she dwelt upon the many little troubles that made up
the sum of her daily grievance. By that time she had
reached home.
' You must go now; she said ; ' Aunt Elsie would not like
me to walk with a stranger.'
So he had gone; and she went into the house, and said
nothing to her aunt of the meeting, for no reason but it made
it pleasant to have a secret in her life apart from Aunt
Elsie.
The next evening, when Nannette was in the garden, her
friend of the day before came past. Aunt Elsie was asleep,
so no call came to remind her of the lateness of the hour!
It was so natural that he should stop to ask her how she was,
and whether she had got over her fright of the day before.
Thus the acquaintance ripened. The days were soft and
warm, the evenings still, the sunsets lovely; and Nannette
was always out in tlie garden, standing by the gate, flattering
herself that it was the beauty of the evening that detained
her, dreaming in happy idleness, watching the sky as it
changed from rose and gold to quiet and sombre grey,
finding in the hundred changes in the clouds, a hundred new
thoughts. She felt herself so full of hfe and health and
strength, so brimming over with exuberance of spirits; and
now, for the first time, she experienced the strange pleasure
that it gives a woman when she first feels her power to
fascinate and attract.
Xo. 45.—September 1878.
2 C
402 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Robert Elwes was not a man Nannette would ever love;
he was too uninteresting, too matter of fact. He was what
his friends called a thoroughly good sort of fellow, but he
was no ideal hero such as a girl of romantic nature would
picture to herself as the man who should some day be her
master. He had come down from his work in London to
meet his brother, who was returning from a long voyage. He
had not expected to make new friends when he left home,
and now in a week's time all was changed. He was even
hoping that the vessel that was bringing the sailor home
might be detained, and he would have a few more days
of sunshine, a few more sunset meetings at the garden gate.
The evening before this story opens, he had told Nannette
that his brother would have arrived before the following one,
and that he would bring Jack to see his new friend; so
Nannette had gone to watch, and they had never come. The
time went past; it was quite dark when her aunt at last
awakened with a start.
' Nannette, Nannette, are you there, child ? I was dream¬
ing ; I thought I heard voices—a man's voice, Nannette,
speaking to you, and you were promising to leave me to go
with him. I am a foolish old woman, child, but tell me
there was no one speaking to you; let me hear from your
own lips that it was all a dream.'
' Of course it was a dream. Aunt Elsie. I have been sitting
here dreaming also; no one here but our own two selves.
Who else could come at this hour ?'
' No one, Nannette ; but I feel that the day may not be
far distant when you do leave me, and I am selfish, child. I
cannot bear the thought; I could not live without my sun¬
beam.'
Nannette rose from her seat and put her arms round the
old lady's neck.
They were very fond of each other, these two, who
had never had any one to come between tliem.
' You dear foolish old thing,' she said, and pressed a kiss
on her aunt's forehead, and then she lighted the gas and drew
the curtains with one last long wistful gaze down the
road.
' To-morrow evening they may come,' she thought, and
then she sat down at her aunt's feet and clasped her hands
upon her knee.
' Aunt Elsie, I wish you to tell me of something ; I wish
you to tell me something of your own life—why were you
never married ?'
A unt Elsie: A Sketch. 403
' "Why, ISTannette ? AU women do not marry ; it is not
necessary that because one is an old maid, that one should
have had a story in one's life. Perhaps I never saw any one
I could love ; perhaps no one ever cared for me—who can
tell?'
But the old lady's fingers unconsciously strayed to the
ring upon her left hand, the hoop of pearls, growing black
and lustreless from wear. She turned it lovingly round and
round. Her hand had grown thin, and the ring was now far
too large ; it had once fitted a soft white girlish hand. She
had gone off into a dream of long, long ago ; Nannette had
also done the same, but her dream was of a happy future.
Suddenly she broke the silence.
' Aunt Elsie, did you ever know any one of the name of
Elwes ?'
She had asked the question at random, more as a beginning
to a conversation, than with any particular reason. She
wished to tell her aunt of her new friendship; she was not
prepared for the sudden start with which her question was
received.
Miss Grteme did not speak for a minute or two ; wlien she
did, her voice had a quaver in it, and she laid her hand sadly
on Nannette's head as she sat at her feet.
' You asked for the story of my life, Nannette; shall I tell
it to you, or is it better that I should not ? It is the story of
a long-forgotten pain, perhaps it were best to let it remain so,
I may visit its grave at times and see the flowers that now
bloom around it, but it is not fair to take one as young and
bright as you into the churchyard where our dead hopes lie
buried.'
' Tell me, Aunt Elsie dear. It is not bed-time yet, and I
am not inclined to read or work. I shall sit quite still if you
will tell me.'
' It is so long ago, child. It seems almost as if it were
another's story, not my own; and yet how clear and sharp
it stands out from the background of the past! I was an
only daughter, Nannette. I had two brothers older than
myself, and one younger, your father. There was only a year
between us, and we were inseparable. We used to spend
our holidays together, perfectly happy if we had each other.
I do not think then we should have believed any one if they
had told us that a day was not far distant when we should
be separated. But death stepped in and broke up our happy
home.
' My mother had died when I was quite a child, and now
404 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazitie.
my father fell a prey to some malignant fever, and we were
left orphans and penniless. Your two uncles, through the
interest of friends, found employment in London; your father
went into the army : his education fitted him for it; and I,
as a girl, and unable to do anything for myself, was sent to
my uncle's until such time as I was old enough to go out as
a governess or, if good fortune would have it, get married.
I was only seventeen then, and very young for my age.
My uncle and aunt and my cousins were very good to me,
and there I found a really happy home. I can look back
upon that part of my life with happiness. As long as my
uncle and aunt lived, I never wanted any one to whom I
could turn in either joy or sorrow without finding ready and
willing sympathy.'
Miss Grseme paused ; the story had been easy to tell till
now, but it was getting near the crisis in her life's history,
and she hesitated before she began. Nannette sat still,
waiting; she was interested in what she had heard. She also
was only seventeen years old; would their lives have any
similarity between them ?
' The light is hurting my eyes, child,' Aunt Elsie said at
last;' let us»sit in the firelight: it is enough.' So Nannette
put out the lamp, and they were left in the gloom.
' My eldest cousin was at Oxford, and we saw little of him
save in summer. The next one was Janie; she and I were the
same age and very great friends. I see her now, as distinctly
as then, and yet more than fifty years have passed. She had
soft brown eyes and hair and a low voice—a being made to be
loved; and I, who had ever had much self-reliance, made her
my pet and spoilt her. She worshipped me with the fond
admiration that the weak have for the strong, and I returned
her love in full. If I had not loved her as 1 did, I could not
now talk as I do. Thank God, no feeling but love ever was
in my heart for her.
' Well, I must pass on. It was in the summer, when we
were both eighteen, that in the long recess my cousin
Edward brought a friend to Frampton—that was the name
of my uncle's property. I had not known he was coming;
Janie was away from home for a week, and I went into the
drawing-room unexpectedly. Edward had arrived ; he came
forward and greeted me warmly, and then he turned and
introduced me to his friend. I hear his words, I see the
kind bright answering smile, " Elsie, let me introduce Mr.
Elwes to you. You must be good to him as my friend till
Janie comes home." Then we talked on for some little while—
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. 405
nothing worth repeating, mere commonplace remarks, and
yet the echo of all he said sounds in my ears till this day.
At last Edward said," Eobert, we had better go out now if we
are going." Do not start so, Nannette, my child. Nothing is
going to happen; it is but an every-day story.
' How shall I describe the next ten golden days ? I did not
know what had come to me. I seemed hardly able to
breathe in case I should break the spell. The air seemed
full of life and light. I could not walk ; I danced from pure
happiness. I was out before breakfast to breathe the morn¬
ing air; at night I sat at my open window and watched the
moon rise, and drank to the very dregs the girl's cup of
romance. I always was with Edward and his friend, and he
was ever courteous, ever considerate to me. My wishes were
consulted in everything, and all the plans for the day were
arranged, as far as possible, so that I could participate in
them. And yet, looking back now, when the years have
served to make me view the pa.st dispassionately, Eobert
Elwes never showed me more attention than what any
man would show a girl who for the time attracted him,
and with whom he was thrown in contact. It was in myself
that the fault lay. I had hardly begun to realize wherein was
the cause of my happiness, when the dream was dispelled.
My cousin Janie came home. Nannette, I hardly like to
think of it even now, when so many years have passed, but
I dreaded my cousin's home-coming; I tried to feel glad, I
scolded myself for the feeling, I went to meet her, and she
and I walked home together.
' She scanned my face with her loving, anxious eyes ; she
asked me much about the last ten days, and I answered her,
I know not how, and then we went into the house. That
evening after I was in bed, she stole to my side and bent
over to kiss me.
' "Elsie darling, I have guessed something, and I am so very
glad;" then she slipt away as noiselessly as she came, and
I was left alone with my own glad thoughts. So others had
seen it as well as myself. I hugged my secret close in my
arms and fell asleep.
' I was wakened next morning by the rain dashing against
the window. I rose in haste, fearing I was late, and the clouds
were chasing each other wildly across the sky. I dressed
and went down-stairs to the dining-room, but paused on
the threshold. There were voices, Janie's and Eobert's. A
pang of jealousy shot through me. Poor child, she meant no
harm.    As soon as I entered she made some excuse and left
406 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the room, but she seemed to take the brightness with her.
Kobert was not the same as usual; he was preoccupied, and
our usual pleasant before-breakfast chat came to nothing. So
things went on, a cloud had come over my sun, and each day
made the cloud seem darker. I could not have told in what
the difference lay. Eobert's manner was in no wise changed
towards me—on the contrary, to an outside observer he was
more than ever my friend; but I knew his secret, and that it
w'as not my company he sought, but Janie's.
' So the time went on until one day I was out walking. I
had wished to be alone, and had escaped from them all. I
wandered into the woods which surrounded my uncle's house,
and there among the trees and flowers I tried to arrange my
thoughts.
' It did not take very long. Of one thing I was resolved,
that for the present I must leave Frampton. Another of my
uncles had that morning written to me begging of me to
pay him a long-promised visit, and I resolved to accept the
invitation. Perhaps if I were out of the way, things might come
right. I could not stay where I was, for Janie still persisted
in considering Eobert as my friend. Having made up my
mind, I turned towards home to write my answer, as there
was an opportunity to send a reply that evening. I had
not gone far when I came suddenly on my cousin. She was
sitting under a tree crying bitterly, and at her side was
Eobert Elwes. I started back, hoping I had been un¬
observed, but my foot had broken some dry twig, and Eobert
looked up.
'"Oh, Miss GrsemeP'he exclaimed, " I have distressed your
cousin; I did not mean to do so. Do come and make my
peace for me with her. I will trust my cause in your hands;"
and then with a fond look at Janie he left us. I sat down
beside her and did not speak, knowing it was better not at
once to check her tears.
'" Oh, Elsie!" she said at last, " it has all been some dreadful
mistake, and I meant no harm; he says it is me that he loves."
' I knew it beforehand, and my voice was quite steady when
I answered her, " It is no mistake, Janie darling. I have
known how it was for a long while, and now all you have
to do is to try and give him what he asks you. It will not
be verv hard, I think ?"
' She looked up at me for the first time through her tears
and smiled. " I was wrong, then," she said, " for I thought it
was you that he loved. No, Elsie dear, as you say, it will
not be at all hard."
Aunt Elsie : A Sketch. 407
' We went home together after that, but I felt ill and weary,
and went at once to my room. Robert was obliged to leave us
early next morning, so I did not see him again. When he
returned once more to claim his bride, I was in a new home.
I had found that I was wanted in my other uncle's house;
he was a bachelor, and very lonely, and when he begged me
to stay with him I did not say no.
' That is very nearly the end now, Nannette, and it is but
an old maid's dream. Robert got an appointment in India,
and he and Janie went out there immediately after their
marriage. It was not long after they had sailed that a letter
and packet were delivered into my hand; it was from
Robert Elwes, the only letter he ever wrote me, one full of
promises of warm friendship, and sending me a pearl ring
as a remembrance of one to whom I had shown kindness,
and who had won his greatest treasure for him. So I was
rewarded,child. What more could I have wished than to have,
in the writing of the man I had loved, the assurance that I
had gained for him his greatest happiness on earth ? It did
not satisfy me then, child, but it satisfies me now ; and had
my life been otherwise ordained, I should not have been
here now to make a home for my child.' She paused, and
iSTannette looked up; her eyes were bright with sympathetic
tears.
' That is not all, Aunt Elsie dear. You have not told me
yet what became of Robert and Janie, and about yourself
also.'
' They are both dead now^ Nannette. Janie only lived a
few years, and left Robert alone again with one boy, who in
time was sent home to relations in England, as India was not
a good place for the child. Many years afterwards I heard
of Robert's death also, and now I have quite lost sight of
them. The Elwes lived in London, but by this time their
child may have grown-up sons and daughters of his own.
Remember, it is nearly fifty years ago- Sometimes I wish I
could hear something of his child, but perhaps it is better
not. Now, Nannette, you must go to bed. That is but
a sad story for you to dream about. Weave into it brighter
colours for your own life's story.'
Nannette did not seem to hear; she was sitting gazing into
the fire, all the love and tenderness of her nature written in
her moist eyes, and the quivering of her sensitive mouth.
She turned to her aunt at last.
' Aunt Elsie, would you be very glad if I were to tell you
that I have found your friends, and that they are my friends
4o8 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
also ? "Will you forgive me that I did not tell you of this
before ? I am sorry, I meant no harm, but I have a new
friend, and his name is Kobert Elwes !'
' "Where, child ?—when did you meet him ?' the old lady
asked with trembling eagerness.    ' Perhaps it is his son.'
' I do not think it can be, Aunt Elsie, for he does not seem
more than three or four and twenty; but perhaps he is his
grandson.'
Then Nannette told her experience, and how Eobert Elwes
had saved her from the sea.
Her aunt hardly seemed to realize Nannette's deception,
so eager was she to hear all particulars. To-morrow you will
bring him to me, chUd. To think of Eobert's grandson being
so near, and yet I did not know it'
l^annette took her aunt to her room, and gave her the
usual good-night kiss. There were softer feelings in the
girl's heart that night than had ever been there before.
M. E. T.
{To Ic continued)
WQt Alpine jFlofcocr,
Little flower, if I bear
Thee from this thy movintain air,
Bid thee 'neath our mists and gloom
Open out thy tender bloom,
Wilt thou strive with us to live,
Foreign land thy fragrance give ?
I would fain to England bring
Tokens of the Alpine spring.
Ah ! can I for thee secure
Breath of heaven so fresh and pure ?
No, I will not bear thee home.
Eather let me forth and roam
To the Alps in search of thee,
"Where thou dwellest lone and free.
On the rock-strewn windy down,
Ear away from smoke of town,
There my steps to thee I guide.
Through the sunny hours abide,
And from thy sweet breath distil
Purest joy my heart to fill.
Beatrix L. Tollemache.
Let Them Alone. 409
iLet Wcitm alone:
A TALE TOLD IN LETTEES.
LETTER XXXII.
The Eev. N. Slade to his Father.
Sept. 17.
My dear Father,—The dreadful disease is on the decline;
yet I have had three funerals and visited six sufferers—not
including the two you know of—since I returned. Yesterday
evening Eeynolds knew me for the first time as I was
kneeling by his bed. I hardly thought I could have felt a
minute of such intense joy again as when he put his hand
in mine. I believe he thought he was dying; but this
morning there seems a shade more hope. We all took the
Sacrament together yesterday evening, after he became
sensible. After this he was much exhausted, and the stupor
seemed partially to return. At last, waking with a start, he
seemed to look anxiously for me. I was at his side in a
moment. ' Walter,' said he, ' Walter Benson—is he dead ?'
' No,' said I quietly, ' he is not dead—nor worse. His sister
is with him, and I have seen him.' ' See him again,' he said
rather excitedly. ' Tell him from me that the valley of the
shadow of death is not hard to tread, if he can trust. . . . Say
I have not given him up—I pray for him yet; and God will
grant me his soul before I die. . . . Tell him of the thief on
the cross, whose one moment's penitence was accepted. . . .
Ay . . . to-day we may both be in Paradise.' His voice
died away, and he looked as if he was going—so spirit-like,
so transparent I never saw a face. Bending over him,
and taking his hand, I whispered, ' Say no more. I will tell
him all. Let your mind be at rest on all matters. Mrs.
Wimpole writes daily to your family (" God bless her," he
murmured). Margaret Scott is out of all her troubles; she
went this morning, at peace with her Maker and forgiving
all, and blessing you with her last breath.' I told him
these things to anticijDate any fresh care that might come
into his mind. A wonderful look of peace and relief came
over him, and I think he slept. This morning the doctor
looks a little happier; but if he lives, the recovery must be
slow, the prostration being extreme, from the great mental
and bodily strain that preceded the attack.
410 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
I have been to see "Walter Benson. There is a great
change in him; I think Eeynolds' prayers are heard. I
believe he is over the crisis of his malady, and the mental
storm is calmer too. Instead of the violence of the preceding
days, he had the look of one conscience-stricken and ashamed.
I gave him all Eeynolds' messages word for word. ' Does
he say all that ?' said he; ' then, perhaps, there is hope for
me yet! But how is he ? is he dying V 'I think he is
better,' said I. ' Thank Heaven for that!' returned he; 'if
he had died, I killed him. I have killed my father; my
mother and poor Jack are watching him die. My poor
Emily here is wearying herself out with me. I have ruined
them all! What should any one want to keep such a
God-forsaken wretch as me in the world for ?' (He raised
himself up in the bed, and grew very much excited.) ' I tell
you, Slade, it is no use preaching to me. I have done
nothing but mischief all my days. There's a poor girl here
whose life I have cursed; and a poor honest fellow, they tell me,
came to his end somehow through my folly! . . . Then I
have blighted her life too. She hates me now, and I deserve
it!' ... He meant Mary, I knew. (Heaven forgive me ! I
believe if he had thought she loved him still, I must have
left him in his misery !) Mrs. Rivers and I drew hini gently
down in the bed again, and she soothed him with caresses.
I said, ' What message am I to carry back to Eeynolds, then?
Am I to tell him that all his labour has been in vain, and
that, though by God's mercy just rescued from death, you
are still raving, thankless and despairing ?' This was
the right chord. ' No, no,' said Walter, calming down in a
moment; ' tell him I will live, if it please God. I will try
to bear my life ... I will try to be a better fellow; though
how it is to be done, or what is to become of me. Heaven
knovv's !' I added a few words of comfort on my own part,
and left.
On coming back to Eeynolds' room, I found him either
asleep or in the old stupor, and poor Jack Benson sitting
bolt upright in the chair opposite to him, and crying with
all his might. How this young man has won his way into
all their hearts, and what good he has wrought in this short
time, while I, in my pride and self-sufficiency, have been
despising him and thwarting him at every turn! True, as
to the differences in our views, they remain where they were;
but how little they seem to me now—how infinitely little !—
in comparison with the great truths which, I believe, we all
rest on alike in the view of death.    I never believed that
Let Them Alone. 411
this man preached the gospel, but now I see that he has
lived it; his life has been a witness to it more powerful than
all sermons.
I have written this morning to the bishop to accept the
living; so my old home will be mine still. I cannot look
forward yet to anything. All is whirl and confusion within
me and without. Mrs. Wimpole was obliged to go over to
her own house this morning, but will be back late in the
afternoon. She will bring comforts and necessaries for the
sick, including poor Eeynolds, who in point of luxuries is
hardly on a par with the humblest of his flock. I want to
have him moved to my house by and by, if possible;
meanwhile Mrs. Wimpole will bring an air-bed which she
possesses. He is lying on a couch as hard as a board, for
there has been no possibility of moving him hitherto since
he first threw himself down, and the hardness must be misery
in his attenuated state. I must go out again, and shall leave
Jack in charge. I have begged him to write to Eeynolds'
family, and furnished him with the necessary particulars, as
Mrs. Wimpole will not be back in time. N. S.
LETTER XXXni.
Mr. J. Benson to Sir Francis and Lady Eeynolds.
Sept. 17.
Mr. J. Benson presents his compliments to Sir Francis
and Lady Eeynolds; and I take the liberty of writing to you,
though I am a very poor hand at it, never having occasion to
use a pen much, but there is no Body else to-day. I am
alone with Mr. Eeynokls, and I am sorry to say he seems to
me very ill indeed for he is gone to nothing all in a few
days and he has not looked up or spoken since I came in
but Slade (our other parson) says the doctor considers him a
trifle better and my brother is better, but 1 have not seen
him for this is the first time I have been able to leave home
(Sydwood) since my father took ill and I came to Eeynolds
first. Dear sir you must excuse mistakes I being such a
very bad scribe but I would do anything for your son and I
cannot even write as well as I might because I keep looking
round to see if he moves or anything ails him and if he
would only open his eyes and speak to me if it was only to
say Jack (which is what every Body calls me) I would go on
with much better heart. I think Eenolds will not die,
because I cannot think that God would let him die when he
412 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
is doing so much good to every Body (except himself) but
perhaps I am no judge about this, for I have sometimes said
things like that to Eenuolds, and he always says we are no
judges of what God does. But I think if he dies it will be a
bad job for Illingham and so it will for Sydwood for no Body
ever did so much good to my father or to Walter as he did
and no Body was ever so kind to poor Jack (me) before—I
mean no Body worth anything and Mrs. Wimpole will tell
you the same and there are lots of people all round the
garden gate only they don't like to come in and ring for fear
of disturbing but they are all waiting to know how he is and
if I knew myself I would go and tell them.
5 P.M.—Mr. J. Benson presents his compliments as before
and I could not finish sooner for at the last word Eennolds
called to me and when I heard him say Jack I thought I
must have cried for joy—I mean I believe I did and I was
by his side like a shot and he says Jack it's very good of you
to be there taking care of me, and I says it's not at all good
and then he says What are you doing there at the table and I
tell him I am writing to Sir F. Eenolds and family and he
says Thank you dear Jack and give my love to them all and
tell them I want for nothing and have very kind friends and
I think I am better and I says Do you really think so and
he says Yes. And I think with that I had better end my
letter and dear sir you will excuse the long scrawl I hope
for I don't know how to put things short and properly.—
I remain your and your Son's most sincere Friend,
J. Benson Juxioe.
LETTER XXXIV.
Mrs. Wimpole to Miss Eeynolds.
Sept. 18.
My dear Miss Eeynolds,—I think I may venture to tell
you that there is a decided improvement in our dear patient;
and although the doctor will not say that danger is quite
over, I can see that he hopes it. Mr. Eeynolds is altogether,
I hope, more comfortable to-day, as an air-bed has been
brought, and he has been moved on to it, and he is also able
to take a very slight quantity of nourishment. All the
doctor fears is a relapse ; and until the danger of that is over,
I scarcely dare impart to you any very confident hopes, and
I try not to let my own rise too high. I feel the deepest
sympathy with Lady Eeynolds, yourself, and all your family
Let Them Alone. 413
in your grievous anxiety. I can judge what must be the
feelings of the mother of such a son, though it has not pleased
the Almighty to bless me with so great a happiness myself.
I have asked Mr. Eeynolds if I should desire you to come,
but he is decidedly against it. The thought seemed to
frighten him. ' No, no,' he said, ' not here, not now, not to
this stricken place; tell her on no account to leave my mother.'
You may be interested to know that there is improvement
in another patient, a young man in whom your brother has
taken the deepest interest—Mr. Walter Benson. I think
either recovery would help the other.—In haste, yours most
faithfully, Diana WuiroLE.
LETTER  XXXV.
Eev. N. Slade to his Father.
Seipt. 19.
My dear Father,—I think there will be joy again even
in stricken lUingham, for Eeynolds is decidedly better, and
the plague is declining. Poor Benson is also in a way to
recover. It is the greatest of mercies that he has not been
taken; yet I feel for him deeply when I think of the prospect
he has to face with returning life. I stayed with Eeynolds
again last night, but he was so tranquil that I ventured to
sleep a little in my chair. Dear good Mrs. Wimpole lay
down in another room. At near seventy, I fear this kind of
thing is too much for her. Jack Benson sat up with his
brother. Mrs. Elvers went home to help her mother; so we
all got through the night. When I came in this morning
from my first round of visits, I found Mrs. Wimpole reading
letters from Eeynolds' mother and sister, which she showed
me; but we could not venture to read them to Eeynolds, the
grief, the agony, was too bitter. They were in answer to a
letter of the 14th, begun by poor Eeynolds himself, and
finished by Mrs. Wimpole. The main point, however, was
that as soon as possible after the receipt of that letter, a
friend of Eeynolds, a Mr. Beilby who was luckily staying at
Sir Frederick Eeynolds' place, was to start to come here; so
we expect him by this evening. It will be a great relief to
have another hand; yet I believe I shall half grudge him my
post. It has been impossible to be with Eeynolds, as I have
been during the last few days, without loving him, though
our conversations have been short and few. I am to bury
poor Margaret Scott this afternoon; then, if all is well, I
414 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
shall go over to Sydwood, take the latest report from here,
and bring back news of Mr. Benson. He does not seem
likely to die yet, but is in a helpless state, mind and body.
Mrs. Wimpole and I fancy this IVIr. Beilby must be engaged
to Miss Eeynolds. He is another of the Priorsworthy
set. N. S.
LETTEE XXXVI.
Mrs. Wimpole to Miss Reynolds.
Stpt. 19.
My dear Miss Eeynolds,—I have received your • and
Lady Eeynolds' letters tliis morning, and deeply sympathize
with you in the bitter grief and trouble under which you
wrote. I am comforted, however, in thinking that ere this you
have received better news, and in being able to confirm it this
morning. The improvement continues, and every hour, in
which there is no relapse, is a gain. Our patient has a calm,
peaceful face, and seems at rest in mind and body. He lets
himself be managed like a little child, and his sweetness and
gratitude for the very little we can do for him are such that
we love him better every hour. We will prepare for Mr.
Beilby's arrival, and I trust it will be a great pleasure to
your brother.—Yours affectionately, D. W.
LETTER XXXVII.
The Eev. E. Beilby to Miss Eeynolds.
Illingham Parsonage, Sept. 20.
]\Iy Dearest,—Be comforted. All is better here than we
dared to hope. I arrived last evening too late for post; but
I found that kind Mrs. Wimpole had written to you and
sent you a better account. To-day the improvement is more
decided. I should not know it myself, for he looks to me
as near another world as a man can, to be in this ; but I
gather it from the glad and thankful faces that I see round
me, including the doctor's. I never saw a little man look
more delighted than he did this morning, when he came
down and announced to us that he thought now his patient
would do. But you will want to know more in detail. My
journey, though as rapid as wheels and steam could make it,
seemed terribly long in my state of suspense. I arrived
here at six, my heart very low, and feeling, I must own,
hardly a grain of hope.    My first glance showed me the
Let Them Alone. 415
blinds were not down, but I thought I should find him at
the very last. Sending away the fly, I crept round to a back
door, that I might not have to ring. Two or three women
looked scared at the sight of me ; but I said, ' I am Mr.
Beilby, Mr. Eeynolds' friend; how is Mr. Eeynolds ?' An
old woman bustled forward and said, ' Oh, thank the Lord,
sir, he's better !' Not till that moment did I quite realize
how hopeless I had been. The revulsion of feeling almost
unnerved me. ' Can I see him ?' I said. ' Perhaps, sir, I'd
better tell Mrs. Wimpole first.' ' Oh, certainly.' So I was
shown into the study, the very ' den ' from which our dear
Frederick has written to us so often,—very dismal and lifeless
it looked,—and there I awaited Mrs. Wimpole or her com¬
mands. She came down herself, a handsome, dignified, but
quaint old lady of seventy or so. She shook hands cordially
and said,' Mr. Eeynolds is better, but he is to be kept very
calm and quiet. You must not see him until he is prepared.
Meantime I will send you in some refreshment.' I accepted,
being nearly famished, and there came in various delicacies,
evidently of this good lady's providing. Ten minutes after,
there came in a gentleman whom I at once knew to be Mr.
Slade, though I did not much expect to have seen him
there. We introduced ourselves, and then he said he would
take me up. He seemed hardly the cold stiff person I
expected, for his manner was kind, though quiet. He opened
the bedroom door very gently without knocking (in which I
saw the considerate nurse), and said in a low but cheerful
voice,' Eeynolds, here's your friend; you're not to talk much,
remember, but I'll leave him here for you to look at.' He
slipped away and I went in. There lay Frederick, with the
face of an angel, but worn to a shadow. He stretched out
both arms to me and said, ' Ned, dearest Ned, how very good
of you! They only told me this evening you were comin",
that I might not fret myself with wondering and wishing.
How's mother, how's my father, and my poor Helen V
' Badly enough when I left them,' said I; ' but they will be
all right by this time: they must know now that you are
better.' ' Yes, I am better,' he said ; 'I have no pain now.
But still, you know, Ned, I don't feel much like living.'
' Pooh, pooh,' said I,' you know nothing about it; I've heard
an opinion worth a dozen of yours.' A smile came over his
face, and he said, ' The same Ned as ever,' and then we sat
holding each other's hands like two children, but for the
most part in silence. I was longing, as you will believe,
dearest, to tell him of our last conversation, and was turnin"
416 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
in my mind how I could tell him without exciting him, and
how I could stop myself if I once got on the subject, when
Fred himself got me out of the difficulty. Opening his eyes
suddenly and looking full at me, he said, 'Well, have you
and Helen settled it yet ?' ' Yes, the very day before we
got that bad news.' ' I thought as much. Thank God,' he
said, and turned as if he did not want to go on with the
subject then. He drew a deep breath as if of relief, but
there were tears in his eyes. I saw what was passing in his
mind; he thought he was leaving you to me, but please God that
shall not be quite so. I hope you will yet for many a long year
be to him what you have been. After a long time Mr. Slade
came in again, and seeing we were quiet and good, he had no
pretext for turning me out. But I saw he looked anxious to
Ije doing something, and Eeynolds saw it too, and summoning
him with a look said, ' Give me my medicine, please, Slade,
and then come here. I want to speak to you. I want you to
manage Mrs. Wimpole and make her go home to bed
to-night, for I know she can't be comfortable here; and if
you won't go home yourself, you go properly to bed in the
spare room, and Beilby will look after me. You have been
up so many nights, you will be ill yourself next, and what
shall I do then ?' He spoke in a sort of tender, playful way,
and I felt perfectly bewildered at the terms they seemed to
be on. I looked at Slade; that cold Puritan had tears in his
eyes, and was looking at Fred—well—much as I look at you,
Helen. ' No,' he said, ' let me stay with you this one night
more. Mr. Eeilby must be more tired than I, for he has
travelled two days and a night, and then to-morrow I'll
resign you to him.' ' No, no,' said Frederick, ' you mustn't
resign me ; for as I get better I shall grow more troublesome,
and there will be work enough for you both.' I settled the
question by suggesting we should divide the night between
us, and I would sleep first, if he would promise to call me
about one or two. Then he went out to settle the matter
with Mrs. Wimpole, and I turned to Frederick and said, ' Is
this Slade ? is this the cold Puritanical Low Church parson
that there was no warming up by fair means or foul ?'
' Yes,' said Fred with something of his old funny smile ;
' yes, this is the very man, but I never knew him till now.
He's the best fellow in the world next to yourself, Ned.
But it's quite true he was cold in those days ; he owns it
himself: he's made various little confessions to me. I was
quite right in thinking he had a much profoimder dislike to
me than I had to him ; and just at the last, poor fellow, he
Let Them Alone. 417'
took it into his head that I was in his way with a certain
young lady, and of course that didn't tend to sweeten him.'
' I remember,' said I,' something about this in one of your
letters to Helen.' ' Oh yes, I believe I told her. Well, I was
right in my conjecture, and poor Slade went and fretted over
his disappointment, and hated me more and more for three
whole weeks by himself in AVales, and then came back to
find himself all wrong, and me in what case you know;
since which time he's changed utterly. He doesn't even
talk in big words now. Tiiere isn't a tenderer-hearted fellow
in the world; and he's such a nurse ! He nursed old j\Ir.
Miller for years. The first I knew about it all was when I
came to myself out of the long stupor, when I found Slade
kneeling by my bed. That was the first time I had seen
him since he passed me with Mary Aylmer.' ' Yes, yes, I
know all about it; and now hold your tongue, and don't toss
about.' ' Very well, Ned,' he said, and tried to go oft' to
sleep like a good child.
We got through the night pretty well, and this morning
came Mrs. Wimpole, and Mrs. Elvers, and the young gentle¬
man who always figured in Frederick's letters as Jack. Then
came the doctor and cheered us up as I told you, and then
I went up to sit with Fred. Presently I was startled by a
wonderful apparition. The door opened and tliere came
stealthily in a figure as thin and gaunt as our dear Fred him¬
self, with clothes hanging loose upon him, and long black locks
falling shaggy over a pale unshaven face. His expression
was most rueful; but you will understand it all (for you are
well up in the history, I know) when I tell you it was
Walter Benson. It seems he could endure no longer without
seeing Eeynolds for himself; so he took the opportunity of
being for a minute alone, and without leave of doctor or
nurse, gathered himself up and presented himself in the
guise I have described. ' Yoto here, Walter!' exclaimed
Fred. 'Why, how dare you do such a thing ? Go back to bed;
you'll get a chill and kill yourself!' ' Little matter for that,'
said the gloomy spectre ;' I wanted to see you, Eeynolds, and
now I have seen you I shall be easier. When I first heard
you were getting better, I began to believe in God; and what's
more, I gave thanks to Him honestly, from the bottom of my
heart, for the first time since I was a child. That's what
you've done for me ; and now if you can get me to the point
of thanking Him for sparing my own wretched life, you'll
have done a more wonderful thing yet!' ' You will get to
that point, Walter, and that very soon,' returned our dear
No. 45.—September 1878. 2 D
418 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Fred ; and here I came away, for I felt it was no scene for a
third. And now I have spent all my day in scribbling you
this very long letter (which I know my darling will enjoy),
and I must end it.—All blessings be with you, your own
E. B.
LETTER XXXVIII.
Mrs. WiMPOLE to Miss Aylmer.
Sept. 21.
My dearest Mary,—I had your letter this morning, and
will answer it as I can.    I am very busy, as you will believe
when I tell you I have hardly had time to think of my
darling child since she went.    You did not carry away all
the troubles with you in your little heart, for there have
been troubles upon troubles here.    I rejoice to think that
you had gone before all the misery began, and that you have
at least been in health and safety.    I hardly know  how to
tell you all, for I must make my story short.    Perhaps even
in that out-of-the-woiid place where you are, you may have
seen a paper that lias told you the cholera has been raging
in lUingham.   Perhai^s j'ou may have heard, too, that shortly
after you left, poor old Mr. Benson was struck down with
paralysis, brought on by grief and care.    He still lingers, a
sad wreck.    I dou't know whether I should speak to you of
Walter, but you had best know all.    Your final letter of
dismissal affected him very bitterly, and the next day he was
seized with the cholera.    He was then in a lodging close to
Mr. Eeynolds, whose care of him was beyond all praise.    I
speak now of what happened before his attack, when I believe
it was wholly due to Mr. Eeynolds, under God, that the
unhappy boy retained his sanity, and was kept from self-
destruction.    He is recovering, and is in a better state of
mind.    The day following his attack, Mr. Eeynolds himself
was laid prostrate; he was worn out with anxiety, for, in
addition to the charge I have mentioned, he had to care for
the cholera-stricken in both parishes, Mr. Slade being away.
He has been for days at death's door.    I shall never cease to
feel thankful that only two hours after his attack, I happened
to come to his house with supplies I had promised him; and
hearing of his illness, I took possession of the sick-room, and
have remained in it, with slight intervals, ever since.    Poor
Mr. Slade, who had been touring in Wales, out of the reach
of letters, and had known nothing of what was  passing,
turned up providentially the same evening.    He and I have
Let T/iein Alone. 419
been joint nurses, and I am thankful to say our patient is
recovering. I know how you will rejoice at this, for you,
like so many others, owe a debt of gratitude to this noble-
hearted young man. He and Slade are becoming like
brothers, and I am truly glad to see my two favourites learn¬
ing to appreciate one another. I always wondered at the
sort of antipathy there seemed to be between them, two of
the excellent of the earth as they were; and I used to try
hard to bring them together. Feeble mortal that I was, I
had better have let them alone. It took a whole tragedy in
five acts to do the work; it required earthquakes to make
these mountains encounter; but it is done, and I think they
are friends for life.
The bishop has presented Mr. Slade to tlie living, at
which all his friends truly rejoice. The unhappy girl
Margaret Scott is dead, I believe peacefully, at last. Mr.
Beilby, a friend of Mr. Eeynolds, and engaged to his sister,
came two days ago, and his presence has cheered us up very
greatly. He was a fellow-curate of LIr. Reynolds at, —
what's the name of the place ?—and they are perfectly
devoted to one another. He is a charming person this Mr.
Beilby, but of quite a different type to our friend. He is
strongly built, square, with a fine massive brow, and a frank
cheerful manner that does you good like sunshine. I am sure
we needed tliat sunshine, for this last fortnight among tlie
dead, the dying, and the despairhu/ has l^een one of the most
trying of my long life. Well, thank Ckid, our worst sorrow
is turned into joy, and He will care for the rest. To go
back to ^h: Beilby (what a ridiculous old woman you will
think me to be so taken up with young men ; but it is the
privilege of seventy years to be as enthusiastic as one chooses
without any fear of one's sentiments being mistaken '—other¬
wise, what would be the good of living to seventy ?). To go
back to Mr. Beilby, then, I hear his ringing laugh sounding
in Mr. lieynolds' room ; it is like coming to another world to
hear any one merry again, and in this house ! He is not of
so sensitive a nature as our dear friend Eeynolds, and has
less of the saint and the angel about him. The one intends
to marry, and the other does not, which is just what you
would expect of the two characters. Then, to compare him
with our other friend. He is what you would call, in a good
sense, much more a man of the world than poor Slade, has
infinitely more humour, and tact, and sarolr vivre, with less—
what shall I call it ?—exaltation of mind. I think the tlnee
are nearly perfect, each in his own way.
420 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
And now, my dear child, I must cease gossiping. I trust
you are becoming somewhat calmer and happier after the
great shock of the last weeks. I must tell you honestly, after
all you have seen and heard, I have rejoiced that you were
saved in time from a lot which could have given you no solid
prospect of happiness. When this unhappy young man
has left the neighbourhood (and his friends are trying to
arrange something for him), you must come back toBurnham,
and let your old friend do what she can to lighten your load
and efface the memory of your last melancholy visit.—Ever,
my darling, your loving 1). Wimpole.
{^Several letters are here omitted.—Ed.]
LETTEK XXXIX.
Bev. E. Beilby to Miss Eeynolds.
Sejit. 24.
My Dearest,—Erederick got up yesterday for an hour for
the first time; and this afternoon he is sitting, wrapped up
in blankets and propped with pillows, by the lire, for it is a
sharp day. He is about as big round as my big stick that
you used to laugh at when I threw it for Wowski. By tlie
bye, you are to bring Wowski when you come—a pleasant
travelling companion for you ! As your mother is so much
better, we tliiiik you .might start in a day or two ; and I shall
come and meet you, at least, as far as York. Mrs. Wimpole
is determined that we shall all three go and stay with lier—
Fred, you, and I; and Ered inclines to the plan, as he seems
to have a dread of your coming to this house. I believe he
thinks there is a horror clinging about tlie very walls within
which he has suffered so much, and he cannot yet bear to
speak of the days that preceded his own illness. Clearly,
change will be the best thing for him; and before he conies
back, we will turn his house out of the windows for him, and
make everything look as different as we can.
The cold Puritan has gone back to his own house these
two days, but looks in every now and then, and always
brinjTS something with him that he tliinks will amuse or
interest Ered. I sit and laugh at the pair—tlie two great tall
fellows are so like a couple of children that have quarrelled
and made it up. I assure you, however, I am by no means
jealous; for I am still tlie best fellow in the M'orld, and Slade
is only the second best; besides, I am Helen's chosen, and I
think that gives nie a great pull over the Puritan.
Let The III Alone. 421
Helen darling, how strange it is that I should sit and
write in this way!—I who came here so lately in the most
miserable suspense, not thinking for a moment that I should
see my best friend in life, only hoping to do the last offices
for him! When I tliink how all has been ordered for us, I
feel almost wild with joy. Good ]\Irs. Wimpole looks at me
as if she wondered (though not with displeasure) to see me
laugh; but except when I am on my knees giving thanks, T
feel as if I could do nothing but laugh and sing. 1 have
begun to take the daily morning services for Fretl, which have
been interrupted ever since the cholera broke out, and I hope
I shall be able to go on with them till he can take them
himself. Tlie first morning, though it was at eight o'clock,
a great number of people of all classes collected, many—sadly
many—in mourning. When I mentioned Fred's name in
the thanksgiving service, there was a general murmur, an
audible sob of joy.
By the bye, I don't think I have mentioned to you tlie great
fact that Mr. Slade has been presented with the Rectory;
I heard him telling Frederick about it yesterday, and the
latter looked as pleased as possible. How, now they are such
friends, they are to adjust their theological differences, I
don't know ! I suppose they must agree to differ, and eacli
go his own way, interfering with his fellow as little as may
be. I wouldn't trust tliem together noiv over a chapter
in the Romans! It is a sad pity poor Slade has come to
grief in his love affairs, and no wonder that he still looks as
woe-begone as he does. Perhaps there may be hope for him
still, as the young lady is again free. His father and mother
are coming to stay with him on Monday—nice old people,
they say. Walter Benson is fast getting strong, and he and
Fred have been having a long confab this morning. What
good hearts there are in the world, even under weak heads!
That good fellow Jack is going away with his brother to the
sea; and after consulting with Fred, he has made up his mind
to sell out his railway shares (a little private property left
him by an aunt) and furnish Walter with the means of
getting out of his worst difficulties. If ever the old squire
becomes sensible again, he will no doubt help (as Walter
makes the most solemn promises of amendment); but, indeed,
I fancy he is drained pretty dry. For present necessities,
that excellent woman Mrs. Wimpole has given him £50, and
promised him as much again by and by; and so he may be
considered settled and done for, until he can get to work at
something.
422 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
We had another touching scene to-day, when Mrs. Benson,
leaving her husband's bedside for the first time, came to see
Fred, and showered blessings on him for ' saving her boy.'
We shall have another still, Helen, when you and Mrs.
Wimpole meet. I find myself wondrously popular in
lUingham, shining with a borrowed liglit. So soon as I show
myself in the streets, out turn the good folks at their doors
and stop me to ask after ' Muster lienlds,' or ' Iwor young
minister,' or ' lioor young priest;' and then they contrive to
keep me for a 'crack' about him, which is generally all to
one tune. I don't half understand their lingo, but I carry
off my ignorance, I flatter myself, wonderfully, and make
most fluent replies. I certainly see nothing of the coldness
of nature which Fred seemed to feel at first among these
—shire folk; but I fancy if they are slow, they are constant,
and they are thoroughly attached to him now. Farewell
for a few days, my own love.—Your own
E. B.
r.S. by F. J. Eeynolds.
Deaeest Nelly,— 1 wanted to read Xed's letter to you,
but he won't let me. I have no doulit it is sad rubbish, so
to make it worth your having I put in a line, INIy hand is very
shaky, but I suppose that was only to be expected. I must
get fat soon, for they make me eat every two hours in tlie
day. They are all very good to me, only Ned is a shocking
tyrant (as you will find some day), and he says I am not to
write any more. The dog is reading over my shoulder,
though he won't let me read his; and there—that blot is his
doing entirely. He was unkind enough just now to show
me my gaunt unshaven face in the glass, and I am sure the
mother that bore me wouldn't own me. Kiss that same
little motlier for me. I am glad she is going to write to
JVIrs. Wimpole. She carUt say too much. Yes, yes, Ned, I
am leaving oft'. F. J. K.
Postscript by tlie Editor.
On tlie 26th of September Walter Benson left lUingham
with his brother ibr the seaside. On tlie 2!)th Miss
Eeynolds arrived at Burnham, where Eeynolds and Beilby
joined her; and a happier party of young people than good
Mrs. Winipole had under her roof were to be found nowhere
that autumn. About the same time Mr. and Mrs. Slade
came to stay witli their son at the Eectory.    And now, all
Ode: For Music. 423
the correspondents having got together, the letter-writing
necessarily ceased. There is nothing more to transcribe and
little to tell. We have heard, however, that, some few weeks
after the other guests, Mary Aylmer also came back to
Burnham ; and as it is said that Mr. Xeville Slade has again
become a constant visitor there, let us hope there is a chance
that he may not remain a bachelor to the end of his days.
[L. C. G.]
THE  END.
©lie:   Jor iHusic.
Voice of the Spring, go to my Love from me,
And scatter your fair flowers upon her way ;
But tell her, bliss is a vain dream, to be
Like all your sweetness, passing soon away.
Tell her that Truth stands fast,
When all Life's joy is past.
Gentle Summer Wind, your fragrance shower
Over the dreary paths my Love must tread;
Ere the glad day when Peace shall be her dower,
And Heaven's own sunshine rest upon her head.
Tell her that Faith is strong.
Though the night weareth long.
Dying Autumn Hues, your beauty brings
Back to my Love the memories of past years;
AVhat if among your Dead she counts Life's si:)rings,
And on their grave has shed her fondest tears ?
Tell her Hope's wing is keen,
And soars to worlds serene.
Tell her, 0 Winter Storms, once more from me,
To chase the gloom that lingers on her brow;
Your cheerless spells her thrall shall never be.
For the true Sun of Love shines even now.
Faith—Hope—and Love's strong chain
Defies Earth's rudest strain.
Anon.
424 The Ladies' Edinb}trgh Magazine.
^ Sljort Account of tfje ©bjects anli ^imS of tl}e
SEorlung ILalitES' €Juilli,
So many people have asked the question, ' What is this
Workinfj Ladies Guild of which we hear so much ?' that we
propose to answer their inquiries as briefly as we can.
It is described in the report as ' a Society of ladies and
gentlemen willing in some way to aid gentlewomen requiring
assistance.' Its object is not merely to form a much-needed
link between the ladies who are seeking employment and
the institutions and centres of industry where they may
obtain it, but to bring the societies which already exist for
the aid of gentlewomen into closer connection with one
another, so that by hearty co-operation they may increase
their sphere of usefulness, and exemplify the oft-quoted
truism that' union is strength.'
It also seeks to utilize much scattered energy and xinused
kindness at present wasted for want of an outlet; and by
uniting personal help and sympathy with official assistance,
this Guild avoids alike the indiscriminate charity which is
too often associated wath individual efforts, and tlie red-
tapeism wiiich not unfrequently fetters even the best
organized associations.
The aim of this Guild is not so much to render pecuniary
assistance, though in cases of great necessity this is occasion¬
ally given; it strives rather to teach women to help them¬
selves, providing work for those who are fitted to undertake it,
and helping to train others who may have had no opportunity
of acquiring proficiency, or who hitherto had not fully
recognised the need of efficient training.
One great advantage is that the names of persons assisted
by this Society are not revealed. Many poor gentlewomen
who would shrink from accepting assistance if it entailed
publishing their misfortunes to the world, can have no
objection to confide their circumstances to the sympathy and
discretion of one of their own sex.
Another rule is, that any lady who is assisted must be
personally known to the associate who recommends her. By
this means, personal intercourse is established, which may
be attended by many beneficial results to both parties.
One of the greatest problems in the present age of transi¬
tion is how to employ untrained Avomen. In former years
it was by no means considered necessary for a governess to
Objects and Aims of tlie Working Ladies' Guild.    425
be a person of education. A slight smattering of one or two
popular accomplishments was sufficient to procure her the
important mission of training young minds. But times have
changed, and the roh of Becky Sliarpe has become well-nigh
impossible. The most ignorant and negligent parents will
now no longer rest contented with uneducated or half-educated
tuition for their children; and though the facilities for a
thoroughly solid education are now within the reach of all,
so that the rising generation will be without excuse if, when
the need comes, they are unable to find employment for
themselves, yet those gentlewomen whose youth was over
before education became the fashion, if visited by reverses of
fortune, are indeed in a pitiable position. They cannot dig,
and are ashamed to beg. Tliis is the class that our Guild
seeks to aid.
All the associates are asked to mention every possible open¬
ing for employment,however trivial; for even if not permanent,
it may suit some one who is waiting for another engagement.
Amongst temporary employments obtained by some of the
associates, the report mentions acting as walking companion
to young ladies in London, making covers for chairs and sofas,
assisting as amanuensis, directing and posting invitations to
parties, undertaking the superintendence of a nursery during
the temporary absence of the head nurse, taking the manage¬
ment of a Home or a Eeformatory between the resignation of
one mistress and the appointment of another, etc. In fact, there
is no office that can be filled by gentlewomen that the Guild
is not prepared to supply.
Some of the associates receive ladies requiring kindness
and rest into their own house on a visit; others give occa¬
sional drives and tickets for music and recreation to the
liard worked; others take trouble to find situations, and give
information about hospital schools and lodgings.
There are classes for teaching ladies dressmaking in con-
nection with the Guild, and there are special departments for
plain needlework, painted fans, and art needlework, managed
by associates. Several registries are in connection with the
Guild, and it has a registry of its own at the office in London,
113 Gloucester Eoad, where all further information can be
obtained from the secretary, Miss Chapman. Notices con¬
cerning the Guild appear continually in the Woman's Gazette,
a monthly magazine, to be obtained from Messrs. Hatchard
at 2s. 6d. a year.
There are branches already established at Cannes and
Scarborough, and groups of associates at Brighton, Southsea,
426 The Ladies Edinburgh Magardnc.
£}"■  -"■'".b'
and Torquay, but the centre of the work is in London. It
is when stranded in large cities that women most need help,
and those who would gladly assist them are often ignorant
of their very existence. It is in these great centres that a
Society should be specially welcome, that teaches us who our
less affluent neighbours are, and how we may best help them
to help themselves.
One word more. The Society is established on a perfectly
unsectarian basis. Persons of all creeds are equally assisted—
nay, more, they are admitted as associates. It is connected
with no sect, party, or shibboleth whatever, but it is an
eminently Christian Society, inasmuch as its object is for
women to help to ' bear one another's burdens, and thus fulfil
the law of Christ.' Those who are assisted are themselves
admitted on equal terms as associates, and are therefore
bound to assist the Society in any way they can ; thus
an undue feeling of dependence is avoided. As the Bishop
of Lichfield justly remarked, when addressing the associates,
' all are working ladies alike; though by the dispensation of
God's providence one lady requires remuneration for her
work and another does not, all are working together as
members of the same great human family.' May we not add,
as servants of the same Master.
' Like the fish who brought the coin,
We in ministry would join.
Bring what pleases Thee the best.
Help from each to all the rest.'—G. Macdonald.
SlDNKY PlIILII'S.
©ur 3Lii)rarg ^Tablc.
The Art of Beauty.    By Mrs. H. R. Haweis.
Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly.
The title of this curious production is certainly misleading, perhaps
intentionally so. We should not at all infer from it that the special
subject of the volume is that jiersonal beauty of womankind which
is commonly supposed to be the work of Nature rather than of any art
at all. Considering the amount of beauty there is in the world
besides human fairness, we must think this book claims too much for
itself when we find that it is merely an effort to tell women how to set off
their beauty, if they have any, or how t(3 make up for the absence of
it if they have none. But the name is the least of our quarrel with
this book. It contains so much genuine cleverness and knowledge, and
conveys so much curious information, that the thoroughly unsatis¬
factory  tone which pervades it is the more to be regretted.    This
Our Library Table. 427
seems to be the drift of Mrs. Haweis' advice to Englishwomen and
t;irls : ' Make yourself beautiful if you can, by any means in your
power; study everything in earth and sky to find out what is most
becoming ; arrange your house and all your surroundings with the
view of setting otf your charms. Paint, powder, pads, false hair—
everything is allowable whicli makes you fairer, unless it hurts y(jur
health. If you are plain, you must be quaint, queer, conspicuous,
somehow, or you will be overlooked in the crowd, and never get
married ! ' Awful threat. We used to be told it was something of
an offence against womanly refinement ta make oneself conspicuous
in society, but now it is held up as almost a sacred duty. One
element of woman's beauty would soon disappear under Mrs. Haweis'
eloquent teaching ; the ineffable charm of unconsciousness would
speedily be a thing of the past should these counsels prevail. How
pleasant it will be for society when all our pretty girls are instructed
on high principles to pose themselves against becoming backgrounds,
and the plain ones to try to be picturesque ! As for dress, Mrs.
Haweis has three ideals—the old Greek dress, the Watteau costume,
and the attire of the court ladies whom Sir Peter Lely painted.
Now which of these three are we to imitate ? or are they to be com¬
bined ? Upon this point we ai-e left in the dark. It is all very well
that people should be taught to improve their taste in both colour
and form by the study of natural tints and outlines,—and if more
attention were generally given to such observation, no doubt dress
would be improved as well as other things,—but we do protest against
Mrs. Haweis' application of her doctrines, especially in her last
section, 'A garden of girls.' Here we must say that some of her
remarks are only surpassed in bad taste by the quotations (made,
certainly, with disapprobation) in the earlier part of the book from
M. Ch. Blanc's, L'Art dans la parure et le vetcment. However, in
one point Mrs. Haweis certainly gives good advice when she fights
against the notion of distorted waists and squeezed feet having any
beauty in thein. We fear the would-be beauties will not listen to
her on this head, though they will eagerly accept her encouragement
in other details of their questionable embellishment.
PivEjf Bonds.    By E. Werner.    Translated by Bertha Ness.
London : Rennington & Co.
The rei)utation which has been obtained in this country for E.
Werner by Success, and hoiv he won it, and Under a Charm, will hardly
be enhanced by the present j)roduction, translated under the name of
Riven Bonds. The story is neither so agreeable in itself nor so well
put together as those above named ; and the tendency to exaggeration
in the characters which was before perceptible, is now more decided.
It appears that this writer agrees with Mrs. Malaprop that ' it is best
to begin with a little aversion,'as this story is based upon the same idea
as Success, of a couple uniting without affection in early youth, then
parting in anger, meeting again, and finally becoming devotedly
attached to each other. With a repetition of idea comes a repetition
of characters ; the dull apathetic young wife, Ella, who afterwards
develops into a marvel of beauty and energy, is a feminine edition of
Arthur Berkow in Success. Her father reminds us of the tyrannical
old mine-owner, and her artist husband of the proud and sensitive
Eugenie. The hero of this story, Reinhold Almbach, presents to us
the old but ever-touching picture of real genius thwarted by circum-
428 The Ladies Edinbur^^Ji. Ma<razi!te.
£>"■  -"■'".b'
stances. His great musical powers are forcibly repressed by his
unromantic uncle, upon whom he depends in some measure, and
whose daughter he has married, without any particular affection for
her. The uncongenial circle in which Reinhold lives, the dull routine
of business, the prosaic nature of life in the German town, and the
uninteresting society of his undeveloped wife and her parents, all
weigh heavy on him and keep down his powers. But his slumbering
genius is aroused by the influence of an Italian singer, Beatrice
Biancona, meant to personify all the fire and fascination of the South,
a gifted beautiful passionate woman, but who strikes us as being
considerably overdrawn. She draws out all Reinhold's musical
capacity, and all the feeling which his wife has never elicited; circum¬
stances push on the matter, the ' bonds' which hold Reinhold to his
wife and child are violently 'I'iven,' and he goes oft' to enjoy the
influences of the sunny South—music, warmth, beauty, and the society
of Beatrice Biancona. How this proceeding is avenged on him, how
amidst all possible outward success he finds no satisfaction, and
comes at last to long unutterably for what he has so fiercely flung
away, cannot be explained without telling all the story ; but although
Reinhold does suffer and has a good deal to endure, yet at the end
he is let off easily on the whole. The process by which the ' riven
bonds ' are renewed is not a pleasant one to read of, and the meetings
between Ella and her husband, after ten years of separation, are
singularly uncomfortable incidents, though they might not appear so
to readers used to the German facilities for dissolving marriages.
Then the whole relations between Reinhold and Beatrice are anything
but edifying, though apparently accepted as matters of course in the
society in which they move. Finally, Beatrice loses her power over
her former adorer, and obligingly takes herself out of the way, and
Reinhold can undisturbed devote himself to Ella. As a whole, the
book is unsatisfactory, notwithstanding the energy and power with
which the story is told, and the dramatic force of many of the scenes.
The freshest and best character in the book is Hugo, Reiuhold's
sailor brother, bright, honest, and real, worth ten of Reinhold, in
spite of his musical genius, and acute susceptibilities, and so forth.
It was quite unnecessary to make Hugo fall in love with Ella when,
after being placed in more favourable surroundings than those of her
early life, she develops into a beautiful and fascinating woman ; the
good sailor does not deserve the fate of a hopeless attachment.
This work is apparently not translated by the same hand as the
preceding ones, and the change is not for the better, as the transla¬
tion is often over literal, and here and there marred by awkward
turns of expression.
©tiestton Series.
I. History.—Explain the claim of James VI. of Scotland to the
throne of England.
II. English Literature.—What do you understand by the term
Pastoral poetry 1 Illustrate your answer by reference to noted
English examples.
Answers to be sent in by 15th October, addressed 'Qu. C, care of
Question Scries. 429
Miss Walker, 37 Gillespie Crescent.' The best answer to each question
will be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of
the year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magazine. History not to exceed
twenty-four. Literature twenty-six printed lines ; twelve words go
to a line. We warn correspondents against running time too short.
The 15th is the latest possible day on which the Editors can receive
any answer; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO JULY SERIES.
Heather has borne off the palm from all comjietitors, being best in
both. In History: B. and M. B. both excellent; Rediviva, Spidek,
and May-Fly, very good ; Bretwalda, good. In Literature: After
Heather, Claribel, beautiful, but over the limits ; Rediviva,
very good ; B., good, but scarcely long enough.
I. England was nevermore loyal than when James the Second's cause
triumphed at Sedgemoor ; but the terror inspired by the ' Bloody
Assize' grew to open discontent when James suddenly raised his
army to 20,000 men, and filled it with Catholic officers. In vain
Parliament j^rotested at this violation of the Test Act; James, find¬
ing it refractory, prolonged and finally dissolved it, supplying his
treasury by a secret subsidy from France. Armed with an illegal
decision, extorted from the judges, in favour of Sir Edward Hales, a
Catholic, James next admitted Catholics to all civil and military
offices, and sanctioned the public exercise of Catholic worship. He
revived the High Court of Commission, abolished by two Acts of
Parliament, and began a series of attacks upon the Church. Especial
indignation was excited by the ejection <jf the Fellows of Magdalen
College, Oxford, for maintaining a President legally elected by them¬
selves instead of two unqualified candidates recommended by the king.
To win the Nonconformists, James published (1G87) a Declaration of
Indulgence, dispensing with all religious tests. Whether the statutes
thus annulled were good or bad, James in this acted unconstitu¬
tionally. A second Declaration (April 1C88) was ordered to be rend
in the churches, and a petition against it, presented by Archbishop
Sancroft and six of his suffragans, was received by James with great
anger. 'The Seven Bishops' were imprisoned and tried, but acquitted,
to the delight of the nation. The birth of an heir to the throne (June
1C88) precipitated the crisis by destroying the hopes of the succession
of James's Protestant daughter Mary. An invitation to England,
signed by seven leading English noblemen, was sent to William of
Orange, who landed with 13,000 men at Torbay, November 1G88.
Heather.
II. Iphigenia.—The beautiful Iphigenia was daughter of Agamem¬
non, king of Mycente, and of Clytemnestra, and was already betrothed
to Achilles when the Greek forces assembled at Aulis for the siege of
Troy. Delayed by contrary winds, the Grecian leaders inquired the
cause of an oracle, which declared that Diana, offended by the slaughter
of a sacred hind, slain by Agamemnon, could only be appeased by
the sacrifice of a maiden of the race of the Fair Helen.    Agamemnon
430 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
thereupon sent for Iphigenia, on pretence of wedding her to Achilles,
and the sacrifice being performed, a favourable wind set in, and the
Greeks sailed for Troy. Euripides says that Diana, pitying Iphigenia,
carried her off, leaving a white doe at the place of sacrifice. Another
version, followed by Racine, makes her rival, Iphigenia daughter of
Theseus and the Fair Helen, suffer in her stead.
Joan of Arc.—Not long since, there still stood near Domreniy
the ' Fairy Oak' beneath which, perhaps, the idea of a divinely-
inspired mission first suggested itself to the peasant girl, Jeanne d'
Arc. Whatever we may think of her ' voices,' it is undeniable that
she saved France by her heroic self-devotion. Misjudged by her age,
the records of her trial prove her tohave been a truthful, pure-minded,
high-souled maiden, brave as a heroine of Ariosto, but yet a peasant,
and probably alienating the French nobles by her superiority, her
pretensions, and her power of taking care of herself. Her death is
a disgrace to the English, still more to the savage Cauchon, her
judge, and to the ungrateful Charles, who made no effort to save her.
Eleanor of Castile.—One of the best-beloved names in English
history is that of the gracious Eleanor of Castile. Married in 1254:
to Edward of England, son of Henry III., the bridegroom being four¬
teen, and the bride onlj' ten years old, this child-marriage proved a
union of undisturbed domestic happiness, and Eleanor is quoted as
the model of a perfect wife. During the Crusade she saved Edward's
life by sucking the poison from his wound, though the physicians
pronounced her devotion useless and insisted on cutting out the flesh.
Unfortunately for Edward, he lost his wife's gentle influence when he
most required it. She died 1292, w hen about to join him on his first
Scotch expedition. The stone crosses at Northampton and Waltham,
and the name ' Charing Cross,' mark spots where her bier rested on
its way to Westminster.
Margaret Roper.—Margaret, favourite daughter of Sir Thomas
Moi'o, inherited much of his talent, and is noted for her accomplish¬
ments and her affection for her father. Her touching farewell to
Sir Thomas on his way to execution is well known. After his death,
she went with some friends and took down his head, set up over
London Bridge.    She had it embalmed, and preserved it till she died.
Heather.
IS.B.—We beg to state that the positions of two of the Literature
answers in the June Series are reversed—Heather first, Midob
second. This is owing to a slip, observed only after the sheets were
finally revised. But for this inadvertence, Midge's answer was on
the whole the best.
Strau liotcs.
St. George's Hall Classes.—A meeting for tlie distribution of
prizes and certificates gained by the students of the St. George's Hall
Preparatory Classes at the late Local Examinations was held on
Thui-sday, 25th July—Professor Masson presiding. The chairman,
in an interesting speech, traced the history of these classes from the
spring of 187C, when a few ladies resident in Edinburgh met together
to study for the Local Examinations, to the past winter, when 138
Edinburgh  students  and o02 corresponding students had  enrolled
Stray Notes. 431
themselves. In conclvision, the learned professor urged the claims
of Latin and Mathematics as subjects above all others fitted to
cultivate habits of mental accuracy. Mr. M'Glashan then submitted
his report. Of the 448 students on the roll, many, he said, had
joined one class or several, merely with a view to self-improvement,
and without any intention of presenting themselves as candidates ;
but 117 ladies had gone up for examination, 5G taking preliminary
subjects only, and 69 taking special subjects, and obtaining certificates,
wliile 29 of the latter further distinguished themselves by gaining
prizes. In many cases very high marks were taken. There had
been seven bursaries open to all candidates, and three of them had
been awarded to St. George's Hall students, namely :—£25 to Miss
Louisa Macdonald (corresponding student), who stands highest on the
Honours list; £20 to Mi.ss Bain (corresponding student); and £10 to
Miss Burton (Edinburgh student). Of four prizes offered for pre¬
liminary subjects, one of £3 had been gained by Miss Malcolm (corre¬
sponding student), and one of £2 by Miss L. Bews (corresponding
student). These ladies stood third and fourth on the preliminary
list. Special prizes had also been offered by the committee to
students of these classes. They were taken as follows :—£5 for pre¬
liminary subjects by Miss L. Bews (corresponding student) ; £2 for
preliminary subjects by Miss M. R. Mitchell (corresponding student);
£5 for ordinary special svibjects by Miss Shepherd (corresponding
student) ; £5 for Latin by Miss Gair (corresponding student) ; £.5 for
Mathematics by Miss Buchau (Edinburgh student) ; £5 for Logic by
Miss Gibb (corresponding student); and £3 for Theory of Music by
Miss Malcolm (corresponding student). Throughout the session the
students had displayed great diligence and enthusiasm, making the
work of instruction very pleasant to the tutors. Mr. M'Glashan
intimated that when the classes were resumed in November, a class
of Natural Philosophy would be opened under the tuition of Mr. P.
R. Scott Lang.
From the above statement it may be observed that most of the
rewards have fallen to corresponding .students, a fact which, it is hoped,
will go far to convince those who have expressed doubts as to the
possibility of success attending a system of instruction by correspond¬
ence. Those also who have hitherto considered themselves cut off
from the advantages enjoyed by ladies living within the reach of
masters and classes, may learn that they have now no excuse either
for idleness or for discontent with their own unaided efforts to read
or study, when help and guidance can so easily be obtained through
the medium of the penny post.
M. W. thus answers Villa Rey : The paraphrase, ' O God of
Bethel,' was originally composed by Dr. Doddridge, and altered to its
present form in our Bible by Logan. A note to this effect may be
found in the edition published by Allan Bell & Co., London, 1836.
F. G. also answers, giving the date of Dr. Doddridge 1702-1751 :
' He was a famous Nonconformist preacher and writer; a short account
of him will be found in Chambers's Cyclop. Evg. Lit., vol. i. p. 777.'
Apis asks: What are the books, mentioned by Goethe, which,
though now forgotten by the world in general, have permanently
influenced men ?
An Ixquirer asks if anybody can tell her of an English History in
rhyme for children ] [We ourselves have dim childish recollections
of the existence of such a book ; but they are so very vague, and the
432 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
title and author's name have so totally escaped our memory, that we
can onlj- hope some kind correspondent will give better informatimi
to An Inquirer.—Eds.]
G. W. has ascertained that the harp and the horn were the most
ancient musical instruments in Scotland. She now begs for an
answer to this question : ' What ancient nation only washed thrice
in their lives ? and on what occasions did they do so ?' G. W. thought
it might be the Scythians, but history assures her that they never
washed at all. A friend has told her that the women of Bulgaria are
only washed at their birth, on their marriage, and after death. This
seems to us fairly to meet her question, but she still seeks further
for exemplification of the same feeling with regard to personal ablu¬
tions. The Bulgarian ladies would appreciate our Scottish proverb,
' The clartier, the cosier ;' their third ' wash,' however, can hardly be
said to trouble them during their lifetime. We ourselves knew an
old Highland woman, long bed-ridden, who reluctantly consented, at
the entreaty of a benevolent lady visitor, to the cleansing, probably
for the first time in her life, of her house and bedding, on condition
that the obnoxious process should not be extended to herself. At
the same time she predicted that ' it would be the death of her.' On
liberal payment two neighbours undertook the repulsive task of
scouring the premises ; but, in spite of scrupulous observance of the
conditions, our poor old friend was quite as good as her word, and
conscientiously expired within a few weeks of the operation, which
thus proved to be her ' happy despatch.' She would have been better
off in Bulgaria. We advise G. W. to consult Burnaby's Fade to Khicu,
which gives a good deal of curious information on the manners and
customs of semi-barbarous tribes, where she may possibly find the
solution of her question.
—0-
^^oticcs to Corrcsponticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
"Various articles have been promised or received for the series
proposed on ' Country Subjects and Pursuits.' We shall be glad of
further suggestions or communications from any lady willing to
contribute to this series. A good paper on the Dairy and Keeping
Cows would be very acceptable ; also on the Garden.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society
will be held on Saturday, 5th October, at 25 Great King Street.
Debate, ' Does the dress of men and women of the present day show
evidence of development in refinement and good taste I'
Our Female Novelists. 433
©ur JFcmale iloiidists.
XXI.
THE  SISTERS  BEONTE—CUEKEE,  ELLIS,  AND
ACTON  BELL.
h. 1816—(/. 1855. h. 1819—</. 1848. h. 1822—</. 1849.
' Great thoughts, great feelings, came to them
Like instincts, unawares.'
Have any of our readers ever stood on a Yorkshire hill, and
surveyed from that vantage-ground a wide reach of moor,
purple with August's bloom of heather ? Have they heard
the rush of the foaming beck as it dashed along with tumul¬
tuous noise, or shivered as the keen north wind swept over
the moor with naught to stop its chill advance ? for long
grey stone walls and stunted bushes of birch and thorn—all
too low to afford shelter from the keen blast—alone diversify
the face of the country. Those who have done so will know
somewhat of the rough cradle in which the Bronte family
were nurtured—somewhat, too, of the dreariness of the sur¬
roundings which must insensibly have cast the minds of
Charlotte, Emily, and Anne in that stern mould which so
constantly infuses gloom into their writings. There are no
inettinesses on Yorkshire moors. The scenery may at times
be gorgeous from contrast of heather bloom with dark wind-
rent fir copse, or sunset glory catching the cold waters of
the beck and turning them to a golden thread across the
dark moor; at other times all is desolation, driving winds
and drifting snow, and unutterable barrenness. So is it
with the Bronte writings; they detail life's trials and sorrows
in language of stern grandeur; yet often they paint in
colours as rich as their outlines are rugged and harsh.
The remarkable trio of whom we propose giving a sketch
were all born at Haworth, a village on the confines of
Yorkshire and Lancashire. There, nestled amid the moors,
the old, grey, square parsonage, the only home they ever
knew, was the scene of the joys, hopes, sorrows, and literary
labours of these three sisters.
A traveller on leaving the train at Keighley, would have
to proceed upwards for several miles, when he would reach
Haworth, a stone-built village hanging on the side of a hill
so steep that a wheeled vehicle can scarcely get up the main
No. 46.—OCTOBEE 1878. 2 E
434 ^^'^ Ladies' Ediiihirgh Magazine.
street. A little way back from the houses stands the church ;
behind this, again, the parsonage, ugly and uninteresting, with
an unbounded view to the back over moorlands of the
wildest description, which reach to the churchyard and
parsonage garden Myalls. The churchyard is crowded full of
monuments and old stones, all in greatest confusion. The
whole place and country are bleak and weird, and at the
time of which we write—our heroines' early years—there
can have been no communication with the outer world for
many months in the year.
The childhood of these talented women—too early left
motherless—was passed under the care of their father, the
eccentric incumbent of Haworth, and an invalid aunt who
could do but little for their welfare. Like Topsy, the six
children simply 'growed,' finding amusements, interests, and
education for themselves. The two eldest,Maria and Elizabeth,
died young, and in 1825 Charlotte at ten years old was the
eldest of four little things—herself, Branwell, Emily, and
Anne. Her first life experience was sad ; at Cowan Bridge,
the school made famous by her indignant pen, as Lowood in
Jane Eyre, she saw her elder sisters sink under the hardships
endured there. After their death, Charlotte and Emily were
removed, and spent their next years at home with their one
brother, Patrick Branwell, and youngest sister Anne. Many
a curious story is told of their childish precocity and
passionate love of books and newspapers. Their aunt taught
the little girls sewing and a few household duties ; and thus
time passed, till at fifteen Charlotte went again to school at
Eoe Head, not twenty miles from home. Here she had a
happier school life than before, finding in Miss Wooler not
only an excellent schoolmistress, but a lifelong friend. Shy,
reserved, and physically delicate, Charlotte shrank from the
usual type of boisterous school-girl; she made, therefore, but
two friends at Eoe Head, both known to us through Mrs.
Gaskell's Life—the one as the ' E.,' the other as the ' Mary,'
to whom the interesting letters given in that volume are
mostly addressed.
Two years later, and we have in a lately - published
Monograph ^ the following vivid description of the young
Brontes on their way to join a picnic party at Bolton Abbey :
'Their conveyance is no handsome carriage, but a rickety dog¬
cart, unmistakably betraying its neighbourship to the carts and ploughs
of some rural farm-yard.    The horse, freshly taken from the field, is
» Charlotte Bronte.    By T. Wemyss Reid.
I
Our Feuiale Novelists. 435
driven by a youth who, in spite of his countrified dress, is no mere
bumpkin. His shock of red hair hangs down in somewhat ragged
locks behind his ears, for Branwell Bronte esteems himself a genius
and a poet, and, following the fashion of tlie times, has that abhor¬
rence of the barber's shears which genius is supposed to affect. But
the lad's face is a handsome and a striking one, full of Celtic fire and
humour, untouched by the slightest shade of care, giving one the
impression of somebody altogether hopeful, promising, even brilliant.
How gaily he jokes with his three sisters ! With what inexhaustible
volubility he pours out quotations from his favourite poets, applying
them to the lovely scenery around him ; beside him, in a dress of
marvellous plainness and ugliness, stamped with the brand "home¬
made " in characters which none can mistake, is the eldest of the
sisters. Charlotte is talking, too, there are bright smiles upon her
face; she is enjoying everything around her, the splendid morning,
the charms of leafy trees and budding roses, and the ever-musical
stream—most of all, perhaps, the charms of her brother's society, and
the expectation of that coming meeting with her friend, who is so
near at hand. Behind, sit a pretty little girl, with fine complexion
and delicate regular features, whom tlie stranger would at once pick
out as the beauty of the company, and a tall, rather angular figure,
clad in a dress exactly resembling Charlotte's. Emily Bronte does
not talk so much as the rest of the party ; but her wonderful eyes,
brilliant and unfathomable as the pool at the foot of the waterfall,
but radiant also with a wealth of tenderness and warmth, show how
her soul is expanding under the influences of the scene. ... If she
does not, like Charlotte and Anne, meet her brother's ceaseless flood
of sparkling words with opposing currents of speech, she utters at
times a strange, deep, guttural sound which those who know her
best interpret as the language of a joy too deep for articulate
expression.'
Such in girlhood were those who a few years later were to
astonish and puzzle the reading world as Currer, Ellis, and
Acton Bell. Of the fourth in the group, Branwell, little can
be said. His, alas ! was the dark shadow in the home circle,
never to be lightened nor removed till it passed into the
more awful and abiding Shadow of Death.
Up to 1835 their life ran smoothly, these being probably
the happiest years at Haworth Parsonage. After this time,
Branwell having chosen an artist's career, many efforts were
made by his sisters to earn their living as governesses, so as
to enable their father to maintain him as a student at the
Eoyal Academy. But to natures so peculiarly sensitive and
clinging, ' governessing' was more or less of an agony not
mitigated by their own experience. To Charlotte, indeed,
the load was more tolerable, as she became a teacher under her
friend Miss Wooler. Emily, who went first as a pupil under
Charlotte, fell ill from home-sickness, and had to be sent
back to wander again free and unfettered on her own breezy
moors.    She  made  a second  effort to help her family by
43^ TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
becoming a teacher in a school near Halifax, but the
Christmas of 1836 saw the three sisters united again at
Haworth. There on winter's evenings, by the glimmering
firelight, they held serious consultation as to ways and
means of earning money. Like the Five Sisters of York,
they had an unvarying promenade, not the nave of a stately
cathedral, but their own humble parlour. There they
nightly walked and talked together in 1836; there also, in
1849, sat Charlotte, the sole tenant of the little room.
During the memorable Christmas time above mentioned, the
young obscure girl felt the first desire for authorship which
was to end in the production of such works as Jam Eyre and
Villettc. Thus moved, she took the bold measure of asking
by letter the Laureate's opinion of some verses she enclosed.
Southey's answer, kind but discouraging, reached her the
following March, and induced her to resume teaching, from
M'hich, three years later, she had a chance of release by the
offer of a home of her own. Quietly and resolutely this
offer was declined, from her own feeling that she could not
give to him that offered it the entire devotion which a
hiisband has a right to expect.
Events followed in quick succession. To qualify them¬
selves as teachers, Charlotte and Emily went to Brussels to
perfect their French; thence they were recalled by the illness
and death of Miss Branwell, the aunt who had so long shared
their home. Soon after her return to Brussels, Charlotte was
destined to j^ass through a bitter experience, common enough
in women's lives, and which is told in her own novel Villette.
If to it we owe that striking book, we at least may not have
cause for regret; but to poor Charlotte the dull gnawing pain
of disappointment brought with it the usual disinclination
for home life, restlessness, and desire for change of some
kind. On her return to Haworth she writes thus sadly to a
friend:
' Something in me which used to be enthusiasm is tamed down and
broken. I have fewer illusions. What I wish for now is active
exertion—a stake in life. Haworth seems such a lonely, quiet spot,
buried away from the world.'
This is a cry wrung from an agonized spirit's pain—a pain
M'hich had sent her, Protestant as she was, before leaving
Brussels, to seek relief in the confessional of a Eoman
Catholic church. The good ' father in God' whom she met
there seems to have given, by his kindly advice, temporary
consolation to the suff'ering stranger;  what  she relates of
Our Female Novelists. 437
Lucy Snow in   Villette was drawn from facts  in  her own
life.    For her, henceforth, there
' Had passed away a glory from the earth.'
Some, indeed, may hold that it is
' Better to have loved and lost,
Than never to have loved at all,'
but it may be questioned whether Charlotte Bronte was one
to endorse that sentiment.
As Anne was forced at this time to relinquish her situation,
the three sisters were again united at home, and became,
henceforth, all in all to each other. The strength of their
individual idiosyncrasies does not seem to have prevented
their characters from dovetailing perfectly the one into the
other. Again, in their rambles over the moors, they eagerly
discussed a plan for keeping a small school of their own; a
proposal which was frustrated by the deepening of that
terrible shadow of which I have already spoken. Un¬
principled, idle, and now disgraced, Branwell was cast upon
their hands, submitting the home circle to that process of
slow torture which can only be inflicted by an erring
brother, and of which those only who have gone througli it
can estimate the intense suffering. Handsome, clever, and
popular, he cast these gifts to the winds, and lived a life
which was one prolonged grief to father and sisters. Through
him Anne lost her situation, that of governess in the same
family where he was private tutor. Slowly but surely she
had become aware of the power certain vices were assuming
over him. Nor was Charlotte astonished, on her return li'om a
brief visit to a friend near Leeds, to find Branwell again an
inmate of the parsonage, and to learn, by a letter which
followed him next day, that he had been dismissed by liis
employer. In the disgrace of dismissal, the gentle, patient
Anne was forced to share ; and now the three sisters had to
view with anguish, not unmixed with loathing, the downward
course of the idolized brother from whom they had once
hoped for such great things.
While sadly watching this wasted existence, a new era
opened, bringing fresh interest into their lives—namely, that
of tlieir first appearance in print. We give Charlotte's own
words:
' One day, in the autnmn of 1845, I accidentally lighted on a ms.
volume of verse, in my sister Emily's handwriting. Of course I was
not surprised, knowing that she could and did write verse.    I looked
438 TJi'S Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
it over, and something more than surprise seized me—a deep con¬
viction that these were not common effusions, not at all like the
poetry women generally write. I thought them condensed and terse,
vigorous and genuine. To my ear they had also a peculiar music,
wild, melancholy, elevating. My sister Emily was not a person of
demonstrative character, nor one on the recesses of whose mind and
feelings even those nearest and dearest to her could, with impunity,
intrude unlicensed ; it took hours to reconcile her to the discovery I
had made, and days to persuade her that such poems merited
publication. . . . Meantime my younger sister quietly produced some
of her own compositions, intimating that since Emily's had given me
pleasure, I might like to look at hers. I could not but be a partial
judge, yet I thought that these verses, too, had a sweet, sincere pathos
of their own. We had very early cherished the dream of one day
being authors. We agreed to arrange a small selection of our poems,
and, if possible, to get them printed. Averse to personal publicity,
we veiled our names under those of Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell,
the ambiguous choice being dictated by a sort of conscientious scruple
at assuming Christian names positively masculine ; while we did not
like to declare ourselves women, because—without at the time sus¬
pecting that our mode of writing and thinking was not what is called
' feminine '—we had a vague impression that authoresses are liable to
be looked on with prejudice: we noticed how critics sometimes use
for their chastisement the weapon of personality, and for their reward
a flattery which is not true praise. The bringing out of our little
book was hard work. As was to be expected, neither we nor our
poems were at all wanted ; but for this we had been prepared at the
outset: though inexperienced ourselves, we had read the experiences
of others. The great puzzle lay in the difficulty of getting answers
of any kind from the publishers to whom we applied. Being greatly
harassed by this obstacle, I ventured to apply to the Messrs. Chambers
of Edinburgh for a word of advice—?/«!/ may have forgotten the
circumstance, but / have not; for from them I received a brief and
business-like, but civil and sensible, reply, on which we acted, and
at last made way.'
This modest effort failed, as others had done; indeed,
anything attempted by a Bronte seemed predestined to fail.
At the same time, they were alarmed by their father's loss of
sight. Cataract had injured the old man's once keen eyes,
and the danghters, in dread of total blindness, arranged a
visit to Manchester, where he miciht consult an oculist.
Thither he went, attended by Charlotte, and in August 184G
an operation was successfully performed.
The indefatigable sisters now joined in putting forth a
prose volume, to which each was to contribute a story.
Charlotte's {The Profcssm^) was rejected by the publishers,
l>ut those of Emily and Anne appeared (Wutliering Heights
and Agnes Ghmy). This book barely struggled into existence,
and nothing more. Still the busy pen worked on; like the
beautiful fountain in Undine, the irrepressible genius could
not rest imprisoned even by the heavy stone of sickness.
I
Our Female Novelists. 439
sorrow, and failure laid upon it. Still the waters rose, till,
finally overcoming all barriers, they welled forth in a strong
fountain, sparkling in the full light of day. It was while
nursing her blind father in his poor Manchester lodging
that Charlotte found at last fitting expression for her genius
by beginning her unequalled novel, Jane Eyre, published in
October of the following year, when, to use the words of a
recent biographer, ' all England rang with the praises of the
novel and its author.' But brief was Currer Bell's enjoyment
of her unexpected literary success, for again sorrows came
upon her thick and fast. Branwell's excesses had at last
undermined a constitution never strong; and his sisters now
saw their only brother sink into the grave, without even the
solace a tardy repentance might have afibrded them. With
the dour spirit of his family, he met the last struggle
standing, as if unwilling to yield even to the strong hand of
Death. Strange that a will which could thus nerve him to
fight so drear a battle, could not avail him in wrestling
against habits of evil! His death was only the precursor of
tliose others which were soon to leave Charlotte a desolate
and solitary woman.
Emily, weighed down by sorrows and difficulties, was the
next to follow. Like Charlotte, possessed of uncommon
genius, she was, unlike her, spoilt by over-indulgence of
her own peculiarities. Cold, stern, and repressed, she lived
a truly solitary life, and her terrible story, Wvtliering Heiglits,
is much what we should expect from a writer of her stamp.
To us the book has something of the lurid, baneful light of a
witch's fire, before which we shudder and turn pale. With
few womanly characteristics, Emily had but one friend, an
ungainly bull-dog named Keeper: she repulsed alike
Charlotte's solicitude and Anne's tenderness. Alone she
sulfered and died, to use her sister's words, ' after a short,
sharp conflict, refusing to the last all help from sister,
doctor, or remedies. After laying Emily by their mother and
Branwell in Haworth Churchyard, in December 1848, the
two others lived on, the New Year dawning drearily upon
them. Not only was Charlotte suffering from Emily's loss,
but yet more from the terrible foreboding that Anne was
slowly but surely following her. Sweet and gentle as ever,
Anne received gratefully Charlotte's despairing efforts to
prolong her life, continued through the dreary winter.
Thus she writes of her hopeless task :
' The days pass in a slow dark march ; the nights are the test—
the sadden wakings from restless sleep, the revived knowledge that
440 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
one lies in her grave and another not at my side, but in a separate
sick-bed.'
Anne's gentle patience and willingness to adopt suggested
remedies were Charlotte's comfort as life drawled on its slow
length at Haworth. The following lines were written in
March by the sufferer, among the last ever penned by her:
' If Thou shouldst bring me back to life,
More humbled I should be ;
More wise, more strengthened for the strife,
More apt to lean on Thee.
' Should Death be standing at the gate,
Thus should I keep my vow ;
But, Lord, whatever be my fate.
Oh ! let me serve Thee now !'
In May the gate of Death opened to receive Anne Bronte,
and calmly and trustingly she passed the dark entrance to
Life. It was at Scarborough, where she had gone in hopes
of staying disease, that Charlotte laid her last sister to rest;
and the anguish of her solitary return to Haworth is thus
told in a letter to a friend :
' I felt that the house was all silent—the rooms were all empty.
I remembered where the three were laid, in what narrow dark
dwellings, never more to reappear upon earth. So the sense of deso¬
lation and bitterness took possession of me. The agony that was to
be undergone, and was not to be avoided, came on. I underwent it,
and passed a dreary evening and night, and a mournful morrow ; to¬
day I am better.'
The many sad letters written at this time bear throughout
the evidence of a brave, strong, and unselfish spirit. We
can now picture our heroine alone in the old parlour, busily
working at Shirley, which she finished in September. It was
enthusiastically received, and its author was soon after
induced to again visit London, where she was introduced to
Mr. Thackeray, Miss Martineau, and other persons of literary
eminence. But, like a wild moorland bird, her spirit could
not live in so uncongenial an atmosphere as that of the ' big
Babylon ;' she soon took flight again to her northern home,
to the fresh air and lonely stillness of Haworth.
The quiet parsonage had by this time become a powerful
centre of attraction to many visitors, both from the
neighbourhood and from a distance. Miss Bronte's solitude
was frequently enlivened by those who were anxious, under
some pretext or another, to get a sight of the author of Jane
Eyre. What they saw is best told in the words which she
uses to describe that heroine—' a little nonnctte, quaint, quiet,
Our Female Novelists. 441
grave, and simple;' an English gentlewoman who would
not be 'lionized,' nothing more.
After two years of seclusion she produced Villette, the last
and not the least striking of her powerful novels. Its com¬
position must have been fraught with pain; for, in detailing
Lucy Snow's sorrows, struggles, and loneliness, she was re¬
producing the events of her own life at IJrussels, and giving
vent to her own heart's bitterness. She greatly missed the
sympathy and counsel of her sisters ; there were now none to
listen while she read the growing manuscript.
There is little more to add about the few remaining years
of her life. She spent much time in reading and writing, in
corresponding with old friends, and occasionally with fellow-
authors. Though unable to leave her father for any length
of time, she visited London, the Yorkshire coast, and Scot¬
land.    Of the latter she writes :
' My stay in Scotland was short, and what I saw was chiefly com¬
prised in Edinburgh and the neighbourhood, in Abbotsford, and in
Melrose ; for I was obliged to relinquish my first intention of going
from Glasgow to Oban, and thence through a portion of the
Highlands. But though the time was brief and the view of objects
limited, I found such a charm of situation, association, and circum¬
stance, that I think the enjoyment experienced in that little space
equalled in degree, and excelled in kind, all which London yielded
in a month's sojourn. Edinburgh, compared to London, is like a
vivid page of history compared to a large dull treatise on political
economy; and as to Melrose and Ahbotsford, the very names
possess music and magic.'
And again:
' My dear Sir,—Do not think I blaspheme when I tell you that your
great London, as compared to Dun-Edin, " mine own romantic town,"
is as prose compared to poetry, or as a great rumbling, rambling,
heavy epic compared to a lyric, brief, bright, clear, and vital as a
flash of lightning. You have nothing like Scott's monument; or if you
had that and all the glories of architecture assembled together, you
have nothing like Arthur's Seat; and, above all, yon have not the
Scotch national character ; and it is that grand character, after all,
which gives the land its true charm, its true greatness.'
The Scotch may well appreciate so genuine a tribute to
their capital and their nation.
Of Miss Bronte's father, old and infirm as he now was, we
will say a few words. His feeble health greatly influenced
his daughter's prospects in life. Although living much apart,
taking his meals alone, and indulging in solitary rambles,
he was yet strongly attached to his daughter, and her
increasing celebrity gratified his vanity. So jealous was
he of anything that might  come   between  them, that   it
442 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
was in compliance with his wishes that she dismissed in
1853 a suitor whose faithful attachment she nevertheless
returned. The Eev. A. Nicholls had been her father's curate
and was her own tried friend, but she would not suffer
herself to be withdrawn from her course of life-long obedience
to the old man. A year later, and the eventide of her sad
life was brightened before its final close.    It was in April
1854 that time or some softening influence prevailed over
Mr. Bronte ; Mr. Nicholls was recalled, and Charlotte became
his loved and happy wife. Henceforth her letters speak only
of the happiness, the love and care which surrounded her too
late to prolong life. In the prospect of becoming a mother,
her strength finally gave way, and in March 1855 the
husband and father listened at Haworth to the bell tolling
' mournfully drearily' for her who was no longer with them.
The sorrowing widower took upon himself her labour of love,
cheering and comforting her father's declining years, till, at
an advanced age, Mr. Bronte followed his wife and six
children to the grave.
We have only space for a few words of description of the
three sisters and their works. Charlotte was small and
slight, short-sighted, and decidedly plain, her only beauty
being large well-shaped brown eyes and soft abundant hair
of the same colour. She had the traditionally large nose said
to go with talent, but e?i revanche, had very small hands and
feet; her dress was always plain and old-fashoned in the
extreme. Emily was tall, large, and more awkwardly shaped,
with dark dreamy eyes, and a countenance full of power.
Anne, with Emily's fine eyes, and Charlotte's shy appear¬
ance, had a much gentler expression than Emily.
Among Charlotte's books the first place belongs, by
common consent, to Jane Eyre. Full of genius and truth,
it is a powerful fiction. There are parts which awaken a
response in every fibre of our being, such as the episode of
poor Helen Burns; while we must respect the little heroine
for her steadiness, discretion, and gewQXdl savoir faire. As to
the moral, we own ourselves unable to see it as other than
good throughout. Many of our readers can remember, or may
learn from the best contemporary reviews, the furore excited
by the appearance of this book, seriously condemned by the
highest critics, the general impression being that the veiled
author was a man with moral principles none of the best.
Those who cling to such an opinion of the morals as deserving
condemnation, must pardon our stubbornness in thinking and
maintaining that those only to whom most things are evil, viz.
k
OiLT Female Novelists. 443
the vicious and the prude, can derive harm from this book.
Men do not, it is true, dilate to young women on their own
shortconjings, as Mr. Eochester does to Jane Eyre ; but both
the circumstances and people are meant to be exceptional, and
that such facts may—nay, do—occur is sadly too true. All
must do the author this justice: the right balance is never
lost, wrong is never called right; and when Mr. Eochester
attempts to make Jane Eyre confound the two, she shuns
temptation by flight. We wish that many more recent
writers, in placing their heroines in questionable situations,
would at least give them the spirit of a Jane Eyre, when thus
meeting a teriible temptation :
' The more solitary, the more friendless, the more unsnstained I am,
the more I will respect myself. I will keep the law given by God,
sanctioned by man.'
Sliirley is delightful, clever, and quaint. The scene is laid
in West Yorkshire, and the characters and incidents culled
from real life, and from the riots which actually took place
early in this century. To the faithful delineation of the
' curates' we can bear full testimony. In Villette we have
the same originality and truthfulness, with the added source
of interest that it is based on the story of her own life
abroad.
We have given her reasons, as stated by herself, for her
selection of a nom de plume; and if to excite public curiosity
was her wish, it was fully gratified, English society being
stirred throughout the land to know who and what was
Currer Bell. The truth oozed out in 1849, when a Haworth
man, living in London, recognised some of the descriptions
and characters in Shirley. Her earliest written novel, The
Professor, was not published till after lier death, at the request
of her friends; it certainly does not equal the others in
merit.
Of the two other sisters, we may say that it was only in
Currer Bell's reflected light that Ellis and Acton could have
shone at all. Wuthering Heights and Agnes Gray are even
now forgotten. The former is a repulsive tale, and that it
should have been written by a young woman of seven-and-
twenty is a mystery, and a sad one. The characters are de¬
testable, one and all, the scene laid in a dreary and un¬
interesting country; the gentlemen in the book are, in their
behaviour to women, rarely decently civil, and usually
brutal and violent; yet the story is not without a weird
fascination that compels us to read it through, though with¬
out pleasure or edification.    In poetry Emily Bronte was not
444 1^^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
wanting in pathos or power. We cannot forbear quoting
from a little poem, entitled Rememhrance, in a metre rough,
but not unpleasing, as well suited to the subject:
' Cold in the earth, and the deep snow piled above thee;
Far, far removed—cold in the dreary grave !
Have I forgot, my only Love, to love thee,
Severed at last by Time's all-severing wave ?
' Cold in the earth, and fifteen wild Decembers
From those brown hills have melted into spring;
Faithful indeed is the spirit that remembers
After such years of change and suffering.
' But when the days of golden dreams had perished,
And even despair was powerless to destroy.
Then did I learn how existence could be cherished,
Strengthened, and fed without the aid of joy.
' Then did I check the tears of useless passion,
Weaned my young soul from yearning after thine.
Sternly denied its burning wish to hasten
Down to that tomb already more than mine.'
A song fit for a Brunnhild, and equally so for an Emily
Bronte. Less original and more morbid than her sisters' are
Anne's works. In Agnes Gray we have a picture of her own
governess life—truthful, but possibly coloured by a sickly
mind, and certainly not inviting. There can be no questiou
but that The Tenant of Wildfell Hall is a life-picture drawn
from an unhappy brother, representing the deterioration of
a fine character under the influence of degrading vices.
Perhaps the most pleasing part of the volume containing
Wuthering Heights and Agnes Gray is the biographical sketch
of her younger sisters, appended by Charlotte after their
death. In defending their books from censure, one plea may
be urged for all the sisters : ' They knew no better.' That
their stories betray much knowledge of evil is their mis¬
fortune, not their crime. Impelled to write by real though
eccentric genius, and at the same time precluded by their
rough and retired life from much useful knowledge of the
world, and of the social safeguards which protect and
regulate other women's happier lives, these sisters scarcely
knew how undesirable were many of their scenes and subjects
in the pages of a novel. One bitter source of familiarity
with evil was ever at their side; and we can only feel pity
that women of such powerful and original minds should
have been in daily intercourse with what must have in¬
sensibly  blunted  the   delicacy  of  their   perceptions   and
Hesperos. 445
fostered their morbid habits of thought—the life of such a
one as Branwell Bronte. It is high praise that their own
standard was never debased, and that with no uncertain hand
they mark the boundary between right and wrong. If there
are passages in their books which we cannot defend on the
score of taste, we refuse to condemn them on that of morality.
Their genuine love and admiration of one another is ever a
bright and beautiful trait in the strangely sad lives of the
sisters. It never varied or waned, and often served to cheer
and brace their spirits in times of sadness otherwise in¬
supportable. It is touchingly alluded to in a short poem by
Anne:
' Warm hands are these, that clasped in mine,
The warmer heart will not belie ;
While mirth, and truth, and friendship shine
In smiling lip and earnest eye.
' Though far I roam, that thought shall be
My hope, my comfort, everywhere ;
While such a home remains to me,
My heart shall never know despair ! '
So they lived and fought together the battle of life bravely
and weU; now, we trust, all three have passed into the land
where
' Beyond these voices, there is peace.'
B. C. J. D.
?l?esperos.
By thy side I love to linger
When the sun is setting low,
And the evening sky is lighted
With a pink and rosy glow ;
When the twilight, gently stealing,
Tells us that the day is o'er,
And the wavelets, dancing lightly,
Break upon the golden shore.
Toils and business—all are over.
Hushed are revelry and mirth ;
In the sky the stars are watching
Over all the sleeping earth.
And the moon in tranquil beauty
Sheds her calm and gentle ray,
Till the sun all gloom disperses,
And the darkness ends in day.
C. M. Williams.
4-I-6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
^unt ISlsic:   ^ Skrtrij.
CHAPTER  II.
It would have been difficult to say which was in the
greatest excitement, Nannette or her aunt, when the hour
drew near the following evening at which Eobert usually
appeared. The old lady had been in a feverish state of rest¬
lessness all day. When Nannette came down to breakfast,
she found her aunt already in the dining-room. She could not
be induced to take her afternoon's drive, so fearful was she
that during her absence the Elwes might be there. She sat
in her usual window seat, her constant knitting in her hand.
The poor for many miles round were supplied with woollen
socks from those never-idle fingers.
Their early five o'clock dinner was over, and Nannette was
at her post in the garden.
What a perfect summer it had been 1 Never a day but the
sun shone and sank in golden splendour over the sea. The
evening in question was no exception to the rule. The
garden was looking its loveliest, the air was laden with the
scent of flowers, and Nannette's dress, as it trailed on the
gravelled walks behind her, brushed the beds of mignonette
as she passed, and made, as it were, fresh clouds of incense
rise to the azure world that lay so far away. But Nannette's
mind was not filled with dreams and unrealities; she was all
absorbed by the new experiences that were opening to her
view. At last she thought that she had caught a glimpse
within those gates of romance that she had so long wished
would open for her, and disclose what lay behind them.
She took her stand at the gate, leaning on the rustic fence
that enclosed the garden, and there with her face turned
towards the sea she waited for her friend.
And there, half an hour afterwards. Jack Elwes first saw
her. The two brothers were together, walking as if with
some end in view. The road, so thick with soft white dust,
was not an inviting place for an evening's stroll. And yet
they seemed in no wise discontented with their lot. They
were talking eagerly, and Jack was teazing Eobert about his
new friend.
'" Fall many a flower is born to blush unseen; " is that the
way of it. Bob ? How she must have thanked you for forming
an oasis in her Sahara!'
Eobert seemed oblivious to the remark; he was straining
I
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. AA7
his eyes to see if they could find the object of their talk.
Xannette saw the two figures as they came in sight; Eobert
she knew at once, but her curiosity was roused as to what
his brother would be like. She saw he was a medium
height, that he was dressed in naval uniform; but as they
approached, she withdrew from her prominent position.
' There she is !' exclaimed Eobert, pointing to the spot
where Nannette had been; but she had disappeared from
their view.
As they came near, she once more approached the gate
and greeted Robert with a bright glad smile. Women know
when they are looking their best, and Nannette felt that such
was her case that evening.
' Good evening. Miss Graeme,' Eobert said, advancing and
holding out his hand. ' I have brought my brother to make
your acquaintance. Jack, let me introduce you to Miss
Graeme.'
jSTannette held out her hand with equal frankness to the
sailor, raising her eyes to his with some words of welcome
on her lips.
She turned once more to her first friend.
' Something very strange has happened,' she said;  ' but
you must come and be introdiiced to my aunt.    Do you
know, she thinks that in a kind of way you belong to xis.'
' I am very glad to hear it,' said Eobert with an air of
amusement; ' but how do you mean ? Are we relations ? or
is there some mystic tie between us ?'
'You should not laugh at me,' she answered gravely.
' Perhaps Aunt Elsie is wrong, and you do not belong to us
at all; only the name was the same, and so we thought it
might be.'
' Shall we go at once to your aunt and try and prove our
identity ?' said Jack.
He had been watching his brother and Nannette. She
was by no means the rustic maiden he had pictured to him¬
self as likely to have enchained his brother's fancy. He
could not but admire her, and, with an inherent love of
novelty and fun, he followed the pair up the gravel walk,
hoping that the acquaintance they were forming might serve
for some pleasant hours' companionship whilst he was in that
part of the country.
At the door Nannette once more paused.
' You must be very gentle with Aunt Elsie,' she   said.
' Oh, how much I wish that what she thinks may be true,
and that you really are her Eobert Elwes!'
448 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Miss Graeme had heard voices. She rose from her seat to
cross the room to meet them; but she could not move: she
trembled in every limb, and had to hold by the chair for
support.
Presently the door opened, and Nannette introduced her
friends. The old lady did not speak at first. She took
Eobert by both hands, and gazed with questioning eyes into
his face. She seemed to be satisfied at last, and turned to
welcome his brother; but her gaze returned again to Eobert.
In his features she saw at once the likeness to her old love.
She made him sit down beside her, and still with her hand
resting on his arm, she asked eager questions about his
father and mother, and his grandfather; and much as Eobert
longed to turn to Nannette, he could not but satisfy Miss
Graeme's anxious questioning.
The time went past, the evening shadows grew deeper,
and still she had not heard all she wished to know^ At
first Nannette and Jack sat and listened, but by degrees
their attention wandered off from the story of long ago to
the far more interesting present; they became absorbed with
their own interests, engrossed with each other.
At last the time came when the brothers rose to leave; it
was very late. But the parting did not signify much; next
day they had promised to return and take up their abode for
ten days at the cottage before they went up to London.
That night, as Nannette laid her head on her pillow, the
question came to her mind, which of the brothers did she
like the best. She could not tell: the question for the present
must remain unsolved; but it was the face of Jack Elwes
that came first to her mind when she awoke the following
morning.
There is nothing new under the sun; the history of the
world and human life repeats itself. Men are born, love,
marry, die, the same how as they did when the world was
first inhabited thousands of years ago; it will be the same to
the end. And thus Miss Gramme saw the story of her own
life repeated in that of her niece; but closely as she watched,
how was it that she missed the truth ? Was it the very
anxiety that made it her fondest wish that Nannette and
Eobert should love each other, that kept her blind to the
fact that things were not going as she wished ?
She did not seem to see that it was not Eobert's footstep
on the path that brought the soft flush to her niece's face;
she did not notice tliat it was not Eobert's flowers that were
ever worn in Nannette's  hair or dress, they were usually
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. 449
blooming in the glass on the table, long after Jack's were
withered. It had become her darling project that hei" niece
should marry the namesake of the man she had loved; and
that Eobert was hopelessly in love was quite easy to see.
No one noticed that things were all going wrong: the awaken¬
ing came suddenly and unexpectedly.
The brothers' visit had lengthened out beyond its original
intention; it was not strange that two men even opposite as
they were in character, thrown into constant and close con¬
tact with a fresh young girl, should both love her. There
was in Nannette such perfect freshness, so utterly unspoilt
by the world, and so fascinating and attractive in its uncon-
ventionality, that each vied with the other in showing her
attention. Nannette loved homage, admiration was life to
her, and she had never before experienced it in the same
way. The tribute to her beauty that until now had been
paid to her, was from men old enough to be her grandfather,
or beardless boys who had never been beyond their country
town. It had been gratifying in its way, but what was it in
comparison to what she now experienced ?
But to do Nannette justice, it must be said that she did
not realize to what an extent the admiration she excited in
Robert Elwes had gone. She liked him much; he was the
older friend of the two. Besides her feeling of friendship, she
could not forget the service he had rendered her in rescuing
lier from the sea. If for a moment even it had entered her
head that she was raising false hopes in his breast, she would
have been the first to break off the pleasant intercourse that
existed between them. As it was, they were all blind, save
perhaps Jack, and he saw only too well how things were
with his brother
It was a bright warm afternoon, about a fortnight after
this strange, unlooked-for friendship had begun, that Nannette
had wandered down to the sea-shore to wile away an hour in
happy dreams.
The brothers had business to transact in the neighbour¬
ing town, so Nannette was alone for a few hours.
In the garden of the cottage Miss Grasme sat in the
sunshine, or rather just out of the sunshine, in the shade of
the weeping ash that stood near the porch ; in the veritable
sunlight the old Scotch collie lay basking, catching now and
then at the flies which came too near even for his perfect
temper. Miss Gramme's knitting lay on her knee, her spec¬
tacles were pushed from her eyes and rested in idleness on
her forehead, her delicate lace cap-strings were just stirred by
No. 46.—October 1878. 2 F
453 '^Ji(^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the breeze that floated towards her across the fields from
the broad expanse of waters. Her thoughts had wandered
far away, they must have strayed to some pleasant fields,
judging by the calmness of the smile that seemed to hover
round her mouth, and in her eyes still seemed to lurk some
of the old fire which had been there in such abundance when
she was a girl.
She had been sitting where she now was for more than
two hours, and was beginning to think of returning to the
house, when the click of the latch of the garden gate made
her turn her head. Her eyes rested lovingly on Eobert Elwes
as he came towards her up the path. lie was so strong, so
bright in his manhood, he looked so eager to do battle with
the world. His usually grave face wore a curiously anxious
expression as he scanned the various paths and corners of the
garden in which Nannette could have hidden herself. Miss
Graeme interpreted his look aright, but did not at once give
the wished-for information.
' You are home earlier than I expected,' she said. ' Where
is your brother ? You have not left him behind you, tired of
his present life ?'
' Oh no! Jack took it into his head to walk home by the
sea-shore; he is such a regular sailor. But he would not be
dissuaded, as he had set his heart on it; and so we parted
company, as I was anxious to get home.'
'And now you are come, do not let an old woman keep
you if your time is precious. I am quite happy here, and
Nannette will soon be home.'
' Has she gone out ?' he asked, disappointment in his tone.
Then he paused a moment or two, as if in consideration
whether to speak or not. At last he broke the silence, and
what he said came in low heartfelt tones. He turned away
his head while he was speaking, looking out straight before
him, down the long straight expanse of white and dusty
road.
' Miss Graeme, must I tell you, or have you not guessed
for yourself, what is my chief interest, my chief business here ?
Do you not know that I love Nannette ?—love her so deeply,
so intensely, that life to me without her would be a dreary
blank. I have known her such a short time that I fear I am
presumptuous, but in that time consider how much I have
seen her. Only remember that my first introduction to her
was under trying circumstances, that put us on a friendly
footing at once. And now, Miss Graeme, I must speak to
Nannette.    I return to my business to-morrow, and before I
Aunt Elsie : A Sketch. 451
go I must tell her what my feelings are towards her. It was
for this purpose that I hurried home j ust now. Tell me which
way she has gone, and where I may find her ? Can you bid
me dare to hope ? Can you give me any encouragement ?
She is so good, so gentle, that it may only be her nature that
has prompted her manner towards me; but surely, if she
will not give me her promise now, she will let me hope for it
some time not so very far away.'
The young man paused, he turned towards Miss Graeme
and waited for her answer. How those tones had thrilled
through her!—the voice, everything so like the tones of him
she had known so long ago. How all-powerful they seemed
to her! Nannette could not, must not, resist such pleading.
The silence was once more broken by Kobert; he was im¬
patient to pour his love out at the feet of the girl who had
enchained him with her strange unconventional ways.
' Will you not tell me where she is, Miss Grteme ? Will
you not wish me well before I go on this errand of such
vital importance to me?'
He had risen, and was standing before her, ready to go
whenever she answered his demand. She put lier hand on
his arm : he wondered what had moved her so ; it trembled
like an aspen leaf, and her voice sounded strangely unnatural
from the strain she had to put upon herself to keep it to its
usual soft, quiet tones.
' Willingly I give you what you ask,' she said, ' all my
most anxious wishes for your success. For your own sake,
Robert, as well as for the sake of those who are now no
longer here, I would gladly give my child to your charge.
Plead your own cause to her as you have done to me ; I do
not think you need fear the result. You will find Nannette
on the sea-shore in some one of her favourite haunts.'
She paused, and he was gone. With rapid footsteps he
trod the short half mile that lay between him and the sea.
His heart was buoyant with hope. Had not Miss Graeme
given him to believe that he had nothing to fear, everything
to hope ? A lark was pouring out a stream of song in the
blue vault above him, but his heart seemed even more full
of song than the voice of the bird. He was coming very
near the shore now. He could hear the waves breaking at
the foot of the cliffs. A fresh breeze was blowing, the sea
seemed in wild, glad mirth, and harmonized with his mood.
He stood on the topmost crag a moment, and scanned the
coast beneath him. No one was in sight. He could see the
ledge of rock from which he had rescued ZSTannette the first
452 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi. Magazine.
time he had seen her; would she were there now, that he
might again rescue her, and thereby gain a promise that he
might be ever with her, during her life, to guard and shelter
her from all trouble, when the waves of this troublesome
world, which must sooner or later encompass us all, should
be surrounding his darling! He did not stand on his exalted
irosition long; a few minutes served to show that she whom
lie sought was nowhere in siglit. Carefully descending again,
he continued his way along the cliff. It was perilous foot¬
ing, but to descend and so reach the object of his search^ from
the shore, would be a much longer proceeding, and did not
coincide with his feverish impatience. He wondered he had
not seen Jack, but no fear of coming evil broke upon his
mind. He might so easily have missed him, and his thoughts
were all with Nannette.
Jack, meanwliile, had wandered home by the sea-shore.
Nannette had not promised to be there, but perhaps the
information which she had given the day before, that she
often walked there, was not intended to remain unnoticed.
Jack had fallen in love, very much to his own surprise ;
and, sailor fashion, he had done it thoroughly, as thoroughly
as Eobert in his own quiet way had also done ; and it had
dawned on him only a day or two before that he and his
brother had both been guilty of the same folly. He had,
however, never contemplated telling Nannette of his love,
but thought that by a few weeks' absence they would have
learnt to live without her. In the meantime, but a few days
remained, and he could do no harm in sunning himself in
the society of his lady-love. But it was all very well for
him to moralize thus quietly, when he was alone, and not
within reach of Nannette's charms. Trusting implicitly in
his own self-control, he had sought the sea-shore that after¬
noon ; but, alas for the stability of all human resolves !
Wandering along by the edge of the waves, kicking the
pebbles from his path with the end of his cane, or perchance
returning some piece of stranded sea-weed to its natural
element, his eye espied a lady's dress up amongst the rocks.
Quick as thought, he turned his steps in the direction of the
fluttering muslin which had betrayed its mistress's hiding-
place ; and there, seated on the rock, above surrounding
things, sat the object of his search. Her face flushed as she
first saw him, but she did not say no when he asked ' that
if he were not disturbing her he might stay there a little.'
It was about five o'clock on a June afternoon; the sun had
so far sunk from its height in the zenith as to give long
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. 453
shadows;   the sea was deep intense  blue, save where the
light breeze that was blowing had curled it into foam; the
waves chased each other merrily toward the shore, and broke
in laughter on the rocks at Nannette's feet.    She seemed to
partake of their mirth.    Her eyes and mouth were brimming
over  with smiles, and in her lap  was  a  handful of flat
pebbles, which she had but a few minutes before been toss¬
ing into the sea.    Her small ungloved hands were tanned
with the sun, and, despite her shady hat, her complexion had
assumed a richer hue than her natural colouring warranted.
She was in one of her most saucy and captivating moods.
Lying on the rocks at her feet, Jack Elwes felt the spell of
her presence creeping over him.   At first she would do nothing
but laugh and tease; she would not listen to his repeated
assurances of sorrow at the morrow's parting; she turned all
he said into jest, his most ardent expressions of despair at
going she took as so many civil speeches, and only tossed
another pebble into the sea.    But the pile of pebbles was
finished at last, time was flying, and it came home to her that
this was the last talk she would have with her friend alone—
the last of those meetings which had been so inexpressibly
sweet to them both.     A touch of sadness came over  her
wayward mood ; she was gentle, as before she had been pro¬
voking.   Jack felt the change, and silence fell on them both.
Neither spoke, the tide rose gradually higher, the sun sank
lower, the wind had fallen, and the waves broke only as a
pleasant murmur on the ear.    Everything was bathed in a
flood of glory; earth in its beauty seemed but a foretaste of
heaven.    The glory had crept so near them that it lighted
up the rock against which Nannette leant, showed the mosses
and lichens which had crept into its cold and stony heart,
and rested lovingly in shreds of gold on her hair.    She was
gazing  wistfully  over the sea, to where the clouds  were
gathering, waiting to be tipped with the sun's dying splendour;
she was not conscious of Jack's eyes riveted on her with their
story of love written in them.    Perhaps her thoughts had
taken no very definite road, save trying to make up her mind
to be the one to rise and break up this last pleasant interview,
conscious of the fact that it must be nearly the time of the
cottage dinner hour.
The resolution was taken at last; she raised her hat from
where she had thrown it, and returned it to its rightful place,
and then she slowly rose to her feet.
' We must go home now,' she said sadly ; ' it is late.'
Her foot was on the rock above her, she was preparing for
454 TIic Ladies Edinbtirgh Magazine.
the upward climb, when Jack awoke to the sense that she
was really going.
' Nannette, my Nannette!' he exclaimed; and she turned
to him as if he had a right to call her so.
Then came the old story, poured out in all the heat and
fervour of a man's first love. What need to repeat it ? How
can all the passion and love of a life be put down truly in
cold black and white on paper ?
But words were spoken, promises given, and Jack and
Nannette knew that nothing but death could separate them.
Slowly they retraced their steps homewards, the moments
were so precious spent together in this their new-found
happiness, and no thought of any but themselves came to mar
the sunlight in their dream.
They did not guess that what had given to them both such
new love of life, had rung as the death-knell to another's hopes.
Eobert, continuing his way along the cliffs, with eager
hurrying steps, came at last near the place where Jack and
Nannette were together. Suddenly he stopped. Surely his
ear had not deceived him; borne upwards on the breeze
came the sound of a human voice. He listened more
attentively, eye and ear both strained to the utmost; he Avas
not mistaken, but a cold chill came over him as he recognised
in the eager, ardent tones the voice of his brother.
To whom was he speaking? There could be but one answer;
and yet, to satisfy himself, he went on a few steps farther.
Yes; there, just below where he stood, were Nannette and
Jack, all unconscious of his presence. He had come v;pon
them just at the moment when Jack was pouring out his
love; he stood riveted to the spot; he saw Nannette's gesture
as she turned and gave herself to him ; he saw her folded in
arms that were not his; he saw the first fond kiss imprinted
on those lips that he had dared to hope would have some day
been his own. Oh, could not the agony of that gaze have
penetrated to them as they stood ? Could they not have seen
how the happiness they had found had utterly blasted
another's life ?
A few seconds he stood, then the spell was removed, and
with a low moan as of a dumb creature in pain he turned
from the spot.
He felt nothing; he was completely crushed with the
suddenness of the blow. Not even jealousy of his brother
found place at first; he was too much stunned to realize even
who it was that had stepped in between himself and her whom
he loved.
538 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and about the same time began writing her History of the
Peace, of which she finished vol. ii. in November 1849. In
1850 were published the Letters of Man's Nature and Develop¬
ment. These were joint productions of her own and j\Ir.
Atkinson's, the larger part of the matter being his, but the
publication her doing. She admits that she did not take
this step without misgivings,—indeed, she describes it as the
greatest effort of courage she ever made,—but she says that
she ultimately found it an inestimable blessing, by dissolving
all false relations and confirming all true ones. In the Eev.
James Martineau's review of this work culminated the great
secret sorrow of her life, viz. the estrangement of this once
favourite and fondly-loved brother. During 1850 she began
writing for Household Words, and also undertook farming
on a small scale, which seems to have proved a pleasant
and profitable experiment. She also translated, or rather
epitomized, Comte's Fhilosophie Positive.
1854 opened cheerily. In the spring of that year she
wrote a Complete G-uide to the Lakes, little thinking that it
would be her last literary work of importance (except her
autobiography), yet so it proved. From March in this year
she had observed in herself unsatisfactory symptoms, the
evidence of which she did not understand; and her health
became steadily worse, with a short intermission, until
January 1855, when she became convinced that something
was seriously wrong, and went to London for medical advice.
There she learned that she was suffering from disease of the
heart, which must terminate fatally, and might do so at any
time. She at once made final arrangements concerning her
affairs, and returned home, accompanied by a niece. Then
she set to work in earnest upon the Autobiograpliy, whicli
she had long regarded as a task that must be performed, in
order to tell the world some things about herself which she
could not commit to any one else to say for her.
About her state of mind in the near prospect of death
Miss Martineau tells us a great deal. She owns to some
natural regret at the thought that she should never again
enjoy health; but expressly declares that she entertained no
fear of death, no expectation of a future state nor desire of
it, no wish, indeed, that anything should be otherwise than it
is. She tells us that her days were full of pleasures and free
from care; and speaks of the singular interest, full even of
amusement, in watching human affairs, and acting in them
when on the verge of leaving them. She rejoices in her
personal freedom from responsibilities, and describes herself
456 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magaz'me.
plucking the floM'er that charmed us both.   The man I speak
of is my brother.'
' He has only known her for a fortnight; how does she know
his feelings will not change ? What assurance can he give
that he is worthy of her V
' Much can happen in a fortnight,' he answered Fadly. ' Did
a fortnight never bring anything to you, after years jberhaps
of life's usual monotony ?'
Miss Gramme's mind flew back to her girlhood, and there
the history of ten golden days stood out in strong relief.
She could say no more; not even in this did Heaven favour
lier wishes: her will must again bend to the all-powerful
Will above.
' And now,' continued Eobert, ' I have but one thing to ask
before I go, for I am going home to-night. For my sake, be
gentle with Nannette. When she comes, do not let her ever
suspect what has passed between us. Make some excuse for
me, say business has recalled me to town. Do not, I beseech
you, let a thought of trouble disturb her happiness. Do not
fret about me; I shall soon be all right. Because one joy is
taken out of my life, that is no reason why I should not find
others. Perhaps in the future it may be given her to know
how much I have loved her, love her now, and never shall
cease to do on this side of the grave. I must go—I have no
time to lose; give me your promise that you will do as I ask.'
' Eobert, this is hard !' she exclaimed; ' but for your sake I
promise. And, Eobert, when my child has left me to gladden
another's home, you must come and see a lonely old Avomau,
who loves you dearly for the sake of one who is gone.'
He stooped and kissed her forehead tenderly and reverently.
A ray of light seemed to come to him from the past, revealing
that she who spoke to him had sufi'ered as he now was
suffering. In the wave of sympathy that rolled from her to
him, he read her story.
The kiss rested lovingly on her brow, and ere the pressure
of his lips had gone he had left her.
Not long after glad voices sounded in the garden, and in
Aunt Elsie's blessing and gentle kindness Nannette found no
clue to Eobert's sudden departure. She laid her head on her
pillow, in overflowing gratitude to the Giver of all good,
little dreaming that He who had filled her cup to the brim
with love and happiness, had also filled the cup of another with
bitter sorrow—both given by the same hand in perfect love
and mercy. M. E. T.
{To he contimied)
LIL
At Home and Abroad. 457
at Hlome anU abroaU.
No. I.—CANNES.
To those of our readers who are considering how they may
best escape the winter, a short account of one pleasant rest¬
ing-place may perhaps be acceptable. I pass over the early
stages of our journey, the horrors of tlie well-known crossing,
the brief visit to Paris, the first glimpse of southern sunshine
at Marseilles, till at length the train plunged into the purple
gorges of the Esterelle Mountains. There the scene was
indeed lovely. It was one of those balmy November days
so enjoyable to travellers on the Eiviera, who, fresh from
London fogs, can almost fancy that they entered an enchanted
region, and feel as if the ' earthly paradise ' of which poets
sing were not unattainable after all. Before us lay the grand
tideless sea,—
' the sacred sea ; the sea of all civilisation and almost all history ; the
sea of Egypt, of Palestine, of Greece, of Italy, of Byzant, of Marseilles,
... to which we owe the greater part of our own progress ; the sea,
too, of Carthage, of Algeria, and Cyrene, and fair lands now desolate
—surely not to be desolate for ever ; the sea of civilisation. Not
only to the Christian and to the classic scholar, but to every man to
whom the progress of his race from barbarism towards humanity
is dear, should the Mediterranean Sea be one of the most august and
precious objects on this globe ; and the first sight of it should inspire
reverence and delight as of coming home—home to a rich inheritance
in which he has long believed, and now sees at last with his own mortal
corporeal eyes.'
So wrote Canon Kingsley in Good Words twelve years
ago. And as we gazed at the glistening waters, with deep
purple and bright peacock shades, here and there splashing
up against the red rocks that jut out into the sea, forming
innumerable bays and inlets, it was not difficult to echo his
enthusiasm about the scenery, which from the mouth of the
Ehone to the shores of Palestine forms' one girdle of perpetual
beauty.'
On first arriving at Cannes, it is strange to recall the short
history of this favourite winter resort.
Little more than thirty years ago, a report of cholera made
the officers on the Italian frontier insist on Lord Brougham's
remaining a few days at one of the little fishing villages on
the coast before proceeding with his journey. He took a
fancy to the place, bought land, and built a villa; some of
45 S The Ladies' Edinbuvgli Magazine.
his friends followed his example, and the English colony
gradually increased, until one Scotch and three English
churches, over a hundred hotels and pensions, and innumerable
villas, extending as far as the eye can reach in every direction
amongst the olive-clad hills, testify to the prosperity of this
great winter city.
After arriving at Cannes, it is perplexing, among these
endless varieties of climates and situations, to choose one's
place of abode.
Some people maintain that the villas among the fir trees
at the west end of Cannes are the healthiest. Others, again,
object to these, and say that the Route de Frcjus is damp in
wet weather; and as the only rain which falls during the
year is in the winter, travellers should be prepared for a
certain number of soft days even here. Then, when not damp,
the Eoute de Frejus certainly is dusty; besides, the walks are
mostly either up or down hill, which is trying for invalids ;
but then some would consider themselves amply repaid for
these drawbacks by glorious views of the Esterelle Mountains.
The centre of the town is unpopular; report has stigmatized
it as unhealthy, and certainly the odours are not always
pleasant. Still, more is said about them than necessary by
those travellers who are never contented out of their own
country, and I have never been able to discover that illnesses
are more prevalent in that quarter than in any other.
The Croisette rejoices in a lovely view, including not only
the Esterelles, but also the Grasse Mountains and the Alpes
Maritimes ; but then it is exposed to every wind that blows.
The most sheltered situation of all, and one that becomes
more popular every year, owing to the residence of a famous
physician in that neighbourhood, is the so-called Provence
district. It boasts of lovely walks amongst the olive trees ;
but the views, except in some remote spots, cannot compare
with the other parts of Cannes.
My advice to all who are coming to Cannes for the first
time, is never to trust to the recommendation of friends,
still less to that of agents, but to come themselves to a
hotel for a few days and look about and choose their own
villa, as no two people in Cannes agree as to the relative
advantage of situations; and if all new-comers did this, end¬
less discontent might be avoided. Life at a villa certainly
is much more comfortable and less expensive than at a
hotel. Those who do not wish to bring out all their establish¬
ment, can have dinners supplied from a restaurant at a very
cheap rate.
At Home and Abroad. 459
The price of living at one of the great hotels, with all
included, would not be less than £1 per day for each person.
Some of the pensions will take people in at ten or twelve
francs a day, but none of these estimates would include the
expensive luxury of a separate sitting-room.
At the pension of Garibondy, the charges are only eight
francs a head; but it is more than three miles from Cannes,
up a steep hill, and can only be recommended to those who
do not object to a perfectly quiet country life in a very
beautiful and somewhat exposed situation. An omnibus
goes twice a day to Cannes ; but there is no house at Gari¬
bondy except this pension itself, which stands quite alone
on the top of a hill, surrounded by umbrella pine trees, with
a wild gorge on one side, a background of snow-clad hills
and a marshy plain stretching from the foot of the hill on
which it stands to the Esterelle Mountains on the west, and
the sea on the southern side.
Ladies in reduced circumstances who are ordered to come
to Cannes for their health, and who are unable to defray the
expenses of life there, if furnished with proper references,
might easily gain admittance to the Asih E'vangdipie, where,
on payment of five francs a day, they obtain the advantage
of trained nursing and every comfort and appliance that is
really required.
Some English people come to Cannes expecting to find a
tropical climate, where they will require none but summer
clothing. Far from it. There are few days between Novem¬
ber and April when a serge dress would be too hot; and I
have even known days when a sealskin was not unwelcome,
especially late in the afternoon, when the chill which always
accompanies the sunset was beginning to make itself felt.
The houses, too, are not built to keep out the cold, and the
little wood fires give out the smallest possible fraction of heat.
By all means, therefore, bring woollen dresses, but have them
made of rather a lighter material than you would wear at
home.
Cannes should certainly be avoided in October, on account
of the mosquitoes and of the autumn rains. November is
generally a lovely month, unless the rains are delayed and ex¬
tend into it. The greatest cold of the year may be expected in
December, while January and February are usually splendid
months. March, again, is cold and windy, but April is not
unlike an English June; it is the most delightful month in
the whole year, not too hot for long walks and expeditions,
yet perfect summer weather.
460 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Through the winter, Gloire de Dijon, monthly, and indeed
all the hardier kinds of roses, are in full blossom. Mignonette,
heliotrope, marigolds, salvia, candytuft, pansies,and adjuratum
never cease flowering. Towards the end of January the
violets set in, and in February the mimosas along the Antibes
road assume their golden glory, and soon after this the
famous anemones begin to stud the fields; but, alas I we
nmst now go at least six miles from Cannes in order to find
many wild flowers. The peasants root them all up in the
neighbourhood of the town; for, in their eagerness to pluck
them, the English used to trample on the young corn
amongst which they hid their purple and crimson splendour.
Many of these flowers, however, may still be found in the
neighbourhood of Mongins and Auribeau, quaint little towns,
perched on the tops of terraced hills, reminding one of the
pictures of Judea; indeed, all the scenery of this part of
Provence is very like the descriptions of Syria. Here and
there are rough stony tracts of country, where nothing but a
few scattered pine trees, myrtle, heather, and gum cistus
grow ; then, again, there are fertile valleys filled with groves
of olive trees, w-hich also line the carefully - constructed
terraces on the sides of the hills. Every patch of earth is
made the most of in this country. Not only are vines planted
between the olives, but young corn nestles up to their
gnarled stems, its green freshness forming a pleasing con¬
trast to the silvery foliage of the olives above and the rich
red of the loam beneath; while distant glimpses of blue sea
and snow-clad Alps, with a bright sun and cloudless sky,
complete the scene.
The Provengal farmers have no system of rotation of
crops. When their patch of land, which has been made to
produce ' corn, and wine, and oil' at the same time, is ex¬
hausted, they allow alternate strips of land to remain fallow
for a year, after which they again cultivate it as before.
The road to Grasse is lined with fields of roses, jessamine,
and tube - roses, cultivated for the scent factories there.
Grasse and its factories of scent and bonbons is well worth a
visit; but the most interesting place there is the house of
the painter Fragonard, celebrated as the scene of a most
characteristic episode in the first Revolution.
Fragonard, who was the court painter, and had been paint¬
ing at Trianon for Marie Antoinette, returned to his native
town of Grasse when first the Eevolution broke out, and there
employed himself decorating the walls of his house and of his
atelier.    For some time he was left in peace; but at length the
k
A t Home and A broad. 461
Eevolution extended to Provence, and Fragonard was warned
that the mob meant to attack his house, and that he, as a
froUge of the Bourbons, might expect to fare badly. Seizing
his brushes, he hastily commenced painting a cap of liberty
on the wall of the vestibule. The mob broke in, and, finding
him thus employed, thought him a republican, and raising
the shout of ' Vive le citoyen Fragonard !' swept on, leaving
the beloved atelier untouched ; and these paintings remain
to this day to testify to the truth of the story.
A lovely expedition may be made from Grasse to the wild
rock and waterfall of the Saut de Loup ; and those who like
to extend their drive to the little town of Vence Cagnes,
about eighteen miles farther, can thence return by rail to
Cannes, and will be amply repaid by the beautiful scenery
and quaint towns through which the road passes.
Expeditions are the principal amusement of Cannes.
Evening parties are rare, and those who come there expect¬
ing gaiety, will probably be disappointed; but there are
walking and driving, sketching and botanizing parties, and
picnics almost every day, during the months of February,
March, and April.
Some of the pleasantest of these expeditions are those in
the direction of the Esterelle Mountains, either to St. Cassien
with its hermit, or the ruined castle of Kapoule, built for
protection against Saracen pirates, and whence the lovely
bay of Teoule and the rocky gorge of Maureville are com¬
paratively easy walks. Turning farther inland, there is a
beautiful drive along the old post road, once famous for
brigands, to the solitary inn of Esterel; and thence, good
walkers can ascend the sharp summit of Mount Vinaigre,
and gain an extensive panoramic view of the surrounding
country.
On the other side of Cannes there is a lovely drive to the
old town of Antibes, with its quaint streets, and lighthouse
perched on a conical hill which rises from a promontory
stretching far out into the sea. The road to Antibes passes
through Golfe Juan, where the old peasants, who still
remember 1814, point out the exact spot where Napoleon
landed from Elba to electrify Europe, and the olive trees
beneath which he bivouacked on that eventful occasion.
The little islands of the Lerins, too, are full of interesting
historical associations. At St. Marguerite, they show the
rocks down which Marshal Bazaine is said to have scrambled
in his hurried escape, and the suite of rooms in which he
was confined, as well as the dungeon  of that  still  more
4'53 TJic Ladies" Edinburgh Magazine.
unfortunate and mysterious prisoner, the ' man with the iron
mask.'
Much has been written on the subject, but the mystery still
remains as insoluble as ever. The Matthioli theory seems
now to have fallen through, failing to est:iblish the identity
of dates, and the most tenable hypothesis still is that the
hapless man was a brother of Louis xiv. The guides point
out a model of the iron grating which was placed in the window
to prevent the prisoner from throwing out any more plates
for Cannes fishermen to pick up; but there are no authentic
relics or traces of the mysterious prisoner.
A few years ago this island was tenanted by exiles from
Algeria, banished here on account of political offences; and
as they glided about amongst the fir trees in their white
bournouses under a fiery sun, it was difficult to remember
that one was still in Europe. These poor men would often
approach English travellers, entreating them in broken French
to post the letters they were not allowed to send otherwise
to their relatives in Algiers, and offering to sell them the
little shells and wild asparagus they had collected on the
island.
The smaller island of St. Honorat is more interesting still,
especially to students of ecclesiastical history. ' Indeed,' as
Mr. Green, the historian, says,' ' the isle of St. Honorat is one
of the great historic sites of the world. It is the starting-
point of European monasticism, whether in its Latin, its
Teutonic, or its Celtic form; for it w^as by Lerins that the
monasticism of Egypt first penetrated into the West.' Few
monastic establishments can boast of a longer series of great
names; Salvion, Hilary, Ca;sarius, and Vigilius were reared
within its walls. It was the home of the great Vincentius
of Lerins, whose famous aphorism, Quod semper, quod ubique,
quod ah omnibus, has been so often quoted by the Eoman
Church. There, too, St. Patrick learnt that type of monas¬
ticism he afterwards transmitted to the Celtic Church. St.
Honorat was the battle-field of the semi-Pelagian contro¬
versy, the scene of the massacre of monks by Saracens in
the eighth century, and has rightly been called the lona of
Southern Gaul.
The strongly-fortified castle of Lerins, an interesting relic
of the Middle Ages, once united the functions of fortress and
abbey. Externally, the architecture is military; but the
interior is monastic, and few mediaeval remains are more
beautiful than the arcades of the first-pointed work in the
* Green's Stray Studie.i, p. 36.
At Home and Abroad. 463
cloister. It carries one's thoughts strongly back to the days
when that great potentate, the Abbot of Lerins, possessed
military and spiritual jurisdiction over the surrounding
country, as well as over the colony of 4000 monks imme¬
diately under his control. The monastery was secularized
at the time of the Eevolution, and in recent days the island
narrowly escaped being turned into a tea garden by enter¬
prising British speculators; however, it was purchased
instead by the Bishop of Frejus, who has established a
silent but very active agricultural order of monks there,
under whose charge the barren and sterile island is fast being
converted into a flourishing farm.
No women are admitted into the conventual buildings
save the princesses of the House of Bourbon, but by special
permission of the Pope the late Queen of Holland was
allowed to visit it three years ago. As her health would
not permit her to walk to the convent, and no carriage was
to be found on the islantl, the brethren dragged their august
visitor on a gaily-decorated truck along the little tramway
constructed for agricultural purposes, and all the great ladies
of Cannes followed, walking two and two, taking advantage
of this opportunity of visiting the forbidden precincts.
People often ask what there is to do at Cannes, and certainly
the typical Englishman, whose only idea of occupation and
amusement consisted in 'killing something,'would find little to
gratify his sanguinary taste ; for, except a few pigeons, which
are occasionally ' butcliered to make a Britons holiday' on
the Croisette, there is no sport at Cannes. The society, too, is
of a somewhat tame description; and so a man who is entirely
dependent on exciting pleasures too often takes refuge
amongst the gaming saloons of Monaco from the ennui of
existence in a place where there is nothing for him to do.
But those who are contented with simpler amusements find
plenty of scope for indulging their respective inclinations.
The artist sketches an endless variety of lovely views, the
pedestrian clambers up the highest peaks and takes long
walks through varied and beautiful scenery, and the geo¬
logists and naturalists devote their energies to the
collection of specimens, amongst which we may mention
trap-door spiders, Varaignee maconne, whose wonderfully-
constructed habitations and curious habits are extremely
interesting.
No account of Cannes would be complete that omitted all
mention of a spot so dear to many English hearts as the
Protestant cemetery.    It is in a fine open situation, on a
464 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
little eminence between the ever - changing sea and the
changeless hills. Here rest Prosper Merimee, the French man
of letters; Munro, the Scotch sculptor; and Lord Brougham, who
may well be called the founder of Cannes. The white marble
crosses amongst tlie fir trees, the graceful slope of the ground,
the glorious views of the sea, and of purple and snow-clad
hills, and the absence of all damp and gloom owing to the
dry nature of the soil, combine to render it one of the
most beautiful graveyards in Europe. Although Cannes is
essentially an invalid's city, yet the percentage of deaths
is very small, which is all the more surprising when one
remembers that many new-comers arrive in a dying state.
Health, naturally, is one of the chief topics of conversation
at Cannes; yet though the presence of so many invalids is
sometimes thought depressing, there are many who feel that,
deprived of their home duties and interests, their lives
would be very aimless without the care and sympathy con¬
tinually needed by those around them.
To some lonely and sorrowful English, the Cannes churches
are really like a bit of home transplanted amongst strange
surroundings; and the principal English church in the Eoute
de Frejus has indeed fulfilled the wish expressed on its porch,'^
and been to many 'a little sanctuary' in the strange country
to which they had come.
I have scarcely time to do more than briefly to allude to
the principal walks at Cannes—the one to the Croix de
Gardes, for instance, where you walk up through groves of
Cassia, past Villa St. Fran9ois, known to all readers of the
Memorials of a Quiet Life as Mrs. Hare's residence, into
a wild fir wood filled with splendid white heather, where
you might fancy yourself hundreds of miles from any town,
till you reach the summit of the hill, and look down over the
bays of Napoule, Cannes, and Golfe Juan, and on clear morn¬
ings, at sunrise, may even catch sight of Corsica.
The principal walk on the other side is over the hill to
Vallauris. Well do I remember one such walk. We passed
through the town along the course, regretting the new
buildings that have blocked up and spoilt the picturesque
old market-place; and instead of following the gaily-dressed
crowd, who were flocking towards the Cercle to watch the
regatta, we turned up amongst the olive groves of the
Provence district; and as we climbed the steep hill, we could
occasionally hear snatches of the air the band was playing
on the Croisette, or catch glimpses of the white yachts as
■' Over the porch is Ezek. xi. 16.
A t Home and A broad. 465
they glided about in swan-like beauty amongst the peaked
lateen sails of the native fishing-boats.
The Vallauris pottery has now become so famous that it
threatens to lose one of its chief merits—that of cheapness.
The enterprising owner of the manufactory, too, now spends
large sums in procuring skilled artists, who paint beautiful
pictures on tlie fragile ware, and design most elaborate
shapes, which seem rather out of keeping with the simple
material.
Clodion's •plaqxie of children leading a goat is one of the
prettiest designs; and the old Etruscan shapes, so popular
some years ago, though now rather discarded for showier
rivals, still seem to us unrivalled in their graceful simplicity.
Few things are more interesting than to watch potters at
work, and to see what varied and beautiful shapes rise
rapidly under the workman's fingers from the formless lump
he has placed on the whirling wheel.
The potter's wheel is one of the few things that have
never been improved upon. It still remains exactly as it
was in the most primitive times, when it furnished poets,
prophets, and apostles with so many apt illustrations. A
great poet of our day, E. Browning, says truly:
' Time's wheel runs back or stops,
Potter and clay endure.'
The evening was far advanced when we returned, and
wrapping ourselves up to avoid the bad effects of the sudden
chill which always accompanies the sunset in these climates,
we waited on the green mound by the little chapel of St.
Antoine till we had seen the last of the crimson glory
behind the Esterelles, and the first flush of the after-glow on
the distant Alps. We walked home in the deepening twilight
through the quaint narrow streets of the old town, teeming
with busy life ; for the Cannois, like all natives of a southern
clime, are seldom in their houses, which they regard only as
places in which to sleep and to cook, while their real home
is in the street. On this occasion there was great excite¬
ment amongst the inhabitants of Cannes, for it was the
evening of the day of the conscription, and we met bands of
conscripts with the numbers they had drawn stuck in their
caps, singing as they went along ; while groups of women
were standing chatting at the house doors, some sad, some
triumphant, some watching eagerly to see whether Vincent
or Antoine would return with a lucky number. Here and
there some young girl in a short stuff petticoat and black
head-dress, her yellow kerchief drawn over her shapely brown
No. 46.—October 1878. 2 g
4^6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
neck, might be seen standing a little apart with a wistful look
in her eyes, wondering maybe whether the Holy Maries will
remember the tall white candle she has promised them if
Antoine draws the right number; for she is sure she never
could care for that stupid Jean—no, not if he had all the
treasures of the Chevre d'or'^ itself Yes, Jean had much better
go to the wars, and then he would be out of the way. Jean's
old mother does not think so, however, as she stands tliere
at the corner of the street murnmring in her musical patois
(an odd mixture of French, Spanish, and Arabic, very like
the romance of the troubadours) a prayer which runs some¬
what thus:
' O Sknti Mario,
Que policies en flour
Chanja nbsti plour,
Clinos len I'aurito,
Devers ma doiilour.'
'O Holy Maries,
Who to flowers
Can change our tears,
Incline soon the ear
Unto my grief.'
The Holy Llaries are the patronesses of Provence. Tradition
says that, after our Lord's death, some of His most fervent
disciples, amongst whom were Lazarus, Martha, Mary
Magdalene, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and the ' other Mary,'
were placed by tlie Jews in a boat without sail or oar or rudder,
and were abandoned to the waves that bore them safely to the
little island of Camargue, near Marseilles. Mary Magdalene
retired to the desert of Sainte Baume, where she wept till her
tears formed the little river of the Huveaune; her companions
preached in the various cities of Provence, and converted those
countries to Christianity. In death they were all again
united in the island of Camargue. In 1448 they revealed the
presence of their bones to good King Eene, who built a
magnificent church on the island, which has since been the
scene of many pilgrimages. Such is the legend, believed by
the simple Proven^aux.
The nights at Cannes are even more lovely than the days,
and after the chill of the sunset hour is past it is no longer
dangerous to go out. Often have I sat at my window at
night watching the long shadows of the palm trees on the
moonlit terrace, the dim outline of the Esterelle, the shining
reflection of the moon on the water, and the Eucalyptus trees
looking so eerie in the weird light that it was not difficult
to people them in imagination with little elves and sprites,
1 The Chevre d'or is the guardian of the famous treasure buried by
the Saracens somewhere under the mountains of Provence. To find
the treasure is the great ambition of every Provencal person.
A Dream Maiden. 467
as E. V. B. has done in her charming illustrations of the
Magic Valley, a Provengal fairy tale that all who come to
Cannes should read.
Yes, when I think of all that I have described, and of much
else, I feel inclined to counsel thus the southward-bound
traveller : ' Do not go to Eome to be poisoned with malaria,
nor to Naples, scarcely less unhealthy; the cold winds of
Florence would freeze the marrow of your bones, you might
as well winter in Edinburgh; and the glare of the white streets
often renders Nice unbearable, to say nothing of the society
from Monaco which now frequents the Promenade des Anglais.
No; if you want a quiet winter home, where you need never
be dull, and yet where you can live as secluded as you like,
follow our example and come to Cannes.'
Sidney Pjiilips.
SI ©ream JHaiticiu
My baby is sleeping overhead.
My husband is in the town ;
In my large white bed uncurtained,
All alone I lay me down.
I have combed out my golden waves of hair,
And scarcely stirred they lie
All down below my slender waist,
So white and calm am I.
And dreamily I have said my prayers,
And dreamily closed my eyes.
And the youth in my blood moves sweetly
As my pulses fall and rise.
I lie so peaceful and lonely,
A maiden in spirit-land,
With the moonbeams in at the window,
And hand laid close to hand.
I wander forth in the moonbeams.
All free of heart alone,
Neither awake nor dreaming.
To-night it is all one.
4^8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Light of step across the carpet
Of the flower-entangled spring,
Light of spirit through the haunted
Wood pathways, murmuring.
The earth is telling her secrets.
Never shy or strange to me;
My heart beating only silence,
One with her mystery.
All over the beautiful distance
The air is so fresh and pure.
The night is so cool and silvery,
The calm is so secure.
And afar, down into the sunrise,
The glittering dream-worlds shine;
And by this free heart triumphant
I pass on to make them mine.
0 elfin maiden, turn homeward,
And dream not so cold and wild.
Have I not turned a woman ?
Have I not husband and child ?
H. E. H. K.
 0 
^tx CnciUfitt of ^Tatili- Bau.
'Men must work, and women must weep.'
On the shores of Table Bay, beyond Paarden Island, in the
mouth of Salt Eiver, there is a long stretcli of sand, extending
for several miles, upon which the waves roll with unbroken
strength, and where each wind of heaven is felt in its fullest
force. A bleak inhospitable place, glaringly bright in summer,
cold and desolate in winter. Certainly most uninhabitable ;
and the remains of a wall, a few dozen stones, the relics of a
whalebone fence, and here and there a piece of plaster, must
be the last traces of a boat-house, or a hut in which fishermen
may have occasionally taken shelter from a storm. Surely
no dwelling could have been placed in so wild a spot!
And yet never was scene more lovely in Hester Vischer's
eyes, or house more perfect in her sight, than that long bare
beach and storm-proof cottage to which her husband brought
her three days after their marriage.    Jan was a fisherman,
An Incident of Table Bay. 469
strong, sturdy, and successful; and when he wooed Farmer Van
Eyeck's daughter, the old man was no less satisfied with him
than Hester herself, who, living ten miles inland, had never
seen the sea, and was willing to believe her lover as brave,
and daring, and courageous, as any Viking of old. So they
were married, and came home to the cottage in which every
comfort that the fisher mind could devise had been carefully
stored—presses of cheese, barrels of oil, capacious fireplaces,
windows with wooden shutters, and sailcloth curtains to
keep out the insinuating wind that would creep in at the
chinks despite the liberal tarring all the crevices had received.
One window only was not protected,—it looked seawards;
and there, each night, a lamp burned brightly for the use of
tliose who might be at sea.
The young couple prospered, and wlien Jan was away,
}Iester never tired of watching the ocean with its strange
changes, its roar, and its foam; it surpassed in beauty, she
thought, the green pasture fields of her girlhood's home, and
the yellow boundary of sand was almost as marvellous.
Years fled on, and life was still a pleasure to tlie humble
pair. It was a joyous sight to see Jan haul up his boat to
its shed, whilst Hester gave by no means despicable assist¬
ance ; and two boys, tumbling amongst the seaweed tliat
ibrmed part of the fisher's moveable stock-in-trade, carried
armfuls of it to the cart in which Jan took round his spoils
to all the houses within six miles, the quiet old mule calmly
enduring the while to be adorned with impromptu garlands of
wet seaweed; for had he not known the lads from their
babyhood, and was he not one of the happy cheerful family ?
As the sons grew up, they joined their father in his severer
labours, and increased his gains; and the mother was almost
as proud of her Dirk and Dan as of her husband, who was
no less a hero to her now than in the days of her early
womanhood. Hester had had such confidence and trust in
his power and skill, that the dangers of his life had never
presented themselves to her mind. Hov/ever wild or stormy
the night, no fear of an accident occurred to her; he was so
clever a sailor, no squall could surprise him, no mischance
could overtake him ; and in some degree this trust was
extended to her sons. Thus it was that, when father and sons
were absent, the wife and mother went cheerily about her
work, mended the jackets, knit the hose, lit the nightly lamp
with a pitiful thought for those who were dear to fishermen
less skilled than Jan, and then lay down to sleep without a
doubt of her loved ones' safety.
47o TJie Ladies Edinburgh Alagazine.
With this certain trust, Hester Vischer arose one morning
as the wind howled ominously around her home.
' I wish they were back!' cried her niece, who was soon
to be her daughter, and was trying hard to be as brave and
cheerful in Dirk's absence as Hester was in Jan's.
' They will come to-day, Letty—their three days are over,
and perhaps the forenoon will bring them; but it's been
blowing hard through the night, and if they happen to be
later, you needn't fear aught. Brighten up, girl! a fisher's
wife mustn't be frightened at a few gales.'
Letty shook her head as if she wished she could help
being frightened during the gales, and set about her work to
try and divert her thoughts. But as the hours passed by,
the gale became a terrible tempest, and a fog enveloped
Table Bay; a number of fishermen came down to Hester's
cottage to hear if Jan had returned, and looked very grave
when they heard he had not, and even graver still when
the fog lifted and they recognised his boat not a quarter of a
mile from shore—dismasted. It was hard work for the three
men on board the little craft to make any way with oars in
such a sea, and though they strove for life or death, no
human strength could conquer in such a contest. They had
brought the little vessel within two hundred yards of the
beach, when a heavy wave struck her fiercely on the counter;
for one second it might almost have been said the boat
sprang from the water, her bows went up so suddenly, and
then she sank, never more to be seen by the eyes that had
watclied her so eagerly. A terrible cry rose from the beach,
as, after a silence more fearful than any words, one, form
o.lone was seen battling with the waves. It was Dirk's, and
when he saw through the bliuduig spray his mother and
bride, and heard, above the tempest, their agonized cry, he
urged his failing strength to one more effort. Eopes were
flung wildly towards him, hardy seamen cheered him by
their shouts as each rope fell short of his eager hand ; but
surely he has gained the shore at last, the wave recedes as
he makes one more powerful stroke, then stands erect, and
rushes forward.
' Safe! safe!' cried a tender woman's voice, and then
arose such a terrible wail of anguish that the old fishermen
even started back in horror.
' O God, a quicksand !' burst from Hester's lips, and she
sprang madly forward as if to rescue her son. They held her
back, but threw poles and ropes to the hapless lad, sinking out
of sight not ten yards from their eyes.    Then a wave dashed
Thistledown. 471
over him, and as it went back, taking poles and ropes with
it, no trace was seen of the youth—nothing but the cruel
glitter that showed the existence of a quicksand.
Held back by force from rusliing into the waves, the
bereaved wife and mother fell senseless to the ground, and
was carried to her cottage, where for weeks she raved and
wept, tended by Letty with a daughter's care; and when, at
length, she rose from the bed on which she had suffered the
terrors of delirium, there was little in the gaunt and haggard
woman with the grey locks and wild eyes to remind those
around her of the bright-eyed happy matron of a few short
weeks before. Her friends would liave taken her away from
the scene of her woe, but she would not leave it; day by day,
and week by week, she sat motionless on the beacli looking
out to sea, unconscious of everything else as she repeated
with painful monotony:
' Letty mustn't be frightened. Dirk will come with his
father and Dan. Sailors' wives must not cry at storms;'
and then her voice would change, and she would sing the
low soft lullabies with which she had hushed her lost sons to
sleep when they were in their cradles and their father away
on the ocean wherein all now is rest.
' Bury me by my Jan,' said Hester Vischer on her death¬
bed ; and so beneath the soft blue wave, so treacherous to
her who loved it so well, they laid her down to sleep till the
sea shall give up her dead, and the grave lier prey.
L. D. P.
Thistledown, thistledown,
How the children scatter
All around the feathery seeds
From the prickly thistle weeds,
Thinking it no matter!
Thistledown, thistledown,
Lightly, lightly blowing,
How the little winds in play
Whirl it here and there away,
All the mischief sowing !
o
Little words, little words.
Carelessly we scatter;
472 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Up and down, where'er we go.
Fling tliem lightly to and fro,
Thinking it no matter.
Little words, thoughtless words,
Quickly, quickly spoken
(Scarcely heed them as we may).
May have led a soul astray,
Or a frail heart broken.
Thistledown, thistledown,
Scattered all so lightly,
Note we ne'er the seeds are sown
Till the thistle weeds are <;rown
Ugly and unsightly.
o
Idle words, idle words,
What will be revealed
When the world together met,
The great Judgment-seat is set,
And the books unsealM:
God of mercy, God of grace,
Keep us, laeavenly Father;
Help us all good seed to sow,
Words of love where'er we go,
Harvest good to gather.
D.
©ur iLi&rarg ^afile,
London in the Jacobite Times.    By Dr. Doran, F.S.A.
London : Richard Bentley «& Son.
The subject of this work is without doubt an interesting one, and
by special studies of this sort we can in some degree realize the men
of the past not only by the things they did, but how they lived,
spoke, and thought. If we could have clearly represented to us the
mind and temper throughout the period of Jacobite disturbance, we
might better imderstand the general history of the time, a brilliant
side light would be thrown on the whole scene, and we might come
to realize the life of a day which seems, comparatively speaking, so
near us in years, and so far removed in sentiment. We cannot
exactly say that Dr. Doran's new work does give us as clear a repre¬
sentation as might be desired ; he has collected a quantity of materials
and tells us a great many curious facts and incidents, but the general
effect is confused.    His details are interesting, but they overpower
5^8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the Higher Education  of Women ;   but we may now say that the
' wave' of our good influence has actually spread to the antipodes.
Kitty WRE^f asks the following question : Must I attend the S.
George's Hall Classes in order to pass the Local Examination ? [There
is certainly no compulsion. But those who wish to pass well, will
probably avail themselves of some preparatory help, and we can
assure you, that whether, as residing in Edinburgh, you attend these
classes in pei-son, or as absent, you enrol yourself as a corresponding
student, you cannot obtain assistance more thoroughly satisfactory,
or more likely to ensure your success.]
As the question has often been asked in various ways, we may
mention that the Instruction by Correspondence with the St. George's
Hall Classes is this year thrown open to boys. Corresponding
students resident in Scotland must apply to MissM. M. Houldsworth,
Springfield House, Lasswade; those in England to Miss M. A. Schwabe,
2 Glenorchy Terrace, Edinburgh.
G. W. kindly favoured us with the information that her question
in our September No. had been answered by a friend. The passage
she wished to discover as to the ablutions practised by the ancients, is
from Bishop Jeremy Taylor's works, v. Holy Dying, chap. iv. sect. v.
All readers of the good Bishop's works know how they abound in
quaint classical allusions ; his reference in the instance before us is to
j'Elian, book iv. chap. i. We have to thank G. W. for her com¬
munication, which we were obliged to defer last month for want of
space.
Thalatta and Lily in our August No. have received no information
as to the quotations asked for. We shall be most grateful to any one
who will supply the source of these quotations ; also to any friend
who will answer Apis in our September Magazine.
i^ottccs to Corrcsjjonticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can onlj' be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
For the series entitled 'Country Subjects and Pursuits,'we have
already (promised or received) papers on Fishing, Curling, Keeping
Poultry, Games in the Garden, Hedging and Ditching, and others.
Further suggestions would be acceptable ; also papers on the Dairy,
on Landscape Gardening, and on Swimming.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literarj' Society
will be held on Saturday, 2d November, at 25 Great King Street.
All members who can do so, are requested to attend. Debate,
' Shall wo amend our laws of Spelling ]'
474 The Ladies Edinbiirgli Magazine.
can be traced in the name Colchester, and many interesting remains
have been found there. The town walls, castle, and several churches
are built of Roman brick. (2) York was constituted a Roman station
by Agricola, 79 A. D., and called Eboracum. Eboracum became the
Roman capital, where the emperors or their legates resided, and
where in 211 a. d. Severus died. Carausius, a Roman admiral, who
assumed the title, Ruler of Britain, was assassinated by Allectus at
York, 297 a.d. Constantius Chlorus also died here, 306 A. d., and York
is the reputed birthplace of his son, Constantine the Great. The
Roman parts of the city wall may easily be distinguished from the
more modern masonry. (3) Agricola erected a line of forts between
the Solway Frith and the Tyne, 79 a.d., to protect the southern
provinces from the incursions of the Picts. To strengthen this
barrier, Hadrian constructed an earthen rampart, 120 a.d. ; and a few
yards farther north, Severus built his great wall of hewn stone, 210
A.D. Parts of this wall can still be traced, and at its eastern
extremity is the village of Wallsend, noted for its coal. (4) Watling
Street {Stratum Vitdlianuni) was a great Roman road, extending from
Dover to Canterbury, Rochester, and London, thence to Caer-Siont
(near Caernarvon) by Uriconium and Chester. From Uriconium a
branch diverged to Scotland by Lancaster and Kendal. Portions of
this ancient road are still used, and streets in London and Canter¬
bury retain its name. M.  B.
II. The Kiiig^s QuJiair, or 'King's Little Book,' is a volume of poetry
composed by James I. of Scotland, during his imprisonment in
England, in the reigns of Henry IV. and Henry Y., and describes the
events of his captivity ; the chief incident being the captive king's
first sight of Lady Joanna Beaufort, from the window of his prison
in Windsor Castle, as she walked in the garden underneath.
The Schoolmaster is a treatise on classical education, by Roger
Ascham, tutor and secretary to Queen Elizabeth. It was published
by his widow in 1571.
Ralph Roister-Doister is our earliest English comedy, acted in ]531,
and written by Nicholas Udall, for some time master of Eton College.
The scene of the piece is laid in London, and the story gives a cui'ioiis
and animated picture of citizen life in the sixteenth century. The
heroine is a young and pretty widow, who has a lover and several
other suitors, chief amongst whom is the ridiculous personage who
gives his name to the play.
The Castle of Olranto is a medifeval romance written by Horace
Walpole, son of the celebrated minister of George I. and George II.,
and himself noted as a wit and letter-writer. It may be considered
the first English specimen of that class of works afterwards enriched
and illustrated by Scott, Bulvver Lytton, and others. The time
chosen is the Feudal Age, the place Italy ; the heroine represents the
sentimental languor of the eighteenth century superadded to the
female type of the Middle Age, and the interest of the tale is sustained
by the mysterious aj^parition of an armed warrior, a colossal helmet
which finds its way into the courtyard, and a liberal supply of secret
panels, subterranean passages, etc. The manners are absurd and
unnatural, and the story full of contradictions, as are all romantic
fictions before Scott. Heathek.
Stray Notes. 475
[Ladies who come to Edinburgh for the purpose of attending the
Classes of the Ladies' Educational Association, can be boarded in
private families, where they will receive assistance in their studies.
Apply to the Honorary Secretary of the Association, 4 Saxe-Coburg
Place, Edinburgh.]
Edinburgh University Local Examinations.—We are permitted
to insert the following extracts from letters written to friends, by
ladies who have benefited by our S. George's Hall Classes during the
past session. The extracts speak for themselves, and may perhaps
answer some of the inquiries, and meet some of the minor difficulties,
which beset young students preparing for a similar course of study:—
'Aug. 15, 1878.
'All I can say is that I shall never regret that I joined the S.
George's Hall Classes. It was almost by chance that I did so. For
several years I had been anxious to pass an examination, chiefly
because I am a governess, and I knew what an advantage it would
be if I could attend lectures and obtain a certificate.
' It was almost impossible for me to do as so many others can who
live in towns. I always happened to be living in the comitry, and so
was obliged to give up the idea of passing a Cambridge Local. Then I
wished to join one of the Cambridge Classes of Instruction by Corre¬
spondence, but here another obstacle presented itself in the shape of
the expense. I found it would cost far more than I could afi'ord to
prepare myself for one of the Cambridge Examinations, so that at last
I gave up the idea in despair and was obliged to be content to study
alone.
' Towards the end of October last year, I happened one evening to
take up the Saturday Beview, and after reading one or two articles, I
turned to the advertisements, and there to my great delight I saw one
about the Correspondence Classes in connection with the Edinburgh
University Examinations. I immediately wrote to Miss Dundas to ask
for further particulars. She sent me a prospectus and a pamphlet which
explained the system of instruction. I found that it would cost
much less to prepare myself for an Edinburgh than for a Cambridge
certificate, and I determined at once to join the classes in November.
' I need scarcely say how helpful I found the fortnightly papers,
the explanations were always so clearly and kindly given. However
stupid my mistakes might be, they were always most patiently and
courteously dealt with. I was never afraid to ask about anything
I could not understand, for I knew that my difficulties would be
swept away as soon as my papers were returned.
' I don't see how any one (even the most stupid person) could help
deriving the greatest benefit from joining these classes. I always
find it so much easier to work with an object in view. It prevents
me from getting lazy and careless. It is such a help to be obliged
to get a certain amount of reading done in a certain time. I
think one of the rules an especially useful one—viz., that if we have
to refer to books in answering the usual fortnightly qiiestions, we
must say that we have done so in the margin. This makes one rather
anxious to have as few references to books as possible.
' In conclusion, I must say that I am looking forward with great
47^ Tlie Ladies Edliibiu'gJi Magazine.
delight to the renewal of the class work in November. Every one
tells me that the Special Subjects are not nearly so " dangerous " as
the Preliminary. I trust I may be successful next year in gaining at
least an ordinary certificate. M. J. B.'
'Aug. 9, 1878.
' Nothing seemed more unlikely this time last year, than that we
should have had a Local Centre for Examination in , for the
simple and sole reason that we knew actually nothing about it; and
yet we knew all about the Oxford and Cambridge Examinations, and
were interested in several young friends in the south who went in for
them. But the visit of an enthusiastic Edinburgh student changed
all that; and having some faith in ourselves coUectivclij, an honest
desire to do good work, for its own sake, and for the credit and (as
it might afterwards prove) the good of our native place, we made
out, after a little laying of our heads together and pulling all together,
a sufficient number of candidates.
' Fully half became corresponding students. One or two who were
quite grown up, thought it the more conscientious plan to work
entirely without help ; but as eventually we fell on a plan of mutual co¬
operation, the question of correspondence or home work cannot be well
compared in this centre. But I should like to say here that in three
cases out of four, I think the admirably - prepared corresponding
papers must be of great advantage to the student, as they define so
clearly what the work ought to be, dividing it into portions suitable
for the time necessary to prepare it, thus avoiding the great drawback
to home study, want of method; and they go over much more ground
than a casual look at the Jiiial examination papers might lead you to
think was necessary, making, in short, the work more thorough.
' But to return to our work of preparation. After three months'
study, we all saw that we knew much less than we thought we did,
and we had an idea that some one should, as the children say, " Hear
us our lessons." One of the mothers was found willing, and till the
end of the time she gathered us together once a month. The first
meeting was quite awful in its way. During tea, instead of our
ordinary chatter, we talked nothing but Thin and examinations ; and
afterwards, instead of elegant little work - bags or preparation for
merry-making, every one produced an ink-bottle and a bundle of paper.
Our hostess had prepared a series of questions on each subject,
extending over an understood number of pages in each text-book.
For encouragement, she confided to us that she could scarcely answer
any of the questions without the help of the book ; and having made a
strict rule that no one should talk, each question was read out, and
we then wrote down the answer, which was often timed. At the end
of each subject, and before we proceeded to another, came the hardest
bit of all; we began in rotation to read aloud the answer to each
question ; and although we all knew each other very well, we had at
lirst very shaky voices. It happened that we began with questions
on history, and our often misguided remarks led to no little merri¬
ment, which put us quite at our ease, and from three to four hours
passed so quickly we were quite astonished.
' The meetings did much good; they showed a girl where she was
more deficient than her neighbour ; they encouraged the timid, who
found out that she did as well as others ; and sometimes they checked
the over-confidence of another.    We all passed ; we are still to work
SU'ay Notes. 477
on     We are getting new candidates, and we hope what we began
will prosper.'
'I mentioned, when we met last winter, the "Instruction by
Corresjiondence " with Edinburgh, by aid of which we were preparing
for tlie University Local Examination. Now that we have obtained
our certificates, yo>i may like to hear how we fared. The whole
thing was an unfailing interest to us all last winter, and we found
this plan of teaching a very real help in systematizing and testing our
reading. Of course we had read the Second Book of Samuel and the
Tales of a Grandfather before, and had also studied geography,
grammar, and arithmetic ; but once beyond the schoolroom's daily
routine, it is .sad and strange how hazy grow even important details,
and how desultory our reading often proves when the test of an
examination is applied to it. The papers of questions set by Mr.
M'Glashan during the winter came once a fortnight ; those by Mr.
Reid, during the shorter spring course, every week ; and I think
those whose social and other duties exact a large share of the day
should begin their preparation in November: they will not find a fort¬
night too long to prepare thoroughly for each paper. Map-drawing
alone consumes much time, and we found the best way to "get up"
our geography was to begin by drawing a map of the country, and to
learn names of towns, rivers, etc., afterwards ; we stood thus a better
chance of both answering questions and drawing the map by heart, if
our next paper required one. These periodical examinations were
([uite as interesting and often more diflicult than the University one,
to which they were leading us. Another advantage in beginning
your Preliminary Subjects in November is, that having completed the
winter course early in March, more than three months remain, in
which you may, if you please, work up two or three Special Subjects
with a view to obtaining your certificate, whether ordinary or honour,
at once. Instruction by Correspondence can be obtained in some of
the " Specials " also ; but while undertaking these, you must remember
that unless you pass in Preliminaries, no amount of marks will avail
you in aught else ; and for this reason, some of us, while reading up
their Specials, went over the ground again in the spring course for
Preliminary Subjects. I am afraid we plied our Edinburgh corre¬
spondents, secretary, and professors, with manifold queries, but they
always responded most kindly and promptly. As the examination
approached, we grew nervous, and felt keenly how much we had left
undone. But for the feeling that it would not do to set a cowardly
example, one at least might not have reached her centre at all, on
that Tuesday in June. We were not a large body, our centre being
only just formed. We took our seats at either end of the little
tables, furnished with paper, pens, and ink ; the rules were read, the
papers distributed, and we " fell to." Once launched, we enjoyed our
three days' ordeal most thoroughly, and the fatigue of writing for so
many hours a day was forgotten in the absorbing interest of our
subjects. I should add that we had from the local examiner all tlie
help he could lawfully oifer us, and every arrangement made by him
spoke of courteous consideration. As to the papers, we did not find
the arithmetic as hard as we expected it would be. One hint given
us some time before seems worth noting. On receiving a paper and
marking the questions you feel able to answer, try also to apportion
your time, and keep to your division of it as nearly as possible, other-
4/8 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
wise a question on which you can say a great deal will absorb too
much, and the others be neglected ; for time flies fast on such occa¬
sions, and a frantic despair scatters such ideas as may have been ready
for presentation. ... I wish this Edinburgh Local Examination
and the Instruction by Correspondence were more widely known.
Many girls would like to test their knowledge, and would enjoy tlie
preparation as much as we did, but are daunted by the severer
Oxford and Cambridge Examinations, and the higher fees of the
latter University. It seems to me an excellent bit of training in itself,
apart from the fact tliat in these hard times women should be pre¬
pared to help themselves, and take stock of their attainments before
the day of poverty dawns upon them. N.'
The following is from a Corresponding Student, one of the prize-
holders :— ' Aug. 1878.
' I enrolled myself as a pupil for the quarter beginning in
April last. My motive simply was to keep up my studies by
working up some subjects for the Edinburgh University Local Exami¬
nations, to prepare candidates for which these classes are specially
designed. I first received an outline of study, including all the pre¬
scribed work in the subjects I took, and indicating precisely how mucli
was to be got up for each paper of questions. Of tliese there were eight
in the course of the quarter, to which answers were expected within
three days. As, however, there are only two mails in the week to
Shetland, I generally could not send my replies until after, at least,
four days. At the end of the quarter there was a general examina¬
tion of the whole work, which had to be done in a certain time, and
without assistance of any kind. My answers to each paper were duly
returned corrected, along with many suggestions for improvement.
It was most interesting, and a welcome break in the monotony of life
here, to receive either a paper or corrected answers ; the arrival of
the mail, always an exciting event in this isolated place, was rendered
doubly so when either of these important documents appeared with it.
• To girls who are not within the reach of masters or help of any
kind, the system of Instruction by Correspondence is simply invalu¬
able. If its existence were more widely known, it would no doubt
be much more largely taken advantage of by those who have at
present no idea that the means of self-improvement is by it brought
into their very homes.
' In June I went to Edinburgh for the examination, and found it
not nearly so formidable as I expected. Greatly to my surprise, I
succeeded best with the subject I was most afraid of—Arithmetic, in
which we girls so often fail. I was very much pleased, on the whole,
with my quarter's work and its result ; and though the examination
teas an ordeal, and I was glad enough when it was over, yet the
three days during which it lasted were not without a certain enjoy¬
ment. M. R. M., Lerwick, Shetland.'
The following is also from a Correspondent at a distance :—
' As you wished me to tell you what I thought of the system itself,
I will do my best to give you my opinion of it. I cannot too strongly
express my sense of the boon it has been to me. It brings the
advantages of working under competent teachers witliin the reach of
many who without it could not obtain them. In my own case, con¬
stant uncertainty as to my place of residence, and the fact that my
leisure hours were always dependent upon the arrangements of other
Stray Notes. 479
people, for years prevented my taking advantage of any of the means
of instruction so plentiful in the present day. As to the instruction
itself, the difficulties of receiving it in a Corresponding Class are of
less importance than appears at lirst sight; while the system possesses
some advantages peculiar to itself. I will mention the two which
struck me most. First, I found that having to state all my difficulties
in writing was of great use to me. The necessity of putting them in
as short and clear a form as possible, helped me by simplifying them
to my own mind, and by obliging me to ask only questions that
would elicit answers to explain them. Secondly, it was easier to
take a review of the work, as we had the advantage of our printed
papers of questions, by which we could form a fair estimate of what
we knew and what we needed to know better. Therefore, whether
as a test of knowledge already possessed, or as a means of obtaining
more, it seems to me that this system is most useful. H.'
The following is also from a Corresponding Student, whose letter
represents a state of matters common to very many ladies in country
homes :—
' It is with great pleasure that I answer your questions
concerning the S. George's Hall Correspondence Classes; and I
hope that, after hearing how much we enjoyed them, you too will
become a member, for your circumstances are so like our own,
living in the country, with no possibility of taking up a new study or
prosecuting one begun at school. And yet, still determined not to
leave off work, we had struggled on for two years with, I fear, our
interest gradually diminishing, and our thoughts turning more and
more eagerly to novels and amusements, when we were roused one
day by noticing an advertisement in the Queen to the effect that
the Correspondence Classes of S. George's Hall would be opened in
the beginning of November. This, we thought, was just what we
wanted, and we wrote at once for more information about it. In
answer we received a charming letter from the secretary, containing
full particulars, and enclosing a report of the last year's proceedings.
After some deliberation we resolved to join the following classes, viz.:
Preliminary Subjects—Arithmetic, English Grammar and Analysis,
and History and Geography; and Honour Subjects—French, German,
and English Literature. I daresay you will be surprised at the
number of subjects we undertook ; but it really is not so much as it
seems, because most girls know about as much French and German
as is required, and with a little trouble can easily pass the examina¬
tion, and so only English and the preliminaries are left. The former
is extremely interesting, and we were almost astonished at what we
learned by means of the question papers and the essays we had to
write. It is certainly the hardest work, but the trouble is quite
repaid by the increased insight which is gained into the history of
the English language and the thoughts of our great poets, such as
Chaucer, Shakspere, and Wordsworth.
' I must interrupt my story here to tell you how much easier and
pleasanter our work was made by the kindness and encouragement of
everyone we had anything to do with, from the secretary downwards.
You see it might be an extra inducement to you to join the classes
did you know how many nice people you would meet. Especially we
found this the case during our stay in Edinburgh for the examinations.
Every one seemed to try to be nicer than any one else, and, as you
4^)0 The Ladies Edinbitrgh Magazine.
may imagine, we found that very delightful. At first, however, I
must confess that my nervousness about the result of my examination
all but prevented me from feeling delighted with anything. But for
the cheerful assurance of the secretary that it didn't matter whether
you passed or not, and that you weren't of necessity an incorrigible
goose because you happened to be "plucked," I think I should have
turned tail and run whenever I came in sight of the University. In
fact, when we first entered the examination room, I was so unutter¬
ably alarmed by the sight of the long rows of benches, and by the
array of ink-bottles and pens, that I did make an involuntary move¬
ment to depart. Happily for me, the examiners were kind, and the
questions tolerably easy, and so we both contrived to pass compara¬
tively well. The arithmetic examination was, in prospect at least,
the most difficult for me. I had not opened a book on the subject
for more than six years, and how was it possible that I should so
have mastered the mysteries of vulgar and decimal fractions as to be
able to answer any random questions therein \ However, the daily
half-hour spent over Colenso and Barnard Smith had had an almost
unhoped-for effect; and on hearing the result of the examination,
great was my delight to find that I had obtained over 90 per cent.
Between three and four hours a day was the usual time spent over
our lessons, and we fotind that that enabled us to learn all that was
required, and to be quite ready to answer our papers whenever they
came. I hope I shall hear from you before long that you are enrolled
as a member of the S. George's Hall Classes. L. J. M. M.'
In spite of cordial appreciation of the efl'orts of our lively corre¬
spondent, we urge upon young students the wisdom of working by
instalments, not undertaking too much at once, and remembering
that high marks in three subjects, or even in two, are greatly to be
preferred to a mere ' pass' in foiir or more.
 0 
iJlottcES to CorrrsponKcnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edmhiirgli Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can onl}"^ be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
tlie Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
Various articles have been promised or received for the series
proposed on ' Country Subjects and Pursuits.' We shall be glad of
further suggestions or communications from any lady willing to
contribute to this series. A good paper on the Dairy and Keeping
Cows would be very acceptable ; also on the Garden.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society
will be lield on Saturday, 5th October, at 25 Great King Street.
Debate, ' Does the dress of men and women of the present day show
evidence of development in refinement and good taste ?'
Our Female Novelists. 481
©ur Jfmalc Ulobeltsts.
XXII.
HONOURABLE MRS. NORTON.
1). 1808—rf. 1877.
Our s'lcetches of Female Novelists have now been brought
down to a period nearly approaching our own. It is
impossible not to be struck with the very high standard of
personal character which is attained by almost every one of
these ladies. Above the average of their sex in attainments,
they seem also to have been bright examples of all domestic
virtues. No amount of literary excellence could compensate
in their eyes for neglect of the charities of home; and
indeed in many instances they were little aware of their
own talent, and wrote with no view to fame, but simply
because their nature needed this outlet.
But as we draw nearer our own day, and the books which
lie on our drawing-room tables, we cannot but be aware of a
marked difference in tone. Though the coarseness of language
and manners which disfigured some earlier writers has
disappeared, and there is much, very much, that is well fitted
to elevate and to please, it is no longer possible to say
that all feminine fiction is good and pure in intention ; on
the contrary, it is a melancholy truth that what women
have written, women may blush to read. The causes of this
change are manifold ; we can only touch them superficially.
Something is due to the greatly increased number of writers.
Authorship has become a profession, a means of livelihood,
to be adopted by any one with a certain facility of language
and inventive power, even though by no means specially
fitted to charm or instruct the world. Nay, in days when
so many new theories are started, and so many old institu¬
tions are supposed to stand on their trial, there are not
wanting some who take up the pen expressly because, through
their fault or their misfortune, they are at war with society,
and wish to break a lance against our received codes of
behaviour. But a cause of far wider application is to be
found in the complicated nature of modern civilization, and
the tendency to look inwards which is engendered by it.
There is far too much introspection among us. Instead of
throwing the veil of a noble reserve over the intensity of our
No. 47.—November 1878. 2 H
482 77^1? Ladies' Edmbtirgh Magasitie.
joys and sorrows, we are for ever feeling our own pulse, and
describing our symptoms. Life in the present day no longer
furnishes us with a siifficient quantity of healthy excitement
in the form of outward incident and adventure: consequently
we are thrown upon our inner consciousness, and much
morbid study of the anatomy of the human mind is the
result.
Formerly, the villain was the villain; he might dis¬
semble, but we could always see the treacherous features
beneath the mask ; and though the fair and much-enduring
heroine might be persecuted to any extent, slandered, and
under a cloud, yet there was never any doubt in the mind
of author or reader that her conduct was in reality irre¬
proachable, and that some day her innocence would shine
forth undimnaed, to the confusion of her enemies. Now,
our sympathies are too often asked for some situation
in which the lines of right and wrong are artfully shaded
into each other, till we cannot say where the one ends and
the other begins. We only know that the victim finds her¬
self in a position skilfidly ari'anged so as to allow no loophole
of escape, and yet we feel that one grain of common sense
(which, though said to be the most uncommon of all senses,
is not altogether unknown in real life) would have scattered
all the toils so artfully woven round her. Often, in reading
some pitiful modern tale of misfortune and misery, and
' wrong amended by wrong,' which makes us feel intense
tliankfulness that the ordering of events is not committed to
the hands of the novelists, our only consolation is that such
chains of untoward circumstances do not take place in real
life. Of course truth, as it is stranger, so also is it sadder
than fiction; but the'great principle that we would urge,
and which is too much overlooked by these writers, is, that
every one has their fate in their own hands at some time in
their history, and that there is a compensating pendulum in
the affairs of men, which, if it bring misfortune, also raises
up friends, or, if temptation meet us, a way for escape is
offered.
These remarks are not specially applicable to our present
subject, for Mrs. Norton's writings are far above the average
sensation novel; but as she is probably the most distinctly
modern author of whom we have yet treated, it seemed a
suitable opportunity to notice the change of style which has
arisen. It is true also that her books do leave on us a sort
of wistful sadness—but too well explained by the events of
her own history—which makes us ask whether Life is indeed
Our Female Novelists. 483
so hard upon the weak and tender, and whether those who
cannot fight its stern battle must submit to be ruthlessly
trodden down ?
Caroline Elizabeth Sarah Sheridan was the descendant of a
line famous through four generations for its talents. Her
grandfather was Eichard Brinsley Sheridan, statesman,
orator, and dramatist, who will never be forgotten while wit
retains its power. Her father, Thomas Sheridan, who was
married to a daughter of Colonel and Lady Elizabeth
Callender of Craigforth, died while she was yet a child,
leaving his affairs in great disorder; and she was brought up
by her mother at Hampton Court. One of three sisters,
noted alike for their beauty and their talents, Caroline had
inherited no small share of her grandfather's brilliant gifts,
and was richly endowed with everything that should win
admiration and love. She had the dazzling complexion of
the Sheridans, dark hair, and eyes full of fire; a charm of
manner which fascinated all who came in contact with her,
and which never left her, even when years and sorrows had
dimmed her beauty. Her nature was full of enthusiasm,
formed to respond to all that was noble and generous; but
the great art of making allowances was one she was slow to
learn, and bitter was tlie scorn which she could lavish on
conduct which fell short of her high ideal.
At the age of nineteen she was married to the Honourable
George Chappie Norton, brother to the then Lord Grantley.
The young couple took up their abode in a house at Storey's
Gate, St. James' Park, which speedily became the centre of
a society illustrious both by birth and intellect. At this
period there was no acknowledged leader in the London
world; Lady Blessington was in Italy, whence she did not
return for some years; Lady Morgan had not yet migrated
from Dublin. The Miss Berrys were established in their little
house in Curzon Street, and had gathered round them a choice
circle of friends; but on the whole we should judge that the
average London society of those days was a few degrees more
frivolous than at present, and many degrees less refined.
The world of fashion was ruled by a clique of ladies, the
patronesses of Almack's, who were as arbitrary and despotic
as irresponsible governments usually are; so that the
attractions of a house where people were valued accord¬
ing to their merits, and where the hostess knew how to
combine the various elements among her guests with a
graceful tact which was never at fault, must have been
very great.
484 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Mrs. Norton's name is connected with an incident
mentioned in the life of Lord Melbourne, which will probably
form one of the historical anecdotes of the future. At a
party at her house she one evening presented to Lord
Melbourne, who was then Home Secretary, a young aspirant
for political honours, known also to literature as the author
of Vivian Grey, who had just been defeated for the borough
of Wycombe. Entering into conversation with him. Lord
Melbourne was struck with his ability, and presently asked
him abruptly: ' "Well now, tell me, what do you want to be ?'
The quiet gravity of the reply surprised him not a little:
' I want to be Prime Minister!' And he would probably
have been still more surprised could he have looked into
the future, and seen how that ambition was to be fulfilled in
the career of the Earl of Beaconsfield.
Mr. Norton had no private fortune, and his wife earned
a considerable part of their income by her literary work.
She also made use of her influence to solicit an appointment
for her husband, feeling that slie had strong claims on the
Government, through the services which both her father and
her grandfather had rendered to the Whig party. She was
successful; and Mr. Norton was appointed one of the London
magistrates, an office which he held till his death. But
already signs of domestic discord began to show themselves.
Mr. Norton seems to have been a man of coarse nature, of
morose and unyielding temper. Even his colleagues on the
magisterial bench found it difficult to keep on friendly terms
with him. His conduct is described as ' a mixture of folly
and violence, which might lead to any absurdity or any
injustice.' The superiority of his high-souled wife chafed
him ; he did not care for sentiment, and would probably have
been far happier with a more commonplace woman. Charles
Kingsley, in one of his novels, says that some men, who
would have crushed and ill-used a delicate and high-minded
wife, might be subdued to something like decency if married
to a strong, rough nature,—a help literally meet for them.
But here the iron pot was sailing down the stream in com¬
pany with the vase of choice porcelain, and it was inevitable
that the more sensitive nature sliould suffer.
Three sons were born of the marriage ; and Mrs. Norton's
heart turned passionately to her children, to find in them a
consolation for whatever else was denied her. Both in her
prose writings and in verse we find traces of her devoted
love to them ; and the death of the youngest, who was
accidentally  killed  by  a fall  from  his pony  when  nine
Our Female Novelists. 485
years old, was one of those sorrows which leaves its mark
upon a life. To outward appearance all may be as before ;
but the iron has entered into the soul, ' and the heart will
never cease to vibrate.'
In the year 1836 matters came to a climax, and Mr.
Norton brought an action for divorce against his wife,
coupling with her name that of Lord Melbourne.' There does
not seem to have been the smallest ground for this step;
indeed, it is more than hinted that Mr. Norton allowed him¬
self to be made the tool of some of Lord Melbourne's political
opponents. That statesman, then a man of fifty-seven, whose
grown-up daughter. Lady Mary Fox, was warmly attached
to Mrs. Norton, had been a true and wise friend to the
latter. No doubt the post of confidential adviser to a
young and beautiful woman on bad terms with her husband
is a dangerous one, and so Lord Melbourne found it to his
cost. But there never was a doubt of the result; the jury
pronounced an acquittal without ever leaving their box;
and next day the King publicly congratulated Lord Mel¬
bourne on having thus baffled the malice of his enemies.
But in all such cases, the heaviest penalty is borne by the
woman. The wife could not forget the insult, the cruel
wound dealt her by him who should have been the first
to shield her, and a separation was shortly afterwards
arranged.
Lord Melbourne had written in one of his earlier letters :
' I have always told you that a woman should never part
from her husband whilst she can remain with him. If this
is generally the case, it is particularly so in such a case as
yours; that is, in the case of a young, handsome woman, of
lively imagination, fond of company and conversation, and
whose celebrity and superiority have necessarily created
many enemies.' The event showed how true were his words.
Feeling herself deeply injured, and naturally looking for
sympathy under the unmerited troubles which had befallen
her, she found herself, on the contrary, a mark for envy and
ill-will. The shafts of petty malice struck deep and
rankled ; with her proud, emotional nature, the injustice and
harsh judgment she met with, stung her to the quick; she
resented her wrongs keenly, and ' gave back scorn for scorn.'
But years passed: ' Time and fair life bore down ill report.'
She had many friends, people of whose friendship she might
well be proud, who remained true to her throughout, and
^ Memoirs of Viscount Melbourne.   By W. M. Torrens, M.P.
486 The Ladies' Edinburgh ATagasine.
to whom she clung with warm gratitude and affection;
and all who came within the sphere of her influence be¬
came her chivalrous admirers, finding her, even in her later
years,
' Still beautiful, still graceful, with her voice
Of low, sweet music, and her gift of song.'
She found her principal occupation in her pen : besides the
books which she published, she wrote articles for Macmillan
and other magazines; she composed songs, some of which,
as Juanita, are not yet forgotten. Much of her time was spent
in Italy; and for some years she had the companionship of
a little grand-daughter to cheer her. Of the last event of her
life, her marriage with an old and tried friend. Sir William
Stirling Maxwell, who, to the profound regret of all Scotland,
has now joined her in the Silent Land, we need only repeat
what has been said in the poem already quoted from, which
appeared in the pages of that kindly humourist. Punch :
' Truest of all, the friend who at the last
Gave her marred life the shelter of his name ;
And a short sunshine o'er her evening cast,
Denied her in the morning of her fame.'
Mrs. Norton was in failing health at the time of the
marriage, which took place in February 1877; and she
died on the 15th June of the same year, leaving one surviving
son, the present Lord Grantley.
Poetry came naturally to the daughter of the Sheridan s,
and her writings early attracted notice. Her first essay, the
Dandies Rout, was written before her marriage; then appeared
Tlie Undying One, which was published in 1831. It is
founded on the legend of the Wandering Jew, scarcely a
subject which was likely to find adequate treatment at the
hands of a young lady. But it was very favourably received,
and was followed, in 1840, by The Dream, which, according
to the verdict of the Quarterly Review, 'justified the claim of
the authoress to the title of the Byron of our modern
poetesses.' During the early years of her married life she was
editor of the Keepsake, and WTote a good deal of verse, which
would now be thought somewhat unreal and sentimental.
Such verse passed for truth and poetry in those days; the
world admired, the critics stood aside with a sort of half-
contemptuous gallantry. It was a time when there were
no great leaders to form and guide popular opinion. The
influence of Byron was still powerful, but his imitators had
Our Female Novelists. 487
lost the keen, nervous strength which distingiushed their
master; and the poets who have made modern English
literature what it is, sung, as yet, only for the discriminating
few.
But though the affected tone of the day may have coloured
Mrs. Norton's early style, her genius made itself felt through
all. She had a vivid imagination, and a rare gift of eloquence.
When her subject inspired her, she would pour forth a torrent
of burning words, rousing herself to fierce indignation against
wrong, or melting into pathetic strains of regret and tender¬
ness. Poetry was probably the natural bent of her mind, to
which she turned when she felt the need of expression.
Xovels only came later, as she sought to forget her own
troubles in the imaginary woes of her heroines. We should
not assign to her a foremost place as a novelist. Though
she always wrote with ease and grace, and could paint
feelings and describe incidents with much force and depth,
.she was quite without the art of delineating character. Her
men and women are but pegs on which to hang qualities.
They move stiffly,-—they talk to order. There are none of
the little inconsistencies, the unexpected turns and spon¬
taneous impulses which we see in nature. She does not
create, she but makes a conventional copy from a narrow
model. Probably by any one who knew the history of those
years, many of her characters miglit be referred to their
true source, and traced back to the people who surrounded
her. We must remember, however, that her mind was em¬
bittered, and her faculties cramped, by brooding over her
own situation. All her novels are like variations on the
same air; their theme is the injured wife, the cruel world
that stood aloof and misjudged her.
The first of her novels to make a sensation was Btuart of
Dunleath. It is one of the most profoundly sad books that
ever was written, and, without pressing the comparison home,
we cannot but feel that it is drawn largely from her own
experience. The heroine, young, beautiful, and amiable,
separated by a terrible catastrophe from the friend and
guardian of her youth, is married at seventeen to Sir Stephen
Penrhyn, who is simply an incarnation of brute force. In
order that Eleanor may drain the profoundest depths of
sorrow, Mrs. Norton makes her the mother of twin boys, and
then snatclies them from her. They are both drowned
through the swamping of a boat, and the gloom closes round
her more deeply than ever. Then David Stuart reappears;
but  through all the complications which follow, Eleanor's
488 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
purity and innocence shine like jewels in the dark. The
narrative is most powerfully wrought up; Margaret's letter,
pleading with the sorely-tried wife not to seek for a divorce,
is deeply touching, and written in a higli moral tone. The
story ends with the death of Eleanor. The minor characters
which enliven this tragic tale are drawn with point and
humour. In spite of Sir Stephen's Welsh name, the scene is
principally laid in Scotland. Mrs. Norton knew Scotland
well, and loved it. She is fond of introducing Scottish places
and people in her books, and her descriptions of scenery are
true and graphic. Here we have the gouty little ' Airl of
Peebles,' who is wooed and won by Miss Tabitha Christison,
the writer's daughter. Then there is the redoubtable Lady
Macfarren, tail, gaunt, and grim. AVhen she appeared,
bonneted, booted, and shawled, these
' Feminine preparations somehow in her never appeared feminine,
hut rather gave the idea of a " panoply of war ; " as though she had
donned full armour, and a complete suit of mail, and had come to
defy you cap a pic. Even the parasol, with which the fair sex are
wont daintily to shelter their complexions, altered its purpose in the
hands of this vigorous lady; and when closed often served to
" thwack " a rebellious dog ; when open, was borne before her, like the
bosky shield of one of Ossian's heroes, as though the sun—that great,
honest, inactive foe—did not so much signify, and it was the wind
that had to be "met front to front upon the untented field." '
In Old Sir Dovglas we have another picture of an
old Scotch lady, the Dowager Countess of Clochmaben.
This lady habitually wore over her cap a small quilted
black silk bonnet. The factor said ' she was an awfu'
woman to contravene.' She herself, when expressing her
sentiments on any matter, would say, ' in a liard, distinct
voice, " That's my dictum." All her opinions were didums,
and all her dichcms were laws.' Now, we have many
of us known Scotcli ladies of a former generation, whose
opinions were didurns, who had but little tolerance for evil¬
doers, who were narrow-minded with regard to Sabbath
observances, and who expressed themselves often with more
force than elegance. But then their sternness was redeemed
by genuine goodness of heart, aufonds; many a kindly action
tempered the sharp rebuke; and without these softening
touches, in which Mrs. Norton's rigid personages are wanting,
tlie portrait becomes almost a caricature.
Lost and Saved is a painful story ; nor is it made more
agreeable by any great attractiveness of style or treatment.
The characters are of a singularly conventional type; there
Oil}' Female Novelists. 489
is the frank, open-hearted sailor father, his good and
beautiful (but sadly imprudent) daughter, an aristocratic
villain of the most unmitigated description, rejoicing in the
name of Montagu Treherne; a certain Marchioness of Up-
down, surely the fattest, the most selfish, and the most
vulgar lady that ever was drawn in fiction. In fact, we may
justly complain of such a caricature from the pen of one who
herself moved in the society she traduced. But in the whole
tone of the book we see the working of those circumstances
which had set the writer at war with her surroundings. I'he
world had indeed done her scant justice; therefore she
labours to prove that its verdict is worthless, its boasted
morality false and hollow. She assails the follies and vices
of fashionable life with a depth of indignation, a bitter con¬
centration of scorn, which shows how deeply she felt her
own injuries. But though we may think such subjects are
better left in decent obscurity, she touches on them with a
real belief that the sore places of the age need to be exposed
and its weaknesses chastised. She never for a moment
seeks to show them as other than tliey are,—blots on the fair
face of our civilization,—evils degrading to humanity. And
wherever she touches on religious themes, her tone is always
reverent and high.
Of the three novels written by Mrs. Norton, Old Sir Dmglas
is decidedly the most pleasing. It has the merit of ending
happily, and the character of Sir Douglas himself is quite
the finest she has drawn. Generous and warm-hearted,
upright himself and confiding in others, she might have had
Othello in her mind when she painted this noble veteran.
Like Othello, it was the account of his early exploits, through
the letters of a friend, that won for Sir Douglas the heart
of his wife; like Othello, he was
' of a free and honest nature,
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so.'
The story is skilfully contrived, so that Sir Douglas, who is
the most trustful of men, should be led to think there is real
cause for his jealousy. A secret had been kept from him ;
and the discovery of the villany of Frere is just such a shock
as might lead an open, unsuspicious nature to distrust all
and everything. It is a true remark: ' Where trust is broken,
in certain natures there is not only no recovery, but, if I may
so speak, no discernment. Such natures no longer distinguish
who is loyal and who is false. In proportion to their love
for their deceiver, is the belief that none now can be true.'
490 1 lie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
James Frere, the convict, the preacher, the forger, the polished
gentleman, and Alice Eoss, Sir Douglas's half-sister, the
quiet, cat-like, hypocritical Ailie, are unnatural and ex¬
aggerated. But Lady Charlotte Skifton, Gertrude's mother,
is a very clever portrait of the languid fine lady of a bygone
day. Her helpless, incoherent speeches are most amusing,
whether she sees that something is wrong:—
'"And I don't want to interfere between niaii and wife, . . .
though I've been wondering all day what has happened, and whether
he has put his money into a lottery, and lost it; or what . . . Not
that Douglas is a likely man to put into a lottery, but still, however
superior he may be, he might choose the wrong number, you know,
and draw a blank, and you would have to retrench. Indeed, I once'
knew a man (a very clever man, and a friend of your father's) who
was quite ruined by putting into a lottery. He chose 603, and the
winning number was 505—only two oft! so very distressing and
provoking!"'
Or when the world looks askance at Gertrude:—
' " But when I know her to be so good, and they are all so violent
and unreasonable—the Rosses of Glenrossie—I do really think the
Queen ought to do something; and, you see, she does nothing, and
there is no justice anywhere. I declare I think the people that abuse
Gertrude ouglit to be punished. I know that tradesmen can't say
things, and why should ladies ? I mean that they can prosecute each
other (tradesmen), because I once had a butcher who prosecuted the
miller who served Mr. Skifton's father with flour : he prosecuted for
being called ' a false-weighted rascal; ' and I should like to know if
that is as bad as the things they say of Gertrude \" '
Or when she takes a' pastoral cottage' at Bonchurch,' just
like the one in Moore's Melodies,—about Love and Hope,
you know,-—where " he opened the window and ilew away." '
Here is a quotation in a different style, a good instance
of Mrs. Norton's really powerful vein of satire. She is
speaking of the extravagance of young men, and wliat is the
true meaning, as in the Palais de la verity, of their having
their debts ' paid off':—
' Conceive a man addressing his friend thus :—
' " My dear fellow, certainly I will lend you a couple of hundreds.
I'll give you all my three sisters' music-lessons, new dresses, and
jaunts to the sea-side for this year. And there's pale little Fanny,
who costs my mother a good deal in physician's advice. I'll give you
all her doctor's fees for six months or so, and she shall go without.
1 would not be so stingy as to refuse a friend such a paltry sum as
you have asked of me—no, not for the world."
' Such langufige may sound startling and absurd ; but it is a tru«
0?tr Female Novelists. 491
paraphrase and reduction of the flourish of words in which similar
boastful offers are made by young men to the greedy companions of
their follies.'
Again—
' You say you wonder, because I'm a poor cnrate's son, how I can
get on at college ? That's all you know about it ! Of course it is
difficult, and I'm put to it to give wine parties, and so forth, like
other fellows ; but it's to be done with proper management. If I
take six days in the week butcher's meat that my brothers and sisters
would eat, and all the coals and blankets the old women in the village
used to get, and my father's two glasses of port wine, which my
mother fancied kept his throat from relaxing for Sunday duty, and
a year or two of Dick's schooling (who scarcely needs it, for my father
gives him all his spare time, and he's a sharj) fellow by nature), it
comes to a good lump of money in the end; and if there's still some
debt left, I've no doubt I can grind it out of them sooner than seem
shabby to these fellows at Oxford.'
The following is a good specimen of the grace and poetry
that flow so freely from her pen:—
' There are resurrections on earth other than the one which leads
from death to immortality. There are illustrations of God's beauti¬
ful emblem of divine change in the bursting of the dull chrysalid case
to let the winged Psyche forth, other than the one illustration of
coffined clay, from which the imprisoned soul escapes and ascends to
glory. The lesser resurrections of our world are daily round us.
Memories of good, and words of forgotten prayer, and voices of
friends neglected, and lessons of life from which we turned im¬
patiently, as children from dry tasks,—these all may rise again, in
no spectral light, but clad with a sacred halo. Rise—like the
fountain in the desert that quenched the thirst of perishing Ishmael,
when all around seemed but barren sand ; rise—as the good thought
rose in the dissolute prodigal's heart while he fed the foul swine,
despairing ; turning our steps back, like his, into that long-forsaken
track of peace, which shall lead at last to our Father's mercy and the
eternal pardon.'
Since the appearance of the Child of the Islands in 1845,
which was written to commemorate tlie birth of the Prince
of Wales, Mrs. Norton had published no long poem; but in
1862 appeared the Lady of La Garaye, her best, as it is almost
her last, work. Like a calm and peaceful evening after a
storm-vexed day, is the harmony, the chastened beauty, that
meets us here. Her fine nature had reasserted itself; the
trials of her earlier days had done their work, and there is
no longer any jarring note in the mellow richness of her
mature powers. The Dedication, which is addressed to tlie
Marquis of Lansdowne, is quite a fragment of autobiography,
in wliich we are admitted to see something of her own feel-
492 TJie Ladies Edinbiu-gh Magazine.
ings.    With a depth of earnestness to which Poetry alone
could give fitting expression, she speaks to her old friend—
* Thou hast known all my life: its pleasant hours,
Its exercise of intellectual powers,
With thoughts of fame and gladness not to be.
Thou knowest—for thou hast proved—the dreary shade
A first-born's loss casts over lonely days ;
And gone is now the pale, fond smile that made.
In my dim future, yet a path of rays.
The joy that budded on my own youth's bloom,
When life wore still a glory and a gloss,
Is hidden from me in the silent tomb,
Smiting with premature unnatural loss,
So that my very soul is wrung with pain.
Meeting old friends whom most I love to see.
Where are the younger lives, since these remain ?
I weep the eyes that should have wept for me.'
Mrs. Norton was fortunate in meeting with a subject
which appeals so strongly to the higher part of our nature.
Mankind will not willingly let die the remembrance of such
Christian fortitude and self-abnegation as was shown by the
lady and her husband ; and wherever the story penetrates,
it will wear the garb of her sweet and flowing verse. The
passage beginning,
' Oh, Time!    Oh, ever-conquering Time !'
is a noble burst of lyric poetry. It is too long for quotation ;
instead, we give a few lines from the conclusion, which, in
their ripe wisdom, seem not unworthy to gather into one the
lessons of her life:
' But Good is not a shapeless mass of stone.
Hewn by man's hands and worked by him alone ;
It is a seed God suffers One to sow,
Many to reap; and when the harvests grow,
God giveth increase through all coming years,—
And lets us reap in joy seed that was sown in tears.'
Alma Glen.
A Page of Modern History. 493
W(it MgW^^ Mttioto's ILamcnt.
There's a hill far away in Skye,
Round its summits white mists lie,
Down its crags the white sprays fly.
Ochon, ochrie!
Trust not the light on its grey stone crown.
Though its base may be green and its sides may be brown,
For they who trust it never come down.
Ochon, ochrie !
A curse on its tarns, deep as the sea,
A curse on its mists, for traitors tliey be.
Where is the son that was dearest to me ?
Ochon, ochrie !
A. C.
^ ^age of i$loti£rn S^istorg.
THE PRISONEES AT PLEVNA.
By A Member of the Redcross Society.
' If this weather had only come a week earlier, you must
liave been driven away from Plevna by cold and starvation,'
Osman Pasha observed to his Russian guards as he rested
for the night at Fratesti, with every prospect of being blocked
there by a fierce north-east wind and heavy snow-storm. It
indeed required the extraordinary endurance and obedience
of a Russian soldier to continue the investment under
the conditions of the last fortnight. All kinds of fuel had
long been scarce, and the benevolent efforts of the German
Ambassador could not induce the Turks to allow wood for
either fuel or shelter for even the sick and wounded, includ¬
ing their own, to pass Widdin. Tents were soaked through or
blown away, and the Russian soldiers scooped holes in the
wet ground, and roofed them with straw and skins, sitting,
when off duty, crouched up in these cramped, smoky, ill-
ventilated abodes. Even the Emperor at Gorny Studen and
Bogot, an asthmatic invalid, was lodged in only a wooden
frame hut with canvas sides, less convenient than an English
494 The Ladies' Edinburgh Alagasiiie.
cow-house, and his brother, the commauder-in-chief, in a felt
tent. The supply of provisions was becoming most uncertain,
owing to continued snow and rain making the soft, boggy
roads almost impassable, and to a storm which destroyed
both bridges on the Danube; while the rain had spoiled tons
and tons of accumulated stores, and the railway from Shumla
to Eustchuk and the seaports and mouth of the Danube
were held by the Turks. For two days before Plevna was
evacuated the Eussian army was without bread, while
telegrams from an English paper, said to be well informed
in Turkish news, reported that the beleaguered city was
provisioned till February, and the garrison furnished with
warm clothing. The iron huts which had been ordered in
p]ngland for the Eussian army were not permitted to leave
the Thames, as they came under the head of munitions of
war (although many ship-loads of shot and shell had arrived
during the war from England for Turkey); and for the same
reason the Hungarian Government confiscated a quantity of
iron rails, destined to complete the railways through Bulgaria.
Low fever, which had prostrated the Eussian army during
the summer, still made its presence felt, and the want of
shelter or acconnnodation for the sick added to the general
gloom, which reached its height when the news arrived that
Suleiman Pasha had attacked the army of the Lorn under
the Czarovitz, and driven it from Elena, that more than
1000 Eussians had been placed liors de combat, and that the
rest, hard pressed along the whole line of tlieir outposts, were
trying to protect Piela and Tirnova, which once lost would
have placed those at Plevna and Bogot between two Turkish
armies, and no forts or means of retreat.
On 9th December reinforcements and all available ambu¬
lances and medical stores were sent off in haste to Biela; but
the very next day we heard the startling news that Osman
Pasha, doubtless knowing of Suleiman's victory, and the
Eussian discomfiture through the Mahometan spies, who,
with inconceivable carelessness, were allowed to pass as they
]ileased across the Eussian lines, had broken out of Plevna,
which covered twelve miles with its fortifications, and was
already some distance on the road to Widdin, when he was
stopped by the Astrakhan and two other regiments, and a
desperate battle was going on. Many fell on both sides, and
in the meantime the rest of the Eussian army occupied
Plevna, so that when Osman tried to retreat into the town,
finding it impossible to break the Eussian line, he was sur¬
rounded, and compelled to surrender with 15,000 men.
A Page of Modern History. 495
Just outside Plevna, but witliin the Turkish lines, there
was a horrible spectacle. All the Eussians, numbering many
hundreds, if not thousands, who had fallen in the assaults on
the place during July and September, lay stripped and un-
buried, many of them bearing evidence of shocking mutilation,
and nearly all deprived of their upper and lower jaws. The
odour arising from these decaying corpses was enough to
produce a pestilence in Plevna, and such was indeed the fact;
yet the Turks would not bury them, and the first thing the
Eussians did on the morning of the 11th was to perform
this long-deferred work. All the Eussians who could be
spared were sent at once to reinforce General Gourko on his
way to Sofia, and those •who had been fighting hard were
allowed to rest. A few were sent to bury the freshly fallen
dead near the river Vid, and bring in the wounded, who
sorely needed the doctors and ambulances sent the day
before to Biela.
We little thought of the many Turkish sick and wounded,
who, utterly neglected by their own countrymen, lay rotting
in the hospitals at Plevna, where virulent smallpox and
typhus fever had broken out; for we had not heard the
sliocking report of their condition, which had appeared in
the English papers weeks before, when Osman Pasha had
refused the services of the Stafford House surgeons who had
waited upon him, and sent them back to Sofia. So that the
accumulated sick and wounded of another two months, in
the most foul, untended state, had increased tlie mass of
suffering to an extent little short of the charnel-house at
Vilna in 1812, during Napoleon's retreat from Moscow, as it
is described in Joyneville's Life and Times of Alexander I. of
Russia, vol. ii. (Tinsley Bros.), or of Sevastopol in 1855,
when 30,000 men, women, and children, had been hit in
tliree days' bombardment,and the hospitals, all exposed as they
were to shot and shell, presented the most ghastly receptacle
ever known of living humanity (see Eussell's Crimean War).
Osman had left the Turkish surgeons behind him, but they
are utterly useless, being really only hired that Turkey may
look like a civilized nation, for they leave wounds to heal
according to nature, and would not enter these filthy build¬
ings even to save their patients from starvation.
It seemed almost a retribution, that the time should have
been expended in burying the Eussian victims of Turkish
barbarity which might have saved the lives of many wounded
Turks.
At noon on 11th December the Emperor Alexander drove
49^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
into Plevna—a thin, gaunt, pale, haggard man, gasping for
breath from asthma, and, as one of the newspaper corre¬
spondents observed, looking like a hunted deer. His head
was visibly whitened since the campaign began, and the
Turkish wounded, who were then being carried in from the
Vid, presented a shocking spectacle as his carnage passed.
Men naturally melancholy usually bear horrors much better
than more cheerful people do, because facts are seldom so
gloomy as their own thoughts ; but I observed the Emperor's
eyes fill with tears on this occasion. He shook hands with
Osman Pasha, or the Ghazi (victorious) as he is now called,
—what a mockery !—and returned him his sword. We had
heard that two Circassians had brought the news to
Constantinople a week before that Osman Pasha was well
provided for the winter, and this was published at
Constantinople, and duly telegraphed to the Russian head¬
quarters from England; but the Turkish officers say the only
messages really sent were to request leave to capitulate if
there was no hope of relief, and this was always refused.
The Turkish officers and Osman's guard looked well fed,
but all were very dirty; and the rank and file, particularly
the irregulars, were half-starved. The Eussian commander
had adopted the plan of giving the soldiers money to buy
their own provisions from the Bulgarian and Jewish dealers,
who followed the camp, since the Government stores had
fallen short, and they now gave the Turkish officers money
to buy food for their men; but these Turks spent it on spirits
for themselves, and said that their men could not eat black
bread as the Eussians do, and had no fuel to cook meat, so
that a raw meat ration was useless.
On the 12th the Eussians began a regular inspection of
the hospitals, and then discovered the horrible and famishing
condition that the patients were in. The corrupt dead and
the living, crying for water and aid, were lying across each
other; and when the Turkish prisoners and Bulgarian
Mussulmans in the town were set to bury their own
comrades, it was with difficulty that they could be prevented
from carrying out the dying as well to save future trouble.
When this revolting work was accomplished, the infected
state of the town and the scarcity of provisions made it
necessary to remove the prisoners as soon as possible. The
bridge being broken up at Nicopolis made a long march
compulsory in order to cross the Danube, and the Bulgarian
villages, of half-underground mud houses, afforded no accom¬
modation, being already overcrowded with refugees.    All the
A Page of Modern History. 497
Eussian supplies of wood, provisions, and ammunition had,
throughout the campaign, been obliged to come along one
rickety line of railway, as Hungary combined with Turkey
to starve out tlie Russians and Eoumanians from Bulgaria,
and now that railway was blocked with snow, and the
communications across the Danube were most uncertain; so
it seemed necessary to convey the prisoners nearer to the
Russian resources, and trust to the comparatively milder
weather keeping up for a few days more. The Russian army
was not all supplied with warm clothing, and the portion
which crossed the Balkans amidst ice and snow, crossed it
in their summer uniforms; so there was none to spare for
tlie prisoners who, when captured, were very ill provided
with clothes. Still the milder weatlier might continue, and
all would be well.
The prisoners started imder Russian and Roumanian escorts
in different directions, but in the end all were obliged to
cross the river at Sistova, for a most terrific storm arose on
the 18th, and this time it entirely carried away the newly-
repaired bridge at Nicopolis. The waggons which had set
out with them to convey provisions were stopped by the
snow, and they had to carry their scanty amount of food,
huddling together the first night, trying to keep warm, in
a deserted and roofless Bulgarian village. The weakest
succumbed to the cold, and some of their more warmly
clothed guards were frozen to death. But nothing could be
done but push on, hoping to meet provisions on the way;
instead of which a cold, pitiless snow-storm, driven in their
faces by the north-east wind, obstructed their journey along
the whole route. Some fell down and could proceed no
farther; and if they died, their clothes were at once stripped
off, to supplement the torn rags which were the only covering
of men who, in numerous instances, had come from Northern
Africa or the warm districts round Bagdad. Some fought
with their fellows to get hold of tlieir clothes, but as a rule
they bore their sufferings and fatigue with a resignation
which made us forget their barbarous cruelty to the wounded
prisoners who had fallen into their hands, and of whom not
one remained alive to welcome their comrades into Plevna.
An old campaigner told me that things were as bad with
tlie Russians during the siege of Sevastopol in the winter of
1854-5, and that many of their recruits were frozen to death
between Odessa and the seat of war, while others were
actually starved to death. He said tliat after Alma the
Russian wounded lay on the ground six days, and were then
No. 47.—November 1878. 2 I
498 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
sent in a dying state by sea, under a flag of truce, to Odessa;
and that after our war-ships had bombarded Kertch,
Taganrog, and other towns on the Crimean coasts, the
French and Turks pillaged and destroyed the houses of the
Tartar and Russian population, who were taken on board the
British fleet, and landed at Odessa to evibarrass the Russians,
while hospital fever was raging there; and that he himself
occupied a cellar in Sevastopol, with a hundred wounded,
all of whom, except himself, were corpses, when, two days after
the capture of that city, the allied armies first sent their
surgeons to examine into the condition of the Russian
prisoners. I was not at Sevastopol, but I was at Sedan when
the French army surrendered in 1870, and for two days was
without food. Some of the wounded lay on the fields round
that town for many nights; but the weather was warm and
beautiful, most unlike the ice and snow of Bulgaria in
December. When the Turkish prisoners at last arrived at
Sistova, they were lodged in comparative comfort; but then
began their march through Roumania amid fresh snow¬
storms, and a degree of cold which had not been known in
those parts for fifty years, added to which they had brought
away the seeds of typhus fever and smallpox, and these were
now beginning to show themselves. In the early part of the
war the Russian ambulances were so well supplied that
English help to the sick and wounded was sent only to
Turkey, whose arrangements in that respect were below
criticism. Lest the voluntary services of the English surgeons
should be rejected if they appeared wearing a Christian badge,
they adopted a crescent on their sleeves and caps to show
their goodwill to Mahometans, whom they were especially
engaged to assist. Even this did not protect them from the
Circassians, who are of no creed at all, and are ready to
pillage Mahometan and Christian indiscriminately, nor
always from the Bashi-Bazouks; and the Eastern Christian,
who has seen his relatives murdered before his eyes rather
than assume any sign of Mahometanism, cannot comprehend
this religious liberality. It also surprised the Jewish and
Mahometan officers, who are so numerous in the Russian
army as to astonish an Englishman, who is apt to forget that
the Czar has more Mahometan subjects even in Europe than
the Sultan ever had there, and nearly 3,000,000 Jewish
subjects. The last are the chief bankers and Government
contractors throughout Russia, and there are Jewish and
Mahometan aides-de-camp to the Emperor. But as time went
on, and not only their own, but a greater part of the Turkish
A Page of Modern History. 499
wounded was thrown upon the Russian hands, her Red Cross
Society became sorely pressed, and a small English subscrip¬
tion was raised for Russia to show England's neutrality; but
it was far less than the handsome sums which had flowed
into Turke}^ who had relieved herself of all the Russian
wounded prisoners in her hands by simply slaughtering them.
Dr. Humphrey Sandwith, one of the Kars heroes in 1855,
was sent to dispense it at Bucharest, and he erected a large
wooden hospital at Putenien, which he placed under the
direction of M. le Baron de Benkendorf and the Russian
Sisters of Mercy,—an admirable corps,—and this was entirely
devoted to the succour of the Turkish prisoners as they passed
through on their way to Bucharest, and has probably saved
hundreds of lives. Nothing makes men so selfish as extreme
cold, and, naturally egotistical, the Turkish soldiers pushed
their own dying comrades from the fire, and fought with them
for the hot soup which the Sisters of Mercy brought them as
tliey halted for the night; but on Dr. Sandwith coming in and
remonstrating with them in their own tongue, they allowed
the weaker ones to have a share.
The Turkish officers condemn Osman Pasha for holding
out so long in the hope of starving out the besiegers, when,
if such a hope failed, it must bring the greater misery to the
besieged; but he acted under peremptory orders from Con¬
stantinople. Paris in 1871 capitulated with eight days'
provisions left; yet trucks of food and fuel had been waiting
for weeks at Folkestone and Boulogne, ready to pour into the
city, as it was thought, even with a line of railway extending
to all parts of Germany and France, the besieging army
could not be expected to keep the inhabitants from starving
without other aid ; and here was Plevna, with the besieging
army blocked in on all sides except one by the Turks, and
that one side liable to be entirely impeded by snow, wind,
or thaw. But a commander invariably gains his renown at
the expense of humanity, and war at its best has been fitly
described as a suspension of the Ten Commandments.
The Crimean War left a terrible legacy of famine to
Lapland and Finland, for the allied ships destroyed the
villages and stores of grain on the coasts ; and in those bleak
countries nature is slow in repair, and there was then no
railroad to connect them with Southern Russia. People
died, as they are dying in China now, after subsisting on
bark and grass, till they were too weak to reach the relief
stores which had been established at wide distances by the
Russian Government;   and the roads were  strewed  with
500 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
attenuated corpses. It is said that the full extent of the
calamity was carefully kept from the Emperor Alexander,
lest it should make him low-spirited, till he read it in tlie
Times. After Napoleon's abdication in 1814, typhus fever
raged in Germany and Italy for three years, the result of
overcrowded hospitals spreading infection among the civil
population; and in 1816 our own island, heavily taxed to
pay for the long French war, was afflicted with a bad harvest
in common with Germany and France, and the poor in
Manchester and Birmingham were seen collecting potato
peelings in the gutters for food ; whilst in foreign countries
our manufactures and colonial produce were prohibited, to
prevent them from competing with the continental manufac¬
tories which only sprang into life during that war, so that a
depressed trade added to the national distress.
Marshal Blucher used to say there would be no wars if
those who made them had to march in the van of an army,
and it might also be added, if they clearly foresaw the
inevitable but always under-estimated cost.
With head erect, and a flashing eye,
She clambered the rocky steep
Of a sea-bound cliff, 'neath a southern sky,
While the warm wave lay asleep.
Only sixteen summers, vivid and hot,
In clime where the cactus burns,
Had entered her life ; o'er her orphan lot
Nor father nor mother yearns.
Like a lone sea-gull on an island home
She hovered ; the gurgling blue
Beneath her, above the unsearchable dome,
She midway between the two.
On a giant rock, whose glittering crest
Grew out of the sultry sea,
She sat down wearily, facing the west,
And space, and eternity.
Rtibiuel. 501
Yet nothing of these did she recognise
In fathomless sea and sky ;
She only saw, with her earth-bound eyes,
Her life as it flitted by.
She saw—and it dazzled her peasant thought—
How one from the snow-land came,
With an echoing name, for his soul had caught
The glow of artistic flame.
How he looked at her with his sad, dark eye.
Then spake: ' Little maiden mine,
Let me paint thy features or ere I die,
And these soldi shall be thine I'
How she fell into wondrous dream-life when
His brush and his pencil flew ;
How the melody of her life grew then
Deeply toned, and strangely new ;
And how, when the swift-winging moons had flown,
She stood with bewildered awe,
And a form—her own—yet not all her own—
On the glowing canvas saw.
For well had he fathomed the poet's art
From nature's harmonized whole
To select, and by isolated part
To touch man's limited soul,
Which sees not the perfected equipoise
In the universal vast,
Till lesser, interpreting art destroys,
To impoverish and recast.
How he spake: ' Alas ! little Eubinel,
Our beauteous dream is o'er ;
While in dwindled achievement dies the spell
The unknown possible bore.
* And alas! alas ! I must now go forth.
Exchange thy magical clime
For the sombre hues, where our northern earth
In fog hides the glittering rime.'
502 The Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
How he lingered yet, how he fled away,—
Away, like the fairy snow
Of his wondrous home, which is here one day,
Then gone—whither—who can know ?—
Away, like the fickle breeze that plays
Awhile with the silver wave,—
Away, like the faithless sun-tinted rays
That die in the azure cave.
Away—' all alone little Eubinel!'—
'Twas dark Salvator who spake.
' Pretty one, shall we dance the tarantM'
To-night when the stars awake ?'
DuM.y,.
aunt lElste:   ^ <Sfectdj.
CHAPTEE   III.
Four years have gone since the events related in the last
chapter—years fraught with change to the actors in this
history.
Nannette's marriage had taken place shortly after her
engagement. Her husband had got an appointment in the
Mediterranean, and on the shores of that sunny sea Nannette
had found her home. She had shed tears of sorrow at
parting with Aunt Elsie, but the tears were dried by the
hand of him who was all in all to her; and in the land of
the south she seemed to recognise her native air: she
expanded as a flower, each year only adding to her beauty.
Her one sorrow lay in being so often separated from her
husband, but when he was on shore her happiness was
complete.
How Jack grew to love the cottage with its clustering
vine and clinging creepers, with the garden full of rare
exotics, that can only grow in hothouses in our northern
clime !—-the air, heavy with the scent of orange flowers and
velvety cape jasmines, while white myrtle grew in profusion,
such as a bride would have envied, and Nannette amongst
her flowers was the fairest flower of all to him; not even
when she would beguile him indoors to peep into the cradle
where her treasure lay asleep, could he take his eyes off the
mother to bestow a glance on the child.
And during those four years Miss Grseme pined for her
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. 503
child. She had crept so into her heart that it seemed her
very power to live was taken from her when Nannette had
gone.
And Robert Elwes saw the change coming over her, and
hesitated whether he should write to Nannette, ' Come home
and be with your aunt, or she will die.' And still he waited;
the letter was so hard to write, and perhaps he said to him¬
self that it was no more than was to be expected at her
advanced years. Was it fair to cast a shadow on youth's
happiness by the inevitable failing of old age ?
Miss Grteme struggled against her weakness, she battled
hard with life, and would not own herself conquered until
fairly beaten off the field.
Thus by degrees she was more and more confined to her
room, and looked forward only from one week to another,
when Eobert ran down from his busy life in town to cheer
her, whom he now considered as his charge. He had not
been present at Nannette's marriage ; pressing business had
detained him, so he had never seen her since that last
look on the cliffs, when he had seen her in the arms of his
brother. But he had written to her wishing her joy, and
in her answer she had asked as a kindness to herself, that
he would sometimes see her aunt; he had accepted the
duty as a solemn charge, and Nannette never guessed what
a blessing she had been to him, when she gave him this new
interest in his life.
But between this strange couple there was ever growing
a closer bond of sympathy. To outsiders it would have
seemed that there could be little in common between the
man, full of energy and strength, only entering on life's
warfare,—though it had been his lot to see heavy fighting
early in the day,—and the old woman, who had laid aside
her arms, and was waiting quietly till her call should come
to swell the ranks of that innumerable army which no man
can number.
Yet they had botli been through the furnace of sorrow,
and for both their greatest earthly interest was the same
girl, now far from them in a foreign land.
But the time came at last when Eobert could no longer
delay writing the letter that would bring his brother and
wife home again. The doctor said that a few more months,
nay, even weeks, would j)robably see the end of Miss Graeme's
life.
So the letter was written, and went on its errand of sorrow
to the happy home in Italy.
504 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
It was the first cloud that had come in Nannette's life,
and after the burst of grief was over that the news in the
letter called forth, with a child's hopefulness she put the
sorrow from her, and prepared for her homeward journey.
Aunt Elsie must get well, she repeated over and over again
to herself, seeking confirmation of her hopes from her
husband; then the delight of going back to England, of
showing her child to her aunt, of once more going over all
the scenes of her girlhood, kept her from dwelling on the
sadness that was sooner or later coming to her.
Now at last good-bye was said to Italy, and Nannette
with her husband and child were on the vessel homeward
bound. They had preferred the sea to the overland journey,
and with light hearts they looked forward to the time when
the white chalk cliffs should again be in sight.
Not till they were on their way home did Eobert break to
Miss Graeme what he had done. She did not say much, but
seemed happier. The longing to see her child had become
so great, and now that the meeting was no longer resting in
uncertainty, she seemed to dwell on the idea with ever-increas¬
ing delight. But it seemed as if her fraU thread of life
would snap before her wish was realized. She grew suddenly
worse, and not all the anxious care and love of those around
her seemed able to rouse her from the stupor into which she
seemed sinking. At times she was bright and cheerful as
ever, taking a keen interest in the petty concerns around
her, but then, as if the interest she had shown had drawn
too much on her small stock of vitality, there would follow
long hours of drowsiness and sleep, with half- wakened
intervals, in which she seemed not to be fully alive to what
was going on around her.
During all this time Eobert was her constant companion,
having given up all other things to be with her. He knew
it was not for long; he could not bear that she should die,
alone and friendless.
As the days went on, it seemed more and more doubtful
that her life could hold out. Eobert was with her most of
the day, and during the night he would steal to the door for
some sign from the nurse that the frail spark had not gone
out.
So the hours passed waiting, and when does time drag so
heavily by, as when watching by the bed of sickness for
some one whose coming may be too late ? The anxious gaze
fastened on the sufferer, the throb of cold fear that thrills
through one, as a breath more deeply drawn than  usual
Aunt Elsie : A Sketch. 505
seems to say that it may be the sigh of gladness of the dejiart-
ing soul. How eagerly the doctor's face is scanned, as if the
issue of life and death lay in his keeping, and yet it seems
almost selfishness of those on earth to wish to stay their
flight! They have loved their life, the world with its joys
and heartburnings is over for them, ' the longer life the
shorter immortality.'
It was the beginning of October when the cliange took
place in Miss Graeme's condition. The weather was wild
and stormy, in fit keeping with the mood of him within the
house. Yet Robert would have wished it calmer for the
sake of those at sea. He did not apprehend danger, but he
thought of Nannette and her child exposed to the miseries
of a bad passage, and in his heart blamed his brother for
humouring his wife's whim, and not bringing them home
ovei'land.
But all his wishes for the safety of the travellers were
drowned in the present overwhelming anxiety.
As the hours went on, the wind rose higher and higher,
and the heavy roar of the waves was heard coming in on the
rock - bound coast, though half a mile distant from the
cottage. The windows rattled eerily in their casements, and
through the chinks of the doors came the low moanings of
the tempest. It was an awful night; but the outer elements
did not seem to disturb the dying woman and those who
watched around her. It was getting near midnight. The
doctor having gone the round of his other patients, arrived
to take his watch at the bedside of the sufferer. There was
dead silence in the room. The nurse and also the two men
were there; they had not yet separated for a few hours'
rest. In strange contrast with the silence within, was the
fury of the outer elements. The storm seemed on the
increase, and not till one in the morning was there any
apparent abatement.
Then there came a few minutes' lull, and in the lull a
dead, low sound broke upon the ear.
Both men looked at each other. ' God have mercy on
those at sea to-night,' said the doctor, and Robert's scared,
wan face told where his thoughts had Hown.
Again came the sound, bearing its cry for help, and then
again once more.
It seemed to have penetrated to Miss Graeme's ear. She
opened her eyes, full of questioning eagerness, and as the
fourth signal of distress made itself heard, a light came
over her face.
5o6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' The wind is calling "Nannette,"' she exclaimed. ' Listen,
liobert; don't you hear ? It says, " Nannette, Nannette !"
My child must be somewhere near. How can you sit there,
warm and comfortable, and know that Nannette is out in
the storm ?'
Her voice had grown irritable. She was not herself, and
sank back exhausted. Eobert hesitated whether to accede
to her wish, but while he lingered, once more the gun came
across the water.
' Will no one go to Nannette ? Slie is calling, and no
one seems to hear.'
'Aiint Elsie, 1 am going. If Nannette is near, I will
bring her to you. I would willingly give my life to rescue
hers from the sea.'
She seemed satisfied for the time, and fell back on her
pillow, muttering to herself—
' Was it Eobert Elwes who spoke—my Eobert ? The
voice was like his, but it is so long, long ago, and he is
Janie's now. But I heard him say, "Elsie, I will bring
Nannette to you,"—he would not say " Elsie " if he meant
" Janie."' And then the muttering ceased, her eyelids
closed, and for the time she slept.
The doctor signed to Eobert to go, and with noiseless
steps he hurried from the sick-room.
It is necessary now to change the scene to one of a very
different sort, which was being enacted on board of the
nnfortunate ship, whose signals of distress had caused such
anxious forebodings to Eobert.
The first few days of Jack and Nannette's homeward
voyage had passed prosperously;—a fair wind and a good
ship, what more was to be desired ? But the Bay of Biscay
showed itself in its worst light, and even after leaving its
troubled waters, the weather, instead of improving, became
gradually worse.
Nannette would not give in at first, and fought most
manfully with the enemy that lays most low. But the
winds and waves were against her, and she was obliged to
succumb. Then followed days of weariness and suffering
in the small, stifling cabin, with the continual noise from
without of groaning timbers, and the many sounds heard
nowhere but at sea. Her one longing was for quiet—if only
for a few minutes the motion would cease, and silence reign.
Of course Jack spent most of his time on deck, and his
wife found the hours longer than she had ever known them.
At last they were nearing England.    All day long Nan-
Aunt Elsie: A Sketch. 507
nette had lain in her berth, picturing to herself her meeting
with her aunt, and now it was evening. The wind seemed
to have lulled a little, and Jack, when he came down from
deck, was full of hope that the next day would be the end
of their troubles. The night was intensely dark; but tlie
captain knew his ground well: he had not spent thirty years
of his life on that part of the sea without gaining some
knowledge of its peculiar dangers.
Jack's berth was above hers, and soon his regular breath¬
ing told he was asleep. Baby also was lying quiet; and
Nannette, worn out with what she had passed through, and
from physical weakness, lost consciousness for the first time
for many nights.
She had been asleep for rather more than two hours, when
she was wakened by some awful shock, a vast shudder
passing from end to end of the ship, and then silence.
Jack sprang from his berth, and stood beside her. ' Good
God !' he exclaimed, ' something fearful is the matter. You
must get up, Nannette. Put something warm round yourself
and the child. I will go on deck and hear what I can, and
return to you immediately.'
The matchbox had been rudely shaken from its accus¬
tomed place: everything had to be done in inky darkness.
Jack groped his way to the door, and Nannette was left
alone. She heard the hurrying of feet above her, and con¬
fused cries and directions given in the clear, loud voice
of the captain; but what had happened she did not know.
In the darkness she managed to collect a few things, but
they were miserably insufficient to protect herself and the
infant from the inclemency of the night.
The vessel was leaning over so much that it increased
the difficulty of movement. The minutes seemed hours, and
in the darkness she crept to the foot of the companion-ladder.
Lights were being carried to and fro; some passed very
close above where she stood. She ventured to ask what
was the matter, and a wild, scared voice answered, ' Fire.'
The word seemed to convey no meaning to her. ' It is not
that,' she said; but she could gain no truer information.
A few minutes more and her husband returned. She
could not see his face, but his voice sounded strangely stern
and sad. He told her in very few words what had happened.
The captain had been deceived in his reckonings; he had
fancied they were not so far up Channel as they proved to
be, and they had struck on a rock, which he had expected
they would go safely by a few hours later, in the grey of
5o8 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Alagazine.
early morning.    ' Now there is nothing to be done here,' he
said.    ' Save the pumps, all help must come from the shore.'
He took the child in his arms, and Nannette followed
close behind him. The angle at which the ship was lying
made it almost impossible to proceed, but at last he had
put them beyond present reach of the waves. Nannette
found herself in the forepart of the deck, where the other
passengers were huddled together in dismayed silence. The
panic had given way to perfect calm, the only sound being
the clanking of the pumps and orders issued from time to
time by the captain.
After the first great shock, the ship seemed to settle down
helplessly to her fate, from time to time sending out those
cries for help which as yet brought no answering voice from
the coast. Nannette shivered with the cold, and Jack
insisted on returning to the cabin in search of some warmer
covering for her.
He returned shortly with a large white cashmere shawl,
and wound it tenderly round both wife and child. It might
serve to keep them together if—■ But his thoughts would
not put themselves into speech.
Then once more they remained in inactivity. The tongue
of the large bell on deck had become unfastened, and, as the
vessel slowly swung from side to side, rang a knell for the
souls waiting for almost certain death. The water was
steadily gaining ground, and all eyes were eagerly fastened
on the shore, where signs of the signal having been heard
were showing themselves.
They were beyond the reach of the rocket which was
sent out to them, but surely the lifeboat would yet be in
time. The water was rising rapidly; the command was
given to lower the ship's boats, sufficient only to save the
smaller half of the crew. The women and children, with
men enough to man the boats, were to go.
Nannette clung wildly to her husband ; nothing but death
would part them. Far more willingly would she die with
liim than that they should be separated.
* Save the child,' she cried, ' but let me stay. I cannot
leave you. The lifeboat may still be in time; and if not,
what good is my life to me without you %'
Gently he reasoned with her that orders must be obeyed.
Having felt the necessity of prompt obedience all his life,
his higher nature made him act up to it when it was bitter
pain to him.
The boats were ready, the women were lowered into them;
A Hilt Elsie : A Sketch. 509
two had already left the ship's side, the last was nearly
full.
Nannette was locked in her husband's arms in a long, last
embrace; then she felt herself taken from him, and in her
turn lowered into the boat. The rope was cut, and they
floated off.
She raised her head from where she had fallen, in the
bottom of the boat, for one more look towards her husband;
but the waves ran high, and nothing but a mass of water
met her view. Then a cry rose, a wild and fearful wail from
those in the boats, that the ship was going down, and then
a blessed unconsciousness saved Nannette from all present
pain. She was aware, after a while, of a rushing and
gurgling of water in her ears, of a choking sensation, and
that was all.
The boat, guided by a hand unacquainted with the coast,
had perished when within a few yards of the shore, and its
living cargo of women and children were at the mercy of the
waves.
When Eobert left tlie cottage he hurried down to the
beach, where a strange and exciting scene met his gaze.
The gun of distress had penetrated to many a home along
the shore, and brave men were active in their endeavours
to save the crew of the sinking ship. She could just be
seen towering out of the darkness, but the noise of the
elements and confusion of sounds on shore made all com¬
munication helpless. At last the life-boat was launched and
manned, no easy matter with such a surf as broke on the
shore and low-lying rocks. The tide was at its lowest point,
and the group of anxious spectators were assembled on the
shingle at the foot of the cliffs, only uncovered at low water.
The night was not so dark as it had been, and a pale and
watery moon had at last forced its way through the hurrying
masses of cloud that were wildly crossing the sky. A fire
had been lighted on the beach, and several women were
assembled round it, with various appliances for restoring
life if any of the saved were in a state of unconsciousness.
It was a wonderfully picturesque scene,—the ruddy glow of
the fire, the pale green light of the moon, the boiling, foaming
sea, and the masts of the vessel forming a background for
the whole,—while the varied and anxious groups scattered on
the coast were lit subjects for the brush of the painter.
Eobert joined them, and listened to the various hopes and
fears expressed by those around them. ' They have lowered
the boats, she must be going down;' 'no ordinary boats
510 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
could live in a sea like that,' and many other such like
phrases.
Then the life-boat sped on its way; but before it had
reached its destination the wild cry rose, which had been the
forerunner of Nannette's unconsciousness, and the vessel had
gone down with many a brave and true heart on board. The
life-boat could but pick up stragglers, and returned well
filled to the shore.
In the meantime, those on land were watching a small
black speck coming slowly in, growing each moment more
distinct; but the older and wiser heads affirmed it could
never come in in safety.
And they were true prophets of evil. Only a few yards from
the shore, and it was overturned. Eobert stood by the edge
of the waves, as close as it was safe to the destroying
element. Something white in the boat had caught his eye:
it must be a woman. He lost sight of it for a moment, but
again it came in sight, and the next wave would bear it to
the shore. Eobert was ready to seize on his precious
burden, washed in almost to his feet; but the back current of
water almost overpowered him, and for a moment it seemed
as if both rescuer and rescued must perish. But it was not
so, and, staggering under the weight of his double burden, he
bent his steps towards the fire.
It was Nannette and her child, wan and beautiful, but
quite unconscious. He laid her on the rock, and with
woman's tenderness unbound the shawl that united mother
and child. One of the women took the infant, and then
they began chafing the hands and feet of the mother, and
using all means for restoring consciousness.
But at first all seemed fruitless. Eobert called her by
many endearing names, he pressed passionate kisses on her
brow, but nothing roused her from her sleep. At last her
child gave a faint, low cry, and they brought it to her.
Then, with a flutter of the eyelids, a quick-drawn sigh, she
opened her eyes.
She looked round her, as if searching for some one, but con¬
sciousness had not fully returned, and even the unaccustomed
scene around her did not seem to strike her as anything un¬
natural.
Some one remarked she should be taken home, and the
sound of the word recalled the scene of a few hours ago to
Eobert's memory. He had come down there to fulfil a
death-bed wish, and in the agitation of the hour all thought
of Miss Grteme had passed from liis mind.
Annt Elsie: A Sketch. 511
' Yes, we must carry her home,' he said. ' Who will help
me ? there may be difficulty in ascending the cliff.'
Many were the offers of assistance, and the party were
just starting on their homeward way, when a cheer from the
beach told that the life-boat had come in in safety. A man's
figure was the first to leap on shore. He had been scanning
the various groups anxiously, and now with eager steps he
hurried towards the group bending round Nannette.
Robert turned to face his brother; but Jack did not seem
to notice him, his eyes were strained to catch sight of
Nannette. 'She is not dead, my wife cannot be dead,' he
exclaimed, and kneeling down over her, as Eobert before had
done, he once more repeated, ' She cannot be dead.'
His voice restored consciousness once more to her, and
with an effort she tried to raise herself.
' We must take her home at once, Jack,' his brother said ;
' she will take cold here. We must carry her; you are not
lit to do so.'
Jack said nothing in remonstrance, and slowly they wended
their way home. Robert and a sailor carried Nannette
between them, Jack following with the child. No word
was spoken, and Robert, in his anxiety that he should
carry his burden without harm, hardly noticed that they
passed close to the rock from which he had saved her four
years before.
Now once more they were at the cottage, and Jack, in its
outward appearance, found no change. A servant opened
the door. ' Miss Graeme is asking for you, sir,' she said to
Robert, and started back on seeing the group before her.
' I will go to her at once; Jack, you will stay with your
wife.    I shall be back immediately.'
The servant led the way to the sitting-room. The fire had
been kept in all night, and there on the sofa, surrounded by
all the comforts and memories of her girlish days, Nannette
slowly revived.
About an hour passed away before Robert returned. He
had previously told Jack of Miss Graeme's condition, and
Jack had broken to Nannette that her aunt was very ill.
' She is just dying,' Robert said, as he entered the room.
' Nannette, she is asking continually for you; do you think
you could come to her, she longs so to see you ?'
Nannette rose to her feet, and with her husband's arm
reached the bedroom. She was deadly pale, but beautiful,
and her long dark hair was hanging round her, making her
look more like a girl than a wife and mother.
5 12 The Ladies EdinbitrgJi Magazine.
Miss Gnome's eyes were closed as they entered, and the
doctor put his finger to his lips; but their entrance roused her.
' Is that you, Eobert ? Have you brought me Nannette ?'
and then, as her eyes rested on her child, a smile lighted up
the worn and wasted features. ' I knew you would bring
her.    Kiss me, child—my own Nannette.'
Nannette's tears were falling fast. The scene in her
weakened state Avas almost too much for her, but with an
effort she recovered her self-control. She bent over and
kissed Aunt Elsie, not once, but many times, and turned to
her husband, that he also might share with her in her sorrow.
But Miss Graeme did not recognise him. Eobert and
Naimette were all in all to her.
' Eobert,' she said,—but her words came slowly and with
(lithculty,—' you have saved my greatest treasure, so lie,
said once.'
The end was very near, the last few grains of sand had
almost gone, and after her troubles,' at eventide had come
the light.'
Eobert spoke, and once more she opened her eyes.
' Eobert,' she whispered, and even as he bent to hear her
words, her soul passed away.
She had found ' the haven where she would be.' In the
morning on which Eobert had rescued Nannette she was
rescued from a more restless sea, even the waves of this
troublesome world. [M. E. T.
THE END.
Siglits anti ^ounlis.
We hear sometimes, as carelessly we rove
Along the smoke-dried street or primrose grove.
Sounds that remind us with a sudden pain
Of voices once familiar, heard no more,
Of liours and thoughts and feelings that are o'er.
Ne'er to be lived or thought or felt again.
We see sometimes, as faces strange are borne
On past us, looks the dead we loved have worn.
A smile, a turn, a glance, eyes full of tears.
Take recollection suddenly by storm,
Eecall the features of a vanished form.
And open wide the memory of years.
J. Y. K.
Concerning some Modern French Novels. 513
Concerning some Jloticrn JFrcnc'b iJiobels.
' Mark there.    We get no good
By being ungenerous even to a book,
And calculating profit—so much help
By so much reading.    It is rather when
We gloriously forget ourselves, and plunge
Soul-forward, headlong, into a book's profound,
Impassioned for its beauty and salt of truth—
'Tis then we get the right good of a book.'—Aurora Leigh.
The one chief difference between modern French novels and
modern English ones is, that the former usually begin where
the latter leave off. The French novelist lifts his curtains
upon the hymeneal altar. He surrounds it with personages
more or less interesting to the reader's eye. He pursues
these personages through various conjugal and anti-conjugal
adventures. He finishes up with a tragical mishap, or a
grotesque Mlse en scene. With the English author this is
different. He not unfrequently introduces us to his heroes
and heroines whilst they are still in the nursery. He
presents them to tlie world in a curious, immature, jelly¬
like condition. A social earthquake is needed to form, to
set, to crystallize as it were, these vague, undeveloped
characters. It is in this great social earthqualce that the
English novelist of the present day looks for and finds his
plot. It shakes to their foundations the bulwarks of his
fabric. It breaks up ' the fountains of the great deep,' and
opens ' the windows of heaven.' Under its influence his
hero's head, his heroine's heart, grow, expand, take up, as it
were, new vigour. And then presently, the time being come,
he lets us hear and see the tinkle of marriage bells and the
flash of wedding favours; and so, having crowned his heroes
and punished his villains, the author writes finis at the
bottom of his page. This is just the difference between
English and French novels.
It may easily be accounted for. Thoughtful French
people are as well aware of the difference as we are. And
they explain it thus: ' You English girls,' they say, ' have
all your fun before your marriage. You may come and go
as you please; you may dance with whom you will; you may
visit jOMTJeunes amies du convent; you may marry the man
of your choice, or you may elect never to marry at all. No
one can compel you, however much it might be to your
advantage, to do otherwise than you have done.    But once
No. 47.—November 1878. 2 K
514 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
married, your lot is different. Your days are now spent in
" suckling fools and chronicling small beer," as your wise
Shakespeare has put it. Never would a French wife submit
to such a life. She may love her home, but her real life is
too frequently outside it.' It is this outside life that the
French writer chooses to portray, and, it must be owned, he
does it well. The most skilful workman is he who leaves
upon his work the impress of his times.
Foremost among the skilled literary labourers of France in
the present day must be placed the name of Alphonse Daudet.
Frenchmen are justly proud of him. No words of praise for
him can be too strong. ' Ccst notre Tacqer^e et noire Dichcen
d nous,' they remark casually, feeling, at the same time, that
they have paid the English world of letters the highest
compliment in their power. One very enthusiastic admirer
once described him as ' d'apres Balzac et le docteur Jeanson
d' Angleterre.'
But it is neither d'apres Balzac, nor even d'apres Tacqdric,
that Daudet needs to be placed. He has his own special
merits, and plenty of genius besides. Perhaps there is no
more touching book in any language than the one he has
written in French, and called Le Petit Chose. This was
Daudet's first work of any importance, and by it he became
famous. It is simply written, and it is only the history of
a boy who, early in life, set to work to ' reconstruire le foyer,'
ruined by family speculations. As this idea comes to him
before he is seven years old, and as, moreover, he is very
frele et maladif, and wears a blouse when he goes to school,
he gets the name of the Petit Chose. In his own estimation
this name sticks to him through life. He is never any other
than Le Petit Chose. But he has a brother, this poor,
Petit Chose, alias Daniel Eysette—he has a brother called
Jacques. It is Jacques who is the real hero of the book—
Jacques, Avho has a gift of tears and a passion for glue-pots—
Jacques, whom his father addresses as an ' dne,' and in whom
he presently perceives un goilt pour le commerce—Jacques,
who aspires to be a poet, and who, at thirteen, draws up a
plan for a poem in twelve cantos, but whose golden dreams
end in his becoming secretary to a marquis in Paris. Mean¬
while the Petit Chose, who is the real poet, struggles on with
his existence, and presently enters a school at Sarlande as
usher. Life there, however, becomes unbearable, and he
escapes to Paris, with a pair of goloshes on his feet instead
of shoes. Here Jacques awaits him, and the life of these two
brothers, in their garret close to the steeple of Saint dermain
Concerning some Modern French Novels. 515
des Pres, is full of tenderness and pathos. They sleep in the
same bed, which, indeed, was meant for Jacques only, and
there is a little table near the window upon which Daniel
Eysette, the future academician, as Jacques, veut qu'il devient,
writes his poems. But the future academicien is still only
the Petit Chose ; un enfant incapable d'al/er seid dans la vie,
and he loses himself and his goloshes in Paris, and has various
other adventures, from all of which Jacques rescues him, and
thereby constitutes himself his ' Mh-e Jacques.' ' 0 ma mere
Jacques, que tio es ban !' sighs the poor little Petit Chose. He
feels he can never repay his brother for all his goodness.
He is overwhelmed with gratitude. He vows never to give
him one moment of pain. He has a good heart, you see,
this poet, this future academician, this Daniel Eysette, this
Petit Chose.
Of course Jacques, having been some time in Paris, has
gathered unto himself a certain number of friends. There is
one house he only visits on Sundays, but then he goes there
every Sunday. For some time he seems to shrink from
taking Daniel with him to visit these friends. Daniel's
clothes are scarcely presentable. Besides, it is not the
house for a poet. Both these scruples are eventually over¬
come. The brothers start off together. The house is a china
shop in the Passage Sanmon. It is kept by one Pierrotte, a
family retainer of the Eysettes. Pierrotte has a daughter,
Mademoiselle Camille, of the black eyes and the piano-
playing fingers. Besides black eyes and a piano. Made¬
moiselle possesses also a poetical sentiment. A secretaryship
seems a poor profession beside that of a poet. Daniel reads
one of his poems to his brother's assembled friends. It is
entitled, ' 'The Adventures of a Blue Butterfly.' The cliina
merchant seems stupefied by its originality. The rest of his
friends are silent. Only the black eyes soften as they gaze
at the young poet. Jacques alone applauds with enthusiasm
when the reading of the poem is finished. He feels that
finis is written to another poem as well as to the one about
the blue butterfly.
He has not the pain of seeing his poem ended day by day,
however. The Fates spare him this sorrow. The marquis
goes off' to Nice, and takes his secretary with him. Before
he starts, however, Jacques arranges with a publisher that
he shall bring out his brother's poem, and he especially
charges that brother to let him know how the sale of the
work goes on. And above everything, he adds, Ne faites pas
pleurer les yevu noirs.
5l6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
And so Jacques departs for Nice. The Fdit Chose sees
him off at the station.
It is annihilation to poor Daniel. He feels as if his
brother had carried away with him la moelle de ses os, et la
raoitie de sa taille. Snares are laid for him on every side.
He falls into the traps. He writes false letters to his Mere
Jacques at Nice. He goes no more to see the black eyes.
He even leaves the garret of Saint Germain des Pres, and
when Mire Jacques comes back and hunts for him, he finds
his child behind the scenes at the Theatre Mont Paruasse.
This is a terrible shock to the poor Slere Jacques.
However, he mends matters as best he can. He takes
Daniel to a quiet hotel in the Batignolles. There is a supper
prepared. It is like the night of Daniel's arrival in Paris
with his goloshes ; only there is a difference,—sucli a terribly
sad difference!
At first there is a reserve between the brothers, but Mere
Jacques soon succeeds in conquering that. Then he talks of
the new poem Daniel is to write; but the boy puts this
thouglit from him, and says he will work for his living and
to ' reconstruire le foyer.' Eventually he gets another place as
usher in a school hard by.
But it is at night that the real difference is visible.
Jacques coughs,—Jacques does not sleep. Sometimes he
leaves the bed and lies on the sofa, so that his brother
should not be disturbed. But the Petit Chose is disturbed;
he grows anxious; he prays each day, 'Eternel Dieu, conservez-
moi ma mh'e Jacques.'
The end comes notwithstanding. The Petit Chose, coming
back from his school one winter day, meets the doctor, who
tells him that his brother will not live out tlie night.
Scarcely believing him, the boy rushes to their common
room, soon, alas ! to be his only. Then he sees his Mere
Jacques stretched on the sofa, pale and dying. His voice is
weak, but with its last breath he charges Daniel surtout de
ne jias faire pleurcr les yeux noirs. Pierrette the china
merchant is present. The last sacraments are administered.
The hand which the Petit Chose holds in his grows heavy
and cold.    His Mere Jacques is dead.
Then comes the funeral, the illness of the Petit Chose,
the nurse who watched him in the Maison Pierrotte. The
black eyes are tender and forgiving; death has sanctified
their love. The young poet abandons his blue butterflies.
The Petit Chose loves verses still, but those of other poets
far better than his own.    And if you want ]}TOo1i of this, go
Concerning some Modern French Novels. 517
to the Passage Sanmon, where is a shop with tliis super¬
scription, Porcelaines et cristaux—Ej/sette et Pierrotte. And so
ends the poet's young dreams, and Daudet's Petit Chose.
I have dwelt at length upon this book, because Daudet
has written nothing like it since. His next work was, I
believe. Jack, a clever book, but a miserable story. One
cannot help being interested in poor little Jack, avec iin k,
so spelt because he was lefilleul tie Lord Peambuk. For this
same reason, he wears as a child a costume Anglais, namely
a kilt. But with increasing years, troubles gather round
him. His mother marries D'Argenton, an unknown poet,
but too well known to Jack as one of his schoolboy tyrants.
This step-father thwarts the child in every way. It is hard
for real nobility to show itself through degradation, and it
must be owned that Jack sometimes fails. He triumphs in
the end, however, when, dying in a common hospital after
liaving passed through various grades of low life, he recognises
Dr. Eivals, the one friend of his childhood. His mother lie
knows not, despite her effort to gain recognition. 'Jack,'
she cried,' je svAs id. Pas un mouvement. La 7nh'e eut un cri
^pouvantahle, Mort ?'
Non, dit le vieux Rivals d' une voix farouche.    Non, Delivre!
In FromfMt Jeune et Risler Ain4 we have once more the
tender strain of a true and hopeless love. The book is not
half as pure and pathetic as the Petit Chose, nor is it as fresh
and original as Jack, but just this one silken thread of the
little lame girl's love for the brilliant Frantz is woven in
wdth the many scarcely coloured cottons, and carries on our
sympathies. Besir^e 2')enchde sur son ouvrage, partait pour un
de ces grands voyages en pays des chimlre, doii elle revenait
toujours heureuse et souriante, s'appuyant au bras de Frantz.
And at this moment Frantz enters and announces his
engagement to Sidonie Chc^be. But poor Desir^e dies and
has a grand funeral, and then our interest in the book seems
gone. The violet is extracted from the bouquet, and the
rest of the flowers are but artificial ones.
And such very ill-smelling, artificial ones too ! Tliat is the
wonder of it. How can people care to read about such
monstrosities as ' De Moronval' in Jack, or as ' Sidonie ' in
Froment Jeune et Risler Ain4. Such monsters do not exist in
real life, or if they do, we would rather not be acquainted
with them. If we wished to know about them, we miglit
peruse the Newgate Calendar; only at Xewgate the villains
get punished, which in these books they do not. On the
contrary, it is the innocent who suffer.    Jack dies in an
5i8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
hospital; D'Argenton lives and flourishes. Probably he has
even a grand success with that newspaper of his. As for
Darwin's survival of the fittest, that theory seems to be
unknown in this land of LAttre. Brave, good, strong-hearted
Mere Jacques dies, and the poor, weakly Fetit Chose, who
does not know how to take care of himself, survives. To be
sure, like the heir of all the Eussias, Mere Jacques bequeaths
his brother a bride.
And if this is true of the earlier works of Alphonse
Daudet, it is still more so of Ze Nahab, his last production.
A crash of horrors, thus an enemy described it; but an
admirer could scarcely say otherwise. This is not the case
with Eugenie Grandei of Balzac, nor is it with his Ursulc
Mirouet. Neither is it so with Lm Fetite Fadette, nor Lea
Maitres Sonneurs of George Sand. And yet many of botli
authors' were best avoided by the young reader.
Besides this, there are several writers whose books are
both amusing and worth reading. There is Cherbuliez, who
may be called the novelist of the police court, so intricate
are his plots, so inevitable his situations. There is Gustave
Droz of the Cahier Bleu; there is Octave Feuillet, with his
Roman du Jeune LLomme paiLvre. There are plenty of others ;
but I forbear to mention more. But it has been truly said,
that tliey who dip into French literature of the present day
dip as it were into an ocean. H. A. Duff.
I'Per angusta ad augusta.' *
As one pursued by hated foes runs down
A narrow street and seeks an outlet there,
But tall grey houses rise up everywhere.
And meet his gaze with unrelenting frown.
Urged by his mighty need, he knocks and waits
At a closed door, while nearer through the air
The cruel shouts surge on, until despair
Well-nigh has seized him, then—ah, see ! the gates
Fly open now, a brighter vision smiles
On the poor hunted soul, and joyous sounds
Of welcome reach us: we can tell no more ;
We have not stepped across the magic bounds
Of that grim threshold ;—still the street beguiles
Us, and we linger on outside the door.
Beatkix L. Tollemache.
' The motto is taken from an old doorway at Chur.
Edinburgh Housekeeping Tzvo Hundred Years Ago.  519
(Gtiini)ui-sfj f^ouseftcepins Ebio 11;?unl)rcti gears ^go.
In Lord Macaulay's famous chapter on ' The State of
England in 1685,' he has succeeded in bringing before us
with great vividness a picture of the houses and habits, the
minds and manners, of the inhabitants of the southern part
of Great Britain, but he tells us very little about those of
his own ancestors in the north, probably considering them
too uncivilized to deserve his attention. Some glimpses of
their condition, however, may be obtained from a humble
but perfectly trustworthy source which is now before us ;
and it may not be without interest to some of our readers to
study their ways, as revealed by a set of ancient account-
books carefully kept by different members of a family in the
middle ranks of life during the latter part of the seventeenth
and first years of the eighteenth centuries.
We shall commence by examining a long and narrow
volume, bound in parchment and tied with leather thongs,
whose dingy yellow pages are filled with accounts, inventories,
medical receipts, memoranda, and lists of Latin and English
books, in ' most admired confusion,' but affording curious
details for the eye of an antiquary. The lady who owned
this book was a daughter of Sinclair of Ormistoun; her first
husband was a W.S. (Writer to the Signet) in Edinburgh;
and after several years of widowhood, she was married a
second time to one of the ministers of that city, Mr. Thomas
Wilkie, minister of the Canongate Church. Her education
must have been pretty good, if we may judge from this book.
She was sufficiently skilled in arithmetic to manage the
difficult factory accounts of her deceased husband with a
number of noblemen and gentlemen who had placed their
affairs in his hands. Her spelling was correct according to
the fashion of tlie day, and if occasionally she made an
error, which would not have been made by a lady in her
position now-a-days, it must be confessed that her hand¬
writing is far superior to that of our own times both in neat¬
ness and elegance.
The arithmetical difficulties of those days were great com¬
pared to ours, from the difference between English and Scotch
money, and the number of foreign coins in circulation; but
Eachel Sinclair steadily works her way through money
sterling and money 'Scots,'' merks,'' rixdoUars,' and 'Portugal
pieces,' in a most clear-headed manner. The entries commence
in 1687, while  the country was still under the oppressive
520 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazirie.
yoke of the last Stuart king. No traces of politics or public
affairs are to be found in the pages before us; and it is
curious to think that these quiet little household details were
penned, and the writer was going about her purchases in the
booths of the "West Port or the Lawnmarket, at the time
when the Lords of Convention were sitting in the Parliament
House to decide the fate of Scotland, and the once dreaded
Claverhouse, known as the ' Bonnie Dundee' of the ballad,
was making the Castle rocks ring with his horses' hoof tread,
as he and his men dashed out of Edinburgh to the
' Hills beyond Pentland and lands beyond Forth.'
Turning from these stirring memories, we present a page
of our writer's accounts, with all the curious filling up of
her columns. ' Edication maun aye be minded,' as Dandie
Dinmout says, and we begin with college accounts.
1689.—Accompt of deburs^s. for my son John :
"Nov. To y'regent at his entrie to y'colledge, five^
dollars,       .        .        . .        . .        .^
To the Janitore and his man,
ffor two eln bot \ a eln cloatli to be a coate to)
him, at 6 lib. y' eln,   .        .        .        .        .)
ffor ane hatt to him,       .....
ffor a paire of stockings, ....
for binding his Greik Testament,   .
for a book,     .......
To y' bibliothek, 
To Mrs. Reid for books, ....
And so on, with various little details, the prices being all
filled in with perfectly useless ciphers. These entries are
all in Scotch pounds, shillings, and pence, which are equal
to one-twelfth of the English coins of the same name: the
£14, 10s. Od. paid for entrance fee into Edinburgh College,
dwindles down to £1, 4s. 4d. sterling, which, however, is high
compared to the price of his hat and his stockings, which
cost respectively Is. lOd. and Is. of our money. Trifling
details like these bring us not only into the homes, but into
the very pockets of our ancestors.
We shall now turn to a young lady's expenses; but having
given a faithful specimen of our old book as it stands, we
shall hereafter give all prices in English money, adding
English words where necessary.
Debursts. for Christian since Martimas 1689:
1689 Dec. for 64 eln (yards) of temmie at 14s. y' eln     £   .«.   d.
to be a gowne,      .        .        .        .        .077
For lace to it 0   3   0
For whyte ribband for a band,.        .        .026
014 :
10 :
; 0
004 :
04 :
: 0
Oil :
05 ;
: 0
001
: 02 ;
: 0
000
: 12 :
; 0
'ooo
\ 07
: 0
001
: 00
: 0
001
: 10
: 0
005
: 16
: 0
Edinburgh Housekeeping Tivo Hundred Years Ago.  521
1689 Dec.
For a paire of gloves,
0
0
4
Jan. 6, 1690.
For coals to the schoole,   .
To her mistress for her Qu**',   .
00
0
2
106
Aug.
To her writing m"- for a Qu'*'',.for 3 eln of ribbands at 3cl. y* eln,
00
3
0
09
1691.  To Mr. Keith for a Qu'"' at playing antl> ^ Q 10
singing,          .....      j
To his servant,  0 0 10
For her musick book,        .         .        .        . 0 2    (!
For a paire of Virginalls to her,        .         . 2 9    4
ffor  a  Knot of  chirrie-coloured  crimp) .. -.     ^
ribbands to her,    . .        .        .      f
fTor a paire of Shoes,         .        .        .         . 0 14
The half of the exjjenses to Moffat Well, | 9 ^'     ('
Jnne last,      .....)
Mistress Christian's virginals would be a prize to the
antiquarian now-a-days. They prove that the fine arts were
by no means banished from the families of Scottish Cove¬
nanters such as that to which she belonged. Her knot of
cherry-coloured ribbons recalls to us the pictures of poor
Henrietta Maria, and the shilling paid for patches in another
tell-tale page at a somewhat later date, as forcibly carries us
to the court of' good Queen Anne,' and reveals Queen Fashion
as a despot tyrannizing alike over Whig and Tory, Presbyterian
and Malignant.
Having seen something of the expenses of dress and
education in the family of the lawyer's widow, we shall
now look at the expense of living.
' An account of what my house stood me from IMartinnias
1699 to Whitsunday 1700.' Here follows an abstract of
'fresh meat and other necessaries, butter, herran (herring),
salt beefe, and salt,'—amounting to £27. The board of a
son in London for half-a-year in 1692 cost £6, 8s. That of a
child in the village of Cramond, where he lived with his
nurse, was £8, 3s. 4d. for a year. Meal, milk, and ale are
the chief items of expenditure. Tea and coffee were, of
course, unknown, but ajjpear frequently in the accounts of
the lady's nephew twenty years later: ' | lb. Bohea 6s.
sterling,' 2 lbs. ' green tea 16s.,' and so on. Potatoes and
vegetables in general are never mentioned, but after tlie
Union with England a much greater variety of food, and
also a great rise of prices, appears in these books. The boll
of meal, which in September 1694 cost 6s. 8d., is in November
1712 entered at 11s. 6d.; but the season may have been a
522 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazitie.
bad one. Poultry, eggs, fish, and rabbits were very cheap,
and seem to have been largely used in winter, so that our
ancestors' fare during that season was by no means confined
to salt beef The one article of luxury which seems never
to have varied in its nominal price is oranges. They are
not mentioned till 1722,but appear then at two for threepence,
even as now-a-days.
The ladies who kept these books seem to have had a
perfect passion for inventories. The information obtained
from their long lists of furniture, silver, linens, and books,
enables us to form a good idea of their houses; and while we
find them much richer than our own in some respects, we
miss many articles which are to us of prime necessity. Few
ministers' houses can boast of anything like the abundance
of silver which adorned the table of the minister of the
Canongate; still less can we find a house so full as his was
of bed and table linens, chiefly made by the diligent hands
of his wife, whose spinning-wheel was a great institution in
the family. On the other hand, we are struck with the total
absence of china, glass, and earthenware, the place of these
articles being supplied by ' timber cups and dishes,' and
large store of' putre' (pewter) trenchers, which must have
been beyond the power of the most clumsy hands to break.
It is not until 1721 that tea is introduced—green tea at 10s.
per lb., and the young bride buys along with it a tea kettle,
teapot, and two dozen teacups at Is. 6d. each. Eegular
payments to ' Water Will' remind us that, in the absence of
water pipes, this personage was of great importance to the
family.
The wages of servants seem very low, but presents were
liberally given, and shoes were supplied. In 1693 the half-
year's ' fie' or wage of ' my woman Jeane,' is only 10s.; those
of Isobell and Epie are even lower. The annual rent of the
house is £7, 15s.; that of ' my lady Hellen Enstruther'
(Anstruther), whose name very often appears in these pages,
is £2, 10s. for the half-year 1692, from Whitsunday to
Martinmas.
The yearly rent of a 'seat in ye kirk' was 13s. 4d. The
children of the family were sent in summer to country
quarters at the villages of Newbattle, Ci'amond, and ' the
Pannes,' probably Prestonpans ; they were committed to
the care of an Aunt Sarah, who keeps account of their
expenses.
Various journeys are mentioned. Charles goes to Peter-
head, and  afterwards to Holland.    John goes to London,
Edinburgh Housekeeping Two Hundred Years Ago.   523
and the mother lierself one summer rides into Galloway,
paying ' for horse hyre, etc., £2, 6s. 8d.' John's journey to
London is less expensive. 'July 5th, 1691, to Captain
Balfour for his passage, £1, Is.; to the mate for his bed, 53.
lOd.; for brandie, burnt wyue, and other provisions given
him when he went aboard, 5s.' We should have been glad to
know liow many days he took to accomplish this voyage ;
but if the east wind of those days was equal to what it
is now, we have no doubt John thought it more than
sufficiently long.
The library of the minister consisted of about thirty
volumes of theology in quartos and folios, weighty alike in
substance and in outward form ; a few Latin books also found
place in it. Smaller publications are not deemed worthy of
being named in the catalogue, although so many pamphlets,
tracts, and small books are mentioned as having been
purchased, that the house must have been well filled with
literature. The Spectator was not bought till it was published
in a volume; but it is curious to find that our venerable
Edinburgh friend the Courant was regularly supplied to the
family.
The medical receipts in Mrs. Eachel's book give but a
poor idea of the state of science, and it says little for the
efficacy of at least one of them that the funeral expenses of
the patient are recorded upon the opposite page. What
indeed could be expected from a ' Composition of powders
for purging wind out of the veins !'
In the midst of homely details and dry pages of figures,
the young daughter of the house. Mistress Christian, with
her cheerful songs and her'knot of chirrie-coloured ribbands,'
seems to have been the only ' thing of beauty' that flashed
across the old Edinburgh home of 1690. Pleasant must
have been the music of her virginals contrasted with the
monotonous hirr of her mother's spinning-wheel; and we are
not surprised to come at last to 'An account of what I
depursed at my daughter's marriage on January 1700.'
In these old records the ornaments of life find no place,—
nothing is purchased that is not strictly useful; and we are
all the more surprised to find among the grim catalogue of
funeral expenses in one of these volumes,, the only notice
found in their contents of the existence of such things as
Jiowers! a small sum having been produced out of those
frugal purses ' for flowers to lay on the corpse.' Surely the
graceful tribute must have come from the young hands of
Mistress Christian. M. S. M.
524 Tlic Ladies Edinbtirgk Magazine.
©ur 5Li&rarg Cable.
A Voyage ix the ' Sunbeam.'    By Mrs. Brassey.    London :
Longmans & Co.    1878.
' How small the world has become!' is the first reflection that suggests
itself on takin'^ up the book before us. Now-a-days a voyage round
the world takes the same place in our lives as did the Grand Tour
which was supposed to give the finishing touch to the education of
our forefathers. We meet a lady at an evening party, and she quite
calmly tells us she has just returned from Fiji, as an excuse for her
dress being somewhat unfashionable! But a yacht voyage round
the world—a voyage undertaken by a whole family, including nurses
and children, for pleasure—has still enough of novelty about it to
excite our curiosity; and probably most of us have been following
Mrs. Brassey in her lively and pleasant account of her travels. Let
us here begin by paying our meed of admiration to her indomitable
pluck. Beautiful and luxurious as the Sanlieam appears to have
been, still a yacht of G50 tons is but a small home in which to brave
the perils of the great deep ; and when we find her confessing that,
after having sailed tens and tens of thousands of miles, she cannot
cure herself of sea-sickness, we the better appreciate the courage and
determination which bore her through all the varied experiences of
that eventful year.
Giving a wide berth to Africa, and skirting the eastern shores of
South America, the course of the Sunbeam brought her, in October
1876, to the entrance of the Straits of Magellan. Her passage
through these straits is one of the most interesting parts of the
voyage. The magnificent scenery and brilliant skies which her pai-ty
found there, form a wonderful contrast to almost every other account
of those dreaded seas, which have passed into a proverb for danger
and tempest. From Valparaiso tlie travellers started on a little criiLse
of 11,000 miles across the Pacific Ocean. This occupied them three
months, including visits to the South Sea Islands, and a glimpse of
that wonder of wonders, the volcano of Mauna Loa, in the Sandwicli
Islands. After these flowery lands and glassy seas, the scene changes
with a crash ; and a severe gale, which met them otf the coast of
Japan, and which did serious damage on board, though Mrs. Brassey
describes it with all the composure of an 'old salt,' recalls our
thoughts to the winter of northern latitudes. All their experiences
of Japan are more or less coloured by the intense cold. We shiver
in sympathy when we read how, on awaking the morning after their
arrival at Yokohama, they thought it very cold and dark, and heard
noises of a strange kind. Reason good; the skylights and port¬
holes were all covered and blocked with snow, the water froze as it
came out of the hose, forming a sheet of ice on deck, while masses of
snow and ice were falling from the rigging ! Nevertheless, Mrs.
Brassey contrived to see enough of Japan to fill an ordinary book of
travels, if judiciously spun out ; and her opinion that in a very short
time Japan may become independent of foreigners, and perhaps as
violently opposed to them as ever, opens up a new phase of pos¬
sibilities in the history of that remarkable nation. The homeward
voyage gives us a curious cand interesting glimpse of China and the
settlements of the Malay Peninsula ; and so, jjassing through the
intense heat of the Indian seas in the months of March and April,
and pausing to add another testimony to the beauties of Ceylon, our
Our Library Table.      ■ 525
travellers reached the comparatively familiar scenes of the Overland
Route.
But the special attraction of the book is the flavour of the salt sea
foam it brings with it.    Good descriptions of foreign lands we can
have in plenty; but nowhere else have we met with such a charming
picture of what we may call home life at sea.    People speak of a long
voyage as monotonous ; here, at any rate, each day brings its incident,
from the excitement of rescuing the crew of a burning ship, to the
shoal of whales, which gives us the following delightful bit of nursery
education : Baby, when asked what the whales do,  ' opens her mouth
as wide as she can, stretches out her arms to their fullest extent, then
blows, and finishes up with a look round for applause'
Philochristus : Memoirs of a Disciple of the Lord.    London :
Macmillan & Co.     1878.
We open this book with a good deal of speculation and uncertainty
as to what it may contain, and not till we read some pages are its
scope and intention evident.    We then find that it purports to be
the writing of a companion and disciple of Jesus Christ—a contem¬
porary record ;   and the character thus assumed by the writer is
sustained by a narrative, in style so vivid and life-like that the very
fault of its being an  assumption  is well-nigh forgotten.      With a
simplicity and a realisticism almost startling, the various phases of
tlie life of  the time—social, religious, political—as it existed botli
among the native inhabitants of Palestine and their foreign invaders
iind conquerors, are portrayed.    The directness and incisiveness of
narration and portraiture carry us, as we read farther, with irresistible
force and fascination to the very heart, as it were,  of  the social
economy described.    The central Figure, as we gradually realize its
vxtrij-duy personality, if we dare so speak, in the midst of the simple,
homely life of Galilee, leaves an impression on the mind of the reader—
vivid in words, as in painting the pictures of Dore—which the language
of Holy Scripture, from its very familiarity, often fails to evoke.
We acknowledge at once that a life of Christ such as we find
here is calculated to exalt and intensify our ajjprehension of
the human element in His character : and we are aware that a large
number of so-called orthodox critics will to this admission append
the words, ' at the expense of the divine.' We speak with much diffi¬
dence on so weighty a matter ; but we cannot refrain from recording
our conviction that for such an allegation there is no foundation in
fact or experience. If we hold that Christ was 'perfect God and
perfect man,' can it be other than allowable and desirable that we
slnnild have as full a commentary on this second element as the
]lowers of human reason are able to furnish? Such a book as that
now before us would necessarily bring into prominence the human
aspect of the character of Christ, if faithfully carried out from a
literary point of view only ; that being the aspect which would most
clearly, in the first instance, impress His followers.
Suggestive readings of, and comments on, the acts, miracles,
and parables of Christ abound, given as from the mind of an
eye-witness of their performance or narration. A striking sen¬
tence is that in which ' peace on earth' is spoken of as only pos¬
sible when ' the Son of Man is in His place as King . . . and all
nations i/i their places as His servants.' The sketch of the character
of Judas is impressive and highly suggestive, as explanatory of the
mere fact of his original choice as an apostle.    Tlie language through-
526 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
out is chaste, reverent, reticent ; in many cases, as one may say,
awe-inspiring; in all beautiful, grave, as befits the subject. The
peroration, containing passages of wonderful beauty and fervour,
briefly touches on the faith and aspirations of Philochristus and his
companions, after their Master has ' ascended up into heaven.' It is
not often we meet with a book concerned with deeply serious themes,
which possesses so irresistible a power of entrancing the imagination
and captivating the attention.
©ucsttou Series.
I. History.—Who bore the surname of Bell-the-Cat? State the
circumstances under which it was given.
II. Eiiglixh Literature.—Give the derivation and a note on the
primitive etymological meaning of the following words : desultory,
ambition, candidate, tribulation.
Answers to be sent in by 15th December, addressed ' Qu. C, care of
Miss Walker, 37 Gillespie Crescent.' The best answer to each question
will be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of
the year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magazine. History not to exceed
twenty-four, Literature twenty-six printed lines ; twelve words go
to a line. We warn correspondents against running time too short.
The 15th is the latest possible day on which the Editors can receive
any answer; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO SEPTEMBER SERIES.
In History: B. is the best; Heather, excellent; M. B. very good,
but she goes too much into the reasons for excluding James, thereby
leaving herself too little space in which to speak of his claims.
Spider and Mayfly both good.
In Literature: Only Claribel and Heather have answered.
Claribel's answer is excellent, and we can only regret that she has
exceeded her given limits, and must, therefore, be ranked below
Heather.
I. On the death of Queen Elizabeth, James VI. of Scotland claimed
the throne of England in right fif his groat-grandmother, Margaret
Tudor, eldest daughter of King Henry VII. From this princess he
was descended in two lines, by his mother in the tirst place, and also
by his father. From his mother, Mary Queen of Scots, he derived
his undoubted right, and from his father, Henry Lord Darnley, he
inherited what might have been a rival pretension to the vacant
tlirone, as they were descended respectively from the first and second
marriages of Margaret Tudor. By lier first marriage, to James IV.,
she left a son, James V., who was the father of Mary Queen of Scots.
By her second marriage, to Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus, she left
one daughter. Lady Margaret Douglas, who married Matthew Stuart
Earl of Lennox, and became the mother of Henry Lord Darnley.
The marriage of Queen Mary and Darnley and the birth of James VI.
thus united in one person the two strongest claims to the throne of
the Tudor kings. B.
Stray Notes. 527
II. A pastoral poem (Latin pastor, a shepherd) is one which describes
country life and scenery. It is often in the form of dialogue, or en¬
livened with addresses to the muses, nymphs, fawns, and other
personifications of art or nature. Theocritus, a native of the Greek
colony of Syracuse, who lived in the third century B.C., first excelled
in pastoral poetry, and was imitated by Virgil, whose Encolic
Eclogues are considered models. This branch of poetry has always
flourished more amongst hardy and primitive races, living in monn-
tainous districts, than amongst more luxurious and commercial
nations. Of English pastorals, Sir Philip Sydney's ' Arcadia' is our
earliest and one of our best specimens. Contemporary with it is the
'Shepherd's Calendar,' by Edmund Spenser, in form like tlie
'Arcadia,' a poem in which love and loyalty and Puritanism are
oddly mixed up with the fancied shepherd life. Milton's ' Lycidas,'
perhaps the most beautiful and pathetic piece he ever wrote, is a
pastoral elegy or allegory upon the death of his friend, Mr. Edward
King. One of the most popular and best known English pastorals
is Allan Ramsay's 'Gentle Shepherd,' published about the middle
of the last century. Shenstone's poetry, too, is chiefly of this
description. In the present age pastoral poetry has almost entirely
disappeared. Heath ek.
Straw llotcs.
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.—We have already
drawn attention to the fact {v. October issue), that board in private
families can be obtained by ladies who come to Edinburgh for the
purpose of studying in the Classes of the Educational Association.
Not only is the comfort and convenience of the students duly provided
for, but assistance in their studies will be given to all who desire it.
Any communications or inquiries should be addressed to the Hon.
Secretary of the Association ; but instead of Saxe-Coburg Place, they
had better be sent to 117 George Street, Edinburgh.
University Certificates for Women.—Ladies desirous of holding
such certificates, and who, although able to study for the purpose at
home, are precluded from coming to Edinburgh, may be interested to
know that a certificate of equal value may be gained at St. Andrews
next June. This was eagerly sought during the present year by
many candidates, some of whom had made their preparation at
Cambridge, others at various centres, London itself being one of
these. No preliminary examination is required,—whether this be
regarded as fortunate or the reverse,—and those who wish it can take
a certificate of M. A. standard in one brancli only ; while by passing
in /'()U)- subjects, one of which must be a language, or in tlu-ee, one of
which must be in honours, a full certificate and title may be taken.
Further information can always be had on applying to Professor
Roberts, University, St. Andrews.
Higher Education at Brisbane, New Zealand.—Some of our
readers may care to know tliat the recently-elected Principal of the
Girls' High School in the above-mentioned place, is an Edinburgh
lady of much experience in teaching. She was, during one session, a
member of our Latin class, and last June she obtained the L. A.
degree of St. Andrews. It is gratifying to see on all sides the good
results of the impetus first given by our Educational Association to
5^8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the Higher Education  of Women ;   but we may now say that the
' wave' of our good influence has actually spread to the antipodes.
Kitty WRE^f asks the following question : Must I attend the S.
George's Hall Classes in order to pass the Local Examination ? [There
is certainly no compulsion. But those who wish to pass well, will
probably avail themselves of some preparatory help, and we can
assure you, that whether, as residing in Edinburgh, you attend these
classes in pei-son, or as absent, you enrol yourself as a corresponding
student, you cannot obtain assistance more thoroughly satisfactory,
or more likely to ensure your success.]
As the question has often been asked in various ways, we may
mention that the Instruction by Correspondence with the St. George's
Hall Classes is this year thrown open to boys. Corresponding
students resident in Scotland must apply to MissM. M. Houldsworth,
Springfield House, Lasswade; those in England to Miss M. A. Schwabe,
2 Glenorchy Terrace, Edinburgh.
G. W. kindly favoured us with the information that her question
in our September No. had been answered by a friend. The passage
she wished to discover as to the ablutions practised by the ancients, is
from Bishop Jeremy Taylor's works, v. Holy Dying, chap. iv. sect. v.
All readers of the good Bishop's works know how they abound in
quaint classical allusions ; his reference in the instance before us is to
j'Elian, book iv. chap. i. We have to thank G. W. for her com¬
munication, which we were obliged to defer last month for want of
space.
Thalatta and Lily in our August No. have received no information
as to the quotations asked for. We shall be most grateful to any one
who will supply the source of these quotations ; also to any friend
who will answer Apis in our September Magazine.
i^ottccs to Corrcsjjonticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can onlj' be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
For the series entitled 'Country Subjects and Pursuits,'we have
already (promised or received) papers on Fishing, Curling, Keeping
Poultry, Games in the Garden, Hedging and Ditching, and others.
Further suggestions would be acceptable ; also papers on the Dairy,
on Landscape Gardening, and on Swimming.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literarj' Society
will be held on Saturday, 2d November, at 25 Great King Street.
All members who can do so, are requested to attend. Debate,
' Shall wo amend our laws of Spelling ]'
071)' Female Novelists. 529
©ur jFcmale i^o&dists.
XXIII.
HAKEIET    MARTINEAU.
ft. 1802—^. 1876.
Among the French refutjees who fled to England on tlie
Eevocation of the Edict of Nantes was a surgeon named
David Martineau. This young man married a daughter of
a family of Huguenot refugees named Pierre, and settled
in Norwich, and the descendants of this pair afforded a
succession of surgeons to Norwich, until the early death of
our heroine's eldest brother terminated the series. Harriet
Martineau's father was the youngest son of a large family,
the offspring of one of this race of surgeons, but was himself
a Norwich manufacturer. His wife w^as Elizabeth Eankin,
eldest daughter of a sugar-refiner of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, a
clever woman, and a good, though, it would appear, not a very
tender mother. Harriet was the sixth of tlie eight children
that sprang from this union. She was born June 12th, 1802.
Harriet Martineau's childish recollections are very strong
and clear, and date back to an unusually early age. Those
who are accustomed to think of her as a strong-minded,
masculine woman, will be surprised to learn that during her
childhood she was subject to frequent nervous panics. This
was probably due to neglect in infancy, which laid the
foundation of years of weak health and disordered nerves.
Her terrors were excited by such trifles as the swaying to and
fro of the waves, seen through the planking of a jetty, the
sight of the star-lit sky, or the dancing of the prismatic
colours on the wall. She was haunted by the dread of
pursuit by wild beasts by day, and by all sorts of nervous
fancies by night. The white circle thrown by a magic
lantern on the wall continued to be a source of unconquerable
teiTor to her when she was thirteen years of age.
She seems to have been endowed with a strong natural
sense of justice, which was constantly wounded by her
mother, brothers, and sisters. To this, as well as to ex¬
aggerated severity and want of tenderness towards her
childish faults, she attributes the secret misery of her life,
and her consequent bad temper, the loss of self-respect, and
the bewilderment of her conscience. Perhaps this may have
No. 48.—December 1878. 2 L
530 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
been so. Probably the depression of spirits caused by bad
health, added to a very sensitive and affectionate heart and
extreme shyness and reserve, would cause the child to brood
over troubles which are more or less common to all, until
they assumed undue proportions. Her timidity made her
awkward and helpless, especially when she was particularly
expected to do anything well, and this naturally provoked
frequent impatience. She describes herself as possessing a
good deal of vanity, and a ' frightful' capacity for jealousy.
She was obstinate and difficult to deal with, yet her heart
seems to have been easily won by kindness. She tells ns
frankly that she does not remember, in her childhood, ever
once owning lierself wrong; yet she judged herself by the
unflattering things that were mercilessly said to her, and
always believed herself to be in the wrong. She seems to
have had strong religious tendencies ; but, as she had mucli
vanity, and her religion consisted of a perpetual sense of
shortcoming, it afforded her but little comfort. All this
accumulated misery was nevertheless real to the poor child,
because it was partially morbid. When she was about
seven, owing to the influence of a friend a few years older
than herself, she began to take a sort of moral charge of her¬
self. Becoming ashamed of her habit of misery, she tried
hard for a course of years, from about the age of eight to
fourteen, to pass a single day withoiit crying—but failed.
The story of her friendship with a little girl of her own
age, whom she calls ' E.,' shows her to have possessed, in
spite of her unamiable temper, a tenderness of heart and
capacity for faithful self-devotion which were really noble.
Poor little ' E.' was lame, and her parents chose not to
recognise her infirmity, but to assume that she was like other
children. From the time that Harriet grew intimate with
'E.,' which was when the pair were.seven or eight years old,
she never more had any play. Now she was very fond of
play, and the ungrudging endurance of ' the many long
years through which she stood, with cold feet and a longing
mind, with "E." leaning on her arm, looking on while other
children were at play,' amounts to something like heroism.
Once only did she fail in her generous devotion to her little
friend,—on the occasion of a birthday party, when her father
gave rare and precious leave for hide-and-seek among tlie
packing-cases and pigeon-holes of the warehouse.
' For weeks,' she says, ' I had counted the days and hours to this
birthday and this play ; but "E." could not play hide-and-seek, and
there we stood looking at the rest—I cold and fidgety, and at last
Our Female Novelists. 5 3 r
uncontrollably worried at the thought that the hours were passing
away and I had not had one bit of play. I did the fatal thing that
has been a thorn in my mind ever since. I asked " E." if she would
much mind having some one else with her while I hid once. O, no,
slie did not mind at all; so I sent somebody else to her, and ran off,
with a feeling of self-detestation which is fresh at this day. I had no
presence of mind for the game—was caught in a minute, and came
liack to " E." damaged in self-respect for the whole remaining course
of our friendship.'
There must have been something very lovable in a child
capable of being the subject of such an episode.
In the year 1811 was born her youngest sister, Ellen.
' Xow I sliall see the growth (jf a human mind from the
beginning,' was the remark of the philosophical little elder
sister, then nine years old. And to this new sister she
resolved to look for her future happiness, and to devote her¬
self with such love and tenderness that she should never
know her own bitter experience of the want of it; and this
resolution she fully carried out.
Up to the age of eleven, Harriet, with her next elder sister,
Rachel, had received her education at home from her eldest
])rothers and sister, but she does not seem to have found
much pleasure in her lessons. She and Ilachel were then
sent to school to the Rev. Isaac Perry, a dissenting minister
who had recently joined the ranks of the Unitarians, and had
thereby lost his pulpit and the chief part of his (boy's)
school. It does not appear that up to this time Harriet had
been recognised as showing any sign of being cleverer than
fither children. On the contrary, she was considered by
her family as being dull and inobservant, and was accustomed
to be toki that ' slow and sure' was the maxim for her, while
' quick and well' was that for Rachel. Nevertheless at eight
years old she had endeavoured to draw up a table of Scripture
])recepts, under the heads of various virtues and vices, and
liad confided to her mother her hope that it might some daj"
be printed and make a book. And sliortly before that time,
on accidentally looking into Milton's Paradise, Lost, she had
become so enamoured of it, that in a few months there was
hardly a line in the whole poem that she could not readily
have turned to. At Mr. Perry's she distinguished herself by
her compositions, and made good progress in arithmetic and
Latin.
Harriet's first introduction to the science of political
economy (though the name was unknown) was at Mr.
J'erry's school; and tlie to her 'unintelligible raillery of
her brothers ' about the National Debt and the Sinking Pund,
532 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazitie.
seems to prove that she readily grasped the ideas presented
to her.
At the age of sixteen she went to a boarding-school at
Bristol, kept by an aunt and some very clever young cousins,
but this seems to have been more on account of her bad
health and temper than for the sake of education. She
speaks of this Aunt Kentish as the first human being of
whom she was not afraid. After fifteen months she returned
home, somewhat improved mentally and morally, but worse
rather than better with regard to her healtli.
By this time her deafness, whicli had only begun to show
itself as slight hardness of hearing when she was about
twelve years old, had become very noticeable and incon¬
venient, and excessively painful to herself. This deafness
must not be forgotten by the readers of Miss Martineau's
story as a lasting, and, from its nature, an ever-present
affliction throughout the whole course of her life from her
early teens. While fully alive to, and ever keenly conscious
of, ' the daily and hourly trials,' and ' unspeakable miseries '
attending exclusion from the world of sound, she neverthe¬
less set herself bravely to make the best of the inevitable.
Instead of succumbing to a calamity so truly distressing, she
fortified herself by two grand resolutions,—one for the sake of
otliers, that she ' would never ask what was said,' and the
other for her own, a vow of patience that she ' would smile
in every moment of anguish from it, and never lose temper
at any consequence of it.' Meeting it in this heroic spirit,
she found it the grandest impulse to self-mastery, though it
took a long time to effect the cure ; and in looking back at
her life from the edge of the grave, she acknowledges ' that
this same deafness was about the best thing that ever
happened to her.'
Harriet returned home in April 1819. In 1820 her eldest
sister married a surgeon at Newcastle. This event made
young women at once of Eachel and herself. Perhaps, there¬
fore, this point of her history is the fittest at which to pause
and trace, as briefly as possible, the course of her religions
experience and views. She was brought up a Unitarian.
As she grew older and knew more, she gradually came to
see the inconsistency of Unitarians in taking what liberties
they pleased with a revelation they professed to receive, and
in setting aside what portions they did not choose to accept,
while yet calling their religion Christianity. She seems to
have been in her early youth very susceptible to religious
influences, passing through a long phase of what she calls
Our Female Novelists. 533
fanaticism and pastor-worship. In due time she read a great
deal of philosophy, her especial master being Hartley, whose
teaching imbued her with strong aspirations after self-dis¬
cipline and devotion to duty. She studied the Bible ' inces¬
santly and immensely,' but, though enthusiastic about the
moral beauty and spiritual promises of the sacred writings,
never believed in the essential doctrines of Christianity.
Her introduction to Necessarianism was by speaking to her
brother James on the question of divine predestination,
which had long and sorely perplexed her; he told her that
there was a Necessarian solution, and advised her to work it
out for herself She did so, and became once for all convinced
of Necessarianism; and to this ' grand conviction' she attri¬
butes whatever her life has had of steadiness, consistency,
progressiveness, and strength. She, in process of time,
relinquished prayer in the usual acceptation of the word.
' Not knowing what was good for her, and being sure that
every external thing would come to pass just the same
whether she liked it or not, she ceased to desire and there¬
fore to pray for anything external for herself or others, except
spiritual good.' She describes herself as passing through
successive gradations, regarding Christianity—since to her
it could not be a, faith—as a matter of speculation, of spiritual
convenience, of intellectual and moral taste, and finally, as a
mere fact in the history of mankind.
' It took many years,' she writes, ' to travel through them ; and I
lingered long in the stages of speculation and taste, intellectual and
moral. But at length I recognised the monstrous superstition in its
true character of a great fact in the history of the race, and I found
myself with the last link of my chain snapped, a free rover on the
broad, bright, breezy common of the universe.'
But this final' emancipation ' did not take place until many
years later than the point in her history where we have left
her.
During Harriet Martineau's girlhood, it was not thought
proper for young ladies to make their studies very prominent;
and to this opinion she submitted as in duty bound. She was
at the work-table regularly after breakfast, making and mend¬
ing for herself or the household, and walked regularly with
tlie rest of the family; and if ever she shut herself into her
own room for an hour's solitude, she knew it was at the risk
of being sent for to join the sewing circle. Nevertheless she
made time for study—her philosophical reading, and trans¬
lation from Latin and Italian—in the early morning and
late at night.    Skilful in household employments, she was
534 ^^'^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
able to cook, to iron, to make and mend all her own clothes,
including the knitting of stockings, and could have even
earned her own living by fancy-work ; and the pride is more
than pardonable with which she congratulates herself on not
being ' a literary lady who could not sew.'
In 1821, at the age of nineteen, Harriet made her first
appearance in print, by an article upon ' Pemale Writers on
Practical Divinity,' which she sent to the Monthly Rqmsitoi-y
(the Unitarian periodical), signing herself' V.,' and posting it
without mentioning her enterprise to any one. It was near
the end of the month, and she had no expectation of hearing
any more of her paper, much less of its insertion in the
forthcoming number, but, to her surprise and delight, in
due time there it was, with a request to hear more from ' V.'
of Norwich.
During the next few years she wrote a number of short
stories — sometimes unconsciously touching on political
economy—and some poetry, of which she writes in later
life, ' I can't bear to think of it.'
After her d&ut as an author came a time of great trial in
her private life. Her health was bad, and her eldest brother,
who was tenderly beloved by his family, fell into decline,
went abroad, and in June 1822 died. In the calamitous
season of 1825-26, her father was nearly ruined by the
deterioration in the value of his stock, and died the same
year. Soon after this she became engaged to one whom she
had known for a long time. Four years previously she had
had great trouble owing to some mischief made by a third
person between herself and this gentleman. And now, when
she was hopeful and happy in her engagement, her betrothed
suddenly became insane, and, after months of illness, died.
This was a heavy sorrow to her at the time, but years
afterwards, in looking back over her life, she expresses her
conviction that it was well for her that she had never married,
not from want of appreciation of domestic life or of capacity
for domestic affection,—on the contrary, she seems to have
possessed both in a high degree,—but in view of her character,
v.'hich was best fitted for single estate, and of her life's work,
which could only thus have been effectually accomplished.
In June 1829 the Norwich manufactory failed in which
Mrs. Martineau and their daughter had invested their money,
and they lost by one stroke almost all tliat they had. The
three daughters were therefore obliged to earn their living
by their own exertions. The eldest and youngest soon found
suitable occupations, but tliere was a great difficulty as to
Our Female Novelists. 535
what Han-iet should do, as her deafness precluded both
music and teaching. It was settled that she should live at
home with her mother and an aunt, and for some time she
maintained lierself by fancy-work. She went to London,
and while there, though failing in all attempts to get her
articles even looked at by the publishers, she received an
offer of employment in proof-correcting and other literary
drudgery at a small salary. This opening she relinquished
with grief and disappointment, in obedience to a summons
home from her mother. At this time the Central Unitarian
Association advertised for three prize essays, commending
Unitarianism to Catholics, to Jews, and to Mohammedans,
the prizes being respectively ten, fifteen, and twenty guineas.
Harriet tried for all three prizes, and that successfully; yet
by the light of the wisdom of riper years she judges her
essays very disparagingly. Yet this success was a great
event to her, and marked out authorship as her legitimate
career.
Soon after this she began to ponder her Political Economy
Series. The story of the difficulties, delays, and discourage¬
ments which she met with in finding a publislier to take up
her proposed work is quite an exciting one, but too long to
relate in detail. She went up to London to urge her case in
person, but the only result for some time was severe bodily
fatigue and exertion, in addition to mental anxiety, which
laid the foundation of subsequent illness. She describes
herself as so ill one day with worry and the fatigue of a walk
of four miles and a half, that she was scarcely able to stand
without support, and, as leaning over some palings near
Shoreditch, pretending to look at a cabbage bed, saying to
herself, as she stood with closed eyes,' My book will do yet! *
and then moving on as soon as possible lest passers-by
should think her drunk. At last she found a publisher,
though on terms most imfair to herself, one stipulation being
that he should withdraw at the end of two numbers unless
the sale reached one thousand in the first fortnight. In
point of fact, the fortnight's sale reached a far higher number.
And so, in 1832, before she was thirty, Harriet Martineau
found herself a great woman, with, if not a fortune, at least a
competence at command, a fame which soon became European,
and an influence which was sought after not only by members
of Parliament and public bodies, but even by the Cabinet
itself. So important a personage had she become before her
series was half finished, that she was personally forbidden
the empire both in Eussia and Austria.    Her common sense
536 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and detestation of being ' lionized ' kept her from being
carried away by the flattery she received, and her courage
from being crushed by the cruel attacks made upon her by
her literary opponents.
On the establishment of the success of her enterprise, she,
with her mother and aunt, took up her residence in London.
The work occupied two years and a half, and immediately on
its completion she started for America, where she spent two
years. Her arrival there happened at a time when the great
controversy on negro slavery was beginning to stir the
community. She was openly committed to hostility towards
slavery by her previous writings, especially by the number of
the Political Economy Series called ' Demerara.' Neverthe¬
less she was received by the Pro-Slavery party with the
extravagant adulation and enthusiasm expressed by the
American phrase 'to be Lafayetted.' For one year this
lasted, and then she fell among the Abolitionists, on whose
side, in truth, her sympathies had always lain; and openly
espousing their cause, even to the length of consenting to
speak at a Ladies' Anti-Slavery meeting, she not only lost at
once all her popularity and most of her friends in America,
but became such an object of odium to the Pro-Slavery
majority that she was actually in danger of losing her life by
lynch law.
On her return to England she published Society in America,
in which she made it her endeavour to take her stand on the
American point of view, and to judge American society by
American tests. And one of the first constitutional lawyers
in America wrote to her the spontaneous assurance that there
was not in the whole work a single mistake in regard to the
political constitution of the Eepublic. This book was soon
followed by Retrospects of Western Travel.
It may be mentioned here that subsequently, as a result
of Miss Martineau's description of America, distinguished
patriots of three countries—of Sweden in 1837 or 1838, of
Ireland in 1839, and of Italy in 1847—begged that she
would study the political conditions and needs of their
respective countries, and lend her judgment and influence on
their behalf.
In 1838 she wrote Deerh-oolc, and the same year visited
Scotland, to explore the topography of Shakespeare's Scotch
play, in order to furnish notes for Mr. Knight's edition of.
Shakespeare. The following spring she went abroad, and
visited Padua and Venice in order to do the same for Shake¬
speare's   Italian  plays.    While in Italy her health, which
Our Female Novelists. 5 37
had been somewhat failing for several months, entirely broke
down, and she returned home, reclining on a couch im¬
provised by her companions, to spend five years in confine¬
ment to a sick-room.
During the first half of her illness she was capable of
literary work, and The Hour and the Man, and the first two
vols. of Tlie Playfelloiv, belong to this period. Life in the
Sick-Boom was written in the autumn of 1843. During this
season of ill health she finally refused to accept a Govern¬
ment pension, from the sense that her freedom of utterance
would be thereby impeded. Nevertheless she expressly
declares that she ' would have proudly and thankfully
accepted it, had it been offered by Parliament.' She did
gratefully accept a subscription-testimonial about the same
time.
From this state of suffering and prostration she was
restored, in the course of 1844, by mesmerism to perfect
health, the immediate agent in her recovery being, she is
careful to inform us, a widow lady.
In the course of the following spring, at a friend's house,
she met Mr. Atkinson, the guide who superintended her
final emancipation from ' the ghost-peopled caverns of super¬
stition,' and conducted her forth on ' the broad, bright, breezy
common of the universe.' From this date began the ten
years which she calls the ' sunny period' of her life, and
describes as the spring, summer, and autumn of her career,
all crowded into a small space, and bursting suddenly out of
a long winter. Having attained to more than forty years,
she says, she began to relish life without a drawback.
Her mother being meantime settled with one of her
married sisters, in May 1845 she herself took up her abode
in lodgings at the Lakes; but within six months she had
bought ground at Ambleside, and began building a house
there, with keen appreciation of the delights of land-
proprietorship ; and in April 1846 she took possession of
this abode. Meanwhile, in the autumn of 1845, she wrote
the three vols. of Forest and Game Lav) Tales; and in the
following spring compassed her ' only political plot,' viz.
the reconciliation of Mr. Cobden and Sir E. Peel. In the
autumn of 1846 she joined some friends on a tour to Egypt
and Palestine. Her main idea in the work she published on
her return, was 'to illustrate the genealogy of the old faiths,
the Egyptian, Hebrew, Christian, and Mohammedan.' Soon
after she undertook to deliver an annual course of winter
lectures to the mechanics of Ambleside and their families,
538 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and about the same time began writing her History of the
Peace, of which she finished vol. ii. in November 1849. In
1850 were published the Letters of Man's Nature and Develop¬
ment. These were joint productions of her own and j\Ir.
Atkinson's, the larger part of the matter being his, but the
publication her doing. She admits that she did not take
this step without misgivings,—indeed, she describes it as the
greatest effort of courage she ever made,—but she says that
she ultimately found it an inestimable blessing, by dissolving
all false relations and confirming all true ones. In the Eev.
James Martineau's review of this work culminated the great
secret sorrow of her life, viz. the estrangement of this once
favourite and fondly-loved brother. During 1850 she began
writing for Household Words, and also undertook farming
on a small scale, which seems to have proved a pleasant
and profitable experiment. She also translated, or rather
epitomized, Comte's Fhilosophie Positive.
1854 opened cheerily. In the spring of that year she
wrote a Complete G-uide to the Lakes, little thinking that it
would be her last literary work of importance (except her
autobiography), yet so it proved. From March in this year
she had observed in herself unsatisfactory symptoms, the
evidence of which she did not understand; and her health
became steadily worse, with a short intermission, until
January 1855, when she became convinced that something
was seriously wrong, and went to London for medical advice.
There she learned that she was suffering from disease of the
heart, which must terminate fatally, and might do so at any
time. She at once made final arrangements concerning her
affairs, and returned home, accompanied by a niece. Then
she set to work in earnest upon the Autobiograpliy, whicli
she had long regarded as a task that must be performed, in
order to tell the world some things about herself which she
could not commit to any one else to say for her.
About her state of mind in the near prospect of death
Miss Martineau tells us a great deal. She owns to some
natural regret at the thought that she should never again
enjoy health; but expressly declares that she entertained no
fear of death, no expectation of a future state nor desire of
it, no wish, indeed, that anything should be otherwise than it
is. She tells us that her days were full of pleasures and free
from care; and speaks of the singular interest, full even of
amusement, in watching human affairs, and acting in them
when on the verge of leaving them. She rejoices in her
personal freedom from responsibilities, and describes herself
Our Female Novelists. 539
as enjoying a genuine holiday for the first time for a quarter
of a century. With regard to humanity at large, she tells
us that the world as it is was growing somewhat dim before
her eyes, but that the world as it is to be looked brighter
every day.    And with regard to herself, she
' cannot but acknowledge that philosophy has opened her way before
her, and given a staff" into her hand, and thrown a light upon her
imth, so as to have delivered her from doubt and fear,' and that
' death seems easy, simple, and natural.'
Xevertheless there were to be yet twenty-one years of
patient endurance of suffering and declining strength, and of
unflagging interest and sympathy in the questions of the
day, and the welfare of those around her, before the end
came. The niece who devoted herself in the beginning of
this illness, met her own death many years before the aunt
whose dying hours she hoped to have tended. What account
we have of these years is written or collected in the form of
Miss Martineau's own letters by another hand. Whether
the staff and the light given her by philosophy supported
her in the actual hour of death w-e can never know. At
sunset, on June 27, 1876, she passed away, and was buried
in the burial-place of her family at Birmingham, the simple
record bein"—
HAEPJET MAETINEAU,
DAUGHTER OF
Thomas and Elizabeth Martineau.
Born at Norwich, .June 12, 1802.
Died at Ambleside, June 27, 1870.
In this sketch we have not felt called upon to enter the
lists against Miss Martineau's ' free-thought,' and have pre¬
ferred rather to give as many as possible of the facts of her
life, leaving the reader to form a judgment upon them, than
to trespass on necessarily limited space by attempting to
analyse her character. Her talent and energy, clear sense
and courageous plain-speaking, are undoubted ; and these are
great qualities. But on the moral side we find the hardening
influence of her loveless creed—a want of tenderness, and
the lack of that humility which springs from the deep
consciousness of a higher than human standard of right and
wrong, and of personal shortcoming in regard to it, and which
exists only in the school of Christianity, where perfect justice
is compatible with divine love and mercy.    In her life there
540 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
was no master to dethrone autocratic self as the motive
power and spring of action. The scandal which became
connected with her name in later life may have had no other
foundation than great want of discretion, which gave licence
to uncharitable tongues to say their worst. But if this
public condemnation was deserved, then we need no more
impressive comment on the end to which such self-centred,
Godless morality must lead, when frail humanity trusts to
its guidance alone.
We are not called to judge her; it is right to speak of the
dead as charitably as we can. She was, in many respects, a
very useful woman in her generation; and could she have
ceased for a moment from self-consciousness, she might have
been still more so. But from her life and death there comes
this lesson,—humility is the only foundation for greatness;
therefore the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than
Harriet Martineau. E. A. H.
©amascus.
TO HON. L. T.
After long years.
Gloomy with fears.
Travail, and tears,—
Suddenly Light
Breaks through the night.
Heavy and grey.
Clouds ever lay,
Low on my way—
Yonder the Blue
Opens to view.
Once all around.
Falsehood I found
AVorshipped and crowned—
Time at last brings
Truth on his wings !
H. A. Duff.
The Frozen Thames ; or, Dieu Dispose. 541
3ri)e Jro^en Etamcs: or, ©ieu Qtsposc.
CHAPTER  I.
The month of November in the year 1142 was a most
unusually severe season, and great blocks of ice were
formed in the Thames above Oxford; and it soon began to
be whispered that if the frost continued, the river ran a
chance of being entirely blocked up.
At this time the city was in a state of siege, being lield
by the citizens for the Empress Maude, whom they considered
the rightful possessor of the English throne. King Stephen
was by no means inclined to let such an important place
slip from his grasp, and since Michaelmas he had rigorously
besieged the castle, and, with great cruelty, had burned the
greater part of the town in his rage at the rebellious spirit
displayed by the citizens.
It may be therefore imagined that the poor, houseless
families felt the biting frost as an additional hardship, and
many were the gloomy forebodings uttered on every side.
In the camp, too, the soldiers began to show discontent; for
when with right goodwill they had burnt all the best
houses and property of the unfortunate townsmen, they had
hardly considered how, in the event of a protracted siege,
they might suffer from the want of shelter and food.
The country at that time being in the most disturbed
state, the necessaries of life having to be brought from great
distances, there was the greatest likelihood that the caravans
of provisions never reached their destination, being constantly
intercepted on the way by one or other of the roving bands
led by the discontented nobles.
In a wattled hut near the banks of the frozen river, a
small group of persons might have been seen huddled round
the central wood fire on the evening of 27th November
1142, on which my story begins. A patriarchal old man, in
fisherman's dress, was employed in tying together the holes
in the rough net, which, however, had done its duty in its
own day in cat(jhiiig multitudes of fish in the neighbouring
river. Though- wan and emaciated, yet a peaceful, placid
expression rested on the furrowed face of the aged man, in
strong contrast with the wild, discontented eyes of his young
companion. The latter was a fine, handsome, strongly-built
young fellow of some twenty-five years of age.
542 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
His thick, tangled hair hung in a heavy mass on his
bronzed neck, left bare by the loose rough jerkin which
clothed the upper portion of his person.
A young woman, with a child in her arms, completed the
group; and she was the first to break the silence which
seemed brooding over them, by saying, in a nervous, timid
tone,' The night falls apace, fatlier; there is scarcely light
enough to mend that net.'
' Nor much need,' interrupted the young man impatiently.
' I am sure I can't think what makes father go on mend-
ing, mending for ever, when there is little enough chance of
our requiring a net again as long as this cruel weather
lasts.'
' Nay, nay,' said the old man smilingly,' let us have all
things ready for the good time when it comes. Did not the
wise woman say to Brenda the other day, that soon food
would be to be had for the asking, and what food except of
our own catching are we likely to get ?'
The young man turned with a contemptuous snort away,
and addressing no one in particular, growled out, ' I think
fools are plenty, whatever food is. When do you expect your
scatter-brain back from his wild-goose chase ?'
' He won't attempt to cross till after dark, Harold,'
answered his sister, and a look of anxiety rested on her sad.
.gentle face, ' and then he must watch his time to steer his
boat between the drifting blocks of ice. But sure, spite of
the danger, brother, you would not have had me stop the
lad, when it seemed the only way to get a message to
Wallingford.'
' And pray, my wise Breuda,' said Harold more gently,
' what good will the message do ?'
' That,' said Breuda,' we know not. Our part is merely
to obey orders. If you want to know, Harold, the meaning
of all this mystery, why did not you take Will's place, and
contrive the interview with Alice after dark, as he did last
night ?'
' Nay, sister,' said Harold fiercely ; ' I'll have nought more
to do with Alice. She is welcome to have any of the Norman
courtiers for me, and joy go with her.'
' I think you wrong her shamefully,' said Brenda, roused
for a moment out of her usually gentle manner. ' You know
well that only her devotion to her royal mistress could have
induced her to immure herself within those gloomy walls,
and I am certain she is as leal and true to you there as
when she shared our pittance here.'
The Frozen Thames ; or, Dieu Dispose. 543
' Ah, sister! you only say this to comfort me; but how
can a rough man-at-arms like me bear comparison with the
court gallants ? Nay, when Eobert of Gloucester returns,
which it is to be hoped he will soon, you will see that I am
right, and that we may go and dance at Mistress Alice's
wedding with one of the dark, merry Norman gentlemen. Or
else,' he added still more gloomily,' with a false English baron.'
' Well, well, time will show,' said Brenda in a weary tone ;
' I know well how useless it is to try to change your opinion,
and, indeed, perhaps it would be better for us to try to do
our duty and be contented, without troubling ourselves about
the future.    Look at father, and copy him.'
' That's all very well for women and old men,' said Harold,
' but I must do something. I think I will try and break a
hole in the ice and catch a few fish, either for our own supper
or to sell to the soldiers.'
So saying, he pushed aside the skin which hung across
the entrance, and strode out into the cold winter night.
Now, to make you understand poor Harold's grumblings,
I must tell you something of his antecedents.
Till the sack of the town last Michaelmas, Harold's father,
Nigel Penda, had held a good position at Oxford. He was
a fish-merchant, and had a good trade carrying his fish up
the river. He possessed a good dwelling-house, and employed
several ceorls.
Harold had rebelled at this peaceful, uneventful life; and
when his sister Brenda married another fish-merchant of the
name of Mellent, he obtained his father's leave to serve under
the banner of Brian Fitz Earl, one of Stephen's most turbulent
barons.
In 1141, when Matilda, Countess of Anjou, and her half-
brother, Eobert of Gloucester, arrived in England, Earl Brian
espoused her cause, and after the battle of Lincoln he trans¬
ferred Harold, who had already distinguished himself for
valour, to the Empress's service.
Now among Matilda's ladies one Alice Fitz Altamount
was distinguished for her beauty, and gentle, though spirited,
character.
Soon Harold's fierce and passionate heart was no longer
his own, but entirely belonged to the beautil'ul Norman girl.
At first sight it may appear strange that a rough man-
at-arms should be considered in any way a fit husband for
a lady of rank. But it must be remembered that ' strange
times make strange maimers.'
In the enforced flight from London, Harold had been able
544 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to be of the utmost use to Matilda and her ladies, and their
gratitude was proportionate. Still this might have hardly
sufficed to bridge over the distance between the lovers, had
it not been for the Empress's partiality for Harold's lord,
which induced her to lend a favourable ear to Harold's
pleading, backed by tlie tearful entreaties of Alice, for whom
she had a sincere ati'ection.
Be this as it may, she did consent to their engagement,
and in this case her sanction was all that was required, as
Alice was an orphan ward of the late Count of Anjou.
The young girl, gentle and quiet herself, almost worshipped
lier strong, determined young suitor, and they were quickly
betrothed, and obtained leave, on their arrival at Oxford, for
her to pay a visit to Harold's home.
Ey this time Brenda's husband had died, and she and her
baby and a young stepson lived with old Nigel Penda. The
wedding had been fixed to take place on St. Michael's day;
but on that day, alas ! a far different scene was enacted.
The Penda house was one of the first devastated by
Stephen's ruthless soldiers, and poor Brenda driven forth
with her children and father, houseless, homeless, and utterly
destitute.
Harold had gone to take a message from the Empress, and
on his return he found his father and sister living in the
wretched wattled hut described at the beginning of this
narrative, and his promised bride shut up within the four
walls of the castle, which was closely surrounded by Stephen's
lawless troops, who were living amongst the havoc they had
created.
At first Harold put a bold face on it, and earned a scanty
pittance by the sale of his fish to the camp. But he soon
found that he was too well known as a follower of Brian
Eitz Earl to meet with great encouragement, and it was only
the shame of leaving his feeble old father and delicate sister
to the tender mercies of the troops which prevented his
going to Wallingford and again taking service under his
warlike lord.
At first he generously felt glad that Alice, though separated
from him, was safe within the castle, and he never doubted
that Matilda's brother, the good Earl of Gloucester, would
come with a sufficient force to raise the siege. The Earl of
Gloucester had just returned from Anjou, where he had been
summoned by the King of France to settle some disputes.
However, on first landing on English ground he was
greeted by the news that Stephen  had taken possession of
The Frozen Thames ; or, Dieu Dispose. 545
his castle of Wareham, and at the time he was so earnestly
expected by his sister at Oxford, he was busily engaged at
Wareham in the recapture of his own possessions.
At this time news travelled slowly, and no rumour of the
reason of his delay reached Matilda, who began to fear that
Stephen might succeed in starving out her small garrison.
Outside, Harold, also hearing no news of the Duke of
Gloucester, became a prey to gloomy anticipations that either
Alice would die of want, or, in the event of the capitula¬
tion of the castle, that she might be bestowed on one of
Stephen's followers.
The severe frost setting in deprived him of his only
occupation, and, between famine and distress, he became
daily more morose, and began to indulge in bitter and
imjust suspicions against every friend as well as foe, not
even excepting his betrothed.
At this time, with his mind ripe for any suspicion, he
became maddened by the idea that Alice was striving to
keep up a sort of fitful correspondence with his late master,
Brian Fitz Earl.
He discovered that Brenda's stepson, who had a boyish
adoration for Alice, had found some mysterious means of
communicating with her, and only the night before the one
on which my story begins Will Mellent had ventured after
dark across the river, now rendered very unsafe by the
great blocks of floating ice. Harold had not the slightest
doubt that he was the bearer of a message between the
lovers.
As he this evening strode down to the river, he soon saw
that fishing had become quite impossible, since the ice was
thicker than ever. Sitting down on a heap of snow, he gave
himself up to gloomy and rebellious thoughts.
' The priests,' muttered he,' tell us that God is good. I
can't see it! At any rate He is not good to me and mine.
What with Alice false and utterly out of my reach, my
father and sister dying by inches before my eyes, and the
only means of supporting them taken out of my hands by
this cruel frost, I can see nought but despair and misery
before me. If God be good, let Him take away this blighting
cold and ice, and I will believe in His love and power!' At
that moment he was startled by the sound of a soft step
near him, and, peering through the dusk, he saw Will
creeping stealtliily up the banks of the river.
' Why, I never saw the boat, boy,' exclaimed he in surprise;
' where have you hidden it ?'
No. 48.—Decbmber 1878. 2 M
54^ TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' Oh! the boat's safe enough,' answered Will. ' I have sped
well on my errand, Harold ; wouldst thou not like to know
what message I bring from Wallingford ?' And the boy
looked up roguishly in his companion's face.
' Nay,' said Harold gruffly, ' keep your messages for those
for whom they are intended, and don't come prating to me.'
' Oh ! very well,' said Will composedly, 'just as you like;
but, Harold,' and he looked eagerly at him, ' you know the
signs of the weather better than I; do you think there is any
chance of a thaw ?'
' I wish I did,' was Harold's angry answer; ' but as far as
I can see, this frost may go on till we are all frozen into
pillars of salt like Lot's wife.' And he ground his heel
against the hard ground in impotent rage. A peculiar smile
flitted across the boy's face, but he only said,
' The proverb says, " What is, is best;" so, if the cold is not
good for us, maybe it is for somebody else, who knows ?'
' Well, Will,' said Harold with a scornful laugh, ' if you
can show the good of starvation, I shall believe your old
proverb ; but in the meantime, my lad, you had better come
in, for it is time you were asleep.' And he took hold of the
boy to pull him up the slope; but Will, slipping from his
grasp, said mysteriously ' that he had business to attend to
first,' and disappeared into the darkness.
CHAPTER 11.
The inside of the Castle of Oxford presented at this time a
miserable spectacle.
The small guard of soldiers who remained to Maude stood
to their posts with a dogged determination which had more
despair in it than devotion to their cause. They knew, unless
they were relieved in twenty-four hours, that the last scanty
provision would be exhausted, and that if they refused to
give up their queen to Stephen's fury, she and they
must inevitably fall a prey to gaunt famine. Their numbers
were rapidly becoming thinned by the shower of heavy
stones thrown not only against the walls, but over them, from
the two mounds commanding the keep and entrance. This
very morning a herald had proclaimed from one of these
eminences,' that the King would grant life to the inhabitants
of the castle if it were given up within twenty-four hours.'
On hearing this, Maude, pale and thin from fasting and
privation, had appeared among them, and promised them that
Tlie Frozen Thames; or, Dicii Dispose. 547
if by six the next morning they were not relieved, she gave
them leave to deliver up the castle and all i^ contained to
the besiegers. The soldiers having often heard her declare
that any form of death was preferable to becoming the
prisoner of her hated cousin, imagined from this concession
that she had some definite hopes of her brother's near
approach; and, in consequence, their own drooping spirits
somewhat revived, more especially as she was evidently in
earnest, as Robert d'Oyley, who held the castle in her name,
proclaimed her message from the walls in the hearing of
them all.
It was now nine o'clock in the evening, and yet no signs
of Duke Robert.
The Empress Maude was in the bare room in the keep,
which served her as boudoir. She stood alone, with clasped
hands, gazing through the unglazed loophole on the white
world of snow outside.
A variety of feelings seemed struggling in her breast, for
her handsome, though proud face, worked convulsively as
she murmured,
' I never thought to take to flight, and yet what good can
I do by remaining as food for Stephen's revenge ? Oh!
Robert, Robert, I have often slighted thy advice; would that
thou wert here now to counsel me ! How dark it grows, it
must be getting on for ten o'clock, the hour fixed !'
At this moment a heavy curtain which hung at the end of
the room was moved aside, and the figure of a young girl
became visible, from the light of the taper she held in her
hand. She carried over the other arm a quantity of cloaks
and furs. Her bright, dark eyes sparkled with excitement,
as she said in a low tone,
' All is ready. Brother Francis, d'lveray, and d'Oyley
await us at the postern; indeed, my beloved mistress, you
must not falter now. The Earl has horses at Abingdon, and
with these white garments, thanks to this blessed snow, we
may, please God, escape unseen.'
' But, Alice,' said the Princess, as she allowed the girl to
envelop her in a long white far mantle, and tie a white
woollen scarf over her dark hair,' how about the sentinels
placed opposite the postern, on the other side of the mill
stream ?'
' That has been looked to,' answered Alice. ' Will has
industriously circulated a report among the soldiers that the
Earl, your brother, is on the way from Wareham, and indeed
there is some news that partly confirms it, and therefore theii-
34^ TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
attention is chiefly turned to that side. And your proclama¬
tion this morning leads them to the same conclusion. But
after all, dear lady,' she added gently, ' we must trust in the
good God who has mercifully sent this blinding snow to our
help in our necessity. But what do we here talking, when
everything depends on speed and silence ?'
Without further delay, the two women crept noiselessly
out of the room, and then down the stairs and the long descent
of the keep to the court below. There, extinguishing her
light, Alice led on, daintily picking her way between the
sleeping soldiers, who lay about at intervals, till she gained
the other side of the castle and the postern gate, in the
shadow of which stood three dark figures.
These proved, on closer inspection, to be Eobert d'Oyley,
whose father had built the greater portion of the castle, and his
swornbrother-in-arms,Rogerd'lveray. ABenedictine Brother
completed the trio, his venerable bald head looking lit Lie
suited for the expedition on which they were bound.
' Come, daughter,' said the latter, taking the Empress's
hand, as Robert d'Oyley noiselessly drew back the well-oiled
bolts.    ' The church shall take you under its protection.'
The descent to the bridge below was soon effected, and,
favoured by the darkness, the bridge was crossed in safety.
As Alice stepped on to the other side she felt her hand
taken, and discovered Will's slight figure beside her.
They were now close to the tent of the sentinel on guard,
and could see his tall figure looming dark throiigh the night,
as he wearily leant upon his halberd.
Will hastily drew Alice down into a drift of snow which
rested against the tent, and in less than a moment their
example had been followed by the other fugitives.
Here they remained in perfect stillness for what seemed
an interminable period, but which was in reality little more
than five minutes, when the snow, which had been falling
lightly for some time, began to descend in much heavier
quantities, and the sentinel roused himself with an angry
shake, exclaiming, with an oath, ' It was mortal hard that a
poor fellow should be set on such a fool's errand as to stand
still and freeze in a snow-storm, when every one knew that
all chance of surprise lay on the other side of the castle.'
After drowsily walking up and down his beat for half a
dozen times, he raised the curtain of his tent and passed in.
It took very few minutes for our party to rise from their
snowy seat and swiftly to pass the tent door; and they were
not a minute too soon, for they had not gone a dozen yards
Tlie Frozen Tluimes; or, Dieu Dispose. 549
before the sentinel put out a sleepy face, thinking he heard
a movement.
He gazed into the distance with half-closed eyes, muttering,
' Nothing but snow, snow. Methinks I am snow-blind;' and,
with a grunt, Stephen's watchful sentinel returned to his
slumbers.
Will could hardly restrain a chuckle, for he well knew
poor Peter Dale's drowsy proclivities, and liad not a little
counted on them. The party had now to cross a vast waste
nearly knee-deep in snow, and the women and priest found
it rather difficult to keep up with their warlike companions.
At last they reached the river bank, and Will and the priest
took each one of Alice's hands, resi2;nincr the care of the
Empress to the two brave knights.
The first trio led the way, as Will was the only one to be
trusted to pioneer them safely across the ice-bound river.
It was a passage of no little difficulty and danger, as the
water had frozen in a very capricious manner, sometimes as
firm as a rock, and at other times, where the current was
stronger, there were cracks and fissures, across which the
fugitives had to spring as best they might. As they neared
the other side the passage became easier, and they ventured
to speak to each other in low tones.
' Why is not Harold here ?' inquired Alice, and Will made
answer:
' I have told him nothing about it. He has been so savage
and morose lately, I did .not dare. Why, this evening I heard
him say that he would believe there was a God if He would
thaw the river. It's a good thing his wish was not granted ;
and, Mistress Alice, I fear you will have hard work to
smooth his ruffled feathers, for he has taken it into his wise
head that you have lost your heart to his late master the
Earl.'
Alice started with consternation, almost losing her
footing; but quickly recovering her composure, she said
decidedly:
' If that is the case, he must not be left for an hour under
such a wild delusion.'
'Easily said, my mistress; but how am I to persuade him?'
answered the boy.
' I'll tell you when we reach the other side,' said Alice.
' You need not accompany us further on the way to Abingdon,
for you have had enough trouble, and the road is easy to find.'
They relapsed into silence till the opposite bank was
gained, and they all sat down to rest for a moment.
550 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
'Will,' said Alice, 'cut off a bit of my hair with your
dagger.'
The boy obeyed, and then looked inquiringly at her.
'Take that to Harold,' she commanded, and give it into
his hands, with the words, " Haste to Wallingford ;" then run
away, and say nothing more.'
Will promised obedience, and, doffing his cap to the
Empress, vanished without a word.
' What has become of the varlet ?' exclaimed she im¬
patiently.
' Oh !'said Alice, 'we shall do better without him now.
It is only a case of hard walking.'
The toilsome journey to Abingdon was performed in safety,
and in little more than an hour's time they were warmly
welcom^ed at the Abbey, where they had been anxiously
expected.
After partaking of some refreshment, the Empress and
Alice were informed that horses were in readiness to convey
them to Wallingford, and they safely rode the eight remain¬
ing miles, and were welcomed with the greatest enthusiasm
by the Marshal of Wallingford, Matilda's old and tried friend,
Brian Eitz Earl. They were also greeted by the cheering
news that the Earl of Gloucester was only a day's march
off, and that their well-timed flight would stop him from
his meditated attack of Stephen's army, with the handful of
men who had returned with him from Normandy.
Such a proceeding would have been perfectly hopeless, and
the Te Deum that Brother Erancis celebrated was rendered
all the more hearty from the thanksgiving sent up for the
safety of Matilda's well-beloved brother.
CHAPTER  III.
In the meantime Will had returned to the hut, and roused
Harold from an uneasy sleep, by forcing the lock of hair
into his hand, and shouting into his ear the words, ' Haste
to Wallingford!'
Harold started up, clutching the long, silky tress, and in
vain tried to get any further information from Will, who
either was or pretended to be overpowered with sleep.
Einding all his questions unanswered, he strode into the
open air to collect his thouglits, and at last came to the
conclusion that either the false Earl had carried off his
promised bride, or that some scheme was on foot for her
forcible abduction.
Tlic Frozen Thames; or, Dieu Dispose. 551
His mind completely filled with this idea, he instantly
set forth for Wallingford on foot, but he had many miles to
go round before he could reach the only bridge. This
delayed him some hours, and it was late in the afternoon
ere, footsore and hungry, he came in sight of the castle.
He considered for some time how he should best effect an
entrance, but at last he demanded admission boldly in right
of his past services to the Earl.
He was cordially welcomed and admitted, and as he
passed along to the great hall, it struck him that there was
an unusual air of festivity and state observable.
On arriving in the banqueting hall, imagine his astonish¬
ment at beholding the Empress Maude, whom he had supposed
shut up in Oxford Castle, calmly seated in a chair of state on
the dais, whilst at her feet, quietly engaged with her needle,
was the Lady Alice.
As in duty bound, he stepped forward, and bent the knee
before the Empress, who smiled graciously upon him, and
seemed greatly amused by the vacant, amazed stare which
he fixed on her and her attendant.
' But how did your Majesty escape V at last he stammered.
' Why,firstly,thanks to God's good providence,and secondly,
to Alice's wits,' she made reply. ' We escaped last night
through the snow, dressed in white, over the frozen river.
And now we hope to be joined very shortly by our noble
brother, who was on the way to our relief when he was met
by the tidings of our miraculous escape. And now, my brave
Harold, it is my turn to question wherefore you have sought
us here. Is it to claim your bride and take arms in our
cause ? But in faith, sir, you look so bewildered, that were
it not afternoon we should imagine you had walked here in
your sleep.'
Harold coloured, and tried to recall his scattered senses.
' I never thought to find your Majesty here, whatever I
might have expected concerning Mistress Alice.'
' Well, Alice,' said the Empress good-naturedly,' you had
better take your savage and feed him. Maybe with you he
may find his tongue.'
Spite of his bewilderment, poor Harold had plainly
perceived that Alice was greatly offended with him; for
during the whole interview she never once glanced at him,
but kept her eyes fixed on her work. And now that his
suspicions were removed, he became tormented with doubts
as to whether she could ever forgive him.
She gravely, at her mistress's bidding, led the way into
552 The Ladies' Edhiburgh Magazine.
another apartment, where she quickly provided her lover
with such a meal as he had not tasted for a long time,—but
still in silence. At last he could bear her distant manner no
longer, and looking up at her with mournful, penitent eyes,
in broken words he implored her forgiveness, and pleaded, as
extenuating circumstances, his misery, and the mystery in
which Will had enveloped all his proceedings. Alice was
not implacable, and, in fact, was too rejoiced at being with
him after their separation to hold out long; so at the end of
an hour they had laid out their future as satisfactorily as if
there were no such troublesome things as wars and sieges.
Alice explained that some men-at-arms had been sent to
convoy old Nigel Penda and his daughter to Wallingford ;
and Harold soon settled that they need only wait for their
arrival to celebrate the long-deferred marriage.
' And then,' he said rapturously, ' you will be mine, and
we will never part again.'—
' If the Lord will,' said a grave voice; and Brother Francis
stepped from an oratory in a recess at the other end of the
room. ' Ay, young man, you may well look ashamed. When
you, with daring infidelity, proposed making a bargain with
your Maker, you little thought how you would have rued
the day if your impious wish had been granted. If the
thaw, for which you had the audacity to ask as a proof of
the existence of a God, had set in, this escape had never
been effected ; your queen would have been in captivity,
harder to bear than death, and your promised wife would by
this time have become the property of one of Stephen's
lawless barons. Nay, my son,' he added, seeing Harold's
downcast expression, 'it is not for me to judge you hardly,
for I know you were well-nigh mad with trouble; but oh!
my children, may this lesson teach you in these troublous
times to trust more implicitly in the God of love, and learn
that though man proposes, God disposes.' L. D. E.
MOEBID fancies crossed my vision.
' Everything we love must die.'
'Twas a day in drear December,
Clouds were in the winter sky.
Clouds were also o'er my spirit,
Time seemed long, and life was sad;
A Snowdrop. 553
AVhere had flown my morning freshness ?
All was then so bright and glad.
Nought of sorrow, nought of sadness,
All I loved were gathered there;
Then my future rose in gladness,
Shadowy castles filled the air.
Gone are now my happy castles,
All my dreams have passed me by ;
Everything is dark and dreary
As this dull December sky.
Slowly turned I from the window,
Down the stair I took my way,
Came at last into my garden—
Damp, and drear, and dead it lay.
' Yes, 'tis truth !' I sadly murmured,
' Everything on earth must die.'
Suddenly my steps arrested.
Something now had caught my eye,
Something checked my peevish murmurs.
Pleading 'twas not truth I said;
Only a poor foolish snowdrop
Had awakened from the dead.
Thus it was I learnt the lesson,
We must die to live again;
' Death the gate of life,' I whispered,
' All we suffer's not in vain.'
Then I turned me from the garden,
Traced my footsteps up the stair.
Once more crossed my chamber threshold,
Eaised once more my weight of care.
But the burden was not heavy,
Gladly now I took the load ;
Christ the first fruits ; our Example,
We must follow where He trod:
Follow o'er the roughest pathway,
Follow simply, without fear;
Like the snowdrop we'll awaken,
But to an Eternal Year.
M. T.
554 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Our CJjrtstmas ©inner anli its Consequences,
Our day-dreams were verified at last, and we were actually
at home in the old house, surrounded by the friends who
had known us when we were babies. Ten years before a
l)ank failure had driven us abroad, and in our wandering,
make-shift life home had been the paradise for which we
longed, and hoped, and struggled.
Our exile was much harder for my sister Edith than for
me, because she was seventeen at the time of our misfortune,
and enjoying her first season. I was so young I scarcely
remembered our former life; so thoroughly liked our roving
existence and all the variety it afforded,—new places to be
explored, and new friends to be made every year. Whenever
we were particularly fortunate in regard to our surroundings,
and I was disposed to exult over it, mamma or Edith would
say gravely, * Poor child ! But of course you have never
known the comforts of an English home and respectable
English servants, or you would not be so pleased with
this.'
Nevertheless I was anticipating the Christmas festivities
with mixed feelings, for I had received so many disappoint¬
ments since I had landed in my native country, that I
di'eaded further disillusion. England had seemed to me so
grey and sad-looking, and the people so stiff and cold ; there
was none of the charming cordiality that had characterised
our life abroad. Society was more a duty than a pleasure :
everybody tried to do their duty, but not cheerfully. You
did not visit because you wished to see the people, or to
make arrangements for future meetings, but only because
you owed them a call.
I felt like a fish out of water, while Edith, on the contrary,
was quite in her native element, and thought everything
was right because it happened at home.
The morning after our arrival I wished to run over to the
rectory and ask one of the girls to take me up to the top of
a charming hill I saw in the distance,—I know I should have
been delighted to do it for them had they come as strangers
to anywhere we were,—but Edith assured me they would be
quite astonished at such a freedom. I must wait till they
liad called and we had returned their call, and they had
asked us to some entertainment to show their wish to be
friendly, and we had asked them to something else; and
Our Christmas Dinner and its Consequences.       555
then, if the girls were pleasant, I might propose it for some
future day, leaving them to fix it when most convenient for
themselves,—and by that time my hill would be covered
with snow.
I suppose I looked my astonishment and disappointment,
for Edith added complacently,' Such free and easy manners
may do abroad, but here it is very different, my dear, as you
will see in time.'
' Very different indeed,' I said to myself.
Then the servants were very troublesome in spite of their
high characters. Abroad, when Pauline was stupid or Marie
untidy, we laughed and did the work ourselves; here
the servants' deficiencies brought disgrace on their mis¬
tresses.
' What will Mrs. So-and-so think of me with a servant
like that?' called out mamma distractedly, when our page
had announced the visitor simply as ' Here's a lady.'
And Edith was in despair for the credit of htr housekeep¬
ing when the cook spoilt the jelly.
I failed to see the force of it, I must say. You could not
make, the servants do their work properly, and you were not
allowed to do it yourself, and yet all the blame and disrepute
fell on your devoted head.
That cook of ours was a great trial to me. She had been a
dozen years with old friends of ours at some remote period
of existence, and they almost insisted on our taking her,
assuring us that we could trust her with uncounted gold.
Perhaps so. AVe never tried her with that, but I should
not have liked to be obliged to trust her with anything
else.
'A most respectable-looking woman,' mamma called her;
but I thought her quite repulsive, with her gaunt figure and
grim face, and forced smiles when she saw any of us; which
latter seemed to require an awful amount of pressure before
they appeared at all on her sour visage, so different from the
smiling ^//es and graceful honnes I had been accustomed to
see.
She was very extravagant also, and took mysterious
illnesses which affected her memory, and made her forget to
cook the dinner. Yet she was popular in the lower regions
with all but the little page. One day, when we returned
rather late from a long drive at the hour the dinner ought to
have been announced, the page rushed in to say cook was in
a fit on the kitchen floor. We all trooped downstairs to find
her prostrate, with her head on the fender, and clutching in
55^ TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
her hand an empty bottle that smelt of rum, surrounded by
the materials for our meal, but all mixed up together like a
conjuror's trick.
To us this was conclusive; but the woman stoutly main¬
tained it was only a sudden attack of illness, for which the
rum had been tried as a desperate remedy. She was given a
mouth's notice to quit. We would have wished her to leave
at once, but the other servants took her part, and declared
her to be ' a most respectable person,' and the bottle of rum
only an unlucky coincidence. I wonder what respectable
means in England ! I always imagined that the term implied
a person worthy of respect, but I suppose that was one of
my foreign ideas.
We said we did not care to retain permanently any one
subject to those sort of illnesses ; but perhaps a remem¬
brance of the approaching Christmas festivities made us
more lenient than we would otlierwise have been, and we
agreed to allow her to remain till the end of the month. I
had built up a little romance in regard to Edith and a
neighbour of ours, Mr. Hay, who had also been involved in
the bank business which had exiled us. I do not know how
I found it out, but there had certainly been something
between them long ago. Edith was still pretty, although no
longer very young, being past seven-and-twenty, and was
much admired by those who did not know her age ; and of
course Mr. Hay, who was five years older, must be quite
middle-aged now. He came to call upon us as soon as we
arrived, but we were out, and he never came back again, and
we never met him anywhere, for he was a gentleman farmer,
and too busy to go to parties.
However, he accepted our invitation to dinner on Christ¬
mas day ; and I am sure Edith was pleased, although she
pretended to be so cool and indifferent. I found her looking
very earnestly at his note, which mamma had left on tlie
table, and although she said, in a matter-of-fact way, ' I see
I\Ir. Hay has the same remarkably ugly monogram he used
to have long ago,' I saw her blushing.
The cook sustained her role of injured innocence most
admirably; our meals were regularly served and beautifully
cooked; and Beatrice—for such was the lovely name she
bore—said so plainly in every look and gesture, ' Behold in
me a poor victim of tyranny and unjust suspicion!' we almost
relented, and made her an abject apology, requesting her to
remain till her own convenience.
Mr.   Hay  was  only another  disappointment.     He   was
Our Christinas Dinner and its Conseqjiences.       557
quite an ordinary-looking man, not even strictly handsome ;
and he shook hands with Edith less impressively than with
mamma, and hoped she had enjoyed her foreign tour, as if
she had been absent a month instead of ten years. He took
no notice of me, and seemed to have forgotten my existence.
The dinner was excellent; and Mr. Hay, seated by Edith,
woke up a little, and spoke of old scenes quite brightly.
The plum-pudding was particularly good, and Mr. Hay
pressed Edith so much to take a second helping that she
agreed, although I am sure she did not care for it. I should
really have liked another piece if any one had pressed me;
but nobody did.
Shortly after Edith became very pale, and, without making
any excuse, suddenly rose and left the table. Mr. Hay
looked so vexed and annoyed, I was sure it was something
he had said that had caused her to do so strange a thing.
We had scarcely recovered from our surprise, when the
door was burst open in the most violent manner, and in
rushed our unlucky page, crying loudly ' Help, help ! murder,
murder! we are all poisoned!' and fell down flat on the
floor.
The scene that followed baffles description ; one lady
fainted, and another went into hysterics, and a gentleman
declaring himself to be at the point of death left a tender
and pathetic message for his wife, with whom he had been
on notoriously bad terms for the last fifteen years.
Mr. Hay came to the rescue in the most surprising
manner. He first laughed at the idea of poison as a bad
joke on the cook's part to frighten the boy; then he picked
up the recumbent page, and interrogated him strictly on the
grounds of his belief that we were all poisoned. The boy's
testimony, which, although given amid tears and sobs, never
varied in spite of Mr. Hay's Jesuitical hints and insinuations,
was this: That on carrying down the plates he had been
tempted to take a small piece of pudding left on one, and
finding it so good he had proceeded to help himself from
the dish. The cook surprised him while his mouth was still
full, and with wicked glee assured him he would never
forget that piece of pudding as long as he lived, but that, if
he had taken much, he might not have a long life in which
to remember it.
And then she added, ' She knew how to serve people out
who treated her as we had done, and that she had always
been famous for her plum-pudding, and that greedy folk
would get a fit punishment to-night.'
5S8 TJie Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
A groom on horseback was despatched instantly for the
nearest doctor, in case of accidents. Mr. Hay next confronted
the cook, and commanded her to eat up directly a large
plateful of pudding. The woman had certainly been
drinking after despatching the fatal pudding, or she would
not have betrayed herself to the boy; but she had sufficient
cunning to pretend to be much worse than she was, and
would not comprehend any questions put to her. A vacant
stare, and an incoherent murmur to the effect that she had
always been famous for her puddings, and everyone enjoyed
them, and she could not help folk over-eating themselves,
and she had characters for twenty years, and nobody ever
found fault with her cooking before, and she never tasted
dishes that had been in the dining-room—not she, etc. etc.,
was all that Mr. Hay's cross-examination could elicit. He
declared she ought to be shut up with the pudding till sh.e
had finished it, and he was so furious I believe he would
have done it had she been his cook.
When the doctor arrived, no one was found to be seriously
ill but poor Edith, who had complained less than any, and
had been consequently rather overlooked, while we flew with
remedies to less gentle or less courageous patients. There
had certainly been some sort of poison put in the dish,
although not in such quantities as to cause any risk to life,
except in Edith's case, in whose second helping a quantity
appeared to have concentrated.
Oh ! that was a terrible night, and how I wished we were
safe back again in dear France or Switzerland, where the
people were too stupid to think of revenging themselves in
this fashion !
Mr. Hay and myself were the only two of all the dinner
party who did not go to bed, and in our casual meetings on
the stairs, when I was rushing about to get things for Edith,
we became quite friendly. He wished to send for more
advice, and himself suggested fresh remedies every five
minutes. It became almost ludicrous to see Edith's door
opening slowly and one of the maids gliding in to say Mr.
Hay wondered if champagne would not be a good thing to
try, and immediately afterwards milk would be suggested,
and then soap, and then mustard, and then cayenne pepper,
and then salt and water, and a variety of other extraordinary
cures.
Next morning Edith was pronounced out of danger and
in the fair way of recovery; and all her fellow-victims were
well enough to return to their own homes.
Men's Rights. 559
Mr. Hay insisted on giving the wretched cook into
custody; but when he returned with the necessary warrant
she had vanished. I believe mamma connived at her escape,
having a great dread of justice, or rather law, as at present
administered, considering the punishment included in the
proceedings greater to tlie innocent victims than that
eventually awarded to the guilty person. Anyhow we
never heard of her more.
Mr. Hay got ill as Edith got well,—at least he never found
himself strong enough to take the journey of five miles
home till the day that she came downstairs; and the con¬
sequences of it all was that they became engaged. Edith
declares herself to be for ever grateful to the piece of
pudding that caused Mr. Hay so many reproaches on that
eventful night, for it cleared away all the mists of the last
ten years, and let them know how much they really cared
for each other, which nothing short of a like calamity would
have done.
The consequences to me were not so agreeable. I lost my
only sister, and my taste for plum-pudding was utterly
spoilt; I have never cared to see, far less to taste it ever
since. NoNO.
PERSONS REPRESENTED.
Mrs. Tkedemdown, M.P., S.A.
A Nw-se.
Mr. Tredemdown, hushand to Mrs. T.
Mr. Pahst, hrother to Mrs. T.
A Baby.
A Servant.
Scene.—A hall: man-servant opeiiing the door; enter
Mr. Pahst.
Mr. P. Is your mistress at home ?
Mctn. Yes, sir, but she is just going to her oftice. My
master is at leisure, however.
Mr. P. (aside). 0 ho! rather peculiar. So Minnie has an
office, has she!
Follows the servant into a room, ivhere we find Mrs. Tredem¬
down standing with her lack to the fire reading the neivspa2')er.
Mrs. T. {aside). Who is this creature?    Just like one of
55o TJie Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
these stupid men, to show a visitor in when I am busy.
(Aloud) How d'ye do, sir ? Glad to see you. Pray be seated.
(To man-servant) Why on earth did you let this man in ?
You should have told your master, and shown him up to
the drawing-room.
Mr. P. Minnie, do you not know me ?
M7-S. T. Gracious ! 'tis my brother Peter; how do you do,
old fellow ? I thought you were in South America. {So saying,
she shook him heartily hy the hand, and gave him a slap on the
shoulder.) Well, how do you like the old country ? You
will see a change here—change for the better since I was a
girl.
Mr. P. H'm, I'm not quite so sure of that. What's this
about an office ? and have you had a fever, your hair is so
short ?    I don't think you look very well. Minnie.
Mrs. T. {laughing). I'm tolerably busy, what with these
mining shares in Honolulu, and Parliament duties coming
on,—you know I'm member for Muttlebury,—and the girls
growing and needing good openings found for them, and
Mr. Tredemdown so delicate, poor man. I have to run down
to Brighton with him every now and then for change of air,
so no wonder that I don't look as young as I did. Don't
look so bewildered, poor fellow. I hope you are not going
to faint; there is nothing I hate so much as fainting men.
Here, take a glass of sherry.
Mr. P. Oh, Minnie! what do you mean by all this
nonsense. You'll kill me with laughing; you surely must be
mad.
Mrs. T. Mad! I was mad, I allow, but now we've
changed all that, and women have got their rights, and put
men in their proper places. But I won't talk business with
you ; men always get the worst in an argument, and it's not
fair to lead them on. I know you want to see my husband,
he is in the drawing-room. He will enjoy a chat with you ;
poor fellow, he is constantly on the sofa now. I fear I must
leave you, I have an appointment with Mrs. Henpecker
(worthy woman, capital head for business) and Lady Snap-
emup. We have to choose a manager for the North London
Lunatic Asylum out of fifty candidates, all clever women,
with excellent testimonials. I think my niece Frances has
a good chance ; clever girl that. Well, here is Mr. Tredem¬
down.    How are you to-day, dear ?
Enter a man looking rather ashamed of himself, and with a
melancholy expression of countenance. He wears a purple velvet
dressing-goion, trimmed with poi7it lace ; a little hoy holds him
Mens Rights. 561
tightly hy tlie hand. He hriyhtens up rather at the sight of Mr.
Fahst, but his passive vulanclioly returns as soon as he sees his
vjifc.
Mr. P. Well, my dear John, how are you ? Minnie says
you have not been very well.
Mrs. T. No, indeed he has not. I tell him he should take
more exercise, and next week he is going to take the children
down to Brighton for a week of sea-bathing.
Mr. T. I'm truly glad to see you, Peter. Minnie is such
an active woman now that I have nothing left to do. I
made this lace on my dressing-gown myself, and I've trimmed
baby's pelisse, too, with it.    Should you like to see baby ?
Mr. Fahst looks very much sliocked, and seems to think if
his sister is mad, her husband is worse. Nurse enters with
baby, and hands it to Mrs. Tredemdovm, %oho holds it for a few
moments till it begins to cry, and then says :
Here, John, take the child, I'm never comfortable when
I have it; I'm so afraid of its head rolling off, and in these
long clothes one hardly knows which end to take hold of.
Well, good-bye, take care of each other. I'll be back to five-
o'clock tea.'
Exit Mrs. Tredemdown, buttoning her jacket as she goes, and
taking dovjn her bonnet from the stand at the door. The two
7nen look at each other. Mr. Fahst begins to laugh, but poor
Mr. Tredemdown says sadly, as he sinks into an easy-chair :
It's no laughing matter, I can assure you, Peter. Ever
since Mrs. Tredemdown has had her vote, she has been
insufferable. The poor boys, too, feel the change in their
mother and sisters deeply, but there is no help for it. She
goes to about half a dozen meetings daily, comes home about
five, has a cup of tea with me and the boys, and then gene¬
rally dines at her club with some of her alarming friends, or
goes to a scientific lecture.    {Sighs.)
Mr. F. But how can you stand it ? You should stop all
this nonsense; why, it must be your own fault, for when
Minnie married you, she was as gentle and attractive a girl
as one could wish to see.
Mr. T. Oh ! I don't think it was the fault of the women at
the beginning. Some insane men put it into tlie heads of
some insaner women, and the mischief has been spreading
ever since. It makes me quite sad to see Hubert and Fred
' sitting in the drawing-room till they are married,' as the
saying is. And in town the poor things get but little
amusement, for the girls are all too busy to take them any¬
where.    You remember Emily, my eldest girl,—what a nice
No. 48.—December 1878. 2 N
5^2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
pretty creature she used to be,—well, she is a merchant in
Liverpool now; her chief business is to send out Skye
terriers to Calcutta in exchange for cockatoos. Her mother
says she is a girl of spirit, but for my part, I am fondest of
Amy. She cannot bear this upsetting of nature, and, to her
mother's disgust, prefers staying at home with her old father
to lecturing, or becoming a fashionable doctor. My eldest
son, Charley, has married a farmer in Ireland.
Mr. P. A farmer ?
Mr. T. Yes, I believe she farms her own land. She is not
a bad sort of girl, and I think Charley is very happy. She
is kind-hearted, though rather a rough diamond. It was
love at first sight. She met Charley at a lawn tennis party,
called here next day, and three days after proposed. The
dear boy came to me at once, and as I knew of no reason for
refusing my consent,—and their mother leaves all such things
to me,—they were married within three weeks. It was quite
romantic, I assure you, but things do go on at a great rate in
this age. If you will excuse me, I w^ill just get my wife's
slippers and warm them for her. She likes those little atten¬
tions. She will be home directly, and would be very tired if
she were a man; for she does far more than I did when I
had charge of the office, but nothing could tire Mrs. Tredem-
down.    Here she is.
{Enter Mrs. Tredemdown)
Mrs. T. Well, here you are, both of you, having a good
gossip, I daresay. My slippers—thanks, dear. But really I can't
stay more than half an hour; Mrs. BuUeman wiU call for me
in her brougham in an hour. We have to give our votes in
the house for—; well, it's something you would not under¬
stand if I told you ; and then I dine at the club. Wish I
could ask you, brother, but our rules do not admit gentlemen.
You would meet some of our cleverest and most energetic
women. I may be late, as we have a debate afterwards, but
don't sit up, dear: I can let myself in, you know. To-morrow
is my leisure day ; so, brother, I hope we shall see a little
of each other. Good-bye, I hope you will have a pleasant
evening.
{Exit Mrs. T.) M. F.
CH* SMcrncr: ^ German Currcr 33clL
Whilst translations of English novels are often published
with remarkable rapidity in Berlin or Leipzig, and eagerly
E. Werner: A German Currer Bell. 563
read by an appreciative public, we at home have hitherto
for the most part been content with a very superficial
acquaintance with German works of fiction. The fact is, we
are somewhat prone to believe that our nation has all to
give and nothing to take in that branch of literature. Nor
are we without a reason for this pride.
It is a well-known fact that Great Britain specially excels
in its fictitious literature. Those frequent acts of piracy
which call forth the lamentations of victimized authors,
prove that even the great Republic beyond the seas, so
gifted with creative intellects, must stoop to borrow supplies
from our little island in order to provide this particular
literary food for its children.
France, too, despite Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, and
the late George Sand (might we not even add Alphonse
Daudet ?), has been obliged to yield the palm in light litera¬
ture to the land that boasts of a Dickens, a Thackeray, and a
George Eliot. And so we turn to Germany to measure our
strength.
Germany possesses an innate leaning towards romance
and devotion to aesthetics, in great part a heritage from her
fable-loving forefathers, which causes a tone of unreality
and improbability to pervade some writers' productions.
Occasionally, on laying down one of their novels to return to
the sober prose of this nineteenth century, one feels as if
suddenly awakened from dreams of poetic wanderings in
fairyland.
So much for the faults of German fiction; and now, if we
take the trouble to wade through a good deal that is weari¬
some, and more or less worthless, shall we not be rewarded
by discovering also much that is both praiseworthy and
deserving of imitation ? Yes ; and that English readers are
gradually becoming convinced of the fact, is plainly shown
by the slowly but steadily increasing interest taken in
novels translated from the German. They chiefly attract
by power and definiteness of purpose, the power being both
of language and description. Slipshod writing and bad
grammar are unknown—indeed, they would not be tolerated
for one moment by German readers of any class. All have
too profound a love for their native tongue to acquiesce
quietly in its mutilation, and too keen an eye for detecting
faults of expression to let such things pass without the
bitterest satire. The other kind of power is closely connected
with the fact that most German writers of note have some
decided aim in view, which makes them describe scenes and
564 TJte Ladies EdijibnrgJi Magazine.
characters with an exactitude sometimes even degenerating
into tediousness.
In seeking to educate the public mind, warn it against
dangers, point out abuses,—religious, social, or political,—
German novelists and play-writers are for the most part
faithful to their task. The stage and press have again and
again pointed out what ruin and sorrow must result from
participation in those bubble speculations which have been
started by Germans, since the French gold of '71 awakened
a thirst for further gain, and through which, while a few
persons may have grown suddenly rich, many others of that
usually prudent nation have been enticed into dangerous
investments which have been their destruction.
With the same unsparing truthfulness have various authors
sought again and again to expose the love of display, etc.,
the hypocrisy practised in society, the cringing to bearers of
titles, and all that toadyism abounding at small courts, which
form so large an element in German society.
Foremost among those who wield the lash unflinchingly
is E. Werner, whose writings have found much favour with
the British public,—indeed, her Am Altar (Sacred Vows)
has appeared simultaneously in two English translations.
This author's vigorous style is the probable reason of her
being spoken of in all our reviews as ' Herr' Werner: she
writes with such energy and powder as few would expect to
emanate from a woman's pen. It is nevertheless true that
this distinguished authoress, wdiose real name is Elizabeth
Blirstenbinder, is a gentle, sympathetic woman, beloved in
private life for her genial, sociable qualities.
The only child of a prosperous man of business resident
in Berlin, the quiet leisure of her early days gave her much
opportunity for reflection. To this fact she herself attaches
much value, believing that she thereby gained self-reliance
and self-knowledge, together with strength of character and
clearness in her opinions. Her father was not of a com¬
panionable disposition; therefore, in accordance with his
wishes, Fraulein Biirstenbinder and her brothers kept much
aloof from society. She had no friends amongst her con¬
temporaries ; but her mother was all in all to her, and their
sympathies thoroughly coincided. The memory of this loving
mother is treasured by the daughter with true filial devotion,
as that of her good genius.
Berlin is no forcing-house for mysticism, romance or
sentimentality of any sort. Keen satire, unsparing criticism,
a matter-of-fact way of viewing life and its concerns in
E.  Werner: A German Cnrrer Bell. 565
general,—these   are  the  characteristics  of the  capital   of
Prussia, and now and then a vein of harshness and bitterness
traceable in E. Werner's compositions, bears witness to the
chilling influence of the social atmosphere in which most of
her days have been passed.    She also inveighs against the
sins of great church dignitaries and the exclusiveness and
love of patronising to be found amongst the nobility, as only
one educated where rationalistic and democratic ideas pre¬
vailed would be likely to do.    Women, it is declared, are
naturally conservative; as a rule, be it said to their credit,
they are equally disposed to espouse the cause of religion.
But if many of her daughters are an exception in this latter
respect, Germany only reaps as she has sown, though she
now, perhaps, would fain return to the old and simple paths,
which are all the safer because well-trodden.   Meanwhile she
has yet to recover from the pernicious effects of the long
years when sloth, formalism, and mysticism reigned supreme,
with the natural results of a strong reaction to scepticism.
Instead of the best and noblest, chiefly—if I may be per¬
mitted the expression—the halt and maimed in intellect w'ere
ofi'ered for the service of the sanctuary.    If a son was an ill-
conditioned boor, too great a dunce for any other profession,
he was still counted good enough to become a priest or pastor.
The result is a well-nigh shipwrecked faith, with but few
helpful hands to steer the vessel through the troubled waters
of atheism and socialism, or weather the fierce  storm  of
ultramontanism.    Thus  it  cannot be wondered at if bold
seekers after truth, brave pioneers ready to denounce and do
battle with existing evils, should display masculine strength,
rather than feminine softness, in waging this mighty warfare.
To paint touching pictures of lowly grief and hidden sorrows
courageously borne, to blend sweetness and purity with lofty
conceptions of character,—these, it would seem, are peculiarly
adapted to the powers of female writers of fiction.    But such
work must have its forerunners.    The rough way must first
be made plain by a commanding voice, sounding through the
wilderness of social evils, ' Cut down, cut down, and spare
not;' the golden grain of truth must first be severed from
the chaff of superstition.    A hearty acknowledgment of the
ties and obligations uniting the whole human family must
take the place of a punctilious courtesy, which nevertheless
finds an outlet in secret backbiting; singleness of purpose,
and a love of what is genuine and real, must be more valued
in society than has hitherto been the case; then, and only
then, writers, pointing to the emblem of Him who is the
566 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
truth, can hope to find a ready hearing. Till then is it much
to be wondered at, if sincere and honest hearts, turning with
innate shrinking from the existing state of things, fail partly
in their over-zealous haste to discern the good from the evil
when carrying out their work of reform ?
Women can well afford to hold out the hand of fellowship
to any among their sisters whose real object is social amend¬
ment, if only they deny all countenance to that class of
writers who misuse their powers by displaying to the world
in bright, enticing colours, pictures which had better remain
amongst the hidden things of darkness.
But to return to E. Werner. Despite much sternness in
holding up a mirror to existing evils, touches of grace and
beauty are not lacking in her works. We find many such in
Vineta (Under a Charm). The hero's generosity and genuine
simplicity shine forth from time to time from beneath a very
rough exterior in a way marvellously calculated to enlist the
reader's sympathies in his favour of this youth, whose honest
heart still pulsates warody, despite the many intrigues of a
deceitful, worldly-minded mother, enough to sicken him with
human nature, and make him cease to believe in the existence
of honesty of purpose.
In Ein Held der Fcder, a story of the Franco-German war,
we have a very faithful picture of the studious and peace-
loving Professor, who lays aside his pen, the weapon dearest
to him, in exchange for a sword wherewith to fight loyally
for the Fatherland.
A7n Altar (Sacred Vows) wages war against Jesuitical
cunning, and exposes clerical abuses.
In Glilch ylti!/(Success and how He Won it) are contrasted
with dramatic skill the position of the working classes with
that of possessors of wealth and title.
Gesprengte Fesseln (Riven Bonds) has not only failed to
increase E. Werner's reputation in Great Britain, but in
Germany it was likewise met with a good deal of criticism
on the score of improbability. But being only one of her
earlier productions, it would probably never have been trans¬
lated but for the warm reception accorded to her later
works.
It is in the weekly numbers of the Grutenlauhe that the
writings of this talented authoress have hitherto been
published, and it is to be hoped she may long continue to
add fresh attractions to its pages. M. M. C.
Our Library Table. 567
©ur ILibrarg Cable.
Modern Frenchmen. By P. G. Hamerton. P\iblished by
Seeley, Jackson, & Halliday, 54 Fleet Street, London.
Every member of the reading public must feel grateful to Mr.
Hamerton for giving us this delightful volume. It contains five
biographies of Frenchmen of this century—men whose names deserve
to be widely celebrated and long remembered. The book is, however,
unequal ; for while the three lives which stand last—those of Rude,
J. J. Ampere, and Henri Regnault—are thoroughly interesting and
are written with a full and hearty appreciation, the two first are just
the reverse ; and this is not because these men were themselves less
interesting than the others, for Victor Jacquemont and Henri
Perreyve yield to none in nobleness of character, but, somehow or
other, this account of their lives strikes us as flat and almost dull.
Perhaps, though, we ought not to expect Mr. Hamerton to write as
sympathetically of the man of science and the priest as of the
sculptor, the man of letters, and the painter, for his fellow-feeling
must naturally be stronger for the devotees of art. The account of
Rude is excellent. We seem to know the strong, simple, honest
fellow, witli his manly determination, in spite of all artistic triumphs,
to remain through life what he was born, a simple working man, with
his unwearied persistence in labour, and his quiet giving up of every¬
thing to his art. That his wife possessed the same temper as himself
is shown by this extract : ' The marble was there for the new statue,
but what about the current expenses whilst the artist was executing
xil . . . There were house expenses and studio expenses, the wages
of the carver, and all to be paid—out of what? "If necessary, we
will sell the linen off our backs!" said Madame Rude.' The bio¬
graphy of Ampere is both interesting and amusing ; the description
in it of Madame Recamier is very good ; and there is a capital
anecdote of the elder Ampere. But the most beautiful and the most
touching of these sketches is that of Henri Regnault, for in him we
see youth and genius crowned by the Angel of Death with a hero's
wreath of glory. Indeed, the story of this young artist's life is in
itself a poem. Born to a heritage of fame,—his father was that Victor
Regnault so renowned in science,—from his childhood inspired by
art, at an early age winning high honour with his pencil, and when
only twenty-seven giving up the gaiety and brilliance of a Parisian
life to live secluded in Morocco for the sake of his painting,—himself
so richly gifted, so high-sj)irited, so noble-minded,—and then the
tragic end ; for he died fighting gallantly as a common soldier outside
Paris in that terrible winter of '71, having left comfort and beauty,
art and love, to serve his country in her hour of danger. He was a
little over twenty-seven years of age. At his funeral, Mr. Hamerton
writes ; ' The nave of the church was so thronged that it could not
hold the people. His comrades in arms were there . . . and—sadder
than all the black hangings and the crape, and the chanting and the
drumming—close by the bier lay one little fragrant bouquet of white
lilac, sent by his betrothed.'
As a last thought about this book, we may remark that, widely
difiFerent as these five men were in age, in profession, and in character,
in one thing they were alike : they were all single-minded, and their
568 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
lives were completely subordinated to one noble purpose. Each with
unswerving determination trod that ' path of duty,' which, as our own
great poet has told us, 'is the way to glory,' and therefore we can
hardly think that any one will close this record of their lives without
feeling raised, if only for a short moment, above the triviality, the
meanness, and the self-seeking of this bustling world.
Question Scries.
I. History. —Give a brief account of the sect called ' The Lollards.'
State the origin of their name, and the names of their chief leaders.
II. English Literature.—Mention three noted writers of English
prose prior to 1570, adding brief descriptive notes.
Answers to be sent in by 15th January, addressed 'Qu. C, care of
Miss Walker, 37 Gillespie Crescent.' The best answer to each qiiestion
will be inserted in the magazine, and prizes are offered at the close of
the year for the greatest number in each department. N.B.—Answers
only to be written on one side of the paper, and the real name and
address of the sender, besides her pseudonym, to be given. Only
the latter will appear in the magazine. History not to exceed
twenty-four. Literature twenty-six printed lines ; twelve words go
to a line. We warn correspondents against running time too short.
The 15th is the latest possible day on which the Editors can receive
any answer; an accidental delay in delivery may exclude a good
answer from competition.
ANSWERS TO OCTOBER SERIES.
In History: B. the best; Heather, veiy good ; M. B., very good,
but too long ; Hilda, the same ; Spider and May-ely, very good, as
usual.
In Literature: Clambel, in spite of a slight mistake in a date (1621
for 1611), is much the best ; Hilda and Heather are good as far as
correctness goes, but have taken their answer too closely from the
authority they have evidently studied upon the subject. Hilda is
promising ; we hope she will persevere.
I. The summoning by the shire-reeves of four knights from each
shire, as representing the lesser barons, to the great council of King
John, was the first recognition of the representative system in Par¬
liament. In 1265 Simon de Montfort further summoned two citizens
fi'om each city and two burgesses from each burgh to Parliament.
Edward I. confirmed the election of burgesses, and in 1293 summoned
them to discuss at least matters of taxation. Still the four orders of
the State, clergy, barons, knights, and burgesses, continued to meet
and make grants separately. In Edward III.'s reign, knights and
burgesses united under the title of ' The Commons,'and the clergy
withdrawing, the barons remained as the 'House of Lords.' Then,
too, the petitions of the Commons on receiving the royal assent were
ccmiirmed as statutes, and the first regular Speaker was chosen.
Parliamentary power grew rapidly. The deposition of Richard II.
was by the consent of the Houses, and the succession to the crown of
Henry VIII. was regulated by them. After the troubles of the
Stuart reigns, the passing of the Bill of Rights confirmed this ancient
privilege to the House of Commons. The present separation into
the great parties of Liberals and Conservatives may be traced under
different names from the early days of James I., and the system of
Stray Notes. c,6g
administration by a Cabinet and Premier drawn from the existing
majority in the House of Commons, dates from the reigns of William
and Anne. The sole right of taxation has rested in Parliament from
a very early date ; but the system of annual grants began only after
the Revolution. Bills passed in 1832 and 18C7 have greatly enlarged the
electoral body, previously little changed from the days of Henry VI.—B.
II. One effect of Coverdale and Tyndale's translations of the Bible
was the fixing of the English language. The Bible, where diffused,
has always had a conservative effect on its language. Wyckliff's
translation was comparatively little known and read, and had become
to some extent obsolete in a hundred years. Coverdale's Bible (1535)
was at one time ordered to be kept in every parish church, and there,
chamed to the desk, was read by all who wished ; and the latest
authorized translation (1621) was made on the same lines, and differs
little from it in style. Again, this open Bible gave an impetus to
reading which prepared the English people for the brilliant literary
era of Elizabeth. Yet another effect was the enriching of our
language by the addition of many theological and abstract terms
from the Latin. For many years monkish Latin had been in
England the language of theology, and the old English theological
terms had dropped out of use. These, chiefly abstract, Latin terms
employed in our translation, soon became incorporated in ordinary
English, and greatly enriched it. Still the gain is not unmixed ;
some of the now obsolete Saxon theological terms explain themselves
better to the unlearned than the Latin equivalents which have been
the sources of many religious bewilderments and puzzles. And the
narrative portions of the Old Testament and the Gospels are more
English and more comprehensible by the people than the Epistles
where terms from the Latin most abound. Claribel.   '
N.B.—\Ye must again request that competitors will mark their
addresses on their papers, otherwise mistakes may be unavoidable in
assigning the prizes. The last Questions of the present series will be
issued in January, and we then hope to commence a new series with
some improvements, of which due notice will be given. '
King's College Lectures fob Ladies.—The inaugural lecture of
the session was delivered by Canon Barry, at the Vestry Hall Kensine-
oaa',^;>°'''^°"V°" Monday, 14th October, and was attended by about
200 ladies. Instead of introducing his own subject. Holy Scripture
and Church History, he devoted the hour to a review of Higher
Education in England, treating his subject under three heads ■—(1)
Ihe present position of Higher Education in England (2) The
same, as affecting women. (3) The work done by King's College
In the absence of more detailed information from a Report, we luay
mention as stated by the lecturer, that the courses of last year were
attended by from 500 to 600 ladies, during each of the three terms
into which they are divided. A very large majority were working
students, taking part in examinations and essays, in which the
results of their work bore favourable comparison with that of the
male students of King's College.
The proposed courses this year are twenty-two in number.    In the
case ot Latin, Greek, and Harmony, both elementary and advanced
570 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
classes are offered, and in other subjects also, if found necessary, these
will be formed.
The departments embraced in the syllabus are Holy Scripture and
Church History, Mental Philosophy, History, Language, Mathe¬
matics, Astronomy, Physics, including Harmony and Drawing.
The Ladies' Educational Association.—The annual general
Meeting took place on Saturday, 9th Nov. Several vacancies in the
council, made by the retirement in rotation of members, were filled
by the following elections:—Miss Blyth, Miss L. Dundas, Miss
Houldsworth, Miss Kerr, Miss Menzies, Miss H. Neaves, Mrs.
Russell, Miss Urquhart, and Dr. Donaldson. All the opening
Lectures of this session have now been delivered by their various
Professors. Full particulars regarding the Association may be
obtained from the Calendar now published by David Douglas, 9 South
Castle Street.
Ladies' Preparatory Classes.—The system of Local Examinations,
as now carried on for many years, is rapidly gaining ground in Scot¬
land. Preparatory classes are being started in schools and by private
tutors, none of which have attracted more attention than those now
opened for the fourth session in S. George's Hall. These classes
now include, besides the usual Preliminary Subjects, courses in
English Literature, Logic, Natural Science, Mathematics, Latin,
French, German, and the Theory of Music ; Latin seems this year
particularly to attract ladies. To us the most interesting feature is
the system of Instruction by Correspondence, by means of which the
benefit of these classes is carried to many a secluded country house,
vicarage, and manse in the remoter parts of the kingdom. Already
nearly oOO distant students are enrolled as correspondents, a fact
the more to be noted, inasmuch as Glasgow is copying our examj^le by
establishing similar classes.
i^ottccs to CoriTSponticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Murray & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. No anonymous com¬
munication can be noticed.
All contributions to be accompanied by the writer's name and
address. Rejected articles can only be returned if accompanied by
stamps to cover postage. This applies to all short poems, etc., sent
inside letters, with requests for answers. No enclosure can either be
noticed or returned unless a stamp be sent at the same time.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
tlie Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
Papers already promised or received for tlie series on ' Country
Pursuits,' on Curling, Fishing, Keeping Poultry, Games in the
Garden, Hedging and Ditching, Dairy and Cows, and on Swimming.
Further suggestions very acceptable.
Contributions are often delayed for want of space.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society
will be held on Saturday, 7th December, 10.46 a.m., at 4 Oxford
Terrace. All members are requested to attend, if possible. Debate,
' Is the present neglect of Italian in favour of other languages, common
in the education of girls, to be regretted I'
