gl5l51En5l5l5l!5l515lE15ISlSl5l^L^l5l!5l5lSl5l5l^
^^^■^
r.
m:
1
! i i-         j /.ft
U-3.q3.
^ ^s
THE ATTEMPT
A    LITERARY    MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE
LADIES'  EDINBURGH  ESSAY  SOCIETY.
VOLUME    VI.
"AUSPICIUM   MELIORIS   ^VI.'
PRINTED FOR THE LADIES' EDINBURGH ESSAY SOCIETY.
COLSTON & SON, EDINBURGH.
MDCCCLXX.
12:" 19   NO -<
1936 ^^,
CONTENTS.
Among the Butterflies, by Lutea Reseda,    .
Anent Knots and the Unloosing of them, by Sanct Rewle,
Baron de Montigny, The, by Meigeag Bheag,
Biennial Milestone, A, by Elfie,
Brother or Title, by Mas Alta,
Castle Rock, The, by M. E. T.,
Character of William III., The, by Zoe,
Charles Dickens, by M. E. T.,
Child at the Grave of its Mother, The, by Veronica,
Christmas Tree, The, by Lutea Reseda,
Comfort in Tears, by Dido,
Conventual System, The, by O. M.,
Croquet, by Des Eaux,
Curish House of Mercy, A, by Jeannie,
Day in the lona. A, by Dido,
Edinburgh Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor, The, by
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association, The, by Grace,
Evensong, by Mas Alta,      .....
Exhibition of the Royal Scottish Academy for 1870, The, by M. E. T.,
Fragment, A, by Elsie Strivelyne,   .
Glance Inward, A, by Zoe, .
Grace Crichton's Wedding, by Dido,
Hero-Worship, On, by Esther,
Holy Grail, The, by Elsie Strivelyne,
Home from the East, by Mas Alta,
In the Storm, by Melensa,
" It is well with the Child," by Veronica,   .
Jocelyn, by M. E. T., .
Kathrina—Her Life and Mine, by M. E. T.,
Eta,
PAOB
190
58
7
1
207
275
105
187
182
274
233
9
234
281
139
209, 217, 241
117
137
81
57
69
13, 25
70
258
23
284
152
132
111
u
CONTENTS.
La Beata, by M. E. T.,        .
Last Poet, The, by Sanct Rewle,
Legend of Jubal, The, by M. E. T.,
Lines, by Sanet Rewle,
Marie of Oberland, from the German of Rodenberg, by Dido,
Mediseval Chivalry, by Lutea Reseda,
My First Dinner-party, by Dido,    .
Our Crusty Friends, by Dido,
Picnics, by Dido,     ....
Prisoner, A, by Mas Alta,   .
Progress of the Attempt, The, by Veronica,
Psychology, by Grace,
"Put Yourself in His Place," by M. E. T.,
Railway and River, by Sanct Rewle,
Serpent Worship, by Einna,
Shadows of Marriage, by Lutea Reseda,
" Sleep on Till Day," by Mas Alta,
Society as a Profession, by Sanct Rewle,
Something About Everything, by Elsie Strivelyne:—Umritsur,
Song, by Melensa,   ....
Song of Joy, by Melensa,    . ,
Souvenirs of the Royal Academy, 1868, by Mas Alta,
Still Waters Run Deep, by Mas Alta,
Tennyson's " The Two Voices," by Grace,
Trip to Bohemia, A, by Inperita,   .
Una Ferguson, by O. M.,   . . .       49, 73, 97, 121, 115, 169,
Upon the Brae, by Mas Alta, .....
193,
PAGE
62
88
163
126
120
17,38
64
89
177
255
95
152
262
176
182, 201
224
157
158
127
111
41
36, 79
103
42
93
225, 249, 263
62
INDEX OF CONTEIBUTORS.                                                                 iii
INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS' NOMS BE PLUME.
PACK
Des Eaux,             .........           234
Dido, .       .           •           .           .           .           .           13, 25, 64, 89, 120, 139, 177, 233,
EiNNA,        ..........   182, 201
Elfie,         ........
1
Elsie Steivelyne,            ......
57, 127, 258
Esther,      ........
70
Eta,            ........
209, 217, 241
Grace,       ........
42, 117, 152
Inperita,   ........
93
Jeannie,    ........
281
LuTEA Reseda, 17, 38, 190, 224, 275
Mas Alta, 23, 36, 62, 79, 103, 137, 157, 207, 255
Melensa,    .........         41, 111, 284
Meigeag Bheag,   .........               7
M. E. T., 62,81,111,132,163,187,262,276
0. M., 9, 49, 73, 97, 121, 145, 169, 193, 225, 249, 263
Sanct Rewle,       .           .           .           .           '.           .           ,58, 88, 126, 158, 176
Veronica, 95, 152, 182
^OE, ■         .           .           .    69, 105
-
THE   ATTEMPT.
ERRATA.
—om.0—•
Page 41, line 20, for "earth heaven-bright," read " earth-
f
heaven bright," ^
Page   92, line 22, for " Stuarts," read " Staverts."
Page   92, Une 32, for " Cora," read " Oona."
Page   93, line 10, for " Ebbe," read " Elbe."
Page   94, line   8,/o/-" Erngebirge," reacZ "Erzgebirge,"
Page 227, line U,for " Oudinny," read " Ondinny."
i;iic iciiiaiii. uL iiiei/euiuiogisis. xime was wnen travellers' tales ot tlie eccentricities
of other climates moved our far-off wonder. We heard of the desert simoon, the
West Indian cyclone, or the China floods, and we congratulated ourselves on the
immunities enjoyed by our otherwise variable climate. But such extremities seemed
almost brought within tlie limits of our own experience, when the winds lashed them¬
selves into the fury of hurricanes, to the destruction of life and property, and our
best behaved rivers converted their patron towns into very Venices.     Astonished
A
THE   ATTEMPT.
In the opening pages of this Magazine for the year that died as the past year began
its course, Elsie Strivelyne discoursed to us, in her closely thoughtful style, from some
of the texts inscribed on the milestones of national and individual life ; some of
which are Ebenezers of joy and thankfulness; others, tombstones recording grief or
disappointment; and most of all, finger-posts set up to mark important stages in
the journey of life, and pointing out the way to the future. Since that seasonable
sermon, the distance we have travelled along the dusty highway of Time has brought
us up again and yet again in front of one of those timeous monuments, gazing whereon
we read so many truths and lessons, that the opportunity for moralizing seems at
hand once more.    Preach we then to all who care to listen.
To prove that the times in which we live deserve the erection of a high recording-
stone in Time's druidical circle, the oracular pro2:)hecies of would-be priests to the
great arch-Druid are not needed to be fulfilled. Neither is the end of the world
arrived, nor the millennium b(;gun, in accordance with their predictions: the world's
present life-like vigour defying all historical comparison, unless, perhaps, in the case
of autedeluvian activity.
Within the last two years, strange peculiarities in our weather have attracted
the remark of meteorologists. Time was when travellers' tales of the eccentricities
of other climates moved our far-off wonder. We heard of the desert simoon, the
West Indian cyclone, or the China floods, and we congratulated ourselves on the
immunities enjoyed by our otherwise variable climate. But such extremities seemed
almost brought within the limits of our own experience, when the winds lashed them¬
selves into the fury of hurricanes, to the destruction of life and property, and our
best behaved rivers converted their patron towns into very Venices.     Astonished
Z THE   ATTEMPT.
comment on volcanic eruptions, astronomical phenomena, and elemental wars abroad,
might well give place, when we ourselvess had cause to discourse of " Last week's
Tornado," the late " Shower of Stars," and the disastrous results of the " Inunda¬
tion," reported in yesterday's newspapers. The terrible exploits of the elements, that
have been so particularly noteworthy in our high and windy city for two successive
springs, must have supplied " weather conversation extraordinary" for weeks, and
thus done much towards redeeming that august theme of universal comment from its
usual commonplace reputation.
To turn from elemental strifes to national irreconcilabilities,—look at what has
been the menacing attitude of warlike Europe, and then listen to her peaceful pro¬
testations ! La Pcdx, cries France, the leader, donning her panoply provided by new
army grants, and strengthening her fleet limbs with ironclads. The other nations
dutifully re-echo her words, taking care to follow her action's examjjle. Prussia,
clutching dismembered Germany in h#tf' eagle talons, with constant pecking nearly
annihilates ill-used little Denmark; while Russia, ready to spring on Turkey, casts a
wolfish eye towards our Indian possessions, to which a new passage has been opened
alike to friend and foe in the latest triumi)h of engineering science of this scientific
age, just inaugurated by the presence of all the crowned heads of Europe or their re¬
presentatives. Poor, poor Italy, mourning the departed glory of her gone youth,
and uncertain to which of the olfering quacks to entrust the task of renovating her
charms and influence, yet supports the trembling old Pope in her weary arms. The
power of that gentle life should surely, while it lasts, restrain the meeting of turbu¬
lent oppositions. But, O Hispania ! what can be said of thy sad fate ? Richest of
all European countries in resources, but with their development dejiendent on the
darkest form of religious superstition, can any one wonder that these wells of good
have been poisoned into putrid springs, or converted into mere stagnant pools
of noxious evil, and that with but a glimmering of light at last sliining on the deep
darkness, despotism has only been exchanged for anarchy ? Distracted must be the
gropings till the clear light shall arise, but the shadow upon Spain has been too deep
not to foretell the approach of dawn, when once more the noble old spirit of its
ancient heroes and bards will awake the torpor of present ignorance, and bathe the land
of the Cid and Cervantes in the rays of true enlightenment.
From all the entanglements of the Continental imbroglio has Great Bi-itain
stood superbly aloof, blessed in the pursuance of a most statesmanlike " Peace-at^any-
price policy;" so that as a contrast to this state of sleepy quiescence, it was quite en¬
couraging and refreshing to find that the British Lion could do more than growl in
THE   ATTEMPT. 3
reply to the practised insults of his African brethren. Many and cutting were the anim¬
adversions bestowed on the abettors of the brave and enterprising " Abyssinian
Expedition" when it started; but the return of the noble warrior-explorers, in all the
fulness of victorious achievement, must have satisfied all but the most ill-natured and
selfish dissatisfaction, by adding another to the list of the triumphs of British arms,
and varnishing anew Britain's old chivalrous reputation, now so sadly stripped of
the terrors it was wont to inspire in foreign evil-doers, when the " Iron Duke" lived
to  " keep the powder dry."
Obsolete customs are apt to be despised, but if the national will has not seen fit
to keep this precept, our enemies have shown its use, and, in j)articular, we should
feel indebted to our Yankee brethren, for the lesson tliey gave us in the gift of the
Fenians. Treated as an insignificant little serpent, and trampled carelessly as a mere
mountain adder, Fenianism grew to a great hydra with so many heads, that, like his
illustrious prototype, the British Hercules found none but the extremest of stamping-
out measures effective,—a policy which, however reluctantly pursued, has proved itself
the most humane in the long-run, which bids fair to be indeed a long one, as, not¬
withstanding the greatest sacrifices and conciliations, Ireland is not yet satisfied.
And yet the fate of the Irish church is sealed ! a boon that was to have provided
the panacea for "all the ills that Irish flesh is heir to."
More serious yet, in its general consequences, is the national botdeversement
of class distinctions, introduced by the latest acceptance of the principle of reform,
to which such effect has been given in tlie late general election. As this Maga¬
zine is non-political, ■ far be it from us to obtrude our politics on its readers,
the rather that we acknowledge ours to be somewhat decided; but in reviewing
the events of two years unusually eventful in constitutional changes, it would
be the ineffective performance of our task to refrain altogether from comment.
The great mind of the nation has shown itself eminently liberal by the powerful
voice of the numerical majorities lately enfranchised, and especially so in Scotland,
possibly because the people are more independent and educated than their brethren
south of the Tweed. It does not follow, however, that the independence and educa¬
tion are correctly exercised, as there is a palpably dangerous tendency in the human
mind to let a sense of freedom run away with one, and to use knowledge as power,
rather than responsibility. We have never seen this so clearly described and ex¬
emplified as in Bulwer Lytton's very best work that is known to us,—" My Novel," a
perusal of which we would fain commend to all the radical spirits of the age. The
heart of the British people is undoubtedly true and good at  the core, but at this
4 THE   ATTEMPT.
critical juncture some warning seems advisable against the evils of a course of pull¬
ing down old strongholds for the mere love of new erections, no better in structure
and materials, and wanting in the respectability of age and experience, or for the sake
of " playing Polonius" to an adored leader's Hamlet. Time, too, has dealt hardly
with us in this respect, taking from the front ranks of our ruling wisdom all but the
lasting name of one who had
" The poet's, soldier's, scholar's eye, tongue sword,"
and ill his country's cause toiled nobly,—with the head of a statesman, the heart of a
poet, the soul of a patriot, and all the chivalrous devotion of the old English aristoc¬
racy, of which he was the modern preux chevalier. But though this " hero of a
hundred fights" has fallen in the field, his honours descend to a representative
of his noble name and race, who yet rears the time-worn banner, round which,
as to a well-known standard, the old faithful lances press, and again " Stanley is
the cry!"
Tn the annals of modern heroism, there is yet another name, covered with
well-won honours, whose sound is just now specially associated with the hope of added
lustre of new and hitherto unparalleled achievement. The lately-received letters
fi'om Dr Livingstone not only point to the realization of the nation's long-cherished
expectation of seeing the great traveller return, but indicate the probability of the
fulfilment of Sir Roderick Murchisoii's prophecy, that he will do so by Egypt, there
meeting his brother-explorer. Sir Samuel Baker; and when his unwearying foot
again presses British ground, after traversing the unknown waste of the entire
breadth of the African Continent, he will surely receive a welcome worthy the
Columbus of a new world.
In these days of severe testing of all opinion and institutions, theological con¬
troversy is specially rife, and religious systems, forms of government and creeds,
share the common convulsion. The Church of Rome, sensible of her equivocal posi¬
tion in Italy, and danger in Spain, has been most industrious in England. The
preparations for the (Ecumenical Council, now met at Rome, as the diminished repre¬
sentative of the famous old council at Nice, have at last given the cue to Protestant
zeal, of which the King of Prussia has required the exercise in the celebration of
Luther's birthday, in thankful remembrance of the services rendered by the great
Reformer to the cause of religious freedom. The troubles of the religious world call
upon the spirit of Truth to help her sister Protestantism against the united
powerful enmity of Ritualism and  Rationalism, the mere modern developments of
THE   ATTEMPT. 5
superstition and infidelity, disguised respectively as devotional zeal and calm
scientific reason. While the Church of England is more particularly liable to
the plausibilities of the former, Presbyterianism sufiei's from the sojjhistries of
the latter. Such are the attractions of Germanism for the Scotch mind, that
free-thinking tenets walk about under the mask of liberality, to the endanger-
meut of steady principles such as our noble reformers rooted in their country's
heart. If we people of England and Scotland adhere to all the traditions of our
fathers that are right and noble, the national churches will stand; desert them, and,
stigmatized as encumbrances, our Churches will fall, and other representatives reigu
in their stead.
After religion and politics, education is the question of the day, and a sufficiently
difficult and distracting one. The cry is for a national system,—a large body of
public opinion inclining to its being enforced by compulsory measures ; but in
matters affecting the exercise of will, moral suasion is the only true power, as
such educational theorists will sooner or later find out, the more so that the adoption
of a compulsory system necessarily involves what is called the " unsectarian clause,"
by which the element of religious instruction is eliminated from the daily teaching
of the proposed national schools. This is an alarming possibility, which cannot be
too strongly deprecated in these days of sharp religious controversy, against the
dangers of which young people require to be trained up in the faith of the Scriptures.
As an example of the excellent results attending a sound religious, as well as secular
education, Scotland can point to her parish schools, and quote what such men as
Lord Xapier of Magdala have said of the effects of their training observable in
after life. The discussion of the technical and classical systems niay, we hope,
lead to the adoption of the first without discarding the second, as the study of
science at school has been eminently successful in Prussia, and may well be so
in England; while, on the other hand, the ancient languages have long proved
a training power for the mental faculties, unequalled but by arithmetic and
mathematics.
The mention of these branches leads us to the advances now being made in what
must be to us the yet moi-e interesting department of female education. Without
entering upon the wide arena of controversy opened up by the question, as to the
point up to which a woman may safely be educated, we venture modestly to assert
that she may, without peril, get the benefit of a little more than she has yet done, and
on that we think there can be but one opinion. The danger lies in running to
exti'emes, which must ever bring any untried system into disrepute, and finally prove
0 THE  ATTEMPT.
its death-blow. We are no ardent advocates of ladies' colleges out and out, but warmly
approve the plan of following up the school education of girls by such a course of
instruction as is offered in the prospectus of the " Edinburgh Ladies' Educational
Association." Success attend its eifoi-ts, so long as they are directed towards the
accomplishment of this desirable end !
Of the literature of the day we have only to say that, of the many marvels of
this fast age, it presents one of the most marvellous, in the extraordinary taste
displayed for what is called " light reading."    Science has always her votaries, who
roam as ever delighted in the kingdom of thought; biit it seems as if the grand
principle on which the mental food of the great majority is supplied were, that it is
very easily swallowed, and with no trouble about the digestion.    Our vision of the
reading world is generally en voyage in railway carriages   and in steamboats,  its
pockets filled with light literature, which " he who runs may read."    In particular,
the extraordinary appetite developed for the mental cramming of periodicals, may
render a philanthropic critic solicitous regarding the quality and calibre of magazine-
writing.    Newspapers there  are of all grades and for all grades in society, whose
social tastes are generally the reflection of their political tenets ; and outside the
charmed circle of triie humour, that laughs amiably at all absurdities, have arisen
scurrilous publications, that deal in rough sarcasm and empty bombast, "to tickle"
the eyes as well as "the ears of the groundlings;" but with the graver magazine-
writing that supplies gi-aver needs, the highest responsibility rests.    What is most
to be dreaded is flimsiness.    " Pray you avoid it."    The A ttempt has its own duty to
perform in this particular; and while duly recommending the charms of a sketchy
style  of writing,  as appropriate to a ladies'  magazine, we would impress upon
the adherents of this periodical never thereby to be seduced from the singleness
of aim and earnestness of purpose which constituted the strength of all literature.
Whatsoever is true and pure and noble, let it be read in the pages of The A ttempt,
and it  will meet a ready response in the hearts of the much-maligned " Women
of the Period." Elfie.
THE   ATTEMPT.
CIj£   §aron  tr^  Pontigng.
Florence de Montmoeency, Seigneue de Montigny, who was sent to Madrid in 1562 as Envoy
from the Netherlands to the Spanish Court, was, after having been detained in Spain for five years,
ostensibly at liberty, but virtually a prisoner, seized and confined in the Alcazar of Segovia at the
close of the year 1567. One day in the following July, the captive's ear was arrested by the notes
of a song in the language of his fatherland. The burden of the song proved to be the tragic fate
of his brother Count Horn, and of his friend Count Egmont, mingled with a warning as to his
own certain doom, if he were unable to escape before it should be too late. The friendly singers
then went their way ; but their tale and warning roused Montigny to attempt an escape from his
prison, which was, however, frustrated, and the unfortunate Envoy was secretly strangled on the
16th of October 1570.— Vide Motley's " Rise of the Dutch Republic," vol. ii., p. 259, et seq.
Hotly gleam'd the Spanish noonday-
CTleam'd through bolt and bar,
To the lonely captive watching
In the Alcazar.
Ah ! his heart had fled the prison ;
For the heart is free,
And the spirit scorns the fetters
Of captivity.
Dreamy sounds came floating upwards
From the world below,
Tread and shout of busy hundreds
Passing to and fro.
■ "Weary, weary is this bondage,
Will it never cease 1
Must I languish here forgotten,
Hopeless of release ?
Each man went his way care-laden ;
Was there of them all
One who cast a glance of pity
On that high tower wall;
" Nine long months, and still no tidings
From the world without !
Even a bloody fate were welcome ;
Better death than doubt.
Where the tyrant's noble victim,
Watched with jealous care,
Darkly mused in brooding anguish.
Deepening to despair 1
" Why, alas ! did Fate e'er lead me
To this hateful strand,
Where my heart grows sick with longing
For my own dear land 1
Pale his brow with sorrow's pallor,
Sad the upturned eye,
Strained to pierce the radiant glory
Of the summer sky.
" Where, in halls that own no master,
Sits my widowed bride,
Mourning for her lord, so early
Parted from her side.
THE  ATTEMPT.
Where my babe, whose smile hath never " Gallant Seigneur de Montigny,
Blessed his father's eyes, List the tale we tell!
Makes the gloomy walls re-echo Listen ! though each cruel accent
With his mirthful cries. Smite thee like a knell.
" Where my gallant brother labours
In our country's cause.
Grant, 0 God ! his pathway lead not
To the lion's jaws."
Hark ! the sound of minstrel voices !
And the captive's brow,
Casting off its deadly pallor.
Flushes crimson now.
See ! his pale lips quiver wildly,
And his eyes grow dim,
And a pulse of strong emotion
Throbs through every limb,
" Is it but my wayward fancy,
Cheating my fond ear 1
" Many a weary mile we've wandered
With our heavy tale,
If, perchance, our solemn warning
Might with thee prevail.
" Dark and chill the storms have gather'd
O'er our country now.
And men's hearts, well-nigh despaii"ing,
'iNeath the tempest bow.
" For fierce murder, gory-fingered,
Shakes her reeking brand,
And the blood of slaughtered thousands
Crieth from the land.
" And thou, too, must weep, 0 captive !
Friend and kindred dead,—
Or are those indeed the accents
Noble Horn and princely Egmont
Of my home I hear t
Sleep in gory bed.
" Ah ! what memories of gladness,
" Bouse thee, then, 0 brave Montigny !
From the bygone days.
Ere it be too late,
Do they stir within my spirit,
Ere the tyrant's malice hurl thee
Those familiar lays.
To a bloody fate.
" Surely heaven hath in its mercy
" Prison bolts will yield like water
Sent this minstrel band.
To a golden key.
Thus to soothe my weary bondage    •
Why, then, pine in hateful durance.
In a cruel land."
If thou may'st be free 1"
But too soon the short-lived pleasure
Then the warning strain grew silent,
Changed to chilling woe.
But the captive's soul,
As this strain with direful clearness
'Neath a flood of new-bom feelings.
Echoed from below.
Swayed beyond control.
THE   ATTEMPT.
Bitter grief and fear and anger Fear, how soon made sadly certain !
Struggled wildly there, Hope, alas ! how vain !
With a trembling hope, that o'er them Never shalt thou, hapless Baron,
Shot with fitful glare. Tread free ground again.
Two dark years thou still must languish,
Tyranny's doomed slave.
Till a blood-stained gateway lead thee
To a martyr's grave.
Meigeag Bheau.
^^t Conijmtual System.
There can be no doubt that the case recently brought befox-e the public,—that of
Saurin versus Stai-r, with its disclosures of the petty tyranny, the ignoble toil, axid
the many humiliations of a nun's life,—rudely dissolved the charm with which many
imaginative minds must have invested the conventual system. Instead of the ideal
nxxn, " sober, steadfast, and demure," kneeling before the cross in patient expectancy
of the life to come, which should make up for all px'ivations, loneliness, and pain in
this pi'esent existence, heai'ing the tumult of the world afar off, as inland listeners
may hear the waves upon the shoi'e,—we have a nondescript being, half child, half
old maid—gi-eedy, sordid, foolish, pining for the vanities outside the convent walls,
yet too cowardly to venture into the world again. But are we to take her for oui-
ideal, discarding the thought that any women of a better type than the last-
mentioned are contained in convents 1 Sux-ely no. There are some, certainly, who
go into convents as they would go to balls, for the sake- of a new sensation; and I
can well imagine that to such the daily hai-dship and privation of convent life would
be a painful disillusion, cau.sing them at once to shrink back into the world, or, if
that were impossible, to go on leading a peevish and useless existence, fretful and
hopeless.
But ai-e thex-e xiot others who would hail with thankfulness, ignoi-ant but sixi-
cere, the opportunity for self-sacrifice,—for devotion,, for giving up body and spirit
to the harsh i-ules and blind obedience of such a system 1 If it is not so, why has
the conventual system continued to our day 1    If only the foolish and weak-minded
10 THE   ATTEMPT.
have sought the shelter of monasteries and nunneries, v/here has been the force
which has maintained them all this time? The reason why so many resorted to
them in the ancient days is plain : learning and the arts were unable to flourish
anywhere else in those ages of iron, some of the noblest sjjirits in all ages and
countries were glad to seek shelter from lawless violence where the wildest opiDressor
could not reach them ; and if even men shrank into cloister shades to pursvie peace¬
ful arts, how nnich more women 1 In those times there was no life for a woman,
except as a wife or a nun. Either some " baron bold," hard-headed, hard-fisted, and
possibly, hard-hearted, like many of his contemporaries, who would serve as an effi¬
cient protector till he was surprised by guile or slain in battle, or the " bridal with
heaven," and living burial for the rest of your life. A single woman of mature
years was an anomaly,—as she is still in most countries on the Continent,—though
not here, where she is, as the author of "A week at a French Country House" says.
" an institution."
And, let me say in passing, a most important one. What should we do with¬
out the old maids whom 1 have heard called " the green lanes of English life," the
connecting links between family and family, dear to all, yet specially tied to none,
the universal sympathizers and repositories of everybody's secrets ? Where would be
the aunts who, not only in stories but in real life, are such indulgent friends and
relatives 1 What is a married aunt ? Considered as an aunt, of what value is she 1
Her husband and children occupy all her time and thoughts; you, her insignificant
niece or nephew, are comparatively nothing to her. Quite right and natural that it
should be so, but the real aunt is the maiden aunt. She will not confide your pri¬
vate affairs to her husband, or draw invidious comparisons between you and her
children, as she might have done had she been married ; she will act as a horse or a
cow to any extent in your early childhood, and listen to your troubles as you grow
up, after everybody else is sick of them and of you. May old maids never fail from
out the land, say I! For on6 who is smaller, more spiteful and peevish than most
married women, ten are more unselfish, more devoted, more excellent.
But, to return to the single woman of past centuries. Wliat was the use of her ?
Unable to fight, unable to distinguish herself in any way, unfit to protect hers(?lf, or
to be in the world at all. Much better had she never come into it ; but, since she
is there, let her to a convent instantly; let her leave the merry maidens whose
life is still before them, and the stately matrons who have duties and cares, sons
and daughters, and take refuge in the only place which is found for her under the
skv.     "She  will  doubtless  have a reward,"  thought the  spirit of the  time, this
THE   ATTEMPT. 11
poor lonely creature, all whose womanly tenderness has been crushed and cancelled ;
there is something laid up for her, which we, who enjoy this pi-esent life, cannot
expect! She was half-pitied, half-envied; pitied, perhaps, by mothers when the
sweet laughter of their children was ringing in their ears ; envied, when all was
silence, and they could think of the time when the dearest voices should grow faint,
the dearest hands unclasp their hold, and they should go forth alone into eternity.
We can see the necessity for convents then ; but now, and in this Protestant country,
their existence appears absurd. Still they do exist, and therefore some must be found
to go into them.
Let us try, therefore, to examine into the reasons which induce people to do so,
and also into the effect which such a life is likely to have upon those who lead it. The
reason which is generally assigned for such a stop as entering a convent, is disgust with
the world and the things of the world. But I think, in a country like this, where the
women are bound in a three-fold chain of conventionality, some stronger reason than
" a yawning fit o'er books and men," would be required to induce them to break
through it, even for the purpose of binding themselves to a far harder bondage. " You
shall be tied up tight," says Society ; "I will tie your hands from working, your feet
from wandering out of my narrow way. Believe me, it is the right one. Your grand¬
mother, a far better woman than you, walked in it for a matter of seventy years.
Oh ! you have come to a stone, and fallen down, have you, and actually hurt your¬
self? So did she. Glet up again and go on. You shall find yourself, whenever
you attempt to follow any particular bent, suddenly stopped by a blank wall of cus¬
tom and prejudice, but you shall not devise bonds for yourself. You shall remain
apparently free, really fettered, like the rest of your sex, and be thankful that you
are an Englishwoman."
Who shall rise up and saj', " I am a woman, not a girl a]iy longer. For more
than ten years I have run the gauntlet of the correct amusements and occupations
of my sex. They are wearisome, and I am weary ; therefore I will defy society and
go into a convent"? Will not a stronger, higher motive than mere weariness be
needful for such a step? And where is such a motive to be found 1 Where, if not
in the very qualities which, rightly and wisely directed, make a woman the joy of
her home, the comfort and stay of all about hor, so dear and so noble, that the
heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, and her children rise up and call her
blessed ?
Some women are born with a passion for self-sacrifice. To endure, to love, to give
up their own will  and wish, is with them an instinct.    And such women may, I do
12 THE   ATTEMPT.
not say will, look round them, and see no room for anything but self-indulgence.
Perhaps they are so situated that whatever they do might be better done by some
one else. And upon such women an easy, comfortable, sheltered existence, will
weigh like a sense of crime. " Where is the cross I am to bear ? where is the work
1 am to do ? Where is the truth of those words of St Paul, himself a lonely, unrest¬
ing wanderer,--" For none of you liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself"!
So they may say, as they feel their youth fading, and their world growing no broader,
no loftier. The bloom is falling, where is the fruit? And they begin to think of an
existence whose every step is a sacrifice, as a welcome change.
I don't think such women would be deterred from entering a convent by the
revelations of the late trial, by the prospect of having to sweep floors and scrub
stairs, y Yet these are the very women who should be kept in the world, kept there
that their light may shine before men, that their unselfish lives may nerve others to
follow their example. Let the weak, the idle, the careless, seek a new "distraction,"
as the French call it, in the cloister ; but let the earnest, the devoted, the true-
hearted stay where they can be of use.    If those who would fain
•' Fill their odorous lamps with deeds of light,
And hope that reaps not shame,"
are to quench their shining within convent walls, and onl}^ the will-o'-the-wisp
brilliancy that flutters lightly among the snares of life, is to be left,—the world will
grow dark indeed.
Now, let us look at the efiect such a life would probably produce upon those who
entered it. I do think that the best women who did so would suffer the most in mind
and character. God sets us to grow up together, men with women, brothers with sisters,
children with parents ; and if, unloosing all these bonds, we make to ourselves new
ones, becoming one of a sisterhood, and subject to a woman, who has no natural
authority over us, we are sure to suffer for it. " Yes," some one may say, " but no one
goes into a convent expecting enjoyment; that could be found elsewhere. It is peace,
quiet, self-immolation, that is sought for there." But is peace to be found by leaving
all that our hearts cling to 1 will self be forgotten because we are so much left alone
with it ? Shall we not find that we have brought with us into the narrow cell the
same spirit that made the world a place of temptation and difficulty, and will
not nature revenge herself ujjon us in secret for trampling upon her laws ? Will
not the best woman who shall ever wear a nun's veil, waken with a start some day
to the thought that she might  have gone heavenwiird, with loving e3-es about her.
THE   ATTEMPT. 13
witli strength that grew tender for her sake to lean upon, that she might have been
true woman, and yet true saint t
The effect of a convent life upon the mind would be, I should think, extremely
narrowing. Whether you are clever or stupid, it is well for you frequently
to meet with your superiors in mental faculties. And a cultivated, thoughtful
woman would certainly not be likely to meet with hers among a number of persons
of her own sex who lived shut out from the world, ignorant of literature, except a
few mythical lives of saints, as improbable, though not as amusing, as the Arabian
Nights, and whose artistic tastes, if they had any, could not find exercise except in
the adornment of some shrine with flowers. The narrow round of duties, penances,
and tasks, would soon warp and wither the intellect; and the intelligent, high-minded
woman would sink to the level of a grumbling, gossiping school-girl, without the
prospect of ultimately rising higher. Or, even if this did not happen, how pitiful to
shrink into one's self, among those who looked forward with dull inertness to a long
changeless life, and those who enjoyed the petty pleasures afforded them one
moment, and fretted over the privation of the convent the next ! No ; if we " pre¬
sent our bodies a living sacrifice," let it not be by shutting them up within convent
walls. Any one who read an article in "Good Words" for 1868, setting forth
how a young and delicate girl left her home, in order to learn nursing, and lived and
died among hospitals and work-houses, tending the poor and needy, and earning for
herself, by her faithfulness unto death, a crown of life, must have seen that there
are other ways of consecrating body and soul for those to whom the duties of mother
or sister, daughter or wife, have not been given.
O, M.
" If it really is the rule of the house," said cousin Charley's wife, as we were all
sitting round the fire at grandpapa's, last Christmas eve,—" and if I must tell a story
even though I don't know one, I think I had better tell you about my cousin Grace
Crichton's wedding, and all that happened at Netherhope that week,—only, mind
it's no story." We all promised contentment with whatever she might tell us, for
Charley's pretty young bride had taken all our hearts by storm ; and she began :—
" You all know that I was an orphan and an heiress, and that I was brought
up at Netherhope by my uncle, George Crichton.      I  was seven years old when  I
14 THE   ATTEMPT.
went to Netherhope, and my cousin Grace, Uncle George's only daughter, was about
six months younger. I can just remember her mother, who died very shortly before
Uncle George took me home to be a companion for Grace, who was very lonely,
poor little motherless thing ! among all the boys, good-natured and kind though they
were to her. So Grace and I grew great friends very soon, and I was very happy at
Netherhope. Uncle George treated me in all respects like a daughter, the boys
were like brothers, and Grace the very dearest of sisters; so, orj^han though I was,
mine was a happy childhood.
" I needn't describe Netherhope ; it's large, and old, and eerie, and it stands
away up among the Lanarkshire hills. Two generations back it belonged to
an old Lord Justice-Clerk,—I forget his name just now,—a regular Judge
Jeffries he must have been, from the stoi'ies tliat hung about the place ; and
well do T remember how old Bell's threat,—' Whist ! or the auld Justice Clerk
'11 get ye !' used to be sufficient to quell the wildest storm of rebellion in the
Netherhope nursery. His bed was extant,—such a relic of barbarism ! and his arm¬
chair, and some other things ; but I especially remember his chessmen,—next to
hanging, I believe his passion was chess,—which stood under a glass case in the
drawing-room, where Grace and I used to go and look at them, and wonder what the
different pieces meant. We knew they were for playing a game of some kind ; and
I remember we agreed that the red pieces must have been those used by the Lord
Justice-Clerk, and that his hands had stained them red with blood.
" But to come back to my story. Life went on very tranquilly at Netherhope till
Grace and I were seventeen, and our governess left us. Then two important events
happened ; the first a very distressing one,—my cousin Archy, Uncle George's third
son, ran away. He was a wild idle boy of fifteen, impatient of all rule and discipline,
and detesting work of every kind. At last, after a violent quarrel with his father about
some flagrant piece of idleness, Archy disappeared, and search for him was in vain.
We wrote, and advertised, and took all possible steps to find some trace of him ; but
none was found, and after some months of wearing anxiety and constant exertion,
the search was given up as hopeless. The other event was a letter from Grand-
mama Lascelles, asking me to go and live with her in London,—an invitation which
I accepted, as you all know. I was sorry to leave tlie country, and Uncle
George, and the boys, and above all, Grace; but I was tii-ed of the regularity of
our life at Netherhope,—tired of long walks, and long lessons, and long sermons,
—tired of our quiet Lanarkshire neighbours, and desperately anxious to see
the   world,—so   I   accepted.      Grandmama   sent   a   very   polite   note   to    L^ncle
THE   ATTEMPT. 15
George, asking him to allow Grace to come up with me for a visit; and
Uncle George returned an equally polite refusal. There is no love lost between
these two, as I have seen many a time. And so I left Netherhope. The sun was set¬
ting behind Tinto as Uncle George drove me to the station, and Clyde was all a
flood of gold and red with the reflected light; and oh ! I should have been glad to
change my mind and go back,—but it was too late ; and I went to grandmama, and
for more than four years I saw nothing more of Lanarkshire.
"Last November,—a thick foggy day it was, I remember—I got a letter
from Grace, announcing her approaching marriage, and asking grandmama and
me to come north and be present at the ceremony, I accepted at once, and
after a little hesitation so did grandmama,—and the 3d or 4th of January
found me in Lanarkshire once again. Oh, it was cold, so bitterly cold ! Snow
on all the hills, ice on all the lochs, frost and icicles everywhere ! and in spite
of all the wraps Grace had sent in the carriage that brought us from the station,
we were half frozen when we reached Netherhope, and saw them all standing to
welcome us in the blaze of the light and warmth that poured out from the great open
hall-door. Uncle George lifted me, an animated bundle of shawls, from the carriage,
greeted me with that short sharp salute of his, and then turned to receive Grand- •
mama Lascelles, while I hastily shook hands with Jamie and Sandy, threw my
arms round Grace, and hugged her to my heart's content. My dear pretty Grace !
I wish I could make you all understand how pretty and sweet she is ; but I never saw
a face more difficult to describe. There are some lines of Mrs Browning's that come
nearer the thing than any description I could give ; but there is a look of firmness
about Grace's lips that they leave out altogether :—
" Her face is lilj'-fair,
Lily-shaped, and drooped in duty
To the law of its own beauty ;
Oval cheeks encoloured faintly,
Which a trail of golden hair
Keeps from fading off to air ;
And a forehead fair and saintly,
Which two blue eyes undershiue,
Like meek prayers before a shrine."
" A few hours afterwards came the time I had been looking forward to ever
since I received Grace's letter. Uncle George and Grandmama Lascelles sat down to
backgammon—(backgammon and politics were the only two subjects on which they
thoroughly agreed, so all tea-time we had talked politics, and  lamented the liberal
IG THE   ATTEMPT.
ascendancy in Lanarkshire); Jamie and Sandy went off to their books; and Grace
and I sat on the low broad sofa beside the fire, and took hold of each other's hands,
and began to ' talk it all over.' Family news first, for though letters had informed
me of all that could be called events, there were a thousand details I longed to hear.
How Hugh and George were married, and in India with their regiments; how
Jamie was going to the bar, and Sandy wished to be a minister ; how no tidings,
good or bad, had ever come of Archy.
" All this we discussed, and all this converged and centred in the one topic of
absorbing iiaterest to us both,—Grace's approaching wedding. 1 had a thousand
questions to ask concerning the bridegroom elect, George Lockhart; for though now a
Lanarkshire laird, he had inherited HunthOl from an uncle, and had been but little
at Netherhope in my time. I just could remember a tall boy, with curly black hair
and big brown eyes, coming to one of Uncle George's shooting-parties with old Mr
Lockhart of Hunthill. ' He remembers you better than that, Bessie,' said Grace.
' He remembers how proud you were of your Highland blood, and of that old Gordon
tartan dress you used to wear; and he used to like you better than me then, he says.
I do hope you'll like him, Bessie,' and Grace nestled closer to me on the sofa. ' I'll
like any one who makes you happy, Gracie,' said I, ' and I don't expect to find him
entirely/ohjeciiojiahle. Why! it can't be prayer-time already'' But it was ; and
our conversation had to be suspended for the night.
" T was to sleep in grandmama's dressing-room; but after I had helped her to un¬
dress, and seen her comfortably established in the gigantic four-poster, I sat long by
the fire in her room, combing my hair, and listening to her remarks on the Xether-
hope family. ' Pretty girl Grace has turned out, Bessie ! very pretty, and with a
sort of elegance about her, too, though she wants style terribly. But how very firm
and determined her manner is ! not masculine in the least, you know, but just with
that quiet composed way that shows she has a will of her own. Not the least like
her poor dear mother, who never could make up her mind for herself ! Grace has all
her father's obstinacy,—I can see it in her eyes, and in the set of her mouth. I
never liked Mr Crichton, Bessie, my dear, as 1 daresay I've told you before—never
could get on with him. But your grandfather had the strangest fancy for him, and
your poor dear Aunt Carrie was so devotedly attached to him, that I had to give in.
But I didn't like him—cold and sarcastic and obstinate he always was, and so plain-
looking ! so different from ?/o?«- father, who was the handsomest man in the regiment,
and so high-spirited and gay ! Ah yes, he was a true highlander,—as different
as possible from that cold reserved lowlander George Crichton.    But you don't re-
THE   ATTEMPT. 17
member your father, my dear.' ' Scarcely,' said I, as my thouglits wandered off to
the time long since past, when Uncle George and my father were subalterns together
in Grandpapa Lascelles' regiment; and I smiled to myself as I thought, that had
Uncle George not been the Laird of jSTetherhope, with a well filled purse and 'a lang
pedigree,' my easy-tempered grandfather's ' strange fancy,' and poor soft pretty
Aunt Carrie's ' devoted attachment,' would have stood him in little stead with
Grandmama Lascelles. * Cold and sarcastic and obstinate ! ' Ah, no. I, even I,
knew better. I never saw any man capable of such deep and tender and enduring
love as my uncle George Crichton.
"Then I sat thinking of my handsome young father, whom I could just
remember; of my mother, whom I never had known ; while grandmama talked
on about Uncle George's curious taste in waistcoats, Grace's old-fashioned muslin
dress, Jamie's red hair, Sandy's deplorable accent, the elder sons' marriages, and
poor Archy's mysterious fate, till her voice died aw3y, and was succeeded by
a gentle ladylike snore; and I roused myself with a start to find that the fire
was nearly out. My old terror for the Lord Justice-Clerk was still strong upon
me, and I was very thankful that I had not to traverse any of the long eerie Nether-
hope passages to reach my cosy couch in the dressing-room. But his Lordship
haunted my di'eams nevertheless ; for all night long, he and my grandmother, with
Grace and George Lockhart for vis-a-vis, kept performing, ' in my mind's eye,
Horatio,' an eccentric sort of foursome reel, to the very great disturbance of rnj
peace and tranquility."
End of Part First.
Dido.
The Minstrel.
" So may he rest, his faults lie gently on him,
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him.
And yet with charity."
Our slight notices of the life of bygone days would be unjust, if we left unmen-
tioned what might almost have been called an Order of Knighthood by the election
of the gift of nature,—the order of the Troubadours, Trovatori, Minnesingers, or
Minstrels.
c
18 THE   ATTEMPT.
We have great difficulty in forming clear ideas of this profession, fi-om the
rapid alterations of public opinion regarding it, and the consequent re-action. In¬
deed we must always learn the date of a minstrel's existence before we can have any
guess of the estimation in which his rank was held. In early times he was always
noble, frequently the younger son of a princely house, whose talents were cultivated
to serve him instead of a birth-right. In old ballads we often he:\r of minstrels
beloved by kings' davighters, discovering themselves to be the sons of sovereign
princes; and whether this be exactly true or not, we cannot but believe the ballads
of all nations to be founded upon truth, in fact or in spii-it. Those also whom
nature or accident had rendered unable to bear the toils of war, might thus gain the
honours without sharing the dangers of chivalry; for the treasures laid up in their
hearts were keenly enough appreciated to render their jiersons sacred. But it was
considered quite possible and proper to combine the two arts. Every page was
educated so as to amuse his lord and lady with music and with song; and if he had
taste or talent, he not only retained but improved upon his early education. The
knights of Arthur's Court rejoiced in tr3dng their skill upon the harp; among whom
the victor was generally he whom Matthew Arnold has marked :—
" I know him by his harp of gold,
Famous in Arthur's court of old ;
I know him by his forest dress,
The peerless hunter, harper, knight,
Tristrem of Lyonneas."
Kings were proud to cultivate the minstrel's lore,—and often found it useful.
"We all know the story of King Alfred in the Danish Camp, and how Aulaff, the
Dane, in return, improved upon his idea, and discovered the counsel of the Saxons.
Knights also might disguise themselves in the minstrel's habit, and wander safely
through all lands on errands of love and war. In the reign of Richard I., the
young heiress of Evreux, Earl of Salisbury, had been carried away by her French
relations and secreted in Normandy. To discover the place of her confinement, a
knight of the Talbot family spent two years in exploring the province. He
travelled at first in the disguise of a Pilgrim, till having found where she was placed,
in order to gain admittance, he assumed the character and dress of a harper, and
being a jocose person and exceedingly skilled in jests and romances, he was gladly
received into the family. He took an early opportunity of carrying off the young
lady to her lawful guardian, the King of England ; though, strange to say, he did not
claim  her hand  as the  rewai'd  of his services.    Throughout a long period we fre-
THE  ATTEMPT. 19
quently find this combination of the arts of war and peace, in many other songs than
the well-known,—
" Gaily the Troubadour touched his guitar,
As he was hastening home from the war."
Even when not military, the early minstrel was always the equal of the knight,
and often, doubtless, mentally his superior; but by this time of King Richard, the
rank of the minstrel proper had somewhat sunk, from the natviral effect of depen¬
dence upon the will and pleasure of the lord who retained him. Every rich knight
kept a troop of minstrels, who followed him to the field, and afterwards sung the
praises of his valour. The chief of these was crowned king of the minstrels. Liberal
dealings with them were almost a necessity in winning or retaining fame ; and
latterly it became too convenient a method of doing so to be ignored, for the
minstrel-poet, then as now, " of imagination all compact," could " give to aiiy noth¬
ings a local habitation and a name.'" And the lay of the minstrel was more important
than any one modern form of literature,—for it combined the lyric, the ballad, the
novel, the history, the drama, and the newspaper article, perhaps also an occasional
homily,—and was eagerly listened to by all conditions. And while the resident
minstrel delighted the chief's own ears, the harper-errant bore the news about from
court to court, a general postman, advertiser, " Observer," " Rambler," " Spectator,"
or " News " of the times.
The affection that sometimes subsisted between the minstrel and his lord was
powerful and touching. This was well illustrated in this very reign, when Richard
himself, rashly attempting to return home from the Holy Land unprotected, through
the domains of his mortal enemy the Duke of Austria, was lost to the knowledge of
men for a time. As we find in an ancient French chronicle,—" Tlie English had been
more than a whole year without hearing any tidings of their king. Bloudel de
Nesle, his favourite minstrel, being so long without sight of his lord, his life seemed
wearisome to him, and he became confounded with melancholy. Known it was
that he came back from the Holy Land, but none could tell in what country he
arrived; whereupon this Blondel, resolving to make search for him in many
countries, after expense of divers days in travel, he came by good hap to a town
near to the castle where Richard was confined. Of his host he demanded to whom
the castle appertained, and the host said the Duke of Austria. Then he enquired
whether there were any prisoners therein detained, for he always made such secret
questionings whethersoever he went. And the host gave answer there was one
only prisoner, but he knew not what he was, thoiigh he had been detained there
20 THE   ATTEMPT.
more than a year. When Blondel heard this, he wrought such means that he
became acquainted with them of the castle, as minstrels do easily win acquain¬
tance anywhere; but see the king he could not, neither undei'stand that it was
he. One day, he sat directly before a window of the castle where king Richard
was kept prisoner, and began to sing a tenson in French, which King Richard and he
had sometime composed together, to answer each other. When King Richard heard
the song, he knew that it must be Blondel who sung it, and when Blondel paused, the
king took up the response and completed it. Thus Blondel won knowledge of the
king his master, and, returning home into England, made the barons there acquainted
with his place of captivity." Similar devotion we have seen amid the bards of Ire¬
land, Wales, and Scotland.    But this incident contains notice of the other fact, that
•
kings trained themselves in the profession of " makers." This habit was the means
of his restoration; and while in his prison, it is said that Richard had amused him¬
self alternately in wrestling with his guards and in making songs and lays about his
life, bewailing his hard foi-tune and captivity. The following is part of one said
to have been composed by him after having been confined fifteen months in
Austria :—
" No wretched captive of his prison speaks,
Unless with pain and bitterness of soul ;
Yet consolation from the muse he seeks,
Whose voice alone misfortime can control.
Where now is each ally, each baron, friend,
Whose face I ne'er beheld without a smile ?
Will none, his sovereign to redeem, expend
The smallest portion of liis treasures vUe ?
" Though none may blush, that near two tedious years
Without relief, my bondage has endured ;
Yet know, my English, Norman, Gascon peers,
Not one of you should thus remain immured !
The meanest subject of my wide domains.
Had I been free, a ransom would have found !
I mean not to reproach you with my chains.
Yet still I wear them upon foreign ground.
" Ye dear companions of my happy days,
Of Chan and Pensavin, aloud declare
Throughout the earth, in everlasting lays.
My foes against me wage inglorious war.
THE   ATTEMPT, 21
Oh ! tell them too, that ne'er among my crimes,
Did breach of faith, deceit, or fraud appear ;
That infamy will brand to latest times,
The insults I receive while captive here."
But no sooner did Blondel bear home the news, than the nation gladly prepared
the king's heavy ransom. It is wonderful what a hold he had upon the hearts of
subjects he had seen so little, and blessed still less, and we must look for a solu¬
tion of the mystery in his chivalric bearing and valour. That seemed sufficient
to wipe out the dark stains from his name. He has been fondly sung—" King of
the Lyre and of the Sword, not more glorious in battle than tender as a lover and
a poet."
Bertrand de Boru, Viscount of Hauteforte, is still more celebrated in the annals
of that time for his excellence as a poet, than for his bravery as a knight. He was
the boldest of the Chevaliers of France, breathing, it is said, nothing but war, and
rousing the martial passions of all around him to the highest pitch of excitement by
the glowing eloquence of his songs. He was early engaged on the side of Henry of
Guienne against Richard. He was continually exposed to the greatest difficulty
and disasters from his impetuous disposition ; and after a life of constant adventure,
he died in a Cistercian monastery, having thus done all things admired by the men
of his times. A poem addressed by him to his lady-love is still extant, be¬
ginning—
" I cannot hide from thee how much I fear
The whispers breathed by flatterers in thine ear.
Against my faith.    But turn not! oh, I pray
That heart so true, so faithful, so sincere.
So humble and so frank, to me so dear.
Oh Lady ! turn it not from me away !"
The poem continues to place before us the real knight of former times, all
busied in the war and in the chase, the labours and delights of our fathers ;
successively appealing to everything that is dear to him in life, to everything
that has been the study of his youth, and the honour of his riper years, to
confess his interest in them, yet esteeming them all as nothing in comparison with
his love.
We also read of Kambaud de Vaguiras, the son of a poor knight, who gained so
much reputation by his uniting the character of a soldier and a poet in his own
person, that the celebrated Marquis de Montferrat, who took so important a part in
22 THE   ATTEMPT.
the Fourth Crusade, encouraged him in making love to his noble sister. So Vaguiras
divided his time between singing the praises of her beauty and her brother's valour,
and performing his own brave and knightly exploits. The sweet singer of the First
Crusade was not so fortunate in his life or in his love.
Several other renowned knights of these times were poets in no mean degree,
and some of the orders of knighthood encouraged the practise of the art. Sismondi
mentions, in his History of the Literature of the Troubadours, that "a few versifiers of
little note had assumed at Thoulouse the name of Troubadours, and were accustomed
to assemble together in the gardens of the Augustine Monks of that city, where they
read their compositions to each other. In 1323, these persons resolved to form
themselves into a species of Academy " del gai Sabir," and they gave it the title of
"La Sohrigaza Companina dels sejits Trobudors de Tolosa." This "most gay society,"
was eagerly joined by the Capitouls, or venerable Magistrates of Thoulouse, who
wished by some public festival to re-animate the spirit of poet:y. A circular letter
was addressed to all the cities of Languedoc, to give notice that on the 1st of
May 1324, a golden violet should be decreed as the prize of the best poem in the
Provencal language, which event fonned the basis of Letitia Landon's poem of
" The Golden Violet." Hogg's " Queen's Wake " carries us back to a similar trial
of skill..
But the profession was gradually sinking along with the Chivalry from which
it sprung. Two inventioas proved destructive to these institutions. Gunpowder
forced the boldest knight to endure blindly the equal chance of being shot down
with his ranks, without proving the sinews of his mighty arm; and printing did
much to lower the rank and dignity of the minstrel, by taking from him the prero¬
gative of retaining within himself the treasures of the kingdom. His lore could be
fixed, retained, and multiplied to such an extraordinary degree, by means of " these
moveable types," that his order sank from being " a peculiar people," to a more ordi¬
nary rank. Or rather, this invention of printing drove like a wedge through the
profession, and split it into two great branches. On the light hand " the makers,"
who retained their position by the divine right of poets, and on the left hand the
reciters, who merely repeated the rhymes of other people. Ere long this came to be
practised only by " the meaner sort." Contempt poured on them made them sink
to the level of contempt, till in the 39th year of Queen Elizabeth, a statute was
enacted, wherein we find "the minstrel" classed with "rogues, vagabonds, and sturdy
beggars," and adjudged to be punished as such. This act seemed to have jjut an
end to them altogether in our land.
THE   ATTEMPT. 23
But we must not forget that the sunny climes and liquid languages of the south
of Europe inspired to improvisation many a cbivalric soul, long after in other climes
the glory had faded " to the light of common day,"—
'' For Juan was a minstrel still, in times
When minstrelsy was held a thing outworn."
The passionate youthfulness of the individual, in lands where nature is so kind,
seems frequently to act individually, as the youth of a nation generally acts col¬
lectively, and necessitates similar expression.
" So Juan was a Troubadour revived,
Freshening life's dusty road with babbling rills
Of wit and song, living 'mid harnessed men,
With limbs ungaUed by armour, ready so
To soothe them weary, or to cheer them sad.
Guest at the board, companion in the camp,
A crystal mirror to the life around,
Flashmg the comment keen of simple fact
Defined in words ; lending brief lyric voice
To grief and sadness ; hardly taking note
Of difierence 'twixt his own and others' life,
But rather singing as a listener
To the deep moans, the cries, the wild strong joys
Of universal nature, old yet young ! "
And we can imagine some single natures, like Keats and Shelley, to have been
some late lingering blossom of the true chivalric minstrel of the times gone by.
LuTEA Reseda.
" lomi from iht ®ast."
" No, Steve, no, lad— Put on a log, my boy.
Don't lock the gate yet; The biggest you can find there,
He's sure to come this evening. And make the fire blaze up a bit—
And it's not so very late yet. Aye, rake it up behind there.
October nights are cold now. Sweep up the ashes, too.
The sun goes down early,— To look all clean and decent—
It's good five miles from the railway, too.     And now, reach down'my spectacles.
And the road's not over cheerly. And the last letter he sent.
24
Aye ! now for his letter !
What does he say, lad 1
Well, I should know better,
I've been reading it all day, lad.
But I've been so taken up
THE  ATTEMPT.
Five years since he left!
Ah, how long it seems, lad,
That I've never seen him.
Save only in my dreams, lad.
Five years out in India !
With the thought—he'll be to-day home.   How brown the boy will be, lad !
That I clean forgot the coach leaves at four. And think of him with his sergeant's sash
So he'll have to walk all the way home.     And the medal we shall see, lad !
At six, does he say, lad,
His train will reach St Mary 1
And then, he's his five miles to trudge.
And his knapsack, too, to carry.
It will be long seven gone,
Almost eight, I fear, lad.
Since he's all that way to come.
Before he can be here, lad.
If there were some one else in the house,
I'd send yovi, Steve, to meet him
A mile along St Mary's road,
The sooner to greet him.
But while we are chatting
The time will slip away, lad,
And our Willie may be here
Sooner than we can say, lad.
Don't you remember well
The day that he listed ?
How your poor mother sobbed and cried,
And how I resisted !
But Willie said, when times were so hard,
And the last loaf lay on the shelf, lad,
That he'd never be a burden to me,
But would somehow keep himself, lad.
And now, he's really coming back—
Coming home—our boy, lad !
My poor old eyes are nearly blind
With the tears I've wept for joy, lad.
An old man Like me to cry !
Doesn't it seem silly ?—
Who's that's just unlatched the gate ?
Stephen ! it's our Willie ! "
Mas Alta.
THE   ATTEMPT. 20
(Srate €xu\iions Mcbbmg.
Part Second.
" Xext morning brought hard fi-ost, bright sunshine, and George Lockhart, who
rode over from Hunthill soon after breakfast. I had tied up my hair with
Gordon tartan ribbons, to show him I was still 'proud of my Highland blood;' and
he noticed them at once, and asked me if I still thought the 'gay Gordons' and their
Highland brethren superior to the 'loyal Lockharts' of the south country 1 A subject
on which he remembered having a tough dispute with me in bygone days. But I did
not pick up the gauntlet afresh, preferring the study of the modern Lockhart to the
comparison of our respective ancestors. And after watching him closely all day, I
was very well pleased with George Lockhart. He had preserved a boyish simplicity
and freshness, a thorough enjoyment of life, and an energetic manner of talking,
thinking, and acting, very refreshing after the 'used-up' and languid style of my
London acquaintances. Grandmama Lascelles was delighted with him ; there was
a courtesy and deference in his manner towards her which won her heart at once ;
and he was remarkably handsome—a qualification on which she always laid great
weight. He was of very xmusual size and strength, and beside little slight pale-faced
Grace he looked a perfect giant; but his manner towards her was perfection, as even
grandmama admitted,—and that evening, she and I agreed that George Lockhart
was a 'complete success.' 'And indeed, Bessie, my dear,' said gi-andmama, 'though
Grace is my grand-daughter, and very pretty, oh certainly very pretty, and of good
family, and all the rest of it,—I can't help wondering that such a very distinguished-
looking young man did not choose a wife with a little more style and fashion and
manner, than a little quiet commonplace thing like her.' ' Grandmama, you don't
know Grace,' cried I, in great indignation ; 'commonplace ! I never saw a less com¬
monplace girl than she is. She's ten times too good for George Lockhart, or any
other man I ever saw; and I am glad to say I think he appreciates her. I think
her just as near perfection as any one well can be in this world ; and, grandmama,
that quiet composed manner of hers is infinitely more ladylike than the fashionable
tomboy style which prevails at present,' and I mentally contrasted Grace's gentle
dignity with the cool impertinence, and the more than masculine coarseness of some
young ladies, whom I had heard pronounced 'extremely stylish' the week before.
26 THE   ATTEMPT.
' Yes, yes, my dear,' reiterated grandmama, ' Grace is very nice and ladylike, and I
don't doubt she's veiy clever—all these Crichtons are clever, you know, and Grace
is a regular Crichtou ; but still, my dear, she is not exactly the sort of girl whom
one would expect to captivate that very aristocratic, fine-looking, young man ; and
in short, Bessie, I don't wish to forebode any evil to Grace—my poor dear Carrie's
only daughter ! but when Mr Lockhart takes her into society, and sees her among a
number of really fashionable girls, I just wish this fancy of his may last ! Good¬
night, my dear, I'm very sleepy,' and grandmama dozed oif before I could gather
words to express my indignation at such an idea. My pretty, sweet Grace ! fancy
comparing her to these girls of the period who were then in the height of fashion !
but George Lockhart, I thought, had more sense than grandmama gave him
credit for.
"It still wanted a week to Grace's wedding-day, and a very busy week it was to
Grace and me, and to old Bell, who was driven nearly distracted by the multitude
of her avocations. Besides the ordinary preparations for a wedding, we had to
prepare Netherhope for the reception of such an iniiux of the kinsfolk that the list
of their names, when Grace read it over to me, fairly took my breath away,—for
the Crichton cousinhood was a very large one, and its ramifications used to be the
subject of many a genealogical lecture from Uncle George. To be sure, it was only
for one night that they were to remain at Netherhope ; and as we were to have a
dance after the wedding, they would not probably be very particular about their
sleeping accommodation for a few hours, so shake-downs were arranged here, and
comfortable sofas there ; the billiard-room was transformed into something like a
hospital ward, with wooden beds constructed by the village joiner ranged along the
wall; and at last we began to see our way towards the accommodation of the troop
of kinsmen and kinswomen in tolerably comfortable style. The scenes in the kitchen,
in the stables, in Grace's room,—where Bell and an assistant were established with
their needles,—bafile description. But Grace was here and there and everywhere,
putting all that was wi'ong right, all that was crooked straight; managing, planning,
working, with a smile and a kind word for everybody, till even grandmama could
not restrain her admiration, and George Lockhart (who was frightfully in the way
all this last week), positively beamed with delight.
"At last we had arrived at the day before the wedding, when, shortly after
breakfast, as I was sitting over the fire, putting the finishing touches to the wedding
favours, the Hunthill carriage drove up, and little Mrs Lockhart, George's mother,
descended from it and came into the house.    I went to the drawing-room to see her.
THE  ATTEMPT. 27
and found her in the full tide of discourse upon her errand to Netherhope. She was
a little chirpy, flaxen-haired lady, excessively nervous and timid, very fond of Grace,
and very much afraid of Uncle George. ' Yes, Grace dear, George is so sorry not
to see you to-day! but the note just came by this morning's post, and he said,—
' Mother, I must go to Glasgow on business. I'll try to be back by the last train
at night,' and so he rang the bell and ordered the gig round; and he sent his best
love to you, Grace my dear, and was so sorry not to see you to-day ; but he'll try to
be back to-night, and if not, to-morrow forenoon at latest. So I just drove over at
once, that you might not wonder what was keeping him. No, thank you, dear, I
can't stay, I must go off again immediately, bvit I wanted to give you his message
myself.' ' Is it that business about old Dickson's farm, Mrs Lockhart, that's taken
your son to Glasgow V said Uncle George, giving the little lady his arm across the
hall and through the porch. (He had come in while she was speaking, and had only
gathered part of Iier story). ' No, Mr Crichton, no ; I think not. The letter just
came by this morning's post, and it was not from Mr Simpson nor Mr Maclean, nor
any of George's lawyer-gentlemen, I'm sure ; it was just quite a little note on pink
paper, for I saw it lying on his plate, and wondered who it could be from. But I
never ask any questions when gentlemen say ' it's biisiness,' Mr Crichton, for I've
such a poor head for anything of that kind, and my husband used to be so angry at
my stupidity! Thank you, Mr Crichton, thank you ! Good-bye sir ! good-bye
Grace, my love !' and the little lady drove off, and Grace ran up-stairs singing, to
assist at a final ' fitting on,' while I stood at the door gazing after the Hunthill
carriage. * Now,' thought I to myself, ' if I were in Grace's position, I should
torment myself straight on till I saw George Lockhart again about that ' little note
on pink paper !' Well, well, it's liicky that Grace is of a different nature from me.
I'm afraid this ' Highland blood' of mine is very jealous, untrustful stuff ! Coming,
Uncle George !' and I hastened to give my advice at a consultation about the
floor of the barn, where the servants' ball was to take place the night after ours.
" Grace's wedding-day dawned clear and cold and bright. The whole frosty
landscape lay glittering under the winter sun, the air was crisp and fresh, and in¬
spiriting ; the whole household, from the cat iipwards, seemed in a festive and mirthful
mood ; and Grace herself, when she came downstairs, looked as fresh and pure and
sweet as a snowdrop. Not the slightest trace of excitement or bustle ruffled the
sweet composure of her manner; just in her usual quiet way she went about her
duties as hostess at the breakfast table ; and neither grandmama's innumerable
questionings, difficulties, and doubts, nor the pointed jokes of the boys, produced the
28 THE   ATTEMPT.
slightest alteration in her gentle equanimity.    Grace's happiness was evidently too
deeply-seated to admit of any annoyance or vexation on this morning; and the boys
soon ceased their teasing, agreeing that ' it was a shame to torment her the last day
she would be with thera.'    Breakfast was scarcely ovei", when wheels on the gravel
walk announced the arrival of the first consignment of guests, who had come by the
early train ; and from that time onward till near evening, fresh arrivals of kinsfolk
were incessantly taking place, some coming by train, some by carriage, but all in a
state of high goodwill and affection towards Grace (poor girl! I thought she would
have been kissed to pieces !) and most of them tremendously hungry.    All of them
being more or less nearly related to each other, everyone called everyone else by liis
or her Christian name ; and as of course the same names were perpetually recurring
in the different families, the confusion was something sublime.   I know it seemed to
me that every second man answered to the name of Alexander.    I began to feel quite
an alien and an outcast, solitary ' 3Iiss Gordon' among all the Graces and Katies and
Janes ; and at last I besought my three fellow-bridesmaids to admit me to a standing
of comparative intimacy, and let me be 'Bessie' to them ; after which I felt more
at my ease.     I should mention here that, at about two o'clock, we had a visit from
John Lockhart, the bridegroom's cousin and best man, who came to ask if Grace had
heard from George that morning.   He had not returned, and Mrs Lockhart was
getting fidgetty   and  anxious about   him.      But   we   could   give   no   information.
* He'll come by the 5-10 train,' said Uncle George.    ' That will give him plenty of time
—the wedding's not till seven, and indeed seven's early enough, for they only leave
this in time to catch the express going south,—it stops at Sandon Junction at 8'45—
and the less time there is between the wedding and their departure the better—you'll
be but poor company, Gracie! he'll come by the 5-10 John.'    And Uncle George
walked out to see John Lockhart drive off, looking, I fancied, a little serious, if not
annoyed ; while grandmama shook her head ominously, giving me a glance that said
'I told you so !' as plainly as words could speak, and Jamie and Sandy exchanged
puzzled and wondering looks; but Grace was serene and cheerful as ever, and the
subject was dropped.   / could not forget it, though ! Thanks to Grandmama Lascelles'
reflections and forebodings, the seeds of doubt had taken root in my mind, and were
beginning to bear their fruit of mistrust and suspicion.    The ' little note on pink
paper,' the hurried journey, the prolonged absence,—I thought it all over and over
and over, in the midst of the wedding preparations and the reception of the cousin-
hood,   till  my head ached,   and   my heart too.      But no  one,   save   grandmama,
seemed to share my doubts, and all went on merrily at Netherhope.    By half-past
THE   ATTEMPT. 29
six Bell and I had dressed the bride, and we bridesmaids, our toilets completed, had
all assembled in Grace's room, to sit with her till Uncle George should appear to take
her downstairs; and the sight of Grace in her bridal robes, looking so sweet and calm
and untroubled, stilled the doubts in my mind for a time, as I thought how impossible
it was that any man could forsake her.    The  carriages  with  the guests from  the
neighbourhood  of Netherhope were beginning to  arrive when we took  our places
round Grace, to wait Uncle George's summons; and Katie Crichton, the youngest
and wildest of the bridesmaids, stationed herself at the window, to watch them drive
up through the glare of light that fell on the gravel-walk from the front  windows,
though the porch prevented her from seeing the people enter the house.    At ten
minutes to seven the Hunthill carriage was announced ; then there was  a lull; and
then, just as the big house-clock 'gave warning,' Katie sprang from her perch iu great
excitement, exclaiming that here was the minister ; and sure enough, as  I peeped
under the corner of the blind, there was old Dr Farquharson in his thickest great¬
coat, just descending from his gig.     We made  Grace get up and stand in the
middle of the room, while we finally adjusted her veil, and shook out her snowy
draperies ; and then there followed what seemed to me an interminable delay ; but
at last Uncle George's foot was heard on  the stair,—-he  opened the  door, and the
instant I saw his face I knew there was something wrong.     'Grace, my  dear !' said
he, 'we've had to change our plans a bit.    I waited for the minister to see if it would
suit him as well—I'm  afraid  you  can't leave  Netherhope  to-night.     The  fact is,
George didn't come by the 5'10 ; but I've no doubt he'll come  by the last train—
the one that gets to Sandon Junction at 8-30, to meet the express that you were to
have gone south by.    So I'll send to meet him at that train, and bring him straight
on here ; we'll have the wedding when he  comes, and you  can go off whenever
you please to-mon-ow.    And in the meantime I've ordered dinner, for the good folks
are getting hungry; and Grace, my dear, if you  don't mind, I  wish you'd come
downstairs at once.    There's old Sir Charles Dickson, and General Murray, and one
or two more, anxious to have a talk with you before you go ; and there will be no
time afterwards, for they won't stay for the dance.    But, if you'd rather not—'   ' Of
course, papa, I'll come,' said Grace.    ' Why, I think this is the better plan of the
two—we'll hear the speeches and see the dancing ; but George will be so vexed that
this unfortunate business should have come in the way just now!    Give me your
arm, papa, and we'll enter in all due form.'    And before I  had  recovered  from the
shock that Uncle George's news had given me, I found  myself following him and
Grace into the dining-room, where the company were waiting for their appearance,
30 THE   ATTEMPT.
to take their seats at the long tables. Uncle George led Grace to a vacant chair
beside Sir Charles Dickson, the 'great man' of the company ; and then, in passing
to his own place, he took advantage of the confusion to tap me on the shoulder.
' Bessie—Bessie Gordon, come here a minute, I want to speak to you,' and he drew
me apart into the deep bay Avindow. ' Bessie,' said he, ' tell me honestly, has there
been any foolish misunderstanding between Grace and George Lockhart 1 do you
know of any possible reason why the lad is keeping off in this way V I assured him,
as I could most truly, that no misunderstanding whatever had taken place; that I
was perfectly sure (ah, this was not so honest !) that the delay was inevitable ; that
no one would regret it more than George Lockhart, and that he was certain to
come by the last train. ' Well, well, I hope so, I think so,' said Uncle George ; but
I heard him mutter—'My poor bairn !' as he glanced towards Grace, and he looked
very serious as he took his place at the head of the table beside Mrs Lockhart. I,
as first bi'idesmaid, paired off with John Lockhart, the best man ; and I suppose, a
more silent and pre-occupied couple seldom have sat together under similar circum¬
stances, for dread of some impending misfortune hung heavy on the hearts of both.
" That long weary dinner ! I thought it would never come to an end. The clock
struck nine, and John Lockhart, unable to restrain himself, turned to me with a
face full of uneasy and anxious excitement. ' Miss Gordon, what on earth can they
be doing 1 It's not half-an hour's drive from the station ; we should hear the wheels
as they pass the corner of the park, and it's half-a-mile after that round to the door.'
Uncle George and several others began to look at their watches; conversation
flagged, and gradually died away, and every face wore a listening and anxious ex¬
pression—a melancholy-looking bridal party we were ! At last the sound of wheels
was heard, and John Lockhart sprang to the door—I followed him, half-wild with
excitement, and the whole party, infected by the example, streamed out after us into
the hall, and I'ound the widely-opened door. Even Grandmama Lascelles, leaning on
General Murray, ventured forward, regardless of the bitter Januaiy blast. The
weather had changed, and snow was falling thick and heavy. (We learnt after¬
wards that this was the cause of the delay at the station j the 8.30. train had been
very late, having found the line above Sandon much obstructed by snow.) At in¬
tervals through the drift we could see the carriage lamps as it rounded the end of
the park, and at last it turned in at the gate, and drove rapidly up the avenue,—while
our impatience rose higher every second. The carriage stopped before the porch,
the footman sprang down, ' Mr Lockhart has not arrived, sir—there has been no
telegram or message of any kind.'
THE   ATTEMPT. 31
" I don't know whose proposal or example led us, but in a few moments we were
all in the great Netherhope drawing-room, where the wedding was to have taken
place, and which was cleared of most of its furniture for the dance that was to have
followed. I remember a great confusion, Mrs Lockhart and some other ladies cry¬
ing, angry whispers and frowning faces among the gentleman, a i-unniug hither and
thither, and an asking of useless questions, while Grace sat in the midst of us white
and still as a marble statue. But the angry words grew louder and more universal,
and at last Alexander Crichton, one of Uncle George's brothers, a man of very
violent temper, loudly declared that George Lockhart had wilfully insulted Grace
and her family by his inexplicable conduct. ' 111 1 an accident 1' said he, in reply
to some timid suggestions of possible explanation, ' he was well enough when he
bolted off to Glasgow the day before his wedding, and he was bound to let us know
if his business was likely to keeji him too long. Ill news travels fast—we'd have
heard before this if any harm had come to him. The note that he got was in a lady's
writing, ask his mother, for it was she that told me. business forsooth ! I misdoubt
the business, the false hearted—' ' Uncle Alick!' cried Grace, in a voice of such anguish
that Alexander Crichton started and stopped. ' Oh, Uncle Alick, do not say such cruel
unjust things! Is there no onethatwill say a word for George? Where is John Lockhart?
And oh, Mrs Lockhart, will you not help me to speak for your son V But John could
only mutter that it was ' incomprehensible, he could not believe it,' and poor weak
little Mrs Lockhart went from one flood of tears into another, and sobbed,' oh, Gracie
my darling, don't vex yourself, don't mind them!' which was easily said. ' Then I must
speak myself,' said Grace, and she stood up beside the old minister, who had been
holding her hand, and there was asuddenlullin the confusion, and then absolute silence.
' Listen, I know George Lockhart better than any of you, and I tell you he is utterly
incapable of this,—this that you suspect him of. He is a true and honourable man,
and he would scorn the very thought of such treachery and deceit. I do not know
what has caused this unhappy delay—he may be ill—he may be dying or dead'—and
Grace's voice faltered, and she steadied herself on Dr Farquharson's arm—'but wher¬
ever he is, I know that he is true to me, and I will be as true to him. I will tnist
him in spite of all appearances and all suspicion,—yes, I'll trust him though I never
hear of him more. You may think it over-bold of me to speak like this, but, if all
had gone well, I should have been his wife two hours ago, and I should think shame
to stand by silent and hear any one cast a doubt upon his honour. That is what I
wanted to say.' Grace's words produced a partial and temporary reaction. Not
that she had said a word more than we had all known before, or had given the
32 THE   ATTEMPT.
slightest explanation of the bridegroom's mysterious absence, but such perfect trust
and faith on the part of her who had the right to feel most deeply insulted by his
non-appearance, somewhat changed the feelings of those who had resented the matter
chiefly on her account. At Grace's urgent request the guests agreed to remain a
short time longer, instead of hurrying off in distress and confusion ; but dancing
was not to be thought of,-—our hearts were too heavy,—so card-tables were set out,
and Katie Crichton, whose voice was the pride of the whole connection, sat down at
the piano. As soon as she could do so unobserved, Grace slipped away, and in a few
minutes I contrived to follow her to her room. I entered so quietly that she did not
hear me, and I caught sight of her pale wistful face reflected in the looking-glass.
" Poor cousin, with your meek blue eyes,
The truest eyes that ever answered heaven !"
That look would have melted a heart of stone. Oh, how I hated George Lockhart
at that moment ! I understood how Beatrice felt towards Claudio, when sympathy
with her insulted kinswoman wrung from her the infuriated words,—' Oh that I
were a man ! I would eat his heart in the market-place !' For—I blame Grand-
mama Lascelles for it—Grace's words had produced no eflect upon me. In spite of
myself, as it were, I believed George Lockhart guilty of this cruel piece of treachery
towards my gentle, loving, trusting cousin ; and the sobs, amidst which I threw my
arms round Grace, were as much those of burning anger against her faithless bride¬
groom as of tender pity for herself. But I did not dare to hurt her by saying a
word of my doubts, and for some minutes we sat silently holding each other's hands,
till at last Grace, with a shudder that shook her whole frame, said,—' Bessie, I
cannot bear it ! Oh, where can he be 1 some dreadful thing must have happened to
him. Oh George ! oh George !" and at last her tears flowed freely,—the intense
strain of excitement was over. 'What are ye greeting for that way, bau'ns?'
suddenly said the voice of old Bell, who had entered unobserved. ' This'U no do.
Miss Gordon,—ye'll wear her strength oot, talkin' and excitin' her. Gangawa' doon
the stair, an' let them hear some o' your fine Italian sangs, an' leave me wi' your
cousin,—she's had a sair time amang them a', puir thing, an' this her waddin' day.
Never you mind. Miss Grace, my bairn ! it's weel kent the Lockharts is aye leal. Mr
George '11 be here the mom; or if no, ye'll hae a letter,—keep up your heart, my
lamb. Ye'd better bid her good-night. Miss Gordon,' and I was fairly ejected. I
washed the tear-stains from my face, and returned to the drawing-room. Katie
Crichton and John Lockhart, who had a very fine bass voice, were performing
a duet; and during the stillness which pervaded the room while they were singing,
THE   ATTEMPT. 33
I thought I heard the sound of horses' hoofs passing the park-corner. I thought no
more of it, however, knowing that there was no other train till morning ; and my
attention was fixed by the spirit and expression with which John Lockhart and
Katie sang the brilliant conclusion of the duet. Loud and long applause followed ;
then came a silence—a hesitation—for Uncle George, dispirited and gloomy, made
but a poor host that night; and then, just as I was wondering what was to be done
next, the door was flung wide open, and George Lockhart himself appeared !
" In the midst of all my excitement, and in spite of the widely-different circum¬
stances, he brought vividly to my mind the equally unlooked-for appearance of
' young Lochinvar,' when
" So boldly he entered the Netherby hall,
'Mongst bridesmen, and kinsmen, and brothers, and all ;—
Then spake the bride's father "—
and though Uncle George Crichton of Hetherhope wore no sword, and therefore
could not lay his hand on it like Grseme of Xethei'by, yet his voice and manner
were sufficiently stern as he rose and said,—' Mr Lockhart, I must demand an
explanation.' ' You shall have it, sir,' said George, who certainly looked very unlike
the villain some of us had thought him, with his open, manly face, and his straight¬
forward unembarrassed manner, ' but I think it will be the most satisfactory way
for all parties if I begin at the end of my story.' He beckoned to some one in the
hall, and a young man, very roughly dressed, but with an air of a gentleman about him
entered the room. Uncle George looked puzzled ; but I was quicker. * Archy ! it's
Archy !' I shrieked, and ran at him to make sure. Archy it was, sure enough ; and,
without waiting for further explanation, 1 rushed upstairs to tell Grace that George
was safe, and that Arcliy was found, and that ' all's well that ends well.' George
Lockhart's explanation was much interrupted meanwhile by the excitement at the
' return of the prodigal,' as old Dr Farquharson would have said,—I forget whether
he really did say it,—but the facts were as follows :—Archy, when he left Nether-
hope, had gone to sea as a common sailor, and, three days before Grace's wedding,
his temper, which appeared still to be his stumbling-block, had led him to make some
impertinent reply to the skipper of his vessel, which was then lying at Glasgow. The
result of this was that Archy was dismissed in disgrace ; and, leaving the ship in a
hurry, had left behind him a psalm-book which he had carried about with him ever
since leaving Netherhope, and in which his name and address,—' Archibald
Crichton, Netherhope, Lanarkshire,'—were written at full length.     This book was
E
34 THE   ATTEMPT.
found by the skipper's wife, who was a Lanarkshire girl, and had often heard the
story of Archy's disappearance, though she had never seen him ; and finding, upon
cross-questioning her husband, that poor Archy, turned adrift without a character,
was on the direct road to ruin, she resolved to write to his friends. Fearing (very
absurdly) that Uncle George had disowned Archy, and would not take any steps to
recover him, and aware of the engagement between Grace and George Lockhart,
though ignorant that their wedding-day was so near, she made up her mind to write
to the latter and ask his help. The note, however (which George read to the
wedding-party) was couched in the most mysterious terms, begging him to come at
once to Glasgow that he might avert a great misfortune which threatened the family
at Netherhope, and also to keep silent on the subject,—altogether a most high-
flown and romantic epistle, on the pinkest and most highly-scented paper. The
search for Archy had proved long and difficult, and George found it impossible to
leave Glasgow till the afternoon of the wedding-day; but, knowing that the 5.10
train would take him to Netherhope in time, he neither wrote nor telegraphed.
But, at the very last moment, they found they had been upon a false scent,
which, however, aflbrded them a clue to the right one; and George, half-wild
with impatience, was obliged to remain, feeling that this was the last chance
of restoring Archy to his honie. He despatched a boy to the station with a
telegram, but the boy lost it by the way, and when George, ha-vdng at last
recovered and secured Archy, arrived at the station to catch the last train,
he found this luckless messenger waiting to confess his faults. At last they were off",
but they remembered that from Blackhills, the station before Sandoii, there was a
sort of bridle track across the hills to Netherhope, by which they could arrive about
an hour sooner than if they went on to Sandon in the regular way. They accord¬
ingly left the train, hired horses at Blackhills Inn, and started across the hills; but
the snowstorm came down upon them with tremendous violence, they repeatedly lost
the road, and once lost each other; and it was only after the greatest difficulty, peril,
and delay, that they arrived at Netherhope. But all these troubles were soon for¬
gotten. Alexander Crichton was among the first to shake hands with the bride¬
groom ; every voice was loud in his praise, when Uncle George pulled out his watch,—
' What o'clock is it! nearly half-past eleven ! where's the minister 1 Dr Farquharson,
since you have kindly waited so long, will you wait half-an-hour longer, and we'll
have the wedding the day it was fixed for after all. And then we'll have supper, for
some of us that I know of had but a poor appetite for dinner,—and we'll end the even¬
ing merrily as it should be.    Hurry, George, hurry ! change your wet things man !
THE   ATTEMPT. 35
and you bridesmaids, Bessie—Katie—all of you—go back and be ready to come in
with the bride.'
" And a happier wedding or a merrier party, never T am very sure, took place
on either side of the Tweed. Everyone was in the highest of spirits, and I should be
afraid to say to what hour the festivities were prolonged. How George (who was no
hand at speech-making) stuck hard and fast while returning thanks for the toast of the
evening,—' Mr and Mrs Lockhart of Hunthill,'—how Grace pulled him by the coat-
tails, and begged him ' for any sake to sit down,' which he eventually did, amidst
thunders of applause ; how Jamie, the embryo advocate, made his maiden speech in pro¬
posing, 'The Bridesmaids,' and was successful beyond all expectation; how Archy grew
gradually quite at his ease among us, and seemed disposed to please and be pleased ;
how after supper, we danced a reel and two country dances (it was so late that Uncle
George limited the ball to these perfoi-mances) in a style superior to anything that had
been seen in the country-side for fifty years, as old Sir Charles Dickson assured us;
how grandniama took an opportunity of whispering to me that she was ' extremely
pleased with the way Grace had behaved ! she had far more in her than one would
think !' how George and Grace went off to Hunthill with Mrs Lockhart, in the
midst of a perfect tornado of old shoes, and started quietly next day on their wedding
tour. All these things, distinctly though I remember them now, passed at the time
with the rapidity and unreality of a dream. Somewhat chilling was the awakening
next morning, to find everybody tired, and a good many people cross,—Netherhope
looking untidy and unlike itself, and my dear pretty cousin gone away. But the
servants' rejoicings, which took place that night, served as a sort of transition to
every-day life and its realities ; and take it all in all, though there was a good deal
of bitter mixed with the sweet, yet there are few events in my life to which I look
back with greater pleasure than Grace Crichton's Wedding. Now, I'm sure that's
long enough, and nothing of a story after all. I do believe Charley's fallen asleep.
No, he's only pretending.    Wake up sir, and give us a song."
The End,
Dido.
36 THE  ATTEMPT.
Soub^nirs of t^t Sofial Jicatremg,   1868.
"LETTEES & NEWS AT THE LOCH SIDE."
By H. T. Wells, A.—No. 440.
" Pull away, Donald—lay on to it. Jack—
The wind is against us dead, all the way back ;
Gite way with a will, lads—ah, now then, she swings
Fast over the water as if she had wings.
If round yon near point we can manage to get.
No fear, but we'll stop Sandy's white sheltie yet;
That cripple old pony goes always so slow,
How he gets through his rounds I'm just puzzled to know.
But, look ! why, there's Riach's old boat out as well!
He's bound, too, for plunder, that's easy to tell;
So pull away, lads, 'twill be really too bad
If he gets in first, with the start that we had.
Hi! Sandy ! you long-legged old rascal! hi! stay !
Let's see what you've got in your wallet to-day.
So, out with the bag, and let's see what he brings!
Now ! who are the owners of these pretty things 1
There's the 'Scotsman' for you, Donald, ah, lucky lad !
No stupid love-letters to drive you stark mad.
With longings to rush from this outlandish place,
And bask in the light of your lady's bright face.
Who is gazetted 1 who's dead ? and who's married ?
What weight has Sweet Lass at the Trial Stakes carried ?
Ah ! it's little he's heeding, he's deep in his boats,
I do think he knows every yacht that now floats.
Catch, Allan ! three; ah, foreboders of ill!
That blue one looks much like a tailor's long bill.
You spendthrift young dog ! you'll be sorry one day
For throwing your money so reckless away.
THE  ATTEMPT. 37
Gordon, lad, Gordon 1 oh, where is that Pat ?
Taking a line off that battered old hat !
Oh, the cunning old fox, not pretending to see !
Whose else could this sweet little billet-doux be 1
Now for my own—here's from that begging man Spring !
Does he think I possess quite the wealth of a king ?
Bah ! circulars ! stationers, saddlers, hotels,
And a Limited Co. for Artesian wells !
Oh, bother them all !    Good ! a letter from mother I
A note of advice from the parson, my brother;
And, what will I give to his parish school-house 1
Give ! I'm as poor as is any church-mouse !
Now, what have we here 1 a red seal—woe is me !
That comes from the War Office, plain I can see.
' O.H.M.S.' ah, those terrible letters—
The magical links of my Government fetters.
Oh, who would have thought it 1 at this very time.
When the birds and the salmon are just in their prime ;
And every day here's such a glorious feast
For one's rod and one's rifle,—here's off to the East !
To be up at head-quarters before the week's done!
Oh, fancy Pall Mall in this blazing hot sun !
Piccadilly, St James's, the Row, choked with dust !
Well, there's no use in grumbling, for go off I must.
At any rate, here I am safe for to-day—
So, while the sun shines, won't I just make my hay !
To-morrow will only come surely too fast—
Then here goes for pleasure, while pleasure will last!
So, push her off, Donald,—and Allan, back water !
Toss me that fly-book, prepare for the slaughter !
I saw a grand rise in the ripple out there—
Now, you bonnie big fellows, escape if you dare !"
Mas Alta.
38 THE  ATTEiMPT.
(Conclusion.)
In closing our remarks upon Mediaeval Chivalry, we must free ourselves from the
supposition that when we enthusiastically enlarged upon the qualities necessary to a
true and noble knight, we meant for a moment to assert that mankind, as a whole,
were better then than now, and that their times were the golden times, far beyond our
own; because society as a whole was not better, but much worse. The lower
orders were unenlightened and crushed ; chivalry to them in general was a mighty
incubus, that forbade the motions of life in their souls. We must not forget that to
the church alone the serfs owed their freedom, for she taught that men should be¬
long to no owner but herself.
But, amongst the knights themselves, whose education should have taught them
better, practice is sadly at variance with profession. Not only do the annals of
chivalry abound in instances of cruelty, cunning meanness, the seven deadly sins, and
ignoi"ance past all belief, but they are so common as to pass unnoted either by their
age, or the chronicler who narrated them. Not amid its ranks did civilization take
I'oot and blossom and bear fruit: the castle walls that shut out foes, shut out also im¬
provement, and sustained within cruelty, selfishness, coarseness, and utter self
sufficiency,—the greatest bar to all progress, intellectual and otherwise. What ad¬
vantage then did the knight receive ? Simply this, that there was set before him
a model form of perfection, noble, pure, and withal possible to the enthusiastic and
self-denying. As Guizot says on this same subject—" The heroes of Homer do not
seem to have an idea of their brutality, their ferocity, their egoism, their rapacity ;
their moral knowledge is no better than their conduct, their principles do not rise
above theii" acts. It is the same with almost all societies in their strong and turbu¬
lent youth. We do not find them in general with ideas far more pure, more ele¬
vated, more generous, than their daily actions. In our Europe, on the contrary,
facts are habitually detestable ; crimes, disorders of all kinds abound, but still men
have in their minds, in their imaginations, pure elevated instincts and desires; their
notions of virtue are far moi'e developed, their ideas of justice incomparably better
than what is practised around them—than what they practise themselves. Every¬
where the moral thought of men aspires high above their life."    So, with  all the
THE  ATTEMPT. 39
faults of its votaries, the true chivalric character was a beautiful vision, a shining
" Sanct Graal," ever floating away before the gaze and grasp of its admiring followers,
yet ever leading them towards the right paths. Like the expressed form of Christi¬
anity, a life was given as a model; and thougli not always successfully imitated, the
straining after it, which in many cases was earnest and ardent, resulted in a nobler
frame of mind than any other force could then have done. At the risk of seeming
contradictoiy, however, we would beg to assert that the very fact that it was possible'
for men to attain this ideal perfection, was frequently the cause that they did not
attain it. Better a thousand times have an ideal which we can never attain, than
one which would permit perfection ; for the " having attained " would be a gate of
death in life, forbidding progress or ascent; and the self-satisfaction and indolence
consequent thereon, would undermine the foundations of this high-set pianacle. In
modern days, alas, perfection is conceived of a nature mean enough to be easily at¬
tained.    This is one j^ractical evil of the Romish religion throughout.
It was for the sake of the example held out to him chiefly, that the young noble
was sent away from his paternal home, where eyes and judgment might be warped
and blinded by afiection, and consigned to the care of some noble; for, as we find in
the " Memoires de Saint Palaye," a note from " L'Ordre de la Chevalerie" to
this eflect,—" It is fitting that the son of a knight, while he is a squire, should
know how to take care of a horse ; and it is fitting that he should serve before and
be subject to his lord ; for otherwise he shall not know the nobleness of his lordship
when he shall be a knight; and to this end every knight should put his son in the
service of another knight, to the end that he may learn to carve at table and to
serve, and to arm and apparel a knight in his youth. According as to the man who
desires to learn to be a tailor or a carpenter, it is desirable that he should have for a
master one who is a good tailor or carpenter; it is suitable that every nobleman who
loves the order of chivalry, and wishes to become and be a good knight, should first
have such a knight for a master." Habits of prompt obedience and self-surrender
are the best possible to the young, and obedience was the grand first principle of
chivalric training. All honour was done to service,—it was not thought mean, but
ennobled through its end. The page of old did more useful and continuous service
than our modern edition in buttons, and was made thereby only the more a noble ;
for it takes " a good servant to make a good master," and the remembrance of
how he had done work in his youth, would guide him to teach it to the lads of
another generation, that ere long would gather round him in his castle or at the
field,   to learn   from him the  traditional  lore,   manners,   and  obedience.     With
40 THE  ATTEMPT.
all the ignorance, narrow-mindedness, and selfishness that accompanied its best
developments, let us not then forget to give chivalry its due as a healthy and
beneficial j^hase in the life of nations. No nation which has not passed through the
period of chivalry, can rightly understand or clearly illustrate the meaning of the
noble word " gentleman !" The eastern nations escaped its influence, and are con¬
tent with a lower degree of civil freedom and of self-respect than can support the
true dignity of man. This chivalric form took a deeper root in Britain than in any
other country. There alone, we may have noticed, the orders of knighthood retained
their pure chivalric form, without an undue proportion of the ecclesiastical element.
This may be due to the fact that the land threw off the trammels of the church at
the very time when the other nations of Europe, having passed through the true
chivalric period, succumbed more helplessly to that mighty power that assimilated
to itself all capable of being so, and waged an exterminating war against all that
resisted. But our native land, left free to follow the progressive spirit of its age,
flung off", along with the fetters of the church, the withered vestments of chivalry
and feudalism, from which the life had gone forth, or rather restored it, through the
process of Palingenesis, to a new life that might have strength for the new times.
And that Phoenix was not sacrificed in vain. Whence, but from its ashes, arose the
golden glory of the Elizabethan age—its warriors and statesmen, its admirals and
poets. Whence, but from this spirit, were those spirits finely touched unto fine issues
that gave forth the lore of Chaucer, Si^enser, Shakespeare; whence came our
national fortitude, uprightness, patience 1 For the new form is one more reasonable,
more enlarged, more practical than the old ; it is content to fling down its castle
walls, and lay itself open to all ennobling influence from abroad ; it does not wander
forth " errant " upon the earth, for the bare glory of adventure, but bides its time
in the majesty of conscious strength, and the patient power of the integrity of an
English Gentleman. Lutea Reseda.
THE   ATTEMPT. 41
% Soitg of |0».
I AM here all alone at my window,
Gazing out on the dark stormy night;
But no gloom doth its dreariness bring me.
For the joy in my heart makes all bright!
There are clouds on the -wild face of heaven,
There are shadows on earth's slumbering breast;
In the forest afar there is moaning,
On the sea there is weary unrest.
But glad light^glorious light—is around me.
All my life's path is bathed in its blaze ;
From the bright lamp of joy in thought's temple.
Stream o'er me its pure heavenly rays.
Wake ! awaken, oh world, careless sleeping !
Wake to know I am loved,—I am blest !
Give me joy ye wild winds of the forest;
Ocean hear me, and still thine unrest !
Sweep the cloud-veil, oh moon, from thy glory,
And look down from thy gem-begirt throne ;
Peep, ye stars, through the misty maze wandering,
On an earth heaven-bright as thine own.
Drowsy birds in your downy nests dreaming.
Though 'tis night, it is glad day with me,—
Up ! arouse thee and bask in its brightness !
As my heai't sings for joy,—so sing ye !
Live again thou red light of the morning.
Leave thy low ocean grave,—flash on high !
Show my joy to the world-circling heavens,—
Thy Tithonus ne'er loved more than I !
Melensa.
42 THE   ATTEMPT.
There was an ancient theory of the universe, which looked upon it as the battle¬
field of two opposing powers—light and darkness—the conflict being ceaseless, and
the victory uncertain. It is a conflict which, \mder drflerent forms, we still see every¬
where around us,—a battle which is fought over and over again, not only in the
world, but in every human soul. In Tennyson's poem of " The Two Voices," we
have the record of one such soul-conflict, one episode in the long war which is every
soul's history.
The man of whom we read in this poem is " full of misery." It has not always
been so with him,—his youth was bright and hopeful, and rich with noble aspira¬
tions, but that time has gone for ever. It may be that some great sorrow or dis¬
appointment has crushed his spirit; or, more probably, it is only that the disen¬
chantment, which must come more or less gradually to all when the bright visions of
youth " fade into the light of common day," has come to him. He had once seen all
things glorified by " the light that never was on sea or land,"—his hopes of his own
and the world's future had been high and bright,—" then came the check, the change,
the fall," a fall deep in proportion to the height to which he had formerly soared ;
and now everything is seen through the gloom that has fallen on his own spirit. He is
not a sceptic, doubting for doubting's sake; he believes that truth is to be found,
that it is a noble thing to search for it, and that, though he may never find it,
others will; but the thought of the "purpose" that "runs through the ages,"
and the grand destinies of humanity, cannot cure the aching of an individual human
heart.
At the moment when the poem opens, the man, weary and sick at heart,
bowed down by a weight all the more oiJiJressive because so indefinite, seems to
have reached the climax of his wretchedness.    Then he hears within him a quiet
scornful voice—
" Thou art so full of misery,
Were it not better not to be ?"
Why endure to no purpose wretchedness which has no end ?
" There is one remedy for all."
The idea so far chimes in with the man's mood, that at first he offers no decided re-
THE  ATTEMPT. 43
sistance to it. Weary and indifferent, he looks at it as a mere abstract possibility,
and speaks about himself as if he were some one else. The natural instinctive
shrinking from death may cause his reply to be in the negative ; but tlmt does not
prompt the abstract answer that man is too wonderful a being to be destroyed in
that summary way.
The voice replies that it might not be destructive,—there are analogies in nature
which lead us to believe that death may only be the gate of a new life, a transfor¬
mation into a being of higher nature and vaster powers than before.
The answer is characteristic of one who, though he has lost all faith and hope
for himself, still has faith in humanity. Man, he says, is the youngest-born and the
noblest of all creatures,—surpassing them all in form and in the possession of heart
and intellect, and endowed with dominion over all,—" The roof and crown of things."
The sneering rejaly is ready that this is but the fancy of a blind pride—for, " in a
boundless uniA'crse, is boundless better, boundless worse." And even allowing man
to be the highest creature, what is one man among so many ?
To this last question at least there is an answer. Every man has his own indi¬
viduality,—he is himself, and like no other man who has been or will be.
Admit it, the scoffing voice replies, is your individuality anything so great, so
noble, that your loss will be any loss to the race ?
This is not an argument—-only a taunt—and therefore all the more powerful in
the man's present state of dissatisfaction with himself; and the instinctive impulse to
resist the dark conclusion is arrested by a flood of tears.   On this line of argument he
is foiled, and his adversary takes advantage of this weakness and failure to draw
thence an additional proof of the hopelessness of his case.     He is so " steeped in
misery" that he cannot thinly or reason, he-can only weep; and again the suggestion
is repeated,—
" Were it not better not to be ?"
The answer this time is more personal and more hopeful. " I should lose all
chance of a happy change." The voice replies with another of those scornful and
baseless assertions which cut so deep because they find an echo within, that any such
hope is vain ; this disease of the soul is incurable.
Yet all this misery does not make the thought of death more welcome to the
weary soul. In truth, life is not all weariness to him ; there are things in the world
which he prizes, though he only finds it out when he thinks what it would be to
leave them all for ever,—to close his eyes for ever on this fair earth, and the new
beauties which every spring brings round,—to be shut out for ever from the world
44 THE   ATTEMPT.
of intellect, and the new truths which are continually revealing themselves to patient
seekers. And, though it is too true that he must die sooner or later, and leave all
these things, he would fain stay here as long as may be, and watch the new lights
which are hourly breaking on the world's horizon.
But no man, however long his life, the voice replies, can hope to see that slow
dawn break into day; and, could he live for ages, and, gaining fresh knowledge every
year, find the answers to questions not yet asked, by how much would he have
lessened the infinite unknown ? how much nearer would he be to perfect knowledge ?
He might seem to himself and to others to have learned much, but you, the mocking
voice continues, with another bitter personal taunt, you cannot even do that.
" But to seem to find,
Asks what thou lackest, though resigned,
A healthy frame, a quiet mind ! "
It is only too true that these are wanting, that life must be fruitless as well as
wretched ; but yet the man feels it a cowardly thing to leave this life from fear of
pain, or at least, other men would say it was so. Not more cowardly, the voice
replies, than to live as you do now, hating life and dreading death; less cowardly
indeed, in so far as decision of any kind is better and braver than this contemptible
indecision. Why vex yourself as to what men will say of you ? They will very soon
forget you altogether; and, even should they blame you, you will never hear it in the
quiet grave. There is rest to be found there, and sweet sleep after long trouble, if
you will only be decided and resolute for once.
A hard task, the man replies, to draw resolution from doubts and negations :—
Had I hope, as I once had, I could be resolute ; and he goes back in thought to those
old days when he still had confidence in himself and the world ; when all his
thoughts were centred in the conflict of life for which he was preparing; and he
looked forward, across long years of brave battle for the right, to an honoured death
in the arms of victory.
His had been a noble purpose—a life-work worthy of any man's devotion.
These plans and purposes had passed away ; they had proved but the baseless fabric
of a dream ; but still the man who had once entertained them, could not but feel
that it was only in such a cause as this that it would be worth while to die.
But that, replies the voice, was but the heat of a youthful fancy ; you have
come now to see what life really is. And, even had that dream of yours been so far
fulfilled—had you engaged in life's battle with the earnest purpose to fight and die
for the truth, would you  have succeeded 1    Does any one succeed ?    Search for
THE   ATTEMPT. 45
truth all your life, lured on by seemingly friendly gleams of hope, and what will
you find in the end but darkness 1
It is easier to answer this than many similar scoffing questions; for though in the
great world-battle for light against darkness, there has often been defeat and failure,
he cannot forget that there have been some who have striven and conquered.
It is the last ground on which he stands,—when driven from all trust for himself—
the thought of those who did not trust in vain. It may be that his early visions
were a delusion; that he has never heard " the melody of the everlasting chime,"—
has never seen from afar the gates of the celestial city ; but it is something to have
looked on the faces of those who have—men, whose strong faith gave them the
victory over suffering and danger-^over even death itself, and as he thinks of these
men, it seems for a moment to him as if he too felt as they did.
Before the exultant words have died away upon his lips, comes the cold and
sullen answer :—It was only their temperament, not that they had any true ground
for their faith. You have not their capacity for enthusiasm ; you cannot help it if
yours is '■ the fatal gift of eyes " to see things as they are, however you may wish
that the old illusions still had power over you.
If all knowledge of the future is indeed so impossible, the man replies, I
miglit, for aught I can tell, in trying to escape from this life, find myself in another
of deeper and permanent suffering. Going weak and helpless into a world of which
I know nothing, what is it I may not fear?
In answer to this objection, the voice argues from the perfect calm of a dead
face, and the perfect silence of the grave, that death is nothing but a long and
dreamless sleep. The answer is—that if indeed we neither know nor can discover
anything beyond this life, we cannot be sure that those we call the dead are dead.
It is true that, as far as we can judge by the evidence of the senses, the death of
the body is the end of man ; but do not all men feel that there is an immortal part
of them which does not perish with the body 1 Several arguments are here brought
forward in proof of the immortality of the soul—beginning with that which is to
the majority of men the most convincing, and yet the most difficult to sujiport by
proof, the argument from intuition,—" that inward evidence by which we doubt
against the sense."
Again, man finds within him ideas which he cannot have gathered from his own
experience ; for, how could he draw the idea of eternity from the ever-changing course
of time 1 or the idea of infinite perfection from a world where " all things are out of
joint?"    As the stream cannot rise higher than its source, such ideas cannot have
46 THE  ATTEMPT.
originated in the mind of man, they must have been implanted by a higher power—
in whom they are realized—who is not a blind fate, but a heavenly Friend, whose
purposes are wise and good, though often mysterious to human understanding.
Surely that God did not implant in man's heart that "type of the perfection,"
of truth and goodness merely to make the whole course of the world seem an enigma
to him, and his own heart the most perplexing enigma of all. These ideas of
perfection must have an answering substance somewhere ; and, as it is not to be
found in this life, there must be another life in which we shall find it. And the
tempting voice, though he can cast doubt on arguments like these, cannot disprove
them, still less bring any proof that things are otherwise.
The voice replies with an argument against the soul's immortality, to the effect
that there was a time when we were not in existence ; there was therefore a time
when we began to be,—and " to begin, implies to end." His opponent answers that
that last assertion cannot be proved ; but, granting it,—
" How should I for certain hold,
Because my memory is so cold ;
That I was first in human mould."
And then follow several arguments to prove the existence of the soul before its
union with the body.
To explain the absence of any memories of such previous existence, it is sug¬
gested that a " draught of Lethe," such as was fabled in the old mythologies might
cause total oblivion ; a former life might be forgotten as dreams often are here j or
there might only be a dim remembrance of it, which, if the former life had been
a higher one than the present, would account for the indefinite longing and sadness
felt in scenes of great natural beauty and sublimity. Again, had the former life
been a lower one, it might be forgotten as men forget their infancy ; or, supposing
our souls to have previously existed unconnected with any material foi-m, as memory
deals but with time and time with matter, we could have no memory of such an
existence. This hyj^othesis would account for the vague feelings that sometimes
come over us—" like glimpses of forgotten dreams," of something done or felt, we
know not when or where. The reply is the cruellest the heavy heart can receive.
No counter-arguments are attempted—" dreams" are put aside with quiet contempt,
and the facts of sense held up again against the faith of the spirit—" Thy pain is a
reality."
The reality of the pain cannot be denied—the soul still feels it as keenly as ever,
but feels too that it is useless merely to show him the hopelessness of his present
THE  ATTEMPT, 47
State, and to promise him rest and silence. To one crushed and maddened by sorrow,
death may indeed seem the only thing to be desired, but when the soul is " half-sick
of shadows" it does not want darkness, but the substance of the shadows.
" 'Tis life whereof our lives are scant,
Oh life ! not death, for which we pant,
More life and fuller, that I want."
True and noble words, which surely seem an echo of those other words that rise to
our minds as we read them:—" I am come that they might have life, and that they
might have it more abundantly."
So the discussion closes. The tempter is foiled ; but, though the soul has fought
bravely and successfully, his is not the joy of victory—he sits " as one forlorn."
It had been night, and now the morning dawns,—a Sabbath morning, with its
own peculiar still freshness, and he looks out into the world, and watches the people
pressing to the house of prayer. The beauty of a spring morning, the sight of
humble faith and piety,—it is not much after all; but they bring calm and healing to
the troubled and wounded spirit. The gloomy fancies clear away like mist before the
sun, and something of the glow and brightness of other days returns. The dull and
sullen voice is gone ; and a second voice, soft and silver-toned, whispers words of com¬
fort and encouragement. The words are hints, faintly understood, of a hidden hope
yet to be revealed, of a knowledge that all things are working together for good.
They fall like soft music on the ti'oubled heart; and the luxuriant beauty of woods
and fields and flowers completes the cure, and turns " the winter of discontent" into
the hopeful joy of spring-time; and all things combine to bring home the conclu¬
sion,—felt, although no tongue can prove it, that all things are ordered by a loving
Father's hand ; that even
" Every cloud that spreads above
And veUeth love, itself is love."
It has been sometimes said that this conclusion of the poem is unsatisfactory,—
that the long argument with the tempting voice leaves the matter after all very much
where it was, and that the restoration of the man's mind to peace and confidence is
attributed to his looking at the people going to church, and afterwards taking a walk
iu the woods. It seems to me, that the poem, as it is, is far more true than if the poet
had shown us his hero retiring triumphant and perfectly satisfied with himself, after
vanquishing the scofiing voice with a chain of severely logical arguments. It is a
fact, and one of which the voice makes use several times in the course of his argu¬
ment, that our opinions on all points, and particularly on those subjects which lie
48 THE   ATTEMPT.
beyond the evidence of our senses,—do depend very much, more than we like to
acknowledge, on a number of external influences which affect the spirits. And in a
state of weariness and depression, air and sunshine and sympathy, above all active
sympathy, with ovir fellow-creatures, are mental tonics not to be despised.
But there is another reason which shows the poet's conclusion to be at once tme
and instructive. Notwithstanding the weakness of the arguments advanced by the
doubting voice considered as reasons for seeking death,—many of the statements made
are in themselves true, and cannot be disproved by any reasoning, however sound.
That there is very miich that is perplexing in the world and in ourselves, which the
highest intellects will iind it impossible to explain, is true. We must all feel it to be
so—no man, no generation of men, has ever solved " the riddle of this painful earth."
And yet it has a key—a key that is not in our hands—but in His hands who says,
" I am the light of the world—he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life." To believe these words—to trust in and follow that
leader, such faith is the only thing that can make life worth living. And it must
come to us from above ; nature and human sympathy may do much to soothe the
heart, and biing it into a sound and healthy state; but they cannot give this faith, nor
can it come from ourselves—it is the gift of God. Mankind have not been left to
grope their way in darkness, helpless and alone ; the reign of darkness is passing, and
the true light is now shining. To eveiy one who walks by the light he has, and
" will not make his judgment blind," nor let his heart freeze into selfish isolation,
the full light will come, though not perhaps always in this life.    To every one
kneeling on
" The world's great altar stairs
That slope thro' darkness up to God,"
" Crying for the light,
And with no language but a cry,"
faith will be given to feel himself to be
" A child that cries,
But crying knows its Father near."
Grace.
TJie Prize offered for tlie best Prose Article appearing in tJie January Number
of " The Attempt," has been awarded to O. M. for her article on " The Conventual
System."
THE   ATTEMPT. 49
Chapter I.
" We were two sisters of one race,
She was the fairest in the face ;—
The wind is blowing in turret and tree."—Tennyson.
How the wind was blowing that night as we sat together by the fire ! Blowing 1
It was wailing, roaring, rushing,—making the black pines moan round the old house
like human souls in pain. Every now and then it came nearer, and shook the
window, as if a restless spirit that loved us could not remain without, and was
pleading to be let in from the cold, dark, stormy night ; and then it went sweeping
away across the gurly sea, awakening love's ceaseless litany in many a sleepless,
anxious heart, as it shouted on its way. " That it would please Thee to preserve all
who travel by land or water,—we beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord !" What
though the prayer took many different forms ; though one pale young wife could
do nothing but sit by the cottage hearth, moaning with white lips, as the gusts
went by,—"Save him, save my darling, and let me see him again;" though a
widowed mother lay listening to the fierce blast, with an inward cry, more wild and
yearning than if it had been audible,—" Oh ! my boy, my own boy, God help thee
this awful night !" though it might seem like a desperate murmur of pain, it was
heard above the tempest, and answered; for
" The blessedest,
Best sound, the boat keels grating on the sand,"
was heard next morning, and no mother was left childless, no wife widowed in
St Michael's by that "night of stormy water."
I have wandered away from my sister Una and myself, sitting safe and warm
in the red light of the fire, and listening to the wind, but not with that passion of
individual interest with which so many heard it in the little fishing-town. We had
no boat coming in, noi' friend or bread-winner at sea, and though I thought sadly of
the poor women I knew in the village, whose all was tossing on the waves, and of
the brave fellows who were exposed to that great hungry Mystery which circles
round our happy English homes,—all I loved were within the walls of the old house
I spoke of, and safe.
Yes, all.    The time had been when I  sent out a frail vessel to toss on the
G
50 THE   ATTEMPT.
world's restless waves, freighted with my heart's best treasures of hope and love, as
the Hindoo maidens send their little lamp-lit boats down the Ganges. And I
stood on the shore and watched, till the light was quenched by the troubled waters,
never to be kindled again. This is my sister's story, not mine ; mine was shut up
and done with years before the stormy night I write of, but hers was yet to begin.
I was nine-and-twenty ; she was nineteen. I was rather short and very dark, with
black hair, and eyes like our father's; Una,—but I must go to Burns' Mally for
my description of her.
" Her golden hair, beyond compare,
Comes trinkling doon her swan-white neck,
An' her twa eyes, like stars in skies,
Wad keep a sinking ship frae wreck."
The colour of Mally's eyes is not specified, and it would have been hard for
anyone who did not know Una well to describe the colour of her's. It may
have been sisterly partiality, but I don't think I ever saw such another pair.
Their siiie, though they were large and almond-shaped, was lost in their bright¬
ness. Sometimes they were black, sometimes brown, sometimes dark dewy blue,
like the shadows on an evening hill ; but their real hue was violet grey, with brown
lights that sometimes deceived people into calling them brown altogether. They
were shaded by long dark lashes, and over-arched by " eye-brows bent like Cupid's
bow," dark also. And now that I have given you a pen-and-ink sketch of those
dear eyes, that were then, and are still, the lights of my life, I feel it useless to try to
draw them. I cannot give you, or tell you, the love with which I look at them,
and so you will not see them as I do. But this I will say, that none came near my
darling without admiring her beauty, and none knew her well without thinking
that rare as it was, it formed her least attraction. She was tall, with an indescrib¬
able grace about her every motion; and her figure would have made the coarsest and
poorest dress look like the robe of a queen. Her complexion was naturally rather
pale, but a flush like the sunrise came and went upon her soft cheeks with every
passing emotion ; and her li^js were nearly as lovely and changeful as her eyes, show¬
ing teeth like the white sea-foam, when her sweet face broke into a laugh. What with
the rapid changes which her changes of mood wrought upon her face, and even her
figure, her flashing softening eyes, her broad white level brow, her masses of rippling
hair, there was much about Una which reminded you of the sea. It was such beauty as
her's which Buskin says the Venetian mariners learned to love from the sweeping
glory of the ocean.    And, if I linger over her looks, you must forgive me; for I was
THK   ATTEMPT. 51
half-mother, half-sister to the motherless child my father brought home from India
wlien I was fifteen. He married again five years after the death of my own mother,
who was a Scotchwoman, and his second wife I only saw for a few minutes ; he had
very little time to spare before sailing for India, and I was at school. But I remem¬
ber my step-mother's loveliness ; it made an indelible impression on my childish
eyes and heart. Una has her mother's eyes and mouth, but her hair has more of
the gold and less of the auburn. I remember how the beautiful young creature, only
about twice my own age, warmly embraced her little shy dark step-daughter, and
asked me to pray for her as well as for my father, when they were crossing the
stormy sea.
I never saw her again. One wild night at sea, her baby was born; and she only
lived to feel the little helpless hands that seemed tiying to stay the parting spirit,
and then went where there is no more sea.
My father's giief and horror overcame him, so that his new-born infant had to
be cared for by the passengers. She was baptised by a clergyman who happened to
be on board ; and her strange name—Undine—was suggested by one of the ladies,
who thought it appropriate for one born on the water. She lived and throve, as
children sometimes do in spite of circumstances, while others, with the utmost foster¬
ing care, pine and die, and, I believe, my father's heart-strings very soon wound
themselves tightly round his little white sea-daughter, the only relic left him of his
short year of happiness with the lovely girl who had surprised all her friends by
accepting the taciturn Scotch surgeon of an Indian regiment for her husband.
But what I know is, that, five years after that night, when I was called down
to the room where visitors were received, to see my father, and when I saw sitting
beside him a child with the radiant eyes I had often dreamt of, and knew she was
my little sister Undine, I loved her with all my girl's heart from that time foi-ward.
" Una," my father said, after I had kissed him to my satisfaction, " this is your little
new mother. Mary, see what I have brought you from India. A big wax-doll to
nurse till I can come home and take care of you both."
I held out my arms, and the great wistful eyes must have read tenderness in
mine; for, in a moment, two little dimpled arms were round my neck, and the sweet
baby-mouth was pressed to my own, and I had my Una, my treasure tliat I cannot
lose.
For surely I know that, if I am taken first and spared the cruel pain of staying
where my darling is not, her kiss will be the last upon my lips, before they are sealed
for ever; her eyes the last stars that will light up the valley of the shadow of
52 THE   ATTEMPT.
death. Yes, and they will rise beyond it, calm with immortality, and tearless for
evermore.
Chapter II.
" This child I for mjBelf will take,
She shall be mine, and I will make
A lady of my own."—IVordsicorth.
I CANNOT quite pass over our merry school-time,—mine at least; for Una was so
much younger than the youngest of the juniors, that she was, so to speak, in the
nursery for several years. But, even at her first appearance among us, she created a
great sensation. Well do I remember how, my father being gone, I led Una up to
the bedroom, where the girls were employed in dressing for dinner. From a some¬
what wild and reckless " first-classer," I had suddenly become a staid and decorous
matron, with a sense of responsibility large in proportion to the smallness of my
charge. The girls in the west room, to which I belonged, having, contrary to all
rules, left their door open, providing like Jenny Rintherout, for the convenience of
any one who might wish to come in, saw my face as I cautiously ascended the
stairs, before they could at all perceive the tiny creature at my side, and a yell of
mirth broke from those irrepressible persons, which school-girls become when left to
themselves.
" Here comes the meek Maria, with a face like a sermon on the benefits of
afHiction." " Give me your yard-measure, Florry, we'll measure it." " Never mind
being short, Molly, sure ye take it out in your features, they'd reach from Dublin
to Kingstown." " Has our beloved Mother Superior expelled you for sliding on the
baluster V " Has Monsieur doubled the translation V " Is the cat dead ?" " Have
the cockroaches invaded our peaceful couch, eh, Mary V wound up the most mis¬
chievous of the five maidens who shared my apartment, " never mind,— they will
not Vt'aken me, Mary ; but what's this V she cried, suddenly changing her tone.
" Oh ! you cherub, come and give me a kiss !" Then followed a simultaneous rush,
overpowering to Una, who hid her face in my dress, but could not hide the universal
tumult from the eyes of the first English teacher, who was pacing, like the Lord of
Burleigh, along the passage.
" Young ladies,—Miss Fisher, Miss O'Hara, Miss Seymour,—retire to your
room, if you jilease, and dress at once. Really, this habit of chattering at doors,
rushing up and down stairs, and general noisiness and boyishness, is getting quite
beyond me.    I shall speak to Mrs Clayton."    The unsubdued Jane Seymour began
THE   ATTEMPT. 53
to excuse herself and her companions, but was crushed into nothingness by Miss
Wylde (" what's in a name" held good in this case) who, Argus-eyed, noticed a long
and grievous rent in the skirt of her morning dress. " 1 think. Miss Seymour,
considering that that tear, which was probably effected while you and Miss Ferguson
were engaged in the elegant amusement of sliding downstairs on the baluster, must
be repaired before you can present yourself to-morrow morning and pursue your daily
studies, a little of the spare time, which is seemingly so abundant with you, might be
devoted to mending it." So saying, and bidding me take my little sister into our
common room, Miss Wylde marched downstairs, leaving us silenced, but not so
abashed as we should have been.
The girls contended with me for the honour of combing Una's " lengths of
yellow ringlet," and putting her in order generally ; but the time was brief, and the
sharp " now or never" roar of the dinner-gong was heard before all was done. Jane
paused despairingly, with her afternoon frock half over her white shoulders, and
grinned a hopeless grin. '• Give my compliments to Madame, tell her how grieved
I am not to be able to say gi'.ace over the mutton of the noon-day meal. ' I asked
grace at a graceless face' when I expected any favour from Miss Wylde, for she
is like anything but a grace before my meat. Will this button never stay in 1 Oh !
my cuffs, where are they 1 Goodness, Mary, I've got your belt; how did you expect
it to meet round my waist 1 Bring me the bell-rope. No, here is mine. And my
hair is standing on end, of course ; never mind, it will look as if I was shocked
at my own bad conduct. Wait just one moment,—there's a duck,—and don't drag
your wretched innocent there into the presence of majesty without any i)reparation."
All this was said, in spite of obstacles, while she hastily completed her toilette ;
and I, the last straggler, lingered on the stairs, unwilling to be late, but still more
unwilling to let my favourite schoolfellow get into disgrace alone. It was embar¬
rassing to have to prt sent my sister to Mrs Cl.iyton before the whole array of gover¬
nesses and pupils, and to hear the mild reproof,—" And I hope, my dear Mary, you
will set Undine a good example of punctuality." " Undine !" I saw intelligent
glances passing between several of the elder girls. The German class were reading
La Motte Fouqu^'s beautiful story just then, and I was one of them. I was sorry
for it, as I knew the teasing propensities of some of them. I had always spoken of
my sister as Una, I call her so still, but the water-sprite was a favourite among
the gii'ls, and I knew her namesake would hear enough of her name. I was not
mistaken ; Water-witch, Mermaid, Nixie, Lorely, every variety of title that
suggested water was heaped upon her; and it was not till they saw that  it caused
54 THE   ATTEMPT.
her great vexation,—though she did not understand anything about Undine,—that
they left off.
There was one part of this delightful system of teasing which they clung to for a
long time. From the first. Undine showed a strong love for music ; her little voice,
sweet and clear as a silver bell, used to be heard all over the house singing snatches
of old Hindoo airs, caught up before she could speak, from my father's native
servants. When she began to take music lessons, she attached herself strongly to
the old music master. He used to give her every extra minute he could possibly
spare, and she practised hard for him, and was always angry when the other girls
dilated on his ugliness and crossness, in the intervals spent in hunting for theory
slates, and wondering which part of the half-acquired "morceau de salon" one was
most certain to break down in. " I like Herr Miihlbacli," she once slowly said,
bringing  out each syllable  with  deliberate  clearness,  " he   tells  me stories  about
Mozart and (Beethoven was too long a word), and other great men.    And if I
could play like him, I would do nothing else.    I think—(she was  alone with Jane
and me)—I think the angels stop singing in heaven to listen to such music."
" Of course you like him, Water-witch," broke in Florry Fisher, who had
entered unobserved, "he is your uncle, your uncle KUhleborn. I always wondered
who the old Herr was like, and now I know. Don't go near the well in the garden
with him, my dear little merniaid, or he'll dive with you, as sure as fate, and Mary will
be left lamenting. Not that I think you would dislike it at all, though we should be
sorry to lose you ; but he would bestow you safely in some pleasant cave, where you
could warble your own native melodies in peace. . And when I went yachting, as I
hope to do next summer, I should look down throfigh the water, and see you seated
on a rock, with yoviv dear uncle swimming round, you, bewitched by your melodious
strains, like an enchanted seal." Even Una's face of anger and indignation could
not restrain our mirth at this picture of domestic life below seas ; and our laughter
was only bi'oken in ujjon by the sharp voice of Mademoiselle, who sat with
us at our music lesson, calling for Mademoiselle Fisher, whereat Florry fled,
murmuring, " I wonder she doesn't translate it into ' Pecheur.' I'm sure she
does in her heart, if she is cai)able even of the feeblest j^iun."
Una was teasing me to tell her all about Kuhleborn, and I was trying to quiet her
importunities. She had a keen imagination ; and, if the weird story got hold of her, I
felt certain it would do her some harm,—what, I could hardly have defined. There was
only one English translation of it in the school, and I persuaded Kate O'Hara, to
whom it belonged, to lock it up in her drawer, and begged them all not to tell the story
THE   ATTEMPT. 55
to Una. They refrained, but the Klihleborn joke was in their eyes too good a one to
be let drop, and endless were the ways in which it was brought up. The good,
gruff, old Herr went by no other name ; and once, I am ashamed to say, one of the
quicksilver spirits of Walton House hid herself in the thick branches of a tree, under
which he smoked the pipe of contemplation in the interval after dinner, and began
to shower some cold drops (not of modesty) from a watering-can, upon his head.
The drops came faster,—he thought a spring shower had begun, when suddenly
rising, he saw a gleam of terrestial blue between the leaves, and caught the culprit in
the act. " And that dear old merman, that pet of a Kiilileborn, never said a
word about it to Madame," recounted Jane to a select audience that night in the
short period allowed for undressing. " I really could not help it; his fuzzy old
face looked as if he and his natural element had said farewell for ever. I had the
watering-pot—I saw the tree—I knew where he was sure to sit—could an angel
have heljjed introducing him to a little of what he must have lived in ? But T
watched Mrs Clayton's face all dinner time, and fully expected a summons to her
sitting-room to-night. And it never came, blessings on the head of Kuhleborn.
May beer descend upon him as fast as rain falls upon less woithy mortals ; may his
pipe never go out; may  he oh Mademoiselle, je me coucherai tout  de  suite ! "
This, as the door opened, and a solemn visage appeared. " Eh bien. Mademoiselle
Seymour, toujours en retard," and Mademoiselle passed on, while Jane twisted a
great coil of yellow hair round her wrist, hastily fastened it up, blew out the candle,
and lay down beside me, weary with the apprehensions of the day, for, as she said,
" you might as well be expelled as go on thinking you were sure to be so for a
whole afternoon."
Oh happy, careless, mischievous days, that can never come back! Where
is the Mary Ferguson I used to know, who was always ready for any fun that
was going, whose laughing and crying were so frequent and so near to each
other ? Surely, if the child is mother of the woman, as well as father of the man,
my mother has a daughter the antipodes of herself. It is easier to believe that the
old, merry, eager, " riicksichtslos Madchen " is still rvmning about these old stairs,
and schoolrooms, and gardens, than that she has changed into this quiet, sober,
domestic woman of nigh thirty years of age, who keeps my father's house.
When I was eighteen, and Una eight, my father came home, and I left Mrs
Clayton's, and began to study the science of household management.
We did not come to St Michael's till about four years before the time at which
my story begins.    At Mrs Clayton's earnest entreaty, papa let Una remain at Hamp-
56 THE   ATTEMPT.
stead, where our happy old school was, till she was sixteen ; and meanwhile I was
taken to stay with his only sister in Scotland, to learn the mysteries of the menage.
He himself wandered about, now coming to Kedmains to see me, now taking me to
Edinburgh to keep house for him, now to London to see Una.
The great joy of my life came to me, as the summer comes to the flowers, and
I walked the world wrapped in a mantle of dreams too dear to last, till one autumn
day I woke, to tind that I had spent in a few months the happiness that should have
lasted a life-time, and that my lover liad left me. Few of my friends knew of it,
and Una does not know it now. The fii'st time I went to Hampstead after that
day, she stroked my white cheeks and asked if I were well, and I told her I had
been ill, that was all. " All life needs for life is possible to will," and all that was
needful wakened up again in me ; and I lived for her and for my father.
My aunt's boisterous " handful of children " were a great help to me, and also
the daily efibrts I made to make myself a good housekeeper. I can't go into a house
where the boys are all at home, and hear hammering and shouting, and the usual
variety of necessary noises, without a strange pain at my heart, as it goes back to
that noisy Scotch home, where the gates of Eden shut upon me, and I went out
among the thorns and thistles with weary feet^ changed from a girl into a woman.
When Una was about to leave school, my father suddenly arrived at Redmains,
and told me his plans. He had fixed u])on St Michael's as a convenient place of re¬
sidence ; his old Indian friend. General Hilary, would let him a house there; in short
everything was fixed, how soon could I be ready?
" Just come in to dinner, James," interposed my aunt, "and never mind Mary
till afterwards."    So in he went, and I adjoui'ned after dinner to the nursery, where
a wild  wailing had already begun among the young and tender of Aunt Laurie's
flock.     Willie, Jamie, Harry, Eonald, Geordie, joined in a  chorus of lamentation
over Cousin Mary's departure, a rumour of which had reached the regions above,
through the agency of a malicious nursemaid.     I  was sitting on the floor among
them,  submitting  to be  " pu'd at "  like Tibby Fowler of wealthy memory, while
they  proved, to the satisfaction of all disputants, that six  bodies could  occupy the
same space at the same time, or nearly so, for we were heaped together in an undis-
tinguishable mass of cousinly grief and mournful affection, when my aunt came in.
" Now  boys, let Cousin  Mary alone, she  has enough  to do.     My dear  Molly," she
said, as  we went down stairs,  " what I'll do without you I can't think, but your
father wants you to go with him to-morrow."   " So soon ! " and I said nothing more,
for my thoughts hurried to one part of the garden that must be taken leave of.    /
THE   ATTEMPT. 57
I said goodnight early, and gained time for packing. Everything was arranged,
and next morning I awoke just as " the casement slowly grew a gliaimering square."
Rain had fallen in the night, and all was still. I rose and dressed, knelt and
prayed,—-prayed that the bitterness of my life might be changed to sweetness in the
life to come,—and then wrapped a shawl round me, and went out,—out through the
wet walks, till I came to the seat under the rowan-tree near the little loch, and there
I sat down. Tears would not come there, in the chill early day ; the time had been
when I cried till the old boards were as wet with my tears as they were with the
rain, but that time was past. I only sat and thought of what was gone, and then
I kissed the senseless wood, and the bark of the trysting tree, and gathered a bunch
of coral berries and a few primrose leaves, aud came back to the house.
And that day, though poor Redmains put on all its autumn finery to tempt us
to stay, and the sun shone royally out upon bracken and rock and heather, and the
"rampageous" cousinhood held on to Cousin Mary with the energy of despair, till
they extracted from her a general promise, as vaguely affectionate as Willie's in the
old song,—
" Oh lasses, bide till I come back, ;      ;
And faith I'll wed ye a',"
we went away. We were to pick up Una in London, and it was hard work for her
to part from Mrs Clayton and her schoolfellows, who adored her in true school-girl
fashion.
But T must close this chapter, which is already too long, and keep for the next
our arrival at St Michael's, and our manner of life there. 0. M.
(To be continued.)
% fragment.
It was a calm stUl night of rosy June,
When all the sky to westward pales in gold,
And flushes tender purple overhead ;
There was no soi;nd nor motion in the air,
Only the kine, knee-deep in long rich grass.
Crushed the soft blades, still wet with heavy drops.
That lingered from a summer storm at noon;
While all the trees spread out against the sky
H
5S THE   ATTEMPT.
Their leafy bravery—downward trailing birch,
And massive chesnut—ash with fresh young shoots.
And sweeping beechen-boughs alike were thei-e.
Pale Hesper, faint with summer light, sank down
And hid his passionate face;—and as he fell,
The golden moon sailed slowly into view,
And filled the night with glory.    Such a night
As lives in our remembrance like a psalm.
Elsie Strivelyne.
%mni fXnois, anb lljc Unloosing of t§em.
" Once, in the flight of ages past,
There lived a man,—and who was he?"
He bore the not uncommon name of Alexander ; and he lived a considerable time
before the discoveries of Columbus had puzzled the brains of sighing school-boys, or
afforded scope for the superfliious energy of old-world adventurers. There doubtless
were living, at that distant date, many estimable and noteworthy men, of whom we
now know nothing. And this man, possessing no special virtue, conferring, while
he lived, no special boon on the world at large, will, as long as history is written,
read, and taught, be talked of by the world at large as one of the great ones of the
earth. How comes this 1 Because he tamed an untameable war-horse 1 because he
ruled an important kingdom 1 because he conquered as much of the world as was
then known to exist? or becaiise he finally sat down and wept for grief that no more
was left to conquer 1 For all these reasons, doubtless, and for many besides. But
what, with the general public, has given him undying fame, is probably that little
incident in his career connected with the mysterious knot on which, we are told,
depended the fate of an empire.
It is not our purpose here to enter upon the rationale of the Gordian knot, and
its inflvience upon conqiieror and conquered. It shall be enough for us to believe,—
what we see no satisfactory reason for disbelieving,—that this knot, in all its inex-
ti'icable intricacy, did actually exist, and that Alexander the Great did actually cut
it. And why is it, we ask, that of all the events of a life crowded with incidents,
and historically and geograjJiically important, that selected by posterity to remember,
quote, and moralise on, should be of such infinitestimal  impoi-tance?    Possibly,
THE   ATTEMPT. 59
because there is in this incident a moral force, a universal applicability, before which
all mankind, consciously or unconsciously, must needs bow. It was a fact, doubt¬
less, of no small importance to the ambitious monarch referred to, that he ruled the
kingdom his father had ruled before him,—a kingdom of acknowledged renown and
power. But for men in general it is merely an historical fact, a truth for the
intellect alone. When, however, we are told of the energy of a human will bearing
down obstacles hitherto deemed insuperable, forcing its way and gaining its ends by
fair means or by foul, we feel instinctively that here is a truth wider, deeper, higher
than the mere facts of cognition ; a truth whose importance is but inadequately ex¬
pressed when we talk of the conscience or the moral faculty.
It would apjjear then that the world has judged rightly in extracting from this
simple act of Alexander a moral of the utmost importance. But, whether the world
has not, to put the finest possible point upon it, extracted a one-sided, and, conse¬
quently, an imperfect moral, is, we think, fairly open to question.
Universal consent has divided all possible power into two kinds,—active and
passive. Whether this passivity be worthy the name of power, is a purely psycho¬
logical speculation. With that, as with the psychological application of the words
" act," " energy," " capacity," &c., we have here nothing to do. In common par¬
lance, active and passive power are distinguished as energy and patience. Com¬
bining these two, and resting them on the surest foundation, a human character
may most nearly approach perfection; wanting either the one or the other, a life
will almost certainly be a failure.
" Still achieving, still pursuing,
Learn to labour and to wait."
Alexander the Great was a failure. We do not question the indomitable energy
that prompted the stroke ; but we think he might have been a better, a wiser, and a
happier man, had he bestowed a little time on the untying of the knot.
A popular essayist, who is still amongst us, and whose writings breathe a sound,
cheerful, practical, religious spirit, recommends, as a cure for discontent or depression,
half-an-hour of putting to rights. The same amount of time spent in untying an
intricate knot, or winding a ravelled skein, might have the same happy effect.
A knot ought to be untied—time, place, and manner all supposed suitable—
for more than one reason. First—a reason likely to be anticipated and appreciated
by an age and nation that reads Miss Edgeworth's tales—because of the good old
proverb, " Waste not, want not." Human nature was never better pourtrayed than in
the simple tale, " Two Strings to your Bow."    Ben certainly commands our respect;
60 THE   ATTEMPT.
and, though sjrmpathy for careless Hal forbids us heartily to wish the successful archer
joy, we feel that he has deserved his triumph. But there is another, and a more
important view of the subject—that hinted at already—the value of the occupation
as mental discipline ; and that mainly because it serves alike to test and to strengthen
the quality suggested as wanting in the Macedonian conqueror—patience. The suc¬
cessful untying of a knot implies, beyond most other occupations, a combination of
undivided attention, unwearied patience, deliberate coolness, and far-seeing judgment.
For these reasons, then, no knot which skill and patience will untie should be
cut. This, however, under limitations of time and place. Never spend time in
untying a knot, unless the good to be gained by so doing overbalances the value of
the time you may gain by cutting it. We are not to sacrifice practical tangible
good for an abstract advantage. The sailor who sends forth the harpoon on its
errand of death does not pause to extricate the entangled rope :—the axe descends,
the knot is severed, and the lives of the crew are saved. The sempstress, who
works against time into the small hours of the night, knows that it is better worth
her while to break off her knotted thread, and begin with a fresh one, than to spend
the minutes, whose value she knows too well, in saving so much thread as will
suffice to sew on a shirt button. We are, then, it will be seen, reasonable in our
demands. We do not ask that the traveller shall risk the loss of his train, the man
of business that of an otherwise important half-hour, or the sailor that of his life, for
either an economic advantage or a moral abstraction. Neither do we desire ostenta¬
tious display of this, more than of any other accomplishment.
We believe that the undying fame won by so trivial an incident as that of the
Gordian Knot, had its origin in the tendency of mankind to symbolism—to the
investing of finite objects with an infinite meaning. Such is the constitution of
man,—given, a human intellect and an object appreciable by sense-consciousness
alone,—the intellect is not satisfied when sense-consciousne&s has done its part. The
object must be assimilated to that infinite and unchangeable self, whereof sense-
consciousness and its objects form only a part, and that part not essential. A cir¬
cumstance casually noted by the outward eye, unconnected in itself with the
mental experience of the observer, becomes thus a part of that experience ; and, by
shadowing forth a mental in a physical phenomenon, acquires a moral and symbolical
significance sufficient to annihilate any original importance it might have possessed.
We have already analysed sufficiently for our purpose, the physical phenomenon
—the knot literal ; what now remains is to examine into the nature and laws of its
counterpai-t—the knot metaphorical.    And what first strikes us is, that, unlike the
THE   ATTEMPT. 61
knot literal, it admits of a division into two great sections; knots intellectual and
knots moral. The inclination of men is, generally speaking, to shun all admission
of the knot moral, and to set down as an intellectual error what is in reality a moral
deformity. Observe, we do not say an intellectual weakness. We know no man,
who, if left to the guidance of his natural disposition, would not rather be a genius,
a forger, and a suicide like Chatterton, than an upright commonplace Christian,
fearing nothing but sin, asking nothing but the approval of his conscience, and doing
his duty in his sphere. Here we have unconsciously stumbled upon an apt illustra¬
tion of our last remark. Those who have contracted an admiration for the unhappy
Bristol boy, overlook, in their enthusiastic worship of his undoubted talent, the
extreme cowardice of his life and death. To die is comparatively easy; it is the
cutting of a moral knot. A false step on the edge of a cliiF, a touch of a trigger, a
drop more than enough for a sleeping-draught, and a man is hurled into eternity;
where, he may have reasoned with himself, he is still in the hands of the Almighty.
So, too, the sui-vivors reason, while a verdict is returned of " temporary insanity."
But to live justly, wisely, nobly ; to accept one's life as a precious charge received
from the hands of Him who will one day redemand it; is not this the most difficult
task a human being can set himself to learn—the hardest knot he can resolve
patiently to untie 1 This, then, is a moral knot, whose importance as such is too often
overlooked, or delibei'ately misrepresented.
By the canon laid down in our discussion of knots literal, we find that there
are cases where an intellectual knot may justifiably be severed. For example, there
is not, in the whole mass of juvenile literature bearing on school-life, a more
favourite incident than the surreptitious use of keys to exercises by those who are
threading the intricacies of Greek and Latin syntax. Yet, though in the schoolboy
it is undoubtedly a dishonourable action, we do not condemn it in the man of years
—physician, lawyer, merchant. The latter has, for his immediate end, the gaining of
information on some other subject than Greek or Latin; the time is to him of more
value than the study of the passage in question. The boy's case is exactly the
reverse. The intellectual knot is thus elevated into the rank of a moral knot,
which the schoolboy has taken undue credit to himself for having unloosed.
" Life," we hear it said, " is a tangled yarn." Well, be it so ! Let us not
murmur, as though some evil destiny had so involved it. It is the task given us to do by
our Master ; woe be unto us, if we do not strive faithfully to perform it. But let us
not despair, if we are left to find our reward in our own exertion. One day, if not
now, the knot will be unloosed. Sanct Rewle.
62
THE   ATTEMPT.
" m^on t^^ §xm.
I SAW it first in sweet spring-time.
So fair and green, so fresh and gay,
In the young year's glad glowing prime,
That afternoon in happy May.
How bright the budding flowers were !
How wide the heavens stretched, and blue!
And oh, how soft the breezy air
That o'er the rippling river Aew !
Loud trilled the sky-lark from above.
The blackbird whistled from the tree,
And all things sang of joy and love,
That happy day, to you and me.
And at my feet—ah, bonnie lad !
On the soft mossy grass you lay ;
Could either of our hearts be sad,
Upon the brae, upon the brae ?
I saw it next, when summer's glow
Had faded from the land away;
The yellow sun was sinking low
Behind the distant mountains grey ;
The merry lark's glad song was o'er,
The sparkle from the river fled.
The broom's gold clusters shone no more,
The sky hung sombre overhead.
Far to the west the purple strath,
Stretched darkling in the dying day;
And there we stood upon the heath.
And in your hands mine trembling lay;
While there, dear love, we swore to be
Each one to other true for aye,—
Then kissed, and parted—woe to me !
Ujjon the brae, uj)on the brae !
And now, the winter's snow lies white,
The winter's frost strikes hard and deep,
And the poor vanished flowers their night
Of ice-bound sunless silence sleep.
The empty nest, on frozen bough.
Is cold, untenanted, and lone ;
There is no life, no sunshine now.
The summer's gladness all is gone.
And gone, too, all my young life's glee—
In my drear heart no sun can shine;
For far from Scotland and from me
He roams—dear only love of mine !
I know he never can forget
The one who loves him, far away;
But, shall I ever meet him yet
Upon the brae, upon the brae 1
Mas Alta.
"fa §tata."
By Adolphus Trollope.
The sensation novel of the present day is too well known to require description in
these pages. The short and spasmodic sentences, the slipshod English, the common¬
place dialogue and unartistic description, are well suited as the vehicle of incident.
THE   ATTEMPT. 63
character, and plot that are also to be met with every day in the real life of the
police reports, where immorality and its consequences, crime and its punishment,
are the only claims to the notoi'iety that inevitably follows. In the sensation novel
the plot may be more complicated and the crime may be more detestable, but the
foundation is pretty much the same,—an absence of all priaciple, a confoundiug to¬
gether of right and wi-ong, until the right disappears and the wrong reigns triumphant,
in the conduct of the personages in whom our feelings and sympathy are to be inter¬
ested. We may form a pretty correct estimate of a book from the literary excellence
or otherwise of its style. Language is the handmaid of thought and conception ;
and if they be good and pure, the medium by which they are conveyed to us will be
elegant and cultivated. It cannot, therefore, be a matter of surprise to us if the
sensation novel be as inferior in its style and execution, as it is unworthy in its
conception and coarse in its incident and character.
It is with full intent and purpose that the reader's attention is directed to the
novel mentioned on the title—La Beata. And yet it may be objected that this book
deals with sin and shame, with crime and its punishment, with the victim and the
destroyer. And so it does-—but how, and in what manner does the author deal with
these things ? Not with the coarse pen and the coarser thoughts that dictate the
books we have been referring to, but with the pen of the artist and the spirit of the
moralist is La Beata made the object of the reader's sympathy and interest. The
novel of La Beata was published in 1861,—rather late now in the day to introduce it
to this magazine, still we doubt not it is new to many, and the excellences of the
novel are so undoubted, that it is worth the reader's while to peruse it, although so
long before the public.
The book opens with a description of Florence, and its artist and domestic life.
Artist life in Florence is something different from the artist life so freely depicted
in London and Paris, where one would suppose that to be an artist is to be a
Bohemian and a vagabond, and that no artist career could be properly can-ied
out except in an atmosphere of dirt and confusion, of tobacco smoke and pints
of portei-, of bread, cheese, beer, slipshod landlady, and all the concomitants of
low habits and thriftless living. The same grade of artist life is here described ;
the same class, we should rather say, of the artist who paints his picture to sell,
and not to gain fame and immortality; but the artist in Florence must, like his
fellow citizens, conform to the respectable usages of citizen life. Nothing can be
more natural or more charming than the life here depicted ; but it is iipon La
Beata herself that the author has expended his best efforts, and we will venture to
64 THE  ATTEMPT.
say, that few can call to mind a sweeter picture of innocent lovely girlhood than that
of the hapless Beata. Ignorant, unprotected, and alone, our sympathy and our interest
in her never fail; her portrait is drawn with the most delicate of pencils. Pippo, the
unworthy commonplace object of such a tender loving heart, reminds us, in some sort
of distant fashion, of the Tito of Romola; that is to say, like Tito, he is at once the
exponent and the victim of the great principle of expediency ; but there the resem¬
blance ceases. One might perhaps in both cases wonder how such an one could
gain and keep the love of a trae and noble heart, did we not know that love depends
not alone for aliment upon the object loved, but springs fresh, pure, and strong from
the evei'lasting capacities of the heart in which it takes root. M. E. T.
" Lizzy," said my mother, one rainy morning about five years ago,  " Lizzy, put
away that book and attend to me."
With a vague sense of impending misfortune, I obeyed. " Lizzy," continued my
mother, " since my cold is no better this morning, and the weather is much worse, it
will be impossible for me to dine with the Duncans this evening. Now, I know how
provoking it is to get an apology from anybody at the last moment, so you shall go
with your father, instead of me. The Duncans are very good natured, and will
excuse the liberty."
A horror stricken " Mama ! " was all I could find voice to utter; and I stood
before my mother with my mouth and eyes wide open, and an expression of blank
dismay upon my face.
" Now, don't be foolish, Lizzy," said my mother, " and for goodness' sake shut
your mouth, and don't stare in that ridiculous manner. You are sixteen years old,
and, if you don't know how to behave yourself in society, the sooner you begin to
learn the better. There is nothing to be frightened about; you are going with your
father, and the Duncans are old friends. You had better go up-stairs now, and
speak to Hannah about your dress."
Thus admonished, I left the room, and slowly ascended the stairs, to speak to
my old nurse Hannah on the subject of my evening's attire. I confided my woes to
my brothers and sisters, but small indeed were the consolation and encouragement
which I received at their hands. Nettie was first indignant, then satirical, then down¬
right impertinent; Jack and Harry began where she left ofi", and expended an enor-
THE   ATTEilPT. G5
mous amount of perverted ingenuity in presenting to my mind's eye pictures of the
scrapes into which I should be sure to fall, and the absurdities I should be sure to
commit—(" for you know, Lizzy dear, you are dreadfully awkward," as JS^ettie re¬
marked, with a sigh); and Madge did nothing but shout at every pause in the convers¬
ation, "Take me too ! take me too !" till I fled from the face of my tormentors,
to meditate in silence and alone on the awful prospect before me.
The dreaded hour at last arrived ; and, adorned for the sacrifice, I descended to
the drawing-room, to be paraded for the inspection of the assembled family.
" Your dress is very nice, Lizzy," said my mother, " but do try to hold your¬
self a little better, and don't stick out your chin like that when you speak."
" Stop a minute, Lizzy," said Nettie, " your sash is quite crooked, and there's a
hole in one of your gloves.
" Your frock's too short," said Jack. " And how red your face is," said Harry.
But my father, who was growing impatient, spared me further humiliation by hurry¬
ing me off, I having thus been made thoroughly comfortable in my mind with regard
to my personal appearance.
Arrived at our destination, we were warmly received by our host and hostess,
indeed, rather too warmly for my taste ; for Mr Duncan, a stout, red-faced, hospit¬
able, fussy old gentleman, with a very loud voice, thought proper to proclaim to the
company in general, that this was my very "first dinner-party ;" thus making me
for the time being, the observed of all observers ; and, although I knew the worthy
gentleman to be actuated by unmingled kindness "and hospitality, I should have
infinitely preferred it, had he flown into a passion and turned me out of the room.
When 1 recovered from the confusion into which I had been thrown by the
unexpected publicity of my reception, I began to look about me at the rest of the
company who were by this time all assembled. With a very few exceptions, tliey
were all elderly; the gentlemen were bald, the ladies wore caps and shawls; and,
altogether, I thought I had never seen so uninteresting a collection of human beings.
There were one or two young people; among them a very young gentleman, with
very fair hair parted down the middle, and an exceedingly mild expression of
countenance ; he wore spectacles, and reminded me very much of Mr Verdant
Green. He did not appear to know any one of the company ; in a few moments,
however, he was captured by Mr Duncan, who dragged him across the room to me,
and introducing him as Mr Henderson, gave us to understand that we were expected
to entertain one another. Mr Henderson forthwith planted himself ia front of
me, and fired off a series of rapid and explosive remarks upon the weather, blush-
66 THE   ATTEMPT.
ing violently all the time ; the remarks themselves, though undeniably correct, were
certainly rather wanting in originality, and, as it was impossible to find ground for
contradiction, or even for argument, in the assertions of the mild young gentleman,
we very speedily exhausted the subject, and were forced to think of another. I
judged, from the manner of my new acquaintance, that he was almost as great a tyro
at "state-dinners" as I was myself; so, thinking it might be some relief to his
excessive bashfulness to find a companion in misfortune, but not liking to ask him
point-blank if this was positively his first appearance, I inquired, " Have you been
at a great many dinner-parties '?"
" No," replied he, becoming suddenly animated, " I've never been at a dinner¬
party—like this, I mean—in all my life before." I think he was going to add,
" and I hope I never shall be again ;" but just then dinner was announced, and a
fit of trepidation which came upon him, in consequence of having to offei; me his
arm, put a stop to conversation for the next few minutes.
After a few minutes of apparently hopeless confusion, the whole party was
seated at table, where T found myself placed between Mr Henderson and a very
stout gentleman, who was inclined to occupy much more "elbow room" than the
crowded state of the table would afford—a circumstance which considerably inter¬
fered with my mental and physical comfort. Immediately opposite me sat an
ancient maiden lady, of the most vinegary aspect, with two eyes sharp as needles,
which she riveted upon me with an expression of mingled scorn, suspicion, and
malignity, that completely destroyed all the little self-possession I had retained.
But as it is always some comfort to know that we have a companion in distress, I
recovered some degree of composure when I observed the profound mental misery of
my unfortunate cavalier, Mr Henderson. Upon first taking his place at the table,
he had managed to put the leg of his chair through a lady's dress, and had been
rewarded by one of those glances which are more expressive than any words. The
effect of the look was tremendous; for the unfortunate youth trembled like an aspen,
blushed like a peony, and overturned a glass with a clatter, which made everyone
look round; fortunately it was not broken, or I really think he would have sunk
below the table. A few moments of quiet ensued, but he was suddenly and
violently startled by the voice of the waiter at his shoulder, demanding in a
severe and peremptory tone, " White or brown soup, sii- V " A—a—if you please,"
stammered Mr Henderson. " White soup or brown, sir ?" reiterated the waiter, with
increased severity; and IVIr Henderson, with great difficulty, gave a coherent answer;
but his embarrassment returned a few moments afterwards, when another waiter
(
THE   ATTEMPT. 67
called upon him to choose between boiled and fried fish; when Mr Henderson's irreso¬
lute—" a—a—no-thank-you " was at once accepted, and he accordingly got no fish.
Meantime I was beginning to feel rather reconciled to my position, and to enier-
tain a slight feeling of contempt for my cavalier. The only thing which, for some time,
made me feel terrified and abashed, was the sound of my own voice, which I had
raised during a tempest of laughter and conversation, in order to make myself audible
to Mr Henderson; and a sudden and universal lull descending upon the party, I was
brought into most uncomfortable notoriety by the fag-end of a sentence. I give you
my word I never heard anything that sounded more tremendous in my ears than the
simple words, " a very uncomfortable journey " uttered by my own voice during that
terrible lull. Everybody looked at me ; nobody seemed inclined to destroy the effect
of my remark, by resuming the conversation; my spiteful old opposite neighbour
looked at me with a grin, which seemed to say, " Now, see what a fool you are
making of yourself!" and I felt as if every one was wondering who had made this
uncomfortable journey ] why was it uncomfortable 1 where did it begin and end 1
was it attended with any disagreeable results? &c., &c.
It was a considerable time before I could make up my mind to speak again,
though the conversation soon grew as loud as ever; so T amused myself with listening,
and very good amusement it was. At 6rst the various topics which were being discussed
on all hands blended themselves together into a most extraordinary jumble—a lady's
lamentations over her daughter's delicate health mixing themselves up with a gentle¬
man's enthusiastic praises of his horse, and the raptures of one individual over the
last new opera chimmg in curiously through an animated discussion on the compara¬
tive merits of two different kinds of sewing-machines.
But, before long, the stout gentleman I have mentioned, who sat on my left
hand, began to play so prominent a part in the conversation, that the various
committee-parties gradually blended themselves into his party, and became attentive
listeners to his discourse. His name, I ascertained, was M'Corquodale, and he
possessed a farm somewhere near Cupar-Angus. He had come up to town to
attend the marriage of a niece, and visit some old friends, and he seemed to be
thoroughly enjoying the festivities of the metropolis; for never, in my life did I
behold man, woman, or child with so insatiable and miscellaneous an appetite. He
literally ate and drank everything that was offered him, and a great deal besides; he
took all he could get, and then called for more. But I was speaking of his conversation.
When he first sat down, he was taciturn, and even morose; but, as dinner proceeded,
he gradually began to brighten, laugh, and talk, until at last he fairly led the con-
68 THE   ATTEMPT.
versation, and silenced every voice raised in opjwsition. At last, after a peculiarly
successful anecdote, flourishing his right arm in the ecstasy of his glee, he knocked a
large glass full of claret right into my lap, and in the midst of the confusion which
followed, Mrs Duncan gave the signal for the ladies to retire, and I made my escape
from Mr M'Corquodale's stentorian apologies to " little Missy," as he called me, for
"spoiling her bonny white frock."
The " white frock " having been wiped, and various remedies applied to remove
the stain, (which, nevertheless, remained distinctly visible), I joined the other ladies
in the drawing-room, and soon found that this was likely to be the most trying part
of the evening's entertainments. One pai-ty of matrons having gone into committee
upon the price of beef and mutton, another upon the merits and demerits of their
respective servants, and a third (composed of the younger ladies) upon the last new
fashion of hair-di-essing, a fourth took me in hand, my ancient friend with the sharp
eyes acting as chairman of committee, and conducting the cross examination with a
a persevering energy and an unflagging determination worthy of a better cause. My
full name and exact age, with those of my brothej-s and sisters, having been ascei"-
tained, they proceeded to examine me on the subject of accomplishments, an ordeal
which, alas! I was but ill qualified to undergo. I didn't care for music, and I detested
drawing—facts received by my examiners with many elevations of the eyebrows and
shrugs of the shoulders; and, although my fondness for plain-sewing procured me
some approval, the good impression was soon destroyed by an incautious admission
that I hated all kinds of fancy work ; that I had never made flowers in wax, or
even in paper ; and that Potichomanie was to me a science unknown. Their
astonishment rose to horror, upon finding that I had never taught in a Sunday
school; and one lady retired in disgust from the conversation.
My sharp-eyed friend, however, was by no means inclined to let me ofl" yet; and,
having ascertained that I was very fond of reading, she opened a brisk fire of questions
upon the nature and extent of my studies,—I fear the answers were far from satis¬
factory. Her favourite works were Young's Night Thoughts, Butler's Analogy, and
Johnson's Rasselas; and on none of these was 1 at all prepared to stand an examina¬
tion. A feeling of intense misery and humiliation fell upon me ; I began to blush
and stammer, gave some very incoherent answers, contradicted myself, I regret to
say, more than once, to the manifest delight of my malicious inquisitor, and it was
with the sincerest satisfaction that I heard a tremendous laugh upon the staircase
announce the approach of Mr M'Corquodale and the other gentlemen.
Mr Henderson, who was now in much better spirits, having looked over all the
THE   ATTEMPT. 69
photograpli-books witli me, and a very stout jolly-looking lady having favoured the
company with the plaintive strains of " The Last Links are Broken," the party
bsgan to break up; and I returned home with my father, thankful it was over,
elated at having fairly entered the world, enraged Avith the sharp-eyed lady, and
rather downcast at my own deficiencies,—in fact,
" Half proud, half sad, half angry, and half pleased."
Dido.
%  i^lnntt Ifnfoarb.
And who art thou to judge thy brother,
Or wound liim with the keen edge of thy scorn ?
Thou knowest not; and, untried, can'st not know
How thou would'st stand temptation's fiery test.
'Tis easy, from the yet untrodden heights
Of our own snowy virtue, to look down
Exultant on the sullied earth beneath,
And glory in our own unstained whiteness,
And yet be like those Pharisees of old,
When, once before the sinless One they brought
A guilty woman, whose offence they knew,
And sternly urged against her Moses' law ;
But soon as told, whoever sinless was
Amongst them, first to cast at her a stone.
Convicted by the Voice that spake, they each,
Beginning from the eldest, to the last.
Went out, and left the sinner with her God.
And there do thou thy erring brother leave,
Nor tliiiik to scan with thy imperfect light,
The vast whole of God's mercy and man's sin.
Remember that thou needest mercy too ;
And that if it were measured out to thee,
As thou might'st mete it to thy fellow men.
Perchance 'twould not suffice thee for thy need.
ZOE.
70 THE   ATTEMPT.
• it Per0-Mors^ip,
Carlyle, in his lectures on Heroes, says that what he calls hero-worship has disap-
l^eai-ed. If we cannot say so now, it is in great measure owing to Carlyle himself.
Hero-worship is a feeling which lies hidden in every one's heart, inborn there,—but it
is Carlyle who, more than any one else, has given to that feeling a name, and raised
it from the latent position it occupied, to be to many men an article of their creed,
and to some their very religion.
Let us first find out what we mean by hero worship, and then go on to trace
its influence. Carlyle defines it as '•transcendant admiration of a great man." This
must not be taken to mean a mere approval by the reason of the conduct and char¬
acter of a great man; but, as is implied by the word woi-ship, heartfelt admiration,
reverence, and submission. If we accept this definition, we shall see that this is no
new conception, that it is not merely the vague theory of a modem philosopher, con¬
fined to any small section or party of men,—but that it is a principle which, from the
earliest times, has moved the hearts of men and controlled their destinies, more perhaps
than any other; taking them out of themselves, making them forget themselves, and
inspiring them with the noblest and strongest motives that can animate men. " The
history of the world is the biography of its gi-eat men."
It has always been found that, with a leader whom they can trust in and follow,
men can do almost anything; while without one, and left each to do what is right in
his own eyes, they have no unity of jiuz-pose, no singleness of aim, and therefore no
strength. Any superiority they may possess, by reason of numbers or material advan¬
tages, is of no avail, and they are forced to yield to men who are inferior to them¬
selves in almost every way, except that they have a leader, and know how to obey
him.    An instance given by Carlyle shows the truth of this very forcibly.
Scotland, at the time of the Commonwealth, was almost entirely a nation of
Covenanters. But among them all there was no great leader, and the leaders that
they had, brave and good men enough, they would not obey. The Cavalier party
was few in numbers and scattered through the country, weak in everything but their
leaders, and tliere they were strong, stronger far than their opponents. Montrose, "the
noblest of all the cavaliers," put himself at the head of a handful of men, not trained
soldiers, but wild undisciplined Highland and Irish peasants, and with these he attacked
and defeated over and over again the regnlar troops of the Covenanters; while they.
THE   ATTEMPT. 71
who had all the advantages of fighting in their own country, with nearly all its mili¬
tary resources in theii- hands, were utterly routed by the English under Cromwell.
If we look at any of the important events of history,—a nation called into exis¬
tence, or freed from oppression,—or any of those great movements, literary, social, or
religious, which have each made a new epoch in the progress of mankind,—we can
point to the individual men who, " with wisdom to discern what the time wanted,
and valour to lead it on the right road thither, were the salvation of their time."
They gathered up all the vague longings and feeble efforts which had been moving
the people perhaps for generations, gave expression to them in their lives, and
translated them and their deeds into accomplished facts.
It is often said by the opponents of hero-worship that it suited the old times,
when men became leaders of their fellows by their strength of arm and prowess in
battle ; that it is altogether a thing very well fitted for half-civilized, barbarous men
and times, but in this age of progress we have got far beyond such enthusiastic
fancies. No man now-a-days, they say, can be expected to merge his individuality in
that of another, however great and good that other may be, or to give up that un-
alienable privilege of every man—the right of doing what he chooses. But surely this
is going back to the barbarous times instead of leaving them behind us. Every man
ruling himself, living for himself, his actions only guided by regard to his own interests,
—this seems almost the hjwest state of humanity ; and do not men take the first step to
something better when they begin to be influenced by a common object, not a selfish
one, and is it not a step higher still when they with one consent recognise and
follow the noblest man they have, and give him supreme authority over them ?
In times of anarchy and confusion, men return in this respect to the barbarous
ages; it is the special characteristic of such times that every one does what is right in
his own eyes. Was not recognising Napoleon as their leader the one hope for France
after the terrible anarchy of the French Revolution ? And the history of France
since, shows how much it did for the nation to admire and follow enthusiastically the
man who represented their highest ideal, even though that ideal was a comparatively
low one. The Americans are often quoted as an example of a nation, who do great
and noble thihgs, and who have risen to the high place they occupy among foreign
powers without having, either in the records of the past, or among them now, any
man for whom the people felt that reverent admiration and submission, which we call
hero-worship. The great movements in that country are national ones, and controlled
much more by enthusiastic patriotism than by any other feeling. But, if we consider
the general character of the Americans, there seem to be in it some defects that spring
72 THE   ATTEJIPr.
directly from this want of personal loyalty. Their patriotism, which is really one of
the finest points about them, too often exhausts itself in mere bombastic utterances,
becoming simply a channel in which they may allow their own praises to flow moi-e
freely. Since the war, an event has occurred in their history which gives us hope that
they are beginning to let the noble principle of personal loyalty have its proper place.
The war proved beyond all dispute, if indeed proof was required at all, that they were
capable of forgetting themselves and all selfish motives, in enthusiasm for a common
cause. They made splendid sacrifices at the shrine of their country without a murmur,
and, what is perhaps harder for Americans, without a v/ord of self-glorification. One
result of the enthusiasm which aniQiated them during the war, has been the election,
by the voice of the people, to the head of the government, of the General who led their
victorious army—one of the most striking acts of hero-worship this age has seen.
Till now I have been speaking of the efiects of heroes, and of hero-worship on
nations. I must say a little of its influence on iudividuals. Does not every one feel
that, by reverencing that which is above him, he himself is made better ; all that is
noble in him grows nobler when brought into the light of what is nobler still,—and
what is false and insincere cannot but shrink away from the heart that loves and obeys
what it feels to be higher and truer than itself? "We needs must love the highest
when we see it;" it is at once our dutj% our profit, and our highest pleasure.
This does not involve, as is sometimes said, the giving up of all responsibility.
" In this world we cannot choose our work, we can only choose our master." Surely
the choice of a master is a deeply responsible one; and when we have chosen him,
we are not called upon entirely to sacrifice our individuality. " A man embraces
truth with his eyes open—does he need to shut them before he can love his teacher
of truth? He alone can love, with a right gratitude and loyalty of soul, the hei-o
teacher who has delivered him out of darkness into light."
Must I be forced to say at last, that after all this, hero-worship in the highest and
best sense is but our ideal, never to be realized. Granted that it may be so : if we
are never to attain to anything, must we not have an ideal before us, lying far away
out of reach ? It is not by our poor attainments that we must measure and regulate
our aims. And this is not perhaps, after all, such an impossible ideal. " If hero mean
a sincere man," as Carlyle says, " why may not every one of us be a hero 1 A world
all sincere, a believing world,—the like has been; the like will be again, cannot help
being. That were the right sort of worshippers for heroes ; never could the truly
better be so reverenced, as where all were true and good." Esthee.
THE   ATTEMPT.
73
Chapter III.
" We reached the place by night,
And heard the waves breaking,
They came to meet us with candles alight,
To show the path we were taking,
A myrtle, trained in the gate, was white
With tufted flowers down shaking."—Jean Ingelow.
I SHALL never forget the day we came to St Michael's. We reached it late in the
evening, driving some six miles from the last station. The hrst whiff of salt sea-
breeze sent a sort of recognising shiver of delight through Una's whole body. I
remember, as I looked at her,^sitting with her back to the horses in the dis¬
reputable old " shay," her clustering love-locks thrown off her face, and the soft
lassitude of a hot day's journey still upon her,—how her great eyes suddenly
brightened, and a glow came over her cheeks, and each little delicate nostril ex¬
panded at the scent of the sea, when it stole over her senses again.
" Papa, Molly, do you feel if?" she cried, "oh, bless the sea, I can feel the smell
of it again. Let me out, I'll walk the rest of the way. There's going to be the
loveliest moon that ever was, and it will shine upon the sea, and I shall look at it."
" Sit still, child," broke in papa, countermanding the order to the Jehu, who was
drawing up his by no means fiery steeds; " are you cracked, to think of walking
three miles as a finish to to-day's exertions V
Una " fidgeted," to revert to a Hampstead figure of speech. I felt her little boots
dancing upon mine; she wriggled herself further into the corner of the carriage, and
we watched the moon rise, golden and glorious, over a black belt of pines to the left.
Should we never get a glimpse of the wide water where she was born ? Yes, there
it was. The pines swept away like a dark curtain, and suddenly revealed the sea ;
and Una started up in an ecstasy, and stretched out her hands as a child might to
its mother.
There it lay, glittering in the moonlight, and there, on the other side of the
bay, flickered the lights of St Michael's.
" Oh, how glad I am to come to this place. I shall always like it, because we
saw it first in this way," said Una, subsiding. " Darling Molly, Mary mother,
you're done out to-night, and of course you don't appreciate the effects, but to-
K
74 THE   ATTEMPT.
morrow you will. We'll be out before breakfast, and take in the whole situation at
once—oh, how jolly it will be ! No Miss Wylde to put down my name if I'm five
minutes too late, no more use of the globes, 'no more trenches ' in fact."
"And only poor old Molly, instead of Fanny and Georgie, and the rest of the
concatenation," said I. " How will you fancy wandering by the sad sea waves with
one old maid instead of so many young ones 1"
Una's feet ceased their impatient ^ja-s seul upon mine, and she looked earnestly
at my face in the light of the rising moon. " Don't fish, though we are to inhabit a
sort of fishery," she said, " but I suppose you wish to ' subdue your nature to what
it works in.' Say what you like. When I find this marine paradise dull, I'll tell
you so. Here we are at last, and there's old Lizzie to meet us !" Old Lizzie, be it
known, was one of those fast-vanishing treasures of servants who are still found in
the remote parts of these islands, far from register offices, amorous policemen, and
the other disturbing influences which make the domestics of to-day such a fluctua¬
ting body. Thirty years had she served us and ours, with service worth the name ;
faithfulness no money could hire, steadfast affection that sought no change and knew
no check. She had come as servant to my mother when both were young, gone
with her to her married home, nursed me with vigilant care, and stayed behind
when I went to school, in accordance with my mother's last charge, to take care of
the master. In one capacity or another, she had been with some of us ever since,
and now stood waiting to welcome us at the gate of our new abode,—the first home,
properly so called, that we had all known. Quiet, respectful, somewhat imperious
at times, but always so affectionately careful, so earnestly conscientious, truly
Elizabeth M'Pherson (such was her full title) deserved a memorial oak-tree, green
and brave as that which stretched its arms over Deborah's grave in the land of her
exile. A sensible, shrewd Scotch face, not a plain full face yet, though she numbers
fifty years ; grey hair over a broad forehead, large grey eyes, pawky and keen, and
rather wide mouth and a chin denoting decision, as her smile shows benevolence,—
such is she, cui-tseying in her decent garb of black.
" Ye're welcome, sir. Ay, Miss Una, ye've no come far eneugh this day,
that's weel seen." This as Una, hastily shaking hands with her, made a rush
towards the house, which showed whitely in the moonlight, and invited immediate
inspection. " I've got a lass for housemaid, Miss Mary, ma'am, and if ye like her
nae better than I do, ye'll no set much store by her. A glaikit thing ; if she has as
little inside her bit head as there's outside, she'll be a soirow ; but there's nae better
to be had it seems."     A step came down the walk,  and the obnoxious damsel
I
THE   ATTEMPT. 75
appeared. A pretty girl certainly, with a load of brown hair that made her apology
for a cap excusable ; though, in the eyes of a martinet like Lizzie, the scrap of muslin
and fluttering blue ribbons might seem " most tolerable and not to be endured."
She began to help Gordon, my father's old regimental servant, who still acted
as butler and valet, with the luggage, and before long all the efl"ects were safely
landed in the new house, shining and speckless from one of Lizzie's thorough
" reddings up." Una was in raptures, rushing now into one room, now into another,
finding out in each something peculiarly charming.
" Mayn't I have this room, Molly ? It is the smallest, and what a view of the
sea ! and a window-sill one can sit upon, here's luxury ! Unpack the trunk, Lizzie,
this is my dwelling-place—no, tea comes first. It might be well to wasli one's
hands, and take ofi" the first coating of dust and crumbs. Oh ! Molly, this place is
delicious." She took ofi' her hat and jacket, and plunged her face into water, look¬
ing at me over a towel with eyes that danced with delight; shook out her dress, and
ran down-stairs. Following her, I found her sitting in the drawing-room, taking in
the aspect of things in general.
This sitting-room must be described. It had a bow-window, a regular old-
fashioned one, with comfortable seats around it, and was panelled with oak one-
third of the way up the walls. Our own furniture had been put into it,—plenty of
cozy low chairs, and a big piano ; two or three tables, the largest whereof was now
spread for tea ; book-cases not yet filled, and all the etceteras which ladies accumu¬
late. The carpet I had chosen was green, with a slight tinge of brown here and
there, representing ferns. When I saw it, it reminded me so much of Redmains
that I chose it at once. Did I need reminding I Ah no. Shall I ever tread among
green fern-fronds, to my life's end, without the sense of a step that once crushed them
by my side, of a hand that once parted the hazel boughs to let me pass ?
But I have dwelt long enougli on our arrival, and must return to my starting-
point, the stormy night on which this story begins. In the three years following
our settlement at St Michael's, the place gradually became fashionable, till the old in¬
habitants might have addressed it as Quince addressed his transformed companion, 
'' Bless thee, thou art translated."
When first we went, very few people had found it out; but before long, the pine-
trees began to fall, and white villas to arise in their place. Extinguishing the quiet
little church where we were wont to worship, a new and splendid edifice appeared,
where decorations, intoning, and marshalling of small undisciplined choristers, occu¬
pied the chief attention of the presiding priest, to the horror and shame of Lizzie
76 THE   ATTEMPT.
who would have shaken the dust, or rather the sand, of St Michael's from her feet,
and departed when once she had been inside it, but for my abject entreaties. The
tap of croquet mallets began to be heard, and St Michael's was popular and
populous.
Such was the state of things when Una had attained her twentieth year, and
become the girl I have described.
Well, we sat beside each other, T in a low arm-chair, and Una on the fern-
strewed floor of the drawing-room,—her white arm, in its muslin sleeve, on my kneej
her glorious head shining out against the darkness of the rest of the room. Chignons
are vulgar and ugly in themselves, some people say, but Una's was not. Her hair
was all rippled back, and was lost in the mass of gold behind ; it hardly looked more
beautiful as it waved below her waist when she came in from bathing. She was
looking into the fire, and talking dreamily, as she often did, when alone with me in
our quiet fire-light time after dinner. " Mary," she said, and then came a pause.
" Well, what darling ?" said I. " Mary, I read Undine before I left Hampstead."
" Is that alii" said I, with a sigh of relief; for to tell you, 0 reader, the truth, a
family of Glynnes had settled at St Michael's a year before, and the son had for some
time been paying marked attentions to Una,—therefore I trembled lest he should
that very day have ' put it to the touch,' as we had been lunching there. " Is that
all 1 You wicked child, when I took such pains to keep it from you."
" They were never done teazing me aboiit Kiihleborn and Hildebrand, and water-
witches and mermaids," she said, " and so I took possession of a copy old Herr
Hartmann left about, and read it through, in the original, Molly. Doesn't that
soften you ? Dear old Molly, I know what you were afraid of, but you needn't have
been. I am not like Undine, except in being really remarkably fond of the water,
now am IV " No, you are neither so patient nor so frolicsome," I said, " and
then you know Undine got on quite well till Hildebrand came, and your Hildebi-and
has never came." " No," and the bright head sank a little, " sometimes I think he
never will." " This is the very night for him, at any rate. What a storm !" "I
wish papa would come back from General Hilary's," said Una, uneasily, and then she
went to the window, and looked into the darkness.
" Molly, do you know this kind of weather makes me horribly restless. I must
have some connection with the sea, from having been bom on it. I'd give anything
to be down near the cliffs just now."
" And I would give anything to know that Jack Evans was with his wife just
now, and Bob Wingate with his mother.    There are sore hearts in the village to-
THE   ATTEMPT. 77
night," said I, in the sort of vague, helpless sympathy which we give, when we seem
to have nothing else to bestow.
" Then why shouldn't we know now 1" said Una, suddenly. " Haven't we
waterproofs, and can't we walk ?"
" My darling chUd, it is as black as pitch, and what would papa say if he found
us gone off?" I remonstrated.
" We'll be back before he is," said Una, " if papa and the General get on their
Indian reminiscences, which they have done by this time, the witching hour of mid¬
night will be upon them before they've done. Now, just come along, I'll get you
your cloak in no time, and there is a moon every few minutes,
" By whose gracious, golden, glittering beams.
I trust to taste" 
what in the world is that 1"
The sudden noise which stopped Una's quotation was a hurried knock at the
front door, and a rush along the hall; the drawing-room door flew open, and admitted
Sarah Porter, the girl Lizzie engaged as housemaid, and who still, strange to say,
adhered to the establishment.
" Beg pardon, ma'am, but little Billy Cootes is just come, and he says 'm (the
ma'am abbreviated by excitement) that there be a ship run aground out at the
Devil's Elbow, just across the bay, and maybe you'd like to see it." This in the tone
in which she would have announceed a circus, a Punch and Judy show, or any other
delight St Michael's could have offered to a discerning public. I had not time to
reply before Lizzie followed her despised subordinate, and calmly took up the word—
" Gang to the pantry, Sarah Porter, and be seeing after the young ladies' teas. It
sets ye to be talking about wrecked ships that kens little o' the matter. If them
that was in them minded their ain business as little as ye do, they'd a' be at the
bottom sune or syne, an' serve them richt. ' The Deil's Elbow,' quo' she, the deil 'ill
be at your elbow before long, my lass; idle folk are his best prentices." The dis¬
comfited maiden withdrew, and Lizzie continued, addressing me this time,—" Ye're
no gaun out this awesome nicht. Miss Mary." " I don't see how we can," I was
beginning, when Una came forward. " Now, Lizzie, don't be despotic,—Molly and
I are goiug down, not to see the ship, but to see if any of the fishermen are come in,
and if they are not, to say what we can to comfort their wives. We won't be gone
an hour. There's no rain, only a high wind, which is a thing we both delight in ; so
you may go and prepare brandy and blankets to revive us when we come in."    She
78 THE   ATTEMPT.
cut short Lizzie's remonstrance by running up-stairs; re-appeared clad in a long cloak,
with a little sailor's hat tied firmly under her hair, evidently ready for action, and
proceeded to get me up in somewhat similar fashion. " Aweel, Miss Una, I \\dsh
nae harm may come of it," was Lizzie's parting shaft. Did harm come of it 1 Can
I tell whether, through the slow moving years that change our good into evil, and
our evil into good, that night brought most harm or happiness ? The last, I think,
for in mercy we are so made, that one hour of happiness drowns and obliterates years
of pain.
Out we went in spite of Lizzie, though the gust that caught our breath at the
door almost made me turn back into the fire-light. But Una drew my arm through
her's, warm, soft, and firm, and we passed down the avenue, with the pines wailing
over us,—out at the gate, and along the sandy soil of the road which led to the
village. Since the elevation of St Michael's into a fashionable place of resort, gas
lamps had been introduced at wide intervals among the houses ; but on this night the
wind had blown them out, if they had ever been lighted, which was doubtful. So
in the blackness we proceeded on our way, till all of a sudden the moon broke out,
and showed us the row of fishermen's cottages, and a crowd gathered on the shore,
mostly women and children,—but among them the anxious weather-beaten faces of a
handful of men. Nearly all the boats were out, for the storm had risen just after
sunset. We had gone quickly along the edge of the cliffs, to where the land curved
inwards and the cottages stood; and there, on the other side of the bay, so near,
yet so distant, with all those yawning bUlow-graves between, was the ship. Alas
for the mothers and wives of the men that it held, for the Almighty had dealt very
bitterly with them ! Where was there any hope ? No one could approach the ship
from the point at which she had struck, for the cruel rock called the Devil's Elbow
stood out from the mainland, which at that part was quite precipitous, about a
quarter of a mile. It was strangely curved, which gave it its name, and looked as
if it had once belonged to the cliffs behind, but had been rent asunder from them
in some long-past convulsion of the solid earth.
The only chance for those on board was in a boat from the place where we were
standing. And who could ask those poor shivering women to let the few men go,
who had been saved, as if by Providence, from joining that evening's fishing,—even
though the errand was the noblest that could be given to mortal man? One woman
sat apart on the stone, her hands clasped round her knees, her eyes, dry and terrible
in their hopeless dread, looking out to sea. She was young, and her long hair had
got loose, and was blowing over her shoulders.    I went up and touched her,—" Alice"
THE  ATTEMPT. 79
I said " you should not be here."    She shivered, and then came a helpless moan of
misery.
" Oh, Jack, Jack, I'll never see him again. Oh, if he had only kissed me
before he went. Miss Ferguson, I wouldn't mind it so much. But he were in such
a hurry, poor lad, and he just ran down to the boat while I were up-stairs, and kissed
his hand joking-like when he saw me coming to the shore.    And now ."    And
she rocked to and fro, still tearless.
Somehow, I suppose because of my being a woman, the sight of this one young
creature, no older than Una, whom I had seen walking on Sundays with her hand¬
some young fishei-man along the lanes, and who now was crushed by the fear of never
seeing him again, pained me more than that other sight across the bay,—the wild sea
dashing in triumph over the doomed ship, threatening every moment to wash her off
the rock, and destroy so many of the men God had made.
" Hush, Alice," I said, " remember Jack is on the open sea, not smashing on
a lee shore like those poor things at the Devil's Elbow. God helping him, you'll
have him back again in the morning; and do you think God can't take care of him
on the sea, as He has done many a time before 1" O. M.
{To be continued.)
^onbmm of lljc ilogal ^tatremg, 1868.
" Conveying the Body of a Child-Martyr across the Campagna
TO the Catacombs."
O'er the Campagna hangs the gloom of even.
From the wet marsh-lands rise the vapours white.
And from the troubled clouds, one star of heaven
Peers through the silent night.
From the dark distance, the great city's murmur
Floats like a whisper o'er the shadowed plain,—
Now dying faintly, and now rising firmer,
Then sinking low again.
80 THE  ATTEMPT.
Sudden, upon the night-breeze damp and chilly.
Trembles a sound, a footfall, a soft word,
So faint, it scarcely moves the silence stilly.
As rather felt than heard.
But, as it onwards comes, the voice sounds clearer,
And the light footsteps more distinctly tread;
Then through the gloaming, nearer come and nearer.
The living with their dead.
In dusky garments clad, with heads low bending.
With clasped hands in anguish still and meek,
In wordless woe, their slaughtered dead attending,
The lonely tomb they seek.
Through the low portal of the grey rock massive,
A sullen smoking torch grasped in his hand,
One slowly goes, in teai-ful sorrow passive,
To light the weeping band.
Thitherward, like a blossom fallen untimely,
Pallid and wan, yet placid, sweet, and mild.
With heaven's own peace stamped on her brow sublimely.
Bear they their martyred child.
The stain of murder on the white robe, crying
For vengeance on the heathen horde, stares red;
The small hands crossed on the cold breast are lying,
Low droops the fair tressed head.
Oh, dear pale lips, that would not, truth defiling.
Speak words of honour in an idol's praise,
'Mid God's own light, in holy joy now smiling.
You sing before His face.
I
THE   ATTEMPT. 81
Poor dim blue eyes, that closed to earth for ever
As fell the brutal lictor's ruthless blow,
From your dear Lord's sweet face your-gaze shall never
Stray now to things below.
Brave little hands, that would not sin by casting
One grain of worship-incense to false Jove,
You wave of praise the censer everlasting
Before your King above.
Tired childish feet, that did not shrink nor falter
From treading, for Christ's sake, death's way alone;
That thorny path has led to heaven's bright altar—-
God's calm, strong, steadfast throne.
Rest, then, poor tortured corse, in earth's kind keeping;
Lie down in silence, till the dawn breaks bright,
When the great golden trumpet from thy sleeping
Wakes thee to heaven's fair light. Mas  Alta.
CIj{ €j:^§ibiiion jof % ilogal Stotfisfj ^cab^mg fax 1870,
In going over the pictures in the Royal Scottish Academy, we are struck with the
fact that the great feature of this year's exhibition is the landscapes.
On entering the Xorth Octagon, the eye is at once arrested by one of the finest
landscapes that has ever hung upon these walls,—No. 323, "On the Way to the Cattle
Tryst," by Peter Graham. It is most gratifying to those who note the progress that
Scottish artists are making, in every department of painting, to observe that this
artist, although comparatively but a few years before the public, has attained a
standing among British artists, equal to that of any living landscape painter. The
picture to which we are now about to call attention, has added no little to his fame,
but it is superfluous at this date to speak of its merits as a painting. These have
been judged of and decided upon in a much wider arena than the one it at present
82 THE   ATTEMPT.
occupies; and all judges of true aii; have assigned to it the highest place among
landscapes. It is a splendid painting, not alone for the manner of its treatment, but
for the feeling that it evokes in the mind of the spectator. There is a feeling of gran¬
deur, of simplicity, and of truthfulness combined. It is evident that Peter Graham
does not consider that the grand truths of nature are to be conveyed to the minds
of others by the exquisite painting of a few stones in the foreground, or of a patch
of heather, or of a delicate flower; neither does he improve nature or sentimentalize
over her. Nature "when unadorned adorned the most," holds good in landscapes as in
the human form divine; still,no doubt, the poet's mind must work through the painter's
brush, if a good result is to be arrived at. A servile imitation would not please : the
scene, whatever phase it presents, must be felt before it can be truly rendered, or the
true feeling conveyed to others ; but who can look out upon these silent hUls and not
feel their solitary majesty? It is not the beauty of sunshine, of waving trees, and flow¬
ing water. The atmosi)here is dull and comfortless ; the thick and heavy mist slowly
up-rises to meet the disjDcrsing clouds, through which the morning light heralds the
rising sun, soon to illumine these vast hills, so that their mossy verdure will
gleam like velvet in all the green freshness of an early spring morning. But that hour
has not yet come ; and the shepherd, issuing from the distant hut, suggests that with¬
in are to be found comfort and warmth, which the heavy mists are not likely to
conduce to without. What would Rosa Bonheur say to the Highland herd huddling
together in the foreground? No fattened specimens of English feeding are among these
lean and hungry kine ; but we question if ever her hand painted truer or more
spirited'specimens of the genuine Highland breed, which indeed are painted with ex¬
traordinary merit.
It is but a year or two ago that we had one among us, whose pictures were ever
hailed with fresh enthusiasm and delight, and who devoted himself through long
years to the delineation of Scottish scenery,—the Sir Walter Scott among painters.
To say that the mantle of Horatio Macculloch has fallen upon the shoulders of Peter
Graham, would be to say an absurdity, for the works of the two artists are widely
different. But there is one point of resemblance, and that is, the love for, and ap¬
preciation of, the picturesque and noble beauties of the Highlands of Scotland ; and
although Macculloch delighted in the sunshine and in the smiles of nature, he also
painted her as he found her; and rigid adherence to the truthful feeling of the scene
is always predominant in his paintings.
At the opposite side of the room, North Octagon,— No. 386, "On the Solway,"
is a landscape by Mr Bough.    The  first look at this picture does not please.     It
THE   ATTEMPT. 83
has a highly scenic effect, produced by apparently empty space and curious massing
of yellowish paint. It is no exaggeration to say that shortly this feeling of
disappointment changes to that of absolute admiration of the beautifully evanes¬
cent colours, the softly rippling water, the artistically attuned harmony of the whole
scene. The broad Solway flows peacefully through a wide and sandy plain. In
the foreground one or two sea mews are dipping down, a few ducks are paddling in
the water, an English drover and his cattle are crossing the ford. On the English
side, the setting sun, with lovely tender colours, lights up the flowing i-iver with the
most charming lights and shades. On the Cumberland hills in the distance, the
evening clouds are gathering fast—-the delicate colours of the setting sun blending
with advancing twilight; the quietly rippling water, and softly departing day, the
changing effects of light and shade, are all marvellously rendered. In the Sculpture
Room there is a sea piece by Mr Bough, that we think is the most charming in the
Exhibition,—]Sro. 864, " Canty Bay." It combines gi-eat breadth and vigour of
treatment with the utmost possible finish j it is worked out with the greatest ease
and nicety. The sea is fresh, breezy, and exhilarating, beautifully lightened up by the
setting sun ; and the eye is carried out to the Bass Rock in the distance,—far out to
sea, with the same sense of reality as we should have on board ship. It is a fresh and
lively scene, admirably painted.
In considering the productions of the artist, as in criticising the effusions of the
poet, we instinctively come to ponder upon the mind that sets the pen or the pencil
in motion ; and, indeed, it is only when we discern the imagination through the
pencil, that we are satisfied with the production. Each artist, as each poet, has his own
peculiar gift or faculty, if indeed an artist in the higher sense of the word. These
thoughts rise in our mind in considering the works of both Sir !Noel and Waller
Baton. The one seems to revel in fancy, sometimes beautiful, sometimes grotesque ;
while, in the works of the other, a kind of imaginative melancholy is ever the feeling
of his landscapes. Waller Baton has several very beautiful pictures in this Exhibi¬
tion. We shall, however, confine ourselves to two, as illustrating more particularly
the peculiar combination ever to be observed, of the most gorgeous colouring with
a feeling of melancholy repose. Waller Baton delights in that hour when all
nature is clothed in the gorgeous purples and reds of an autumnal sunset. He makes
this hour peculiarly his own, and it is diflicult to say which is most admirably
expressed,—the tender feeling of rest that steals over the scene, or the subdued, yet
gorgeous radiance that the setting orb spreads over the face of all things below. No.
562,  " Sunset from Altuacraig, Bay of Oban," and No. 731, "King's Cross Boint
84 THE   ATTEMPT.
Arran," both illustrate, in the most charming manner, this union of beauty of
colouring and repose of feeling.
There is one lovely little landscape,—No. 456, " The Mountaia Tarn," by Sir
George Harvey, that is also remarkable for the sweet poetry of its composition.
It is a very rural and pastoral' scene, with browsing sheep, pleasant green hills, a tiny
lake, and summer sky. The charming stillness of the scene steals upon one's senses
like the grateful feeling of the soft summer air.
We advise our readers to examine for themselves " The Pass of the Cattle,"
by John Smart No. 816, Sculpture Eoom,— a beautiful j^icture, tnithful and
powerful, with some finely painted cattle in the foreground.
No. 706, " Twilight on the Moor," by James Cassie. How admirably is the
feeling of weariness given in the slow moving horses up the darkening road. The
same artist has a sweet summer moonlight scene,—No. 551. No. 429, "Inistrynich,"
by Arthur Perigal, is a charming, crispy landscape, beautifully painted; unfortunately,
however, devoid of all the softening effects of atmosphere : the tree in the foreground
is a perfect study of foliage. We must not omit to mention No. 401, " Evening,"
by Joseph Farquharson. The old subject,—a long picturesque path between two
walls of Scotch firs, the setting sun gilding the tops of the trees and radiating the
perspective. J. C. Wintour has several very efifective pictures, whose colouring
seems to date from the middle ages.
In our wanderings up and down, we have omitted to mention a number of very
charming things ; but, as we have to take a rapid glance, both at the genre pictures
and the water-colours, we are forced unwillingly to leave the landscapes.
No. 486, "The Sleep of Duncan," by Daniel Maclise. This picture portrays a
scene of which the world never tires. Lady Macbeth is a name that never palls upon
the ear ; and the arch-sjiirit of this tragedy is here depicted, but not exactly as the
world loves to imagine her. We do not think Mr Maclise's conception quite
realises the idea formed of the dread murderess in the popular imagination,—she who
never faltered in her fell purpose, and yet who had all a woman's nature. The
figure of the sleeping king is very fine. Shakespeare's own words,—" There's such
divinity doth hedge a king," are quite applicable to the sleeping monarch, who
looks every inch a king. The guards are well disposed, as are also the accessories,
although somewhat out of harmony with the times in which this dire tragedy is
supposed to have taken place.
No. 511, "Edinburgh, 16th June 1567," by Mr James Drummond, is a pic¬
ture of undoubted merit:   an incident in the life of Mary Queen of Scots, who is
THE  ATTEMPT. 85
about to be taken to Loch Leven. The Queen is the centre of the picture. Mr
Drummond has not aimed at exciting sympathy for the unfortunate Queen by the
portrayal of her much vaunted beauty ; still it is a noble face, and expresses well
a certain undaunted power, that goes far to explain the secret of that influence she
exercised over all who came within its sphere. Surrounded with open enemies, her
soul oppressed by secret crimes,—still she stands unmoved amidst the excited mob of
weeping women. Her whole surroundings are in keeping with her noble bearing, and
sympathy for her sorrows, rather than detestation for her crimes, is the feeling evoked
by this very clever picture.
On the other side of the Great Room,—No. 574, is Sir Noel Paton's " Caliban."
If talent were sufficient to make a picture attractive, there would be little doubt of
the attraction of this miserable monster,—for surely never was the term man-
monster so thoroughly realized as in this creature. In fact, it is the diabolical mingling
of man and beast together that makes it so unpleasant to contemplate. Caliban sits
in the foreground, so disposed that he fills it up with a kind of arch. Ai'ound and
above, in another and more transparent arch, float Ariel and his attendant sprites, fill¬
ing the circumambient air with spirit music, lovely as their own floating forms. The
tawny monster listens with pleased wonder, his light blue eyes glisten with human
interest and delight. These bright and glistening eyes are surmounted by the crown
of a bull; he has the ear and nose of an ape ; but the month is the crowning wonder
of this unearthly abortion,—such a commingling of the beast and the human was surely
never before achieved. It is not by the vulgar aid of bristles, claws, and fur, that this
union is typified of the human conformation struggling with that of the animal. It
is conveyed by something much more subtle, a something that makes us turn with
horror from this strange abortion. The sea-shore, and various spoils of the ocean
lying at Caliban's feet, are managed with all the usual delicacy and finish for
which Sir Noel Paton is deservedly celebrated. In spite, however, of all the talent,
delicacy, and finish of the picture, it is impossible to have any pleasure in its con¬
templation.
Mr Archer has four pictures of domestic interest,—the largest and most promi¬
nent. No. 692, " Fair Helen of Kii-kconuel," is chiefly impressive from the sympathy
that is expressed in suiTOunding nature with the scene in the tragedy ; nature
seems to tell us that murder is being done.
No. 540, " The story of the Three Bears" is quite a perfect gem,—the expres¬
sion both of the girl and her little brother is so charmingly conveyed.
Mr Keeley Halswelle has three very fine pictures in the Exhibition; we have
86 THE   ATTEMPT.
only space to notice one of them. No. 304, in North Octagon, " Roba di Roma," is
a capital delineation of Italian life. The handsome peasant to the left of the picture,
challenges competition with the works of the great master John Philip j the woman
is admirable, a splendid specimen of Roman peasant beauty,—where, indeed, beauty
both of form and face, of bearing and of expression, seems to flourish more vigor¬
ously and truly in the lower classes than in the higher; quite different from what is to
be found in more northern latitudes, where to be patrician is to be beautiful, to be
ignoble is to be vulgar and commonplace. The grouping is vigorous and distinct;
the head of the Jew vendor of the holy relics is capital in expression,—the whole pic¬
ture is full of life, originality, dash, and iinish.
No. 654, in South Octagon, "A China Merchant," by Erskine Nicol. This
charming picture is in Mr Nicol's best manner, uuexaggerated, yet full of the true
Irish feeling. The china merchant's wife, stooping in the foreground and smiling
up to the customer, is as sweet a specimen of Irish beauty as one would wish to see ;
and the china merchant himself is no unworthy mate for so sweet a wife. The
colouring is composed and harmonious, and the children in the cart are natural and
pleasing.
We should like to point out to our readers No. 474, " Maternal Care.' A
sweet and natural scene, with an air of reality and simplicity in the mother's face
that is very charming. The whole composition of the picture is true in its
details, and efiective in expressing, with quiet simplicity, " maternal care." This
picture is by Mr Hugh Cameron, whose diploma picture—" Asleep," No. 450, is also
in Great Room, and is a very efiective picture.
We must now, however, pass on to the Water-Colours, leaving, with great reluct¬
ance, many interesting pictures unnoticed. The North Room is, perhaps, on the whole,
the most interesting in the Exhibition. It is full of beautiful specimens of this truly
delicate branch of art,—a bi'anch that seems to be cultivated with the highest success
by the lady exhibitors. One of the sweetest and richest specimens on the walls is
No. 260, by Miss S. S. Warren,—a woodland scene, vigorously drawn, full of rich
and beautiful colouring, subdued in tone, and harmonious in feeling, minute in all
its details, and of the most perfect iinish. This is one of the loveliest things in the
room.
Lady Dunbar is well known as one of our most successful water-colourists.
She is always original and striking. No. 36, " Antibes, Alpes Maritimes," is a delight¬
ful specimen of her lively and dashing style of treatment.
THE   ATTEMPT. 87
Mrs Forbes Irvine and Mrs Stewart Smith,—in No. 81, by the former lady,
and No. 101, by the latter,—preserve to our recollection specimens of the old
architecture of Edinburgh.     Both ladies are excellent water-colourists.
Mrs Charretie, in 46, has a charming portrait of a coquettish beauty.
No. 70, "The Absorbing History of Cock Robin," by Miss W. Dunlop, would do
credit to any artist;—the child's head and face are charmingly natural and pleasing.
No. 69 is a small landscape, by Mr James Paterson, an unknown name
among Edinburgh exhibitors. To our belief, there is no cleverer specimen on
the walls than this unpretending little landscape.
No. 84, " MUking Time," by Mr George Manson, another young artist, is also
a most effective picture,—excellent in drawing, simple in design, it is full of truth and
nature: it is really a pretty picture.
No. 179 is a most charming landscape, "Brook Side, Dollar," by Waller Baton.
"We simply call attention to it, as it might be passed over in the more absorbing
glories of " Castle Campbell, Dollar," No. 187, by the same artist.
Arthur Perigal has two lovely landscapes. No hardness of outline can be com¬
plained of here ; the effect is soft and harmonious. Of the two we prefer 170, "Near
Edinburgh." The other, 169, "A Lowland River," is also a beautiful landscape.
There are many names we have to pass over for want of space.
J. Osborne Brown contributes three specimens of water-colours, excellent in
drawing and fine effects of colours. The names of Charles Lodder, James Faed, James
Ferrier, and Robert Frier, assure us of the excellency of many of the other contribu¬
tions. We shall finish off our rapid sketch by asomewhat longer description of No. 100,
by W. B. Scott, brother of the late David Scott,—"And behold the veil of the temple
was rent in twain." The dread event is passing in the distance, but the attention of
the spectator is concentrated on the convulsions of nature, as typified by the rending
of the veil in twain. The head priest stands back in terror and dismay ; the sacrifi-
cator hides his shuddering face, while the vivid lightning plays up and down, lighting
up the gorgeous vestments and the rich magnificence of the temple. The sacrificial lamb
is ready upon the altar, but the sacrifice is not now to be completed. This striking
picture is bold in execution and faithful in conception ; it reminds us forcibly of a
similar class of subjects, so often produced by his lamented brother.
We must now bring this cursory notice to a close, regretting that so much has
been left unsaid that might have been said, as to the numerous and delightful pic¬
tures that are in this year's Exhibition. M. E. T.
88
THE  ATTEMPT.
^^t  fast  l^n.
From the German of A. Grun.
When will the poet's tongue
While yet the spring appears
Weary of singing 1
Joyous with flowers—
When will the poet's song
While we rejoicing pass
Leave off its ringing ]
The sunny hours;
Is not the poet's quest
While the dark cypress tree
Now unavailing 1
O'er a grave stoops ;
Is not each blossom plucked
While human eyes yet weep,
And each soux-ce failing ?
Or a life droops ;
While yet Apollo's car
So long will poetry
In azure glides ;
Here have her home.
While by one mortal viewed
While in her joyful train
On high he rides ;
Votaries roam.
While with heaven's thunderbolts
And from this ancient house
Tremble the spheres;
Singing in pride—
While 'neath their menaces,
Will the last man pass out
But one heart fears ;
Poet beside.
While yet, when storms are past.
God holds the universe
Rainbows may shine;
As a fair flower
And one soul longs for peace.
Smiles on it, henceforth still
And love divine;
Ruled by His power.
While, with night's starry seed,
Let then this wondrous flower
Aether is sown,
Wither and die;
WliUe the scroll's golden text
And let the earth and sun
By one is known ;
Like fallen leaves lie,—
Towards the moon's lucid ray,
Ere thou canst ask, if not
While the heart yearns,
Tired of demanding.
When to the quiet woods—
Does the eternal song
Weary it turns;
Ring notwithstanding ?
Sanct Rewle.
THE   ATTEMPT. 89
#ttr €txiBiQ Jfmnbs.
I Suppose we are acquainted with at least one individual who may, without
aspersion, be placed in the above category. Most of us must be able to reckon them
in large numbers, and few of us will own to any gi-eat partiality for the tribe.
But under the generic appellation of "crusty" there are several species; and I intend
in this essay, to attemjjt the description of only one of these branches of the family.
I don't know any one word that exactly fits the class of persons I have in my
mind; but T am sure we must all know some individual who, under rough, stern,
and unprepossessing manners and address, is believed to couceal much tenderness of
heart and excellence of character ; but who manages to conceal them so very
effectually, that the world at large may be pardoned for doubting their existence.
The species is generally marked by a noble disregard for the amenities of society
and the rules of good breeding; a dogged and stubborn manner of expressing its
opinions on all subjects, utterly careless of the feelings of those who may happen to
be present; and an extraordinary knack of discovering your mental weak points
and sensitive places, and rubbing against them with the most laudable perseverance
and energy. Your friends say to you, " Oh, you must not mind Mr Snarler'a
manner,—he is a little gniff and disagreeable, but it's only his mannei-, it's just a
way he has; he always likes to speak his mind, and says exactly what he thinks ;
and then he has such an excellent heart, and does so much good!" and so Mr Snarler,
on the strength of his excellent heart and charitable actions, is permitted to conduct
himself in a manner that would disgrace a bear. I would humbly submit that the
performance of one of our social duties is not, or at least should not be, an excuse
for neglecting the others; and that it is perfectly possible to be kind-hearted and
charitable, without transgressing the code of good-breeding and civility.
"Speaking one's mind," and "saying exactly what one thinks," are things
upon which our crusty friends especially pride themselves; and more especially
I have noticed this among our feminine crusty friends. Possibly the masculine
specimens are as bad among victims of their own sex; but certainly the misery
I have experienced, from several severe courses of truth-telling, has generally been
inflicted by ladies. But let that pass. I know the confession will be received with
astonishment and horror; but, nevertheless, I must here acknowledge that there is
no species of character which inspires me with such dread, such disgust, such
detestation, as the character which " speaks its mind." Honesty is a grand thing,
truth is a beautiful thing, conscientiousness is an admirable thing ;   but oh, my
90 THE   ATTEMPT.
fellow sufferers, is it not true that we may have far too much of every one of them ]
and that the being who, under the excuse of a love for truth, thrusts upon you cool
incivilities and flat contradictions, laughs at yoiu- most cherished opinions, pro¬
nounces an edict of contempt and disapproval upon your friends, and expects you
to smile and accept his or her ideas as your guiding principles, is objectionable
beyond your powers of expression. For truly the mental laceration, the agonising
process of (figurative) flaying and scourging, to which I have been subjected by
the " good-hearted, honest, outspoken " portion of my crusty friends, is torture of
such keenness, that, to escape its recurrence, I should welcome the companionship of
a Uriah Heep, or a Sir John Chester, exclaiming
" And of all ills, good heaven, thy wrath can send—
Save, save, oh, save me from the Candid Friend !"
For hypocrites, whatever they may say behind your back, would, at least, not insult
you to your face ; and though they might not prove trusty friends, would be
agreeable companions. But, without going farther in the defence of hypocrisy,! would
humbly advise the ultra devotees of sincerity to leaven their talk with a grain or two
of politeness and kindly feeling ; to remember that their ideas, however profound,
need not be incessantly and pugnaciously levelled at their friends' heads; to bethink
them that they may sometimes (it is just possible) be in the wrong; that even
when in the right, their opinions may be disagreeable to the rest of the company,
and may frequently be suppressed with great advantage ; and finally, to believe that
truth is none the worse for being mixed with a little ciAdlity and consideration.
But to return to a less objectionable type of our crusty friends,—those who do
not render themselves so violently offensive as the candid species, but who merely
cloak and disguise their real kindness of heart under a gruff and unprepossessing
demeanour, and a sharp fault-finding way of speaking. These individuals, never
pleasant upon a slight acquaintance, often gain a very strong hold on our affections
when we come to know them well, and perceive their real excellence,—a knowledge
which only makes us regret the more that the roughness of their manner should
cause the mistaken view of their characters which is entertained by the world at
large. This type of character has always been a favourite one with novelists ; and I
can call to mind at present four specimens, all possessing many points of similarity, yet
each with individuality sufiicient to distinguish her from the others, and make her,
as it were, the representative of a particular grade of the crusty character. The
ladies to whom I allude are Miss Bettina Davenal (in " Oswald Cray "), Mrs Sandy-
shaft (in " Barbara's History "), Miss Betsy Trotwood (in  ''David Copperfield")^
THE  ATTEMPT. 91
and Miss Kate M'Quarrie (in "Alfred Hagart's Household.") The points of
similarity between them, as I said before, are many. They are all ladies, they are
all rich, they are all crusty and crotchety, they are all presented to us as "Aunts;"
three of them are spinsters, and in the case of the fourth, the dear departed Mr
Sandy shaft is as completely obliterated from the recollection of all the world and his
widow, as if he had never existed; and they all possess much real goodness of heart
beneath a severe and harsh exterior.
Miss Bettina Davenal is the least interesting, the worst tempered, and the
coldest-hearted of the four. She is not merely crusty, she is soured, an early
disappointment has crushed her heart as well as her spirit, and her sympathies are
slow and torpid. She detests her noisy high-spirited nephews ; is unnecessarily
severe and contemptuous towards her pretty foolish niece Caroline ; and even Sara's
gentle patience she tries to the utmost, before it wins the love of that hard, unde"
monstrative nature. I think the utmost we can accord Miss Bettina, at the end of
the book, is our pity for her loneliness and infirmities ; excellent, conscientious, and
upright though she was, our hearts never feel any warm sympathy with her.
Next I would place Mrs Sandyshaft, the redoubtable aunt of " Barbara's
History." She, very different from Miss Bettina, is a woman of deep affections and
strong passions. The first she lavishes on her little niece Barbara, the latter she
vents pretty freely ui)on everybody else. She is the happy possessor of a himdred
pigs, whom she rules by means of a portentous whip; but her gentler moods are very
naturally and beautifully described, and we forget the Amazonian figure in top-boots,
striding about the farmyard, and quelling the refractory porkers, when we read of
her joy, her rescue from the very gates of death, at the i-etum of " her little Bab."
Her delight, at the commencement of the story, when Barbara indignantly repudiates
the charge of mercenary motives, is very characteristic ; also her disgust at the first
sight of Barbara's baby, and her gradual reconciliation to it. But we must pass on
to Miss Betsy Trotwood, the best-known of my four specimen ladies, the most
amusing and original of them all. Dear, irascible, illogical, charming Miss Betsy !
from her first appearance, when she bui'sts upon the amazed and trembling Mrs
Copperfield like something between a fury and a fate, our sympathies are entirely
with her. She is the most thorough specimen I know of the crusty character; her
violence, her obstinacy, her defiance of the co7ivenances in her interview with the
Murdstones ("that murdering woman of a sister !") these are her shell, her mantle,
her disguise,—and beneath them is Miss Betsy Trotwood, the protectress of David
Coppei-field, the admiring champion and patroness of the idiotic " Mr Dick," the
92 THE   ATTEMPT.
loving and thoughtful adviser of poor silly little Dora. Her skirmishes with the
donkeys ; her incessant references to the mythic " Betsy Trotwood," whose non-
appearance had been so great a blow to her; her re-christening of David ; her con¬
sultations with Mr Dick,—all her little eccentricities we readily pardon for the sake
of her large, loving heart. But then, we must remember, that she is represented to
us fully and fairly in the pages of the work, and that we are enabled to judge her
by following her through a long period of years; while I have no doubt, that if we
had resided in the neighbourhood of Miss Betsy Trotwood's cottage, and kept up a
visiting acquaintance with her, Ave should, for a long time, have considered
her an old person of violent and unladylike manners, who bullied her poor little
nephew, and treated the donkey-boys with great bmtality; so liable are our crusty
friends to lay themselves open to misconstruction.
Last, not least, let us glance at Miss Kate M'Quarrie. She is incomparably the
highest and noblest character of the four I have selected; indeed, I have some doubts
whether I am justified in placing her among our crusty friends at all. Like Miss
Bettina Davenal, her affections have been blighted, and the hojje of her life
destroyed; but, unlike Miss Bettina, she retains the warmest sympathy and interest
in the joys and sorrows of others ; the grief of her girlhood has in no way chilled her
feelings or palsied her affections. Her affectionate and eloquent pleadings with her
niece Cora M'Quarrie, whose Highland pride has well-nigh destroyed her happiness
for life, show us how keen was her remembrance of her own love-troubles, how deep
her repentance of her own fault. Miss Kate's scorn of the toadying Stuai'ts, reminds
us of Mrs Sandyshaft's indignation at Barbara's mei'cenary father; and in number¬
less points she is like Miss Betsy Trotwood ; but, in head and in heart, in dignity,
spirit, and true worth, the stately old Highland lady leaves the other three immea¬
surably behind. She, more than any other character in the novel (save, perhaps, poor
little Katy Hagai-t!) reminds us that the author is a poet. The humourous part of
her character—the crusty, harsh side of her nature, capitally described though it be,
is poor beside the pages which tell of the romance of her youth, the interview between
her and Cora, and the closing scene of her long life. That closing scene; the de¬
scription of her last illness and death,—the fiery spirit of '• Captain Kate " flashing
out here and there, through the mists of age and the shadow of death ; the voice she
hears call her " across the wustes of seventy years,"—all this is written by the hand
of a poet, and we bid farewell to the grand old lady, feeling that for her sake we wil
gladly bear with the infirmities, and seek out the virtues of Our Crusty Friends.
Dido.
THE   ATTEMPT. 93
Far away in the pleasant hills of Bohemia, stands the little watering-place of Toep-
litz, situated about seven hours by rail from Dresden ; and the way lying through the
most picturesque and attractive part of Saxony,—it is one of the finest places for a
pleasure party.    So I, at least, thought after the excursion I am about to describe.
One fine night, in the beginning of September, between twelve and one o'clock,
a merry party left the Dresden station for Bohemia:—two gentlemen, four ladies, and
myself. We travelled all night, my companions sleeping the whole time. I think
I must have dosed a little also at first; but, when day beg.in to dawn, I was wide
awake. For a long time I could distinguish nothing from my window, but by-and-
by, "the rosy morn" beginning to appear, I perceived the quiet Ebbe beside us,
dotted here and there with little boats, idly floating on the mirror like water;
peaceful villages surrounded with orchards bending with fruit, and fertile fields; while
the sun was slowly rising in the east, spreading a glow over the whole landscape.
The others now began to awake, and looked tired and rather cross in the keen fresh
morning air. They all declared that they had not slept a wink. Wondering what
they called not sleeping a wink, I looked out of my window, and found that the Ebbe
had vanished, and that we were in a mountainous country. It was now about
seven, and soon after we arrived at Toeplitz. By this time all traces of bad temper
had disappeared, and we were very merry as we sat at our nice breakfast of cofiee
and little rolls strewn with poppy seed, for both of which Bohemia is so noted.
Immediately after breakfast we set out on a voyage of discovery through the town.
Toeplitz is not large, but clean and airy; the streets are narrow and very steep.
We saw a great many bath-houses, where patients go to drink mineral waters.
We entered one of them, and found the water springing up hot from the earth into a
stone basin. There were many fine shojDS. The most tempting were the confec¬
tioners and the famed glass shops. I could have looked for hours at the beautiful
Bohemian glass, with its deep, rich tints, but other things attracted our attention.
At first, we had been walking in clean well-kept streets, the houses all painted
snow white, with bright green shutters, red roofs, and verandahs filled with flowers.
Novv, however, we turned into a dark, dismal street, where almost all the shops were,
what we should call, pawnbrokers. This was the Jew's quarter, where they used to
be locked up formerly every night. We saw several beautiful faces among the
women and girls, but the men all looked repulsive.
94 THE   ATTEMPT.
We now determined to climb the Schlossberg or Castle hill, which was not very
far from the town. This was the pleasantest part of the day. We had much difficulty
in reaching the top, but once there, we felt ourselves well rewarded for our pains by the
lovely view. At our feet lay Toeplitz, with its snowy houses ; the church bells ringing
softly in the disance for mass,—for there was a Roman Catholic festival that day, and
we had hopes of seeing the procession to the church. On the other side, broad fertile
fields, intersected by walnut and plane trees laden with fruit. Then, closing in the
landscape on every side, the lofty mountains in the Ern Gebirge, partly covered with
mist, and with their summits lost in the clouds. It was a splendid sight,—and the
faint tolling of the church bells, borne to us by the summer wind, added to the gran¬
deur and solemnity of the scene. We had lunch among the ruins of an old castles
which ornamented the summit of the hill, and gave it its name, formerly the abode of
a celebrated robber baron, who used to sally down from his fortress to the plains below
to plunder passing travellers, and return laden with rich spoil. After lunch we took
one last look all around, and then began the descent. We reached Toeplitz just in
time to see the procession. In front walked the priest, repeating Latin prayers aloud .
the figures of Christ and the Virgin were borne before him. A band of peasant girls
followed, dressed in white, with ivy wreatbs, and a mixed assembly came behind,—
the women dressed in the bright colours peculiar to Bohemian taste, the men with
their hats off, and all devoutly praying. We watched the procession into the church,
and then went to the hotel for dinner.
We had then only two hours more before returning home, which we re¬
solved to spend in some beautiful gardens near Toeplitz. They were crowded
with people, listening to a band playing airs from operas. The musicians were
on a wooden platform prettily ornamented, while the listeners sat all around in
a cleared space in the centre of a large glade of trees. Many countiy peopla
were there from the procession,—we could see their bright costumes gleam¬
ing through the trees. Besides these, there were Hungarians, with their orna¬
mented costumes, miners in black and silver, Tyrolese in grey and green, with
their high peaked hats, and officers of almost every regiment in Germany,—
some in red and blue, others in white, green or pink. It was a lively scene,
and we were sorry to leave it, when the time arrived for our departure. It was six
in the evening before we got to the station, and the shades of evening were already
beginning to descend as we sped on and on towards the Saxon fi'ontier. Everywhere
the labourers returning from the quiet fields paused to look at us, and soon the Ebbe
appeared like a thread of silver beside us;   and, by the time we reached Saxon
THE   ATTEMPT. 95
Switzerland, lights had began to twinkle in the villages and among the lofty hills on
the other side of the Ebbe. Some of the heights were crowned with sandy precipices,
others with huge rocks, that looked like the castles of feudal times. At last night
descended, and wrapped all in her sable mantle. HUls, rocks, and river vanished,
and all was one vast darkness. We reached Dresden late at night, and all agreed
that we had never spent a pleasanter day. But my last thoughts that night before
falling asleep were, that after all, there is no country like Scotland, and no place like
home ! Inpekita.
(A Pindaric Ode.)
In early days, content with humble aim.
Known but to few, and quite unknown to Fame,
A little band of eight or nine
Were wont to weave of prose and rhyme
A modest offering for the Muses' shrine.
But, see! Ambition waves her purple wings,
And clear her sUver voice as clarion rings—
" Why thus your powers conceal ?" she cries,
" Arise, Arise ! "
And Hope points, smiling, with extended hands
To where Success in the far'distance stands;
The rousing voice inspires, the vision cheers,
And soon in printed type and cover blue
A Magazine appears !
Two of the little band,
With skilfulhand,
The Magazine conduct; and, by their zeal inspired,
And by Ambition fired.
The rest each other stimulate and cheer ;
96 THE   ATTEMPT.
And now, from far and near,
To aid the work,
With eager haste
Contributors appear.
With glowing pen one writes
Of war and chivalry and knights
Of bygone days.
" Mas Alta's" muse now throws a gleam
Of fancy o'er some simple theme,
Now sings in martial lays.
While " Echo " with clear voice rehearses
The thoughts of foreign bards in English verses.
" Dido" waves her magic wand.
And, see ! before us stand
The Bards of Italy.
With earnest voice " des Eaux"
Pleads for those sunk in woe
And helpless misery;
And sweet as sound of evening bells,
One in soothing numbers tells
The joys of " Hope and Memory."
'Tis not for Fame alone they write,
Though still the vision bright
Which erst they saw attends them on their way ;
But to instruct, amuse, delight.
To please both gi-ave and gay;
And though from Fame's capricious hands
The wreath of laurel they may fail to gain,
Yet will this thought still cheer them on their way,
Who pleases others does not toil in vain.
Veronica.
THE  ATTEMPT. 97
Winn   fi at QUB on.
Chapter IV.
" A ruddy shaft our fire must^^shoot
O'er the sea.
Do sailors eye the casement, mute,
Drenched and stark,
From their bark.
And envy gnash their teeth for hate—
Of the warm safe house and happy freight,—
Thee and me."—Browning.
I WAS SO occupied with trying to soothe Alice Evans, who had now, to my relief,
begun to cry, that I had hardly noticed the rest of the group ; but just then I heard
Una's voice as if in expostulation, and rejoined her.
" Is none of you man enough to take a boat out to that ship 1" she was saying.
" Are you going to see those people drowned without even trying to help them ]
Oh, if I was only a man ! " She stamped her foot as she spoke, half in impatience,
half in sorrow.
" If you was, miss," growled one of the men, " leastways if you was a fisher¬
man, you'd know better than to think any boat could live in that there sea ;" and
as he spoke, a monster wave crashed down upon the sand, as if to emphasise his
words. " Their time have come, poor souls, but it ain't for the like of us, what has
wives and childer, to throw our lives away after theirs, and no good nother."
Una wrung her hands. " Oh Mary, I can't bear it; to see them perishing in
sight of land, in reach of help ! "   And she burst into tears.
" Now, now. Miss Una," said old Ringwood Masters, a great friend of ours,—in
fact, we knew them all,—" don't 'ee fret so. They're neither kith nor kin of thine,
s\ire-li/."
Una did not hear him, she had sat down on the sand and covered her face.
Suddenly she started up.
" Oh, Ringwood," she said, " oh, Tom Aikens, do you think God let you stay at
home from the fishing to-night that you might stand and look at that ship breaking
to pieces opposite you 1 Why, He might have left nobody but women in the place,
and then we could only have sat down and cried; but He left you, and now you
won't do anything.      Oh dear, oh dear !"
98 THE  ATTEMPT.
There were steps behind us, and up came young Glynne, and a yoimg man,
whom I supposed to be a friend of his. The moonlight was now clear and brilliant,
though the raging wind was as strong as ever, and I noticed his face,—a handsome
one certainly, but even in that moment of first sight I did not like it. Very dark,
but with light blue eyes set near together, and having from that fact a peculiar
brilliancy. The contrast between these very light and very bright eyes and his
dark complexion and black curly hair, struck me at once; also the contrast between
his careless clegage air of aristocracy, and the extremely commonplace and some¬
what plebeian appearance of his companion, Henry Glynne. The latter is easily
described. He was short, broad-chested, thick-necked, narrow of forehead and chin,
but wide of mouth,—even the moustache could not conceal the thick lips and heavy
outline, carefully as it \^as cultivated. He was neat, but rather "loud" in his
style of dress, and the greatest attraction, in a pecuniary point of view, in St
Michael's, being possessed, report said, of £8000 per annum, made by his father in
the sugar trade.
His mother and two sisters lived with him at St Michael's, and, as I have said,
he was a decided admirer of Una's. Unsuited as that moment was to such reflec¬
tions, I could not help thinking he had not helped his cause by appearing beside
this very handsome stranger, who must have been over six feet high, and had a
remarkably good figure. But Una only saw in them possible leaders of the forlorn
hope she was so anxious to organise.
" Oh, Mr Glynne," she cried, entirely forgetting the strangeness of the meeting
and the whole affair, " do help mc to persuade the men to take a boat across to
that ship. Look, every wave washes over it; they will all be lost before anything is
done."
She had anticipated Mr Glynne's exclamation of surprise, and he replied—" I
heard a ship was on the rocks, and Maiyon and I thought we might be of use. (My
friend, Captain Maryon, Miss Ferguson, Miss Una Ferguson)—but after all, what
can be done, eh, Maryon 1" " Well," answered a voice with a little of a foreign ring
in it, " if there is anything to be done, I'm your man. What ladies suggest should
never be impossible. I say, my men, which of you will go with me to that inviting
looking rock over there ]" He put his hand into his pockety but there was a protest
from the men. " Nay, sir, if it ain't worth our while already, money won't make it
so. If so be as your honour is willing to risk your life, why shouldn't we be ?'
The leader had been all that was wanting, the " with me " had its certain efiect j the
men were ready and willing.
THE  ATTEMPT. 99
Una shut her eyes for a moment, and I heard the low " thank God." Tlien
her bright eyes flashed out again, and rested on the bold handsome face of the
stranger with interest,—I half feared with admiration. There is no man a woman
admires so quickly as "he that does the thing she dares not do." "No time to
lose," said Cajjtain Maryon, as he saw how fast the ship was breaking up. " No,
Glynne, you stay and keep these ladies from fainting, I won't let you come ; think
of your mother and sisters. If I'm swamped, there'll be one vagabond the less in
the world, and my affectionate friends will be spared the expense of a tombstone.
Unless they are all mistaken in their conjectures besides, there's hemp in my weird
that ensures me against salt water. Will you let me shake hands with you ? " he
said, coming up to us, " we have met so strangely, and we may never meet again."
We gave him our hands, and he must have pressed Una's very hard, for she blushed
and half turned away.
" Good-bye, and God bless you for your brave heart," I said half involuntarily.
Then a cry of " all ready, sir," rose from the men, and the stranger jumped into the
boat just as she put off—off into that awful sea !
I could not help shuddering, as I saw how she seemed buried every few minutes
by some tremendous surge, and then rose over it like a sea-gull. No thought of going
home before her return came into either of our minds; but we watched with straining
eyes and inward prayers that black speck on the angry sea. How many would be
saved, even if they reached the ship in time; and if not, what succour could there be 1
Nearer and nearer, slowly breasting the billows, preserved as if by a miz'acle, the
deliverers came, then suddenly a mighty wave swept with a deadly force over the
wreck, and hurled her off the rock into the boiling sea. Such a cry as went up
from those perishing sailors I never heard before, and God grant 1 never may again.
The boat was near enough to save some ; too late, alas, for many, for the ship went
down with that sudden wail, and most of her crew with her, never to rise again till
the last summons to sea and land to give up the dead that are in them. But some
few struggling figures were still to be seen, wrestling with the last agony, where she
had sunk; and we saw all of those that could be reached dragged into the boat,
which then made for the shore again.
We gave one simultaneous gasp and shriek as the ship settled down ; and
when all was done that could be done, I looked in Una's face for the x'eflec-
tion of my own dismay. Then recollection came—the living must be cared
for now.
" Mr Glynne," I said, "Una and I will go home and get all ready to receive those
100 THE   ATTEMPT.
who are saved at our house.    Papa is a doctor, and it is right they should be brought
there.    Will you see that they are 1"
I said this chiefly because I saw that the women who were watching the return
of the boat were incapable of any exertion for the present. Nothing would be ready
in the cottages that night.
We soon gained our own door, and found Lizzie waiting for us. " Lizzie," I
said (how queer and hoarse my voice sounded), " there are some poor men being
brought from, the wreck. Tell cook to heat water, and put blankets to the fire, and
do all that's wanted." Luckily Lizzie had been brought up on the coast of Fife,
and understood the treatment of such cases miich better than either of us.
She retreated to the kitchen, and all was prepared, when we heard the sound of
steps coming slowly up the avenue, and two fishermen came in, carrying-—was it a
dead body or a living man ?
He was young, not more than seven-and-twenty, with brown hair drenched and
draggled, with long wet brown lashes over closed eyes, with a cold white forehead,
as calm and smooth as if the treacherous sea had kissed him to sleep for ever. I
felt a pitiful tenderness of heart as I looked at the muscular strength and youthful
beauty laid low, like the feeling of the woman to whose house the body of a youth
was brought after the battle of Langside, and who, saying sorrowfully " my darling,
my darling, some mother's heart is bleeding for thee," found that it was that of her
own son ; certainly Lizzie covild not have tended him with more eager care if he had
been her's. My father, she, and I, had our hands full, for four other dripping figures
were brought in and laid in the kitchen and dining-room, and there was little time
to think, till " after all was done that hand could do." Under Lizzie's directions,
and with the help of the fishermen, we siicceeded in rousing four of the five from
their deathlike trance, among them the young man who was broiight in first; but
in the case of the fifth we strove in vain.
He was an old sailor, and on his head was the mark of a blow, most probably
received fi-om some portion of the wreck, which my father said must have caused
death almost instantaneously. When I looked at his quiet face, and contrasted it
with the expression of trouble that came over each of the living brows, as thought and
memoi-y crept slowly back, words I had been reading that evening (how many days
ago it seemed since then) came back to my mind—
" All our life is mixed with death,"
" And who knoweth which is best."
Who but the Lord of life and death, who takes one and leaves anotlier ?
THE  ATTEMPT. 101
The youth, the only one of the five who looked like an Englishman, was the
last to open his eyes, and as fate, if fate there be, would have it, the first creature
they lighted on was Una.
She had been entrusted for the moment with the task of chafing his hands, and
her beautiful face was bent over him, anxiously watching for some sign of return-
ino- life.
O
Whether some vague idea of a welcoming houri or a pitying angel stole into
his mind, I cannot say, but he fixed his eyes so steadfastly upon her, that all Una's
shamefacedness rushed over her in a flood, and sent the blood to her very hair. She
turned away her face, and then recollecting herself, said—" See, Molly, he has
opened his eyes." "Where am 11" were his first words. " Ah, I know. Don't
turn away from me now. I am dead, and can do no one any harm, least of all
you, darling ; look at me again."
My father had left the room, and I went to the stranger and took his hand.
" You are saved," I said, " and among friends ; all you have to do is to go to
sleep." The sound of my voice seemed at once to recall the memory of his last
adventure ; and suddenly his face was alive from the past and awake to the present.
" I beg your pardon, ladies. I must have put you to inconvenience. I have not the
least idea how I got here." " Then never mind how you came," said Papa,
re-appearing, " we'll take care of you. I'm a doctor, sir, and you'll please to consider
yourself in an hospital. Maiy," turning suddenly to me, "go to bed. Lizzie, you're
the woman for making whisky punch, just see that ' the bairns' get a good stifi"
glass each at once." Lizzie gave some directions to Gordon and Sarah, and was
going out with me, Una being already up-stairs, when the back-door was heard to
open, and there hurried into the kitchen, as if borne on the howling blast, a withered
old woman with black ej^es, known among men as Mrs Sandyside, General Hilary's
housekeeper. If the Devil's Elbow had come marching to the door, I should not
have been much more surprised, for she was one of the women who are such
" keepers at home " that their existence becomes a mere tradition to the outside world.
I should have been astounded at the apparition on any other night I mean ; that
night, or rather morning, for it was nearly three o'clock, I merely opened my eyes
as far as their sleepy weight would permit, and wondered what would happen next.
Lizzie knew her well. The two were alwaysexchanging condolences over the old
times that were better than these, when Lizzie's still active feet carried her to the hall.
" I'se warrant ye've heard what has happened, Mrs Sandyside," she said, but my
father interrupted her.
102 THE  ATTEMPT.
" Has General Hilary sent you with any message, Mrs Sandyside? If he has,
pray go into the dining-room, and I will come to you directly. There are too many
here, and I was just clearing the room." The old woman did not answer at first;
it was as though the storm had taken away her breath. She looked round the room
with stealthy eagerness, till she saw the young Englishman; then she gave a sort of
smothered cry, and sprang to the sofa where he was lying. Xo mother over a son
long-lost could have shed more rapturous tears. " Oh ! Brand, is it you, oh! my
boy, my darling, look at old Grace. Don't you know me? Oh ! to think of your
being cast up like drift-wood at the doors of them that would have given their lives
for yours !"
Astonishment kept us all silent, till the housekeeper regained her composure and
something of her usual stiff dignity.
" I beg pardon, doctor, but this is Mr Brand Hilary, the general's son, and
I that nursed him when he was a baby, to find him here, within a mile of his
own father's house, and being seen to by strangers. ISTot but what its all the
kinder of you, sir, he being none of yours ; but oh ! Mr Brand dear, tell me how
it all happened, and where you've been all this long weary time," said the faithful
old creature, the tears still streaming down her cheeks. But any further communi¬
cation was prevented for the time by my father, who forbade her to excite his
patient.
" He'll stay here to-night, Mrs Sandyside, and by to-morrow you'll hear all
he has to tell; you only bewilder him more just now.     Does his father know V
" That he doesn't," was the housekeeper's reply. " Was I going to tell him the
son he sent away six years ago had come back this way 1 The general might have
been glad or he might have been sorry; glad he'll be at his heart, I reckon ; but
how was I to be sure when old Jonas just came up from the shore, saying if it
wasn't Mr Brand that was carried up first to the Lawrence Lodge, it was his ghost.
You'll let me stay here too, sir ?"
" Oh yes," said my father. " Now, Molly." I took the hint, and moved off
up-stairs to my own room. There I found Una already in my bed, and her white
face and great eyes almost fi'ightened me.
" I could'nt sleep alone, Molly," she said ; " I heard that scream every time
T closed my eyes."
Well, weariness did its work, combined with the soothing potion Lizzy brought
us before long, and we slept sound, though our dreams that cold morning were of
peril and wreck. O. M.
THE  ATTEMPT. 103
" Btxll  mahrs  guit   g^p."
It's down on the river, so placid and still,
As the red sun sinks slowly behind the far hill.
And the nightingale's notes on the soft breezes float,
That gently there sways 'mong the lilies a boat.
With her hand on the tiller, a maiden so fair,
With dancing blue eyes and with bright rippling hair;
She laughs and she talks to young Frank at her side.
As his oar idly dips on the scarce moving tide;
While hardly a word or a smile will she deign
To Harry, who's gazing and watching in vain
For one tone or one glance, in his heart long to keep;
For, though little he says, yet—" Still waters run deep."
When children together they all of them played.
And here by the river, when older, they strayed ;
Together they talked of their hopes and their fears,
And shared with each other or laughter, or tears.
And sometimes on Harry sweet Alice would smile.
Or now it was Frank she would laugh with the while ;
And then with them both she'd pretend to fall out—
Oh, how charming her frown, and how dainty her pout!
Then, the breeze that had ruiSed her soon would pass o'er.
Leaving both the lads far more in love than before.
But while Frank on the lass sweet caresses would heap,
Harry worshipped in silence—" Still waters run deep."
The mill by the river stands bonny and fair.
And Frank to it all is the miller's sole heir:
But Harry is poor, for his father's long dead,—
And a fatherless lad must work hard for his bread.
He knows but too well that he never must say
One word of the love that has grown day by day
With his life's very being,—but guard it apart,
The one precious thing in the depths of his heart.
104 THE  ATTEMPT.
But he cannot bear now to be always so near,
Yet for ever divided, from her who's so dear;
For a soldier he's 'listed—this evening's the last
Of those once happy hours that for ever are past.
The sun has long set, and the red glow is gone
Yet still 'mong the lilies the boat's rocking on;
But hushed are the laughing and chattering gay,
For silence has fallen with twilight so grey.
Frank looks at the mill-wheel, and fancies the time
When the bells shall be ringing his glad marriage-chime:
And Harry is thinking—" To-morrow will come,
And I shall be following the fife and the drum.
While they just the same here together will be—
Oh, will she, I wonder, think ever of me %"
And Alice 1    One thought she can't quite drive away—
" I wish I'd been kinder to Harry to day."
The evening grows later—the moon rises high.
And calmly and proudly sails slow through the sky;
The water laps softly the green bank along.
And still the sad nightingale pours her sweet song.
At length Harry speaks—" It is time I must go—
To-morrow my regiment claims me, you know;
Yery long it may be ere I sit here again.
And things will have changed, I doubt little, by then,"
Then Alice leans over the side of the boat.
Where the broad lily-leaves on the cold water float,
And she jjulls from the river a blossom so white—
" There, Harry, keep that, to remember to-night."
'Tis a bright winter's morning, so frosty and clear,
And merrily peal the glad bells on the ear;
Through the snow-covered churchyard, with fondness and pride,
Frank leads back sweet Alice, and calls her his bride.
Ah ! who in that hour of rejoicing and glee,
Gives one thought to the soldier far over the sea ?
THE   ATTEMPT. 105
'Tis a dark winter's evening—the day's work is done,—
The enemy's routed, the hard fight is won ;
And there, rifle in hand, on the battle-field red,
By the side of his Captain, young Harry lies dead !
And close to his heart, in that last wakeless sleep.
Is a withered pond-lily— " Still waters run deep."
Mas Alta.
" A Prince profound in his ideas, skilful in the forming of plots and coalitions ; more
skilled in giving occasion for wars than in fighting, more to be dreaded in the
secrecy of the cabinet than at the head of an army; an enemy rendered capable by
his enmity to France both of imagining and executing great things, one of those
geniuses who appear to have been born to move at their will both sovereigns and
people; a great man if he had not desired to be a king."
The above short summary of the character of William of Orange, given by
MassUlon in the " Oraison Funebre de Monsieur le Dauphin," though drawn by no
friendly hand, would appear to be both just and true as far as it goes, giving us the more
striking features of one, who is, we think, fairly entitled to be called a great man.
He possessed a giant strength of will, united to a body of which it has been said that
its life was one long disease. William has been described by Lord Macaulay (more
accurately perhaps than politely) as an "asthmatic skeleton." The power of the mind
over the body has seldom been more clearly demonstrated than in the subject now
before us. We can hardly doubt that his peculiar creed, and the circumstances of his
early life, in a great degree led to the formation of his character; his hatred to France
had much to do with the course of his actions. Born and bred a Calvinist, he was
carefully instructed: in the religious system to which his ancestors, the Princes of
Orange, had generally adhered; a system to which he was peculiarly partial, the
gloomy and terrible doctrines of which were eminently calculated to strengthen
and deepen the grave stern nature on which they were grafted.
William Henry, Prince of Orange (grandson of the great William the Silent,
whose history has been told with such graphic power in the pages of Motley's " History
of the Dutch Republic"), was born a few days after the death of his fatlier Prince
_.
106 THE   ATTEMPT.
William the Second, his mother being the daughter of Charles the First of England.
" Destined to raise the glory and authority of the house of Nassau to the highest
point, to save the United Provinces from slavery, to curb the power of France, and
to establish the English constitution on a lasting foundation, he enjoyed high
consideration as the possessor of a splendid fortune, as the chief of one of the most
illustrious houses in Europe, as a magnate of the German Empire, as a Prince of the
blood royal of England, and above all, as the descendant of the founders of
Batavian liberty."
The circumstances of his early life were hard and depressing, and served to
develope qualities which fitted him for the position he was afterwards so nobly
to fill. Early trained to rule himself, he early learned the art of ruling others.
Regarded by the people as their rightful head, be was watched and suspected
by the ministers of the Republic, who regarded him with unfriendly and jealous
eyes; removing from him at the age of fifteen all those in whom he had
any confidence. They left him at that early age without friend or adviser;
but all the harsh and even ciiiel treatment of these early years of his life
served but to increase the innate strength of his character, while it also doubtless
fostered what may well be considered its defects of moroseness and unsociability.
He early learned to be cautious beyond his years. He proved to be an able
statesman, but was remarkably deficient not merely in the graces and accomplish¬
ments, but even in some of the common amenities and courtesies of life. He was
thought blunt even by his own countiymen, and churlish by foreigners; he took
little interest in either literary or artistic pursuits ; statecraft being apparently the
ruling passion of his soul. He is said to have had a slight turn for sarcasm, and an
unconscious talent for oratory of a quaint kind. Aided by a singularly good
memory, he acquired enough of various languages to write and converse in them.
His theological opinions were, as we have said, very decidedly Calvinistic, but he was
as decidedly averse to all persecution and intolerance. " At the age of seventeen
he was surprising skilful diplomatists with his weighty observations on public
affairs; at eighteen he sat among the fathers of the Commonwealth, gi-ave,
discreet, and judicious as the oldest among them ; at twenty-one, in a day of gloom
and terror, he was placed at the head of the administration; and at twenty-three
he was renowned throughout Europe as a soldier and a politician."
As a warrior, however, he is less renowned than as a statesman, though his
personal taste is said to have tended in the former direction ; but, while never
attainuig any very great celebrity as a strategist, he always gained the respect and con-
THE   ATTEMPT. 107
fidence of his soldiers. His personal courage was of a rare quality, and nothing, not
even the imminent and constant danger of assassination, was able to deprive him of his
firmness and self-possession. No danger ever seemed to have power to shake his
iron nerves, or rather, let us say, his iron will and determined resolute purpose.
Strengthened by the sort of fatalism which seems almost inseparable from his
peculiar creed, and by what he believed to be the rightness, nay more, the heaven-
appointed, heaven-directed tendency of his course, he pursued it unflinchingly,
unfalteringly to the end. When remonstrated with for exposing himself with such
daring recklessness in his first campaigns, his opponent the great Conde remarking
after the battle of Seneff that " the Prince of Orange had in all things borne
himself like an old general, except in exposing himself like a young soldier,"
William's reply was, that it v^as from a sense of duty and a coolly formed plan that
he did so, and not from the rash impetuosity and temerity of a young soldier.
But with all these hard stem qualities, he was not without a softer side to his
nature. The gentler emotions partook in him of the depth which belonged to his
character, as they are not unfrequently found strongest and deepest in such grave
self-contained men, and when apparently placed in such strange juxtaposition ; great
tenderness and great strength of character being by no means opposed the one
to the other,—a deep and unsuspected fountain of tenderness often springing
out of the hard and rugged rock of a stern and undemonstrative nature. Among
outsiders he was supposed to be one of the most cold blooded of mankind. " But
those who knew him well, and saw him near, were aware that under all this ice
a fierce fire was continually burning."
His fury, if once roused, startled those who witnessed it, and " where he loved
he loved with the whole energy of his strong mind; when death separated him fi'om
what he loved, the few who witnessed his agonies trembled for his reason and for
his life." A hard, unsympathetic, unloveable nature to the mere casual observer,
he yet proved himself capable in no common degree of winning and retaining the
devoted love of both wife and friend,—that of the former amounting almost to
idolatry ; and as to the friendship between him and Bentinck, there are few more
touching instances on record. When the young Prince was dangerously ill with
malignant small pox, Bentinck nursed him day and night, till he was himself
smitten with the disease, with a devoted watchfulness and care for which William
through life testified a grateful remembrance ; and though for a time a cloud
passed over the faithful servant's love for his master, owing to Bentinck's jealousy
of Albemarle, the king's affection for him seems  never to have wavered ;   and
108 THE  ATTEMPT.
Bentinck was present in the king's dying chamber. The man who could have
inspired and retained the affection of a woman like Marj, and a servant Kke
Bentinck, must have had in him much to love and esteem.
His patriotism does not ap2)ear to have been a strong point in his character.
Whatever he had belonged to his native Holland ; with England he never identified
himself, and though he did much for her, and her blood ran in his veins, he neither
loved her nor was loved by her. But even his regard for Holland was sub¬
servient to the stronger passion of his hatred for France, an enmity which was pre¬
sent with him even on his deathbed. The chief aim of his life seems to have been
to form a great coalition of the European nations against France ; and England
benefited by him, not because he loved her, and above all things desired her welfare,
but rather because she was necessary to his political schemes.
He makes his appearance as an actor on the stage of English history in 1687,
when in his thirty-seventh year. He is described as slight in form, with an eagle
eye, a thoughtful brow, and a cheek furrowed by sickness and care.
In 1688 William and Mary were proclaimed in London, which was loud in its
professions of loyalty to the new sovereigns. William of Orange was apparently in
a proud and enviable position ; but " uneasy lies the head that wears a crown," and
the new king was surrounded with difficulties and anxieties of various kinds. A
keen observer, too, of human affairs, he was fully prepared for a reaction in the
popular favour, nor had he long to wait for it. The two great parties in England
were again at war with each other. The Tories clung to the hope of a restoration of
the Stuart dynasty, and only accepted William as the lesser of two evils. The
Whigs welcomed him, but merely as the leader of a party ; and had no mind that he
should assert himself as the sovereign of the entire nation. He was beset with
difficulties inseparable from the position he now occupied as the ruler of a great
country, passing through a crisis in its religious and political history. He took upon
himself the direction of foreign affairs. " The revolution had on a sudden placed
England in a situation in which the ser-vices of a great minister for foreign affairs
were indispensable to her. William was admirably qualified to supply that in which
the most accomplished statesmen of the kingdom were deficient. He had long been
pre-eminently distinguished as a negotiator. The clue without which it was perilous
to enter the vast and intricate maze of Continental politics was in his hands."
He chose his ministers for the home government Avith great impartiality, not
excluding any who professed themselves willing to support the throne. A popular
monarch William never became, his morose and ungracious manners disgusting the
THE  ATTEMPT. 109
courtiers who had been accustomed to find their sovereigns sociable and easy of access;
but though unpopular in the capital, he seems to have been ever most popular among
his soldiery. In 1690 he went over to Ireland ; his spirits rose at once on finding
himself at the head of his troops, and he completely won the hearts of his men by the
way in which he shared all their hardships,—" sharply reprimanding officers who
were so anxious to procure luxuries for his table, as to forget the wants of common
soldiers."
He made himself intimately acquainted with each regiment, and his pleasant
looks and sayings are said to have been long remembered. William's army consisted
of about 36,000 men. He determined to attack the Irish without delay, though in so
doing he acted contrary to the opinion of some of his officers, Schomberg in par¬
ticular, who thought it was too hazardous an experiment. On the 1st July was
fought the battle of the Boyiie. The king had been wounded by a chance shot when
leaving his breakfast-table the day before, but though obliged in consequence to hold
his sword in his left hand, he led his men into the hottest part of the fight. Schom¬
berg and Walker both lay dead on the field, when, just as the battle raged the
fiercest, William, coming up with the left wing, decided the fate of that important day.
On another occasion, at the battle of Landen, he displayed the same valour, considera¬
tion, and coolness, and though the result was then very difierent, and he was
disastrously defeated, his nobility of character was as conspiciious in misfortune as in
success. His unconquerable spirit rose to the occasion, and he set to work without
delay to repair, as far as might be, his defeat, and collect his scattered troops.
Of personal ambition, the desire of vain glory and self aggrandizement, he seems
to have had but little; he did great things, and desired great things, but more, it
would seem, in order that he might work out what he believed to be the divine pur¬
pose and the salvation of Europe, than from any other motive. Even his hatred to
France, deeply and strongly as it no doubt entered into his personal feelings, pro¬
ceeded from his conviction that she was the deadly enemy and the great obstacle to
European freedom and equality, which he conceived to be in danger of utter destruc¬
tion from the weight of her power and ambition.
The historian Fronde, in writing of Mary Queen of Scots, remarks—" Mary
Stuart was chiefly interested in herself, and she was without the strength of self
command, which is taught only by devotion to a great cause." Now this devotion to
a great cause seems to us to be one of the keys to William's character and actions.
Of the calm wisdom and unselfish consideration with which he acted on many
occasions, aud in trying and perplexing circumstances, many instances are recorded.
110 THE   ATTEMPT.
His religion, though perhaps of rather a narrow and Puritanical type, appears
to have been deep and earnest; and his letter to the General Assembly of the newly
established Church in Scotland contains some truly religious sentiments. " We
could never," he writes, " be of the mind that violence was suited to the advancing
of true religion, nor do we intend that our authority shall ever be a tool to the ir¬
regular passions of any party ; moderation is what religion enjoins, what neighbour¬
ing churches expect from you, and what we recommend to you."
Both the King and Queen are said to have had a particular dislike to evil
speaking, slander, and gossip of all kinds. When any such was ventured upon in
his presence, the king is said " to have preserved a profound silence, and to have
given the speaker a look, which, as was said by a person who once encountered it—
and took good care not to encounter it again—made your story go back down your
throat." His submission to, and recognition of the divine will in circumstances of
severe trial, is simply and touchingly shown in the short note which he wrote to his
friend Bentinck (then Duke of Portland) a few hours after the defeat at Landen,
one of the most disastrous days of his life. " Though I hope to see you this evening "
(so runs the note), " I cannot help writing to tell you how rejoiced I am that you got
off so well. These are great trials which it has pleased God to send me in quick
succession ; I must try to submit to His pleasure without murmuring, and to deserve
His anger less."
Unselfishness, thoughtful consideration for others, and entire submission to
God's will, were manifested in his dying chamber. He died professing his firm belief
in the Christian religion; his last words were to ask for Bentinck; on his body was
found a piece of black ribbon, containing a gold ring and a lock of hair, belonging to
the wife he had loved so truly and mourned so passionately.
Disfigured and shorn of its beauty by many weaknesses and defects, the charac¬
ter of William the Third of England was still a great and noble one; posterity
can hardly deny that he was a great man, one of England's greatest men, who has
made a mark upon her history which no time can efface ; and whether we think of
him gratefully or ungratefully, in admiration or dislike, our grim preserver stands
out from the background of history as one whom the world cannot forget,—a man
to whom Burns' words seem particularly applicable,—
" The rank is but the guinea's stamp,
The mail's the gowd for a' that."
ZOE.
THE   ATTEMPT.
Ill
Sjcrng.
When the pearly morning
Whispers to the song-birds.
Ere the drowsy warning
Slumb'ring peacefully,
And the winds awaked to motion
Flutt'ring seek the sea.
Sighing their devotion.
Oh God of day, to thee !
When the red sun, ploughing
Through the mists all-golden.
Sees the tree-tops bowing
To him reverently,
And the hills, with gladness flushing,
Eager greet their king.
Hears the brooklets rushing
Their hymn of welcome sing.
When the twilight dreary.
Creeping o'er the ocean,
Shrouds the wavelets weary,
Sobbing ceaselessly.
And the star of evening gleaming
Keeps pale watch on high.
From her far home beaming
Upon earth tenderly;
When the wild night, sweeping
Through her halls of darkness.
Hears the mourners' weeping
Rise despairingly.
And in gentle pity scatters
Sleep o'er land and sea—
Then—night or day, what matters 1
I ceaseless think of thee.
Melensa.
Patljrxna, Ijtr Itxfc antr ||line,
In a Poem, by J. G. Holland.
By universal consent, America is conceded to be the most go-a-head country in the
world. To use their ovm words, the Americans beat all creation. In the old country,
we take a thousand years before we can turn out a real poet, and a thousand multi¬
plied by five before we can match one of the old Greek philosophers. We produce
a really gi-eat statesman about once in a century, and our Wellingtons, Nelsons,
and Marlboi'oughs become finger posts for people to point at, until history gets quite
tired of their oft-repeated exploits. But it is quite difierent with the Ameiicans.
Like a well-known statesman of our own growth, they are fit and ready for anything,
from commanding the Channel Fleet to filling the post of Chancellor of the
Exchequer,—nothing comes amiss.    A first-rate statesman will step  from  behind a
112 THE  ATTEMPT.
tailor's board, and the next rail-fence will provide a President with genius and
power sufficient to change the destiny of millions of human beings. In all the
domestic arts and manufactures, in all the appliances of mechanical skill and utilities
of social life, the old country is left toiling breathlessly after her precocious and ad¬
venturous ofi'spring, and all this has been done, and invented, and brought into prac¬
tical use, in the course of two hundred years, since their forefathera left these shores,
to begin a new life and to make a new country; and so soon did these old Puritans
wax giddy and light-hearted with their success, that the father of American poets,
the worthy old Puritan Benjamin Thomson, who lived and wrote in the old Puritan
times, composed a sort of lament upon the " Crisis of New England" and deplores the
approaching downfall of the new country, seeing the unexampled degeneracy of the
people—the women wearing silk gowns, and the men smoking tobacco. We can
imagine the old Puritan's dismay, if, like Washington Irving's celebrated hero, he
could awaken out of his long slumber, and see his descendants strolling along
Broadway.
Koger Walcott is the next worthy who essays his poetic flight. He must have
been the father of all the Yankees,—for, with the true business feeling uppermost,
he tells his readers that as he has spent time and money in composing verses for their
edification, he expects them to return the benefit by ordering their cloth from his
shop. The next in order is Michael Wrigglesworth, who, mightily impressed by the
haste and hurry of the people about him, became convinced the day of judgment was
at hand, and wrote these appropriate lines, tpyifying the state of mind and body of
the world around,—
" They rush from beds with giddy heads,
And to their windows run."
It will be seen, however, from these quotations, that the Americans, however
apt at every other pursuit, failed somewhat at producing poets at the shortest notice,
and it is only within the present century that anything like poetry has been pro¬
duced in America. Now, they can point with justifiable pride to the names of
Bryant, Sigourney, Willis, Whittier, and Longfellow,—Edgar Poe stands apart. As
far as genius has a claim and a right to be honoured, Edgar Poe would stand among the
highest in any nation as a lyrical poet. He is unsurpassable; he has written lines that
a Campbell or a Burns has scarcely equalled. His " Annabel Lee," and the famous
poem " Nevermore," have never been equalled for the perfect harmony of the senti¬
ment with the rythmical expression. Another poet has now arisen above the
American horizon,—J.   G.   Holland, author of " Bitter  Sweet," and " Kathrina,"
THE ATTEMPT. 113
published in 1869. In America he has achieved a great success, and is now quite
famous. With us "fame" is a much more jealously guarded plant. No poet is famous
unless he can do what no one can do after him. Mr Holland is, however, a poet, and
" Kathrina " will no doubt win her way to the hearts of many English readers as
she has done to hearts across the Atlantic. Mr Holland cannot be put upon the same
pedestal as Bryant or Longfellow; he occupies a place of his own, somewhere between
these two and N. P. "Willis and Sigourney. Mr Holland has evidently been a close
student of English poets ; many of his lines have a familiar ring to the ear, which is
caused by the unconscious adaptation of the turn of thought and expression most
familiar to the mind of the author. In all American literature deserving of the
name, the moral in view is always excellent. In this particular, and in their
earnest religious faith, they stand alone among nations; for who but themselves
can show a literature so free from any immoral taint, and so true and simple in its
religious teachings. It is as if the influence of the old Puritan Fathers still remained
upon the earth to keep straight the path of their descendants. The aim of " Kath-
riua " is high ; its moral is to point the great truth, that unless the true Christian
spirit inspire the life and actions, all blessings, even the greatest, are but as dry
dust and ashes.
Paul, the unhappy hero of the poem, is, to say the least, bom under an
unlucky star. Living alone with his widowed mother, whom he fondly idolises, his
childhood is darkened not only with her sorrow, but by the whispered words of his
companions, which made him
" Learn .... the secret in the street from those
Who pointed at me as I passed, or paused
To gaze in sighing pity on my play !"
The secret is his father's suicide, and this is the cause of his mother's grief.
The author, however, is not content with this one brooding horror over the young
Paul's life. He no sooner passes childhood, than he begins to understand that his
mother has the same suicidal determination; to which, in spite of her daily prayers
to the Almighty for help and strength, she ultimately falls a victim. Now, this
accumulation of horrors upon poor Paul's head, is very much in the style of Edgar
Poe, but by no means told with corresponding fervour of expression, so that it loses
much of its effect upon the mind of the reader, who is quite amazed that such a
strange idea should come into the author's head, solely for the purpose of making
Paul a rebel henceforward, and a despiser of his Creator.   All this, to say truth, is
114 THE ATTEMPT.
highly unphilosophical; for Paul, who really has a naturally religious nature, would
not, under such circumstances as these, have become estranged from God; he would,
on the contrary, have clung the closer in all fear and humility. Paul has long known
and felt that he has the nature and powers of a poet; but he is now quite alone
in the world, and miserable. " Kathrina" is, however, about to appear on the
scene. One Sunday (of course, in his unhappy frame of mind he never thinks of
going to church) he takes a walk in the country, and finds his way to " Hadley
Church ;" but he shall speak for himself,—
" I heard the sound of flutes, .... and one voice,
A woman's, or an angel's, that compelled
My feet to swift approach, a thread of gold
Through all the web of sound,    I followed it
TUl, by the stress of some strange sympathy,
And by no act of will, I joined my voice
To that one voice of melody, and sang.
The heart is wiser than the intellect,
And works with swifter hands and surer feet
Towards wise conclusions, so without resort
To reason in my heart, I knew that she
Who sang, had suffered, knew that she had grieved,
Had hungered, struggled, kissed the cheek of death
And ranged the scale of passion, tm her soul
Was deep, and wide, and soft with sympathy ;
Nay, more than this, that she had found at last
Peace, like a river, on whose waveless tide
She floated while she sang.   This was the key
That loosed my prisoned voice, and filled my eyes
With tender tears, and touched to life again
My better nature."
He enters the church and looks round him.
" I scanned the simpering girls within the choir,
But found not what I sought ; and then my eyes
With rambling inquisition swept the pews,
Pausing at every maiden face in vain.
One head that crowned a tall and slender form
Was bowed with reverent grace upon the rail
Before her ; and although I caught no glimpse
Of her sweet face, I knew such face was there.
And there the voice."
THE ATTEMPT. 115
Kathrina, for it is she, is about to take her first communion,—a solemn ceremony
among the old Puritans, who required the vows to be taken by the young communi¬
cant before the whole congregation.
The service over, Paul finds Kathrina to be the niece of a dear friend of his
mother's. He goes home with them, and, of course, at once falls in love with
Kathrina, who, to say truth, is well worthy of his love; her only fault being a strong
tendency to sermonizing. However, this seems to- be rather expected from clever
young ladies in America, and Paul composes himself and listens with a very excel¬
lent grace. Kathrina tells him, in very long sentences, that all poets and artists
must have their interpreters, that Paul the poet holds the " Heavenly Manna " in
his hands, but that he is not able to distribute it to the people, but she, the teacher,
and such as she, feed the multitude. Very true, no doubt, and Paul acquiesces in
all that his pretty preacher says to him. Turner is only Turner to the apprehension
of the crowd outside through Euskin's interpretations ; and where would Shake¬
speare be but for his annotators and translators ? Paul, like all wise epicures,
understood well that hope is sweeter than fruition.    He says—
"All the summer fled,
And still my heart delayed."
" One pleasant eve
When first the creaking of the cricket told
Of autumn's opening door, I went with her
To ramble in the fields."
The scene that ensues unfortunately brings to one's recollection that exquisite
episode of Coleridge's " Geniveve." Paul reads a poem of his own to Kathrina. At
first she does not understand the meaning intended to be conveyed ; when she does—
" Like the flash
Of the hot lightning, the significance
Of the strange vision gleamed upon her face
In a bright throbbing flame, that fell full soon
To ashen paleness.    By unconscious will
We both arose ; she vainly strove to speak.
And gazed into my eyes with such a look
Of tender questioning, of half reproach,
Of struggling, doubting, hesitating joy,
As few men ever see, and see but once."
116 THE ATTEMPT.
" In such a pomp
Of autumn glory, by the sunplest rites
Kathrina gave her hand to me, and I
Pledged truth and life to her.  I bore her home
Through shocks of maize, revealing half their gold,
Past gazing harvesters, with creaking wains
That brimmed wdth fruitage, my adored, my life,
Fruition of my hope—the proudest freight
That ever passed that v^ay."
"^Into her place
As mistress of all home economies.
She slid without a jar ; as if the fates,
By concord of fore-ordinate design
Had fitted her for it and it for her,
And, having joined them, well were satisfied."
And now, having brought Paul and Kathriua into the usual port of all novelists, we
will wish them good-bye, premising, however, that the poem does not end here.
The moral has still to be worked out,—for Paul, though blessed in every relation in
life, is by no means a happy or contented man.    Although wife, child, fame, all are
his, until he is brought to see that all human blessings are as mere dust in the
balance, he does not find God; and when he finds  God,  he loses the priceless
ti-easure of his faithful Kathiina.    She dies early, as one whom the Lord loves, and
it is over her tender heart now at peace, that the bereaved and unhappy Paul finds
the rest he has been seeking so long and fruitlessly.
We have quoted long and fully from this poem ; but we hope our readers may
peruse it for themselves.    The moral is well worked out, and the contrasted lives of
Kathrina and Paul, point the difference between the Christian and the unspiritual
life of Paul.    There are many passages of great force and beauty, especially that
which tells us,—
" And now,
A guest was in my house—a guest unbid—
Who stayed without a welcome from his host,
So loathed and hated, on such errand bent.
And armed with such resistless power of iU—
I dared not look him in the face."
Death, the unbidden guest, does not leave again until he leaves Paul's home
empty of all that had made life pleasant to him. M. E. T.
THE ATTEMPT. 117
The Second Report of this Association is now before the public. Various cir¬
cumstances have delayed its publication, so that, though appearing only in March, it
refers almost entirely to the session of 1868-9, not to that which is now completed.
The results of that second session of the Association's work, as they are set be¬
fore us in this Report, are most gratifying and encouraging to all who are interested
in the higher education of women.
Keeping before them as their aim "the establishment of a Faculty of Arts for
Women," the Association have wisely adopted the division of subjects which exists
in that Faculty in the University ; and being thus able to avail themselves of the
services of the University professors, have secured for their pupils the best possible
teaching on each subject. It has not, at this e^rly stage, been possible to make the
curriculum of the Ladies' Educational Association as complete as that of the Uni¬
versity. One department of the Faculty of Arts—the Classical—has as yet been
omitted altogether. There are perhaps some practical difficulties in the way of
teaching Latin and Greek to large classes of ladies ; and besides, girls have already,
in modern foreign languages, a mental discipline analogous to that of classical
study, both as regards the grammatical study of another language, and the becoming
acquainted with another literature than our own.
The other two departments of the Faculty of Arts, however, those of Mathematics
and Philosophy, were represented in the second session of the Association ; the first
by the class of Experimental Physics, under Professor Tait (to which this year a class
of Mathematics, under Professor Kelland, has been added) ; the second by the
classes of English Literature, under Professor Masson, and of Logic and Mental Philo¬
sophy, under Professor Fraser. Reports by these professors and their assistants are
given in the appendix to the Report of the Association.
The class of Experimental Physics was perhaps the boldest experiment of the
second session, as it was more entirely out of the line of the reading by which in¬
telligent girls usually supplement their school education than the other classes
were, and Professor Tait's announcement that his lectures were " not to be, in the
common and degj-aded sense of the word, popular," may have seemed a little
alarming. But the results justified his respect for the powers and energy of his
pupils.
118 THE ATTEMPT.
The deficiencies in the ladies' work in this class, of which Mr Smith speaks in
his report, seem to have arisen from the circumstance that not only " all physical
and mathematical," but even a great many arithmetical ideas, " were perfectly
new " to them. Here we especially see the need of these preparatory classes for
which the Association appeal in their report. All that most girls learn of arith¬
metic is its processes, while they gain no acquaintance with its laws and principles ;
and it is this which makes real scientific teaching so new and strange to them. But
this is a fault which can be remedied, and we hope" will be ; for, of course, if there
had been no deficiencies in the education of girls, there would have been no need for
this Association at all, and the more clearly these deficiencies are pointed out, the
better will the Association know in what direction they should aim.
The classes coming under the Philosophical department of the Faculty of Arts,
required less special preparation, or at least the previous work of most of the students
was a better preparation for them than for a Mathematical class.
English Literature is a subject in which girls are at least as well educated as
boys. One was therefore prepared for Professor Masson's report (though this does
not make it the less gratifying), in which he remarks that the best students in the
class he taught for the Association were closely comparable to the best of his Uni¬
versity class.
Of the success of the class of Logic and Mental Philosophy, one could not have
felt so certain beforehand. It was, as Professor Fraser remarks, " the first attempt
of the kind in Great Britain." But, as he goes on to say, it has certainly become
evident, as far as the results of one session can make it so, " that women " (we
don't know if he means Scotchwomen only) " are not inferior to the other sex in
capacity for psychological and logical education, and that they may be animated with
the enthusiasm for these studies which Scotchmen so often show." Professor Fraser's
opinion on this point is confirmed by Mr Lindsay, who, as Examiner in Philosophy
to the University, has the best opportunities of comparing the work of Association
and University students.
All these reports combine to prove that there is no deficiency in women, as
regards either mental capacity, or energy and perseverance, which should prevent
their receiving and profiting by a very high and thorough education. We women
are often accused of a love for "smatterings" of information, and a girl's education is
often spoken of as having, for ground work, a number of unconnected facts in history
and geography, and a certain power of "doing sums ;" and for superstructure, enough
French to ask for what one wants at a Continental hotel, enough German to read an
THE ATTEMPT. 119
easy story, enough Italian to translate the words of a song ; the power, as to drawing,
of making a fair copy of a pencil sketch ; and as to music, of playing a certain number
of drawing-room " pieces /' or, if the girl's education has been a little more ambitious,
we find, perhaps, a knowledge of Latin, which leaves her incapable of construing
a simple sentence; of mathematics and algebra, which does not enable her to do a
sum in equations ; and various vague ideas about chemistry and physics, which go
by the name of " science."
This is doubtless an exaggerated picture. There are many schools and classes
which give a sound and through-going education, and there are many gii-ls who
supplement defective school teaching by their own reading. But even in the cases
in which the accusation of "smattering" is so far true, the fault is much more owing
to circumstances,—to the unreasonable requirement of society that girls should know
and be able to do a little of everything, and to bad teaching, than to any innate
want of thoroughness in the female mind. Before very long we may hope to
see, thanks to the exertions of this Association and other similar societies, good
preparatory teaching, carried on and completed by such higher education as
the classes of this Association offer, placed within the reach of girls, at least ia every
large town ; and though, when it becomes a matter of course for girls to complete
their education at these higher classes, as their brothers complete theirs at the
University, one may miss some of the enthusiasm which is felt and expressed now,
when those who have long been gathering disconnected information from books or
conversation come into contact for the first time with a powerful mind, thoroughly
acquainted with some special subject, and new regions of thought seem to be opening
every daj^, and new light flashing on the commonest facts of life, it will only be
because sound principles and methods of education will be so thoroughly diffused,
that new facts and ideas will be acquired by all, constantly, gradually, and naturally.
And this is the safest and surest method of study, though perhaps less fascinating
than a sudden introduction to innumerable new facts and new ways of thinking.
Let us hope that the girls of that day will remember with the same gratitude
which must be felt by all the present students of the Association, those who did the
hard work of the beginning, who planned for them, and secured for them, the
complete course of education which they enjoy.
Leaving out of view the much-vexed question of special professional training
for women, we can at least maintain that such higher education as this Association
offers is, to use their own words—" the best help to a good and useful life, whatever
may be the scene, and whatever the after pursuits of that life."   For, to quote again
120
THE ATTEMPT.
from the Report, " cultivation does for women what it  does for men—intensifies
every moral attribute in proportion to the mental growth.    Those who must go out
into the world, go out with a truer courage, founded upon a nobler estimate of work;
those whose duties lie within the cir-cle of home, find them invested with a new and
vivid significance, from the higher elevation and consequent larger views of their
own minds; we believe that womanhood can only be made more titily womanly,
as manhood is made more truly manly, by the utmost use of the possibilities of high
cultivation."
Grace.
ntu oi ©htxlmxti.
Fkom the German of Rodexberg.
How fair the maids of Hel'goland,
The maids and matrons all!
Their scarlet dress and yellow band,
Their figures lithe and tall.
Yes, pearls they are that brightly.shine
Upon the barren sand,
The fairest pearl of all is mine,
Marie of Oberland!
How merry are the sounds by night,
Beside the emerald sea,
Wliere 'neath the festive torches' light
The sailors dance with glee.
Fair maids in feast-day dresses fine
Appear on every hand;
The fairest maid of all is mine,
Marie of Oberland !
A green tree grows on yonder hill,
A cottage stands below;
Bushes and shrubs the garden fill,
And perfume round it throw.
A window wliere the roses twine,
Looks down upon the strand ;
The fairest rose of all is mine,
Marie of Oberland !
I loose my shallop from the side,
Wild rage the wind and sea ;
The little window's opened wide,
She waves farewell to me.
Alas! we too must part, must part.
Though billows lash the strand ;
Farewell, thou darling of my heart,
Marie of Oberland !
Dido.
THE  ATTEMPT. 121
E n a   g t X Q n B a n-
Chapter V.
" And the stately ships go on
To their haven under the hill ;
But, oh, for the touch of a vanished hand,
And the sound of a voice that is still."
— Tennyson.
We were late next morning; and when I came down, half doubting whether it
had not been all a dream, I found my father had gone up to the Hall. I well
knew his pvirpose, and went to the kitchen to make inquiries. Young Mr Hilary
was in the spare-room, but the tawny faces and black hair of the sailors still
decorated the extempore couches in the kitchen. All at once, one of them awoke,
and began to murmur words, at first unintelligible to me, till at length I made out
that he was speaking Spanish, a little of which I had picked up some years before.
I mustered up enough of the language to assure him that he was " all right," or
words to that effect, and returned to the dining-room. Una was down, looking as
fresh and as calm as if last-night had been spent in playing Beethoven, or reading
Browning.
" Don't you feel like a heroine, Molly f she said, "I do. First that very
charming Corsair. I don't care what his real name is, he shall be called Conrad
and then this interesting waif "
Here she paused, and her morning flush became fainter. " Molly, did you see
how I blushed, when he looked at me ]"
" Yes, I did," said T, " and no wonder, he gazed as if he had never seen such a
vision."
" His eyes were like a ghost's," said Una,—" like a ghost come back to visit
some one who had used him ill."
" The ghost of a very handsome man," I responded; " he has a look of his
father, but his features are much better. "Where are the letters, Una ?" And
finding them beside my plate, I hastily broke open one from Eedmains. Aunt
Laurie had her hands full, evidently. Geordie had fallen ofi" the old pear-tree,
and sprained his ancle ; Ronald had caught a feverish cold, in a premature attempt
at deer-stalking (a mercy it was no worse, and the boy did not shoot himself, was
Q
122 THE ATTEMPT.
my aunt's comment). Of course the Lindsays had come to pay a visit, just when
the house was upset; and last, not least, Frank was coming home.
This last piece of news obliterated from my mind poor Aunt Laurie's list of
troubles—Geordie kicking on the sofa, and poor Ronald grumbling in bed, Mrs
Lindsay and her three fading, frivolous daughters, " fushionless," Aunt Laurie
called them in her exasperation—and brought the tears to my eyes with a strange
sudden start. Frank was the eldest of the " boys," and much as I liked them all,
was my favourite. He had gone out to India six years before, after passing his
examination for the Civil Service, and it seemed he had now leave to pass a few months
at home. He would be changed now, the bright hair would have grown dark, and
the red cheek brown, very likely thin and worn looking—India ages people so fast.
But however different the young man of twenty-five might be from the lad of
sixteen I remembered so well, he would be as dear as ever for the sake of a day in the
woods about Kedmains when I was twenty. We went nutting together, and when
I was tired with reaching up to high branches and climbing on rocks, we sat down
in a little glade where the leaves were turning golden, and he asked me to sing. I
had hardly done so for several months, but I could not bear to deny him, he was
going away so soon. So I sang the song he asked for,—a lilt of the olden times, of
faithless Jamie Douglas and his injured loving wife, pining in her bower,—
" Waly, waly, up the bank,
And waly, waly, doon the brae."
I sang it in a kind of dream, it seemed as if some one else were throwing sorrow into
song, raising the old familiar tune, that I had hummed in my carelessness many a
time, when it was a sort of pleasure to sing, in my very happiness, "the songs that
make us grieve," till I came to the passionate cry,—
" Martinmas wind, when wilt thou blaw,
And shake the green leaves off the tree ?
O gentle death, when wilt thou come ?
For of my life I am weary."
Then the dream went, and I felt that it was I, singing the old sad words with a
new sad heart, and I laid my face on a mossy cushion close by, and cried till I was
weary.' Frank was first silent with wonder, then remorseful for having made me
sing such a "beastly melancholy" song, that was his phrase, I remember, for it
nearly brought on a fit of hysterics, then he put his arms round me, and begged me
to stop, and I managed it at length. Then I made him 2:)romise never to tell any
one how I had given way, and  I  believe he kept his word, and only showed his
THE ATTEMPT. - 123
remembrance of it by having eyes in the back of liis head for everything I wanted
till he left home. But the aifectionate words he said will never leave me; and have
often comforted me since. So, remembering old times, T laid the letter down, and
said, " Frank is coming home, dear boy. How very glad I am ! We must have him
here, Una. Papa will be glad to see anybody so fresh from India, if fresh is an
appropriate word for the dried-up remnants of what were once Englishmen in your
native land, Una."
" Aly native land," said Una, in high disgust. " Am I a Hindoo 1" And she
began to spout Barry Cornwall's description of his first appearance in the world,—
" White wers the waves, and red the morn,
In the stormy hour, when I was born."
We heard steps on the avenue, and Papa and General Hilary appeared and
went straight upstairs. We had only a glimpse of our old friend's face, white and
set, and yet with a light in the dark eyes that seemed to make it young again.
A few minutes passed, and Papa came down.
" Give me my coffee, Molly," he said, " and don't ask questions, Una," for Una
had already sat down on the arm of his chair, and was preparing to extract some
particulars from him.    "After all, I'm thankful I've only girls."
" Questions are unnecessary after that. Papa," retorted Una, reluctantly resum¬
ing her seat, " we have only to draw our own inferences about the only son who
makes you express such feelings. Negative blessings are precious after all, n'est ce
pas. Monsieur mon p6re?"
" Breakfast would be a positive blessing, if you would let me eat it, my
dear," said my father. " I have walked to the Hall and back, besides going to Mrs
Glynne's."
" To Mrs Glynne's, Papa !" exclaimed I, " what took you there, if all questions
are not prohibited 1"
" The health of the son and heir, Molly. Last night's desperate exertions
have prostrated him with what his mother calls a fever, and I call a rather bad
cold. As for your hero, who led the expedition—Marine, Maroon, oh yes, Maryon
—I met him sauntering out with a cigar in his mouth, as fresh as a daisy."
We continued our repast, and it was hardly over when General Hilary
walked in.
" Good morning, Miss Mary, good morning, fair Una," said he. " Well Fergu¬
son, how shall I thank you and yours for giving me back my boy 1"
" By keeping him on dry land, now you have got him," said my father.    " After
124 THE ATTEMPT.
all, Mrs Sandyside found him out first. He'll be none the worse of his ducking in a
few hours, meanwhile I desire he may be let alone."
We rose and left Papa and the General together, and I went down straightway
to the cottages, to see whether the men had come home.
Jack Evan's cottage was the first I came to. Ah! I could see all without froinsT
in, throiigh the window. There was Alice kneeling at her husband's feet, pulling off
his long, wet sea-boots. She had been crying, I was sure of that, for the tears were
still shining on her cheeks and in her eyes, but what a wealth of happiness looked
out from below the wet lashes 1 How tender were the hands that did the
menial office ! Many a rich man, tended by "gallant gay domestics" might
have envied the weary toiler in deep waters such proud, loving service. Off
came the last boot with a vigorous tug, and then Alice threw her arms round
him once more, as if she could hardly believe she had him again, and I turned
from the window—she did not want me now.
I went on to Mrs Wingate's, where Bob was receiving an ovation, all the
empty labour of the dark night forgotten in the joy of reunion.
And after rejoicing with them, T turned my steps homeward, having promised
Una to be back soon. No sooner had I turned the corner from the path to the
cottages into the low growth of pines near the cliff, than I was aware of a man
approaching from the direction of the Glynne's house. A cigar was tainting the
morning air, and the smoker of the same was Captain Maryon. He recognised me
at once, and came up with outstretched hand, leaving his cigar to smoulder among
the dry pine-needles by the way.
" Glad to see you out after last night. Miss Ferguson," said he. " I hope you
were none the worse for it?"
" Mr Glynne was, I hear," I replied. " No, thank you, we caught no cold.
After all, you were the only person who exposed yourself."
" And I have certainly taken no harm. How is it with those poor fellows you
took in 1 Do you know I seemed to know the face of one of them as if I had seen
it in a dream. He is like a fellow I knew ages ago, we were at Harrow together.
Let me see, what was his name 1 Hilary,—Brand Hilaiy. Have you the least
idea who this shipwrecked mariner may be. Miss Ferguson 1"
" Your old schoolfellow, beyond a doubt," I said, " lie is the son of General
Hilary of this place, but has not been in England for several yeare."
" So the dear old country gave him a rough reception to pay him out for his
neglect.    Odd is'nt it, that a rich man's son should be wandering about in that style 1"
THE ATTEMPT. 125
" I know nothing of the circumstances," I rejoined, rather glad we were coming
to the gate of Lawrence Lodge, where our conversation would have an end. Should
I ask him in ] My inner woman at once negatived the proposal, which was dictated
only by a general spirit of hospitality. " All in the wild March morning," I heard
Una's voice. She was walking round the garden waiting for me, for we were to pay
a visit together before lunch, and, after the manner of Bunyan's pilgrims, as she
walked on her way she sang. How I wished she had not been chanting " Si tu
savais " so near the gate. My companion knew her voice at once, I saw, and looked
most wistfully up the path to the house ; and just as I was hardening my heart to say
good morning, Una was beside us.
Charming she looked, with her little sealskin cap contrasting the bright hair
underneath it, and her cheeks freshened by the wind. Charming, and I was not
alone in my thought. Captain Maryon's eyes fastened upon her at once, with that
look of admiration which stamps a man's character so quickly. There was a warn¬
ing bale-fire in each of the " Corsair's " eyes as he looked at Una, but T forgot their
evil light in a sudden conviction that came over me, burned in upon my brain as
if by a lightning-flash. I had seen them before. Not in a bad dream, one of those
in which we are haunted by a face we hate with wicked eyes and cruel mouth, which
pursues and all but overtakes us in the land of visions.    No, as Heine says—
" Sie waxen dieselben Augen,
Die mir so elend gemacht."
They were the eyes that had once looked brightly, beguilingly, tenderly, into mine ;
then coldly and carelessly, till I saw them no more save in dreams, where they grew
out of the darkness night after night, gazing with their old dead dearness into mine;
till I prayed God in His mercy to take them away and let me rest. Why had they
come back now 1    Or were these ten years a dream, and this the waking reality 1
Every drop of blood in my body seemed to rush to my heart, and I felt cold and
sick in the morning sunshine. I held out my hand instinctively. " Good morning,"
I said, " we have an engagement, and must go. Come, Una." He thought me
abrupt no doubt, but I did not feel we were safe till I got into the house.
" What is the matter, Molly, darling ?" said Una. " You are as white as a
sheet, and shaking too.    Sit down, and I'll get you a glass of wine."
" I don't want it, child," I said. " We'll be off in a few minutes, I feel knocked
up, that's all."
" Last night has been too much for you,"  said Una.    "Why do I drag you
126 THE ATTEMPT.
about as if you were made of gutta-percha like me. I'll go by myself to the rectory,
poor old Pere Haslam will be glad to see me, and you shall sit with Lizzie this
afternoon. She was saying the other day she never got a crack with either of us
now, we were so taken up."
" Very well," said I, " mind Una, go across the fields to the rectory."
" Even so, most wise, there be thieves abroad, corsairs and the like. Lo, I will
speed across the fields more swiftly than the roe, and none shall behold me." And
so saying, and kissing me, thereby tipping her tiny head-gear still more defiantly
over her nose, off she went.
I watched her turn a corner with an uncomfortable feeling, and then went to
Lizzie's room.
But I must defer that afternoon's talk to another chapter, merely stating that
our recovered guest was driven off to the hall before Una's retui-n, after many
acknowledgements, and accompanied by the happy and triumphant Mrs Sandyside.
O.M.
Stt0cjisleb h^ Morbstofldlj's Sonnets on *' g^rsonal Calk."
" And thus from day to day my little boat
Rocks in its harbour, lodging peaceably."
Sweet is the placid murmur of the brook.
Meandering through yon valley's shady nook;
And sweet his thoughtful philosophic strains,
In Nature's poetry supreme who reigns;
But nobler is yon brooklet's later course.
When rocks and stones oppose its gathering force ;
And nobler is a Korner's battle lay.
High-sounding 'mid the clamour of the fray.
To glory pointing out by sword and pen the way.
THE ATTEMPT. 127
O, not for me the peace that knows no strife,
The gentle ripple of the poet's life,
The rest unsweetened by a long day's toil.
The stillness undisturbed by life's turmoil!
Be mine to ride upon the storm-tossed sea,
Face Nature in her untamed x'evelry,
And check the fevered current of the brain.
By some external impulse dulling pain,
To guide an energy no power could e'er restrain.
Sanct Rewle.
Umritsur.
" The Golden Temple of Umritsur is to be illuminated for the Duke of Edinburgh."
This was an announcement that made us decide on visiting the most important
Indian building in the Punjaub, said to be second only to the Taj. Accordingly, we
set out one morning, this time not by the much abused dale gharry, but by the
newly opened railway. Let not our readers however imagine, as we fondly did, that
ours are like the railways of their happier land. First there is often great confusion
caused by the difference between railway and cantonment time made to allow for thff
variation as the line goes eastward; then there are Baboos to give the tickets, who,
when a breathless passenger asks for his fare, take pencil and paper and begin to do
sums before his despairing eyes; porters there are none, but the native coolie, great
in his habitual laziness and dirt, has to be found, and, when found, paid for; neither
does luggage take care of itself in the miraculous way we once knew, it has to be
weighed, paid for, booked and ticketed, unless it can be smuggled into the carriage,
and after all these precautions the owners may be happy if it is neither stolen nor
burnt. Add to all this the pace, which is, including stoppages, sixteen miles an hour,
with engines too feeble to cope with a strong wind, and you have a faint idea of
railway travelling in the Punjaub. We were unfortunate, too, in the weather, for a
dust storm was in progress, than which nothing is more pre-eminently disagreeable—a
128 THE ATTEMPT.
gale, and the air the colour of pea-soup, the country dimly visible and yellow with
sand, everything gritty to the touch, and eyes and mouth full of dust—these are not
the elements of a day of pleasure. At one station we inquired how long we were to
stop ; five minutes, said the guard; but presently we heard him make some ominous
remark to another official about refreshments, and they and the engine driver
vanished and were seen no more for three-quarters of an hour, save when the
latter returned to abuse a luckless man, who, misunderstanding the machinery, was
carefully running ofi' the scarce and short supply of water. During this period
we waited with what patience we might, eating dust as before, and declaring
that no illumination could take place. Finally a train came in, and we moved on,
charitably hoping that it had caused the delay ; though we have heard that it is no
uncommon thing for passengers to be kept at a station until their estimable railway
attendants have dined in peace.
Arrived at XJmritsur, we found outbursts of loyalty in the shape of A.s,
V.s, and crowns in every direction, and we spent the early part of the afternoon
in listening to the arrangements hurriedly made for the Duke's reception,
which evidenced the liberal hospitality that seems to us to be the one good
point of Indian life. At about four we adjourned to the Town Hall (which was
decorated with Cashmere shawls), to see an address presented to His Royal Highness
on his arrival. In due time he appeared, and took his place on a platform, accom¬
panied by his own suite, and the principal gentlemen of the town. In the body of
the Hall was an assemblage of natives of the better class, clad in every variety of colour,
many of them in rich gold embroidered stuff's. After the address, which was in
Persian, had been taken out of a handsome casket, a most absurd incident occvirred.
It had not been intended that it should be read ; but a wish was expressed that the
formality should not be omitted, and it was therefore handed to a native, who began
it somewhat stammeringly ; just then anotlier, gorgeously apparelled, came into the
hall, and seeing what was going on, ran forward, snatched the address, and scornfully
pushing aside the first reader recommenced in sonorous tones, the string of titles we
had already heard. The Duke's gravity was sorely tried, but not even his sense of
the ludicrous put him at his ease, and we could not but remai-k that, considering the
experience he has had of such ceremonies, he has not the self-possession we should
expect to see in one Avho is "to the manner born."
After the reading of the address, he proceeded to examine shawls and other
native goods, and then saw from the verandah some wrestling for which the
Sikhs  consider themselves famous,  and some  very  feeble  attempts  at  tumbling
THE  ATTEMPT. 129
and rope dancing—amusements designed to wile away the time till it should
be dark enough for the illuminations. Here, too, were collected members
of the several religious sects of the Sikhs, men dressed mostly in yellow,
with strange ornaments of feathers and beads; our attention was specially
attracted by one of the few surviving " Jl^ahungs," or Immortals—fanatics who
swore to die for their faith, and were the forlorn-hope of Runjeet Singh's army
—he wore a dress of dark blue, and on his head was a high pointed turban,
covered with knife blades and chukkers, more of which he held in his hands. These
are steel quoits, which could be flung to great distances, and inflicted severe wounds.
We would have given much for a photograph of this old man, whose name was
changed, by the Avay, to Unhung by his conquerors. As soon as it grew dusk we
drove away to the Temple, going at a footpace through the city; the streets are very
narrow, but on this occasion wore an unwonted aspect of cleanliness. The little
shops are as usual all open in front, and were densely packed with natives crouching
row behind row, their brown skins and neutral tinted clothing, to use a mild term,
so much resembling the colour of the mud walls that at a little distance we seemed
to see only rows of white teeth and bright black eyes shining out from the dusky
mass. Every house was lighted with strings or network of tiny earthenware lamps
with cotton wicks—a simple but most effective mode of illuminating. The verandas
were all hung with white or coloured stuffs, and the whole effect as we wound along
was picturesque in the extreme. Passing behind an unfinished clock-tower, we canie
out on a platform, below which, in the centre of the sacred tank, shone the golden
temple. A marble pier, with open railings, runs across the water to the chief
entrance, and the design of the railing stood out in a fretwork of light; the temple
itself was lit up in colours attained by placing lamps behind glass bottles filled with
coloured water; every house in the vicinity was crowded with people and blazing
with light, while fireworks were let off^ plentifully from rafts on the water; " golden
rain" fell from the surrounding buildings into the tank, and numerous fire-balloons
floated slowly over our heads. All this, reflected in the water, made a picture only
attainable in the East, and duly appreciated by the visitors under their silver-poled
crimson awning. Alas, that such a fairy bit must be marred by the inevitable
vulgarity of John Bull! Right in the middle of the glimmering fretwork was a
transparency, doubtless thought very fine by the natives as a " Europe" decoration,
but also, to our sui-prise, approved by the gentlemen present, who did not seem to
think enormous white letters, on a red ground, out of keeping with the rest of the
scene.    After spending some time here, the Duke wound up the day with a dinner
130 THE ATTEMPT.
party and reception, and left XJmritsur early in the morning. Truly it is not only
the head that wears the crown that is uneasy, for His Koyal Highness' life
is one continued round of ceremony and gaiety; he cannot even travel in
peace, but must get out at small stations and bow to the local notabilities whose
names are mumbled over to him. We saw one such performance, and if it is
true that a reverence for royalty is deeply rooted in the British heart, it is no
less certain that the proofs thereof have a touch of snobbism about them. " Every¬
body" went to see the Duke, except the lady who did not go because she feared no
one would be there but the Miss Smiths. There was the gentleman there who pro¬
fessed to scorn such things, but whose fussy manner belied his words ; there was the
usual assemblages of ayahs and children, and the Smiths aforesaid, whose name
is legion, and whose conversation when the special train came in, was not to be
admired. Determined to be noticed, they nished to the carriages, and their extremely
loud remarks of " There he is !!"—" Why doesn't he come forward V—" Quite good
looking !"—" So like the Queen !"—must have been pleasant to the victim at whom
they were levelled. But the train moves on, and the British public having talked at
their guest, begin to talk of him. One is scandalised that he wore no gloves, another
that he was not in uniform, a third criticises his face, and a shy gentleman falls into
hopeless despair because he stood next the Misses Smith and feared the Prince might
think he belonged to them. Such an idea is sufEcient proof that little Pedlington
is great in its own estimation, whether it be in India or in England.
To return to TJmritsur. Next morning we went to see the Temple by daylight,
and found it well worth a journey. It stands, as we have said, in the centre of the
tank, and is aj^proached by a marble pier, the entrance to which is through a pair of
silver gates. Before descending into the sacred iuclosure the visitor has to take off
his boots and put on cloth slippers provided for the purpose, which we found a most
uncomfortable arrangement, as the whole pathway was being washed after the
night's illumination; however, we paddled along the pier, and did our best to
hear and understand our guide's rapid Hindustani in spite of the horrible din
of voices, and torn toms or native drums, in full swing within the building.
The walls of the temple are of marble inlaid in elaborate, designs, gods, devils,
and emblems of which the meaning was unknown to us—such as an apple with a
knife sticking in it. The dome and small minarets at the corners, and almost the
whole interior, are plated with gold, though here and there occur panels of silver,
glass, or inlaying of roughly cut precious stones. There is an entrance on each side,
so that the interior has somewhat the shape of a cross,  the central space being
THE ATTEMPT.
131
covered with a square silver awning, thickly sewn with jewels ; round and under
this the worshippers were sitting gabbling loudly, while opposite to them priests were
reading from books deposited on a sort of altar. Here we were presented with
lumps of candied sugar, and then ascended to a balcony which runs round the build¬
ing, both inside and outside, and from which we could see the whole square, and
observe beyond the natives bathing in the holy, but green and hlthy, water, the high
houses which are used as free quarters by the various Punjaub Rajahs, our guide
carefully explaining that they paid no rupees for living there. "VVe were also shewn
different portions of gilding or marble given by each Rajah, gifts to the temple being a
highroad to Sikh favour. Not long since one of them bestowed a large donation on it,
but on the rupees being counted a considerable amount was missing, so that not even
religious veneration will control the propensity of the natives to theft. Passing back by
the pier, we entered another building also domed with gold, where the book, " our
Bible " as the guide called it, is kept when service is not going on. In a sort of bay
window is a golden cage, and inside this the book on rich silks, priests keeping watch
beside it. At night it is removed into a small padlocked apartment, and deposited
on a sort of bed, round and on which were lying cowries and strings of flowers, the offer¬
ings we supposed of the poorer classes. The attendants presented us with some of the
flowers and seemed much pleased at hearing us remark that they were sacred, whispering
to each other, " She is a wise lady, and knows these things well," and salaming with
increased energy. In this house there is also a collection of Sikh weapons, some of
them the property of Rimjeet Singh. Much of the ornamentations reminded us of
what is seen in the Alhambra Court of the Crystal Palace; and on one ceiling of
which we caught a glimpse through an open window, we saw an arabesque in red
and gold, certainly familiar to us in Moorish work.
We drove back at a walk through the city, preceded by a mounted " sowar"
and a " chuprassie" on foot, to clear the way; and as we looked at the
crowd we again noted here and there a stately grey-bearded Sikh, one of
the last warriors of the old ai-my. Altogether Umritsur is the only place
that ha.s yet evoked any sympathy in wa, even its name is suggestive of
by-gone glory, meaning " Fountain of Immortality," and we cannot but admire
the men, who fought so well, and threw down their arms at last, rather than
let our shells touch their beloved temple, only bargaining that their conquerors
should respect its precincts,—an agreement that has been religiously observed. From
the city, we drove to the fort, which was also built by the Sikhs, and is, engineers
say, remarkably well constructed.     Except in a military point of view there is
132 THE ATTEMPT.
nothing noticeable in it, save that there are three mortars carefully turned upon the
Temple, a fact of which the natives are well aware. It is in every way satisfactory
to have such a hold over them, and any turbulence on their part could, if need were,
be punished by the utter destruction of those burnished walls that now glitter so
brilliantly in the broad sunlight.
So terminated our visit to Umritsur, and as we returned home, we only regretted
that we were unable to learn more of the history of this, the one beautiful sight we
have seen in the Punjaub. Elsie Strivelyne.
^ 0 ttl^n,
By M. De Lamartine.
Translated into English Verse by H. G. Evans & T. W. Swift.   Liverpool 1868.
By what is the name of De Lamartine best known in this country 1 Is it as a poet,
or as a historian; as a statesman, or as a demagogue 1 In all these capacities he shone
with no common light in France; and if oblivion fell upon him before the grave,
it is but the common lot of many whose career has been as distinguished, whose
virtues as noble, and whose talents as great, as those of the celebrated author of
" Jocelyn." The desire of perpetuity is strong in the heart of man. If we have to
part with the dear possession of life (and, in spite of its sins and sorrows, its dis¬
appointments and its failures, with what desperate tenacity we still cling to it), we
desire that at least our memory may remain green in tlie hearts of our fellow-men; our
consolation is that, though we depart ourselves, our name may live in the annals of
the world we leave behind. And not even the glorious promises of religion can
detach us wholly from the scene where lie all our hoj^es, our fears, our joys, and
our sorrows. But even in this, is man doomed to disappointment. Time, who,
with his remorseless scythe, cuts down with unerring certainty the ever-recurring
life, holds also in his hand his winnowing fan, and when with this he has sifted
the deeds of man, little is left to tell what the busy life has been. The name of
De Lamartiue offers no exception to this painful truth.    Even when in life he passed
THE ATTEMPT. 133
out from the active knowledge of men ; but as a poet, a philosopher, and a historian,
he will live as long as a taste for pure literature endures.
Although the best parts of " Jocelyn " have now appeared for some time in an
English dress, it is but little known out of the author's country. Sweet and melodious
as is the measure, it does not well bear translation. Upon its first appearance, now
more than thirty years ago, it at once attained immense popularity. It is a romance
in verse,—the life of a priest, who, in the first blush of manhood, sets out upon the
journey of life, intent upon self-sacrifice. It is the life of one who takes up the
burning cross with eager, yet ignorant hands ; whose impassioned and tender spirit
does not yet comprehend what deeps it has to pass through, before the agonised
soul may find rest at the feet of its Master. This is a subject with which such a nature
as Lamartine's was well able to cope. Himself the apostle of love and the propounder
of devotion, such a conception as that of Jocelyn was sure to come nobly from his
hands. Jocelyn's first act, upon arriving at manhood, is one of the purest self-
devotion. With no particular vocation for the life of a priest, rather, indeed, gifted
with those strong aflPections which, if not our deepest blessing, may turn to be our
heaviest scourge, he, nevertheless, resolves upon entering the cloister, that his
only sister may enjoy the happiness he denies to himself. With a heart burning
with the deepest emotions and torn inwardly with grief, while all sleep around
him, he leaves his home and all that had hitherto made his happiness.    He says,—
" Only to leave more peace behind I roam,
And part from those fond hearts and that dear home ;
May love and peace remain to fill my place,
And may my sacrifice at least bring grace !
Guard in my atead the loved ones' lone abode,
Bless night and day their life's unruffled road.
Be Thou Thyself, 0 Heavenly Father, ITiou !
My mother's son, my sister's brother now !
Crown with Thy gifts, and lead them, Lord, I pray,
Through lengthened life, along a peaceful way;
TUl up to Thee to render thanks we go,
All gathered to Thy heart from here below.
I spoke ; and 'neath the woods that crowned the height,
Tlie home-view sank for ever from my sight."
Jocelyu is now shut up within the stone walls of his cloister, preparing to take
the vows that are to separate him for ever from the life of the affections. Henceforth
134 THE ATTEMPT.
as concerns himself, all is to be dead within; he is to live only that his life may
bless the life of others.    Six years pass away ; he speaks,—
" The stones bear count how oft I softly trod.
The path that led me to the House of God,
My meditations, prayers, and thoughts profound
Have dulled my senses in the chUling round.
These heavy walls, these naves, these aisles' long sweep.
Have on my brow their sUent peace graved deep.
TUl now, e'en in my dreams have scarce found place.
Memories that sting, regrets, or fancied face.
Of freedom, love, or nature's laughing mood ;
All with the Lord's own peace is deep imbued.
How blessed it is, in God one's heart to hold.
Like sweet perfume fast kept in case of gold.
To have one's aim so high, one's coiu'se arranged,
Fit years to live, with the same thought unchanged.
Unstained is kept the record of my days.
Not mine the praise.    God, whom I serve always,
May my whole life be thus a stainless page.
My heart for ever free from passing rage."
So Jocelyn speaks and believes; but this is not to be. At present it is but the
lull before the storm : soon he will be plunged into the fiery furnace, only to emerge
therefrom seared and scorched; death more welcome than life; no hope but in
Him who trod the winepress before him.
The revolution of 1791 breaks oivt, and Joceljm, with all others of his calling
who have escaped the bloody massacre, seeks refuge in the rocky defiles of his country,
and in their woody recesses hides his doomed head from his ruthless pursuei's. A
kind shepherd sujjplies him in secret with a scant subsistence, which he ekes out
with snared game and netted fish. In these solitudes of nature, Jocelyn again finds
a passive content and peace; although he recognizes, alas, too keenly, that man was
not made to live alone.
" And spite this sky and sweet spot free from strife,
This lone existence is but death in life ;
The joy is quenched that lit the path I trod,
O ! who can fill thee, SoUtude, but God ?"
Tired of his solitude, he again dares the dangerous path, crosses the frail
bridge that divides his hidden retreat from  the world beneath, and gazes  upon
THE ATTEMPT. 135
the scene spread out before him,—a scene of lowing herds, of browsing sheep,
of shepherd and shepherdess, whose happy companionship does but aggravate
the feeling of his own loneliness. He returns to his solitudes, resolved
never again to feed his heart with sights so desti-uctive to his serenity of
sj^irit. He is not, however, to be left long to his loneliness. One day as he is
hanging idly over the dreadful ravine thab separates him from the world beyond,
watching the eddying waters, and his thoughts rising from nature to nature's God, he
suddenly hears the report of a gun, and marks with overpowering interest the
flight of a man and young boy before the pursuing soldiers. To help their flight he
in a moment determines upon rushing to their aid. Crossing the dangerous bridge,
with a loud shout he arrests the fugitives, who, with a dreadful terror, are surveying
the chasm at their feet, equally appalled at the death before and the death behind.
The elder man hands over the boy to Jocelyn, and prepares himself to arrest the
steps of the soldiers. He points his gun ; and, as they reach the chasm, ready to
spring the bridge, they fall lifeless and the reverberating echoes of their fall
down the mighty rocks, fill the ears of the saved. But, alas, their guns also have done
theii- work as surely, and the elder man falls heavily into the arms of Jocelyn, who
scarce has time to drag him over to the slopes beyond. Jocelyn and the boy convey
the wounded man to their safe retreat. The night passes away, the dying father
confides the poor child to Jocelyn's care, and dies as the morn comes in. For a time
all goes well. The boy learns to love Jocelyu as he had hitherto loved his father,
and Jocelyn finds in his sweet companionship such happiness as he had never hoped
to feel in this world again.
But this delicious cup of health, of strength, of sweetest friendship, is soon to be
dashed from his lips. He has wondered many times in his secret heart at the boy's
tenderness, loveliness, and angelic nature; but his heart is satisfied, and with a
grateful spirit, he drinks to the full the deep draught of satisfied feeling. Time
passes on, and their Eden is complete.    Jocelyn speaks—
" When I return from distant chase, out-worn
At eve, with wounded feet and fingers torn,
With elk or chamois o'er my shoulders thrown ;
And see from some high peak, remote and lone,
My sweet blue lake, that lies shut in so calm,
Like pure, bright raindrops held in infant's palm ;
And catch deep down the grotto's smoky shade
The flicker of the fire by Lawrence made ;
13G THE ATTEMPT.
I muse a moment; ' there below,' I cry,
' By yon bright point that lynx eyes scarce could spy,
I have a second self, my better part,
A friend to wait my step with beating heart,
An eye that looks for me, a smile of love,
A soul left in my charge by heaven above ;
My all !—and whose sole world I comprehend.
His country, parent, sister, brother, friend ;
Whose pulse-throbs count my steps ; who, when I stray,
Cares for one instant only of the day.
That instant when he sees me from below.
And runs, his arms around my neck to throw.
And, like young roebuck bounding on before.
Draws me across the threshold of our door.
Soon over mine the feeble arm is thrown,
And each the day's events and toils makes known.
Our home we enter, and he hastes to say
How many young our doves have hatched this day,
What store of milk from oiu: black goat he gets.
How many small fish may have filled his nets ;
Then shows what leaves and mosses he has got.
With which, ere winter comes, to line the grot;
Fruit from the bushes that these wUds adorn,
His fingers bleeding from the piercing thorn;
And all our gentle, tame companions here.
The forest birds, the elk, the mountain deer,
Whether by habit it may be, or choice,
Gather about him when they catch his voice.' "
Alas, that such a sweet and happy life should end in misery unmentionable. But
so it is, and so our readers will find for themselves, when they peruse this beautiful
poem from which we have chosen our quotations,—not with the view of pointing out
its chief beauties, but with the intent of carrying on the story as we proceeded. Its
excellences our readers will find pleasure in searching out for themselves. Lamartine
is equally at home in describing all the varied scenes of nature, or in portraying
the various emotions and passions of the human heart. With his countrymen,
this poem placed him at once in the foremost rank of poets. With us it is not much
known ; it docs not bear well its English dress, the delicacy and melody of the versifica¬
tion are much impaired by the translation. Lamartine's poetry does not translate
easily or well; he is much better known by his travels in the east—a splentlid series
of pictui'es, of reflections, of philosophical and devotional meditations ;  the outpour-
THE   ATTEMPT. 13
ings of a poet's heart overflowing with love to God and to man.   How paradoxical it
now appears that the same hand that penned these travels, should have also written
the famous history of the Girondists, in which Lamartine appears as the apologist
and defender of the monster Robespierre, and of his bloody faction.    Surely never was
paradox more startling than this ; and there is little doubt that the advocacy of such
a cause, by such a man as Lamartine, did no small mischief to his country.      It
inaugurated the revolution of 1847, into the struggles of which Lamartine threw
himself.    He it was that decided upon the rejection of the Orleans dynasty, and by so
doing, and by uniting his name to the violent demagogues of the day, plunged France
into a scene of confusion and anarchy, from which it has^taken years of wisdom in her
rulers to recover.      In the sanguinary conflict that ensued, and for four days raged
in the blood-stained streets of Paris, Lamartine disappeared, his name was heard
no   more;   and  never   again   did   he   emerge   from   the  obscurity   in   which he
shrouded himself.    It has, however, to be said for him, that when he saw the way
in which his colleagues were to go, he withstood their violence and disorder with a
heroism as great as ever animated his forefathers, he vindicated nobly the blood
from  which  he   sprang; but  the  tide  was too   strong  for  him,—he   was  over¬
powered and disabled.   He lived long enough to discover that what may be quite true
and fine in theory, is not always what can be put into practice.   A poet is not quite
the man able to  rule and intimidate an insensate mob,      Lamartine oj^ened the
flood-gates of revolution, when he simply intended to open the door to freedom.
The lesson which his life teaches us is, that groat men often make great failures both
of their own lives and of that of others.    Let us hope that a world may open to all
true spirits, where failure and disappointment are things unknown.
M. E. T.
Night is falling, grey and still;
Quiet lies the darkening earth ;
Hushed, all sounds of noisy mirth.
From the folds upon the hill
Float the sheep bells' vespers faint,
138 THE ATTEMPT.
Gently, subtly as a dream
Doth the soul with music fill.
Through the cloudy aether gleam
Bright small stars, that pulse and thi-ill,
As, before some cloistered saint,
On the jewelled shrine, the lamps
Glow and tremble, while around
All is void of light or sound;
Or when, through midnight's ghostly damps.
Red watch-fires dot the sleeping camps.
In the churchyard, where the land
Heaves itself in mossy swellings
Over the last lowly dwellings
Of the village dead, a band
Of lads and maidens reverent stand.
With clasped hands, and lifted eyes;
And from their lips, the simple words
Of evening prayer and praise arise
Up to the starred and cloud-flecked skies.
And, as they sing, the sleepy birds
Hear the soft notes, and twitter low
Their faint response, and sweet "Amen!"
Then settle in their nests again.
And to their leafy slumbers go.
The tree-tops, as the breezes pass,
Their hymnody of nightly praise
Whisper in stately tones—the grass
That i-ustles down among the graves.
And in the chancel-shadow waves.
Unto those manifold-tongued lays
Joins its dim voice, and sways the while.
As in some great cathedral aisle
The choir-boys bend, when in the Creed
The priest the Holy Name may read.
THE ATTEMPT. 139
The children cease—theii- hymn is sung;
A nd to their homes they quiet wend ;
Yet still the tones of praise ascend
From Nature's never-silent tongue—
The notes the night-breeze bears along
In rolling, floating harmony,—
The all-pervading melody
Of grateful Earth's sweet Evensong.
Mas Alta.
>l-€gj*«=-s-
" % §au in llje |ona."
A VOYAGE in this steamer, whose praises we had often heard, had often been the sub¬
ject of our hopes and aspii-ations ; and at last, while visiting some friends on the
west coast, we found ourselves in a position to make out our long-looked-for excur¬
sion. It was agreed that we should embark in the " lona " at Greenock, and go on
as far as Ardrishaig, the turning-point in the "loiia's" course, and then coming back
with her to Greenock, arrive there in time to get home by the last boat at night. It
is of no importance to my narrative that my readers should know precisely where
" home " was situated. On this point, therefore, I shall take the liberty of leaving
them in the dark; and shall merely assure them that " home " was sufficiently
distant from Greenock to make the hour of starting in the morning a very unearthly
one. Imagine, then, our cheerful position, when, at the aforesaid unearthly hour (it
was so early, that I never precisely ascertained what it was), we were roused from
refreshing slumbers and pleasant dreams, by the news that it was quite time to get
up, and that ifc was a pouring wet morning !
A council of war (in extreme deshabille) met at the dining-room window, which
commanded a sea-view, to consider our position and our prospects. Our party con¬
sisted of three ladies. The eldest, who is remarkable under all circumstances for
unfailing cheerfulness and a determination to make the best of everything,—-gave Ik^i-
opinion first, and at once declared in favour of the excursion ; being quite sure, slie
said, that the day would turn out better than it promised. The second lady,—whose
leading characteristic is obstinacy of the most impenetrable type,—remarked that she
140 THE ATTEMPT.
had no confidence whatever in the weather, but that having made up her mind to go
to Ardrishaig, to Ardrishaig she intended to go. The third—who is seldom (if evei-)
able to make up her mind upon any subject at all,—-observed that she felt herself to
be in the hands of two energetic and self-willed females, and saw nothing for it but
to submit; she also pathetically confessed that, having come through the ordeal of
rising at that hour in the morning, fate had no further terrors for her, and she
agreed to go.
So, after a hasty toilet, and a still more hasty breakfast, we started. Tlie
aspect of affairs out of doors was not calculated to raise our spirits. Though
it was the middle of June, the morning was cold and raw, a strong east wind
was blowing, and a thick, heavy, persistent rain was pouring down on our
devoted heads. We had an all but inexhaustible fund of faith and hope within
us; we had all excellent constitutions and high spirits, not to mention an enormous
supply of shawls, waterproofs, and umbrellas; but truly we required all these
advantages to enable us to adhere to our purj»ose, as we trudged along the muddy
road to the pier, while the mist came down lower and lower on the hills, while
the sulky Scotch rain poured heavily, obstinately down, and while every man we
met greeted us with the one invariable salutation,—" A coorse mornin', leddies!"
The friends whom we met on board the steamer which conveyed us to Greenock made
no attempt to conceal their astonishment and horror at what they politely termed our
" madness." " My dear Mrs Archer ! Ardrishaig, of all places ! To-day, of all days!
You'll have no view.—You'll be drenched to the skin—You'll catch your death of
cold—You'll lose the last boat at night—You'll get sea-sick going round Ardlamont
Point," &c. &c. The only effect, however, that all these well-meant remon¬
strances had upon us, was that we felt the affair had now become personal—that our
honour was concerned in making this excursion a successful and enjoyable one, and
that we landed at Greenock determined to be neither cold, nor wet, nor hungry,
nor tired, nor sea-sick, nor ennuyees, but to enjoy ourselves to the full extent of our
capabilities ; and I may just as well mention here that we succeeded. The day was
never fine, but it was for the most part fair, driving showeis and gleams of sunshine
succeeding each other at intervals, which we all agreed was infinitely preferable to an
entirely fine day, inasmuch as the " light and shade" effectswere brought out so much
more strongly, while the mists rolling up from the hill-sides greatly increased the
picturesque aspect of the distant mountains. Scenery is at all times difficult
to describe; and I think I shall on this occasion get rid of t'le diiUcidty by
passing it   over altogether.       The faithful memories of those of my readers who
THE ATTEMPT. 141
have made this voyage, and the lively imaginations of those who have not, will easily
bring before their minds the lochs and mountains, glens and bays, past which the
'' lona" holds her course, and whose beauty must be seen to be appreciated, for the
most glowing words seem cold and poor beside the memory of their loveliness and
grandeur. I shall therefore urge those of my readers who have a taste for the
picturesque to make the voyage for themselves; and direct the attention of the
accurate and statistical, who would like to know the names and pojjulations of the
ports at which we stopped, the height of the mountains we passed, &c., (fee, to " Black's
Picturesque Guide to Scotland," a work which I can confidently recommend; and
I shall confine my remarks chiefly to the deck of the " lona," and the various
occurrences which came under our observation there.
Behold us, then, seated in what we agi-eed, after much consultation, to be
the most comfortable situation on board—namely, close under the lee of the
funnel! which kept us thoroughly warm, and sheltered us from the wind, while we
were in a better position for enjoying the view than we could have obtained in the
cabin. The weather was such as to shut out all considerations of personal
aiipearances; so, adopting for our motto " ease before elegance," we trans¬
formed ourselves into moving mountains of shawls and waterproofs, and then
each selecting a comfortable chair, we encamped close together under the funnel,
and began to enjoy ourselves. We had not been there many moments, when
we bad a melancholy and instructive example of the selfishness of human nature.
An elderly gentleman, having surveyed us for some moments with a very envious
expression of countenance, began to come nearer and nearer to us, in a slow and
cautious manner, till at last when close behind my sister's chair, he addressed her
abruptly as follows—" Excuse me, miss, but your shawl's singeing." We en¬
deavoured to discover some slight smell of singeing; but in vain, and my sister
replied—" Indeed, sir, I think you're mistaken." Our friend withdrew, shaking
his head; but not two minutes afterwards, when he thought we were occupied in
conversation, he approached stealthily, carrying a chair, which he inserted just behind
my sister's position, and there ensconced himself in the very situation he had con¬
demned as dangerous, and from which he had endeavoured to oust us by stratagem !
Soon after this, immense excitement was caused by an individual at our end of the
vessel, who had utterly and totally foi'gotten the place where he had embarked in
the " lona," and had consequently got into difficulties about his fare. He was an
Aberdonian, from his accent, but that didn't help the investigation much. A little
crowd soon collected round liim, in the midst of which he sat like a man in a trance,
1 12 THE ATTEMPT.
offering a small premium to any one who should suggest the missing name to him.
The good-natured mate of the vessel stood patting him on the back, and begging him
to collect his thoughts; but beyond a settled conviction that the place he came from
was not Greenock, he could be sure of nothing. " 'Twasna Greenock; 'twas the
tither place. Eh, sirs ! can ye no tell me the name o' yon ither place?" I really
forget what they did with him in the end; I know he submitted without a murmur,
but continued to shake his head at intervals, and say softly to himself,—" Preserve
me ! what is the name o' yon ither place?" One circumstance which forced itself
iipon our attention very early in the day, was the extraordinary number of newly-
married couples among our fellow passengers. It was impossible to mistake them,
or to help observing them ; for though they pi-esented every variety of age and cir¬
cumstances, there was about them all aje we sais quoi which at once betrayed them.
Their conduct, too, was peculiar in the extreme ; indeed, I would go farther, and
say inexcusable ; but, under the circumstances, of course, the greatest allowance must
be made for them, and though " I could a tale unfold" which would make Mrs
Grundy speechless with horror, I prefer to drav/ a veil over the eccentricities of
these young people, and content myself with offering, as the results of that day's
observation, one piece of advice "to persons about to marry." The advice is—
Don't walk up and down the deck of a steamer under an alpaca umbrella, in the
fond delusion that you are screened from the intrusive gaze of an unsympathising
public 3 for alpaca is, alas, most treacherously transparent, and you remain distinctly
visible to all your fellow-passengers.    Further comment is, I am sure, siijierfluous.
Another very amusing element of the "lona's" passenger freight was a lai'ge
boarding-school, bent on a botanical excursion. We put them ashore at Tigh-ua-
bruaich, and picked them up again as we passed that point on our homeward roiite ;
but we had the pleasure of their company for a considerable time, during which they
afibrded us infinite amusement. They were chaperoned, of course, by the school¬
mistress,—a nervous unhappy-looking lady, with blue spectacles and queer littlebunchy
curls, and were also accompanied by a stout elderly gentleman, the botanical master,
I supi^ose, who acted as their " guide, philosopher, and friend," cai-ried all their
tickets, and marshalled them with his umbrella in a veiy authoritative and imposing
manner. A hard task he had, poor man; for of all the riotous and unruly assemblages
I ever saw or heard of, that boarding-school was the worst. Considering their
situation, with the abundant provocation it afforded to mirth and miscliief,^con-
sidering also how impossible it was for their blue-spectacled commander-in-chief and
her stout aide-de-camj) to keep them all under surveillance at the same time, one could
THE ATTEMPT. 143
have excused a good deal of insubordination; but words are poor to express the
outrageous state of anarchy which prevailed among these young ladies during the
whole time they remained on board the " lona,"    They whispered, they giggled,
they shrieked, they pointed at the other passengers, they upset each other's camp-
stools, they chased each other about the deck, and came into violent and disastrous
collision with unoffending  strangers; they tumbled down the cabin stairs,  they
quarrelled and pinched each other's arms, they peered under strangers' umbrellas,
and listened undisguisedly to  strangers' conversations,—in short, they conducted
themselves more like a horde of savages than a party of civilized young ladies,
and drove their miserable instinictress (after  a gallant  struggle to enforce some
degree of order), to take refuge in the cabin, and a flood of tears.    I should give
a very imperfect account of these damsels, did I omit mentioning the fearful state of
disorder into which their garments, and more especially their head-gear, were reduced
during the voyage.   The weather being very boisterous, was not favourable to tidiness ;
and I despair of conveying the slightest idea of the ruffled and rumpled, tattered
and weatherbeaten appearance presented by the entire boarding-school.    That por¬
tion of the deck where they had their rendezvous, was positively strewn with hairpins,
ends of ribbons, fragments of veils, (kc, &c., while every fresh gust of wind produced
a more deplorable phase of disorder among their ranks.     This state of things had
reached its climax when we took them on board again at Tigh-na-bruaich, in the last
stage of dishevellment, on our homeward way; by which time they conveyed to
one's mind   the compound idea of a savage   and   a scarecrow.        A   very senti¬
mental lady, with limp curls and no crinoline, professed herself quite charmed,
with what she was pleased to term the delightful naivete and girlish freshness of the
boarding-school misses ; and declared that they reminded her of the Abbess of St
Hilda and her nuns, on board the vessel bound for Lindisfarne, in Marmion.
One party of English tourists afforded us much amusement—it consisted of a
pati-iarchal-looking gentleman, his wife, a mild-featured old lady, much afflicted by
the boisterous weather; and his daughter, an elderly young lady of rather boisteroiis
manners. The old gentleman's habitual tone in conversation was of the loudest
and fiercest description ; and we noticed many people start and look round after one
of his emphatic remarks, evidently thinking that he was violently enraged with his
wife and daughter, while in reality he was addressing them in the most affectionate
terms. Affectionate epithets, indeed, were most profusely scattered through his
conversation ; he rarely made any observation to his companions, without prefacing
it by " my darling !" or "my love !"  at the top of his voice, and in a tone of the
144 THE ATTEMPT.
utmost ferocity. They were going to Oban, or, as they called it, 0-bann; and I am
sure they might consider themselves fortunate if one-tenth of their baggage ever
arrived there, for they were laden like pack-horses, with impedimenta of every
description. The daughter, not content with heaping all her own shai'e of the
burden upon her father (whom she persisted in addressing as " pa "), finally estab¬
lished herself upon his knee, in a manner no doubt intended to be charmingly naive,
girlish, and afiectionate, but which, considering that the young lady was far from
sylph-like, that the father was seated on a very unsteady camp-stool, that the vessel
was pitching a little, and that a very strong wind was blowing, must have been
embarrassing, and certainly was the reverse of graceful.
There was a very magnificent man on board, got up in imitation of the
popular idea of Roderick Dim, but whose accent and general behaviour, com¬
bined with his evident feeling of discomfort in his Highland attire, unmis-
takeably revealed the Sassenach, if not the Cockney. He was, however,
regarded with great admiration by his Southron fellow-passengers, and I have
no doubt many of them looked upon him as the embodiment and representa¬
tive of Eob Roy M'Gregor or Vich Ian Vohr. He was much disconceiied, upon
our arrival at Ardrishaig, by the appearance of a genuine Highland chieftain,
beside whom he showed to very poor advantage, and who bestowed upon the
unfortunate pseudo-Celt a glance of most withering contempt.
Our homeward voyage was not in any way remarkable, save as regards the fresli
eccentricities developed by the tourists who had come on board at Ardrishaig, and
which supplied us with ample amusement the whole way back to Greenock. We
still retained our place beside the funnel, in spite of the remonstrances of a lady
who declared that spine complaint would be the inevitable consequence ; and I am
glad to be able to assure her, " if this should meet her eye," that her prediction is
as yet unverified. It was with sincere regret that we bade adieu to the " lona " at
Greenock, and took up our station on the pier to wait for the evening boat which
was to take us home ; and when at last safely arrived at our " cottage by the sea,"
talking over our excursion beside a blazing fire, we all agreed that, for the artist or
the author, the student of human nature or the connoisseur of human eccentricities,
for those who admire nature in her most varied aspects, and those who merely
desire to enjoy themselves and have something to laugh at, there can be no better
way of gratifying their tastes than " A Day in the lona."
Dido.
THE   ATTEMPT.
145
Win n  Jf^rgttSfln.
Chapter VI.
" I loved you, and my love had no return,
And therefore my true love has been my death."—Tennyson.
Behold me in Lizzie's room, somewhat later in the day, with my head on my old
nurse's knee. Her long service had made her more like a friend than a servant;
and to me it was a great comfort, when suffering from a bad headache, to let down
my hair, which was heavy, and increased the pain when fastened up, and listen to
her quaint racy talk, in the first voice I had grown used to in my childhood.
" Miss Mary," quoth she, as she smoothed down my hair, " ye're unco like your
mother the night."
" Like my mother, Lizzie," I replied, " every one says I am the image of papa.
I can see it myself."
" Maybe, Miss Mary; but ye'll no deny that I that was her foster-sister, and
kent her frae a bairn, should ken whether her bairn be like her or no. It's no ilka
day ye're like her either, Miss Mary; it's times like this, when ye're in pain, and
your eyes look heavy and dark, that I could maist think it was my Miss Mary
come back again. Weel I wot she's better where she is, and where I hope to be or
long. The Word says there's nae death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall
there be ony mair pain." I felt a hot drop trickling down my cheek as she spoke.
This mother, who was to me but a vision, so faintly remembered, so dimly descried,
had she too suffered as I suffered now 1    I could not forbear a question.
"Why do I only remind you of my mother at such times as this, Lizzie 1" I
said.    " Was mamma sad?    Why did she suffer? what did she want?"
" Aweel, my dear, she wanted what many a woman wants a' her life, and lives
her threescore and ten years without, but she couldna, and so she died."
" Tell me, Lizzie," I still pled, " I want to know about her, my own mother.
You know best about her, you loved her more than anybody, except papa, I suppose."
" I'll tell ye, Miss Mary," said Lizzie, after a pause, "be it for harm or for gude.
It canna do ony harm noo, and ye'll promise me no to tell to any one what none
knows but yoursel' and me."
Of course I promised, and what is, perhaps, more uncommon, I kept my promise,
too; but you, O reader, shall be let into our confidence.
o
146 THE ATTEMPT.
''I maun go back many a year, Miss Mary," Lizzie began; "back to the place where
I was reared, and where they made me servant to my dear mistress, your mother that's
gone. I kenna what ails the lassies noo; they've nae suner got ae place than they're
wild for anither, where there's mair men, or less wark, or better air, as they say, the
giddy gomerals. I was a proud lass when they tauld me Miss Mary Ferguson wanted
me for her maid. Ye ken she was your father's cousin. Miss Mary, thoiigh no his
first cousin. And many's the time we had waded about the shore, and fished frae
the rocks, and hunted for brambles thegither. My mother was her nurse, and she
and I were nigh the same age ; and she's often tauld me that in auld times foster-
brothers and sisters were ilk ither's best friends.    * We suld aye be friends,' she said.
'"I have no sister, and you have none, Lizzie M'Pherson ; but when I grow up,
you shall be my bower maiden, like fair Annette's, you mind, Lizzie.
" Come to my bower, my bower-maidens,
And dress to me my hair.
Where'er ye laid a plait before,
See ye lay nine times mair."
Your hair and mine look well together, Lizzie.' And then she wad tak a lang
lock of my hair, that was lint-white then. Miss Mary, and glinted in the sun, and
twist it wi' her ain, where the shadows aye lay deep and dark like the shadows in
the pools at Hartly Linn, where she and I put rowans in our hair, and keeked in
to see how bonnie they looked, langsyne. We were sae much thegither even when
we were aulder, that the folks about Hartness used to ca' us Bessie Bell and Mary
Gray. The auld laird, that's your mother's uncle, ye ken. Miss Mary, was gey and
angry ance when he heard our names joined thegither like that, and said his niece
had lowered hersel' till ilka lass about the town might ca' her neebor.
" But I trow your mother cam round him at last, and gat me for her maid when
we were baith aughteen. Weel I mind the day when I gaed up to Hartness Holmes,
and my Miss Mary showed me her bonnie room, wi' her father's sword ower the
mantel. He was killed, ye ken. Miss Mary, in India, when she was a year axild, and
your grandmother followed him in a month. Her picture was there too, sweet and
fair and bonnie, bvit no like my Miss Maiy except the een.
" And there I lived. Miss Mary, till the Holmes was anither hame to me. There
I was the day they telt me that Rob Andrews' boat had gone down ae nicht like
the last ane, and a' on board perished. I didua greet, Miss Mary, for I couldna
think it was true, or that my Rob could be cauld and stark at the bottom o' the
Firth, and me sitting in your mother's room wi' my hands afore me.
THE ATTEMPT. 147
"Aye, I didna think ance that I suld be ca'd Lizzie M'Pherson till I deed; but noo
the years are bringing us nearer and nearer, Miss Mary, your mother and you, and
E,ob and me. Whiles I wonder if the sea of glass will ever be like the Firth on a
sunny morning, wi' your mother sitting gathering shells, and the clear water
wimpling to the shore, and Rob's boat, wi' the sunshine on the sails, when I strained
my een to see him as it cam' in. Onyway, I had done wi' thinking of marriage
frae that day, and I set my heart on my young mistress. And at last. Miss Mary,
when I had been twa years at the Holmes, and the a\ild lady was dead, and Miss
Mary keeping house for her uncle, I heard frae the servants, and then frae your
mother hersel', that her cousin James was coming hame frae India, and to stay at
the Holmes. I dinna ken how it was, but even then I felt as if his coming was
something by ordinar'. Your mother was unco quiet and still as she grew iip; but
I could see, that kent her, that this visit pleased and excited her. Ye see she had
lived a retired life, and never seen mony people, and she had heard about her
cousLQ frae the time she was a bairn.
" He was left an orphan like hersel', a few years afore she was born, but his father
left money eneucli to set him up and educate him ; and ance he was started in the
world he was sure to get on. And he had a taste for India, and for being a doctor ;
sae, though Hartness had a livin' and a kirk ready for him, he wadna tak it, but he
took his degree, I think they ca' it, and to India he went. And noo he was comin'
liame, and the auld laird was his next of kin, and sae he was to mak his hame at
the Holmes. Servants hae their clashes and clavers, ye ken. Miss Mary, and a
wlieen o' them wad hae it that he was comin' hame for his cousin; naething wad
serve them but that Hartness had planned it a' to hae them twa settled thegither
or he died. I winna say he had, and I winna say he hadna, but I was in a bleeze
to hear them talk as if my mistress was to be handed frae ane to anither, ohn' her
ain word or wish in the matter. Onyway he cam'; and if Hartness had ony
thoughts o' settlin' his niece on his cousin, it settled itsel'.
" The master's weel-faured yet. Miss Mary, but he was braw and bonnie when ho
was aucht-and-twenty, and cam' to Hartness."
" Tell me what he was like, Lizzie," said I eagerly.
" Aweel, ye ken ye're like him. Miss Mary, only he was tall, and broad in the
shouthers, and his hair was light brown and curly, no half sae dark as yours, and
his een were like a gled's, as they are yet. And when there are three in a house
thegither, and ane o' them's ower aiild to care for oiiything but a bien corner o' the
fireside and his paper and his pipe, the ithertwa '11 help ilk ither to pass the time, and
148 THE ATTEMPT.
maybe lose their hearts afore they ken what they're doing. And I needna tell ye
how the days passed, in the linn and in the woods, and in the gardens, till naebody
but mysel' but thought and said in themselves it might be that it was a match, and
Hartness's plan wad answer weel after a'.
" But I didna think sae, Miss Mary. Your mother looked young for her age ;
she had seen naething o' the warld, as folks say, and her cousin was a man while she
was still a bairn ; and noo and then it cam ower my mind that she was giving a' she
had, and getting naething but kindness and care instead.
" Weel, I had maist rather we had baith been drooned in the linn when we were
blythe bairns and nae trouble was near us, than seen what was coming on my mis¬
tress, and I could do nocht. But I aye thought Mr James, as they ca'd him at the
Holmes, might mean mair than he seemed to mean ; and my mistress said nocht to
me, but I saw her whiles sitting idle, her that had aye been busy, and eh ! but she
took lang looks ower the sea, and her een were wistfu' and heavy, like your ain, Miss
Mary.
" At length the day cam',—weel I mind it,-—when the master, your father I mean,
had been awa at St Andrews for three weeks or sae, and your mother was unco
dowie wi' missing him, that a leddy came to see Hartness. She cam' frae St
Andrews, and it wasna ilka day we had visitors at the Holmes, as ye may guess,
sae she was pressed to stay a' night, and my Miss Mary and she had a lang talk.
And when she was gaue, foul fa' her chattering tongue, my mistress sat in her room
as if she hadna the heart to stir. And I looked at her, and the end of it was, Miss
Mary, that when 1 had seen her gang doon the stair to the wee i"oom, where she
and Mr James read and sang thegither, as if her heart made her very feet heavy,
that used to be sae light, I gaed after her. Ye maun ken that this room I speak o'
opened into a bit glass house, a conservatory ye ca't, and I saw her gang in there.
She sat doon on the floor, and then she began to greet as if her heart wad break,
and I couldna stand it, Miss Mary. Sae I said, 'gin she wadna tell me what ailed
her, I could guess ; and I had next to naebody in the world I lo'ed but the sel' of
her, and it wad do her muckle gude 'gin she wad tell me, that wad tell ower as
muckle o' what she tauld me as the wa' or thae geraniums, and maybe be able to
help her some gate, whilk they couldna do. Sae at last she tauld me a'. How that
yon clattering woman frae St Andrews' had said Mr James was unco ta'en up wi' a
braw young English leddy there, and a' body thought it would do fine; an' she liked
him.
" ' She talked as if it were all settled, Lizzie," said my mistress, ' and I had to
THE ATTEMPT. 149
sit by and listen, with my heart breaking all the time. But he doesn't know,
Lizzie, and he never shall. His bride shall be like a sister to me ; what am I that
he should care for me, except as a brother might ? But oh ! she'll never love him
better than I do ; will she ever love him as well 1 Oh ! Lizzie, Lizzie, what shall I
do ?' I mind every word she said, Miss Mary; for while she said it, wi' her head on
my breast, and the crimson up to her hair—sair shamed was she, puir lamb—I raised
my een to the glass door atween Miss Mary's study and the greenhouse where we
were, and 1 saw your father.
"And I saw, Miss Mary, I kent, he had heard a'. His face was as white as a
sheet, and he caught my look, and then he reddened, for a' his sun-bum, as red as
my puir mistress. I kenna how it was, but I saw it a' in a gliff. Your mother
couldna see him, for her back was to the door, while I sat facing it ; and I signed to
him as well as I could, without moving, though my heart was beating like a mell,
your mother might hae felt it but for her ain sobs, and by the mercy o' God, he got
out o' the room without her hearing a sound. He slippit out like a ghaist, Miss
Mary, and I'll ne'er forget his face.
"I quieted your mother as weel's I could, and I gat her awa' to her ain room ; and
she didna see the master till dinner, and then she thought he was but newly back.
"And the next day. Miss Mary, she cam up the stair flushing like a rose, and
ran to her room ; and when she saw me she just stopped, and her een was shining
like her ring that ye wear yet, Miss Mary. ' Oh Lizzie,' she said ' oh Lizzie,' and
then I kenned it a'. She threw her arms round me, and grat like a bairn ; but
I kenned it wasna as it had been the day before ; a' the world was changed
for her, and your father had asked her to be his wife, and she never doubted, bless
her sweet heart.
" ' You know, Lizzie,' she said ' that was all a story that I told you yesterday,
the gossip of St Andrews ; why did I believe it for a mraute 1 It was me he loved all
the time, how can I thank God enough 1'
" It took awa' my breath. Miss Mary, for I kent then that what had been the
day before, was a secret between the master and me. He acted as a man of honour
suld act, Miss Mary ; he is true as steel, though I needna tell ye that; but he couldiia
gie what he hadna got, and his heart wasna his ain when he cam back frae St
Andrews yon simmer afternoon.
" I had seen it a' in his face, but what could I do; I never dared to speak to
himsel', and could I break my mistress's heart by speaking to her ?
" The laird was unco wcel pleased, and a' the bowls rowed right after that, and
150 THE ATTEMPT.
they were wed. And my mistress wadna part frae me, and sae I lived wi' them
still.
"And it was as if the laird had just keepit up to see them married, for he dwined
awa' after that, and died that year, and the master had to live at the Holmes. And
day by day, Miss Mary, I watched your mother, my dear mistress, to see if she
fand out o' hersel' what I wad hae died afore telling her.
"And slowly, slowly, she fand it at last. It was like the waukin' frae a dream,
like what I felt for years after Rob was lost. I wad be standing on the shore wait¬
ing on his boat, and see him as clear as I see you, coming closer, closer, and then as
I felt his hands in mine at last, and heard his voice, a' at ance I wad wauken,
and wish for death, for I was a rebellious and heart-broken lassie, and my pain was
sairer than when I heard he was dead.
"And even sae, I think, when yoixr mother did ken what she had done, her grief
was waur to bear than it had been yon day in the greenhouse. She never said a
word, but I could see. The master was kindness itsel'; but I saw, and eh but she
sune saw too, that he gave her sae muckle kindness and care e'en because he had
naething else to give. And it brak her heart, Miss Mary. Tt wasna his wyte,
and it wasna hers. I aye thought when ye came. Miss Mary, that it would mak a'
the difference. There are women who can live in their bairns and ask for nae mair,
but she wasna ane o' them. She lo'ed ye e'en mair for his sake than for your ain ;
and though I saw her een light up when she saw how proud he was of you, year
after year everything that held her here seemed to grow looser, and she died when
ye were live years auld. But she ne'er tauld me what she was thinking o' again.
Miss Mary, though I could read her face like a book. An' she died. Miss Mary, in
spite of a' the master's kindness and reverence, for the love of him, as surely as
yon puir lassie Elaine, that Miss Una read to me about, died for Sir Lancelot; as
surely as she wad hae died 'gin he had left her for yon leddy at St Andrews, that
was married a month after him.
" She loved him better than her life, better than onything m the world. Many's
the time I sat and grat by mysel', and thought how the Lord could mak it up to my
puir mistress in the life to come.
"The master was spared ae thing, he never kent that she had found out the truth.
He thought she died thinking hersel' a beloved and cherished wife, as she was. Miss
Mary, except that a memory of some one else was mair to him than her living
presence. ' Ye'll never die that way, Miss Mary,' said old Lizzie, pausing suddenly.
' Ye might suffer, and your spirit might be broken, but your heart is stronger than
THE ATTEMPT. . 151
your mother's. Ye're mair like the master, after a'." I bowed my head; I could
not cry. No, I was not to be killed by such sorrow, but had there not been a time
when death seemed the best friend that could have come to me, when my wild weary
heart had longed for it as for great good ! Lizzie knew nothing of that. She may
have guessed at something, but that was all.
" Aweel, Miss Mary, the master grieved sorely and sadly for my mistress. I
mind when she sent for me the day she died. I cam' to the door afore she was ready
to speak to me, and the curtains hid me from her and the master, sae I heard her
words before I thought. ' Good-bye, James,' she said; and though her voice
was weak, it grew stronger, as if her love had leapt up last of a' in her puir
heart to tell itsel' afore she died. ' You'll many again, James, and she may be
dear and good. I shall love her because you do ; but oh ! my darling, she'll not love
you as I have loved. That was all, dear. I wasn't beautiful or clever or good
enough for you, but I love you better than my life.' Then her voice grew fainter
and fainter. Miss Mary, and she kissed him and lay down and sent for you. Do
ye mind ?"
" Only as if it were a dream, Lizzie, but I do remember. Poor mamma ! oh,
poor mamma!"
" And syne. Miss Mary, as ye ken, the master sauld the Holmes and went to
the Indies again; and when he cam' hame, he met the sister o' his auld love at
General Hilary's, and he married her, for a' the difference in age.    Eh ! but she was
bonnie and weel-liked, bonnier than Miss Una, dear lamb, and ye ken the rest."
And Lizzie went on knitting, and I sat and pondered.
How strange it is to feel, at such times, that the hearts we think of as calmly
at rest have beaten as wildly as our own ! I sat thinking in the firelight, till all at
once I saw Una's bright head flash along the pine-shaded path that led to the garden,
and it struck me that a cup of tea would seem to her a necessary of life when she
came in. Accordingly I twisted up my hair, and asked Lizzie to go and see about it,
coming back with an effort from my mother's life into my own, while I went to the
front-door to meet my child. 0. M.
152 THE ATTEMPT.
'Tis well with thee, dear child, for thou art sleeping,
All free from pain in quiet rest,—
Safe in the good and tender Saviour's keeping,
Who little children loved and blest.
'Tis well with thee, thy short sweet life has ended
While still each look thou mett'st was love;
From thy kind earthly home thou hast ascended
To the most loving home ^bove.
'Tis well with thee, no care, or sin, or sadness
Can ever make thee shed a tear;
No sounds but those of love and heavenly gladness
Shall ever fall upon thine ear.
'Tis well with us, for the same gracious Spirit,
Who made thee pure from every stain,
Shall make us, one day, meet, through Jesus' merit.
To see thy face, dear child, again.
Veronica.
Psychology is that part of mental science which relates to the mind itself, and its
faculties ; and thus it is the necessary foundation on which all mental science, and
therefore all science whatever, rests.
According to its derivation, the word Psychology literally means a discourse
about the soul, or the science of the soul. But this must not lead us to suppose that
what we are to study in Psychology is either exactly what we understand by our word
soul, or exactly what the Greeks understood by that word of theirs which we translate
by soul.   We should be liable to suppose, in the first case, that all we have to do with
THE  ATTEMPT. 153
is the higher spiritual part of man's nature, with regard to which he is the likeness
of God ; and, in the second, that we have only to do with that principle of life
•vv hich man shares with the lower animals, and even with vegetables. Instead of con¬
fining itself to either of these sides of man's nature, psychology rather aims ultimately
at a true theory of the union of the two.
It is necessary, then, for the sake of clearness, to give a fuller and somewhat more
technical definition of Psychology, It may be called " the science of the states of the
conscious self in man." The advantage of using such an expression as " the con¬
scious self" is, that without making any statement as to the nature of the object of
our study, it makes quite plain what it is, by appealing to a distinction universally
felt and acknowledged,—the distinction between the Self or Ego, and the l^ot-Self or
Non-Ego, the subjective and the objective, the internal and the external.
This is our earliest philosophical discovery, without which all knowledge
would be impossible for us.     " The baby new to earth and sky," has to learn " by
degrees—"
" the use of ' I' and ' Me,'
And find, ' I am not what I see,
And other than the things I touch '—
So rounds he to a separate mind.
From whence clear memory may begin,
As through the frame that binds him in
His isolation grows defined."
This earliest distinction, which makes the beginning of consciousness, goes on
defining itself more clearly as the mind looks more out into the external world; and
it is one which is taken for granted in all our after observations and judgments.
When we have got our distinction, we have next to find out what the things
distinguished are. For the present, we have only to do with the self which feels, and
thinks, and acts. This conscious self or mind can only be studied, like eveiything
else, by the observation of its phenomena, or, as we have called them in our defini¬
tion, its states; and in this respect psychology does not differ from any of the other
empirical sciences, which are concerned with the external world.
There are, however, some conditions under which psychology has to work, where¬
by it does greatly difierfrom the sciences which are occupied with matter; conditions
arismg from the fact that in this science the object observed and the observing sub¬
ject are the same. On the one hand, this is a disadvantage, for the state of the mind
as observing, and the state of mind which we wish to observe, mutually act upon and
p
154 THE  ATTEilPT.
interfere with each other. On the other hand, it is an advantage ; for, while we
can only know the phenomena of matter at second-hand, through the medium of the
senses, the phenomena of consciousness, of our own minds, are known to us directly,
at first-hand. Thus one possible cause of mistakes—the sense-medium—is absent,
and psychology ought for this reason to be the most certain of all sciences.
But psychology does not consist merely in the observation and collection of
phenomena, for that is not science. Science looks at all individual facts as part of
a system; it takes up each isolated phenomenon that has been observed, and refers
it to its proper place in the system, and to the laws by which it is governed. And
so psychology must take all the isolated phenomena of consciousness, when they
have been ascertained by careful observation, and endeavour to find out the
laws by which they are governed, and the ultimate facts to which they are to be
referred.
It is when we come to this point—the deductions which may be drawn from the
facts of consciousness, and the systems into which these deductions may be formed
—that we find the greatest possible difierence among psychologists.
Some philosophers, observing the great influence exerted on each other by the
body and the mind, have endeavoured to resolve all mental phenomena into nerve-
motion, making all impressions from without to consist in currents passing along the
nerves to the brain, and all the thoughts, desires, and volitions of the mind merely
the equal and opposite reaction, producing currents from the brain outwards.
What will always be, for most of us, the strongest argument against such a theory
as this, lies in the appeal to feeling—the intense natural repugnance which the theory
rouses in the mind.    " Let science prove we are" such mere "magnetic mockeries,"
we feel inclined to say—
" And then
What matters science unto men ?"
If science is going to take out of existence all that makes it worth having, we
will let science go, for we can do without her; but we cannot do without the hopes
and beliefs which make our true lives and our true selves. But can science prove
it ? It is a subject which one cannot discuss without having studied it; but it
strikes even an outsider, that the physiological psychologists, on entering the
charmed circle of metaphj'sics, have caught a little of the infection of that a jjriori
reasoning of which they are always so bitterly accusing their " transcendental"
opponents.
They seem to begin with two a jmori assumptions: that there can only be one
THE  ATTEMPT. 155
basis for human phenomena, and that that basis must be a material one ; and this
original prejudice seems to lead them to prefer the second-hand, or rather third-hand
testimony of physiology concerning mental phenomena to the direct testimony of
consciousness.
This resolution of psychology into physiology is the extreme form of one of the
two great schools into which philosophy has always been, and is now, divided; a school
which generally goes by the name of Empiricism, or Sensationalism, as opposed to
Transcendentalism, or, as the French call it, Spiritualism, though it is unfor¬
tunately impossible, because of other associations, to use that word in English. The
best known leader of the " Sensational " School in this country at present is Mr Mill,
whose great popularity and influence in our day are perhaps owing to this,—that he
has offered to an age, pre-determined to believe only in material facts, and yet with
spiritual longings which it is unable to stifle, the highest and most nearly spiritual
form of the great materialistic theories of Utilitarianism and Sensationalism.
According to Mr Mill, all our mental states of knowledge, feeling, or volition, are
derived from experience, either directly, or as inductions from the facts with which
experience furnishes us. There is no other way in which we can become possessed
of them ; there is "nothing in the intellect which was not first in the senses," and
as all we have in the senses is a series of feelings, mind is thus finally resolved
into a series of feelings, though a series, as Mr Mill admits, with the extraordinary
property of knowing that it is a series, and making reflections on that fact. In
making this admission, Mr Mill seems to me to yield his whole position. What
is it, in the great " bundle of sensations," that holds them together, and gives them
somewhat of unity, connecting remembered past sensations with present ones, and
with possible imagined sensations in the future? What is it that can take from the
bundle any two sensations, perhaps exactly alike and following one immediately
after the other, and hold them apart and compare them, so that they shall be known
to be two and not one ; or which^ taking two separated by time and different in
kind, can combine them, so as in thought to be one 1 Such questions seem to drive
us to the other alternatiA'e which Mr Mill sets before us—that of " believing that the
Mind or Ego is something different from any series of feelings, or possibilities of them."
This is the alternative which is accepted by what is called the Transcendental
School, at the head of which are the great philosophers of Germany. Leibnitz
struck the key-note of the opposition to the sensationalists, when, to their celebrated
maxim—" nothing is in the intellect which was not first in the senses," he added
the words " except the intellect itself; " and this view was more fully worked out by
156 THE   ATTEMPT.
Kant, and by later philosophers, both in Germany and England. It is here that
the true answer to Sensationalism lies ; not in making a list of our beliefs, and then
classifying some as intituive and some as acquired—for this way of proceeding is
always open to attack—but by showing that what the mind does possess a priori are
its own forms of thought and its own powers. It is true that it is by contact with the
external world, through the medium of sensation, that the mind awakes to the con¬
sciousness, first of its own existence, and then of its own powers, and then learns the
right use of them ; but the possibilities of existence, thought, and action, must all
have been in the mind from the first,—the contact with externality could never have
produced them.
In beginning the study of Psychology, after having got some idea of what it is,
one naturally enquires why it should be studied, and if the answer is given that it
is the necessaiy foundation of mental science—of philosophy—the question returns,—
why engage in the study of philosophy at all, when all the natural sciences seem to
offer an easier process and more certain results ? We may answer—study natural
science, study physics first if you will, and you will find that it will drive you to
metaphysics in the end. For it is the desire for the knowledge which philosophy
alone can really give, that impels us to the study of nature, and can only be satisfied
when it reaches that ultimate truth which nature cannot reveal. There are indeed
many in the present day, who, "with a false and criminal heroism," renounce the true
food of their spirit, and try to satisfy its hunger with the dry husks of material facts,
but that is spiritual starvation. If we would only believe it, the longing which is
trying to lead us through and past nature, knows the right way well.
" Nine-tenths of our knowledge, if not all of it, are owing to that thirst after
knowledge, which is like searching after the road which leads to our home : we
perceive it not from the foreign place in which we find ourselves—
" Nel mezzo del cammin di nostra vita
Mi ritrovai in una selva oscura
Che la diritta via era smarrita,"—
But we know there is a home, and a way to it." Grace.
THE  ATTEMPT. 157
" SIwp an till gag."
WORDS TO A VERY OLD SKYE AIR OF THE SAME NAME.
" Oh, sleep on, my warrior—sleep on till day.
Till fled are night's shades from the mountain-tops grey,—
Then thine arm shall be rested, and strong for the fray.
Too swift is returning
The tumult of morning,—
At dawn thy brief slumbers the war-pipe will break—
Then sleep on, my love, nor till daylight awake.
Oh, sleep on, my chieftain—oh, sleep on till day ;
For dread on the morrow will be the array
Of the foemen, all mustered on corrie and brae.
Thy blade must be lightning.
O'er battle-dust bright'ning,
Thy voice must be thunder to sound through the fight,—-
Then sleep on^ my lord, till the rising of light.
Oh, sleep on, my darling—oh, sleep on till day ;
Oh calmly and fearlessly rest while you may,—
But I cannot sleep—I must watch, weep, and pray,
And wait with heart breaking.
Until thine awaking;
Then kiss thee, and arm thee, and speed thee away ;
Oh sleep, then, my own one, oh sleep on till day.
Oh sleep on, my husband—oh, sleep while you may ;
To-morrow, thy sleep may be deep and for aye,
And thy head lying low 'neath the broom blossoms gay.
And I, in the gloaming,
May watch for thy coming.
And watch till I die—ah, woe's me, who can say ?
Then sleep on, my dearest—oh sleep on till day! "
Mas Alta.
158 THE   ATTEMPT.
S0mlg m a Jrof^ssmn.
We mean it seriously—we do not intend to indulge in any of the fashionable sneers
at morning calls and afternoon teas as a kind of slow poison for the tyrant of the
scythe and forelock, neither is it our purpose to hurl any anathemas at the more
special profession whose field is the ball-room, the drawing-room, and the pro¬
menade,—we refer to the matrimonial profession, which is made a reproach to
young ladies compelled too often by necessity to make choice of some means of
earning a livelihood, and excluded by etiquette from all means but one. We do
not defend the scheming mothers and daughters of our gay circles : there is both
folly and fault in the life they lead, and we frankly acknowledge it. But let the
well meaning moralisers who condemn husband-hunting girls, remember that the
princijiles on which they act have been instilled into them from their earliest
infancy. It has been carefully impressed upon them that matrimony is woman's tnxe
profession; and that no lady can earn an honest independence by any other means
without losing caste in society. They are taught to believe that polite circles will
not offer the right hand of fellowship to a lady, who, in any way, and for any cause,
earns her bread from day to day,—literature being the sole exception to this rule.
And one consequence of this stern law of etiquette might have been foretold long
ere now,—the gradually increasing numbers and influence of ladies in all branches
of literature for which general information and desultory reading can be any
preparation.
Both matrimony and literature, be it remembered, are professions, in the proper
sense of the term; a certain pecuniary gain being expected in return for _^a certain
expenditure of time, energy, and money. The young lady who exerts her power of
pleasing, and cultivates social and domestic qualities, in the hope of making what the
world will call a good match, is often moved purely by the desii-e to render herself
independent of the support of relatives or friends. Her profession involves probably
the same amount of preparation and of expense as the lawyer's or the physician's,
with, moreover, a greater risk of failure. And what does failure mean here 1 With
a man, it may mean the career of a Hamilton, a Scott, or a Jeffrey ; the grasp and
energy of the mind spurning the drudgery of technicalities. With a woman, it
means disappointment, fretfulness, and gossiping old maidenhood ; the object of a life
lost, and a stigma cast on a class that has numbered, and we think will number  in
THE   ATTEMPT. 159
its ranks, womanhood's noblest and most useful. It is malcontents of that type,
possessing neither the energy nor the capacity to create for themselves an interest in
life, who bring discredit and contempt on the name of old maid. Hard, doubly
hard,—for if the sick are to be tended, the sad comforted, the poor assisted, to whom
does the world turn but to the despised old maid.
Charity is acknowledged to be a perfectly genteel occupation for a lady.
Whether as parish visitor or Sunday school teacher, she is becomingly and usefully
employed in working among the poor. These occupations are unremunerative,
hence their gentility. No matter whether a lady have a vocation for parish visiting
or Sunday school teaching, it is expected she will take her share of the one or the othei-,
and she does it. We do not wish to speak with disrespect of such charitable work :
we have seen too much of the unselfish and unobtrusive usefulness of many whose
lives have been devoted to it, to wish to despise either the work or the workers.
But is it not too often the case, especially with Sunday school teaching, that the
work is carried on in obedience to the expressed wish of society, and for the sake of
not appearing singular, rather than from any love for it in itself? Is it not per¬
formed often by unloving and inefficient hands, from a mistaken idea that it is part
of a lady's duty as a member of society ? We are anxious not to be misunderstood.
We do not forget that it is a blessing and a privilege for man to serve and assist his
fellow-men. We know that "whoso giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord." But we
do not like that this highest and most sacred of duties should be lightly and thought¬
lessly undertaken, should be regarded as requiring less natural fitness or preparatory
training than any other, A young lady has a little leisure which she would like to
employ profitably. " Take a district to visit," cries one friend. " Teach a class at
the Sunday school," urges another; " it is quite easy, a thing anybody could
do." We submit that if charity means anything at all, it must mean more than
this.
From all the occupations above named, matrimony, literature, and charity,
society, as a profession in its own right, is easily distinguished. Each of these culti¬
vates society so far, and only so far, as society may advance its own special interests.
On them, therefore, society has no pressing claims. It is the profession of the unpro¬
fessional ; and by the unprofessional, that is, by the fair sex, its duties have hitherto
been discharged. And so cheerfully have ladies accepted their lot, and so gi'acefuUy
and conscientiously have they performed the tasks allotted them, that these are
now looked upon as woman's sphere par excellence ; and men, released from social
obligations, do not dream of even offering a vote of thanks to their hard-wrought
160 THE   ATTEMPT.
substitutes, who make calls, write letters, and study civilities, to fill up the failing
measure of father, husband, or brother.
Now, however, when labour is no longer a monopoly of the sterner sex, when
woman's sphere is to be extended, and woman's intellect developed, a most natural
question seems to be—"What will become of the claims of society?" The ques¬
tion has hardly received due attention from those whom it most nearly concerns.
To the lords of creation it is surely of no small moment that, on the number of
professional ladies being so greatly increased, duties which have hitherto devolved
iipon one sex must now be shared by the other. We know that the domestic
view has struck home to the hearts of unprotected males all over the country, for
our ears have been open to the cries of " Who will sew on our shirt-buttons, order
our dinner's, attend to oiir household comforts, if ladies are to be professional ?"
Possibly the social duties have not appeared of sufficient consequence to enter into
serious debate.
Among ladies, it has certainly been too much the custom of late to ridicule
the duties of society as the last resource of vacant minds, or to fret at them as an
unnecessary interruption of the more serious business of life. And on none of the
amenities of life has more wholesale abuse been showered than on the morning call.
The arguments for the putting down of this useful institution are various. It is
said to be a waste of time, a frittering away of the intellect on ephemeral or frivolous
topics, a mutual infliction endured for politeness' sake. This takes for granted that
we have the good fortune (or the misfortune) to find our friends at home. But
we do not mend our cause by replying, that in all probability our friends are out
on the same errand as ourselves; or, as they are well entitled to be, otherwise
engaged at home. " Worse and worse," cries the cynic; " what good can be served
by the handing in of a printed card ? It is an unmeaning form, and you have your
trouble for nothing." K"ot for nothing, though there were no further advantage than
the exercise itself Do we not all know the weariness to mind and body of a con¬
stitutional? But, suppose the custom exploded, would the time be better spent?
Those who can spend it more usefully do so, and are readily excused by the world ;
and for the rest, who are not too busy to make calls at the orthodox time of day,
what better opportunity could there be for the exchange of ideas? The conversation
is not necessarily either epliemeral or frivolous, and is it not pleasant to feel that
our friends have not forgotten us ?
It is but fair, however, to ask what substitute would be proposed for the ten
minutes' intercourse felt to be so severe a tax on the time ?    Some allege that no
THE ATTEMPT, IGl
substitute is required, that the idea of keeping up one's connection with the outer
world is an entire absurdity. Such Timons we hope and believe are few; and if
they do not care for the world, why, the world will not care for them. But some
would propose, as a remedy, the enlarging of our circle of familiar friends, who are
invited and expected to " come in by chance " any evening. We appeal to all who
may read these remarks,—to the domestic, who have household tasks they wish to
perform; to the studious, who desire to have some portion of the day secure from
interruption ; to the professional, who have but a small part of each day for domestic
intercourse and repose; how would they relish this breaking up of their peace
and privacy 1 "Would not the waste of time be infinitely greater ? for the
system, as it at present stands, limits the time for the formal reception of chance
visitors to three or four hours in the middle of the day, leaving the greater
intimacy and ease of unceremonious visits in the option of each man to grant or
to withhold.
It should also be taken into account, that these three or four hours include often
the whole exercise and shopping of the day, and that it is but rarely they are entirely
spent in making calls. There is no denying that morning calls, like all other social
customs, may be carried too far; there is no denying that by many people they are
carried too far. It is surely unnecessary to remind the enlightened nineteenth
century that the abuse of a thing is no argument against its use. And is not this
exaggeration by some of the importance of social duties, the natural result of the
unqualified contempt expressed for them by others 1
The afternoon tea is too extensive a subject to be entered on here. It includes
all varieties, from the indiscriminate gatherings of forty or fifty (we do not profess
accuracy in numbers, not having had much experience of this variety) to the social
tete-a-tete of intimate friends.
But those who feel it their duty to run down the fraction of three hours spent
by a lady in making morning calls, ought to enter a still more decided protest
against the three hours' eating and drinking that goes by the name of a state dinner.
We fear, however, all protest is in vain. As long as gentlemen refuse to lend their
countenance to evening meetings where the creature comforts are not on so extensive
a scale, so long will those entertainments where good eating and drinking form the
chief attraction continue, to the detriment of the health and wealth of entertainers
and entertained. And so long, we are sorry to say, will the quiet tea party be too
often a failure. The wider interests, the more varied experience of the world, and
the more active occupations of most gentlemen, give them, in general conversation,
Q
162 THE ATTEMPT.
advantages enjoyed by few ladies, and appreciated by few gentlemen. The quiet
domestic routine in which so many ladies pass their whole lives is spoken of and
thought of as pleasantest and most natural to them. Here, however, as everywhere
else, the golden rule is a safe guide; for although we have heard many gentlemen
declare that ladies were well off, if they only knew it, we never recollect hearing
any express their willingness to exchange their life for a lady's. Nor, after all, is
there any likelihood of this exchange being too often called for. If the desultory,
unprofessional life of which we have spoken, be a life of sacrifice, then be assured it
will fall to the lot of the unselfish of the world—unselfish by habit, rather than
by nature, for the first and the last lesson learned by a woman is that of self-
abnegation. And is it not the grandest lesson ; is not the life of sacrifice the noblest
lifel
For whose sake, moreover, is this constant cultivation of society by the mother,
the wife, the sister, the daughter 1 Who is the gainer by it 1 Is it not often the
son, the husband, the brother, the father? To what does the lawyer or the
doctor owe the extension of his circle of acquaintance, the increase of his business,
the wider spread of his name and fame 1 To what, if not to the social bond, formed,
preserved, and from day to day strengthened and extended, by the unprofessional
part of his household 1
We do not claim for woman either the power or the responsibility cast upon
her by the great art-critic of the day. We wish it were only true, as Mr Ruskin
declares, that the fiat of woman could beat swords into ploughshares, and make an
end of war and bloodshed. We wonder if Mr Euskin's idea was suggested by
Schiller. According to the latter, the relative positions of man and woman are self
destruction on the one side, and prevention on the other; man ever on the verge of
a precipice, woman ever restraining him from the fatal leap. There is, however, a
slight diflference in the treatment of the subject by the two authors. Schiller's theory
seems to be that woman would exert an influence for peace, if she could; Ruskin's,
that she could if she wovild. Not approving of unqualified assertions and sweeping
conclusions, we do not like either the one view or the other. Moreover, we think it
hard that those who have already suificient responsibility, in the early education and
the moral training of the human race, as well as the spending and saving of the hard-
wou money of the busy, should have the additional anxiety of keeping the con¬
sciences and answering for the sins of the stronger and fiercer sex. Mr Ruskin's
theory savours too strongly of the poetico-pastoral view of the social relations of men
and women, so strangely inconsistent with our matter-of-fact century.
THE ATTEMPT. 163
We must draw to a close j yet much has been left unsaid.   No mention has been
made of the art of letter-writing, one of the great blessings of the world, a principal
bond of society, and a chief accusation  brought  against ladies.      The length of
ladies' letters, the unnecessary information tliey give, the inevitable postscripts and
the illegible crossing; all these, though now rather stale, are still fruitful sources of
amusement and of conversation.    So also we might speak at length of balls, pic-nics,
and promenades, all which are phases of social life, branches of the profession whose
importance we have been advocating.    But space and time forbid ; and we lay down
the pen, merely hoping that our readers, if we have exhausted their patience, will
at least not, through  our duluess,  be led  to condemn or to scorn Society as  a
profession.
Sanct Rewle.
m^t f egtntr of Julral,
By George Eliot.
It has been often said of Sir Walter Scott, that had he not been so great a novelist,
he would have been a still greater poet; in other woi-ds, that his fame as a poet
is swallowed up by his still greater reputation as a novelist. In Sir Walter
Scott's case this may possibly be true ; for " Marmion " and the " Lady of the
Lake " are poems of undoubted power and beauty, and their aiithor may well claim
to take his stand among the " sacred few." We are now told that such also are the
claims of the authoress of the " Spanish Gipsy " and of the " Legend of Jubal;" and
that had she been unknown as a novelist, as a poet she would have deserved well
of posterity. This is the verdict of the critics; but will the reading public sub¬
scribe to this opinion ? We think not; wo believe, indeed, that did the claims of the
authoress of "Komola" rest upon these two poems alone, her celebrity would
be very different from that which she has acquired by her performances as a
novelist. We remember at this moment the caustic advice given by one of our
living authors to a fledgling poet, who submitted his effusions to the ordeal of his
criticism. " Go on," said he, in return, " go on writing bad poetry, it may in
the end teach you to write good prose."    This advice contains more wit and wisdom
] 64 THE ATTEMPT.
than appears on the surface ; for, in submitting our thoughts and emotions to the
higher and more stringent law of composition which poetry demands, we may
eventually learn freedom and concentration sufficient for good expression in the
more facile region of prose. We do not think, however, that the converse of this
holds true; so far is the composition of inferior prose from leading up to good
poetry, that not even the finest and most studied of prose compositions will trans¬
form an author into a poet, if nature has not endowed him with the "divine
alHatus." It is seldom, indeed, that in the annals of literature we meet with an
author whose powers are equally great in whatever path he may essay. Is
Shakespeare himself at all times 1 and would Milton be the glory of our litera¬
ture, if his controversial writings were all we had to judge him by 1
Has, then, the authoress of "Romola" added another leaf to her literary laurels
by the production of the " Spanish Gipsy " and the " Legend of Jubal"? In judging
this question, we must remember how high her place is among novelists. It is
among the first. Do these two poems entitle her to the same eminence among
poets 1 We believe not. As music adapts itself to words, and words to music, so
should thought clothe itself in suitable and harmonious expression ; and prose rises
into poetry when the elevation of the feeling is equalled by the beauty of the
language in which it is clothed. It is not to be contested but that there are
many passages of poetical beauty in the "Legend of Jubal." We could quote several;
but isolated passages of harmonious diction, or even of impassioned eloquence, do
not make a great poem. The "Legend of Jubal," as a whole, is somewhat
long and tedious, and with little interest in its details to enlist the reader's
sympathy. It is a description of patriarchal life in the beginning of time. The
poem opens thus :—
'• When Cain was driven from Jehovah's land,
He wandered eastward, seeking some far strand
Ruled by kind gods who asked no offerings
Save pvu-e field-fruits, as aromatic things
To feed the subtler sense of frames divine
That lived on fragrance for their food and wine ;
Wild joyous gods, who winked at faults and folly,
And could be pitiful and melancholy.
He never had a doubt that such gods were ;
He looked within and saw them mirrored there.
Some think he came at last to Tartary
And some to Ind ; but howsoever it be.
THE ATTEMPT. 165
His staff he planted where sweet waters ran,
And in that home of Cain the arts began."
This is a very charming opening; and although contrary to all our preconceived
notions of Cain, expresses well the truth  conveyed in the tenth line, that we rush
readily to that belief to which our nature inclines us.     Cain believes in pleasant
deities, because his own  nature possess possibilities that attest their existence; but
this, though well conveyed, is not historically true.    What does the Bible tell us of
Cain 1—that he went out from the presence of the Lord a fugitive and a vagabond
upon the earth.     " And Cain said, my punishment is greater than I can bear !"
Who does not here recall   Byron's magnificent poem  upon   Cain, and the  lines
beginning—
"  Why do I exist ?
Why art thou wretched ? why are all things so ?
Ev'n he who made us must be, as the maker
Of things unhappy ! To produce destruction
Can surely never be the task of joy,
And yet my sire says he's omnipotent ;
Then why is evil—he being good ? "
We ask which of these two renderings is the one most in accordance with
the Scriptural idea of the first murderer. We would not, however, be captious,
and the finest passages of the poem lie in the opening scenes, where Cain and his
descendants are presented to us in these and following lines—
" Man's life was spacious in the early world ;
It paused like some slow ship with sail unfurled
Waiting in seas by scarce a wavelet curled ;
Beheld the slow star-paces of the skies,
And grew from strength to strength through centuries ;
Saw infant trees fill out their giant limbs,
And heard a thousand times the sweet birds' marriage hymns."
With the exception of the fourth line, we think this passage very charming ; and so
indeed are many succeeding ones, portraying a state of pleasant idleness and calm en¬
joyment of the simple pleasures of nature :—
" Thus generations in glad idlesse throve,
Nor hunted prey, nor with each other strove ;
For clearest springs were plenteous in the land.
And gourds for cups ; the ripe fruit sought the hand.
166 THE ATTEMPT.
Bending the laden boughs with fragrant gold ;
And for their roofs and garments wealth untold
Lay everywhere in grasses and broad leaves ;
They laboured gAitly, as a maid who weaves
Her hair in mimic mats, and pauses oft
And strokes across her hand the tresses soft,
Then peeps to watch the poised butterfly,
Or little burthened ants that homeward hie.
Time was but leisure to their lingering thought,
There was no need for haste to finish aught;
But sweet beginnings were repeated still.
Like infant babblings that no task fulfil;
For love, that loved not change, constrained the simple wUl."
Thus, according to the author's view, these old heathens were very joyous people
and Cain himself leads a comfortable life. However, with them, as with their de¬
scendants, " i^leasure endureth but for a while." Death steps in, of which attendant
of humanity, Cain, for reasons of his own, had kept them entirely ignorant. Lamech,
with careless aim, has " struck and killed his fairest boy," and Cain steps in among
the amazed and wondering throng and tells them Jehovah has tracked their steps,
and thus all must die. This chaages entirely, for these careless idle beings, the face
of everjrthing ; and out of this fear of death springs new life and activity. They are
roused to value life and to understand its capabilities, now that they stand in dread
of death. This is a true and subtle thought; iilthough it might be objected that, in
the course of six hundred years and more, death must have made himself known in
the lower creation, if unknown among men. We cannot suppose that the patriarchal
sheep and dogs lived also six hundred years and more. This indeed was the objection
that Jeffrey urged against Cain's ignorance of death, when Byron makes him declare
his incapacity even to understand it. He must have known it, Jeffrey says, by the
burnt offerings of Abel, of which he was a daily witness. However, this is the key¬
stone of the whole poem; for now that the knowledge of that death has come upon
them, the face of all things is changed, and each man seeks his appointed task in the
world.    This is a very fine idea, for although, as Cain darkly says—
" He walks unseen, but leaves a track of pain,
Pale Death His footprint is, and He will come again !"
Cain's descendants learn that pain is the precursor and the fount of all human
blessings. They now rise to a higher existence than that of mere passive enjoyment
of the bounties of nature.    We are told—
THE ATTEMPT. 167
" And a new spii-it from that time came o'er
The race of Cain : soft idlesse was no more.
Now Jabal learned to tame the lowing kine,
And from their udders drew the euow-white wine,
That stirs the innocent joy, and makes the stream
Of elemental life with fulness teem ;
The star-browed calves he nursed with feeding hand,
And sheltered them, till all the little band
Stood mustered, gazing at the sunset way
Whence he would come with store at close of day."
These are very pretty lines, and give a pleasant picture of Jabal, the shepherd of
the flock. There are also some good lines descriptive of Tubal Cain, the artificer of
iron, which we have not space to quote.
Jubal, the hero of the poem, the father of music, now comes upon the scene.
Like many another hero, this Jubal, although the father of song, is himself a failure.
The verse that tells us of his melody is rasping, inharmonious, and inefficient; and,
with the exception of an occasional line here and there, and of the passage in which
the first dance is described, which reminds us strongly of a somewhat similar scene
in the " Spanish Gipsy," where the heroine dances before the people, we think the
last part of the poem quite inferior in beauty of description and in harmony of verse
to the opening portions.    We will quote the passage we refer to :—
" The youths and maidens both alike long-tressed,
By grace-inspiring melody possessed,
Eose in slow dance, with beauteous floating swerve
Of limbs and hair, and many a melting curve
Of ringed feet, swayed by each close-linked palm ;
Then Jubal poured more rapture in his psalm,
The dance fired music, music fired the dance,
The glow' diffusive lit each countenance.
Till all the cu-cling tribe arose and stood
With glad yet awful shock of that mysterions good.
Even Tubal caught the sound, and wondering came.
Urging his sooty bulk like smoke-wrapt flame,
TUl he could see his brother with the lyre,
The work for which he lent his furnace-fire
And diligent hammer, witting nought of this—
This power in metal shape which made strange bliss,
Entering within him like a dream fuU-fraught
With new creations finished in a thought."
168 THE ATTEMPT.
Jubal thus reveals music to his race, and then he longs to reveal it to other lands.
He hies him forth and travels far, even to the land of Seth ; but at last, in his
wandering, he cornea to the ocean, he hears
" its miiltitudinous roar,
The plunge and hiss upon the pebbled shore ;
Then Jubal silent sat, and touched his lyre no more."
Jubal is overpowered by the sight and sounds of the ocean; he now resolves to re¬
turn to his own people, a wearied and worn-out old man. There is here a very fine de¬
scription of despised old age. So far from welcoming him, his people put himfrom them.
Jubal's name they reverence, because it is the name of one who has bestowed upon
them a pleasure that a god might have been pleased to bestow; but Jubal's self, his
old and worn-out self, they spurn from them with contempt and ignominy, and with
the sound of the instruments in his ears that he had himself taught them to fashion,
he lays himself down to die, alone and unheeded.
" The immortal name of Jubal filled the sky,
While Jubal lonely laid him down to die."
A kind of mysterious presence however, comes to visit him in his last moments.
What it really is, it is hard to make out; and, as if the author were also unde¬
cided as to its real nature, it is described in verse as incomprehensible as itself.
In the closing scene of Jubal's life, there is little harmony or meaning. If the
death of Jubal had been described in the space of six lines instead of sixty, it would
have been a great improvement to the poem.
Our readers can now judge of its merits from these extracts. That the execution
falls short of the conception is not a matter of surprise. With many beauties both of
thought and expression, it seldom gets beyond a certain dead level of quiet interest,
and we have not a dozen lines in succession without some rasping woi'd that breaks
the continuity of harmony, and brings down the imagination with a sudden swoop
into the mud. Let it, however, be understood that we are criticising this poem with
the ever present conciousness of the hand that wrote it. The prose works of the
author are so full of beauty, and of so high an excellence, that we must be allowed
to carp somewhat, if upon entering upon a new path in literature, the work does
not altogether come up to the expectations that must necessarily arise in our minds,
upon hearing of a new poem from the author of the " Mill on the Floss " and of
" Romola." M. E. T.
THE ATTEMPT. 1 GO
Chapter VII.
" Thou art a queen, fair Lesley,
Thy subjects we, before thee ;
Thou art divine, fair Lesley,
The hearts o' men adore thee."—Burns.
" My darling Molly," began Una; " how are you ? Oh, give me my tea, and I'll
tell you all the news that could be got out of Pere Haslam—limited in quantity, but
valuable in quality."
" What about," said I, as Sarah appeared, bearing the desired beverage, which
she set forth on the smallest of tables near the fire. " Take off your hat and your
jacket, and let us have it by all means."
" Well, give me lots of sugar, and don't spare the cream ; and you've got another
of those celestial cakes ; what a good child you are ! Let me think ; oh yes, I have
heard all about young Mr Hilary."
But upon enquiry, her information only amounted to this, that the young man
in question had had some difference with his father six years before, and had ever
since been wandering about the world, till last night's misfortune had cast him back
upon his native land.
" What the difference was about I've no idea," said Una, " but this savours of
gossip ; however, you're not Mrs Glynne, Oh ! Molly asthore, talk of some people
and you see their—chignons."
Surely two figures were seen approaching through the twilight, and a soft and
subdued voice asked for Miss Ferguson. So we welcomed Miss Glynne and Miss
Rosa Glynne, rang for two more cups, and proceeded. I will just sketch our visitors
while Sarah brings the cups, and they sit bending forward on cosy chairs near
the fire, their short costumes showing their well booted feet, and the soft pervad¬
ing whisper of one, and the boisterous bravura tones of the other, filling the fire-lit
room.
In the first place, the Miss Glynnes are far less obviously of the sugar, sugary,
than their brother. His features are softened away in them, and so are his idiosyn¬
crasies. His thick lips ai-e in them full, ripe and rosy ; his low forehead is shaded
by thick brown hair, cut short in front and frizzled down to the eye-brows; nature
R
170 THE ATTEMPT.
having given them the fashionable brow, art has caused it to disappear altogether,
and make no sign.
Their figures, though rather short, are rounded and graceful enough in their
own way. In short, they are by no means swans, but very nice, plump, comfortable
looking little ducks. Just now, in their grebe collarettes and muffs, with their
little hats, and dainty boots trimmed to correspond, they answer to the description
admirably.
Violet, the eldest, is clerical to a degree. Before the early dawn has peeped
into her chamber, does she spring from her " feathery " couch in haste, and huny to
the neighbouring shriae of St Ursula's, where she kneels on the hardest hassock she
can find, with her eyes devoutly fixed on the youthful priest who conducts the
service, and who blushes beneath her gaze, though unnaturally pale from fasting,
and feels as if they were alone in the church, which indeed is almost the case. A
few, a very few ladies of St Michael's are as much given to early church as Violet
Glynne ; none are so regular.
Penetrate into her bedroom, and you will find it lined with illuminations, with
little crosses in marble and ivory, with small shrine-like erections. Look into her
work-basket, and lo, slippers with crosses decorating their toes, and segments of altar-
cloths, also, I am bound to say, coarse work for the poor, of which Violet gets through
a great deal. She is a good girl and a sensible girl in many ways ; but curates are
her weakness,—and an amiable weakness it is, as Sam Weller said of the gentleman
who was arrested for beating his wife to excess when inebriated.
Now picture to yourself her contrast,—one who differs from her as widely as
the North Pole from the South. Rose is not by any means a rose that shrinks into
its leaves, and only desires a residence
" In desert where no men abide."
She is a rattling, open-hearted, loud-spoken flirt. Where Violet whispers.
Rose shouts, at least it seems a shout in comparison with the tones of her sister.
Rose play^s croquet, and sends the young " director's" ball flying to the verge
of the green, with a laugh that shows all her white teeth; and tells him
she has croqueted Violet there on purpose for him, that they might have some
serious conversation, she knew they'd like it. Rose is " the life of the house,"
the organiser of pic-nics, rowing and yachting parties, on which latter occasions
she appears in ravishing little jackets and sailor hats, with the short skirts
displaying her neat little lace-up sea-boots.       She is the  best lady-swimmer  in
THE ATTEMPT. 171
St Michael's, with the exception of Una, who fairly earned her name by her
proficiency in all matters aquatic; in fact, Eose is as secular as Violet is
" devote."
And there they sit, prepared to discuss all about last night. They are the kind
of girls who call you by your Christian name after a fortnight's acquaintance, and so
we were long ago Mary and Una, and Rose and Violet.
" Dear Mary," Violet began, " I tuver was so astonished as when I heard you,
were out last night. How fatigued you must be ! Really such an adventure ; Rose
and I could not rest till we had seen you, and heard all about it. Of course, Harry
(Harry is 'Arry with his mother, but his sisters know better) told us what he could,
but that wasn't much, and Captain Maryon made light of it altogether ; lay—1 mean
military men, always do that."
Here Rose broke in upon the measured tones of her sister. " Tell us all how
and about it, Una. It's always so with me, if any fun is going, I miss it is sure as
a gun. Didn't I say last night I would take a cigarette with Maryon and Harry
when they went out. Violet's pet was there, and nothing but chant practising
going on. They covdd have dispensed with me, I've no doubt, though the pets liave
an unaccountable taste for my company. It's a variety, I suppose, and they know
what a brick I am for decorations. But my mother was in a wax, well, fume, if
you like the word better (/ see you, Molly), and wouldn't hear of it, so instead I took
to chaffing the Reverend Ambrose. Oh ! didn't I give it him about his fastings and
scourgings and hair-shii'ts. I declared I saw a corner of one below his white choker,
though he does blacken himself nearly up to the chin. And just as I had dismissed
him with a benediction, and driven the mother to the verge of frenzy, in they came
and told us about the wreck. And I said I'd have given the hair off my head to
have seen it (N.B., it's all my own)—so tell us all about it, like a good child."
Hitherto the introduction of a word edgewise had been quite out of the
question ; but now we began to relate our experiences, dwelling much on Captain
Muiyon's coolness and courage. " If it hadn't been for him, even those poor fellows
would have been lost," said Una.
"Ah yes, he's no end of a good fellow," quoth the unblushing Rose. "We
never saw him till a few days ago, but I'm in love with him now, and so would Vi
be, if she could spare time from the clericals. Do you know his mother was
Spanish, so I suppose he inherits his hair and complexion from her, and the blue eyes
look so incongruously delightful. Hal won't allow that he's good-looking at all, of
course.    ' Not your style, my dear Harry,' I said, ' but handsome in his own way.
172 THE ATTEMPT.
Tall men are always awkward, and we all know you wouldn't add a cubit to your
stature if you could ; and dark men are always satanic ; but, for my part, being fair, I
admire them.' Go on, though ; now for Mr Hilary. Ah ! you thought we didn't
know about that, but it was all over St Michael's this morning. There's nothing
for it now but that the knight who came in the storm by water,—not by laud,
unluckily, should make it up with Undine."
I was angry ; but no one minded Rose Glynne's rattle, though I was not sur¬
prised, as the fire-light leapt up, to see a red glow, redder than its reflection, on
what was visible of Una's face. But she seized the flagging end of the thread of
conversation, carrying it resolutely on, laughing about the Corsair, and so on, till
the Miss Glynnes got up and looked for their muffs, and an-anged their collarettes,
and pulled on their gloves, and were ready to start. " The Corsair would fain have
come with us," said Rose, tarrying at the door, " but I told him you had had enough
of him last night and this morning.    Addio, Una ; to-morrow at eleven."
So forth they sallied ; and Una and I, pleased with the compai-ative lull, sat
silent for a few minutes before the fire, and then went up the wide stairs to dress.
I let down my hair before the glass, and paused to think as I brushed it out.
Lizzie's story had drifted back my thoughts far from the troubles and pleasures of
to-day. Had not God been good, in that He had caused such a blossom of lo\c and
delight, as Una was to me, to spring from the grave of my lost mother's hopes and
happiness. " Mother, mother," I sighed, "you know the end from the beginning
now—you see the dark and the light." After all, why had that horror come over me
to-day ? A fancied likeness between two jmirs of eyes which had pi'obably no real
connection with each other, a look of over-bold and open admiration at Una. Why,
who did not admire Una 1 The young doctor who drove the high-ste})ping horee in
a professional gig, and cultivated an unprofessional and unpromising moustache, had
discovered a hacking and chronic cough in the case of Sarah Porter, and managed to
visit her twice a week, that he might get a glimpse of Una before seeing his patient.
Genera] Hilary could hardly take liis eyes off her when she sat down to sing to liim.
There was not a fisherman on the shore but gazed after her, and blessed her as she
went by ;
" Through the whole town,
The children seemed gladder that pulled at her gown."
And was I to be sur])i'ised at the Corsair for thinking as the rest did, or angry or
shocked ?    In f;ict, 1  reasoned out the whole matter; proved to myself, iis clear as
THE ATTEMPT. 173
the rule of three, that there was no cause for apprehension or trouble, and felt,
woman-like, as distrustful as ever.    I " shuddered,"—
" As the village wife who says,
I shudder, some one steps across my grave."
And so reasoning against my instincts, I dressed and went downstairs. The even¬
ing passed quietly away. It appeared, from Papa's account, that Mr Brand Hilary
had been on his way from Mexico in a Spanish ship, when they were driven out of
their course by storms, and so cast ashore. His father and he were now quite
reconciled, and indeed would have been so long before ; but for years Brand Hilary
had been leading a Bohemian life without once visiting England. Anything of the
cause which made him a wanderer, my father did not seem to know; at least he said
nothing of it. I could not help thinking of what he had said when he 6rst opened
his eyes, which only Una and I had heard.
How long I have been in telling of a night and a day. But have you never
noticed how sometimes a crowd of events seem to be compressed into some such
brief period, making a sudden change in your life, which will then flow calmly on,
undisturbed for a long time by anything out of its usual course 1 That evening I
spoke of Frank Laurie ; and my father told me to invite him to come to us as soon
as they could spare him at home. *' That will be some time in May, and you can
show him how to row, Una," said he.
The eleven o'clock appointment with Una, that the Gl3mnes had made, related
to a ride to be taken next morning ; and punctual to the hour Rose cantered up to
the gate with her brother, and, yes—the Corsair in attendance. Una was ready. A
horse for her was one of the indulgences my father permitted us at St Michael's,
and my quieter tastes were consulted by the gift of the most charming of small pony
caiTiages. Mr Glynne threw himself off his steed in headlong haste, blushing like a
l)eony as Una asked after his health, with a little mischievous solicitude which
amused me. The " lovely Rose " called out in dulcet tones, as he helped Una into
the saddle,—
" You needn't suppose he is restored, Mary. This morning we should never
have got him up but for my sending him a message that Captain Maryon would
escort us both unless he bestirred himself. And look at him now, the pale spectre of
his former self. Mightn't it be better for you not to try going on, Harry j this hectic
flush is so deceptive? Ha, ha, ha !" Hose's laugh was not exactly a soft musical
trill of mirth; it was a good hearty roar, expanding her lungs in the most salubrious
1 74 THE ATTEMPT.
way, but not particularly delightful to those who excited it. Even her patient brother
gave her a look which could not be described as amiable, while he put Una's foot
into the stii'rup and remounted. But Una had a natural gift for putting people at
their ease, and I saw she succeeded in healing the slight wound the thorny Rose
had inflicted. Henry Glynne was chattering contentedly to her, and laughing at
her sallies as they rode off. I mentally wondered how long the two coujiles would
continue in their present order,—the Corsair and Hose in the front rank, and Una
and her little cavalier bringing up the rear; and I wished it might last till their
return. The Corsair had looked eagerly for a moment at Una, as she stood in the
porch, with the long heavy dark-blue folds of her habit setting off her noble figure
and her wavy hair.    Would that be enough for him 1
When I heard the clatter of hoofs as the party returned, I looked from my
window. Sister Ann-like, to see the conclusion of the matter. As I expected and
feared,—Harry trotting somewhat sullenly along beside his sister, and Una and the
Corsaii' finishing off at a shaip cantor in front, he talking easily as to an old friend,
and Una listening and smiling as she did to many. No one could help noticing
how well he rode, either. I acknowledged that, as I saw his perfect seat and hand,
and wished him, with all his attractions, anywhere but at Una's side. He got off
to help her down, and Una, who often anticipated Mr Glynne's politeness by
throwing herself off, accepted his assistance, smiled again as she shook hands with
her companions, and came " stately stepping" in her long skii-t into Lawrence
Lodge.
Meantime the foreign sailors had gone down to the village, where quarters had
been found for them, till a subscription could be collected to furnish them with some
necessaries and send them to London, thence to find their way home ; and the one
who would never leave St Michael's, was to be buried that afternoon in the church¬
yard near the sea, where the waves sang dirges all the day long.
"How did you like the Corsair, Una?" I said, trying to speak carelessly, and
succeeding as well, perhaps, as most people do when they are trembling with anxiety
for the answer to a question.
" Oh, he has twice the fun of any man I have met here," she answered. " Lots to
say, and yet he doesn't bore you. Dear Molly, riding and talking and laughing are
three of the most apjietising things I know of. Did you see our order of battle as
we came back?"
" Yes, how was that managed 1"
" It wasn't my management, dear Molly; the Corsair did it, I don't know Low.
THE ATTEMPT. 175
Oh yes, he came up to us and told Mr Glynne his sister wished to speak to him ;
and when he went back. Captain Maryon said he was sure Rose would keep him a
long time, and so she did. I daresay it was all a ruse, Molly, at least you seem
to think so ; but I can't say I was sorry. Sweets to the sweet, but a little sugar
goes a great way with me."
" Well, Una, sugar may be a drug in the market," I said ; " but stupid as poor
Henry Glynne is, I like him better than the Corsair. Mind, this is all a mere
matter of first impressions, but I didn't like his face."
Una looked consideringly at me, then at the fire, as if she saw fancied Corsairs
in tlie red heart of the coals, then again at me. " Neither do I," she said slowly.
We were both silent after that, till we adjourned to the drawing-room. Later on
we went down to the pier, to feel the keen blast from the sea ; meeting some
people we knew by the way, invalids creeping home as the wind grew raw, and
Violet Glynne, as we passed the church wicket, coming out from an extra service.
We spoke no more of Captain Maryon that night; but oblivion of his exist-
tence was impossible. Expeditions had to be made into the country to get the
first snowdrops and daffodils, and the great moonlight-coloured primroses that
were to be found as April went on, in the green lanes and woods inland, though
among our sandy pleasure grounds and winding chines, nothing told of spring but
the golden gorse-heaps and curling bracken buds among the pines. My little pony-
carriage came into requisition to carry luncheon-baskets, to be emptied and filled
again with flowers, and Rose Glynne and Henry would ride, and Una would do
the same, though she often took a place beside Violet and me instead. And into
all these quiet amusements, these spring twilight drives, and gossips, and songs,
did Captain Maryon, of the 11th Hussars, enter with an apparent measure of en¬
joyment, no man saying him nay. He was going to London in May, and so were
the Glynnes, and so—
" The present moment is our ain,
The niest we never saw,"
seemed to be the motto of the whole party, and with it this chapter must end.
O. M.
17G THE ATTEMPT.
Thou breathless emblem of a breathless age,
Fly on thy swift, straight, steam-encircled way.
Frantic until thou reach the wished-for stage,
Pufhng impatience, gi'oaning at delay.
Speed ever onward with the whirlwind's pace.
And utter now again that pained spent cry ;
Even like an athlete worsted in the race,
And no more conscious of the gazer's eye.
In vain for thee wind Scotia's silver streams;
Thou dost not care to linger or to look.
In vain upon her towera the sunlight gleams,
Or on yon cottage in the valley's crook.
Thou car'st not, thou, for cottage, stream, or tower.
Their tranquil beauty has no charms for thee;
The bright allurements of a passing hour
Disturb not thy unswerving energy.
Yet look not with contempt on yonder stream,
Scorn not its constant, unobtrusive flow;
Thunder thou o'er the bridge with eddying steam,
A surer, stronger agent glides below.
Swifter thy pace and noisier is thy tread,
Think'st thou, for that, thou may'st despise the slow 1
Straight as a shaft by skilful archer sped.
Dost thou contemn the river's winding flow ?
Know that, before thy clamour shook our rest
Yon stream's smooth current glided on the same ;
By many generations loved and blest,
That guessed not at thee, had not heard thy name.
THE ATTEMPT. 177
The hand of man can regulate thy power,
Thy future fate depends on Time's decree ;
Unurged, unchecked, unceasing, hour by hour.
The stream runs whispering towards the unfathomed sea.
Sanct Rewle.
picnics.
There is no description of social amusement regarding which there is a greater
diversity of opinion than Picnics; not, like many other social enjoyments, as to
whether they are harmless, for that, I think, is admitted by every one, but as to
whether they are pleasant. I suppose this arises very much from the fact that
picnics, more than any kind of entertainment, stand in need of good management;
and while I am a great admirer of picnics, and would place them very high indeed
in the scale of social enjoyment, I readily admit that an ill-managed and ill-assorted
picnic is a bore of the first magnitude, and a grievance of the darkest dye. When
you join the party in the morning, expecting a drive made merry with talk and
laughter, a ramble through wood or glen, by mountain or loch, and then the con¬
summation and crown of all picnics—a comfortable lunch; when you come con¬
fidently expecting all these things, and find that the Fates and the chaperones have
allotted you a place in a carriage filled with all the bores of your acquaintance ;
that after alighting you have to struggle to the scene of action through a marsh,
along a hill-side where you are scorched by the sun, and over half-a-dozen all but
impassi^ble fences; when you then encamp in a sort of Arabia Petrsea, where no
water can be had for love or money, and find that the salt has been forgotten, that
the sandwiches won't go round the party, that the bottle of raspberry vinegar has
discharged its contents into the pigeon-pie, and that the leg of lamb is thoroughly
saturated with the juice from the cherry-tart; and when finally you have to drag
your weary limbs back to the spot where the carriages await you, and struggle all
the way home to be cheerful and think you have enjoyed yourself; tlien,—I admit,
you have indeed reason to complain. But let your complaints be levelled at the
management and circumstances of the particular picnic, and not at the Institution of
the Picnic in general, which in good hands and under favourable auspices, is capable
of affording more fun and genuine enioyment than any other sort of entertainment.        j
s 1
178 THE ATTEMPT.
I would divide picnics into three great classes—of all of which I have had consi¬
derable experience,—each of which possesses its own peculiar advantages, and possibly
its own peculiar drawbacks. These three classes I would designate as the Picnic
Undeveloped, the Picnic Proper, and the Picnic Grand. The Picnic Undeveloped
would by many people be considered as scarcely deserving the name of a picnic at all.
We all know the sort of thing : a walking exj)edition to some neighbouring locality,
sufficiently distant to make rest and refreshment at the said locality highly desirable,
if not necessary ; an early start, with papers of sandwiches secreted about one member
of the party, a flask of sherry in the possession of another, and a few other little
etceteras distributed among the rest of the company ; the day spent in the open air ;
then the walk home, and an evening of delicious and well-earned laziness. This
style of picnic, from its unpretending simplicity, is not nearly such a hazardous
buigness as the more ambitious attempts of the Picnic Proper and the Picnic Grand.
If the weather is fine, and if none of the party are over fatigued, the Picnic
Undeveloped is pretty certain to be a success. It is a very simple sort of affair; and
if those who join will just take it for what it is, and not sigh after the unattainable
in any foim, they are pretty certain to enjoy themselves. One great element of
success in the Picnic Undeveloped is that it is always, or almost always, under¬
taken with an object. You get it up because you wish to see some waterfall, to
explore some ruin, to climb some hill, which could not be seen or explored or
climbed without the the intervention of the Picnic Undeveloped; or else you have
botanical, entomological, or geological proclivities, and fix this expedition to enable
you to gratify your tastes. So that at the Picnic Undeveloped there is nearly
always something to do, something to talk and think about, which keejis ennui
effectually aloof. And then at a simple affaii- like the Picnic Undeveloped, the
various members are nearly always intimate friends. You don't ask strangers to take
part in so unceremonious an expedition, and so there is seldom any of the stiffness
a})t to attach to a picnic party whose component members are but slightly known
to each other. The Picnic Undeveloped is generally essentially feminine in its
construction ; gentlemen don't care for the " much ado about nothing," as they are
apt to consider the preparation and arrangement necessary even for a Picnic Unde¬
veloped. They look with contempt on the suuplicity of the affair, and vote that le
jeu ne vaf^t pas la chandelle ; and so it comes that at this style of picnic the fair sex
generally find themselves in the proportion of two to one. I remember one appalling
instance of this female j)repondei'ance, at a picnic of the undeveloped class at which
I had the honour of being present, when twelve ladies started on the expedition
THE ATTEMPT. 179
under the escort of—one gentleman ! It was at St Andrews, where the fierce in¬
tensity of the Golf Mania is held sufficient to excuse any amount of ungallant be¬
haviour. I am happy to say, however, that our solitary cavalier behaved with a
courage and a presence of mind marvellous to behold; distributing his attentions with
the utmost gallantry and impartiality, and, with a wisdom beyond his years, keeping
always in close attendance upon the chaperone. He was an undergraduate of Trin.
Coll. Cam.; and I am happy to avail myself of this public opportunity of testifying
my admiration for his gallant behaviour. The most trying incident of the day
occurred when the ordeal seemed almost over, and we were within a mile of home.
At this point a heavy shower of rain came on. The chaj^erone had an umbrella; so
had the undergraduate; but among the eleven young ladies of the party, not one had
even a parasol. At this terrible discovery, the unfortunate young man for the first
time realised the full horror of his position; he cast a despairing glance along the
row of hats and feathers, muslin dresses and gossamer _y?c7ms, and at last placing his
umbrella in the hands of the plainest and most uninteresting damsel of the party, he
walked off at a rapid pace beside the chaperone.
But it is high time that I had come to the second division of my subject—the
Picnic Proper. This, when well managed, is, in my opinion, the most enjoyable of
the three classes I have mentioned. It should be larger than the Picnic Undeveloped,
and should be engineered by the joint eiforts of several families. The Picnic Proper,
too, must not be a walking expedition ; the place of the celebration must be reached
either per carriage or per train; and in the proper disposition of the party in the
different vehicles lies one of the most formidable difficulties of the Picnic Proper.
It won't do to let Aunt Betsy go in the same carriage as young Adolphus Ailington,
for he enrages her with his " airs," and she makes him miserable with her very
visible contempt. Then if George Smith and his sister Mary should be sent off" along
with the Misses Arlington, they will arrive at the scene of action in an agony of
awkwardness and shyness, crimson with blushes, and miserable with the crushing
sense of their inferiority to the high and mighty young damsels who have been
industriously snubbing them all the way to the picnic. Then if Charley Chester is
not allowed to go in the carriage with Janey Johnston, he will be sulky, and she
will be out of spirits for the rest of the day ; and, on the other hand, if they are
satisfactorily disposed of, it is at the imminent risk of offending Captain Carton of
the Horse Marines, who admires Janey Johnston next to himself, and studiously
ignores the existence of Charley Chester. So a little, indeed not a little diplomacy
is required to manage this part of the Picnic Proper.    This class of picnic may have
] 80 THE ATTEMPT.
an object or it may not; but, as in the Picnic Undeveloped, the lunch was a con¬
sequence of the object, and quite a secondary consideration, so in the Picnic Proper
the lunch is the great business of the day, and the waterfall, the ruined castle or
abbey, the fern collection, or the sketch-books, are mere accessories and incidental
circumstances. Tliere are certain features about this part of the Picnic Proper
common to almost all festivities of the kind. Who does not know the struggles
that are gone through in engineering a gipsy fire and tripod to boil the potatoes, and
the enterprising gentleman who achieves the object, after burning all his fingers and
singeing two large holes in his pocket handkerchief? Who does not know the
awkward individual who spills the cream over his neighbour's dress, and breaks
three plates while carrying them to be washed in the river 1 the funny man who
makes puns on all the eatables, and mixes a salad which no one can eat but himself ?
the stout lady who hates sitting on the ground, and requires the assistance of two
gentlemen before she can regain the perpendicular? the extraordinaiy attitudes
assumed by the whole party, in the hope of combining ease and elegance ; and the
inevitable wasp, who always makes his appearance towards the end of the perform¬
ances, and creates a sensation of the most terrific description 1
The Picnic Proper is pre-eminently adapted to bring out people's true characters ;
and, if space permitted, I could dwell long on this part of the subject, for it would
take hours to enumerate the various ways in which self-denial, cheerfulness, ingenuity,
patience, and unselfisimess, may be brought out at a Picnic Proper. I have seen
many individuals, whose excellence I should never have noticed in everyday life,
come out at a picnic in such colours that I felt disposed to canonise them on the spot.
Principally, I am bound to state,do these good qualities abound among the chaperones;
and indeed the very fact that so many ladies arrived at that stage of life which
thoroughly appreciates a good luncheon, a comfortable chair, and a half hour of repose
in the afternoon, are ready to abandon the advantages of civilisation, and go forth to
the hardshii^s and fatigues of a picnic, to act as guardians to a very unruly and often
very ungrateful band of young people, and partake of a meal al fresco, seated upon
the root of a tree, with a wasp's nest in the immediate vicinity, and yet continue
cheerful, good-humoured, and energetic,—the very fact, I say, that such ladies exist
and abound, redounds to the immortal glory of the British matron. For there is no
denying that as regards picnics (and most other pleasant things) " the days of our
youth are the days of our glory, " and that after middle age, picnics are seldom pro¬
ductive of keen enjoyment, and pretty generally result in rheumatism.
But I have left myself but little space for any remarks on the third division of
THE ATTEMPT. 181
my subject—the Picnic Grand. It is difficult to trace the exact limit at which
the Picnic Proper becomes merged in the Picnic Grand; but in the advanced
stages of the latter species there is a marked difference from the former. The
Picnic Grand must be very large, and the scene of action should be at a
considerable distance from the residences of the picnickers. The luncheon must
be complete in all details—cucumber for the salmon, mint-sauce for the cold
lamb, ice for the wine and water, (fee, <fec., are indispensable at the Picnic Grand.
There must also be a certain amount of attendance—the ladies and gentlemen
of the party may be allowed to light the fire, roast the potatoes, and boil the
water for tea; but the prosaic and easy duties of unpacking and packing, laying the
cloth, washing the dishes, and counting the spoons, are at the Picnic Grand always
performed by servants. Servants, I may remark, entertain as a rule the utmost
contempt and abhorrence for picnics. It is to them simply incomprehensible how
individuals, who might lunch quietly and comfortably at home, sitting upon chairs
beside tables, should of their own free will give up the comforts of home, and live
for the day like gipsies. The romance of the thing has no charms for them ; and I
remember how my old nurse once put an anti-climax upon an enthusiastic description
I had been giving her of the delights of a day in the woods, by remarking drily—
" Ou aye, I daursay it's a' very true, but it's an awfu' ruination to your clothes."
The object of the Picnic Grand is always very hazy and undefined ; unless its
promoters are honest enough to confess that their object is the picnic itself. In fact,
this style of expedition is generally got up because people want to have a picnic ; and
after all the guests are invited, and all the preparations made, some sort of pretext
is devised and put forward as the moving cause of the whole. It may be of the
very flimsiest kind, but it does quite well for a peg on which to fasten the fabric of
the Picnic Giand. This kind of picnic, unless the company are specially well
assorted, and the place of the expedition particularly attractive, is apt to be a little
formal and stifi'; though there is no sort of social gathering which literally and
figuratively takes the starch out of the company so quickly as a picnic. Still, very
often, the merriest part of a Picnic Grand is the drive home, when everybody's
shyness has worn off, and, under cover of the deepening twilight, no one is afraid to
speak, and most people even venture to sing. The Picnic Grand, too, is not complete
unless finished off by a dance at the house of its chief promoter; and unless the
fatigues of the day have been extreme, this is pretty certain to be a success.
But I must hasten to conclude this long paper by wishing all my readers may, during
the summer of 1870, expei'ience the pleasures of many successful picnics. Dido.
182 THE ATTEMPT.
^Ijf C^illr af i^t ^xnbt of its Setter.
(From the German.)
Within that little room of thine
Thou sleepest peacefully;
Oh ! mother, dearest mother mine,
Take me within that room of thine,
Oh!  shut it not from me.
So gladly would I come to thee
To be thy child again;
'Tis stormy here, and cold, and chill.
With thee 'tis warm, and calm, and still.
Ah ! let me, let me in.
Thou ledd'st me once so lovingly,
So gladly held'st my hand ;
Now it is lone and sad with me,
Lead me yet once again with thee
To the fair heavenly land.
Veronica.
At first sight, few things appear so strange as the adoration so generally paid to the
serpent. If not the oldest, it ranks at least among the earliest forms through which
the human race endeavoured to propitiate the superior powers ; and traces of it are
to be found in almost every country of the world, and, even at the present day, it
may be met lurking in out-of-the-way corners,of the globe.
Attempts are made to connect this form of idolatry with the temptation and fall
of mail described in Genesis. But it is difficult to see why the descendants of Eve
should pay divine honours to a creature which the Mosaic narrative distinctly states
was degraded to the form of a serpent on account of its complicity in that transaction.
THE ATTEMPT. 183
We read that " the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head ;" and it is
curious to observe how many allusions there are among the ancient myths to the
vanquishing of Evil under the form of this creature. In Egypt, we hear of Horas,
son of Osiris, conquering a serpent. In Hindu mythology, Vishnu, in his 8th
Avatar or incarnation, under the name of Krishna, destroys the serpent who was
killing the herds with his poisoned breath. In Germany, we read of Siegfried ; in
Poland, we find Crac; in Greece, Hercules, Apollo, and Jupiter—all conquering
seqients. But these accounts do not explain the fact of worship being paid to it—
probably its peculiar habits may have conduced to its universal adoration. Men
were early struck with its anomalous locomotive powers. Sanchomiathou quotes an
earlier writer, who says—" The serpent, alone of all animals without legs or arms,
still moves with singular celeiity,"—he might have added grace, for as it moves with
head erect, its body, apparently without exertion, falls into the most graceful curves.
The colours of the snake ti'ibe are frequently vivid, and their eyes bright and
piercing. Then, too, they live an indefinite time without food; they periodically
cast their skins—and were thus fabled to renew their youth; their longevity is,
moreover, great, and they were easily believed to be immortal. Bnt it is probable
tliat they would never have been worshipped but for their exceptional strength and
poisonous qualities. The deadly spring and crushing embrace of the boa, the fearful
poison-fang of the cobra, alike caused the serpent race to be feared; and with
savages it appears that religion springs from fear, and a desire to propitiate the
powers than can inflict injuiy.
But this fear seems to have changed into the opposite extreme of love and
admii-ation before we have any record of the worship, whei-ever we find it. In the
wilderness of Sinai, the groves of Epidaurus, or the Sarmatian huts, the ser])ent is
always the Agathodoemon—the bringer of health and good fortune, the teacher of
wisdom, the oracle of future events.
Ophiolatry seems to have originated about the Lower Euphrates, and to have
spread thence as from a centre. Apparently no Semitic race ever adopted it ; for
the spirit of serpent worship is diametrically oj)posed to the sjiirit of the Bible and
the Veda, and these works pervade the religions of the Semitic or Aryan nations.
Although ophiolatry is met with in Judea, Greece, Scandinavia, yet it is only as the
tares springing among the wheat.
Human sacrifices seem to have been constantly associated with serpent wor-
sliip ; in Judea, so long as traces of it remained, the idea of human sacrifice seems
familiar; and after llezekiah's time, we simultaneously lose sight of both.    So long
184: THE ATTEMPT.
as Greece was Pelasgic, the two went hand in hand, but after the return of the
Heraclidse, human sacrifices went out of fashion although ophiolatry lingered.
In Mexico and Dahomey, where human sacrifices are frequent, serpent worship
is the typical form of popitiation ; and in India the two existed at an early period,
although the mild doctrines of the Buddhist abolished the human sacrifice, and only
the worship of the serpent remained. Notwithstanding these coincidences, there is
no direct connection between the two forms of faith :—the human sacrifice was not
made to propitiate the snake god, nor was the victim devoured by the seipent. In¬
deed, this deity was nowhere sought to be appeased by blood ofierings.
It is natural, in examining the early religions, to turn fii-st to Egj'pt, for this was
the earliest civilised countiy, and pre-eminently the parent of all idolatries. The
Egyptians worshipped all nature, " from bulls to beetles, from crocodiles to cats "—
all came alike. Little wonder that, in such a pantheon, serpents should be included ;
yet the Egyptians cannot be classed as a nation of serpent worshippers. The evil
power Typhon is represented under this form, and Osiris, the supreme sun-god him¬
self, occurs ill the sculptures as a serpent with two human legs, or with a lion's head.
It is difficult to reconcile the representation of the two opposite powers of good and
evil by the same symbol.
In Jewish history we meet no reference to ophiolatry in connection with Abi-a-
ham or his immediate descendants. The brazen serpent (Numbers xxi. 9) is the
first mention of actual adoration; and it is worthy of note that this worship is said to
have been paid to the serpent on account of its healing powers. Since this explana¬
tion seems to have been readily adopted by the Jews, we may infer that they were
accustomed to attribute this characteristic to the snake tribe; but we now learn it for
the first time, though it afterwards becomes so familiar in Greek mythology, where
the serpent is the indispensable concomitant of Hygieia. We find no further men¬
tion of this worship until the time of Hezekiah, when we read (2 Kuigs xviii. 4) that
" unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it." Then, after six
centuries of toleration, it was resolved to put an end to this idolatry. Nothing in either
the Bible or Talmud justifies the assertion that ophiolatry prevailed again among
the Jews, unless the passage—" They worshipped serpents void of reason," which
occurs in Wisdom xi. 15, may be taken as jjroof. The text is in curious contrast to
Matthew x. 16,—" Be ye wise as serpents." After the Christian era, this form of
worship cropped up again among the Nicolaitans and Gnostics, especially the sect
of Ophites, but in this case it was probably deiived from Persia. Of the Ophites,
Tertullian tells us—" They even preferred the serpent to Christ, because the former
THE  ATTEMPT. 185
brought the knowledge of good and evil into the world." They even quote the
Gospels to prove that Christ was an imitation of the serpent, because it is said—" As
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up."
They keep a living serpent in a chest, and at the time of the mysteries, entice him
out by placing bread before him. He issues forth, and having ascended the table, folds
himself above the bread. This they call a perfect sacrifice. They not only break
and distribute this among the votaries, but whoever wishes may kiss the serpent.
This the wretched people call the Eucharist."
Probably this worship continued to prevail in Syria, until the Mahomedan
invasion swept away the mass of superstitions which had fastened themselves upon
Christianity. The Tyrian coins and other monuments suffice to prove that the
Phoenicians were addicted to this idolatry ; but the only direct proof of its prevail¬
ing in Babylon, is the part of Daniel now printed separately in the Apochryplia, the
stoiy of Bel and the Dragon.
It is difficult to understand how a nation speaking a language so purely
Aryan as the Greek, could so completely have relapsed into the Turanian ancestral
serpent worship. It seems probable that the two antagonistic races, Pelasgi and
Hellenes, inhabited the country at the same period, and thus the Pelasgic-Turanian
form of worship remained among the people. The earlier myths refer to the
destruction of serpents and serpent races. One of the oldest is the destruction of
the Python by Apollo. Cadmus fought and killed the dragon that devoured his
men, and having, by order of Minerva, sowed its teeth, there sjirang forth at once
armed men. The conversion of Cadmus and his wife into serpents, as a cure for ills
that were become unbearable, and the respect with which they were regarded, point
to a form of faith that must have been familiar to the inhabitants of Greece.
Hercules was the great destroyer of serpents, strangling two while yet in his cradle.
His adventures with the guardian dragon of the Garden of the Hesperides, and with
the many-headed Hydra, are too well-known to need more than a passing reference.
We meet a kindlier feeling to the serpent race after the return of the
IleraclidcE, when Hellenic supremacy was assured. Then the serpent became the
oracle, the guardian, the healing god. These creatures were kept both at Delphi
and at the cave of Trophonius; but the great centre of serpent worship was
Epidaurus, where stood the famous temple of -iSEsculapius and its grove, where ser¬
pents were kept and fed down to the time of Pausanius, according to whom they
attained an enormous size, some measuring thirty cubits. It is not clear from
whence the myth of ^sculapius came.    There was a temple to him in Alexandria,
186 THE  ATTEMPT.
and there a serpent was kept; but the Greeks are as likely to have taken the myth
to Egypt as to have borrowed it thence. In 462 the Romans sent an embassy to
Epidaurus, who brought back a serpent, which was received with divine honours
by the Koman populace, and its advent was believed to have stayed the plague.
From this time this worship was established at Rome. Minerva was believed to
have committed the care of Athens to the serpent god Erechthonios—sometimes re¬
presented as half-man half-serpent. He was more popularly believed to be a true
serpent; for Herodotus states that when the Persians were approaching Athens,
the inliabitants, though warned by the oracle, refused to leave until they learned
that the great serpent guardian of the citadel had refused its food and left its place.
The ancient Tree and Serpent Temple stood where the Erechtheum now stands,
and being destroyed by the Persians, was rebuilt in its present form.
The influence of the snake in Grecian history is most remarkable. We find
that Philip himself believed in the possibility of the serjDent being the real father of
Alexander; and Cicero does not discountenance the story which he tells us, that one
of Alexander's generals having a poisoned wound, the serpent of Olympias appeared
to him in a dream with a root in its mouth. The context shows that this serpent
was the father of Alexander, and it pointed out where the root grew which healed
the wound.
It is not known to what extent ophiolatry prevailed in Italy. It is probable
that the Etruscans practised it, but theii- inscriptions cannot now be read, and
their existing temples are all of late date, when this form of worship may have
been given up.
At Lanuvium, sixteen miles south of Rome, there existed a large, dark groA'e
near the temple of the Argive Juno. Here there was a vast and deep cave, the
abode of a great serpent.
Ovid's Metamorphoses are full of passages referring to the important part which
the serpent performed in classic mythology : and there are many allusions to it in the
other poets. One may be quoted, where it is ordered—" Two serpents be painted on
the wall, to indicate that the place is sacred." And in pictures at Pompeii and
Herculaneum there are portrayed serpents approaching an altar. It is said the
Emperor Hadrian procured a large one from India, and placed it in the temple of
Jupiter Olympius, at Athens, which he had just rebuilt.
Among a people so essentially Aryan as the Germans, there is no trace of this
worship ; nor was there in Germany, as in Greece, an underlying race of Turanians,
who, less intellectual, were everywhere given to this idolatry.    These ophite races
THE ATTEMPT. 187
seem never to have penetrated far inland. They swarmed up the rivers of France
and the shores of the Baltic. They were adepts at draining land, and fish was theii'
chief food. But such a people was wholly incompetent to deal with the forests that
covered Germany, and were incapable of steady labour, without which, especially in
so rigorous a climate, success in agriculture was impossible. Accordingly, there is
no trace of serpent worship among the purely Teutonic races. Einna.
{To he continued.)
Since the June number of this Magazine was issued, a great loss has been sustained.
Charles Dickens is dead. How short the announcement, how simple the words
that tell us, in one little sentence, the chain is unloosed, the link gone, that boxmd
Charles Dickens and the world in such loving communion together. He died at
his post; the hand had scarce let go the pen, when the eyes were closed for ever,
never again to look out upon a world he loved so well, and in which he had worked so
long and so nobly,—silently, suddenly the summons came, unlocked for even by those
who knew him best. His life was too vigilant, too active, too earnest, for any to
suspect that death was lurking near. To all alike comes death—and the chair
is empty, and the house desolate. For Charles Dickens' death all Europe
mourned. Beyond the seas and across the ocean, lamentation has been made
over our common loss. "Whatever place posterity may assign to him in the
noble army to which he belonged; whether it be foremost in the van, or simply
in the ranks; one place at least he has gained, which destroying time has no
power to obliterate—in the hearts of the men and women of his own age and
day he was first and foremost, for never was author more beloved, never was man
more lamented in the whole annals of authorship. There is no name more popular
than that of Charles Dickens; and yet who can say it was his pre-eminence in
literary talent, or his superiority in moral elevation, that gave to him this un¬
paralleled influence over the hearts of men 1 None would venture to arrogate for
him either the one or the other. We have had, and have still, greater wi-itera
and better men. What, then, was the key with which he unlocked the hearts
of his fellow men 1 Every page that he wrote tells us the secret of his
power.    Few, indeed, had a keener insight into the faults and the follies, the vices
1 88 THE ATTEMPT.
and the crimes of the world around him ; and his pen is sometimes as incisive as
the surgeon's knife; but there rings always through his laughter a touch of tender
pity,—the sound of an honest heart goes always along with his satire; and his
sense of humour, however great, is not greater than his sense of sympathy. If he
laughed he also loved ; if he condemned, he never forgot to pity; and it is this
feeling of true and manly fellowship, in the weakness as well as in the great¬
ness of humanity, that makes Charles Dickens' place so sure in the hearts of
his readers.
Dickens possessed a rare faculty of adequately conveying to the minds of
others the impressions that were made upon his own. The creations of his fancy,
of his imagination, brought out from the store-house of his memory, live, move, and
have their being in the minds of his readers as truly and as really as in his own.
In this respect, and in the strength of his dramatic fire, he resembles Shakespeare.
Certainly his range was limited to what he saw and knew of his own experience of life,
while the range of Shakespeare's creations extends from the king on his throne to
the serf of the soil, and is limited only by life itself. Who now can tell the sources of
Shakespeare's knowledge 1 Like Dickens, he was a man of middle class origin, tastes,
and predilections, and yet he soared where none have ever followed. Nature's eldest
sons are for ever eldest sons,—each one has his own heritage of greatness, not
to be infringed upon. No doubt the world will again and again have good and
genial and pleasant rulers in literary labour, but never again will she have a
Charles Dickens. We have one Shakespeare, one Milton, one Byron; we have our
groat and noble pioneers in science, in philosophy, in social ethics; God does not
let us want; again and again does the right man rise up to fill the right place.
In all his writings, Charles Dickens had one serious aim in view. With a firm
yet elastic foot he was for ever stej^ping over the social palings that separate man
from man. He placed side by side the man in the moleskin jacket and the man
of birtli and breeding, and made them feel as brothers. He told the strong and
the wise that the weak and the foolish have equal rights to happiness and respect.
The poor besmudged infant, dragged up to life by a hand scarce older than its own,
was to Dickens as direct a gift from God, as the smiling innocent lying iu
the arms of its proud and happy mother. Each he declared to be the wonderful
gift of God, and to have an equal right to the good and loving offices of
men and women. He tells us also that happiness and misery are not so far
divided as are our sympathies. Dickens was a great preacher. By the mouth of
little Nell and of poor little Paul he picached to us of the sacred innocence of
THE ATTEMPT. 189
helpless childhood. Tom-all-alone warned us of retribution to come. But we
do not intend here to discuss his merits as an author. It is in quite another aspect
that we are now looking at him ; the memory of his loss is as yet too green to allow
us to speak of him in any critical spirit. It is as an eai-nest reformer of his day and
age that we are now looking upon him ; and as a true and sound well-wisher of the
good and happiness of his fellow-men.
Dickens made little account of the universal equality of mankind, but he
made much of the universal brotherhood. In all he ever wrote or spoke, he
insisted upon the good feeling that is due from man to man—iipon the mutual
forbearance, the mutual kindness. He insisted upon the dignity of labour, upon
the real nothingness of all social distinctions. In these respects he laboured in
the same path as the great philosopher Jean Jacques Kousseau, of whom, indeed, in
community of views of life and men, he frequently reminds his readers. Like
Rousseau he was something more, higher, better, truer than a mere social or political
reformer. Dickens would have all men true and just towards each other. It was not
the rights of parties he advocated, it was the rights of humanity. In these things
Rousseau and Dickens worked with a common understanding. In other respects
our pure minded and English-hearted novelist was far superior to the multifarious
and many-sided Frenchman, whose principles were as loose and uncertain as his
views were clear and far-sighted. Each knew better than to suppose that equality of
social position or distinction is the point to aim at. It is equality of rights, equality
of justice, and equality of labour that is wanted. It is the knowledge that to
trample upon our fellow-men, and to despise their happiness, is to bring destruction
upon the whole community. Certainly the lesson is no new one; it was taught upon
Calvary eighteen hundred years ago, and good men are for ever teaching it; but the
practice of the world is to forget its best teachings,—and those who remind us of the
truth are those who best deserve our love and gratitude. Shakespeare teaches
a great lesson when he tells us that there is good in everything, but Dickens teaches
a greater when he tells us there is good in every man ; and it is because his works
have always this in view that men arc now mourning his loss as that of a friend and
of a brother.
There may be, and there is, much diversity of opinion as to the true and ultimate
place of Charles Dickens as an English Novelist, but there is no diversity of opinion
as to his place among all true-hearted Englishmen.
M. E. T.
190 THE ATTEMPT.
The sunbeams were playing about upon a little marsh that lay half hidden below a
willow-tree. A few flowers grew in it; a green mossy bank rose upwards from it,
and a little stream gurgled down on the further side. There was nothing uncom¬
mon visible; had yo\i passed it you would not even have said—"It is pretty !"
But I will tell you something of the fairy folks that made it their home. The
largest being there, crouched at its outposts, was a dragon, fabled as of old, to guard
all fairy homes. But no fierce look had the monster, not even in its flashing diamond
and emerald eye, that rose brightly from amid the other shades of green and gold.
Very varied, iu size and form and hue, were the inhabitants of that little spot.
There were warriors among them, who had their dwelling in the sheaths of the bark
of the willow-tree. They were cased in complete and flexible coats of mail, and I
heaj-d them called Armadilloes. " I am so happy ! what joyous things are life and
sunshine !" hummed the fair Egeria to herself, as she alighted upon a stalk of grass
to smooth her ruflled robes, tossed by the scented breeze. Most lovely and joyous
did she seem, as, her crystal eyes beaming with full content, she turned to pat down
the spangles on her transparent wings, that caught the sunbeams as she moved,
and reflected them back in many a varied aiTay of mimic rainbows. " What
a happy world," repeated she, " yet do I hear a sigh ? Can one so beauteous
know grief?" And the tiny frolic gazed on a form more rich and gorgeous
than her own; of greater size and higher order. She recognised at last in the
mourner, the proud dame Arctia Caja, who for some cycles had looked scornfully
down on the whole district, from amid her rich robes of black and gold and crimson
velvet pile ! Yet her answer came now sadly and humbly enough. " Yes, I sigh !
for I am dying !"
" Dying, my sister, and you yet so beautiful !" exclaimed a passer-by.
" Your sister !" and a momentary flash of wounded vanity roused the tones, to
sink once more into a long-drawn—"Ah ! alas !"
" Your sister ?" laughed Egeria; "get along with you ! You are just like a
bear, but have not even a bear's legs to walk with—crawling in that ungainly way
in the wind ! You our Beauty's sister? The proud Arctia Caja wouldn't acknow¬
ledge such poor relations, even if she had them !"
" Hush, hush, Egoria, though I thank you for your kind intentions. My day
of pride is over—the approach of death makes one wondrous wise.    He is indeed my
THE ATTEMPT. 191
brother ! When I am gone, yovi may live to see him far more beautiful than I am.
But now I mourn for my orphan family, whom I must leave untended. When
they arise from their cradles to enter the world, they will have no mother's care.
And they will be for a space doomed to wear a shape like unto that creeping worm,
for such is the law of our nature. But they will not remaia so for ever. I told
them how to weave for themselves a cradle of silk and gold, wherein they may
lie and dream their fairest dreams—to wake and find them real. For when our
king smiles on them long enough, they burst their bonds, and rise winged like their
parents towards the sky. It is ever thus ! Alas, to leave the sunshine ! I die !"
and the proud wings folded themselves in death. Sadly Egeria gazed upon one
who had been almost too haughty to be her friend, but who now in death had won
her heart ; and she smoothed the death form in its last slee}), and tried to cover her
with hare-bell blossom.
'• How very beautiful she is," said the tiny Egeria, as she soared away to visit
some friends that dwelt in the leaves of the tree above, and wove fairy robes of true
gossamer green, like their leafy homes.
On the way she met an old acquaintance, called Adela de Guerella, whose
beauty, though milder and less dazzling than that of the deceased Arctia Caja, was
not less perfect. She wore an upper mantle of refulgent gold, set with gems,
while through its fringes and openings peeped an under garment of bright rainbow
hues. " Ah, my pet," cried she, " come and take a trip with me ! I've had such
fun all day—prancing about upon my musk-beetle's back. He's a true fairy-
charger ; and far nobler-hued than your grgat horned stag-beetle. I cannot see
why you vahie him so for his horns, for he does nothing with them; neither does
ho carry perfume about with him, as sweet as the flowers, as my protege does !"
" Everything may be as you say; and yet I like my horned animal, though ho
is inclined to be a little rebellious and saucy at times, even to us flying creatures—
for he will boast he is as good as we are, with false pretences of wings," said
Egeria.
" I wish to tell you of our poor cousin Atalanta's fright; and her escape from
one of those horrid gigantic monsters that have no wings, and can do nothing
but walk and roar, and seek amongst us whom they may devour. We have
often seen them, when they were nimble enough to catch any of our inhabitants,
take great spears and thrust them through them, and carry them away in triumph
in mighty hampers of bleeding victims—so we all know we ought to avoid them.
Atalanta Vvas fanning herself upon a sweet-scented corolla, when one of these ogres
192 THE ATTEMPT.
came by, and roared out—" What a beauty! scarlet and white, and azure upon
black ! I must have it!" And he chased her. While she, in her excitement,
became quite blind and giddy, and knew not where to fly. More than once she felt
a blow, which, for a time, stunned her; but, with the struggles of despair, she again
and again escaped. Panting with fear, she slipped behind the tree, and tried to
hide herself—she could fly no further : his dreadful eye was upon her; she was
spell-bound, and gave herself up for lost. What was her thankful astonishment to
see him turn away, and, in his terrific growl, to hear the pleasant assurance—
" She has escaped me this time ! Where can she have hidden 1 I did not think
I could have lost sight of such lovely hues amid these dark green leaves !"
She was staring at him all the time, and it was not until he had gone, and she
had somewhat recovered her senses, that she found she had folded up her wings so
closely in her fear, that nothing but the soft brown lining could have been seen, and
he could not have recognised it in the shadow. She will be wiser the next time she
is chased, and give up at once ! What a palpitation she miist still have ! Poor
thing—yet I cannot understand these monsters. They are so stupid, for though they
may chase some of us, they shriek and iiin away quite frightened from our little
cousins, though one of their big feet could crush thousands of them. They fancy they
are ugly, because their great goggling eyes cannot see anything beautiful if it is small;
they don't even see the beautiful jewelled plumes we often wear, without sticking
on another great and more projecting eye. They think themselves beautiful
forsooth, when their skin is yellow and gray, and coarse and shaggy. Why, if we
were as large as they ai'e, they would worship us for our beauty alone ! "
" No wonder then they wrap themselves up in so many coverings though they
are but the cast-off garments of other animals less fierce than they, I thought they
peeped through a long reed with a water-bell at the end. I did not know it hel2)ed
them to see better ! "
" Oh, they cannot see at all—for often when they have been seeking for some
of our friends on a leaf, they will fling it away saying,—" There are none !" though I
saw thousands. They hear as badly, and call us dumb, because their great ears cannot
understand the fine vibrations of our high-set voices. And the best of it all is, they
call themselves the Lords of creation, as if the very name of Lord does not remind
us of one who can see all things, and hear all sounds, and love all creatures ! "
" You must be speaking of the giant they call man."
" Yes, they call themselves so, and have so fixed the names of the things they
see, that they call us butterflies." Lutea Reseda.
THE  ATTEMPT. 193
Win n  J e r g u s 0 n.
Chapter VIII.
" Did young people take their pleasure when the sea was warm in May,
Balls and masques begun at midnight, burning ever to mid-day,
When they made up fresh adventures for the morrow, do you say ?"—R, Brovming.
General Hilary and my father sometimes joined in our excursions, and by that
time Brand Hilary had become a friend, and was rapidly becoming an intimate one,
rather of mine than of Una's,     My headaches sometimes kept me at home on those
spring days, and Mr Hilary would be announced and come into the drawing-room,
and sit and talk, or be silent if he thought I looked weary.     His company became
a pleasure to me ; it seemed as if he never could do enough to show his gratitude for
the very common humanity with which we had treated him on the night of the
shipwreck ; and as he grew more at his ease, and the slight rust of his wanderings
was rubbed off, and a little shyness of ladies' society overcome, his manners became
charming; and so handsome and noble he looked, that, like  ' the bonnie Earl o'
Moray'
" He micht hae been a king."
His father's life had certainly had twenty years added to it since his return;
and I often wondered what cause of alienation could have kept them so long apart.
At length I learned it, and then I understood that look of eager half-awakened
tenderness with which his eyes had first opened on Una. It was one day when he
had strolled down from the Hall with a paper I had wished to see, and was sitting
with me in the twilight, while Una was busy helping a band of decorators in the
church to prepare for Easter Sunday, near at hand, that he began, in a tone of doubt
and hesitation,—
" Miss Ferguson, have you never wondered why my father and I were apart
so long?"
" I may have done so now and then," I said, " but no doubt there are good
reasons, which don't concern me, except in as far as I take a great interest in the
son of my father's friend."
" Now, if you were like other women," he said, " that would be an effort to
draw out the reason, but from you it simply means what it says.      No, except in
194 THE   ATTEMPT.
that way it does not concern you ; but you saved my life among you, and I feel you
have a sort of right to know what I was doing in that galley, and how I came to
grief, and I can believe that you will say nothing of it, and besides, you may hear—
you may have heard it already—a wrong version of the story. I know at the time
there must have been heaps of repox'ts, and so I'll make you my saint and shrive
myself once for all.
" ' Now do thine office, friar grey,
And see thou shrive me free.' "
" You had better look into the greenhouse, and under the sofa, for listeners
first," said I. " I'm not accustomed to State secrets, and whatever it was, it
happened a good while before we came here, and I never heard of it." He looked
keenly at me, and then began, looking out of the window to where a late gleam of
sunset was falling on a peep of the sea.
" I declare I'm like the ancient mariner, only you are the A'ery first person I
ever felt inclined to teach my tale to. You have a story in your face. I don't ask
what it is. God forbid I should intrude into a heart tliat has been so kind to me ;
but I see it, somehow. A story like mine is a dictionary, and one can read other
people's stories by it."
" Mine has not been so very sad," I said, " and for yours, your story, your life
is still before you, you can make it what you will.    A dream is not a life."
He murmiired to himself words from a sonj;
" I would I could awaken,
For I dream I know not how."
" You are right, I'm wide-awake now, and have been for a good while ; but I
wanted to talk of six years ago, when I was at Oxford, and had come home for the
long vacation. My mother died when I was a child ; and from all I can hear, I am
much more like my father than like her, and then I was wilful and hot-headed.
Well, you may smile, I can see you, but I've been soused in seas and rivers, and
have shivered in swamps, and wandered through sands since then, and my head is
cooler by long odds. Well, when I came home I took to the sea. I was never out
of boats,—rowing, sailing, fishing, learning all I could pick up from the men in the
village ; and though I had hardly even seen the sea before, except on the voyage
from India, when I was small, for it is about ten years since my father inherited the
property, and I had never lived here till I was twenty, I got to be good at all that
sort of thing.
THE ATTEMPT. 195
" Well, one of the fishermen had a daughter, and I—well, I fell in love with her."
He paused, the last light of sunset had passed away, and the gray, or what
Dante would call the brown, of the evening filled the room. I could only see the
outline of his face, set and stern, looking ten years older, and a life-time wearier and
sadder. The pain it gave me I cannot tell. He grew dear to me as a younger brother
might have been in those few minutes, by that mysterious sympathy which arises
between those who bear alike the signs and tokens of
"Our Lady of pain."
" Don't tell me of it," I said.    " Why should we dig up our old troubles out   of
their graves 1 new ones are born to us every day."
" It would ease my mind," he said, " you don't know how much. Have
patience with me, and don't reject my confidence ; I have a reason for what I am
going to say. I fell in love with Mary Evans, and was always hiring her father's
boat, and going out with him, just that I might see her come down to the shore to
meet him, and wade into the surf with her little white feet shining on the sand.
She will never wade to meet him again, never any more. She was lovely and she
was good. Miss Ferguson, and as sweet and pure as a blossom on a tree,—a girl for a
man to love and treasure all his life. No one could say anything against her
but that she was a fisherman's daughter, who should have married a fisherman, I
suppose, a stupid brute, who would fling her what he had brought in to sell, and
then go to sleep with a curse, thrash her when he was drunk, and neglect her when
he was sober. I don't say they all do that; many of them do. Mary had plenty
of wooers, but she cared for none of them, and before very long I saw she did care
for me. How I used to watch for her coming out of that dark old liole of a cottage,
with the sunshine in her hair, and her blue eyes lighting up like lamps. I wor¬
shipped her more than I might have done a girl of my own station. I worshipped
her innocence, her ignorance, her tenderness ; everything she did or said seemed
beautiful to me, and we were both so young. For a while we seemed to think of
nothing beyond our love ; no one knew anything of it, and we used to meet in the
evenings in a place among the cliffs that no one knew, as we thought, but ourselves.
I used to tell her no lady would ever be so lovely as mine, and repeat poetry to her,
and in fact, we were as blest and as foolish, I suppose, as most lovers; till one day
my father and I were sitting after dinner, I meaning to slip out later, though it was
a rainy night, on the chance that Mary might get out to the tryst, when my father
began,—' I  say. Brand, my boy, by  the time you leave old Oxon you will have to
196 THE ATTEMPT.
be looking out for a wife. You're young yet, and there's plenty of time, but I
daresay I've kept you too much at home with me, and you haven't had the chance
of seeing the sort of girl that would suit you. One like your mother, my boy, with
a sweet voice and a fair face. She would have helped you to choose a wife better
than an old soldier like me, but God's will be done.'
" Mind, I was young and ignorant, Miss Ferguson, and had an idea that the
woman you loved was the woman for you; in my stupidity, I didn't know that
she was precisely the one whom you couldn't, shouldn't, and might not have. So I
looked straight at my father, and said—'I've chosen my wife.'
" The governor opened his eyes, as well he might, knowing that since I came
home I had not seen a lady except the clergyman's wife. ' And where has your
choice lighted, my son?' he said, 'I don't know a single suitable match within
twenty miles, and you are too young, besides, to choose well.'
" Then of course it all came out, like the cork of a bottle of champagne.
' It's Mary Evans, father,' I said, ' old James Evans' daughter.'
" What else I said I can't remember, but no doubt my father thought it very
little to the purpose.    The great fact was out.
" ' You've made a fool of yourself, Brand,' he said, ' a very great fool. We all
do the same at some time of our lives. I did the same when I was a poor sub,
with my pay on my back, and went hankering after a woman who would as soon
have married a drill-sergeant; only I went too high, and you've gone the other way,
I'm glad of what you say about her parents knowing nothing of it, they are too
honest to try to trick you into a low marriage; and as for the poor child herself,
she is a child and you are a boy, and you will forget each other in a month or
two. Therefore you will promise, on your honour as a gentleman, before you
leave this room, never to see her again.'
" Of course you can guess what I said, but my father is not made of wax;
and though I was too like him to be afraid of him, I began to feel he had the best
of it, the dream was melting away. Still I held on to it; I said I should be of
age in two months, and then might do what I liked. To which he replied, that
I might not only do what I liked, but live where I liked after that, but that I
must be aware, that if I chose to marry against his wish, he was not bound to
provide for me. At length he paused, and then said—' The fact is, that knowing
you to be an obstinate boy, I have bten trying to talk as if you were a reasonable
man. The girl's parents are the peo])le for me to go to, they are as proud in their
own  way  as   anybody, and   will   take more pains to keep her out of your way
THE ATTEMPT. 197
than you will to get into hers. I've no doubt they have a respectable husband
of her own rank in their eye for her, and the sooner she takes him the better. Now,
mind, it is your own obstinate folly that forces me to appeal to them, which I
had much rather not do.'
"Well, I got away at last, and off I went through the drizzle to the tryst. I
thought I would try and see her once more, though I began to feel desperate. But
though I waited and waited till late at night, there was no sign of her; some one
had seen us together, and told her father and mother, and there was no further
need of my father's interference. For she was a dutiful little soul, and I believe
had almost forgotten the difference of rank between us; and it was a matter of
course that a fisherman's courtship should begin with the girl and end with her
parents. Well, I tried all I could to see her, but in vain ; she was watched over and
kept at home. Only one day I saw her face just for a moment at the window of the
cottage, as it was getting dark, and I was coming home from a hard day's shooting,—
I tried to weary myself out in body, as I was weary and sick at heart, God knows,—
and there was hardly any light outside, but everything inside was as clear as day
with a turf fire, and Mary was standing near the window, with the light in her
face. It was the last time I was ever to see her alive, and oh, how changed she
was, her blue eyes had great wan circles under them, and her cheeks looked pale
even in the red firelight. I looked and looked till my heart ached,—she wasn't a
child any longer, but a woman, with all her womanhood turned into pain. Oh, to
see her, and be so near her, and yet divided ! I saw her mother was asleep, and her
father was out with the boat, and I couldn't help going to the window and beckoning.
"She saw me and sprang to the window, my poor little darling, with all the
light coming back to her eyes, and even the colour to her face. I had just time to
whisper, for there was only a chink of the window open, and I dared not make any
noise. I told her my birthday was the next week, there would be a great to-do,
but all I cared for was that then I should be my own master; that night she was to
meet me at the tryst, and next morning we should be married at C , and be off
to America. I had hardly time to speak, and she had none to answer ; she put her
dear hand through the chink and I kissed it. I must hurry over the rest, for I
shall tire you, and it's not a pleasant tale. My birthday came, and a wild wet day
it was. There was to be a dinner of the tenantry, and all manner of rejoicings, and I
remember poor old Grace coming in to waken me in the morning, and bless me;
in short, I remember the whole day as a charming and blessed anniversary. The
dinner came off, and they drank my health, and might I live long and prosper,
198 THE ATTEMPT.
and they wished me a good wife.    The rain was driving against the window, and
the wind whistling and howling like mad the whole time, and I was thinking how the
fast-sailing vessel, the " Orion," destined to sail from Liverpool for the United States
the evening after next, would creak and lurch while my little bride and I were
sailing to the New World.    I declare I was ' fey,' as the Scotch call it, only it was
not my death that my goings on portended.    I got up and returned thanks when
my health was drunk, though I had never done such a thing in  my life before as
make a speech of any kind.    1 never stopped for a word.    I filled my glass and
drank it off to my future bride, whoever she might be, and I laughed and joked
with  the farmers  about  my   destiny being settled for me so soon.      I   saw my
governor staring at me.    1 had been as dull as ditch-water for weeks, sitting silent
for hours, so I suppose he thought I had taken rather too much.    At length things
came to a conclusion, and it was quite dark when I started off for the tryst.    I've
been to the place since I came home, it isn't far from the Devil's Elbow ; by the way,
that  is a rock  of good   omen   for me.    It was a hollow among the  rocks,  open
towards  the sea,   but   inaccessible unless you   knew   the ^way  along   the   cliffs.
I knew my way well, and I went along whistling.     When I got there the rain was
falling pretty heavily, and the wind had gone down.    Well, I waited and waited,
till I thought Mary would never come.    I strained my eyes along the path that
led from the village, but not a sign of her could be seen ; she had gone a longer
journey and made another tryst.    At last  I saw, as I thought, something white
on the shore, just at the edge of the waves,   for the tide was rising.    It was so
dark that I risked my life going down, as I did almost head-foremost, but I was
not to die then.      I got to the shore in a few minutes,   how   I don't know, for
I was half wild with a sort of vague fear, and then I saw the white thing was
a woman, and the foremost waves were lifting her, and wandering round her.    I
needn't tell you who it was, Miss Ferguson, you must know by this time.     She
had fallen off the cliffs in the dark on her way to meet me.     I must have been
half mad.     I felt for her heart,  and it had stopped beating, she had fallen on a
sharp stone, and I could see the wound on her brow.     I  kejjt  saying to myself,
' She is dead, she is dead,' like a child trying to learn a hard lesson, for I could
not believe it.
" You must remember how young I was; and when I thought of living without
her, I could not bear it. I lay down beside her, and let the waves wash over us
both, and I knew no more till I awoke in the cottage of one of the fishermen, who
had picked me up in his boat,—found us both floating, one living and one dead."
THE ATTEMPT. 199
" Don't tell me any more," I said, for indeed up to that time, though he had
paused now and then as if in pain, I had felt he was relieving himself, the very
tones of his voice told me what his past suffering had been. " I haven't much more
to tell," he said, " only when I came to myself, I resolved, may God forgive me,
never to see my father again. I felt as if his interference had wrecked my happiness,
and I sailed for America as soon as I was able, not, however, without seeing him
ouce more. He was so melted at my sorrow that he bore much from me, but my
whole heart was fall of bitterness, and I told him I could bear home no longer. I
knew my mother had a brother settled in New York, and there I went. Since then
I have wandered about, now here, now there, and now"—he stopped, and then we
heard a step, Una was come back. " T told you I had a reason for letting you know
my history. Miss Ferguson," he said, " but I can't tell you what it is just now.
Will you believe that it is a good one, for I can't speak of it at present?" "I will,"
said I; "in return, will you do me a favour. Call me Mary, and let me be what
your sister might have been if you had had one." " How good you are to me," he
said ; " oh, Mary"—and here he stopped in good earnest, for Una came in, and soon
after he went home. From that day I felt we were friends in reality. Brand Hilary
and I. I have said that Captain Maryon remembei-ed him as a school-fellow at
Harrow, and their acquaintance was soon renewed. They met at our house one
evening, which I remember well; it was the first opportunity I had of contrasting
then.
Brand Hilary was sitting near me, beside the window, Una at a table at one
side of the room, engaged in making tea for us and Elsie Harper, an old school-
friend of hers who was staying with us, when Sarah the capless announced Mr
Glynne and Captain Maryon. We rose, and I introduced the young men to each
other. It was not till I had said—" I believe you have met before," and Captain
Mai-yon had held out his hand with the greeting—" Well, Hilary, have you forgotten
Harrow, old fellow 1 " that Brand Hilary's face seemed to light up, and he returned
the other's grasp of the hand heartily and kindly. I, remembering that he owed his
life in some measure to the efforts of Captain Maryon, of which fact he was quite
ignorant, was beginning to explain the same, without noticing the sound of a cab
approaching, or a quick step up the walk, till all of a sudden, seeing Captain
Maryon, who faced the window, open his eyes as if in astonishment, I turned round
and beheld a chesnut-hued face, two very blue eyes, a middle-sized young man of
merry countenance—in fact, Frank Laurie coolly stepping in at the open French
casement behind me.     I gave a scream of surprise and deliglit, " Oh ! my dear
200 THE ATTEMPT.
Frank, how glad I am to see you." "And I to see you, Molly," said he, shaking
hands warmly. " Mama told me I was invited here, in fact I knew that where you
were I was welcome, and I thought if I stayed much longer at home, Miss Lindsay,
the thinnest one, you know, would marry me nolens volens. So I came off by night,
telling mother that when the coast was clear T would come back, and here I am, bag
and baggage. The syce, oh I mean the fellow with the cab, is bringing up the
plunder; please introduce me to cousin "Una." So, while Brand Hilary began to
talk to his old schoolfellow, I took Frank across the room to where Una and Elsie
were sitting, assisted by the Heir of Glynne, as Una sometimes called him, who was
so nervous that the water he aimed at the tea-pot flooded the tray, and in short was
on the point of being dismissed as incapable. Una rose to greet Frank, and held
out her hand so cordially, that I saw a shade of resentment on the countenance of her
unlucky little lover beside the table, that is to say, he looked rather aggrieved; and
when Frank had taken the white fingers in his brown ones, and made the imusually
brilliant remark—" How d'ye do 1" I got absorbed in inquiries about dear old
Kedmains and the boys, and Frank's Indian experiences, and then my father came
in, so I was taken up till the time for leave-taking came. Brand Hilary and the
Captain shook hands, and made some appointment for next day, then both came to
Una's corner to say good evening.
Mr Glynne also I'ose. " Good evening. Miss Una (Una hated him for calling
her so, but he was all unconscious); Rose was talking of a ride to-morrow, you
couldn't come, could you V
" Not in this heat," said Una, " I have no desire for a sun-stroke. Good-bye
Captain Maryon, goodbye, Mr Hilary."
"Why not go boating to-morrow if we can't ride?" said the Captain. " I
want to see how Miss Undine enjoys the water herself, since she is so ready to send
others upon it. Perhaps you are not aware, Hilary, that had it not been for her
efforts in your behalf, you might have been 'full fathom five' by this time."
" My eflibrts," said Una, " what were they ? If you thank any one for saving
you, Mr Hilary, it ought to be Captain Maryon." But the latter would not allow
her to explain, and they went away, leaving me to think over the contrast they
presented, and think anxiously and with a troubled mind. 0. M.
THE ATTEMPT. 201
Part II.
If a line were drawn from the shores of the Caspian Sea, north of the Caucasus, to
the mouth of the Vistula, it would be coincident with one of the oldest routes of
communication between the east and the west ; and by this route serpent worship
was probably introduced into the north of Europe. It was near the Caucasus that
Hercules met the serpent-maiden Echidna, and it is from their union that the race
of serpent-worshipping Scythians trace their descent. Here, too, resided the
Amazons, whose institutions seem so mysteriously connected with this form of
worshij). In Sarmatia the people adored trees and serpents ; and we are told that
" the Samogitse, when adversity befel them, concluded that their domestic snake-
gods had been negligently worshipped." In Lithuania, the people " believed vipers
and serpents to be gods, and worshipped them with great veneration." We read
that, in the 15th century, Jerome of Prague saw these idolaters offer sacrifice to
their gods ; and Cromer charges the Wends with the same idolatry 3 and it is added
that in Livonia, the most beautiful captives were sacrificed to the snake-gods.
Although these statements are perhaps scarcely sufficiently authenticated, yet the
impression they leave is that serpent worship prevailed in Eastern Europe during
the middle ages. So many authors, especially a writer of such authority as Olaus
Magnus, would scarcely preserve, much less give evidence to such anecdotes, were
there no foundation for their belief, especially in a country where the snake tribe
is inconsiderable, and represented by nothing larger than a viper or adder 1
There would be less surprise at finding this idolatry in Scandinavia, were it
proved that Woden and Buddha were one and the same deity, as is affiimed by
some scholars. Between the sanguinary Thor and Woden drinking blood from the
skulls of their enemies, and the mild doctrines of Buddha, there is certainly a wide
difference ; nevertheless, the serpent figures in Scandinavian mythology, and unless
this faith were imported from the east, how can it be accounted for in a climate so
severe that scarce any members of the snake tribe exist ?
The traces of Ophiolatry in Gaul are few. The Celts certainly practised
human sacrifices, and the two are commonly found together; but the subject has
been little examined by French archaeologists. The Druids are believed to have
been serpent worshippers, and antiquarians have maintained that the numerous
202 THE ATTEMPT.
upright stones and circles found in Britain are all Druidical remains and Ophite
temples. Fergusson considers this very doubtful: he denies that there is any proof
that the Druids remained in England at the period of the Roman invasion, and states
that this race had then already been driven into the fastnesses of the Welsh hills, and
it is from the Welsh bards alone that we hear of the Druids and serpent worship ;
and further, that there is absolutely no evidence for the Druidical origin of such
monuments as Stonehenge, and no proof that Ophiolatry was practised in these
temples. North of the Forth there exist a great number of Megalithic stones
covered with sculptures, among which the serpent so prominently appears, as to
leave no doubt that it was an object of worship to those who reared the stones.
The period when these were raised is uncertain ; but since many bear the cross or
some other Christian emblem, it is believed that their date is subsequent to the
preaching of St Columba in 563.
Africa has always been the congenial home both of the serpent and of its
worship. One of the best known examples of this faith in modern times is at the
tomb of Sheik Haredi, a Mahomedan saint in Upper Egypt. Should a sick person
require his service, a priestess is sent to the serpent, and, if favourable, his god-ship
issues forth, hung about the neck of the virgin, and is thus carried to the sick
man's dwelling. Here he abides for a period varying probably with the amount
and value of the offerings, and then returns alone. Women visit him annually,
and he is said to twine himself round the neck of the most beautiful. This supersti¬
tion prevailed in Abyssinia, and the serpent and his progeny begin the regal genea¬
logy of this country. We are further told that in the year 340 " one part of the
people of Ethiopia worshipped the serpent, and the rest followed the law of Moses."
This ancestral worship is still found at Dahomey on a lavish scale, together with
human sacrifices. Here also exists the institution of a female waiTior class in all its
hideous savagery, reminding us of the Greek Amazonian fictions. These people
worship serpents, trees, and the ocean, the same trinity as was established in the
Erechtheum in the Acropolis of Athens. The dank gbwe or earthly serjjent is the
first. " It is esteemed the supreme bliss and general good. It has a thousand dank-si
or snake-wives, married and single votaries, and its influence can not be meddled with
by the two others, which are subject to it." Women touched by the serpent become
" possessed," they are seized with hysteria, and after seclusion in hospitals prepared
for the purpose, become priestesses when restored to civil life. They are brought
up in the temple, and taught like the nautch-gii'ls of India; and are marked with
the image of the god pricked into the skin with a dye, which is said to be done by
THE ATTEMPT. 203
the god himself. Besides this earthly sei-pent, there is the heavenly one, called
dank, which is the rainbow, and confers wealth upon mankind.
It seems certain that long before the discovery of America there existed there
a strong veneration for the serpent; but the accounts of the rites practised are not
entirely trustworthy, for the Catholic historians seem only to have sought to
magnify their own powers of proselytising, and have endeavoured to make the
ancient faith an object of horror, rather than to give a veritable history of the
religion practised in the country, The principal deity of the Aztec Pantheon was
Tezcatlipoca, literally sun-serpent, his wife the primitive goddess was Cihuaco-
huatl, the female serpent or female sun. According to the Mexicans, she gave
birth to a male and a female child, and to these is referred the origin of
mankind. A more remarkable myth is that of the Quetzalcoatl, literally the
feathered serpent, the civilizer of the inhabitants of Anahuac. He taught them
religion, arts, laws, agriculture, and the use of metals^ and finally withdrew by the
sea with a promise of return, which was so entirely credited that when the
Spaniards ajjpeared they were joyfully hailed as the returning god and his
companions. The antiquarians of the United States assert that there are serpent
mounds of earth, a thousand feet long, which seem to prove that a race of serpent
worshippers existed in Ohio and Iowa before the Toltecs or Red Indians; but so
many mistakes have been made about serpent mounds and temples, that these
accounts should be received with caution. The Mohican Indians reverence the
rattle-snake as their grandfather, and it is worthy of remark that everywhere it is
the species of snake indigenous to the country that is worshipped ; throughout
America it is the rattle-snake. Bernal Diaz states that living rattle-snakes were
kept in the great temple of Mexico, and were fed with the bodies of victims.
Until the recent discoveries in Cambodia and at Amravati, our knowledge of
Eastern mythology has been but scanty. With the exception of the Zend-Avesta,
there is little native Persian history, and this book is of small service in the examina¬
tion of the question of serpent worship, since it embodies tlie religious belief of the
Aryan, or, as it is here called, Iranian, branch of the Persian people, while ophiolatry
is essentially the religion of the Turanian, or at least Non-Aryan races. At the
time when the Greeks make us acquainted with the Persians, they acknowledged
Zoroasterism, and their previous mythology must be gathered from Mahomedan
historians. Zohak is one of their most interesting and important personages. He
was descended from the Taj or serpent race of the Arabians, and is represented as
having two snakes gi'owing at his back, for whom it was necessary to sacrifice daily
204 THE ATTEMPT.
two young men, in order that their brains might satisfy the cravings of these
monsters. Zohak was conquered by Feriditn, now identified with Thraetaona of
the Zend-Avesta, and also celebrated as the destroyer of the three-headed serpent
Dahaka, who was the creation of the evil power Ahriman. In this mythology we
find the serpent races hated and conquered, and never revered and worshipped as
the Greeks honoured -^sculapius. At Persepolis there is a bas-relief representing
Ormuzd crowning Ardishii" king of the Sassanians, while trampling under his horse's
feet Ardevan, the last of the Parthians, round whose head are twisted two writhing
snakes, showing that the sculptor intended to represent the hated race of Zohak,
followers of the accursed Ahriman, as conquered by the beniticent Ormuzd, while he
bestows a crown upon the king of the fire-worshipping Sassanians. A remnant of the
race of Zohak survived in Cabul, and seems to form a connecting link between
Persian and Indian sei-pent worship.
Cashmere has always been considered as a centre of ophiolatry in India ;
and from the legends of that country has been gathered what is known of
the K"agas or snake gods. These legends are very numerous, and, like those
of most countries, point to the union of the human and serpent races. For
example, a member of the family of Buddha fell in love with the snake-king's
daughter, and was married to her. Although she obtained and kept possession of a
human body, yet a nine-headed snake sometimes appeared at the back of her neck.
Upon one occasion her husband cut it off" with a single blow while she slept, and by
this rash action caused her total blindness. The legend goes on to i-elate that she
was cured after the lapse of some time, through her husband's care and skill. We
are told that in the reign of Akbar (1556-1G05), there were in Cashmere 45 places
dedicated to the worship of Siva, 64 to Vishnu, 3 to Brahma, while there were 700
where the serpent was adored. This is fully confirmed by the architecture of the
temples ; these are found standing in courts, some of which can only be approached
by wading, and others are capable of being easily flooded, and are crossed by light
stone bridges. In these sanctuaries are no images, which is usually the case where the
deity is a living god, and thus antiqxiarians were long unable to discover to what
form of faith these ruins belonged. On the other side of the Bay of Bengal, we find
serpent worship in its fullest developement. There seems to be no doubt that the
great temple of Nakhow Vat, in Cambodia, was dedicated to this idolatry. Every
angle of every roof is adorned with a grim seven-headed serpent, with a magnificent
crest; every cornice is ornamented with a row of these seven headed deities,
but  without  the  crest.    All  the  arrangements  of the  temple  are  suitable   for
THE ATTEMPT. 205
serpent worship. There is no image; all the courts are tanks to contain water,
and every thing recals the temples of Cashmere, but with greater magnificence.
No other temple equals this ; it is 600 feet square at the base, and rises to the height
of 180 feet in the centre, while every part is covered with elaborate carvings. It is
startling to find that, simultaneously with the erection of the great cathedrals of
York, Amiens, and Cologne, a larger and more magnificent temj^le than either was
being erected, and dedicated to a religion of which the western builders knew
nothing. It seems equally strange that all memory of the people and all knowledge
of their buildings should so completely have passed away, that until the last twelve
years no European suspected their existence. A Cambodian legend relates that a
banished prince was driven by the sea upon an island, and there he ascended the
branches of a Talok tree. Like the famous beanstalk of Jack, this tree grew with
extreme rapidity, and when at last the prince was able to descend, he found himself
in a grotto in a hollow of the tree, where he met the daughter of the dragon or
serpent king, and presently was married to her. The sei-pent king built the city of
Nakhou Tliom for a residence for the young couple, but they seem to have repaid
him with ingratitude.
The universal employment of the dragon in Chinese temples, leads to the supposi¬
tion that the symbol must have a religious meaning ; but unfortunately little is
known of Chinese worship before Buddhism prevailed. We meet with a story of two
heaven-sent serpents watching over the first washing of Confucius, and it would be
interesting to know if this be a Chinese tradition, or whether it was imported from
India, since Confucius and Buddha were nearly contemporaneous, and in China
their doctrines are much mixed together. Among the plates of a Chinese Buddhist
standard book, is a view of the temple with a serpent god. This Naga has a human
head and serpentine extremities, and has a number of serpents behind his head.
Long or the winged dragon is in Chinese mythology the being who excels in intelli¬
gence. Ophiolatry in one form or another seems to have prevailed throughout the
Pacific Islands : in the Feejees the principal god Degei is supposed to exist in the
form of a serpent coiled up in a cave on a high mountain. The savages of Australia
believe in the existence of a gigantic serpent, who created the world by a blow with
his tail, and who is the cause of earthquakes. They carefully conceal their rites from
strangers, but are believed still to offer sacrifices to the serpent. There are traces of
this superstition in Java and the Marquesas, and in Ceylon the three and seven-
headed Nagas are found adorning every sacred place, and Naga legends are numerous.
The great Hindhu epic poem, the Mahabharata, which may be considered as one
206 THE ATTEMPT.
book of the Hindhu Bible, begins, like the Pentateuch, with a curse upon the serpent,
and the early part is occupied with the transactions of the Naga race. The scene of
many of these legends is laid at Manipur, where, at the present day, the peculiar god
of the royal family is a snake called Pa-kung-ba, from which the family claims
descent. This snake appears, they say, sometimes of great size, and this is indicative
of displeasure ; so long as he remains diminutive it is a sign of good humour. In
the neighbourhood of Manipur are niimerous tribes of aborigines, still called
Nagas, and believed to be serpent worshippers. As late as 1766 some travellers record
that they went to see a great snake that had been worshipped at Sumbulpore since
the world began ! They saw him emerge from his cave, which he does every
seventh day, and devour a goat provided by his worshippers; his length was
considerable, and his diameter estimated at two feet.    He was still alive in 1836.
The population of India seems to have been originally Turanian, an unwarlike
and unintellectual race, who fell an easy prey to the hardier tribes from Bokhara
and Affghanistan. Hence horde after horde of these have successively overrun
India; and by degrees, partly from the enervating climate, but more from inter¬
marriages, have sunk to the level of the inferior race, and have been in their
turn conquered by fresh hordes from north of the Indus. Buddhism was little
more than a revival of the coarse superstitions of the aboriginal nations, though
elevated by an admixture of Aiyan morality. Btiddha himself was an Aryan, and
it appears that serpent worship was rejected by him and his earlier followers, but
cropped up again, and became an important element in Buddhist mythology.
Baddha began his reformation about 600 B.C. ; he taught an absolute renunciation of
sensual enjoyment, and asceticism became the path to salvation. The sculptures at
Sanchi and Amravati show the wide difference between the earlier and the later
Buddhism. In the earlier, Buddlia is never represented as an object of worship,
and the serpent appears rarely ; in the later, 300 years after, we find Buddha
worshipped, and the Naga his co-equal. It is woi-th while to observe the many
singular coincidences between Christianity and Buddhism. Three hundred years
after its founder, Asoka did for Buddhism what Constantino did for Christianity.
Six hundred years after Buddha, Nagarjuna did for the eastern faith what Gregory
the Great did for the western,—created a church with a hierarchy. In the 16th
centviry after Christ came the Befonnation ; in the IGth century after Buddha
came also a reformation, but one of extermination, so far as concerned India.
Sankara Acharya was the eastern Luther, but he introdiiced a faith much less pure
and more idolatrous than that which it superseded.    He preached the religion of
THE  ATTEMPT. 207
Siva, which had no connection with serpent worship ; although Siva is represented
occasionally holding a cobra in his hand, and with serpents twined in his hair, yet
these are only implements of terror, and are not for worship. Contemporaneously
with the Sivite religion arose that of Vishnu, and here the ^aga appears everywhere.
The commonest representation of Vishnu is when reposing on the Sesha or seven-
headed snake, contemplating the creation of the world; in all his avatars it is the seven-
headed heavenly Naga, and not the earthly cobra of Siva. The worship of Vishnu is
full of sensuality, and whenever grossly sensual images are found in temples, they
may certainly be expected to be those devoted to the adoration of Vishnu, in one or
other of his avatars.
Serpent worship still flourishes in India. In the great temple of Seringham
are two golden statues of the seven-headed Naga, richly jewelled, and similar
images exist at Madura. A modern traveller mentions that at the serpent
well at Benares the ISIag or serpent is worshipped, and this faith is believed to exist
in Cashmere, Nepaul, and the hills generally, though not in the plains. The symbol
of the serpent has been frequently overlooked through the incorrect or uncertain
drawing of many of tbe sculptures ; but now that photography lends its aid, the
Naga is discovered in many sculptures where its existence had been wholly unsus¬
pected, and its cobra hood had been mistaken for a mere head-dress. Einna.
Note.—The facts in this paper are chiefly taken from Fergusson's " Tree and Serpent WorshiiJ."
 ^«Jf^.§«=^ 
xot^tx ax Citl-e?
" On Castle Dacre's rugged walls the evening sun is bright,
Like molten gold the windows flame beneath his yellow light;
From the tall elms the shadows gray fall longer and more long.
And faintly from the distance comes the shepherds' vesper song.
All is so calm, so sweet, so still, such rest is everywhere,
Save in my heart; and oh, what deep and sad unrest is there !
On Castle Dacre's highest tower to-night alone I stand.
And all around me, green and still, lies the broad pleasant land ;
Wide fields, dark woods, and leafy lanes, parks stretching far and free;
The silver liver treading soft its pathway to the sea;
208 THE ATTEMPT.
And dim and soft, the hill-tops blue, and to their farthest line,
Parks, meadows, copses, upland fields, and hill-sides,—all are mine.
In Castle Caere's ancient halls I stand the master now,
The shadow of a coronet is resting on my brow ;
Men call me by a title proud, an old and noble name,
That oft of yore through England wide has rung with knightly fame.
All this ! and yet my head is bowed, my eyes with tears are dim,
All this ! would God it were not mine—'twas gained by losing him t
In one still room he lies alone—he lies alone at rest,—
His cold hands folded quietly above his pulseless breast.
His bright eyes closed, and glazed, and dark, his silky hair unstirred.
His white lips shut for evermore to each dear pleasant word,
The peace of death upon his brow, a smile upon his face,
His face, my brother and my friend; and I am in his place.
Oh, for the days of long ago, when we were boys at play !
Oh, for the sunshine of his smile, his ringing laugh so gay !
Oh, for his lordly courtesy, his gallant bearing high !
Oh, for the clasping of his hand, the greeting of his eye !
And oh, the later, dearer years of manhood's friendship deep.
The stedfast love, now lying dead with him in dreamless sleep !
Oh, for the gentle, winning ways, the tender, manly heart!
Oh, for the sweet companionship of our two selves apart;
The woodland walk at sunset dim, when all the leaves were still.
The breezy stroll at silent dawn, over the broom-clad hill.
The gallop on the heathery moor, the saunter by the stream;
All over-past most utterly, like night's forgotten dream 1
And all that now remains of him is that still face so dear,
While I, in solitude forlorn, am friendless—and a peer !
Oh, brother dear ! oh, brother mine ! oh, first, best, only friend!
Is this, of all our early love, so close and sweet, the end ?
I am so lonely, so forlorn, it surely cannot be
That we are parted evermore, we two, my friend and me.
Take back, take back the coronet, the castle, and the land.
And look once more into my face, and clasp me by the hand.
I only want to see you smile, I want to hear you speak,
I want to see the colour flush into your wan white cheek;
THE ATTEMPT. 209
And oh, how gladly would I give back to your hand again
Proud Castle Dacre's stately towers, and thronging menial train.
It will not be, it cannot be, he never more will come
To lighten with his brave, bright face our childhood's ancient home.
Once more from out his own fair halls, so quietly and slow
He will pass forth, and to his last dai-k, silent place will go.
And I may sit and weep alone—ah me, alone for aye !
I am a peer—ah, what of that 1 we buried him to-day."        Mas Alta.
Cfei  ^bittburglj ^BBacxntian for  Imfrrofaing
t^i  €on'^iiian of tijc  |@oor.
I.
The question of pauperism is one of the most important and interesting of the
present day. The causes which have produced it, and the various schemes which
have been proposed for its prevention and cure, have occupied the attention of many
in all grades of society. That poverty will continue to exist is undoubted, but
that it should have increased to its present extent in our native land, is surely
cause for deep anxiety. It will be a fitting introduction to the subject of these
papers, to lay before our readers some facts and statistics about pauperism and its
state in our city.
It is a generally accepted fact that poor laws, though allowed to be necessary,
increase the evil they are intended to relieve. The legal title to demand suj^port,
when the applicant is unable, from age or sickness, to work for it, acts as an encour¬
agement to improvident habits among the poor, and weakens the sense of obligation
on the young and able-bodied to support the aged and helpless.
In the old Scotch Poor Law Acts the poor are divided into two classes—1st,
" the aged sick, and impotent;" and 2d, " strong and masterful beggars." The earliest
provision for the former was a legal permission to beg, in proof whereof they were
furnished with a token or badge. In 1597 the kirk session were charged to look
after and relieve the poor of the parish, the funds for distribution being collected at
the church doors, and supplemented, when necessary, by an assessment levied equally
210 THE ATTEMPT.
on landlords and tenants.     These funds were distributed personally by the elders,
after careful investigation of every case.     If tlie pauper was dissatisfied, he could
appeal from the decision of the kirk session to the Court of Session ; but this step
was rarely taken.     Licensed begging was still allowed ; but, by a clause of the Act
of 1672, it could only be practised in the parish in whicli  the pauper was born.
For the suppression of the  " strong and masterful beggars," viz., those who were
able but unwilling  to work, stringent measures were adopted ; and the many and
increasingly severe Acts passed relating to them,—one even ordaining that   con¬
tinued offence should be punished by death,—show to what an extent they had
increased, and how heavily the burden was felt.    In 1G72  an Act was passed, by
which it was ordered that houses of correction should be built, in which they were
to be confined and forced to work.    In case of any refractoriness,  the masters were
empowered  " to use all manner of severity and correction, by whipping or otherwise
(except torture), to detain them within the said correction house or close thereof."
Unfortunately this enactment was but partially carried out, and soon fell into disuse.
As time went on, pauperism, and, as a natural consequence, the expense of re¬
lieving it, increased.    This became a matter of anxious thought to many, and among
others to Dr Chalmers, who was of opinion that the system of assessment was essen¬
tially injurious, and actually unnecessary.    He maintained that assessment gave the
poor a legal right to assistance ; and that the funds voluntarily given at the church
door should, by a more thorough investigation of  eveiy case, and more judicious
dispensation of aid, be amply sufficient to support the poor of each parish.    Many
ridiculed this theory, but he made it more than a theory, he made it an actual and
successful experiment.    He accepted the parish of St John's in Glasgow (one of the
poorest in that city), mainly in the hope of having the independent management
of the poor.    This being granted him, he speedily organised his plan of work.    The
population of the parish was  10,000; the  average annual cost of its pauperism,
£14,000 ; and the average annual collection at the church-door £480.   Dr Chalmers
put the work into the hands of deacons, to each of whom was allotted a district,
with whose inhabitants and their circumstances he was expected to become inti¬
mately acquainted.    The instnictions for their guidance were :—" When one applies
for admittance through his deacon upon our funds, the  first thing to be inquired
into is, if there be any kind   of work that he can yet do,  so as either to keep
him  altogether off, or as to make a partial allowance serve for his necessities ;
the   second,   what  his  relatives  and  fiiends  are   willing  to   do   for  him;    the
third, whether  he is a hearer in any dissenting place of worship, and whether
THE ATTEMPT. 211
its session will contribute to his relief. And if after these previous inquiries
it be found that further relief is necessary, then there must be a strict
ascertainment of his term of residence in Glasgow, and whether he be yet on
the funds of the Town Hospital, or is obtaining relief from any other parish. If
upon all these points being ascertained the deacon of the proportion where he resides
still conceives him an object for our assistance, he will inquire whether a small
temporary aid will meet the occasion, and state this to the first ordinary meeting.
But if instead of this he conceives him a fit subject for a regular allowance, he will
receive the assistance of another deacon to complete and confirm his inquiries by the
next ordinary meeting thereafter, at which time the applicant, if they still think
him a fit object, is brought before us, and received upon the fund at such a rate of
allowance as upon all the circumstances of the case the meeting of deacons shall
judge proper. Of course pending these examinations the deacon is empowered to
grant the same sort of discretionary aid that is customary in other parishes."
Dr Chalmers' ministry in Glasgow lasted three years and nine months, and the
practical result of his experiment was, that the average yearly expense of the
pauperism of the parish was reduced from £14,000 to £280, and this not by driving
away the poor, as many supposed, for the imported poor actually exceeded the
exported by fourteen. This last fact Dr Chalmers attributed to the charm of
personal ministration and interest, the poor thinking this more than an equivalent
for the larger allowance of money they could get in other parishes. Nor did the
scheme cease to be successful when deprived of Dr Chalmers' supervision, as was
confidently predicted. It lasted for eighteen years, a triumphant proof of the
soundness of the principles on which it was based, and only ceased to exist from
a combination of circumstances against which it was in vain to struggle. One of
the chief of these was that the parish continued to be assessed, although taking
no share of the funds thus derived. Dr Chalmers considered it one of the first
essentials to the permanent success of his scheme, that any parish ceasing to draw
upon funds derived from assessment should be released from the burden of paying
them. This was not acceded to, and the consequence was that St John's finally
relapsed into the state of the other assessed parishes.
The opinion of Dr Chalmers' successor, the Rev. Dr Macfarlane, as to the state
of the parish during the experiment, was as follows—" The experience of sixteen
months during livhich I was minister of St John's confirmed the favourable opinion
which I previously entertained of the system : it worked well in all respects. With
an income from collections not much exceeding £300, we kept down the pauperism
212 THE ATTEMPT.
of a parish containing a population of 10,000, and I know from actual observation
that the poor were in better condition, and, excepting the worthless and profligate,
who applied and were refused assistance, were more contented and happy than the
poor in the other parishes of Glasgow. I was also agreeably disappointed at finding
that Dr Chalmers was not the only person having sufficient influence to obtain the
aid of the respectable members of his congregation in administering the aflairs of
the poor ; I had not the smallest difficulty in procuring a sufficient number of
deacons for that purpose." An English poor law commissioner, E. C. Tufnell, Esq.,
drew up a report upon the management of the poor in St John's parish, and gave
testimony to the thorough efficiency and success of the scheme. He says further,
" This personal attention of the rich to the poor, seems to be one of the most efficient
modes of preventing pauperism."
In course of time the funds provided under the old Acts for the relief of
pauperism were found to be insufficient, and in 1843 a commission was appointed to
enquire into the state of the poor, and the working of the poor laws in Scotland.
The consequence of their investigations was the Bill "for the Amendment and better
Administration of the Laws relating to the Belief of the Poor in Scotland," brought
in by the Lord Advocate, Duncan M'K^eill. The principal benefits he expected to
accrue to the poor from the passing of this Bill were :—
" 1st. Compelling periodical and constant attention to their condition, and
preserving a record of what had been done or refused to be done,
2d. Giving speedy and efliectual redress against wrongous refusal of relief.
3d. Also against illusory or inadequate compliance with the right of relief.
4th. Requiring relief to be given in the parish where the pauper was found ;
leaving to the parish, not to the pauper, to find out the liability of another
parish.
5th. Authorising the poor-funds to be applied for procuring medical relief.
6th. And for the education of poor children.
7th. And for the relief of occasional claims,
8th. Facilitating compulsory assessments for all those purposes.
9th. Authorising assessments for the erection of poorhouses.
10th. Uniting burghal parishes, so that settlement by residence shall not be
interrupted by removal from one parish to another in the same town, and by which
other advantages will also be gained.
11th. Requiring that insane paupers shall be sent to asylums, except in special
caaes."
THE ATTEMPT. 213
This Bill was passed on the 4th of August 1845. By a clause in it, the Board
of Supervision was appointed, and in each parish an inspector and parochial board.
Thus the distribution of the funds for the poor was taken out of the hands of
the church ofScers, and put into those of paid officials,—a change which must have
been distasteful alike to the purses of the ratepayers and the hearts of the poor.
The mode of managing pauperism prior to the passing of the Act is generally called
" the old system," that subsequent to it, " the new system." Under the latter,
paiiperism continued to increase immensely. It is stated by some that in Scotland
pauperism can only increase in proportion to the population, as there can only be a
certain percentage of " aged, sick, and impotent," who alone are entitled to relief.
But this is not borne out by facts, as it is actually shown that between 1845 and 18G8
the population has only increased 17 per cent., while the registered poor have
increased 27 per cent., and casual poor 41 per cent. In the latter year, paupers
were at the rate of 1 to every 13^ of the population. Then as to the expense, it
has increased in a still greater ratio. Whereas, in the 19 years ending 1839, the
poor's fund increased only about one-third, from .£114,000 to X155,000, of which
.£27,000 was from assessment,—from the year 1845 to 1868, there was an increase of
146 per cent., and of the expenses of management, legal and medical aid, &c., an
increase of 400 per cent.
Then another heavy expense arose in the shape of poorhouses. These, although
permitted by the Act of 1775, existed only in the form of almshouses,—homes for
those who had none to care for them. But fresh provision being made for their
creation by the Act of 1845, they sprang up with great rapidity, and at an enormous
expense. In Edinburgh, the united cost of the two newly erected poorhouses of
Craiglockhart and Craigleith, is estimated as not under £90,000. If these were even
full (the number of inmates they each receive being 1600), the average house accom¬
modation for each individual would be £56. This should be considered with the
fact that good houses for tradesmen and their families can be built for £120, which
is a much lower rate per head than accommodation in the poorhouse. The poor law
officials consider that a most important benefit accruing from these institutions is
the power to offer applicants the " poorhouse test," that is to say to them, that if
they want aid they may go into the " house." This test, while acting as a preventive
to imposition, also hinders in many cases the more respectable from getting the
temporary aid they may stand in need of, as many of these would rather starve than
enter the poorhouse. Nor is this to be wondered at, when we consider that the
almshouses or homes for " the aged, sick, or impotent," and the houses of correction
214 THE ATTEMPT.
for the " strong and masterful beggars," no longer exist as separate institutions, but
are united in the poorhouse, in which we find pi'omiscuously herded together all
classes, from the deserving who have fallen into poverty from causes apart from
themselves, to the most dissolute and disreputable, who have lived in rioting and
drunkenness, secure of an asylum from the State when reduced to indigence and
helplessness by their own misdeeds, and who in the poorhouse contaminate those
associated with them.
The Scotch law of settlement brings a large number of English and Irish,
especially the latter, ujDon our roll. In England and Ireland the pauper can only
obtain relief from his native parish. In Scotland, five years' residence in the same
parish entitles applicants, Scotch, English, or Irish, coming under the definition of
pauper, to obtain relief. It is disputed claims of settlement that make law expenses
so large an item in our pauper expenditure.
It has become very common for country proprietors to pull down cottages with¬
out replacing them, in order to avoid poor-rates, thus driving them into towns, there
to gain a settlement and become chargeable on the poor-rates.
There are many other causes to which the vast increase of pauperism is attribut¬
able, besides the existence and working of the poor laws. The principal cause generally
assigned for the really fearful state our Edinburgh poor have fallen into, is drunken¬
ness, which even those whose knowledge of the poor and their ways is limited can
fully corroborate. On all sides we hear that there are few cases of degradation and
misery among the poor of which drink has not been the chief, if not the only cause.
The number and size of diinking shops in the poorer parts of the town, show how
great the demand must be. Besides these, there are numberless shebeens—unlicensed
houses—where drink is obtainable by tLe initiated at all hours, lawful and unlawful.
It is stated that in the manufacture of alcohol, more grain is used than all that grows
in Scotland; and that in the United Kingdom, £120,000,000 are annually spent upon
tobacco and alcohol.
The dram-shop and the pawn-shop have been called "^The Devil's Siamese
Twins," and they are rarely found separate. The first pawn-shop in Scotland was
opened in 1806. They have increased with great rapidity. In Edinburgh there are
now 33 licensed pawn-shops, and 219 " wee pawns." Of the articles pledged, a large
proportion are bed and body clothes. The facility these places oflfer for raising
money, is considered to be a most powerful encouragement to drink. Although, in
many cases, the deserving poor may be enabled by aid of the pawn-shop to tide over a
hard time,  it is not they who principally support these institutions.    It is the
THE ATTEMPT. 215
drunken and the dissolute, who, in the greedy craving for drink, do not consider
the misery they bring on themselves and their dependants. The state of pawnbroking
has become so unsatisfactory that a committee of the House of Commons has been
appointed to 'consider the subject, and it is proposed that the system of licensing
should be altered, a list kept of all articles pledged, under as well as over 10s.,
and that pawn-shops should be placed more under control. It is the opinion of
many who visit the poor that it would be very beneficial to prevent the pawning
of bed and body clothes, these being comparatively rarely pledged by the respect¬
able, but constantly by those who wish the money to convert it into drink; and
the misery thus entailed is beyond description. Mr Hector of Pollockshaws, who
gave evidence before the committee, states that pawnbroking, drunkenness, and
crime, increase in an equal ratio.
The over-crowding of the town, and the state of the dwellings of the poor, help
to cause their wretched state. No one who has read descriptions of various parts of
the Old Town, can fail to be filled with horror and astonishment that such dens
should be allowed to exist in a civilised country. Our readers will find some
account of them in " The Poor of Edinburgh and their Homes," by William
Anderson, and in " Notes on Old Edinburgh," by the author of " The English¬
woman in America." By the census of 1861, it appears that upwards of 13,000
families, or about one-third of the population, were living in houses of one room ;
of these some opened out of other rooms, some had no windows, and some were
cellars. An English clergyman, who visited some of the closes in the High Street
one Saturday night, writes in the Church of England Temperance Magazine :—" We
can but say that all we saw that night has left upon our mind the painful feeling,
that of all the dark and desolate places of the earth, the Old Town is about the dark¬
est and most desolate." The wretched state of the dwellings, want of water, bad
ventilation, and defective sanitary arrangements, cannot fail to do much in sending
customers to the whisky shops. Nay, more, they are the origin, and cause the
spread of disease to a most fearful extent. The rapacity of the landlords of these dens
is well known. While many of them clear from 40 to 100 per cent a year,
they can hardly be induced to make the slightest repair on their property, and even
when they do, almost uniformly raise the rent.
The insufficiency of both religious and secular instruction is another cause of
the sinking of the poor. In the year 1850, it was estimated that upwards of
60,000 of the inhabitants of Edinburgh were unconnected with any place of worship,
and were living in a state of heathenish  ignorance  and godlessness.    Attendance
216 THE ATTEMPT.
upon secular instruction can, under the age of fourteen, be legally enforced ; but how
could it be enforced when the parents were indifferent, and there was no one else to
move in the matter 1
Indiscriminate charity has done much evil among the poor. A's a rule, it is
the " strong and masterful beggars," the idle and dissipated, who, refusing to work,
gain a livelihood by preying upon the generous, but too often inconsiderate sympathy,
of the rich. It has been said that " the whisky shops of the Old Town are sup¬
ported by the charity of the New." It is estimated that the charities of London
alone amount to about five millions a-year; and those of Edinburgh may be safely
supposed to be in proportion. Each charitable institution has its own circle of
recipients, and these often get help from several other charities, which thus overlap
each other. Indeed, cases ai"e known in which, by adapting the mode of application
to the nature of each society applied to, as much as .£4 or £5 a-week has been
obtained by one individual under false pretences.
It had long been felt that something must be done, and that speedily, to cope
with the monstrous evils about and in the midst of us. United efibrt could alone
achieve it. The public mind was at last awakened to the necessity of action. On
the 15th of April 1867, a meeting was called by Lord Provost Chambers, and held
in the Council Chamber, to consider what should be done. A committee was
appointed to draw up a report on the state of the poorer classes of Edinburgh. This
report was prepared, and, at a meeting held on the 28th February 1868, was adopted
and ordered to be published. The next step taken was the organisation of the
" Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor." Eta.
Authorities.—" A Digest of the Law of Scotland relating to the Poor," by Guthrie
Smith; " History of the Scotch Poor-law," by Sir George Nicholls;
" Pauperism and the Poor-laws," edited by T. Ivory, Esq,; " Memoirs of
Dr Chalmers," by Dr Hanna; " Report on the Condition of the Poorer
Classes of Edinburgh;" <kc.
-5*==^*^^*
THE ATTEMPT. 217
CIjc  (^binbttrglj %nBacxRiion for  Jmproijing
t^^ €an'iiitxan oi t^t "^oox,
II.
In the publications of the Association, the following are stated to be its objects :—
"1. To improve the temporal condition and physical well-being of the poor.
2. To encourage the education of the young.
3. To foster habits of temperance, economy, and cleanliness.
4. To discourage mendicancy, idleness, and dissipation.
5. To remove physical and moral nuisances from the abodes and neighbourhood
of the poor.
6. To endeavour to aid the unemployed in procuring remunerative labour.
7. To meet cases of peculiar trial and sudden privation, and, by kindly assist¬
ance, to prevent the poor from making the fatal descent into pauperism.
8. To advance small sums of money, repayable in weekly instalments, to meet
special cases of necessity."
To achieve these, a " thorough, systematic and sustained house-to-house visita¬
tion " was indispensable. For this purpose, the city was divided into twenty-eight
sections, embracing the various localities where poverty is to be found. To each
of these sections there was appointed a committee, with a chairman and secretary,
who, with the assistance of a staff of visitors, were expected to work out the plan
of the Association.
Upwards of one thousand volunteers having sent in their names, a number of
families, varying from five to twelve, was assigned to each. Each ordinary visitor
has a district; each special or consulting visitor (in charge of a set of ordinary
visitors), a division ; the local Committee, a section ; and the Acting Committee,
which meets once a-week, superintends the whole. The finance, educational, and
other special Committees, are composed of members of the Acting Committee, which
is chosen yearly, and of which not less than one-fourth must consist of chairmen,
secretaries, or members of Local Committees.
The Association does not profess to interfere with pauperism, which falls to be
dealt with by the Poor-Law Board.    Its main object is, by giving timely and
judicious help, to prevent the poorer section of the working classes from lapsing into
2 a
218 THE ATTEMPT.
pauperism. The various measures which such an undertaking implies, cannot of
course all be taken at once ; but sufficient has already been achieved to justify the
expectation of great things in the future.
The personal intercourse between the rich and the poor, as brought about by
the woiking of the Association, is considered to be a most effective means of
improvement. The presence and interest of a person of superior education and
position has, apart from any tangible benefit conferred, been found to have a
humanising and elevating tendency among the poor. One visitor, whose district is
in one of the lowest closes of the Grassmarket, states that several women have
repeatedly expressed a sense of shame at having been seen in a state of intoxication,
one of them adding that she always tried to beep sober when he was likely to come.
This of itself is a step gained; as, by judicious management, the feeling of shame may
eventually be converted into a desire to improve. It is, however, generally felt
that but little can be done for those who are habitual drunkards. It is to the
children of such that the Association, through its visitors, specially devotes attention,
in the lioj^e that by securing for them a suitable education, and, in cases of flagrant
neglect and injurious influence, by removing them to a healthier atmosphere, the
sins of the parents may not be visited upon the children, and that these rescued ones
may become useful members of the community, instead of falling into the ranks of
the vicious and the criminal.
As the providing of really nourishing food, at a cheap rate, is a powerful means
of discouraging drunkenness, and as it is a well-known fact that insufficient and
bad food often causes a craving for stimulant, and leads many to the dram shop,
the Association has opened a Workman's Dining Hall in Chalmers Close, High
Street, where, for Id. and 2d. a sufficient and comfortable dinner may be obtained,
which may be either eaten on the premises or carried away.
In the report on the Condition of the Poorer Classes of Edinburgh, alluded to in
our last number, among the means proposed for lessening the temptations to drink,
is that of calling out the feelings of prudence and economy by explaining the
benefits of Savings Banks, Friendly, Provident, and Building Societies, &c., and
thus diverting money, in many cases, from the whisky shop to these beneficial
channels. The visitors have induced many of the poor to lay a little by in the
Penny or larger Savings Banks as a provision for the future, and it is wonderful
how much self respect is increased by the fact of being a Bank depositor. These
Penny Banks seem to be comparatively little known among the poorer classes,
perhaps because, unlike the Friendly and other Societies, they do not employ agents
THE ATTEMPT. 219
to canvass for depositors. A large proportion of respectable working people subscribe
to one or more of the Friendly Societies, and thus by a small weekly payment secure
a certain sum to be allowed during illness or at death.
With regard to Building Societies, the Association has not yet been able to do
much more than draw attention to them. The Acting Committee has been
gathering information regarding the praticability of erecting a Workman's Village
near Edinburgh, to and from which the inhabitants might be carried for Jd. or Id.
by rail. To pay for the erection of this, is not within the province of the Associa¬
tion ; but were the preliminaries arranged for such a scheme, there is every pro¬
bability that the necessary funds would be forthcoming,—a considerable sum being
already promised. It is proposed that the houses should be built to meet the wants
of a lower class than those for whom model dwelling-houses have been erected in
Edinburgh, as it has not been found that the erection of these has either reduced
the rents or relieved the crowding in the dens of the Old Town. It is tenants
paying from 6d. to 2s. a-week who chiefly suflfer by the pulling down of the old
houses, which are replaced by others of a more exj^ensive class.
The experiment of a workman's village has proved eminently successful at
Mulhouse, in Alsace ; an account of it will be found in an interesting work, entitled
" Lending a Hand." The Company who originated this scheme, started with a
capital of £14,200; and the shareholders agreed to forego any other profit than
4 per cent., any surplus being devoted to public works and improvements. The
Emperor presented XI2,000 from the State, which sum has been devoted to the
public works of the place, sewerage, gas-lighting, wash-houses, bake-houses, &c. The
dwelling-houses are generally laid out in blocks of four, standing back to back, each
having a small garden in front, in each of which the Company has planted two
fruit trees. The smaller houses contain three apartments, and cost £9Q ; the larger
contain six apartments, and cost XI20. They are sold at cost price. A workman
desirous of purchasing, is expected to pay down an instalment of =£12 or XIG, to
cover the expenses of contract and transfer. If he is unable to do this, the Company
generally allows the purchaser, in lieu of this, to pay a few shillings extra monthly,
until this sum is made up. By paying L5s. a month for the smaller house, or
19s. 2d. a month for the larger, the workman becomes, in fourteen years, the pro¬
prietor, subject to certain reasonable conditions, among which are—keeping the
house in order, and not sub-letting it. Until purchasers come forward, the Company
is entitled to let the houses, but the rental must not exceed 8 per cent, on the cost.
No father of a family can either rent or purchase a house without undertaking to
220 THE ATTEMPT.
send his children to school. There is a building erected for the accommodation of
unmarried men, in which a workman may obtain a room, with attendance and house
linen, for 5s. lOd. a-month.
In the space of twelve years, from the formation of the Company to 1865, six
hundred and fourteen of these houses were sold to workmen, and, for part of these,
the whole purchase money was paid up. The success of this scheme is most
encouraging to those who desire to establish a similar one for Edinburgh.
Meanwhile, the Association has taken such steps as are in its power, towards
rectifying existing evils in the houses occupied by the poorer classes. The Acting
Committee memorialized the Town Council on the subject of insanitary dwellings,
and urged that they should refrain from pulling down more houses, till others,
adapted to the means of the ejected population, should be provided to receive them.
Furthermore, the visitors are directed to report all cases of dwellings coming under
the denomination "insanitary"—(printed directions being furnished on this point),
and the Association takes every means in its power to have these either imj^roved or
shut up.
The most efficient way of preventing the deserving poor from lapsing, is to find
work for the unemployed; and to this the Association pays special attention,
though it has been as yet able only partially to supply the want. The Acting Com¬
mittee has in view the establishment of a register of the unemployed, from which
a demand from other places for labourers may be supplied, thereby saving the work¬
man and his family many a futile wanderiag in search of employment, resulting
frequently in temporary, if not permanent, pauperism. Various hindrances have
prevented the accomplishment of this valuable work; and, meanwhile, it chiefly
rests with the visitors to do what they can to get work for the unemployed who
come under their notice. There are various means by which a great deal may be
accomplished in this way, particularly for young persons, who may often be helped
to a situation or apprenticeship by the visitors canvassing among their trades¬
people, or even by watching for and enquiiing about the vacant situations advertised
in our daily papers; and if the visitor is fortunate enough to have a respectable
charwoman in the district, it is often a mutual boon to recommend her to friends.
An experiment is being made by some private individuals of having a supply of
knitted under-vests made by poor women duiing the summer months for sale in
winter. These have already given employment to many who were out of work, or
on half-work ; and if the sale of the vests justifies the expectations of those who
promote the scheme, they will be encouraged to repeat it next season.    The vests
THE ATTEMPT. 221
are advertised in the Advertising Sheet of the " Attempt " for this month. It may
here be remarked, that the war at present waging on the Continent, has already
afiected some of our manufactures, and a portion of work-people are in consequence
thrown out of employment.
In many cases of want of work which come under the notice of the visitors, it
is difficult to ascertain whether it is the will or the opportunity to work that is
wanting. To meet this difficulty, and to enable those who are really anxious to
earn at any rate small wages, a manufactory for fire-lighters has been established
at Mr Swan's, 15 Leith Walk. As the work is not very remunerative, the employ¬
ment acts as a labour test, showing whether or not the applicant is willing to take
what work he can get, until something better turns up. It is hoped that this
branch of industry will be patronised by the public, as upon the encouragement
received, its continuance and efficiency must depend. It is under consideration to
find something corresponding for women and girls, but nothing definite has been
resolved upon. It has been proposed to establish a Washing-House, Laundry, and
Bleach i ng-Gr een.
An important part of the Association's work is in the hands of the Loan and
Finance Committee. The sum of £400 was given to the Association for the express
purpose of giving loans to poor people in times of temporary and special need. These
loans are intended " to enable a respectable tradesman or working man to recover
a position he may have lost, or may be in danger of losing, by accident, family
distress, or other sudden calamity; to give him, for example, the means of paying
rent, of recovering or replacing tools, clothes, or other articles parted with, or
otherwise to enable him to reap some legitimate advantage in his business or occupa¬
tion, which straightened circumstances place beyond his reach. In short, to affiard
needful help to the industrious and provident, willing to help themselves." These
loans range from 10s. to £5. The applicant is required to fill a printed form, find
two respectable securities, and undertake to repay the sum in weekly instalments.
In the second report of the Association, it is stated that 85 loans have been given,
and are being repaid with varying regularity. An interesting experiment has been
tried by one of the special visitors, in connection with the giving of loans for the
purpose of redeeming articles in pawn. Believing that the probability of re¬
payment of loans often depended upon the borrowers finding it to be for their
interest to be regular in the payment of their instalments, the visitor, instead of
advancing such a sum as would redeem at once all the articles pledged, resolved to
limit his loans to 10s., that sum being sufficient to enable the borrowers to redeem
222 THE ATTEMPT.
from pawn such articles as were most pressingly required, or were liable to be
forfeited. He at the same time intimated that as soon as the first loan was repaid,
he would give a second on similar terms, and so on, untU the borrowers were enabled
to redeem the whole of the articles which they had in pawn, and make a fresh start.
One important fact, which goes far to account for the regularity with which the
visitor was repaid, is that he arranged always to visit his district and receive the
instalments on Saturday, just when the men came home with their wages, and
before they found their way to the public-house.
The Acting Committee has proposed that where persons of good character have
got clear of the pawnbroker, it should be made known to them that, in the event of
their being again placed in difficulties through want of employment, illness, or
other legitimate cause, instead of again pledging their clothes, they should apply
to the Association, when such aid would be given, as would enable them to tide
over their temporary difficulties.
In winter, the Association lends blankets to such of the poor as are found to be
necessitous and deserving. These blankets are stamped and numbered, and the
Edinburgh pawnbrokers have undertaken not to receive them in pledge; and if
offered, to send information to the Sujierintendent of the Association, at the office
69 North Hanover Street.
Cast-off clothes are gladly received at the office, and are under the charge of
the Ladies' Committee, who, in cases recommended by the visitors and Local
Committees, give what is requisite. This has been found very useful, as many have
been enabled to obtain work by this judicious aid. As the supply of clothes sent
in by no means equals the demand for them, the Acting Committee has twice
voted money to be spent by the Ladies' Committee in materials for warm clothing
for distribution in winter. The poor are generally expected to make up these
garments for themselves ; in some cases they are anxious to pay part, and occasion¬
ally the whole, of the value of the materials.
Many children have been enabled to attend school by receiving necessary
clothing. But even this supply some of the poor make a stepping-stone to further
demands. A widow, who professed to be in a state of semi-starvation, asked for
clothes to enable two of her children to attend school. After investigation of the
case, the clothes were given, and the visitor ascertained that they were duly worn at
school. Shortly afterwards, the visitor was informed that an examination was com¬
ing on, and that she was expected to get new dresses for the children for the occasion,
white muslin and pink ribbons being preferred !
THE ATTEMPT. 223
The means of education are now brought within the power of almost every one,
and when parents cannot afford even the almost nominal sum charged, the Associa¬
tion is prepared to pay the school fees for the children.
A most important object of the Association is the suppression of street begging,
and much has been done towards the achievement of this. The public is constantly
urged to abstain from promiscuous charity; and the charitable are invited to ascer¬
tain the character and condition of beggars applying to them for help, through the
medium of the Association, which undertakes, when necessary, to supply their wants.
Those whose characters are thus enquired into, are almost invariably found to be
idle and worthless, it being only in very exceptional cases that the deserving solicit
charity.
A committee was appointed, with the view of inducing the existing charities of
Edinburgh to amalgamate, whereby much imposition would be avoided; but the
scheme has not hitherto met with much success.
The Association being desirous of interesting the public in its objects, is always
ready to avail itself of opportunities of giving information on all subjects connected
with it. Several of its members took part in a recent course of lectures on the Poor
Law, under the auspices of the Chalmers Association. One of the members has given
an interesting account of the management of the poor at Elberfeld. It is one of
the many German towns which adopt the same system. There the funds for aiding
the poor are all managed by unpaid agency. Every man who has a vote is expected
to take his share of the work, and few refuse to do so. To the charge of each visitor
four families are committed; he is expected to visit them at least once a fortnight,
and to submit to his Committee all cases requiring relief. The actual expense per
head of relief given is not found to be much less than in this country. But the
ratio of pauperism to the population is much less; the expenses of paid officials,
law, &c., are saved; and the public is satisfied that the poor are thoroughly cared
for. It is hoped that the day may come when the general funds for the poor in
Edinburgh will be administered by a similar agency.
Associations similar to that established in Edinburgh, exist in London, Liver¬
pool, and Aberdeen. One in Glasgow ceased to exist, from want of a sufficient
number of visitors, but is reviving under a new form. Information regarding the
organisation of the Edinburgh Association has been asked for by Birkenhead, Lincoln,
Bristol, Douglas, Kensington, Paisley, Newburgh, Berks, K'ewcastle, Forfar, Cardiff,
Clifton, and Nairn.
The two essentials for carrying on the work of the Association are money and
224 THE ATTEMPT.
visitors. To appeals for the former the public has liberally responded ; but four
hundred more visitors are still required to overtake the whole area of work. With¬
out these, the machinery is imperfect and hampered. As the ranks may find recruits
among our readers and their friends, the next paper of this series will be devoted to
the special duties and sphere of the ordinary visitor. Eta.
{To he continued.)
»&^H«=
To Marguerite.
Farewell, my daisy, lonely you leave me ;
I do not murmur, I would not grieve thee ;
Kind is the hand that transplanteth thee now,—
From a land where we know all the wild flowers that grow,
To a far-away clime where we do not know one.
But the daisy of all flowers must follow its sun,—
So self-thoughts are silenced, to smile on thy lot,
That may make thee forget me—thou still unforgot.
Farewell, dear, farewell.
Farewell, my pearl-gem,—is it all over,
That time when to each we were both friend and lover 1
Through dear days of youth how I clung to thy side.
As dispart from the world as we'd lived 'neath the tide;
Gem-like, thou show'st to me, pure in thy ray.
Brightening my young heart, and lighting my way;
But a diver experienced, who plunged through our tide,
Hath won thee by loving,—to wear thee, his bride.
Leila, dear one, farewell.
LuTEA Eeseda.
THE ATTEMPT. 225
Chapter VIII.
" Oh were we young, as we ance hae been,
We Buld hae been galloping down on yon green,
And Imking it o'er the lily white lea,
And werena my heart licht I wad dee."—Old Song.
The more I thought of Brand Hilary and Louis Maryon (for such was the
gallant hussar's name) together, the more strongly my preference turned towards
the former. True, he was not so ready of speech, nor seemingly so alert in action,
but there was an earnestness of purpose, a frankness of expression in his face utterly
wanting in the other, handsome and gay and bold as it was. And Hilary's face was
handsome too, with true Saxon beauty; fair of complexion though sunburnt, with
hazel eyes that won upon you more and more daily by their truthful brightness, a
square forehead and a firmly-set mouth, as sweet in its smiling as Una's own, and
that great beauty, a well-formed chin. His was a quiet face, though it could light
up, and often did ; but the other face was never still, never allowed you to look
through the windows freely into the moods and tenses of the mind within. It was
possible for it to inspire admiration, nay, affection, but confidence never, or so it
seemed to me. And, as day by day I saw the eyes that were to me a memory and a
fear settling more eagerly on Una, a dull dread of coming misfortune seemed to
come over me. That evening of Frank's arrival, though Brand Hilary had tried to
seem occupied with other things, I had seen how he, too, seemed to feel, even when
he did not see, Una's every movement.    Truly
" Like the moon, she made
The ever-varying currents of the blood,
According to her humour, ebb and flow,"
and I trembled to think that she held in her soft hands unconsciously, the happiness
of the life her urgency had helped to save, and of the other that had been risked for
its safety.
I heard her laugh as Elsie and she ran lightly upstairs, having gathered some
geraniums for their hair in the little greenhouse.    Elsie was twitting her with little
Mr Glynne's devotion, which, indeed, I saw was drawing to its natural close, i.e., an
2 B
226 THE ATTEMPT.
oiFer and a rejection. Una had shown him, as plainly as she could, the real state
of the case, but I felt sure his elastic temperament would not be thoroughly discouraged
by anything short of a point-blank "No," which there was every likelihood of his
receiving before long. But Una would only have laughed if I had told her that Brand
Hilary who hardly spoke to her, who left the Corsair to hand her chair and search
for her glove, was setting his heart upon her with a devotion which T could not but
think would be true and lasting.
Well, just then I had not much time for meditation, for it struck me that
the dinner ought to be suited to Frank's peculiar tastes ; and then I remembered
that seeing the days when Cousin Mary's tarts and cheese-cakes were objects eagerly
coveted and devoured were gone by, possibly an extra good curry would be more to
the purpose. This I commissioned Lizzie particularly to see after, as there was just
time, and then came dinner, and many remembrances of old days, as I saw how the
boy's face had changed into a man's, and yet kept the old expression in a bewilder¬
ing way that confused my ideas every now and then. Then in the evening Una
and Elsie sang the duets they had learned at Hampstead, in what they called
" old times," and Frank sat down by my work-table to talk, and tell me of his life
and prospects, which last seemed to be decidedly bright. About nine o'clock there
was a ring, and what Frank would have called " a chit" was brought in for me
from Mr Glynne, saying he and Captain Maryon had managed to engage a large
sailing-boat, big enough to hold their party and ours with all safety, and they hoped
we would join them in a sail to Ilsley Bank, a pretty place on the coast several
miles away. Mr Hilary had volunteered to assist in the navigation of said boat,
and all would be in readiness about ten next morning, if we could come. Una and
Elsie hastily left the piano, and the Ilsley Bank motion was carried nem. con.
" T suppose I must go, were it only as chaperone," I put in.
" Of course, Molly, it wouldn't be really fun without you," said Una, and she
went to the window.    " There is going to be a gale," she said, " what fun."
" There is going to be nothing of the kind," said Frank. " Molly, are you as
much afraid of the sea as you were long ago, or has familiarity bred contempt %"
" I shall never be a good sailor," I said, " I leave that to Una ; but if you'll
drop a line to the clerk of the weather-office to let us have a dead calm, I don't
mind."
" A dead calm, and a painted ship upon a painted ocean," said Una, " how
delightful ! Screw your courage to the sticking-point, darling, and it will be all
right, and do answer the note.     I see the emerald plush of the Glynne's servitor in
THE ATTEMPT. 227
front, must he tarry till we have settled whether ' a wet sheet and a flowing sea,'
or a dead sea calm is to be our portion 1 A verbal answer will do." So I sent one,
and next morning all was bustle. We should be away all day ; so oiir quota of
the luncheon had to be prepared, and Lizzy was up with the dawn making that
subtle pastry which melts away in the mouth of the fortunate recipient, and
packing up delicate sandwiches, and a flask or two of Moselle, and " making all
things ready."
General Hilary had asked Papa to ride with him to look at some cottages he
was building on a distant part of his estate, and he would not return till late in the
afternoon. So, precisely a quarter before ten on that 26th morning of April, we
started off, with Gordon to carry the baskets to the pier, where we found the
Glynne family, the Corsair, and Brand Hilary awaiting us. The morning was
perfect, with just a light breeze, and as warm and sunny as June would have been
further north. And so Ave stepped into the " Oudinny " with great anticipations of
pleasure. The singular name of the boat deserves attention, as it was an act of
homage to Una. The possessor of said craft had obtained permission to christen
his newly built boat after " Miss Una," and had spelt the name after his own
fashion. We never had the heart to represent to him that there was a slight mistake
in the orthography, and Una had had many a trip in her namesake. As soon as we
got in, I noticed Mr Glynne's state of mind, which was certainly peculiar. They
say love invariably ti-ansforms a man into the reverse of his usual self, makes the
talker silent, the taciturn eloquent, and from as good-natured and easy going a little
fellow as ever lived, it had on this occasion ckanged our worthy friend into a gloomy
misanthrope, wlio seemed like Mr Toots, to be contemplating the silent tomb as
his abode at no distant date, and to regard any one who spoke to Una in the
light of an interloper.
A savage frown passed over his rather narrow forehead, a most needless
contraction of that which Avas already contracted, when the Corsair took Una's
hand to help her into the boat; true, he could not have reached it from where
he stood, but that was nothing. I could not help obserAdng how different he
was from his ordinary self, and, indeed, he drew upon his dcA^oted head a cloud
of comparisons from Eose. Violet was detained by a pressing and special service,
and had, as her sister remarked, " henned off" at the last moment, at the gate of the
church. The church, jmr excellence, no one took much note of the quiet little
building about half-a-mile from St Michael's, where Mr Haslam presided, though
Una and I went there nearly every Sunday, to hear our old friend preach.
228 THE ATTEMPT.
"Dear Hal, 'awaywith melancholy.' Your face would bring down a storm
upon us; you will drive away all the ' birds of peace,' from the ' charmed wave.' Do
try to look less like an embodied funeral, there's a dear fellow. Oh, well, if you
can't, I for one don't want my own or my friends' obsequies forced upon my
attention just at this moment," with which the turned her back upon the head
of the family, whose most unheard-of melancholy was by no means lightened by
her remarks. Una was standing up in the stern, which had been brought close
to the steps of the quay, taking our mufflings from Frank. How lovely she
looked, with her upturned face, and the simple lines of her boating dress, a plain
blue serge jacket and skirt, falling around her as she stood, one little foot just
visible on the gunwale. Una's feet, by the way, were rather like those of the
Queen of Spain, or the little feet which once
" Crept in and out,
As if they feared the light."
But I am stopping the whole boating-party in order to describe them. They
descended into the stern, and the baskets were stored away, with loud calls for
a kettle. " Mary brought one," said Una ; " half the fun is making afternoon tea
at Ilsley Bank, all the smoke will go down the spout, and then how enjoyable it
will be."
" Of course you've forgotten the cork-screw " said Captain Maryon, " if not,
pray let some one drop it into the water ; no good ever came of a pic-nic party that
had a cork-screw."
" Mind the bottles, Frank, you as nearly as possible set down that basket with
a violence that would have smashed them altogether." This from me, while Frank
protested his home-made ginger-beer, that nobody else would drink, was good enough
for me in the old times, that were better than these.
"There goes the salt into the sea, coals to Newcastle," said Hose, as the
unthrifty heir of Glynne, taking the last mentioned useful article from Una, let it
drop over the side in a slight agitation which was rather to his credit than other¬
wise, instead of putting it into one of the baskets. After which, he retreated
further into the bow of the " Oudinny," and seemed to refuse to be comforted.
Well, it was a charming day, and as the sails filled and we swept along, even I,
bad sailor though I was and am, thoroughly enjoyed it. The owner of the boat, a
boy who was with him, and Mr Hilary, managed the vessel admirably ; Rose, Una,
and Elsie, joined in choruses and glees; Una especially seemed half-wild with enjoy-
THE ATTEMPT. 229
ment, and thoroughly in her element, laughing with Elsie over old school stories
and jokes, singing like a mermaid, and making fun of everything and everybody.
" This is what I call thorough and entire enjoyment," she said at last, as she
turned up the sleeve of her jacket, and held her hand and wrist in the eddies beside
the boat. " What a comfort to be able to say that every time I look at Elsie I feel
anew the joys of emancipation. Do you feel the same, Elsie 1 Well, it was a pleasant
time at Hampstead after all, but when I see you, old lady, it brings back the second
last morning of the half, when nothing more could be done to one in the way of
marks of disapprobation, and we threw pillows at each others' heads. Dear me, how
old I feel ! " Saying which, she drew up her hand from the water, white and glisten¬
ing, and demurely sprinkled some drops on the face of Rose, who was pretending to
go to sleep, and whose little dimpled chin, downy cheeks, and tumbled hair, showed
to great advantage under the shadow of her tilted sailor's hat, which almost hid her
closed eyes and dark eye-lashes. " I beg everybody's pardon," she exclaimed, feign¬
ing to start from slumber, " but Hal was so lively, and Captain Maryon so depress-
ingly cheerful, that it altogether lulled me into oblivion, and I dreamt I was at
church, and Violet's pet was intoning, and then that he threw some holy water over
me to make me more fit to be there.   Was that you, Una 1"
" Yours was a waking dream, I suspect. Miss Rose," said Captain Maryon,
" at least you kept opening your eyes every now and then, for fear we should forget
what they were like."
" As if nobody ever slept with their eyes open," retorted Rose, " why you have
kept yours open ever since you favoured us with your company on board, and if
you haven't been asleep, you might have been, for all the entertainment you have
afforded."
" How unjust; I was listening to those divine strains of yours, and then
to your equally charming conversation, and for the last few minutes I've been
wondering how I manage to feel young, when Miss Undine declares she feels old."
" I shall grow young again as I get up in life," said Una. " I saw Miss Screw-
bury, senior, yesterday, and she was evidently not more than twenty, nor so much, I
should say ; I felt inclined to ask her to come and make sand-houses on the beach,
she appeared so juvenile.    Didn't she, Elsie T'
" For my part," said Frank, " I feel so old that for any one else to talk of being
aged in my presence is presumption. Go on. Cousin Una, sing something else and
don't talk nonsense. Sing the Canadian boat song." So Una began, and the others
chimed in, and I sat listening, thinking of merry days long ago, when we had rowed
230 THE ATTEMPT.
home in the twilight singing that very song, along the river that flowed near Eed-
mains. Then followed " Santa Lucia,"—and amid songs and talk and laughter we
drew near Ilsley Bank, and were landed in a small boat, together with the luncheon,
which we proceeded to unpack. The Corsair contrived, by one of his mancEuvres,
to sit next Una, and attend to her in various ways, Frank devoted himself to me,
and Henry Glynne, uncheered by the soothing influence of the viands or the wine,
sat pretending to help Elsie, who, had it not been for Brand Hilary dividing her
from Rose, would have fared badly.
" The salt can't all have been lost, Miss Glynne," Elsie said at last, " for youi-
brother has flavoured this sweet sandwich with it to perfection. I never knew how
nice it was with raspberry jam before; just a touch of mustard and cayenne, Mr
Glynne, and it will be all I could wish."
" I beg your pardon, Miss Harper, what a stupid idiot I am, pray throw it
away, I really—what can I have been thinking of 1"
"Never mind," said Elsie, "here is great store of eatables and drinkables,
without any mingling of tastes ; chacun d, son gout, perhajjs this highly flavoured
and rare compound may suit somebody else." Henry Glynne's embarassment and
gadcherie were painfully increased when he felt they had been observed, as I saw;
so I begged him to look for one of the baskets which I thought had been forgotten,
and when he returned to say it was not to be found, he looked quieter,—but at the
same time I saw a sort of resolute look in his face which told me his mind was
made up, and when we began to stroll about, he told Una he wished to show her
a view from a rock which rose behind a wood at a little distance.
" It is the prettiest look-out hereabouts, Miss Una; do come and see
it."
" Very well, but I am not so selfish as to wish to see it alone," said Una, " will
no one else come ?"
" I would with pleasure, Miss Undine," said Captain Maryon, who was the
only one near, " but I find I've very stupidly left my cigar-case on board, and your
cousin wanted one, I think ; yes, he certainly did, so I won't deprive Mr Glynne of
the pleasure of showing you the view by himself."
" That's all an excuse, you want a quiet smoke," said Una, " however, it must
pass for once. Come, Mr Glynne, I won't attempt to rival the delicious weed." And
so off they went; and when they came back, Una's bright face was so sober, and her
poor little lover's so utterly cast down, though he seemed trying to keep up appear¬
ances, that I felt for both of them.    The best thing I could do was to begin to make
THE ATTEMPT. 231
a great fuss about tea, and in the boiling of the kettle, and the going to and fro
seeking for sticks, &c., to occupy every one as niucli as possible.
Mr Glynne came up to me as I was stooping over the fire. " I've been a great
fool, Miss Ferguson," he said ; " of course you see how it is. I thought in time I
might make her like me, but it seems it's of no use."
"We need not leave off being friends," I said; "I am very, very sorry."
And then the others came up; Captain Maryon having filled the kettle at a
brook near by, and comparing the whole scene to any absurd thing he could
think of as he carried it along, and Una, with the other girls, bringing cups
and saucers and all things needful, assisted by Brand Hilary and Frank. Una
seemed afraid to stop talking, and rattled away to hide her confusion till we
were all seated, and I was dispensing the tea, then she suddenly became
silent, and the sail home was much quieter than that of the morning. Eose, with
her sharp eyes, had evidently discovered the state of affairs, and even she was
quieted, but I had no chance of speaking to Una alone till just before she was going
to bed, when I went into her room. She had been crying, and looked so grieved, that
for one moment I wondered whether she repented her decision.
" Oh, Molly darling, how horrid it all was," she said, " who was to guess that
he would choose to spoil such a nice day in that way 1"
" Any one who looked at him," I said, " but your eyes were otherwise
employed."
" Well, it was a shame, just when 1 thought we were getting to be friends. I
hope nobody will ever ask me again.
" Till Hiddbrand comes ?"
" Hlildbrand will never come. You are the best, Molly, worth twenty Hlild-
brands. And I feel as if I had done wrong, and yet I never pretended to like him,
you know I didn't.    Well, I'll go to bed and try to forget about it."
And so she did, and next morning was herself again ; and in the course of the
day we heard that the Glynne family was preparing to go to London. The girls
came to say good-bye ; they were not quite at their ease at first, but became quite
cordial before they left.    Captain Maryon, it seemed, was going too.
" But not quite so soon," said Bose. " General Hilary has asked him to the
Hall. If you'll believe me, it was only the other day that he heard the whole story of
how his son was saved, and he came down at once to thank Maryon, and can't make
enough of him." This was no good news for me. I had looked forward to the Glynne's
departure, chiefly because I thought it would involve that of their friend, and here
232 THE ATTEMPT.
was he at the Hall, between which and Lawrence Lodge there was continued coming
and going, nor could there be any possibility of changing this. Nor, I was sorry to
see, could there be any doubt that the Captain meant to lay siege to Una, though he
had more control over himself than the luckless heir of the Glynnes, and would not
be rash. What I feared came upon me, for hardly a morning passed in that bright
May weather, without the two young men from the Hall coming in to devise some
plan for passing the day. The Glynnes had departed bodily, the girls in high spirits
apparently, and General Hilary seemed much pleased with his giiest. One day he
was talking him over with me.
" He is well connected, though he seems pretty much alone in the world ; his
father was a brother of Sir Charles Maythorpe, who it seems changed his name on
inheriting his estate, and his mother was Spanish; it is evident he has some foreign
blood in his veins from his appearance. His father was stationed at Gibraltar,
offended all his relations by his marriage, and then died ; so this lad was brought up
in Spain, living at some sea-port town with his mother, till his uncle landed there
by accident from his yacht, saw the boy, and recognised him by the fainily likeness."
" And what did he do 1 " said I. Luckily it was nearly dark, for the familiar
name, so long unheard, and once so dear above all others, had sent the hot blood to
my cheeks and brow as in the old time. No need to ask why Captain Maryon's face
had moved me so strangely now. The ghost of my old trouble had come back in the
shape of a new one.
" What did he do 1 why, he found the boy living with apemirious old uncle of his
mother's, she having died a month or two before, and so brought him home and
educated him, and got him a commission, I suppose, and there he is. Now I must
be going ; why, Mary, I must get the doctor to presciibe for you, your hand is like
ice, and shaking too.    What is the matter 1"
" Nothing," I answered hastily, " my hands are usually cold, it is no bad
sign with me." And then I wont upstaii-s to think. " Maythorpe, Charles May-
thorpe." How the name brought back old times, that it was only pain to remember
now. Was my feeling towards Maryon mere prejudice, an instinct I ought to
disregard, or an intuition 1 " Well," I thought, '' at any rate he and Brand are
coming to dinner, but I hope, I do hope, he won't be here long."
And that night Captain Maryon left the group at the piano and came up to me.
" You don't know how sorry I am, these pleasant evenings are at an end for
me," he said, " but my leave is up, and I have some affaii-s to attend to in London.
Hilary has kindly asked me here again in September, for the shooting, so perhaps
THE ATTEMPT.
233
I may see you again then, if I can get away." He hesitated, and then said,—" Can
you not guess what makes it doubly hard for me to leave St Michael's 1 Oh, Miss
Ferguson, do you think your sister would allow me to see her alone before I go ? I
can't leave without knowing whether I have any chance or not."
It was out, and he stood looking half proud, half ashamed, and a whole tide
of feelings came over me as I saw the look in his eyes, when they wandered half
involuntarily over to Una. Then I saw Brand Hilary glance towards us, and start
as if a new light had broken in upon him, and then rise abruptly and lean on the
piano, talking to Elsie.
I knew that lie knew, ' by tact of love,' what his friend was talking of, but there
were Charles Maythorpe's eyes waiting for an answer,—restless, unsteady, but eager
and evidently earnest, not to be evaded. " I can tell you nothing," I said; " pardon
me, but you are almost a sti'anger, and though I cannot pretend not to have re¬
marked your attention to Una, she is, I am sure, that is, I am nearly sure "
here I came to a full stop.
"She has no thoughts of me, that's likely enough," he said, " and yet may
I not see her to-morrow morning if I come ? " I managed to bring out a sort of
conditional acquiescence, and soon after Brand and Captain Maryon left, and I, in
great trouble of mind, went to Una's room when I heard Elsie leave it.
O. M.
=^^H«
Comfort iit C^ars.
From the German of Goethe,
And how is it that thou art sad,
When all around are gay 1
For by thine eyes I well can see
That thou hast wept to-day.
And what though I have lonely wept 1
My grief was all my own ;
And since those softening tears I've shed.
My heai-t is lighter grown.
2 c
Thy happy friends are calling tlice-
" Come, lean upon our breast!
And whatsoever thou hast lost,
To us be it confessed."
Ye talk and stir—but cannot guess
The grief that tortures me—
Ah no ! 'tis not a loss I mourn
Though deep my longings be.
234
THE ATTEMPT.
Then rouse thee, thou art young and bold,
And shouldst not quail nor tii-e.
At thy young years a man has strength
And courage to aspire.
Alas ! I dare not here aspire,
My hopes are fixed so far;
She dwells as high, she shines as fair
As yonder distant star !
The stars !—we men desire them not,
We glory in their light,
We gaze on them in wondering joy
Through many a summer night.
And I have gazed in wondering joy,
Through many a happy day—
Now let me weep the weary night,
My tears will have their way.
Dido.
C r fl q tt £ t.
For the last eight or nine years we have been of the opinion that Croquet shoiild
take a much higher standing among our national games than that which was at
first accorded to it by a frivolous public, who, though willing to spend hours in
knocking about the balls amid laughter and conversation, failed to see any of the
true mei-its of the game. However, the time and attention which have been be¬
stowed upon it now for some years past, go far towards making amends for the ill-
usage with which it met in the early stage of its existence.
We are not here going to enter into a minute examination of the laws of the
game, as that would require much space ; besides which, our noble contemporary,
The Field, generously opens its columns for a free discussion of these, and, in a spirit
of fair play, lets every one have his turn, either in pointing out objections to, or
in proposing improvements on, the laws. Therefore, we shall confine ourselves more
immediately to the tactics of the game.
One great advantage which croquet has over most other games, is its adapt¬
ability to all sizes of grounds. It may be played with a certain amount of interest
and skill on the back-gi'een of a town house, though to be seen in its full glory,
with its splitting strokes, its following strokes, its rushing strokes, and its long shots,
it needs the wider dimensions of a lawn. There is much diversity of opinion as re¬
gards the proper limits of a croquet ground; we consider that in order to have perfec¬
tion, the distance from peg to peg should be from forty-five to fifty yards, and that there
should be an area of twenty yards beyond each peg and beyond the side hoops, though on
a ground much smaller than this, very beautiful play may be seen.   The arrangement of
THE ATTEMPT.
235
the hoops is also a subject of much discussion, and though we ourselves are satisfied with
the usual setting of two hoops (not crossed) in the centre, we can see the force of the argu¬
ment that, on a ground not sufficiently large to allow of constant changing of the hoops,
the gi-ass around the two in the centre becomes worn and slippery, from the constant
play going on in their neighbourhood, and that many a good break is spoiled by tliis
fact. This being the case, there is some discussion going on among the best players
as to what new arrangement should be adopted ; and while they are on the subject
of changes, it is not improbable that they may alter the position of one of the two
hoops before each peg, which are indeed rather too simply set, it being almost as easy
to run the two as the one. Many players will be sorry to think of the old arrange¬
ment of the hoops being put aside for some newer mode, but when they remember
how many players there are now-a-days who, on a smooth ground, can run all the
hoops in one turn by the help of a ball to croquet, they will see that something a
little more difficult is needed for advanced players. As regards the colouring of the
balls, we must give our strongest testimony in favour of those distinguished by the
number of their stripes, all those belonging to one side having I'ed stripes, and those
on the other blue, as being a far more intelligible plan than that of distinguishing
them by eight different colours. Before proceeding to the tactics of the game, there
is one remark more to make, and that in regard to the mallets. After much serious
consideration, and throwing aside of all prejudice, we think that the All-England
Croquet Club did right in removing all restriction as to the size, weight, or shape of
the mallets, leaving each player to select that with which he can play best.
There was something taking in the idea of a player accustoming himself to no par¬
ticular mallet, but being able to acquit himself creditably on any ground with the
implements there provided, but experience teaches us that the best players are those
who always have their own mallets with them, whether at home or abroad ; therefore,
as good play and not an abstract principle is what is wanted, we give in our adhesion
to this law of liberty.
Having said so much to clear the way, as it were, let us imagine to ourselves
a perfect game, and examine its tactics to a certain degree. It is a fine still day,
with just sufficient bi'eezo to prevent the heat of the sun from being ojipressive, and
two good equal players have met for a game, on a ground of the dimensions already
specified, the turf of which has been watered by showers during the night, and had
a good heavy roller passed over it in the early morning. We shall call our players
Red and Blue, and Red's balls we shall call 1 and 3, and Blue's 2 and 4. Red having
gained the toss, ho leads off with 1, making the first and second hoops with ease,— but
236 THE ATTEMPT.
now comes the first point for consideration,—shall he take up his position before
the third hoop, and so run the risk, not only of being croqueted by blue, but of being
of immense service to him in the making of his hoops 1    On a smooth ground, and
with good players such as we are imagining, we should advise his not taking up
position, at least not just in front of the hoop, but at a distance of about 12 or 15
yards back from it.    Then Blue plays with 2, and is in some perplexity as to his
best move after having made the first and second hoops.    It is difScult to say what
he should do; if he is tolerably certain of his long shots, he might try one at the
ball already in the game, but we should rather advise him to take up position at the
third hoop, for then when Red starts the third ball, he will, if he be at all a
cautious player, prefer joining his other ball to risking a shot at 2 ; this will leave
Blue the choice of either trying a shot at  his own ball with  4, or of trying a still
longer one at his adversary's balls, should they be lying in such a position as to give
him a broad aim.    The game being thus opened, we should say the chances in favour
of either side getting the best of it are pretty even.    And now the play begins in
earnest, and we have an opportunity of observing the characteristic tactics of the
two players. Red plays a very cautious game.   Except on occasions of great necessity,
he risks taking no ball beyond the distance of 10 yards, always preferring to join
his other ball, if there should be no ball or point to make within this distance.    But
what he chiefly excels in are his splitting strokes.   If his enemy's balls have got
together, and are lying within 50 yards of him, he can count on splitting accurately
to within two or three feet of them ; his usual style of play then is to croquet the
next player away, and make a long break with the help of the other; but he is
always careful at the end of his turn to let his two balls be together again.    Blue's
tactics are somewhat different.   He is more inclined to make long shots, considerable
practice in which has given him such confidence, that it is nearly as likely as not
that he will hit anything within 25 yards of him, and occasionally he hits at a distance
of 40 yards.    This often enables him to regain the break after his opponent thought
ho had banished him to a safe distance, but at the same time it tells against him
sometimes, in that it makes him rather careless as to keeping his two balls together,
and tempts him to rely too much on his long shots, so that when he does miss, it
may take him some time to get his balls again into good position.    A stroke in
which both players  excel is the rushing stroke,—i.e.,  in  splitting  or   in running
a  hoop,   they so  measure their distance  as   to   lay  their own ball just behind
that  at which they are next   going to aim,   so that   they   can  " rush"  it into
the   exact   spot   where   thoy   wisli   to  be,   and   then   can   have   their   croquet
THE ATTEMPT. 237
or split shot, or whatever they please. It is only of late years that this
shot has been brought to perfection. By means of it a player may easily
make breaks of eleven or twelve points, or if no accident happen, may make
the whole round should he think it desirable to do so. Another point of
resemblance between our two players is their dislike to long croquets or banish-
ings, merely as such. Of course, at the close of a game, a certain amount of such
play is necessary, and throughout, the ball next to play must be dealt with
carefully; but as a rule, our players prefer using the balls to dismissing them.
At one time, banishing to a great distance was considered an important part
of croquet, but as the science of the game has develojied itself, such a mode of
play has been more and more abandoned, till indeed a rule has been lately made
in an influential quarter, abolishing putting the foot on the ball at all. If this rule
should be universally accepted, it will do much towards putting an end to the
banishing style of play.
People who play croquet rightly become so much in earnest over it, that
they think of it not only as a game but as an occupation, in the pursuit of
which more is involved than the mere pleasure of a few hours, and they bring
to bear on it their own ideas of right and wrong, as they would on any other
work. This is partly what modifies the tactics of different players : thus A thinks
it a shabby style of play to put his adversary's ball right behind a wire, where its
next shot must be lost, in merely getting to such a spot as he can play from next
turn, whereas B considers this one of the most skilful parts of the game, as it is
certainly no easy matter to lay the ball in the exact spot necessary for wiring it;
and B, in his turn, thinks A a little shabby in his jicrpetual practice of sending one
of his adversary's balls to lie for the next ball of his own which is to play. These
instances might be multiplied, but they are sufficient for our purpose, which is merely
to say, that if people play in a frank open spirit, rather foregoing a possible advantage
than running the risk of favouring their own side, they need not suspect themselves
or their neighbours of a shabby intention. But while v/e are thus moralizing, our
two players have nearly finished their game, and if we would see that most exciting
part of the whole, we must hurry back to the ground. Blue has got both his balls
rovers, and has them lying within three yards of the winning peg, whereas Red has
still a few hoops to make. It is Blue's turn to play with his second ball—what shall
he do 1 There are just two kinds of tactics which come into play at this part of
the game, and each kind has its numerous and influential advocates. Blue may
either make a gentle but firm rolling stroke to the peg, and risk getting both his
238 THE ATTEMPT.
balls out this turn, or he may split to the enemy, in the hope of banishing both his
balls and of returning to his position near the peg.    There can be no positive rule
laid down for this, as each player must be guided, to a certain degree, by the style of
shot in which he most excels, but on the whole we sympathise with the general who
endeavours to get out at once, or who, failing in this, remains near the peg, leaving
his adversary to split up to him, for many games are lost by the player who is
in advance scattering his own balls in endeavouring to disperse the enemy.    But of
course it is impossible to say, without seeing the exact game, what should be the
tactics, at this part, we only say that as a general principle, it is better for the
player in advance to trust to his adversary failing in spliting to him, than to spoil
his  own  position by  splitting down  to his  adversary,  for if he fails,   his balls
are separated without his opponent taking any trouble in the matter, who, seeing
what has happened, has only to play carefully to come in and win.    It is just this
question which is puzzling Blue.  At last he determines to split to Red's balls, which are
lying at a distance of about twenty yards from him, and are three yards separate
from one another.   In doing this, he wires himself from the nearest ball, tries a shot
at the other, but has got nervous and fails.    Red takes courage at this, and works his
balls careful through their remaining hoops up to the winning peg, for Blue having
separated his own balls, Red is not distracted from his hoops in oi'der to split up to
him, as must have been the case had Blue remained near the peg.   Red ends his turn
by banishing Blue's 4 ball (he scorns to kill it, though such a mode of playing is
still permitted by the otherwise excellent code of laws drawn up by the All-England
Croquet Club), and by laying his own balls within a few feet of the winning peg.
Blue then tries a long shot at Red's balls, but misses them by a few inches, where¬
upon Red wins the game.    Perhaps the above parenthesis regarding killing reads
rather sharply, but we suppose there is no point in the game on which it is more to
be deplored that players cannot be agreed.    To those who never, from their earliest
croquet playing days, looked upon " killing " their adversary, actually putting him
out of the game, as otherwise than an act utterly unworthy of croquet, it must cause
sincere regret to see so many scientific players upholding such a law.    Why should
one shot, even though a good one, have the power of utterly disabling your adversary ?
Making a fine break of twelve or fourteen points is surely better play than killing your
adversary, even in one beautiful straight croquet of twenty yards?  Yet the first piece
of play does not ensure you the game, whereas the last so cripples your adversary,
that he need scarcely cherish the fiiintest hope of victory.    We wish to stigmatise
no play as mean or cruel which stops short of killing, but that once done, the game
THE ATTEMPT. 239
is no longer a good stand-up fight, but an ignominious struggle of two against one.
We know of no analogous rule in cricket, golf, or billiards, which can be quoted in
defence of this extraordinary law, which we think would never have crept into
croquet, had the game been better understood when its first elementaiy rules were
drawn up (who knows by whom T) years ago.
The game we have above attempted partly to describe, was between two equal
players ; but as it often happens that two players, equally warm in their admiration
of the game, but unequal in the skill and science which they can bring to bear upon
it, meet and wish to have a game, we must say a few words as to the best means of
arranging such a match. "When two such players meet, it generally happens that the
superior player, anxious to encourage his adversary, plays but a poor game, content¬
ing himself for the most part with making his hoops without si:)litting to his adver¬
sary's balls, and even plays his strokes carelessly. This being alike demoralising to
his own play and unsatisfactory to his adversary, various other plans have been tried,
such as the weaker player being given some hoops as odds, or the stronger player, if
accustomed to play with two hands, being compelled to play with one only; but
there are many good reasons against both of these plans, and we think the only good
remedy is that proposed lately by a writer in The Field, viz., bisques. A bisque is
an extra turn taken by the weaker player at any part of the game ; if the bisque
be judiciously timed, it may be turned to great account. We have made the experi¬
ment of playing with bisques, and feel we cannot recommend them too highly to our
readers, as the only means of saving a good player from falling into a slovenly kind-
hearted play, and at the same time as being a thoroughly honourable plan as regards
the weaker player. We ourselves should no moi-e hesitate to accept a bisque, or, if
necessary, two or three, from a superior player, than we should to accept odds at chess.
This plan being once discovered, we consider no weak player justified in insisting on
one stronger than himself playing him on equal terms.
It is rather the custom to say that a game of six balls is not scientific, and per¬
haps it is not so much so as one of four ; but as a game of tactics, it is admirable.
A leader of his side in such a game has need of a clear head, a sound judgment, and
a quickness of viewing a position, whereas a game of four balls is less complicated
and may sooner be understood. A six game should always be played on a large
ground, otherwise, with so many balls lying about, a bad shot often hits one by
chance, and so may upset the carefully laid plans of the best captain. We have not
space to go minutely into the examination of a six game, and shall therefore content
ourselves with merely noticing the peculiar trials and difficulties which the players of
240 THE ATTEMPT.
such a game must expect to encounter. First, as regards the captain of a side, he
must be prepared often to have much of his best work spoilt by a bad stroke from
one of his players, and he must set himself patiently to work to get all the balls into
a good working position again ; and then, worse than this, he must be prepared to
see his side sometimes discontented with his tactics, and unable to see that if they
had not failed in the execution of his orders, all would have been right. If he is a
wise captain, he will sometimes let his players have their own way, that by experi¬
ence they may learn to trust him. Secondly, as regards the players under a captain,
they must be prepared often to forego a shot in which they feel pretty certain they
would succeed, rather than, by going against their captain, to spoil the unity of
their side; for one tolerable leader is better than two, even should he sometimes
make a mistake. Also, they should endeavour, by remembering to what hoop they
are going (when clips are not in use), and by being at their ball when their turn
comes round, to lighten the work of their captain. "With an able captain on each
side, and two intelligent good-tempered players under them, a six game seems to us
to rank only second to what we have already styled a perfect game, viz., two good
equal players with two balls each.
With a few remarks as to the best means of playing matches for prizes, we must
close this paper. After some experience of different modes, we think the usual plan
of drawing the comjietitors in pairs, and then throwing aside the vanquished, and
drawing the victors again in pairs, and so on till there remains but one player in, is
the best. Should an unequal number of players present themselves for competition,
one player draws a bye—i.e., he is supposed to have beaten an imaginary player.
In matches for prizes, we do not think bisques should ever be permitted, though, as
we have already said, we highly approve of them in ordinary games.
Now that the All-England Croquet Club is fairly established, surely Scotland will
not fail to found some national club of the sort. Should such a club be started, no
better place than our own metropolis could be selected for its centre, and doubtless
a field, capable of being formed into several large croquet lawns, could be procured
a little beyond the west side of our city. In some future number we hope to tell our
readers of the inauguration of a Scottish National Croquet Club, and of its first
annual match against that of the All-England. Des Eaux.
THE ATTEMPT. 241
^Ijf  ^biitlj«rglj  %BBacxntxon for  ^m^tablnQ
tlj^  Contrition of t^t  '$oox,
III.
Agreeably to the statement in our last number, we now proceed to indicate the
position and duties of an ordinary visitor.
When intimation is given to the Superintendent of the Association of the will¬
ingness of any suitable person to become a visitor, he takes measures to have a
district allotted tothe applicant as speedily as possible, endeavouring, at the same
time, to ensure the suitableness of the district to his residence and other circum¬
stances. The new visitor is placed under the superintendence of a special visitor,
who is expected to have a general knowledge of the division under his care, and by
whom the newly-appointed visitor is introduced to the families allotted to him, and
is also supplied with a " Directory for Visitors," and a Koll-book, in which to enter
all information gained about the families. The ordinary visitor can at all times
apply to his special visitor for information and advice ; and it is only with his sanction,
or that of another member of the Local Committee, that he can dispense relief. In
every instance in which relief is given, the case must be reported at the periodical
meetings of the Local Committee.
Hitherto the mode of procedure in the different Local Committees has not been
quite uniform, it having been deemed advisable to allow a certain latitude to each,
untn it was ascertained what system worked best. In some sections the special
visitors have called their ordinary visitors together periodically, and received their
detailed reports, which were subsequently communicated to the committees consist¬
ing of special visitors only. In others, the ordinaiy lady and gentlemen visitors
alternately attend the committee meetings, to give in their reports and submit their
cases in person.
The " Directory for Visitors" is a compendium of information required in order
efficiently to befriend and help the poor.   It is arranged under the following heads:—
" The Objects of the Association ; Organization and Directions ; General Rules ;
Kelief in Provisions; Clothing Loans; Employment; Schools ;  Sickness ;
Charitable Institutions ; Sanitary ; Parochial Relief; Provident Habits ;
Mendicancy."
2 D
242 THE ATTEMPT.
There are also valuable "Hints to Visitors" appended to the first Annual
Report of the Association. With so much assistance and information, the visitors,
by the exercise of good sense, tact, and perseverance, can hardly fail to meet the
various contingencies.
There is one point on which the principles of the Association seem not to be
generally understood. We refer to the subject of religion. The Association was
organized to combat a great evil, common alike to Protestants and Roman Catholics ;
it is essentially secular in its objects; its members are of various creeds and denomina¬
tions : hence it is necessary that not only all proselytizing, but even the appearance
of it, should be avoided. The Directory contains the following intimation on this
subject:—
"As the sole object of the Association is to ameliorate the temporal and social
condition of the poor, you are not required to do more for their religious interests
than to endeavour to persuade those who are living in utter neglect of Christian
ordinances to attend some place of worship, and to represent the case of those who
may seem to be neglected to their own clergyman or missionary. You will do no¬
thing, on the one hand, to obstruct or oppose any efforts that are being made in yoiir
district by others for the spiritual benefit of its families ; and nothing, on the other,
having the appearance of favouritism to any religious denomination, or of proselytism
to any one particular church."
It is satisfactory to think that the Association has indirectly been the means of
achieving one great good, viz., the bringing together so many persons of various
opinions, creeds, and denominations, to work in unison and harmony for the good of
their fellow-creatures. Many who were already working either separately, or in
connection with existing establishments, have also joined the Association, thereby
not only adding to the unity and completeness of its work, but gaining additional
means of helping the poor under their charge. Among the most useful visitors of
the Association are members of the working class, who, being well acquainted with
the wants and temptations of those immediately below them, can best point out the
most efficient modes of rendering assistance.
As it may interest some of our readers to hear how the work is actually done,
one of the lady visitors has been requested to furnish an account of her district;
this we now subjoin.
" Last winter, hearing much of the want of visitors for the Association, I was
induced to offer my services, not from a feeling of being competent for the woi-k,
but with the desire of filling a gap until more visitors came forward.    A district
THE ATTEMPT. 243
was allotted to me in a close in the Grassmarket, and the special visitor introduced me
to the various families. At first, from my being new to the work, it was very uphill,
and in spite of a really cordial reception, I felt considerable constraint. In the course
of a few visits, however, this wore off, and I soon became on friendly terms with
them all, and heartily interested in the work. My district consisted of ten families,
afterwards augmented, by taking a second district, to twenty. The heads of two of
these families are landladies, or more correctly factors, who collect the rents.
Neither is in such circumstances as to require aid from the Association, but both
entertain a very friendly feeling towards it, and have been of great help in giving
me useful information about the people, and advising how to aid them. Of the
remaining eighteen, none have more than one room, and that in some cases a very
small one ; most of the families are Irish, and all are willing to talk as long as, aye
and far longer than the most patient listener could attend. I shall give some notes
of a few of the families.
" Granny H. is nearly eighty, and decrepit; still she tries to earn something in
summer by buying a few vegetables at the market, and selling them at a little stall.
She had not money to make a beginning in spring, so, with the sanction of the com¬
mittee, I lent her some shillings, which she has since gradually repaid.   Her daughter
Margaret is a charwoman, industrious, sober, and honest.    Her name was, at the
expense of the Association, put upon the books of the  Society for the Employment
of Women  (.37 George Street), through which means, and by private exertions, she
has had much more constant work than formerly.      Last  summer many  of her
employers left town, and she was glad to get some knitting, provided by a visitor
belonging to our section.    Having advised her to become a depositor in the Penny
Savings Bank, I was glad to find that she willingly did so, and that  she has from
time to time laid by small sums.     On becoming better acquainted with her, I found
that she had one constant source of mortification, viz.,—that she could neither read
nor write.   She said she " would feel shame to go to school among lassies," so I took
her as my own pupil, and arranged that whenever she was not at work she should
come to me at home between nine and ten in the morning, and get a lesson.    Ten
minutes sui3ELce to hear her reading lesson, and five more to correct her slate of
writing and set her another copy;  she has got on remarkably well.    The family
consists further of two grandchildren, a boy of fourteen and a girl of twelve.    The
former is an orphan.    He would not learn, ran away repeatedly from school, and
got among idle companions, to the great grief of his grandmother and aunt.    The
latter  mentioned, as the climax of his misdeeds,   that he had even shirked the
244 THE ATTEMPT.
administration of her " taws," in the efficacy of which she professed gi'eat faith. I
talked to him about the necessity of behaving better, and doing something for a liveli¬
hood, in both of which he readily concurred. But on my return next day with the
offer of a place as apprentice to a painter who would take him on trial, he frankly
stated that if he bound himself to anything he would just run away ! His aunt has
tried to coerce him by refusing to give him food, but he seems not to care, and runs
errand or holds horses for pence enough to buy food. Unfortunately, for such
services he is often paid with a glass of whisky or a drink of beer. He is over
fourteen, consequently too old to be forced to attend school, and as he has neither
stolen nor begged, he cannot be sent to a Reformatory, which seems the only suitable
place for him. Little Mary, the granddaughter, has proved a more hopeful subject.
Her father, having gone to the country for work, left her with her grandmother. Mary's
bright smile was hardly visible through the coating of dirt which covered her face
at our first meeting. A hint that this might with advantage be removed was
acted upon, and at my next visit I found she was a rosy-cheeked comely little
maiden. She was anxious to get work, but had not proper clothes to enable her to
look for a place. The committee gave her an order for some old clothes from the
Association Office, and lent her money to buy a cotton dress. A green grocer
engaged her as message girl, but finding her unsuitable from being unable to read or
write, transferred her with a good character to a laundress, who was to teach her to
wash and iron. Here too, however, her engagement came to an untimely end, for
being set to turn a heavy mangle, the work brought on spitting of blood, which
disabled her for some time. Her next start was more satisfactory. Our milkwoman
has engaged her, and is much pleased with her. This winter she is to attend the
Apprentices' evening classes for readmg and writing, for which she is to pay 6d. a
month out of her own earnings, the Association paying a similar sum. She has
already paid all the money for her dress.
" Samuel H. and his wife are the most respectable looking couple in my district;
their room is a model of cleanliness and tidiness. He earns 19s. a-week at a breweiy,
and has besides, as a retired soldier, a yearly pension of £4. When I first saw Mrs
H., she was recovering from an attack of bronchitis, and looked very wan and deli¬
cate. For some time she always assured me they wanted nothing, but on my urging
an explanation of her not obeying the doctor's orders to take a daily walk, she told
me her story.
" In consequence of an injury of the spine received in early life, she has never
enjoyed good health, and sufiers besides in winter from bronchitis.    From these
THE ATTEMPT. 245
causes she requires, not only extra nourishment, but occasional assistance, both of
which cost money. As her husband has regular work for only eight months in the
year, being dependent upon odd jobs duruig the remaining four, they have always
during the latter period to incur heavy debt, which must be cleared oft' during the
winter. They were obliged last winter, in consequence of her illness, to put most
of their clothes, besides articles of household furniture, into pawn. Her inability to
take a walk arose from the want of out-door clothes to put on. " For he is such a
proud man," she said, " he canna bear the neighbours to know how hard up we are,
for a' he has so good a wage." As their landlady spoke highly of them, and I got
an excellent character of the man from his employer, the Committee empowered me
to advance money gradually to redeem the articles pawned. They have been pretty
regular in repaying the advances in weekly instalments. Last summer, S. H. was
out of work for only one month, and some timely orders for provisions granted by
the special visitor, saved their little possessions from returning to the pawnshop. I
have strongly urged upon them the propriety of laying by in the Savings' Bank while
in full employment, for the idle time, instead of getting into debt and being hamjiered
afterwards. This winter they start clear of debt, so have every facility for saving.
Mrs H. occasionally exjiresses her gratitude for the help she has received, in a truly
Hibernian manner.    " Sure, Miss," she said one day, " Miss L went among the
poor just as you do, and when she died they all turned out to her burial; sure an'
we'll all do the same for you." Samuel H. is a very intelligent man. The occa¬
sional loan of a book greatly pleases him, and he is ready in return to give a " full,
true, and particular account " of all his battles and adventures.
"Widow G. had an infirm mother andfour children. She received 5s. weekly from
the parish, made a little by going out charing, and more by jireying on the charitable.
She was a confirmed drunkard ; her room was always filthy, and the children squalid.
For the two elder I procured some warm clothing, and they were sent to school, the
Association paying the fees. My special visitor applied to the parochial authorities
for an allowance for the grandmother, but they, knowing the character of the family,
offered her " the house " instead, which she refused. Various persons from time to
time applied to the Association on behalf of this family, but it was considered inex¬
pedient to extend further aid to them, partly from the fact that they were in receipt
of parish relief, and partly because it appeared that the charity bestowed on them
had only led to further drinking. Before we knew them well. Widow G. came to me
one night saying they were in a state of utter starvation. The special visitor, with
the intention of inquiring into the circumstances of the case, went to them between
246 THE ATTEMPT.
eight and nine next morning, earlier evidently than visitors were expected, for he
found them enjoying a plentiful breakfast of liver and bacon, tea and buttered toast.
Shortly afterwards they were turned out by their landlady, as being a disgrace to the
place, and I fulfilled my last duty to them by giving in a report of all I knew of the
family to our local Secretary.
"In a cellar below the level of the ground, and with but a small window, lived
"Widow M., her son, and a lodger. Her means of subsistence were not obvious.
Her son, an apprentice, earned 4s. a-week, she herself was ill and confined to bed
most of the winter, and the lodger, Anne , got house-room in return for attend¬
ance on the invalid. There was considerable suspicion that Widow M. concealed
spirits for a shebeen close at hand, but repeated searches by the landlady proved un¬
successful. At last, however, when the old woman was out for an airing, another
search was instituted, and this time suspicion was verified by a number of bottles
being found hidden in the bedding. Mrs M. and her son have since been obliged to
change their place of abode, as the cellar they lived in was reported by me to be in¬
sanitary, and was closed by order of the authorities.    Anne  , her lodger, was
remarkable for the purity and " get up " of her caps, and her appearance was alto¬
gether much in her favour.    She informed me she had been confidential servant iu
a large fai'mliouse in Northumberland, where the mistress was an invalid and her
son insane.    She gave a circumstantial account of her position and duties.    She fur
ther stated that the son attempted to shoot her ; and, by the advice of a neighbouring
clergyman, whose name she mentioned, she left her situation, and summoned her
mistress for wages and board wages up to the ensuing term, which she obtained.
This clergyman further told her, she said, that he would always befriend her; and
gave her a written character, which she afterwards lost.    She had since returned to
Edinburgh, after an absence of thirty years, found all the people she had known dead
or scattered; failed to obtain work; pawned her clothes; and finally sank to field
work.    I told this story to a friend Avho was in want of a confidential servant, and
she said that if the story proved true she would at once engage her, and advance
some of her wages to buy clothes.    Upon this I obtained the clergyman's address from
the Clergy List, and wrote to him enquiring about Anne.    He replied that her whole
story, so far as he was concerned, was a fabrication ; that a person of her name had
some time before resided near him in a wretched hovel, with a woman and her son,
but that her character could  not bear investigation.    Having informed Anne that
I had applied to the clergyman, she was not long in disappearing from my district,
leaving no trace of herself.
b'
THE ATTEMPT. 247
" Widow M'C. and her son Robert come next on my list. The latter is a fine lad
of seventeen, apprentice to a plasterer, and earns 6s. a-week. His employer has a
very high opinion of him. Robert was suffering from a heavy cold when I first saw
him, brought on by being insuificiently shod. The Committee gave him an order
for a pair of strong boots, for which he has paid at the rate of sixpence a-week.
Observing that he was fond of reading and anxious to improve himself, I lent him
various educational works, which he valued highly, and this winter he is attending
the Apprentices' classes, the Association defraying the expense of half of the fees. As
his work is over at five o'clock, and an odd job after hours is a great boon to him,
I have procured for him various little jobs of whitewashing, papering, plaster¬
ing, (fee. His mother is very clean and tidy-looking. She had little or no furniture
when she first came, but has gradually collected what is necessary, and now her room
has a comfortable and home-like look; she has also a nice box of flowers at the win¬
dow. A pair of blankets lent to her by the Association has added greatly to her
comfort. I got for her the weekly cleaning of a shop, for which she receives Is.,
and she has also had a good deal of knitting to do. She was easily persuaded to take
a Penny Savings' Bank book, and lays by Id. or 2d. as she can spare it. She told
me she came from Dumfries to be with her son, as she did not think it good
for a lad to be left alone in a town like this; that no one took any interest in them
or their concerns, till I came from the Association, " and oh, Miss," she said, "folk
little ken how much mischief wad be saved among puir folk, if the rich wad give
them timely help and advice, and a kind word with it." Her landlady, who lives
in the next house, says she has never known her anything but quiet and respectable
since she came, saving once, when she was a little " merry." Her rent has been
paid with great regularity. Passing one day near widow M'C.'s former landlord, I
went ill to enquire about her. He held up his hands in astonishment at my good
opinion of her. " She was a dreadful woman," said he, " always drunk and quarrell¬
ing ; she down tore all the plaster of her room, and left, owing nine months' rent to me,
and money to other people besides ; but her son is a real decent lad." It seemed hardly
possible that he could be speaking of the respectable looking woman I knew, but
some things he mentioned proved that it was the same. This was rather startling.
I found it difiicult either to believe in so sudden a reformation, or to reconcile his
account with my own observation and experience of her; and to this day I have
been unable to do so.
" Next door to widow M'C. lived George H., seventy-five years of age, formerly a
shoemaker.    Mrs H. is his third wife, and the rest of the household consisted of
248 THE ATTEMPT.
her daughter by a former marriage, and a girl of twelve, who was boarded with them.
At my first visit I was much impressed by the piety of the old man. He quoted the
bible freely, and said he waited for death with happy expectancy. I afterwards said
to his landlady that he seemed to be very godly, and must be a gTeat blessing to the
place. She eyed me curiously, and said, " Ye're easy taken in. He's just an auld
heepocryte, and speaks ye fair to get from you as from his ain kirk folk. For a' he
can talk that gate, he's unco fond o' a drappie, and mony a pair o' black e'en he gi'es
his wife when he's had ower muckle, and that's no seldom," This account I found
to be quite true, and he soon ceased to draw upon his religious experiences, when I
explained that the Association would not give him anything, as he was in receipt of
both parish relief and private charity. His stepdaughter was glad to get knitting
to occupy her while out of place; and for the little girl Annie, who reads and writes
well, I got a warm dress, and a place as message girl in a draper's shop, where she
is giving satisfixction.
" Other families have histories more or less resembling the preceding. Several
widows and single women are in receipt of parish relief, which they eke out in various
ways, one by raking over dust-heaps, another by carrying water, and so on. The
Association does not assist recipients of parish relief, as the parish either does or
ought to give what is sufficient; but a little tea and sugar occasionally given from
private sources are most gratefully received. One woman is so fond of flowers that
she hoards every scrap, artificial or real, fresh or faded, that she can find. A gift of
a few flowers makes her quite happy. Indeed, I have found among the poor a great
love of flowers, and a few ^Jackets of annual seeds distributed among the families in the
close in which I visit, have given a lasting source of pleasure and interest. Several
families have as yet required no assistance of any kind, but all give me a kindly
reception, and I always find pleasure in going among them."
These notes give some idea of the work of an ordinary visitor of the Associa¬
tion. From the neglected state of education among the poor, and the various demor¬
alizing influences surrounding them, the number of cases of imposition and deceit need
cause no surprise. Indeed, the visitors who expect success to attend all their
endeavours cannot fail to meet with much disappointment. But surely it is some
reward for patient work, if, through the visitor's agency, a child is sent to school, a
young person removed from injurious influences, work provided for the unemployed,
or a deserving family helped over a time of trouble. It is indeed a noble object to
aim at, that of ameliorating the condition of the poorer classes. Many, we are sure,
could devote a small portion of their time to aid in this good work.   Busy men have.
THE ATTEMPT. 249
in numerous instances, given up a portion of their scanty leisure to work as visitors;
and surely there are many more, ladies as well as gentlemen, who could bestow a
little time in personal ministration among the poor. Eveiy visitor can choose how
much or how little they will undertake. An hour or two in a week, or even in a fort¬
night, would aid in promoting the objects of the Association. The Secretary of the
Ladies' Committee proposes that older or more experienced visitors should receive as
assistants any new comers who shrink from at first undertaking the responsibility
of a district; This plan would enable many to try the work who might otherwise
hold back. We can assure our readers that visiting among the poor, as organized
by the Association, becomes deeply interesting, and with the interest there is the
high satisfaction of fulfilling a most important duty. Eta.
P.S.—Any further information that may be desired will be readily afforded at
the office of the Association, 69 N. Hanover Street.
Chapter  X.
" You'll love me yet, and I can tarry
Your love's protracted growing,
June reared that bunch of flowers you carry,
From seeds of April's sowing."—Broioning.
Into the room I went, and there was Una sitting on the window-sUl, her white
dressing-gown streaming down to the floor. Her brush was in her hand, but the flood
of yellow hair, whitened by the moonlight, was still hanging loose, and she was
evidently engaged in meditation.
" I've got something to say to you, darling," said I. Wliereupon Una put me
into the great motherly arm-chair, and sat down on the arm, expectant. " Nothing's
wrong, Molly 1"
" Not wrong exactly," said I, " but, dear Una, Captain Maryon said something
to me to-night that troubled me very much. He wants—he wants to see you
to-morrow."
" Is that all!" laughed Una.    " My dear Molly, tell him to pursue his usual
z  E
250 THE ATTEMPT.
course, and it will be crowned with success. If he calls in the morning, just that
Mr Hilary may biing a message from the General to Papa, or fetch you the "Saturday,"
and perhaps stays to luncheon, and strolls about in the afternoon, and then drops
in to tea, surely on one of these occasions he may, by some rare accident, catch sight
of me.    Such things do happen."
" Hush, darling," I said, " and don't laugh. I'm afraid Lizzie's adage about
laughing before morning and crying before night will be fulfilled. Una, he has
fallen in love with yon."
A sudden silence fell between us. Una's head drooped till the yellow hair coiled
on my lap and over my knee.    I waited for her to speak, but nothing came.
" I thought it was best to tell you, sweet, for he will certainly come to-morrow,
and I wished you to have a little time to think. Do you need it, Una 1 Darling,
speak to me."
I was so hungry for her answer, and yet so anxious to avoid Massing her decision
by any prejudice which might be unfounded, that my heart was beating as it used to
beat long ago. Still she was sUent. Could she really care for him ? I could not
bear the suspense ; no lover ever waited more eagerly to hear his fate. I put my
arm round her, and said again, " Speak to me, Una."
Then the silence broke into sobs. Una rarely cried, but now I felt the hot tears
falling on my hand, and felt her quivering, as if some sorrow never felt till now had
suddenly broken forth.
" Leave me, please, dear Molly," she said at last. " No, I don't care for him;
I never shall, in that way.     Couldn't you tell him so, without my seeing him 1"
Such a deep satisfaction thrilled through my heart, that I could hardly wonder
after the cause of Una's tears.    They fell faster and faster, however.
" Una, what is the matter 1" 1 said.    " You will melt away like your namesake."
But Una got up and walked to the glass, and there veiling herself in a cloud of
hair, began to brush vigorously.
" Everything is the matter to-night," she said, " and nothing wUl be the matter
to-morrow, perhaps.    But I won't see him."
And I went away ; suspecting, however, that if Captain Maryon had set his heart
on a personal interview, he would by no means be satisfied with my mediation in the
matter. Sure enough he came in next day, as eleven o'clock was striking. I had
spirited Frank and Elsie out of the way, and we were alone.
" T came to say good-bye," he said.    " Can I see your sister. Miss Ferguson 1"
He was greatly excited, that was evident; his eyes were sparkling, and his dark
I
THE ATTEMPT. 251
cheek was burning with a kind of southern glow I had never seen before. I paused,
any woman would have paused, in keen pity and pain, before disappointing him.
" I am grieved to pain you, Captaia Maryon," I said, " but the truth is kindest
as well as best, and Una has spoken most decidedly in the matter, though she would
prefer avoiding an interview with you, and wished me to say good-bye for her. She
will always feel as a friend to you, and wish you well, but what you wish is impossible."
" Impossible !" he said, slowly. " Forgive me, Miss Ferguson, but I feel I have
a right to hear Una's —Miss Undine's decision from her own lips. Without this I
cannot be satisfied." What could I say, but that I would send Una to him, though
I thought it would have been better otherwise.
I went up-stairs and knocked at her door. There was the faint sound of a sob
within, but when Una opened to me, her fair face seemed almost undisturbed.
She went down without speaking, and in a short time I saw Captain Maryon walk
away with his cavalry swing, and blank disappointment, and I thought, fierce anger
on his handsome face. I was standing at the book-room window when he passed
near it, and was grieved and even terrified at his look. Could he think Una had
given him encouragement ? He had something in his hand, a blue glimmer against
his dark morning coat ; and Una had had a blue knot in front of her white dress that
morning. Could she be so coquettish as to give him any thread of hope even in her
refusal 1 He was the man to twist a cord out of such threads, strong enough to
draw her where he would ; unless, unless indeed, there was something within her
that would resist; unless her affections, like Rosalind's, " took the part of a better
wrestler than herself," and were fixed elsewhere.
Well, there was nothing but anger and bitterness in the half-mocking smile on
Maryon's lips, and he crushed the ribbon, if ribbon it were, fiercely in his hand,
seeming to have a sort of pleasure in defacing the sheeny silk that had risen and
fallen on Una's white breast. Yes, it was the same, for before he turned the corner,
he loosened his grasp, and suddenly lifted it to his lips, kissing it as if ia compunc¬
tion, and then I lost sight of him among the pines.
A moment after, the door opened, and Una came in. Her face was white,
her head drooping, and there was a strange look of mingled fear and resolution about
her brow and mouth. She stopped short on seeing me. " Una," I said, " you have
refused him ?    Why did you give him anything to take away with him ]"
" Give him—what could I give hrm 1" said Una.
" The bow on your dress is gone," I said, " and I saw him pass with something
blue in his hand."
252 THE ATTEMPT.
Una put her hand up, and felt in front of the little cambric frill round her
throat, and the colour that had been banished regained its place, and invaded the
white neck, brow, and temples. " It must have fallen off," she said, " and lie has
picked it up. Oh, Molly, I am so sorry, he may have thought I meant him to have
it, though I said No, as plainly as ever I could."
" He took it as No then, not as a No that he might change into Yes in the end?"
" I tried to make him understand, Molly, that what I felt could never change,
but" 
"But what?"
" He said he would never give up till he saw me the wife of somebody else,
that his love was stronger than my indifference. Oh, Molly, I can't tell you all he
said, he frightened and vexed me so much. I'm not indifferent to him either, for
when he spoke and looked as he did just now, I felt such a shrinking from him, a
sort of horror and fear ; I never could love him, never could marry him. He is
not a good man; I saw that to-day when he looked at me, trying to make me change
my mind."
As she spoke, there was a slight clatter of horse-hoofs, betokening the return of
Frank and Elsie, who would seem to have returned prematurely from their early
ride. The reason for this was made obvious by Elsie's entrance, with the announce¬
ment that it was such a morning for bathing, that it was a sin and a shame for any
one to be on dry land, wherefore she had come back early, thinking to find Una
all ready to go with her,
" I'll be ready enough by the time you have changed your habit," said Una,
" come up stairs." The two proceeded up the staircase, and Frank came towards
me where I sat. We had gone back to the drawing-room. " We passed Maryon," he
said, " looking, till he took off his hat, as jolly as an undertaker. Has anything
happened to him 1 You have jilted him, Molly, you young deceiver, I see it in your
face."    " I'm sure you don't," I replied, " nobody has jilted him."
" Well, he wouldn't look that way for nothing, and he is going off to-day, isn't
he 1 La belle cousiue is slaying her thousands. Where is my uncle 1" " You next,
Frank," I said, pretending to start. " Shall I never see a bachelor of threescore
again ?" " No, don't be alarmed, I thought he might have done with the paper; you
packed us off before I had time to read it this morning. You are as tyrannical as
ever, Molly, and just in the old way. Wasn't I always your slave 1" " You were
always the best of boys," I said, " but though you may find the paper, you won't find
Papa.    Mr Haslam walked in and carried him off an hour ago."
THE ATTEMPT. 253
Frank disappeared, and presently the fragrance of his cigar stole through the
open window, as he walked past with the " Times," and then I heard Elsie and Una
leave the house on their way to bathe, with Sarah in attendance. They came back
glowing and bright tO luncheon, and the shadow of the morning seemed gone from
Una's face.    What a day it was for beauty, that May day.
In the evening. Brand Hilary came in alone. There was a change in his
manner, hard to define, yet unmistakeable in its presence, as he greeted us all,
and he called me Miss Ferguson for the fii-st time for several weeks, for he had
quite got into the way of calling me by my Christian name. Una having just
recovered from the unusual trouble of that day, was inclined to be rather in high
spirits, thinking of course that Brand knew nothing of what had happened in the
morning. But I knew better. I was almost certain he either knew or guessed
that his friend's errand to our house had not been merely one of leave-taking;
what more he thought I could not say.
" Captain Mary on is gone 1" T said, by way of making conversation, while Una
poured out the tea in her own peculiar place, and Frank and Elsie had something
particular to say to each other in the bow-window. " Yes, I've just been seeing him
off by the four o'clock train from Kingswood."
" You must have had a hot ride." " Yes, that road is like a furnace to-day, and
I thought you would have refreshment for the weary, so I sent Tom on with the
horses and came in."
" You will miss your friend," said Una, from her corner.
She did not speak quite naturally, neither did Brand, when he said he hoped for
another visit from Maryon in September; and after a few more efforts at our old easy
style of talk, he rose and said good evening, just as Papa and Mr Haslam appeared
passing the window.
" Why, Brand," said my father, " are you off, my boy 1 You will be lonely
without your friend; stay to dinner here."
But Brand said his father would be alone, and went off, leaving a strange feeling
of discomfort behind him, as far as I was concerned.
After dinner Frank declared he would take Una and Elsie for a row ; the long
calm twilight was tempting, and when they were gone to look for a boat, I tired of
sitting in the window, for Papa and Mr Haslam had some private affairs to discuss,
and I thought I would enjoy the evening in my own way. So I put on my hat and
shawl, and strolled out among the pines, as the bells rung for evening service at
St Ursula's.    Not to go to church, to that church at least; a wider, serener church
254
THE ATTEMPT.
was all around me, its pillars the pine-stems lighted by the last evening glimmer ;
its lamps the first peeping stars; its incense the bahny fragrance of the scattered
golden pollen from the blossoming pine-boughs.    No sound was abroad but the far
and faint breaking of the waves.
" Sweet hour, that wakes the wish and melts the heart
Of those who sail the seas,
and of those who linger on the land; of those who are setting forth bright with
hope on their life's voyage, and of those who are resting after its troubles.
My walk took me past the grave-yard near the sea, where the old Spanish sailor
had been buried two months before. No marble monuments were shining there,
like those in the statelier burying-ground near the new church, but it was hallowed
by the tears of hearts that had broken, over the green mounds where they laid their
treasures, wet from the sea, bruised from the cliffs, to rest till the last great day.
And I leaned on the low turf-covered wall for a little while, listening to the distant
plash of the " cruel crawling foam" that could do all this, and yet to-night would
hardly stir the fronds of trailing sea-weed on the margin of the tide.
And as I listened I heard a sound like a sob, not far from me. It startled me at
first, in so lonely a place, but presently, in the fading light, I saw a man's figure sitting
on one of the long flat moss-grown slabs of stone, with his face bowed on his hands.
There was something familiar about the form or the attitude, and I waited for a
moment to see if I could discover who was there alone at that hour. Then I heard
Brand Hilary's voice, and remembered that the little grey stone near him bore the
name of Mary Evans, and I understood. " Mary, Mary, " I heard him say, " have
you forgotten me, darling; do you think I have forgotten you ? Am I faithless,
because I let another hope come in between you and me ? I have suffered so long,
dear, I thought no joy would ever come again, and now it is taken from me
before I had tasted it. Ob, why did not the sea take us both ; am I never to find
rest?"
I could hear no more, but the despairing tones went to my heart. I moved to
leave the place quietly, (did any one ever do so without creating some unwonted
disturbance f), and some fragment of lime and moss, disturbed by the motion of my
arm, fell with a sound resembling in the silence a regular crash of masonry. Brand
started up, and was beside me before T had time to recover from the shock of the
sound myself had made.
THE ATTEMPT. 255
" Mary ! Miss Ferguson !    By all that is peaceful how you startled me !—
' Silence herseK seemed making a row,
Like a Quaker gone delirious.'
Why have you taken to ghostly rambles at this hour in the evening 1"
" I might say the same to you," I rejoined. " Such an evening would tempt
any one out, and as those giddy young people had gone for a row, I thought I might
do what I liked." Here I stopped and felt at a loss ; I could not bear to intrude
upon his confidence, and the new trouble that had come upon him I could not com¬
prehend.
It was not to be explained to me that night, for a sound of talking and
laughter came breaking the stillness, and three figures were apparent in the dusk,
who tui'ned out to be Elsie, Una, and Frank. Their row had been most enjoyable,
and it was getting late, and they laughed at Brand Hilary and me, and expressed
themselves anxious for the evening meal. And when we got in and the lamps were
lighted, and I saw the pleasant little budding tenderness between Elsie and my
cousin, and heard Una chattering and joking, my walk by the churchyard seemed
like a dream; a dream that haunted me though, for when I fell asleep that night, it
was only to see Captain Maryon with that bow of blue ribbon, wearing it like an
order,—crushing it in his hand; then came the low sound of the waves, and then
Brand Hilary's voice, saying " Mary, Mary ;" and then it changed to Lizzie's, who
was trying to awake me, and I rose anxious and unrefreshed. O. M.
44
% grbomr."
" God help me, for my heart is sore !
God pity me, my heart is weak !
Oh, could I only hear once more.
Only once more, my mother speak !
Oh, could I only see once more
The roses clhnbing up the door.
And watch the lights and shadows pass
Over the meadows' swaying grass ;
256
THE ATTEMPT.
And hear the blackbirds' mellow call
Soft from the hedge-row down the lane,
Blend with the rain-drops' pattering fall,
And feel—oh this is home again !
God help me, for it cannot be !
It may be never any more ;
Thank God, my mother cannot see
The anguish of the son she bore.
Oh, if they would but loose this rope !
It cuts me nearly to the bone ;
Is there, can there be any hope ?
Fool that I am ! I know there's none.
I cannot bear so young to die,
With such a short young life gone by ;
Life is so sweet, and mine, ah me !
Could any life more happy be
Than mine was, in my own old home.
Before that cursed fever came.
To make me restless, long to roam
In far off lands in search of fame.
Fame ! is this burning thii-st, this smart
Of wounds unclosed, of fame a part ]
Is this foul sunken earthen floor,
This window barred and guarded door.
This dread of death, so sure and soon—
la all of this fame's promised boon ?
In far-oif England, mother dear,
You long, and wait, and watch in vain,
Some tidings of your boy to hear;
God knows—you ne'er may hear again !
Your dear sweet patient face will grow
More worn and white, more wan and still.
In ever dreading some great ill
You long, yet, shrinking, fear, to know.
You cannot tell that I am here,
A lonely captive sick and weak ;
THE ATTEMPT. * 257
You cannot see my prison drear,
You cannot kiss my hollow cheek ;
Yet still I think that to your heart,
Your mother's heart, some voice must speak.
And tell you, by love's magic art,
That somewhere pain and danger lie
About me—though you know not why.
Oh, when on Sunday, meek you kneel
In that old church where you were wed,
I think a tremor you must feel.
When those sweet pleading words are said—
" That pity thou be pleased to show
On prisoners and captives all;"
You cannot tell, you do not know.
Why so more earnestly you pray;
Is it because so far away,
Your boy lies bound in captive thrall 1
My heart is calmer, blessed thought,
I know that somewhere every day,
From some kind soul with true love fraught,
Heav'nward that sweet prayer takes its way :
For me, although unknown, they pi'ay,
By some unseen good angel taught.
Be brave, hope patiently, and wait;
In God's good time will all come right.
The rough made smooth, the dark made light.
E'en though it only be at Heaven's gate !"
Mas Alta.
258 THE ATTEMPT.
It is a pity that the exigencies of the press compel the appearance of critical
articles immediately on the publication of a new work,—a custom which, in the case
of volumes involving the necessity of study, impairs the correctness and limits the
completeness of a review. In no case does this ajiply more than with poetical
works, especially when, as is the case with our two great poets, their meaning does
not lie loosely on the surface, but must be carefully gathered up by the reader
from the polished line, as it has been quarried by the poet from the rough idea.
How little this has been done by many of the reviewers of " The Holy Grail," a
thoughtful student cannot fail to obseiwe; but we confess it surprised us to find one
who owns that he has been for years an ardent admirer of the Laureate, asking
why the vision was vouchsafed to Sir Bors. "We should have supposed that a
critic who must have read, and, with his usual clearsightedness, have thoroughly
appreciated, the moral conveyed by " Two Years Ago," would have detected a similar
lesson in the history of Sir Bors. That he has not done so, but, like his fellows, has
picked out sundry striking passages for quotation, to the disregard of the aim and
position of the work, is to be attributed to a too hasty perusal.
If anything could take from the lustre of their author's name, it would be
the unfortunate mode in which the Arthurian poems have been published. No doubt
the chief incidents were written first, and the poet could hardly be expected to
reserve these till the entire series was finished ; but for this natural haste he will
suffer, at least in the estimatioa of the present generation, though not in the future,
when the complete edition will be the one in use. It is as though a paiuter, seized
with some great idea, were to sketch in the chief figiires for his picture, and then,
when these are familiar to his friends, should be disappointed that they cannot feel the
same interest in the details of the background. Those on whom the Idylls burst
like a revelation, forget that such a thrill as they then felt can hardly be experienced
twice, and that this new volume is as the background Avhich brings the central
figures into harmony, and explains the perfectaess of the design. As we under¬
stand the Laureate, the gist of what he wishes to inculcate is to be found in the
words of the Great King, who here, as before, remains "the highest and most
human too," the ideal of manliness and virtue, loving with a love far greater, because
nobler, than the false " warmth and  colour" of Lancelot's  passion, mling with
THE ATTEMPT. 259
" great authority," and in his solitary comprehension of and endeavour after the
right, conveying the double lesson that " narrow is the way, and few there be that
find it." Further, his character is the key-note of the music, for he is the exemplar
of the triumph of spirit over flesh, and of the practical over the visionary, which
ideas are the motif recurring through the entire poem. "We use this word in the
singular, because, to continue the simile, the Arthurian series should be regarded as
a sonata, in which we have portions, andante, allegro, as may be, but all subordinate
parts making a musical whole.
And so the king tells his knights they " have seen what they have seen ;" each
man has gathered somewhat from the vision, but only according to his capacity,
for " the eye only sees what the eye brings the power of seeing," as was said by
other than the poet. But he, Arthur, his perceptions sharpened by his kingly
labours, sees this chiefly, that the fulfilment of duty is the great requirement of this
life ; therefore, if he could, he would have prevented his knights from abandoning
the plaiu path, the redressing of human wrongs, in order to seek perfection after
some fashion of their own. 'Sot that he despises visions : he has the deep reverence
which shows him that what seems a vision is none, but a glimpse of divine reality
vouchsafed in such form through regard to human weakness. Thus he works out
his existence from his high-purposed youth, Avhen he would fain have made the
" dead world live" on, with an ever-increasing melancholy, as one by one his
hopes fail, tUl at the last he asks bitterly—"Wliat comfort is in me?" Yet,
while he speaks, the bitterness passes away for ever, in the desire that God may
accept his life, and, uttering those exquisite lines on prayer already familiar to us,
he is borne to the island valley, where more than his bodily wound is to be healed.
Most pathetic is the portion added to the " Morte d'Arthur," showing how once at the
last the brave heart broke down under accumulated trials, and, troubled by hollow
dreams and the ever-present recollection of " one lying in the dust at Almesbury,"
forgot the kingliness which, at a word of comfort from the faithful Bedivere,
re-awoke to an effort worthy of the great past. In the closing lines, we recognise
the impression of a coming day so often brought forward by the Laureate ia his
final stanzas, a habit which, if we mistake not, means more than at first sight
appears,—for in the " awful rose of dawn," ia " the August sunrise," in the •' new
sun and new year," are alike indicated the old faith in the progression of the world
towards better things, the old certainty that " not in vain the distance beckons."
Of the Idylls it is hardly necessary now to speak, further than to recall briefly
that Enid is the exponent of the duty of obedience and forbearance ; Vivien, of the
260 THE ATTEMPT.
triumph of sin, and its direful consequences in Merlin's enforced uselessness ; Elaine,
of the ruin wrought by sin on others than the sinner ; and Guenevere, of the final
victory of virtue, though the tardy acknowledgment of the truth cannot in this
world efface the misery brought about by previous wrong-doing. In " Pelleas and
Ettarre" this is again brought before us, when the wickedness of the Queen robs Pelleas
of his last grain of faith. Indeed we see, in this latter poem, the reiteration of the
facts that seem to have a strong hold of the poet's mind,—first, the unsatisfying
nature of merely earthly love ; and secondly, the sorrowfulness of waste—the waste
of intellect, of moral strength, even of physical power, which, being turned from their
fitting use, become scourges " to lash the treason of the Table Round," so that the
sin brings its own punishment. Before this utter destiiiction comes the vision of
the Grail, to remind the knights of the existence of higher things, but because sin
does not cease from among them, it cannot ward ofi" the time of trouble, and is
withdrawn entirely. The individual stories speak for themselves, though we cannot
but answer the question to which we before alluded respecting Sir Bors. We are
told that Percivale at first failed in the quest for want of humility. He had not " lost
himself," but when he does this, when he surrendered his Ioa'O for his vow's sake,
the vision is accorded to him. Now Sir Bors is characterised most of all by his
humility; " If God would send the vision, well /' he has scarcely asked it for himself,
only goes with the others because it seems the best thing to be done, willing in his
great self-abasement to see nothing, so that his well-beloved Lancelot might be
blessed in his stead. He holds his simple faith staunchly, and answers the angry
priests with calm trust. Is it any wonder that to his patient uncomplaining soul
comes the "sweet Grail?" Even so as we said, the daring earnest Tom Thurnall
can gain neither peace of mind, nor what he covets most on earth, till he has learnt
the great lesson of unquestioning humbleness.
As to these poems from a poetical point of view, we repeat that they are the
background of the picture; and, though careful, as everything of Mr Tennyson's must
be, they are less remarkable than the Idylls. StiU there are numerous passages not
inferior to our older favourites,—the finding of Arthur in " the dismal night," the
" slender sound," growing " as from a distance beyond distance," the often-quoted
expedition of Lancelot to the lonely castle, the battle-field where, on
" That day, when the great light of heaven
Burn'd at his lowest in the roUiug year,
On the waste sand by the waste sea they closed."
In these, and many more, we perceive the power of the Laureate to produce a sense
THE ATTEMPT. 261
of space and air, a sea breeze as it were, and a vivid picturing of nature such as no
other writer has equalled. Kich as is Browning's imagery, he cannot in a few lines,
with broad free touches, paint a whole landscape, such as will aid the effect and
movements of the poem. We may remark, that though we have long known
Tennyson's partiality for an extra-syllabled line as a means of breaking and enrich¬
ing the monotony of blank verse, we think that here and there he has indulged it
so as to leave an impression of roughness on the ear.
" Said, ye that so dishallow the holy sleep,"
is hardly pleasing, while the accentuation is decidedly awkward in
" The circlet of the tourney round her brows,
And the sword of the tourney across her throat."
Gawain's name, too, occurs with disagreeable irregularity in more than one
instance, such as,
" Forth sprang Gawain, and loosed him from hia bonds."
Among the miscellaneous poems, Lucretius has been sufficiently reviewed; "The
Golden Supper " is well told, but has less definite point than is generally found in
tales selected or written by Tennyson.    We venture to think that " The Higher
Pantheism" is too high to be so briefly treated, and yet we would not be without
even these short stanzas.    " Wages " commends itself least to us, for the " glory of
going on and still to be" is less happy an expression than usual.    " The Victim " has
been altered from its original form, and, as almost always happens, for the better,
Mr Tennyson has the discretion to make his later corrections improvements.    We
would only except the line,
"Me, me, not him, my darling no,"
which seems to be not only more emphatic, but more in accordance with the metre than
in its present form. " The Northern Farmer—new style," if taken in connection with
the old, is a humourous and clever descrijotion of the rising man of the period. He has
lost all his respect for " quoloty," and his sense of the beauty of the " blessed fealds;"
his god is money, his creed that a man who cannot earn his " regular meals " is bad,
the only glimmering of good in him is his respect for honest labour. We confess to
a tenderness for the older man, who, if his lights were feeble, at least acted up to
them, and was of a kindlier and more tolerant nature than his successor.
Altogether, this volume will take its place well among its predecessors, and add
one more leaf to the evergreen wreath which crowns the Laureate's brow.
Elsie Strivelyne.
262 THE ATTEMPT.
"$nt gotrrsdf iit  feis  f lace."
A NOVEL, BY CHARLES EEADE.
To call this age an age of transitions, has become the tritest of truisms. "We speak
of it as an ago of doubt and uncertainty, of undevelojjed change. As in the shifting
scenes of a phantasmagoria, or in the ever changing, ever blending colours of the
kaleidoscope, men and women, beliefs and opinions, seem to have no proper stand¬
point from which they can be fairly judged, classified, or arranged in their proper
order, according to any pre-conceived ideas that we may have hitherto held, of what
is right or wrong, proper or improper, suitable or unsuitable. On the one hand,
woman is accused of intruding upon the sacred prerogatives of man; and man,
on his side, is accused of pluming himself upon the exhibition of the weakness and
delicacy of woman.
The physical, mental, and moral development of the two sexes seems to be,
in the present day, in some measure changing places. Of what do we complain in
our most popular poet, of him who bears the present generation up the smiling
heights of Parnassus 1 Ts it not that he is more sweet than strong, that if he
gave us ruggeder paths to follow, and steeper heights to climb, it would be
all the better for our mental strength and for our moral elevation 1 This is not
the complaint we make against our great female lyi-isb. Her strong and rugged verses
are positively dislocating to our sense of harmony ; her depths are depths indeed, and
her heights reach to where but few can follow.
Then our popular novelist,—he who now leads the van, whom all read and admire.
We learn of him a great deal about good society,—all that are respectable, well
educated, and of good repute, are to be met within his pages. He writes fluently,
truthfully, almost eloquently, but his truths are but the truths of commonplaces ; no
great emotions, no high enthusiasm, is ever evolved by his pages. His heroes and
his heroines are always pleasant and agreeable people; they take the world as it
is, and are content to leave it as they find it. If we want startling incidents,
sensational crimes, unruly passions, we must go to our female authors; they will
give us all these.
Were we to pursue this subject further, we should see that stUl deeper lie the
strange anomalies of present beliefs and opinions. We should find the discoveries of
science apparently/ contradictory to our ancient beliefs ; we should find our present
THE ATTEMPT. 263
beliefs taking refuge in outward ceremonies and empty forms. But we will no
longer dwell on this theme : we will hope for this tossed and troubled age, that
this displacing of all our ancient landmarks, and rude substitution of untried
changes, will result in a wiser freedom and in renewed steadfastness; and that
we shall not, like the nations of the past, sink into an effete decadence, but
rather, like the fabled bird of old, renew our strength, and revive in our own
ashes to fresh life and vitality.
It may possibly appear to our readers that the reflections we have been indulging
in have little to do with the heading of our chapter; nevertheless, it is the consideration
of the merits and demerits of the author of the novel of " Put yourself in his Place,"
that has led us iato this train of thought. We have been led to them by the con¬
sideration of the fact that Charles Reade is not a popular author. That he is valued
and appreciated by the discriminating few, is quite true ; but, comparatively speaking,
he is not popular, nor ever has been. Notwithstandiiig, there is no living author
who possesses his genius or his power of writing. He is full of masculine vigour ;
he thinks, speaks, writes as a man. Life is looked at by him from a man's point of
view; events take their proper places in his pages, and possess their true signifi¬
cance. His men and women marry when the time comes, as it is right and proper
they should do ; but the end, aim, object, and subject of their lives is not marriage.
Doing their work in life is the main business of their existence, and, as a natural
conseqvience, they are well fitted to make good husbands and good wives when the
time comes for them to do so. Since the days of Sir Walter Scott, we have had no
such masculine writer as Charles Reade, though so dissimilar are these two authors,
that comparison of their respective merits seems impossible. Charles Reade is no
effeminised writer ; he never oscillates between two virtues, as though neither man
nor woman. But if he has all the manly vigour that belongs to his sex, it must be
confessed he has also something of its coarseness, and that his speech is sometimes
so plain, that good taste is a little apt to desire it were less so. Let it however be said,
he never soils the imagination of his readers, and though free, he is thoroughly
wholesome.
The title of this novel is somewhat inapplicable to the main subject of the
story, which is no other than an earnest and forcible protest against the lawless tyranny
and the black cruelty exercised by the trades' unions in the manufacturing districts of
England—embittering the relations between master and man, wasting thousands of
pounds in unprofitable waste of labour, diverting industry from its channels in
our own country to those of other countries, ruining our trade and crippling our re-
264 THE ATTEMPT.
sources.   Our readers may remember that in Mrs Gaskell's novel, " North and South,"
the same evil combinations among the trades hands are most graphically described.
Charles Keade's novel opens with a capital description of Hillsborough (Shef¬
field) and the surrounding country. A deserted church in a cleft of Cairnhope Hill,
the scene of the chief incidents of the story, is admirably described. Henry
Little, the hero, the unknown nephew of the Tory Squire of Cairnhope, is, by
the force of circumstances, brought up as a tradesman. His mother is a lady,
therefore Little has the home culture of a gentleman ; he is also a man of great
force of character, and of great natural ability, with indomitable courage. He is
also exceedingly good-looking, so that our readers wUl at once perceive he deserves
to be the hero of the book. He is a true man, because the author is a true man,
understands a man's nature, and therefore is able to describe it. Little is a skilled
workman ; he is an admirable engraver on wood, besides being a first-rate maker
of the finer kinds of tools. A wealthy manufacturer of Hillsborough brings him
down from London to his own town, and Little soon experiences the deadly
hostility of the trades—the grinders, the sawyers, and so on. He is pursued to the
death, he is a marked man, his life is not worth one hour's purchase; added to
which, the villain of the story makes use of Little's position with the trades to
ensure his destruction. Of course he escapes all their machinations, or what would
have been the use of writing those volumes about him ? and of course he marries
a real lady, Grace Garden, who would otherwise have become the wife of the
gentleman villain, and all ends as it should do.
There is capital writing in this book. There is the hand of a master throughout;
there are the touches of a real artist. He describes a glorious yeomaness, if we may
coin the word,—Jael Dence, who also is in love with Henry Little. She fights for
him, rescues him, all but dies for him, scolds him well, and then, like a sensible
true-hearted woman, finds out life is good without this one thing she so desires,
and marries the fine old squire. Little's uncle. There is a splendid description
of the bursting of the floodgates of the pent-up waters, and the overwhelming
of villages and of the low lying districts. Charles Reade's strength lies in scenes
that would inevitably overtask the powers of a feebler writer. Our limits
forbid us giving any adequate idea of the plot or the scope of this novel; our
readers must read it for themselves. We shall hope, on a future occasion, to
bring the author again under the notice of the readers of this Magazine. The
novel of " Put yourself in his place," although the last, is not the best of the several
works that have issued from the powerful pen of Charles Eeade. M. E. T.
THE ATTEMPT. 265
Chapter XI.
" Go not, happy day,
From the shining fields ;
Go not, happy day,
Till the maiden yields ;
Rosy is the west,
Rosy is the south ;
Roses are her cheeks,
And a rose her mouth."—Maud.
Well, the morning rose gloriously over the sea, and the dusky churchyard seemed
like a dream. And I went down and found every one before me, a most note¬
worthy circumstance.
" Molly late ! " was Frank's exclamation, as he got up from beside Elsie, to set
me a chair, and Una declared she would make breakfast for once. " Molly late, and
all sorts of plans afoot."
" What are they ? " said I.
" Going to Kingswood in the pony-carriage, and lunching at the waterfall," said
Una. " Frank and Elsie will ride ; pour moi, beloved, I shall drive with you ; I
haven't the energy to I'ide to-day."
" Couldn't we get any one else to join us ? " said I.
" We are a partie caree, and should be destroyed by a fifth," said Frank. " We
want to be strictly en famille."
"Well, we'll go on condition that no French words are used, for I won't
have them."
Elsie had not spoken, but I saw more colour than she had worn for a few days
stealing into her cheek as Frank spoke, and he turned round as if he had seen it,
and looked at her. We set forth about eleven, and had not gone far when a clatter
of horse's feet before us told some one was coming fast, and we met Brand Hilary.
Still the same trouble on his face that had been there yesterday; and then,
suddenly, I noticed Una's manner to him. It had changed from her usual frank
courtesy to a sort of half-avoidance, which I could hardly understand.
He took off his hat; coming to my side of the small conveyance.
2G6 THE ATTEMPT.
" My father bade me say (I was just coming to Lawrence Lodge) that if you
would all come to dinner this evening, without any ceremony, he would be so glad.
Dr Ferguson is to be with him all day, you know. Won't you come, Miss Fergu¬
son?"
He spoke to me, but I saw how he was watching Una, who had just drawn up
the pony, and looked radiant,—at least she had been as bright as the morning till
that moment, then I saw a change. She pretended to see some interesting object at
a distance, among the Avoods.
" Una and I shall be very happy," I said, " and so, T am sure, will Miss Harper
and my cousin. Will you come with us, or have you to give your message at
the Hall 1"
Brand did not answer for a minute or two; his left hand jerked the reins
suddenly, and the horse started, and I saw, for his face was one of those that
" Cannot lie,
Whose thoughts are legible in the eye,"
the slight compression of the lips that spoke of impatience ; and still he was looking
at Una.    It was not polite, but I forgave him,—he looked hurt, angry, and grieved.
" Miss Undine," he said, in a kind of desperate way, " my father gave me a
special message for you." Una was obliged to look at him then, not having the ex¬
cuse that he was directing his words to me.
" Indeed ! What is it, Mr Hilary 1 Whatever Uncle Hilary wants," she said,
in a softer voice, for the General was a distant connection of her mother's, and had
always made a great pet of her.
" Only to bring your music with you," said Brand, and then he flushed angrily,
I thought, at so trival an excuse.
He had seen her face, and that was all it had gained him.
" Certainly," said Una.
And lifting his hat again, and saying Good-morning, away he went.
" The youth must have left his manners at home," said Una, " what rudeness !"
" He wasn't thinking," said I.    " Why are you so unkind to him, Una ?"
" I hate to be watched and scrutinized; and I hate all men, small and great,
except the dear father, and Vkve Haslam, and the General."
" Take care, you forget the braw wooer and the lady who
" Said there was naething she hated like men,"
and lived to change her tune."
THE ATTEMPT. 267
" No, there are one or two good ones," said Una, " and they are the most
provoking of all, they are sure to be stupid or else dictatorial, on the strength of
their superiority. Let them be, and let us talk of something else. There
will be nobody at the Hall to-night but ourselves. Frank and Elsie won't
thank us for accepting, will they ? That is coming to a climax. Well, Frank is a
good fellow, and deserves Elsie." Una paused, and we rattled along the quiet road,
where the pines were getting thinner, and the country beginning to open out. The
sky was shining, the birds, as we got further from St Michael's, were singing
" so rarely," and Una's brow cleared, and she gave her head a little toss of pleasui-e,
and threw the reins suddenly to me.
" Change seats like a darling, and let me enjoy this day," she said. " Oh,
what a day! It is so delightful, oh, indescribably delicious, just to feel that one is
young and happy, and well—free, on a day like this, and forget all one's absurd
little troubles, and be with you. Tell me you love me, Molly. Tell me you always
will, let me be as horrid as I can, till we are two old women together. What makes
me think you are old. Why, darling, you are as young and pretty as any one ;
your hair is like satin, and your eyes are as soft and dark and bright as to-night will
be. I wish we could wait and drive home late, and not have * parade ' at seven, and
have to be got up in our best clothes.    I hate it, even at the Hall."
" You hate everything to-day, child," I said, " is there any other pet detestation
you would like to name ?'
" Not just now. I'll sit quiet and think over my ways, if you'll take cai'e
Moth doesn't shy."
" Moth never shied in his life; if you were as steady going, Una, I should have
an easy mind about you."
We were both pretty silent till Kingswood was reached.
Frank had already lifted Elsie off her horse, and she was standing in front of the
little inn where the steeds were to be put up, looking rather flushed and excited; and
Frank's face, when he came out, told me all, but Una was still a little pre-occupied,
and did not observe him much. Indeed, he at once took possession of me and the bas¬
ket of provisions, and walked us off at a tremendous pace along the road leading to the
wood and the waterfall we had come to see. It was a lovely little wood of beeches ;
their silvery bark and tender emerald foliage softening the hot May sunshine. We
crossed a stile, and were joined by Una and Elsie, both rather silent; in ftict, we were
a rather taciturn party as we wound among the beeches and traced the course of the
stream to the fall, and when we reached the rocks, bounding the rush of green water
268 THE ATTEMPT.
whitened with foam,"and the dark pool into which it fell, we sat do^vn about it—
Frank and Elsie a little apart, and Una as near the edge as she could conveniently get,
on the root of an old tree. She took her hat off and hung it on a branch, and leaned
her head back on the mossy bark with a kind of caress, and^the sunbeams came stealing
through the leaves and cast their gold upon her. My darling, may the sunshine never
fail, though the yellow haii- should grow grey, and the glorious eyes wax dim.
Something of the long-ago day, when Frank and I went nutting, came back to my
mind,—there it was being acted over again, the old play, and now I was the looker-on.
I should never cry again as I ci'ied that day, nor laugh as I laughed before it.
" Sing us something, Una," said Frank at last.
" You've broken the spell," said she ; " why did you speak ? It was so still,
and the Loreleis in the water were singing to me."
" Were they asking you to come back to them, fair Una 1 Well, if the spell is
broken, singing's the best thing to patch it up again. I want a real good old Scotch
song. You can jn-onounce it, thanks to Molly. ' My love ^is like a red red rose,'
that's the song for to-day."
Una's voice rose into the air above the rush of the fall, yet mingling with it and
with the merry-voiced May-day, and she sang. I knew, without glancing at them,
how Frank was looking at Elsie, and saw the rose-flush answering his eyes. That
loveliest of love songs, how Una sang it, half wrapped in her thoughts and uncon¬
scious of the music the two hearts near her were making between them in the sun¬
shine ! How full and clear her voice rang out in the first stanza, and how it softened
and grew tender as she neared the close—
" And fare thee weel, my only love,
And fare thee weel awhile,"
till the bright re-assuring end came strengthening the tenderness into hope—
" Though it were ten thousand mile, my love,
Though it were ten thousand mUe,
And I will come again, my dear,
Though it were ten thousand mile."
It ceased, and Una turned round to look for a tribute to her melody.
" Encore," came from Frank.
He was stretched on the turf, his head on a mossy stone, his hands, brown and
thin, behind it; he was enjoying the dolce far niente most thoroughly, content with
much happiness, and Elsie sat near him, her hands idle and gloveless in her lap, her
THE ATTEMPT. 269
eyes on the grass, but with cheeks that rivalled Burns' rose of June, and caught Una's
o-lance at once. Then Una looked at Frank, and then down again at the water,
which seemed to be repeating to itself, as it leaped merrily from rock to rock,
" Till a' the seas gang dry, my dear,
And the rocks melt wi' the sun,
And I win love thee stiU, my dear,
While the sands o' life shall run."
We were quiet, still no encore came; Una went back into her own thoughts,
till at length she rose and said she was going to explore, and would not disturb any
one, and off she went among the beech trees; while I, under pretence of seeking for
shade, went to sit where a rock and a great grey trunk hid me from Frank and
Elsie, and them from me. There was a slight rustle, a little motion on the part of
one of them directly after; as to me, what business was it of mine, or is it of yours,
O, reader, what ensued on the green side of the beech tree 1 On the side where I
sat, some storm, perhaps the memorable one that swept Brand Hilary's ship ashore,
had broken a great branch, whose buds would never grow green in the spring
again. That was my side now, I thought, as I noticed it; their's was the
one where the leaves flickered in the sun and the stream was still singing
that sweet old refrain. God bless them ! I did not gradge them that happy
day. So there I sat knitting, pour passer le temps, at what Una called my
Penelope's web, a long stocking which had been delayed in its completion by
various accidents, till I heard Una's laugh, and also an intimation that it was high
time for lunch. " That is, if we are ever going home. Perhaps it would be better
to pitch our tents and remain here altogether, eh, Elsie t That habit is too warm
for a May day like this, isn't it," she said mischievously, and she stooped to open the
basket, while Frank roused hunself by a mighty effort from a state af- apparent
lethargy, which Una declared was a pecuniary swoon brought on by thinking of the
new line from Bogglychunderwallah to Musseryfusserybad. He was not of so much
use as usual, but the banquet was spread on the verge of the fall, and we were sitting
down in various easy and elegant attitudes to partake, when we heard a step approach¬
ing, and a tall figure became visible among the trees. In a few minutes. Brand
Hilary appeared, saying he had met his father and given the message that we were
coming, and then tracked us like a redskin in the backwoods, thinking there was
still time to join us.
" Still time and still some food," I said; " we have not begun, and you have had
a long hot ride.    You'll come back with us 1"
270 THE ATTEMPT.
" I shall be very happy."
Una's talk had ceased the moment he appeared, and she sat perched on a large
root employed in trying to make a soda-water bottle stand upright on the grass. We
all shook hands, but the repast did not bid fair to be very convivial.
Now, if the party had consisted only of Frank and Elsie, to them it would have
been as a feast of the gods ; or had they, together with Brand, been subtracted, Una
and I could have enjoyed ourselves quietly, or—I can make no more combinations.
Frank looked at Elsie, and Elsie looked at her sandwich, reminding me irresistibly,
for a moment, of the immortal Mr Pecksniff, when he shook his head at the muffin on
his knee, as if he mildly reproached it with being the cause of all his misfortunes. I
tried to keep up a small chat with Brand, who in his turn was evidently troubled in
his mind ] he seemed to have come with a purpose, and to feel that it Vas being un¬
fulfilled. Frank tried every now and then to join in the conversation, but his efforts
were not very successful. He twice called me Elsie, thereby confusing us all, till
Una started up and pulled Elsie up also.
" Come along, and see the little waterfall at the top," she said, " there's time
yet, and Frank may pack the basket, if he takes care not to throw the plates into
the water by mistake, for tributary flowers, or something of that kind. I'm tired
of sitting here." And Elsie yielded most willingly, and the blue print costume and
the close drawn habit vanished among the beech boughs. Whereupon, the remnant
left sitting by the fall waxed even more silent than before, and I made the discovery
that four o'clock was approaching, and we ought to be going home. Frank under¬
took to summon the wanderers, and Brand and I were left alone.
He had evidently something to say; it was long in coming, but at length he
spoke.
" I have not had an opportunity of congratulating your sister. Miss Ferguson,
but "
" What do you mean, Mr Hilary ? " said I, " and why have I gone back into
Miss Ferguson. You haven't been like yourself for the last few days, and now you
seem to me to be talking nonsense. What special subject for congratulation has
turned up of late ? "
" I see," he said, " you don't wish it made public, but I thought, being such
old friends, I might take the liberty.     I have spoken of it to no one ! "
" Of it? of what 1 Don't let us go on mystifying each other. What is it you
think Una ought to be congratulated on?"
" On her engagement," said Brand; and, as he spoke, T saw a little involuntary
THE ATTEMPT. 271
closing of the strong brown hands that rested on his knee as he sat. " On her
engagement to Mary on."
I was so astonished, that I really could not speak for some moments. Brand
saw this, and thought he had vexed me.
" Forgive me, Mary," he said.
"Forgive you," I managed to say, "you are utterly and entirely mistaken.
What put it into your head that any such engagement existed ? Tell me, I have a
right to know."
" I am mistaken, that's enough," he said,  drawing a long sigh of relief, one of
those which
" Perfect Joy, perplexed for utterance,
Steals from her sister Sorrow."
What a change came over his face. The eyes grew radiant with hope and happiness,
the bright rare smile came back to his lips, the strong active form straightened
itself,—the whole man was different in a moment. I never had seen him look so
handsome, such a look would have beautified and sanctified the homeliest, coarsest
face, and Brand's was neither coarse nor homely. That glow of joy told his love-
stoiy more eloquently than any words could have done, and I knew at once what I
had guessed for some time.
" You see, Mary," he said, " I needn't pretend to you that my congratulations
would have been very sincere. I have loved your sister Una ever since that first
night when I saw her as I wakened up from my ducking, and I shall never have
the courage to tell her so. Don't say a word to her, mind; if she is ever told, I must
tell her myself; but are you sure she refused Maryon 1"
" Perfectly sure, what made you think otherwise ? " I said.
" Oh, a mere nothing, a fancy. He is a fascinating fellow, at least most girls
would think so, and your sister might, for all I could tell. / ought to speak well
of him, at least."
Then the rest appeared, and we set off home, Frank and Elsie cantering in front,
and Brand hovering round the pony-phaeton; and then came what Una called
parade, and we drove up to the Hall and were ushered into the drawing-room.
The dinners there were always pleasant. General Hilary had the courtly
manners and thorough kindness of heart which make a perfect host, and when Brand
came in and stood beside him, father and son made a goodly picture.
The Gejieral offered me his arm, with his old courtly bow; my father escorted
an elderly maiden, cousin of our host's, who was at the Hall; Frank quietly slipped
272 THE ATTEMPT.
Elsie's hand under his arm, when he thought (sagacious creature) no one was look¬
ing, and Una was left for Brand. A nobler-looking couple than they made as they
entered the lighted dining-room would have been hard to find. Tall as Una was,
her head hardly i-eached Brand's shouldei-s, though to-night she was making the
most of her height, and looking queenly indeed.
Dinner went on; the General, my father, and Frank had plenty to say to each
other, the General's cousin addressed herself to me, and deplored the degeneracy in
the present day.
At length Papa and General Hilary got deep into some vexed question of
Indian politics, often discussed befoi'e, and permitted Frank to lower his voice and
talk to his left-hand neighbour, and meanwhile Brand was trying to talk to Una.
Trying in vain, for when he picked up any subject of conversation, she pertinaciously
let it drop after a few minutes. I heard him try Froude, Browning, our drive of
that day, Mr Haslam's new school, where she had been teaching wood-carving, in
which she had been taking lessons, till Lizzie was " clean driven daft wi' Miss Una's
shavings and nonsense," but all vainly. At length he seemed to stop in despair, and
sat drawing the ends of his long moustache into his mouth, and biting them as if in
bitterness of spirit, while he recklessly refused entrees to which I knew from observa¬
tion he was partial, and pretending to be absorbed in the discussion between his
father and mine. As for Una, she looked intently at the trophy in the middle of
the table, a piece of presentation plate something in the style of Colonel Newcome's
cocoa-nut tree, which supported crystal vases and saucers running over with flowers
from the Hall green-houses and gardens.
" Have you not observed, Miss Ferguson," quoth Miss Hilary (whose stream of
talk, albeit it seldom swerved from its accustomed track, never ran dry), " the
marked, the unavoidable falling off in young ladies' complexions now-a-days. These
hats, exposing the face to sun and wind, how can it be otherwise 1 In my youth,
we never went into the open air in weather like this, without being carefully shaded
by a wide hat or bonnet, but now positively there is no distinction in point of appear¬
ance between one of those fisher-girls on the shore and a young lady. The features
remain, of course, my dear Miss Ferguson, but the colouring, where is that?"
1 thought she had two pretty good samples of it before her. Elsie's soft peach
cheeks were blooming and glowing, contrasted by her white brow and golden brown
waves of hair; and Una's colour, usually rather faint, was far brighter that usual;
she looked veritably lovely, every slight motion revealing some new glitter in her
shining hair, some fresh grace of her pliant figure.    No wonder that Brand, for-
THE ATTEMPT. 273
getting his interest in the question under consideration, turned his eyes upon her
face so intently, that his very gaze, unseen, brought her glance from the 6pergne to
meet his.
" How lively we are to-night," I heard her say, " I think we have forgotten we
are at a dinner party. Let's be talking, as Mrs Kenwigs said, or people will say we
have quarrelled."
" We shan't quarrel," said Brand, " we are not intimate enough. Friends
may quarrel, but not mere acquaintances."
" I think you forget we are cousins," said Una. " Uncle Hilary," she said the
next moment, taking advantage of a paase in the Indian argument. " I am your
own niece, am I not 1"
Brand bit his lips at being cut short in what he was going to say by this appeal,
while his father answered heartily,
" Of course you are, my child, and always have been, ever since you toddled
in with the ayah, and we drank your health. Xobody, I hope, was disputing that
arrangement. Your very good health again, my dear," with which he bowed to her
over his glass, with the pleasant protecting smile Brand had certainly inherited
from him.
" Changed times, Ferguson," he said to my father, " the children are men and
women."
" Some of them are not very thoroughly grown up yet," said papa, looking at
Una, " very much the same as when they used to make our lives a burden to us
long ago."
Dinner was over at last, and we swept out of the room, General Hilary super¬
seding the young men and holding open the door. To the drawing-room we went, up
the wide stairs. Mrs Sandyside had done her best to arrange some flowers about it,
and it had a comfortable look, though one missed the app(!arance a room has when
it is a woman's especial domain and kingdom wherein to reign. The needless wood-
fire at one end brightened it up. Una went straight to the window. Well she
might. The " young May moon," moon of the poets, queen of tlie sea, was pouring
streams of light through the casement, and showed the old-fashioned garden, with
its fantastic yews and quaintly cut flower-beds, plainly as by day ; the trees were
silvered as in tijat night of Verona, when Borneo's rare prize leaned out to liim
from her balcony, and Una stood as if fascinated, leaning her brow against the glass,
and gazing out into the evening. q_ ]yf_
2h
274 THE ATTEMPT.
CIj^   CIjristmHs   %xtt.
Thou art far from the home thou hast known so lonor.
Thy nook in the forest free,
And a sentinel bold, for that rustling; throns.
Again thou wilt never be !
Thou art saved, it is true, from the Winter's blast,
From the darkness and chill by the north sky cast,
From the sleefc and the snow, as they whistle past;
Thou art kept a sheltei-ed tree, 'tis true.
Thou art kept a cherished tree.
But will that ever weigh in an even weight.
With thy free old life of yore ?
Wouldst thou choose for thyself here to cast thy fate.
In the shade of our cottage door 1
Wouldst thou leave for these walls the old greenwood fair.
All this glittering load of our gifts to bear ?
For the sun, and the shower, and the fanning air,
Thou wilt joy in nevermore poor tree.
Thou wilt welcome nevermore !
Nevermore will spring kindle the crimson buds,
Of thy rosy tassel-flowers;
Nor summer's ripe sun tinge thy nut-brown cones,
Nor thy gum, breeze-blown in showers.
When we fill not our place, we reach not God's end.
And His quickening spirits He will not send,
With no fruit of His gift will thy branches bend,
But these tinsel toys of ours, for thee,
The loveless load of ours.
THE ATTEMPT. 275
Though a glittering fate may thy present seem,
And an honoured end to thee,
To be set in our midst and the joyous theme.
Of our household mirth to be;
Yet the sun, mid the glories of evening dies.
And our fairest of hopes through its brightness flies ;
So a gloomy future before thee lies,
Thou honoured Christmas Ti-ee, ere long.
Thou fated Christmas Tree,
LuTEA Reseda.
One Sunday afternoon, in the early autumn, my friend and I were returning from
a somewhat longer ser\dce than usual, that had been held in the little grey church
that nestles so cosily under the sheltering hill on the east side of the city. It was
the first Sunday of the month, and according to Presbyterian custom, there had been
administered the ordinance of baptism to a number of infants born in the parish,—
eight infant souls had been this day admitted into the pastoral fold. The parish is
populous, our minister is loved by his people, and holds them well together, the poor
equally with the rich. My English friend was much struck with the blended
simplicity and solemnity of this ordinance as administered in a Presbyterian church
(he belongs himself to what is in England called the High Church); he admii-ed the
little white robed creatures lying so placidly in their mothers' arms ; he thought it a
touching and solemn sight to see their little souls sealed, as it were, to Christ, in the
presence of all the congregation, and when the fathers of the little ones stood forth,
and with bowed heads listened with reverence to the solemn tones of their good old
minister, as he laid the baptismal vows upon them, enjoining them, as members of
Christ's church, to bring uji their little ones " in the way they should go, and when
they are old they will not depart from it," my friend was quite moved, and declared
his opinion to be that the old Presbyterian forms of worship are admirable and
worthy of all respect, and that our dear old Doctor, standing in the midst of his flock,
looked and spoke as a true pastor of his people.  " Of such stuff','' said he, " must the old
276 THE ATTEMPT.
Covenanters have been made; and after all, T do believe it is this sincere form of
worship that makes Scotland what she is, respected wherever she is known." I must
here remark that he had been already much struck with the air of quiet and still
repose that laj^ over the beautiful town, disturbed only by the outpouring of the
people as they went to and fro, attending the different churches. My friend lives in
one of the manufacturing towns of Lancashire, where there is no such quiet rest
visible even on the Sabbath day ; only for a few hours, perhaps, a temporary cessation
of toil. As we returned home, we passed through the beautiful grounds that lie in
the very heart of the city. How silent and sweet everything was ; the noble trees that
line the west walk were still thick and fragrant with their summer foliage, changing
slowly into varying tints of dark greens, reds, and browns ; the cris^J sharp atmos¬
phere was lightened up, although not warmed or softened, by the slanting rays of an
autumnal sun, throwing brilliant tints upon the numerous windows of the stately
buildings that line the street to the light, while on our left the frowning battle¬
ments of the old grey castle rose up above the grassy slopes on inaccessible heights.
A lovely scene of peaceful beauty and picturesque grandeur, that may be enjoyed
any fine Sunday afternoon in the grey metropolis of the north. My friend
was enchanted. It was a novel and charming contrast to anything he was accus¬
tomed to in the ugly and busy Lancashire town of which he was a denizen.
After having admired this peaceful and beautiful scene to our heart's content, we
passed out at the west gate, turned the corner, and soon after began to ascend the slope
that leads round the castle rock. By this time the smiling beauty of the scene
had all vanished, the autumnal sun had set, an easterly haw was swiftly rising and
enveloping everything, while the grey mist had already settled down upon the top¬
most turrets of the old castle. AVe pushed on, and all at once a confused hubbub of
voices burst upon our ears. Whence did it come 1 what did it betoken ? We
hurried forwai-d, and saw, about a hundred yards in advance of us, an eager and
excited crowd, principally composed of women and children. As we got up to them,
we perceived that it consisted of the outpourings of the neighbouring closes that lie
so thickly and so foully upon the side of the Castle Hill. The slope of tlie rock is,
at this point, nearly perj^endicular. It seems impossible that even a goat could
obtain an upward footing; what then was our amazement to see, clinging with
naked feet upon an over-lianging ledge, not more than a foot in breadth, a little girl,
her poor weak aims clasping the jagged sides of the rock overhead, and holding
with the desperate tenacity of a hunted animal to her perilous footing. The slightest
turn, even a gust of wind encountering this ragged puny object in its onward course,
THE ATTEMPT. 277
would have been sufficient to have hurled her down at our feet, her little limbs
crushed out of all semblance of humanity. I turned sick unto death, and could no
longer gaze upward at the little creature.
" For God's sake," enquired my friend of the excited crowd around us, " How
did she get there 1 what sort of hearts have you that you can stand there and see
that wretched child in such terrible peril ?"
" And what would you have us do ]" enquired a decent mechanic. " We have
hearts as well as you for the puir bairn ; the lassie was enticed on and on, by you
laddies, just on the hill you see, sir; she crept on and on, unknowing what she was
to get to, and now that she sees where she is, she daurna stir either back or
forrard."
Although the mist was gathering round so heavily as to make the surround¬
ings indistinct, it was still jiossible to trace the child's course. She had gone
out to play, uncared for and unwatched, with those cruel boys, and they had
dared the poor infant to creep upwards round the rock. She, with a spirit as wild
and thoughtless as their own, had done their bidding. Raising herself up, bit by bit,
she had crept along that ledge, until, standing upright upon the extreme end of
the narrow footing, she looked down, and found herself over a precipice so sheer,
that even her child's instinct told her there was a dreadful death before her, unless
she could find courage and strength to retrace her steps to the point from which
she had started upon her peiulous journey.
"Send for the police at once," cried my friend, "what are you about that you
stand there like so many sheep, doing nothing to help."
" An' fricht the lassie oot o' her judgment," answered a woman out of the
crowd. " Sheep yersel, Englisher ! na' na', we ken better than that, we dinna
want the police : but here's her mither, gude sake, she's that fou, she canna
speak to her lassie." At this moment the crowd opened, to let forward
a ragged loathsome object, a woman with a bedaged drunken face, disfigured
by blows and scars; oh, what a mother to that wretched child. She staggered
forward, and raising her skinny arm, and clenching her fist, she poured forth
such a volley of passionate cui'scs and drunken exclamations, that I shuddered
to hear them. She yelled, she stamped, she vociferated, and it was hard to say
whether it was love or hate that instigated the reproaches and commands that poured
from her lips for her child to come down, and " she'd break all her bones for her,
that she would." The crowd had the good sense to feel that such an interference as
this  could   only do   harm.      They dragged the noxious wretch away, not before,
278 THE ATTEMPT.
however, the child had heard and recognised her mother's voice.] She cautiously and
slowly half turned round, and peered down through her black elfin locks. Was
that a shrill laugh that burst fiom her lips, as she looked down at a safe distance, as
she felt, from her mother's impotentrage f But oh, what was to be done, what could
be done, to save the jjoor child in this awful peril 1 All this takes a long time to
tell. A short half hour, however, was all the time that elapsed from our first
entering upon the scene to the final catastrophe. Night was fast closing
in, and in spite of the remonstrances of the bystanders, we felt that the assistance
of the police ought to be called in—and my friend departed on this errand.
One of the oldest among the ragged urchins] congregated upon the slopes,
watching Kate's rags fluttering in the breeze with anxiety equal to our own,
a stout boy of about fourteen years of age, now made up his mind to try what he could
do to help her back again. Leaving the scciii-e position in which he had ensconced
himself, he crept steadily upwards towards the rock, keeping in a slanting direction
until he had approached nearer and nearer to the outermost ledge, at the other extreme
end of which Kate was standing, and who was beginning to show paljjable signs of
great exhaustion. He leant his body forwards, over towards her, being now divided
from her by the distance of perhaps from 20 to 30 feet.
" Katie, my woman," he called oiit in shrill distuict tones, " tak' na heed
of yer mitlier, nor of thae folk doon there, the police are sent for, they'll gar ye
come doon, if ye dinna come yersel'. Ye'll be in prison the nicht, lassie, if
ye dinna try yersel' afore they are here !" Thus adjured, the poor child
turned her head in the direction of the boy speaker. She looked cautiously
round on every side, and it was wonderful to see, in so young a child, the
amount of intelligent courage she displayed, now she had made up her miud to quit
her perilous hold of the rock which jutted out just where she held by. As she
stood at the extreme end, setting herself firmly against the face of the rock, gras])-
ing with her small fingers at every slight projection, moving her naked feet slightly
—bit by bit, footfall after footfall, she slowly moves along sideways, looking ueitlier
to the right nor to the left. The tiny thing creeps along the face of the mighty
rock with the cautious instinct of a climbing goat. The crowd beneath was breath¬
less, motionless, watching the almost imperceptible progress with straining eyes ; the
perilous passage of this little one from the jaws of a horrid death to life and safety.
I do believe that now all would have gone well with poor Katie, if only my friend
had taken the sound advice of the crowd, who knew the child's habits sufliciently well
to judge of the effect the presence  of the police would  have upon her already over-
THE ATTEMPT. 279
strained nerves and exhausted powers. Often and often, in her slowly moving
course, was the naked foot stretched out only to be draw'n back again. The small
hands clung with convulsive tenacity to every slight projection or even roughness.
Often and often she stopped quite still, and a wailing tiny cry was heard, " Oh,
mither, mither, tak' me doon ; I'll no come up again."
" Whisht, whisht, Katie, my woman," said her boy protector, " yer gettin' on
brawly—ye'll sune be a' richt; dinna greet, lassie, ye'll sup with us the nicht, and
no gae to yer mither's till the morn's morn," and tlius he cheered her to the
best of his ability, with a wisdom beyond his years. Slowly, slowly she moved
on; thanks be to God, that frightful chasm is passed, the child may be saved if only
she perseveres; a few steps further, a few feet further on, and she will be beside the
boy. The crowd below, to its credit be it said, remained silent, immoveable ; no sound,
no word was heard, only the voice of the boy, " forrard, forrard, Katie, here are
some whin busses ye can tak' hold on." The sidelong movement went on, almost
she was safe, the desired " whin busses" were at hand. Whew ! but what is that
that breaks the deep silence all around; what measured tramp is that we hear,
coming nearer and nearer ? Kate hears, she knows, she stops and turns her head in
the direction of the sound ; all at once she catches sight of the blue-coated gentry
walking two abreast, with ropes, ladders, and my friend l)eside them. Ah ! what is
that also, a stretcher ! Will it be needed 1 yes it will, for the poor little wretch, all
but saved, yet not to be so, shrieks out in uncontrollable terror, " Bill, the Perlice,
the Perlice." To her poor little wits, the police, eight or ten in number, the ropes,
the ladders, only meant her speedy capture and imprisonment. They are the only
living beings she has been taught to dread and to hide from. Things that to a happier
child would have been things of horror and of deadly poison, were to her her daily
food; the company of thieves, of dreadful women—women but in name—were to
her her constant associates, the sound of oaths and of imprecations were familiar to her
ears, the presence of dirt, filth, even starvation and nakedness, these were but her
natural surroundings, of these she was not afraid. But the police ! had she not
seen big brawny men and loud-tongued defiant women cowering before them, and
hiding from their sight, and now were these same dreaded beings come for her ] She
shrieked loudly, threw iip her arms wildly, swayed from side to side, tottered, threw
herself against the rock, rebounded back, and thud, thud, thud, the poor little
limbs hit against the cruel rock, and the senseless bleeding body lay at our feet,
and found a bed upon the sharp stones that line the side of the road. It was
with difficulty my friend  and  I  escaped  the  ill-usage of the  crowd,   wound up
280 THE ATTEMPT.
to intense feelings of mixed exasperation and pity by the trying scene
they had witnessed. We waited, however, in spite of their objurgations, until the little
body was removed upon the stretcher (brought by the especial desire of my friend,
as he was tauntingly reminded of by the women around him) to the Royal Infirmary.
After all was over we returned home. " I shall gladly shake the dust of your
city off my feet," said my friend, " and return a more contented man to my own in¬
stitutions. I see it is the same all the world over; religion, like the rest of the good
things of this life, is a luxury for the rich, the poor have to do without it, as
without anything else that makes life endurable. If that little creature had lived
upon the other side of the rock, she would have been safe at the kirk under her
mother's wing, instead of meeting her death as the poor little wretch has done. You
are a comfortable, pious, and well ordered people in the new town ; but heaven save
us all from the  contaminations of the old town of Edinburgh."
" My dear friend," I replied, " we are as other towns and as other people, good
and bad, religion and no religion, happiness and misery, are inextricably mingled."
" Well," said he, " to a certain extent it may be so, but never before did I see
the peace of heaven and the turmoil of sin and misery, in such close proximity. That
old castle of yours looks down upon a strange diversity of life."
" Not stranger than elsewhere," I again observed.
" The contrast seems stranger to me," he replied. " In that little church you
seemed all of you saints upon earth, in simple brotherhood, rich and poor, but
I see the brotherhood and the pastoral care have their limits. It stops at the point
where it is most wanted. "
" You are unjust, my friend, and reasonest not at all," said I, smiling, "but let us
close the discussion by ringing for our tea."
" Well, well, be it north or be it south, human nature is of very mingled yarn."
It will ]3erhaps interest my readers to learn, that poor little Kate still lives, crip¬
pled, disfigured, maimed and helpless as to her body. The spirit, however, has got
better and different treatment than it would have done, had not the sad accident to
her frame rescued her from her mother's den. She is my good friend's particular care.
She has been carefully trained and put in the way to earn her own living, as far as her
crippled condition will allow of her doing. She is a true and living heroine of a
real incident that occurred some few years ago, and of which the narrator was an
unwilling witness. M. E. T.
[Our readers will be glad to know that the approach to this precipitous side of the rock is now
enclosed by a wall, and it is no longer accessible.—Ed. Note.]
'^,
THE ATTEMPT. 281
%,  Curislj  J0ws^ of ^^rcg.
It may not be unwelcome to those who are interested in the various charitable
institutions and works of benevolence in our own country, to hear something of
similar schemes for the alleviation of human sufiering which are being prosecuted in
more remote and less favoured quarters of Europe.
While in Mitau, chief town of the Baltic province of Courland, I had an
opportunity of visiting a House of Mercy which had been established there within
the last four years. This excellent institution chiefly owes its existence to the
exertions of the Dowager Countess Elizabeth Medem, a lady distinguished in Curish
society, as well for her benevolent projects as for the ancient name she bears. The
object of this establishment, called the Mitau'sche Diakonissen Anstalt, is exclusively
the care and tending of the sick, both within its walls and by furnishing competent
nurses, trained in the Anstalt, to attend upon patients at their own dwellings.
When, in the month of June 1865, it was announced that a Committee of
influential persons, headed by the Countess Elizabeth Medem, was desirous of
founding an establishment for the training of sick-nurses and the care of the sick poor,
a number of subscribers came forward, some of them guaranteeing annual sums for
three years, that period being fixed as one of probation for the projected charity. A
large house was purchased in an airy, healthy situation of the picturesque little town,
two deaconesses were invited from the celebrated Diakonissen Anstalt in Dresden
to undertake the active management, and the matter was fairly set in training.
Although, as in all similar enterprises, numerous difiiculties presented themselves,
prosperity seemed to smile upon the work from the commencement. The house was
furnished mainly by donations, and accommodation provided for twelve patients.
Since then the resources having been increased by voluntary contributions and
donations, more beds have been from time to time added and the adjoining house
has been purchased ; so that at present I believe I am correct in stating that thirty-
two patients can be received.
All diseases are treated, with the exception of epUepsy and mental disorders, and
the medical department is under the personal superintendence of an eminent
practitioner, other physicians being called in, when necessary, for consultation. One
feature of this institution deserves especial mention—it is unsectarian ; and, in this
respect, differs  from   all   other   charitable   houses   in   Courland.     Although   the
Lutheran faith, the established religion in the Baltic Provinces, is professed by all its
2 I
282 THE ATTEMPT.
founders, and a Lutheran Pastor acts as chaplain, yet members of the Greek and
Komish chuxxhes are admitted to a share in its benefits ; and even the Jew, despised
and scouted in general by his Christian Curish neighbours, is not refused.
During the past three years, several ladies have enrolled themselves as sisters,
and become efficient nurses, The highest testimony has been borne to their gentleness
and skill by wealthy persons who have availed themselves of their services, and
signified their satisfaction by handsome donations to the Institution. Latterly,
however, the deaconesses have been too much occupied with in-door patients, to be
able to undertake private cases. In the course of the last two winters, when famine
has been heavily pressing upon the already impoverished land, the benefits of this
Diakonissen-Haus have been very great.
The terms for being nursed in this House of Mercy are two roubles inclusive
(about 5s.) weekly, in the common room, and one rouble per diem for a room apart.
The magistrates of Mitau have volunteered a small sum daily on behalf of the poor
of the parish ; and those who are unable to pay are nursed gratis.
In the month of December last, a Bazaar was arranged, and a sum realised of
about eleven hundred roubles, which was set apart as capital.
The deaconesses perform a large portion of the menial duties, this being a part
of the system. Whether such discipline be absolutely necessary to the well-being of
the Society is, of course, an open question.
Each deaconess receives the sum of thirty roxibles per annum, which sufiices for
the mere essentials of her wardrobe, &c. This seems an admirable arrangement,
and one worthy of being copied by similar societies in our own country, for it places
all upon an equal footing, and puts it in the power of those to follow this vocation,
who are desirous of doing so, but who, without this stipend, would be unable to
become deaconesses, having no fixed income, however, small, of their own, to meet
personal expenses.
The interior arrangements of this establishment are admirable. On entering, a
visitor cannot fail to be struck with the extreme order and scrupulous cleanliness
which everywhere prevail; and the neat costume of the sisters (similar to that of
our English protestant sisters of mercy), together with their quiet, cheerful demean¬
our, produce a most pleasing impression.
One large apartment is fitted ivp in very simple style as a chapel, and service
is celebrated there on Sundays, and on certain week-days. These services are
thrown open to the public, and there is usually a numerovis attendance of strangers
in addition to those of the sisters and patients who are able to be present.
THE ATTEMPT. 283
A small libraiy, consisting of books of a religious and devotional character,
has been formed for the use of the inmates. The total prohibition of secular reading
seems unwise, for were a few good, standard works of history, fiction, &c., introduced,
they would form a valuable resource at those moments in the intervals of nursing,
when thorough relaxation of mind as well as body is so desirable, and even
necessaiy.
A covered balcony extends the whole length of the house at the back ; and being
fitted up with seats, forms an agreeable lounge for convalescents. A cheerful little
garden is also attached to the premises, and considerable progress has been made in
the cultivation of it.
It was my privilege to be present last year at the celebration of Christmas-eve,
in the Diakonissen Haus; and the scene was, to an English eye, novel and striking.
A considerable number of persons assembled about six o'clock in the evening in the
chapel, which was brilliantly lighted, and on each side of the altar stood a young
fir-tree covered with many little tapers. After prayers, and the singing of carols,
accompanied on a very good harmonium; an address was delivered by Pastor Lam-
bery, a distinguished preacher and high office-bearer in the Curish branch of the
Lutheran Church. At the conclusion of this solemn and impressive service, all the
assistants adjourned to another apartment, where a pleasing sight awaited them.
On a table in the centre stood a tall Christmas tree, gaily lighted up, and adorned
with pretty devices cut out of gilt and coloured paper, card, and so forth, while
around were placed presents for the deaconesses, and every one of the patients, con¬
sisting of books, articles of clothing, and other acceptable gifts; while for the children,
toys and sweetmeats were provided in profusion. The happiness depicted on the faces
of all present, adult as well as juvenile, was worth witnessing. One patient, a young
Russian officer, who had been under treatment there for many weeks had made a
great efibrt to be present at a scene as new to him as to me, and had actually
donned his full dress uniform at an early hour that day in anticipation of the even¬
ing's celebration.
In concluding this short description of the Mitau Diakonissen Haus, mention
should not be omitted of the praise due to Sister Lydia, the lady superior, for her
judicious and efficient management of this large and important household. Her
mild firmness and self-sacrificing amiability seem to have gained the esteem of all.
It is much to be hoped that this valuable institution may continue to prosper,
so as to become a lasting boon to the inhabitants of the quaint little Curish capital.
Jeannie.
284 THE ATTEMPT.
Jn tl^«  Storm.
All through the long lone night, my waking ears
Have heard the loud waves beat upon the beach,
While from the sky the wild winds answering shrieked ;
And on the window-pane the rain-drops crashed,
As by the Storm Fiend's hand in sport exulting dashed !
And now the morn has come—but brings no rest;
And powerless in the wind's resistless clasp,
And dripping all with ever-driving rain,
Along the storm-beat shore I take my way.
And wild as was the night, creeps on the dreary day.
Onward, in hurrying masses, roll the waves.
Swept by the screaming sea-bird's dipping wing
And from their crests the foam, snatched by the blast,
Is flung far up the clifi", and o'er the plain.
And falls, as falls the sower's widely scattered grain.
And on the inky sky-line flits a sail.
Alone upon the white-flecked wilderness;
Around it roars the stoi'm—no haven near ;
Poor weary boat, be mercy to thee shown—
Poor weary I—like thee—in life's storm I'm alone.
Last eve the sunset kissed a waveless sea.
And guardian stars watched o'er its tranquil sleep ;
But ere the midnight—hurling o'er the sky
His storm-clouds black, the tempest woke in might,
And night's deposed queen shrank teiTor-pale from sight.
But when the dark-browed Storm shall reign no more,
When winds again to wavelets whisper peace.
From out her silvery cave she'll beauteous sail,
Her blissful sinile o'er all things will be thrown ;
The weary boat will rest—but I shall be alone ! Melensa.
The End.
A Prize is offered for the best Prose Article appearing in the January Niimher of'''' The Attempt.''''
^,>A-.
x^^^ol
/^M ;
m^A
e;irisi
a5njitatjiljtril=ital=ilalrn=ita
a
3
BnuLaLsniriLngiLrngiTgTbri
