^m
THE  ATTEMPT
A   LITEEAEY   MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE
LADIES'   EDINBUEGH  LITEEAET   SOCIETY
«
VOLUME    X.
"AUSPICIUM   MELIORIS   JEW
PRINTED FOR THE LADIES' EDINBURGH  LITERARY SOCIETY
BY
COLSTON    &   SOX,    EDINBTJEGH
k
MDCCCLXXIV.
D
>w
1936 ■§>
;o'\^
i;?.
'^^
CONTENTS.
73,
Aurora, by Melensa,      ....
Beyond, by Semper Eadem,
Blind, by Martyn Hay,
Chant of the Bells, The, by Naomi S. Smith,    .
Church Congress, The Recent, by Irene,
Concerning a Vexed Question, by Frucara,
Duty and Art in Dress, bj- Procla,
Duty of Woman to pay Great Attention to Dress ? Is
Early Epics of Germany, The, by Proola,
Euterpe, by E. J. O.,
Exhibition of the Royal Scottish Academy, by E. J. ().,
Fair Anna, by Helfene Muller,
Freedom of the Will, On the, by E. J. O.,
From Kirkwall to Tobermory, by Omicron,
George Eliot's Characters, by Lutea Reseda,    .
Haunted Rocks, The, by E. V. Lynne,
How do I know the Bible to be the Word of God ? by Jeanie Morison,
Industrial Training for Ladies, by Eta,
Inspiration, by Procla, ....
In the P3rrenees, by E. J. O.,    .
Isle of Man, The, by E. V. Lynne,
" Jesus called a Little Child unto Him," by Naomi S. Smith,
Jottings from an Old Maid's Experiences, by Semper Eadem,
" Le Roi est mort, Vive le Roi," by Martyn Hay,
Labour and Love, by Erica,       ....
Leonor de Cisneros, by Jeanie Morison,
Maiden's Philosophy of Dress, A, by Procla,    .
Memories, by Gratia, ....
Memory of the North Wind, A, by Omicron,
Milla Forres, by Jeanie Morison,
FACE
316
312
302
22
191
136
225
it the, by Aliquae, 177
169, 201, 233, 269, 305
239
129, 153
337, 369
33
262
158
163
240
52
104
330, 360
317
157
246
395
359
278
261
352
311
9, 58, 88, 121, 137
OE
IV
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Miss Hyslop, by Sara, . . . . . .210
Murillo's Holy Family, by Lutea Eeseda, . . . .175
Napoleon III., by E. J. 0., 16
Nature and Love, by Noli-me-Tangere, . . . .72
Notes in Church, by Frueara, ..... 8
Nothing, Lines on, by Jane B. Ballantyne,       ....        292
Novel and the Novelist, The, by Lutea Reseda, . . .17, 42
On the Heights, by E. J. 0.,  293
Our Library Table, 31, 367
Pensees, by Naomi S. Smith,    . . . . . .344
Poverty of Wealth, The, by M. A. Palmer,     . . . .146
Railway Bob, by E. V. Lynne, . . . . .197
Recent Researches in Roman History, by Procla,        . . 345, 380
Sea-drop and the Pearl, The, by Melensa, .... 62
Some Defects in Education, by Noli-me-Tangere, . . .        389
Sonnet, by Enna, . . . . . . .146
St. Andi-ews, by S.,       . . . . . . .29
Suppose, by R., . . . . . . .329
Swedish Licensing Laws, a Few Remarks on the, by Des Eaux, . 93
Tears in God's House, by Frucara,        .....        245
Turn of the Night, The, by R., . . . . .51
Umbrellas, by Semper Eadem, .....        166
Unknown Saint, The, by E. J. O.,        . . . . 82, 114
Use of Songs and other Popular Poetry to an Historian, The, by Aliquae,     63
Valedictory Address to 1873, by Elfie, . . . . ]
"Winter Story, A, by Enna,        ...... 23
Ye Tryste of Ye Erie's Dochter, by Melensa, . . .379
Youth the Happiest Time of Life ? Is, by Des Eaux, . .        185
INDEX   TO   CONTRIBUTORS'
N 0 M S   D E   PLUME.
Aliquae,
Des Eaux,
K J. O,
Elfie,
Enna,
Erica,
Eta,
E. V. Lynne,
Frucara,
Gratia,
Helfene MiiUer,
Irene,
Jane B. Ballantyne,
Jeanie Morison,
Lutea Reseda,   ;
}ii. A. Palmer,
Martyn Hay,
Melensa,
Naomi S. Smith,
Noli-me-Tangere,
Omicron,
Procla,
R.
S.
Sara,
Semper Eadem,
16, 33, 82, 1
104, 169,
201,2
63, 177
93, 185
4, 129, 153, 239,
293, 330, 360
1
23, 146
359
52
163, 197, 317
8, 136, 245
352
337, 369
191
292
9, 58, 88, 121,
137, 240, 278
17, 42, 73,
105, 158, 175
.
146
.
302, 395
,
62, 316
.
22, 157, 344
72, 389
.
262, 311
5, 233, 261, 269,
305, 345, 377
.
51, 329
.
29
.
210
,
166, 246, 312
THE ATTEMPT.
Datitdittorg to 1873.
" The years that were, the dim, the grey,
Receive to-night, with choral hymn,
A sister shade as lost as they.
And soon to be as grey and dim.
Fill high : she brought us both of weal and woe,
And nearer lies the land to which we go."
NCE more the darkening sha¬
dows of December close round
the fleeting vision of another
year, drawing the veil of the
irrevocable across the life-path
which each weary pilgrim's
foot shall know no more. So
mark we the stealthy strides
of the Great Enemy on his
unwearied march, carrying all
captive towards that bom-ne
of his dominions " whence no traveller e'er returns."
Scanning the meaning of these solemn footprints, too
quickly do they seem erased to our short-sighted gaze.
Living reahties, how soon they become dim phantoms! and
the present merges in the past with the steady certainty
of silent action. It must, therefore, ever be vnth a sense
of missing much in one glance of retrospection, that the
events of the year are reviewed in our pages.
Thinking of Time's reverses in years gone by, the
patriot's first remembrance of the last twelve months
should be  one  of thankfulness  for  a  period  of much
Janoaht 1874. A
The Attempt.
national prosperity, uninjured either agriculturally by a
euccession of rainy seasons, or commercially by the
, i-ii monetary panic in New York, which overthrew the usually
' ' = "tvell-balanced American equilibrium. Grave cause for
anxiety is ever increasingly evident in the turmoil of class
legislation, out of which have arisen those giant spectres
of trades unions and strikes, which keep up an unfailing
antagonism between capital and labour, and by the propa¬
gation of a spirit of moral cannibalism,—which so recognises
selfishness as the law of humanity, that men must live by
preying on each other,—threatens the disintegration of
that national and Christian unity which has been Britam's
bulwark for centuries. The course of poHtics before and
Bince the Government defeat in spring, when an appeal
to the country was refused by both parties, has been
marked by signs of preparaMon for the working of prin¬
ciples favoured by 4. Conservative reaction, as expressed
in numerous elections, and the receptions accorded Jto
Mr Disraeh's admirable appearances in Lancashire and
Glasgow. * ^ *^ '^     '
British charity has not lacked its call to the fields of
India, wasted by drought and famine ; and British courage
now stands the brunt of savage warfare, for the mainte¬
nance of national honour, injuredjby treachery to a foreign
power. This is the only explanation we have been able
to hear of this mysterious Ashantee war, which, as if to
keep up the interest in the wonders of African travel,
whetted by 8u- Samuel and Lady Baker's successful ex¬
plorations, discloses revelations of aboriginal man, which
hardly justify his title of " fighting animal," unless behind
a flying enemy. General Wolseley would therefore need
supplies of soldiers, as well as stores, to bring out the
retiring qualities of this questionable Fantee valour.
The great peaceful celebration of the year has been the
Vienna International Exhibition, to which, as in Jacques'
golden world, all varieties of strange motley came flocking
as if another flood were toward, and they were all coming
to the Ark. These modern Fairs, which are held on such a
scale as to bring the ends of the earth together to buy,
and sell, and learn of each other, form an important part
in the tecl^cal programme of tho^ducation of the age,
etimulating^a love of travel, gratifyiiig curiosity, revealing
ingenuity, glorifying industry, widening appreciation, and
removing prejudice, with all other landmarks that may
llie Attempt.
interfere with the bird's-eye view, which it is the wish of
civilization to take of the world as a vast level plain of
human equality.
Under these conditions, it has become the fashion for
eastern potentates to travel, and we have had succes¬
sively the Turkish Porte, the Egyptian Viceroy, and
Indian, Japanese, and China magnates starring it like
foreign comets in our western sphere, finally illuminated
by the appearance of Nasur-ed-din, the modern representa¬
tive of Haroun-al-raschid, round whose steps the glories
of the Arabian nights seemed to revive as by magic, till
the "^vorld was dazed with their splendour. In his
triumphal march from one stronghold of w^estern civiliza¬
tion to another, the Shah must have experienced a series
of surprises to stir even his mental stolidity, crowned by
a revelation of womanhood gracing every sphere of life. I
An impression of the imperative value of Christianity and
womanly influence in the scheme of civilization, might
prove of more avail to Persia's oppressed millions, than
Baron Renter's mechanical programme of modern in¬
ventions.
In fulfilment of the duty of royal personages to cement
national friendships, a grand alliance has been negotiated,
in which the Duke of Edinburgh is to wed the Grand
Duchess Marie Alexandrovna, daughter of the Emperor of
all the Russias. In honour of the prince of the royal house
in whom Edinburgh can claim special interest, it becomes a
duty to express the best wishes f r the happiness of his
union with a princess of whom fame speaks so kindly; and
the heartiness of the municipal resolve to celebrate the
event by an illumination, such as makes the occasion of
the Prince of Wales' marriage a brilliant memory in our >
fair city, leads to expectation of such another unforget-
able display m January. Prince Arthur's marriage, talked
of as likely to follow his brother's, will bring to our shores
another of that interesting family, whose virtues seem
to make their fortunes, since the "first modest gem, its
ray concealed," was discovered for our heir-apparent.
European peace prevails, but Spain and France con¬
tinue their favourite indulgence in national imbroglio.
Spain, having driven away her short-lived King Amadeus
m despair of comfort or credit in his reign, is governed by
factions, distracted by minorities, torn asunder by inter¬
necine con fiict. In France a similar spirit of self-destruc¬
tion  prevails,  and  party after party is weighed in the
The Attempt.
balance and found wanting; the memory of the empire is
discredited, the rule of the Comte de Chambord is rejected
because of his refusal to desert the Legitimist colours,
and republican zeal blows the ashes of a dead war, that
one of their own heroes may be sacrificed in the flame.
Whatever the opinions of the mysterious capitulation of
Metz, Marshal Bazaine carries to his captivity the feeling
of just minds against a punishment so disproportionate to
the remoteness of the offence, and the greatness of life¬
long services rendered to an ungrateful state.
The death of the Emperor Napoleon closed one of those
careers of stirring vicissitude that thrill the world with
wonder, and are read by posterity as apt illustrations of
the capricious turns of fortime's wheel. A life and char¬
acter alike so remarkable must be variously criticised; but
judged with all severity, they remain those of France's
great modern patriot, who devjjjed his mental and
physical energies, great as they were, and albeit by
crooked and devious ways, to be sorely spent in his
country's service. The result was the apotheosis of
France's greatness as a European power, and the glorifi¬
cation of despotism, till its hollow shell burst with ruin to
all around. The pathos of the Emperor's last days in the
midst of misfortunes as tremendous as his prosperity was
once transcendent, touched all true English feeling with
a remembrance only of his friendship as the monarch, and
his reverses as the man, and called forth such words of
just kindness throughout the land, in true response to
the confident appeal for an asylum on English shores,
as warmed the exile's heart, and shed peace upon his
grave:—
" So may he rest,
His faults lie gently on him."
" He leaves a name, at which the world grew pale,
To point a moral or adorn a tale."
Year by year we are kept familiar with thoughts of the
great by their removal from the place of the living. First
on our list of losses stands the name of Edward Bulwei;
Lord Lytton, of the highest mark in our literary annals
for well-nigh half a century. His genius, of the brightest
order, was united with a rare degree of application, which
made the last suffering hours of his life ilhistrious ones,
and invests the sad turn of " Kenelm Chilhngly's " story
(ko fiill of liumnur in its opening) with the interest of the
TJie Attempt.
writer's personal trial. The characteristics of his genius,
versatility, fertility, and brilhancy, distinguish hun alike
as a novel writer, dramatist, orator, philosopher, poet and
pohtician; but his popular fame attaches itself naturally
to his character as a writer of fictions, which, minus the
commanding humanity of Dickens, or the polished
sarcasm of Thackaray, transcencJ\both in intellectual
power and imaginative charm.
To a different order of minds belonged John Stuart
Mill, the great political economist, philosopher, and logi¬
cian. A hfe and character so ruled by logical deduction,
that feeling never softenf the hard dominancy of mind,
invite study as those of one of the most remarkable men
of his day..
The light of a genius that leaves bright reflections on
the walls even of many a humble home, went out Avith Sir
Edwin Landseer, the artist whose worship of nature found
expression in dehneating the animal creation with a power
and beauty that make his name immortal.
The sister gift of poetry has lost a humble but gifted
disciple in Janet Hamilton, the Coatbridge poetess.
Reared without learning, in circumstances, to outward
seeming, the most repressive of poetic genius, she hved
a hard-woi'king life of poverty, and never wrote a line
till the rest of old age had been earned. The heyday of
her noon past, her simple strains are tu!^ned to the sweet¬
ness of Ufe's evening. She lived a woman, and she died
a bard.   ^
Events happen in cycles. Last year, held as the ter¬
centenary of John Knox, was marked by the death of Dr
Merle D'Aubigne, the great Geneva preacher and his¬
torian of the Reformation; and within twelve months the
three principal Presbyterian denominations in Scotland
have lost men whom each would gladly quote as repre¬
sentative names^-tff Dr Norman Macleod, Dr Thomas
Guthrie, and Dr William Anderson. The two former are
united in our thoughts as the editors of Good Words and
tlie Sunday Magazine, and in their deaths they were not
long divided. To the list, the name of Dr Candlish is now
added, after living but to see his favourite scheme of
ecclesiastical union narrowly escape the achievement of
another disruption. The Scottish Episcopal Church has
also been called to lament the loss of one of its brightest
ornaments in Bishop Ewing, who, by reason of his open-
mindedneufi and large-heartedness, can ill be spared.    Our
6 Hie Attempt.
citizens have also to lament the loss of Mr Thomson, the
great engineer, and Mr Lawsoii, the most hospitable of
Lord Provosts. By a still wider circle will be lamented
the death of the distinguished statesman. Lord Westbury,
almost simultaneously with that of Samuel Wilberforce,
Bishop of Winchester, who by his catholic sympathies
had endeared himself to his country.
The result of the application of the Scotch Education
Act has been an unmistakeable vote of confidence in the
time-honoured system of Bible teaching, and the rightful
sway of feminine judgment in the training of the young, *J
not least so in our own city, where two ladies were
returned to the School Board at the head of the poll,
excepting the Roman Catholic candidate, who stood first;
and secularism occupied the lowest place.
The work of the Ladies Educational A ssociation has pro¬
gressed with no less, if not more than former vigour, since
last session was inaugurated by Sir Alexander Grant, as
Principal of the University, the bond of afiiliatiou thus
being recognised. In spring were incorporated with the
University Calendar, the Eegulations for the Examination
of Women in the different classes through which they
may have passed in connection with the Asociation.
The examinations duly commenced last October, and just
in time; for the Times began to deplore, in November,
the hard fate of Scotch ladies to whom the Universities of
Scotland had not been so liberal as those of England and
Ireland. W^hatever Sir Robert Christison might have
said as to the arrangement for ladies attending the
Medical Classes, Sir Alexander Grant could happily
answer, without confusion of countenance, in a cheerful
manner regarding the Arts Classes.    Let us hope that
■ our Scotch Universities Avill not find with iis subjects for
satire so  bitter  as appeared in the  Saturday Review of
^ November 15, on the ladies examined at Cambridge, nor
have the will to be bo cruel, though there may seem
reason; because during the struggling beginnings of things
there should only be patience and observance, and neither
satire, prejudice, nor hasty generalisations. The results of
present opinion must be worked into the mode of the
early education of women, before their abilities can be fairly
tested against those of men in the higher education. Yet,
even with their disadvantages, they have done well enough
to cheer and encourage those Professors who have de¬
voted much of their interest and energies to the Ladies'
The Attempt.
Educational   Association.     This   year   Professor   Crum
Brown has added Chemistry to the hst of Lectures, and
Professor Charteris has been kind enough to accede to a
strong requisition, and lecture on Biblical Criticism.   The
large numbers of the class show the interest of the study,?
the popularity of the Professor,^ and the recognition of
the fact regarding all Classes that lie outside of Arts,—
that it is wise to take them when you can get them, or
you may not have them when you want them, seeing that ^
the Association will not risk such Classes without a certain c
number of guarantees.
The Tichborne trial still drags its slow length along,
unfolding wonder after wonder in a wilderness of weari¬
ness, of which the latest daring revelation may be quoted
as an epitomized edition of the gigantic imposture made
out by the pursuer's case. However the jury may decide
on the story as told to them, its manifold episodes pre¬
sent curiosities of real life, which fiction would hardly
have dared to invent.
Of new books, the most interesting seem to belong to
the biographical department* particularly the autobio¬
graphies of J. Stuart Mill, Dr Guthrie, and Mrs Somerville.
In fiction, Bulwer Lytton's last novels, The Parisians and
Kenelm Chillingly, Mrs Oliphant's May, Miss Thackeray's
Old Kensington, and A very Young Couple, by the author
of Mrs Jerningham's Journal are noticeable. Science
pours out her usual treasury of deep thought, to many of
whose students the accounts of the Dredging Cruises of
H.M. S.S. Porcupine and Lightning will be of great in¬
terest ; and poetry contributes Browning's Red Cotton Alight
Cap Country, and Longfellow's Aftermath, with a work of
poetized prose. Master Spirits, from the pen of Mr Robert
Buchanan.
In wishing to subscribers and contributors the saluta¬
tions of the season. The Attempt must once more trust in
their support and appreciation for the realization of to¬
day's watchword of hope, " A Good New Year."
Elfie.
The Attempt.
gotes in dfhurrh.
These four stone walls, they seem too close together.
• • • • •
What is it I hear ?—strange words concerning
The souls of men—Thou Who art Lo\e,
Art Thou Hate also?    Art Thou Revenge?
I had deemed it not so.
• • • ■ •
Is Faith here ?    I know that she is here,
But bounded by the four stone walls.
She must not soar too high,
She must not hope too much ;
And he (God's messenger) is bounded too,
And they, the worshippers, worship with placid brow.
Content it is so.
• • • • •
" Miserable sinners !" I wonder why
My lips refuse the words ?    I, made, and loved,
And sent by God to fill a little space,
Dare I be miserable ?
• • • • •
They stoop so low, these worshippers.
But do they stoop to rise ?    And unto what ?
Is their God boTm.ded too ?
Ye four stone walls!
I dream ye'U crumble into dust,
The preacher's voice be silent.
But all men know their God.
For His great Music sounding through the world
Shall hush the discords here.
Give us, 0 God in Clirist! the wide, wide heart,
That we may take each sister, brother, in,—
For failing this, we hinder Its approach.
Frucara.
The Attempt.
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTEK XXVI.
WATCHING.
For a long anxious fortnight Alaster lay thus hovering, as
it were, between life and death, and utterly unconscious
of all around him. The doctor's face grew graver and
gi-aver day after day, as he returned to Milla Forres only
to find his patient as he had left him the day before. At
first, no one had been so sanguine of his recovery as
Nancy, after the first shock was over. Her bright, hope¬
ful nature always seemed to see the brightest side; but as
day after day passed by, and brought with it no change
for the better, her hope and courage fell, and, true to her
impulsive, childish nature, by-and-bye gave way altogether.
It was Barbara who now supported the household with
brave words of hope and courage; Barbara, who had
looked so grave at first at her little sister's predictions of
speedy recovery, that Nancy had turned away from her
impatiently, as a prophet of evil omen. But so it is always;
it is the true, strong heart, that dares to look at things
as they are, to face the truth, however appalling, that
" endures to the end ;" not the gay, hopeful, sanguine
spirit, that refuses to believe whatever is painful ^o it.
Barbara fi-om the first had faced the fact that Alaster'a
life hung by a single thread. I do not think that she ever
quite brought herself to believe that he would die; loving
him so, how could she believe that? She would hold him
by that great love of hers. Surely he could not burst bands
so strong; yet she faced the possibility that it might be
even so, and because she dared to face it, " the truth made
her free."
One night, about a fortnight after Alaster's arrival,
Barbara was sitting watching by his bedside. Dr Brown
had paid his evening visit, and had looked at his patient
with his kind, solicitous eyes—Barbara thought they
looked graver than usual,—and when he turned to bid her
good night, their kindness, she thought, had a deep com¬
passion in it. She had grown very learned in the varying
expressions of those dark eyes of Dr Brown's, during that
fortnight's watching; she had read in them so often the sad
JANDAET  1874. B
10 The Attempt.
verdict of " no better," which he was always so loath to
speak. How was it that she had never read in them that
other secret, unspoken too, yet always trying to find for
itself a voice? But she did not see it, she did not care to
see it. He was the doctor to her—the doctor on whose
skill and care Alaster's life might depend—that and nothing
more. And he was content that it should be so ; content
if he could only render her any service—any help, however
humble.
She sat pondering silently and sadly by the fireside,
after he had left her, thinking of the ominous pity in those
kind, dark eyes, and the terrible import of such compassion,
when she was suddenly startled by a weak voice from the
bed, saying in a scarcely audible whisper, " Is that Bar¬
bara?" It was no strange or new thing to hear Alaster
speak, for during that anxious fortnight he had raved
incessantly, but there was something in the weak tones
this time different from anything she had heard before.
Instinctively she knew, before she turned her head, that
Alaster had recognised and was Speaking to her; that his
mind had returned to him again. Her heart gave a great
bound of mingled fear and relief, as she turned towards
him. One look convinced her that she was not mistaken,
that Alaster was perfectly conscious. His eyes met hers,
no longer with the wild stare of delirium, but with a quiet
wearied look, like the look in the eyes of a tired child.
She went to his bedside, and lifting the thin hand that lay
upon the quilt, pressed it silently to her lips. Her heart
was too full for words. Tears were very near, but she
would not shed them for fear of exciting the patient. He
looked at her with a quiet, contented smile. She bent
over him, and smoothed the pillow softly, and said in a
soothing tone, " Yes, dear, it is Barbara, you will try to go
to sleep, will you not ?" How sickness and trouble brings
out the motherly element in every true woman! Here
was Barbara, A\ath her strong passionate heart, who loved
this man as only such a natiire can love. Proud Barbara,
from whom in prosperous days he might perhaps have got
all the less in the way of endearment, because she loved
him so dearly, speaking to him now in his sickness and
distress, as a mother might soothe an ailing child!
His weak fingers closed round her hand, and he turned
away his face with a long, contented breath, and mutter¬
ing, "Yes, I'll go to sleep now," he closed his eyes, and
soon his regular soft breathing showed that he had fallen
The Attempt. H
into the first natural sleep he had had since he was
brought to Milla Forres. It seemed as if somehow her
presence satisfied him, and he could sleep holding her
hand, as a wearied, frightened child could on its mother's
breast. Barbara knew that Dr Brown had said that if he
could but get one long refreshing sleep, he believed he
would live, and as she sat there by the bedside a prisoner—
for the weak hand clasped hers firmly even in its sleep—
tears of joy and gratitude rolled over her face. Hour
after hour slipped by while she sat there, the fire went out,
and she was numb with cold, and with sitting so long in
one imaltered attitude, but she scarcely felt it, her heart
was so glad. She longed to go and tell Nancy and Elspet
and Dr Brown the good news, it seemed so selfish to keep
such happiness all to herself, but she dared not unclasp
the clinging hand. So she sat till Elspet came in, in the
early dawn, to relieve her watch, and was sent out again
immediately to call Nancy, that they might all rejoice
together. When Dr Brown came next morning, he con¬
firmed their hopes. Alaster had awakened again by that
time—a different man. He had recognised them all, the
delirium and fever had all passed away and left him, weak,
indeed, as a little child, but quiet and at rest. He had
got the turn, Dr Brown said, now good nursing would do
all the rest. Why was it that the kind, generous-hearted
man turned away from that rejoicing household with a
dim pain in his own heart? He asked himself the ques¬
tion reproachfully, as he rode slowly homewards. It was
not possible, he said to himself, that amid all his compas¬
sion for Barbara, and all his efforts to save his patient, he
had still clung in his heart to some indefinite hope that
this barrier between him and Barbara might perhaps be
removed? It was not possiljle that in his heart he was a
murderer? Yet, why that dull pain? The good doctor
vexed himself sadly on his ride home over this horrible
fancy, and at last gave the question up without finding
its answer. For a practical solution of it he determined
to take a twenty miles ride to get a medicine for Alaster,
which he thought might be of special use to him ; and I do
not know what better solution of the question he could
have come to.
Once begun, Alaster's convalescence went on quietly
and surely. He slept a great deal, and when he was
awake, he was very quiet and gentle and contented. It
was   obviously no   time   for   exciting   scenes,  or strong
12 The A ttempt.
emotions, and Barbara was quite content with things as
they were. It was such a happiness just to be near him,
to be allowed to tend him and care for him, and get the
mute thanks of his grateful eyes, that she began to think
that if she might only continue to be with him, to be a
sister to him, that was all she would ask of happiness. She
would put away those other possibilities which had disturbed
their intercourse, and be a sister to him as she had begun by
being. She had a right to be that, and she would wish for
nothing more. She began to picture to herself a life of this
kind, in which she should always be near him, hearing his
voice and resting in his sympathy, and satisfied with that
inner spiritual nearness which no one could take from her ;
and she came to the conclusion that such a life would be
both a possible and a happy one for her—if only Alaster
could be brought to see it too. And Alaster should marry
Nancy (she was quite content that he should do that, she
thought), and Nancy should be the pet and darling of
them both, and they would all be happy together. It was
a pretty picture she drew before her mind's eye, and per¬
haps not an unattainable one, if all three could but have
been brave enough to face the tinith, and be content with
what it brought them. That was the one radical defect
in Barbara's scheme, that she founded it on a lie. She
founded it on professions of love en Alaster's part towards
Nancy, which were not true, and so the scheme would not
hold together. Had she been brave enough to resolve
that they two, she and Alaster, should tell Nancy the
simple truth, I think her scheme might have worked, and
her pretty vision might have become a reality, but she
could not make up her mind to that as yet. By-and-bye,
perhaps, she might learn better.
CHAPTER XXVII.
" Barbara's final decision."
Nancy was quite happy too in those spring days, every
one of Avhich seemed to bring new strength and life to
Alaster. He was so kind and gentle and tender to them
all; so specially, wistfully tender sometimes to her, that
the thought that his heart had gone from her never crossed
her mind. She rejoiced in his recovery, and in the open¬
ing summer, just as the lambs and the little birds do, in
the warm bright sunshine, who gambol and sing just
The Attempt. 18
because they are happy without asking why they are so.
Oh, that Bweet unreasoning gladness of morning, and
spring, and youth! Does the deeper, quieter happiness of
day and summer and riper years, ever quite rival its un¬
thinking, causeless gladness? Nancy danced and sang
in the great hall, and down the long corridors, till the old
house echoed with her merriment. She flitted like a sun¬
beam into the sick chamber, and Alaster's eyes followed
her admiringly, and wistfully often. He was very tender
with her, in a grave, protecting way. Barbara, too,
was her old loving self once more; and Nancy was
happy.
Old Elspet w^as fairly thrown off the track, and began
to think she had been an old fool, to lay any stress on
the wild words of delirium, or the unspoken anguish
in Barbara's eyes. It had all so completely vanished,
everything seemed so right and common-place and
proper; she came to the conclusion it had been all an
illusion of her foolish superstitious fancy. She had con¬
trived to make out a theory too about the " shadow,"
which quite satisfied herself that its mysterious influence
wuis over; it had meant Barbara's long fit of depression
in the spring, and Alaster's wound and illness,—and now
they might go on their way rejoicing, free from its blight¬
ing shade. No one who does not know the intense super¬
stitious belief in supernatural warnings, which existed in
those days in the Highlands, can quite understand what
an immense relief this interpretation of her vision was to
Elspet. She propounded the new theory to Barbara,
who eagerly countenanced it, and so helped to reassure
the old woman greatly; though, to herself, " the shadow "
had gained another and far deeper significance. One pair
of eyes, however, were still undeceived. Dr Brown had
understood the position of matters too thoroughly to be
easily diverted from the scent. He saw Alaster's and
Barbara's wistful tenderness to Nancy, and while it raised
them both in his eyes, his own generous nature under¬
stood theirs too well for such tenderness to blind him for
a moment. He was puzzled what the end of it would be,
that was all. He was not so sure now, as in the first days
of Alaster's illness, when the mute agony in Barbara's
questioning eyes had first told him her secret, that she
would marry this man whom she loved. That she loved
him still—that she would love him to her life's end—he
never doubted; but he saw that there was another force
14 Tlie Attempt.
at work—her strong generous sister-love, and that heroic
instinct of self-sacrifice, so powerful in every generous
heart. He could hardly believe it, and yet he sometimes
thought, that the latter feeling might win in the struggle,
and then came a gleam of personal hope. Perhaps—who
should say—the wearied heart, worn out with the contest,
miglit turn to the great love that was always waiting for
her, as to a haven of refuge ?
So the spring days ripened into summer, and the birch
trees were green again at the burn side. It was not till
Alaster's convalescence was nearly acomplished, and he
was able to sit with the girls for a few hours, in sunny
forenoons in their mother's little flower garden, that any
reference was made to their last meeting. For some time
the thought had been busy within him that the time had
come when it was his duty to speak of it; but he was so
content and happy as he was, he dreaded any allusion
which might bring it all to an end. One day, however,
towards the end of June, he made up his mind that he
must speak to Barbara, and must understand the re¬
lations in which they were all henceforth to stand to one
another.
He and Barbara were sitting as usual in the bright
little garden, with the great solemn hills looking clown
upon them, and the clear sunshine all about them.
Nancy had gone to see a sick woman in the village, and
take her some little comforts, so the two were all alone.
It was the very opportunity Alaster had been desiring,
and yet, when it came, he shrank from using it. Barbara
was reading to him from a book of old ballads, but her
voice sounded in his ears without one idea gaining
entrance to his mind. Suddenly, in the middle of a verse,
he said, abruptly. " Barbara, I want to speak to you."
She laid down the book in surprise, and looked up in his
face; something in its expression told her at once about
what he wished to speak, and the quick blood flooded her
face as she sat silently waiting.
" Barbara," he went on, "you can't have forgotten our
last meeting, and what we said to each other then? "
A half audible " No," was all the answer from the down¬
cast face.
" Barbara, dear Barbara," he went on, taking possession
of the little hand that was nervously pulling a flower to
pieces, " you will reconsider your decision then ? You
will not send me away from you?"
The Attempt. 15
She looked up at him then with a quiet determined
light in her great blue eyes, as she answered,
" No, Alaster, I will not send you away, jou must stay
here. You belong to Nancy; I have no right to send
you away.'"'
"Barbara, Barbara," he said half irapatientlj^ "I belong
to you, not to Nancy. I have told you I love you, not
her; you have said that you love me. We belong to
each other."
" Yes," she said quietly and sadly, " I have said that I
love you, and it is true. I shall never love anybody as I
love you, but I will not rob my sister."
" It is not robbing her, or if it is, you have robbed her
already—unintentionally, I know, but none the less truly.
My heart is yours, Barbara, it can never be Nancy's now.
Is it not a mere mockery to give her the empty casket
when the jewel is gone—a mockery—and a lie besides?"
She sat looking on the ground for some minutes with¬
out speaking, and when she looked up there were tears
in the great blue eyes.
" I do not know, Alaster," she said, " I cannot tell; I
have thought it all over a thousand times, and I can't
tell what is right; all I kno'U'' is, I cannot do this thing, I
cannot take my own happiness at the expense of Nancy's.
Do not press me, Alaster," she added, pitifully; "indeed, I
cannot do it—-our mother left her in my care."
He sat silent and gloomy for a few minutes, then he
said, " Let us ask Nancy herself."
"Oh no, no," exclaimed Barbara, starting iip, "that
would be worse than anything, to make the poor child
give the death-blow to her own happiness—why, it would
kill her, Alaster."
" But is it fair," he went on, " is it just or kind to marry
her on false pretences?" He spoke hardly and coldly,
and Barbara shivered as she turned away.
" Do not ask me," she said drearily, " I can't tell; all I
know is, I cannot do it."
" Is that your last word, Barbara? " he said; " is your
decision unalterable ? "
" Yes, unalterable," she said, sadly.
She would have turned and left him then, but he rose
from his chair, and drawing her to him, folded her to his
heart. " You must not leave me so, Barbara," he said;
" if we must part, at least we may part as friends."
He spoke quietly.    In this interview there had been
16 . Jlie Attempt.
none of the wild passion of that meeting under the birch
tree. On both sides the sulFerings of the last few months
had deadened the fierce agony of their first parting into
a dull, deep, constant pain; the wild passion had spent
itself, and both were too exhausted by its force to be able
to renew it.
He held her gently in his arms now, and kissed her
brow quietly. She looked up, with a Uglit of hope shining
in her tearful eyes. " Yes, let us be friends," she said
eagerly, ' let me be your sister; I must be that, you know,
to Nancy's husband."
He smiled sadly, kissed her again quietly, and let her
go.
Jeanie Morison.
airchon   IIL
Milan, June 1859.
Joy when it comes all anguish past surpasses.
The sunshine floods the world and happy sky;
Yes, call me to the window when he passes.
And I will see the Emperor ride by.
The narrow street is filled with people shouting,
All the great palaces are scarlet-hung.
The rippling tricolours above them flouting.
And flowers and bays are on the soldiers flung.
The city in one peal of sound rejoices,
Yet weak the trumpets seem that rend the air,
Feeble the clang of bells to myriad voices
Telling of triumph following despair.
Chiselhurst,  January 1873.
Slowly the bells the minutes sad are telling,
Dim is the low light in the wintry sky.
The last procession leaves the lonely dwelling.
And I will see the Emperor pass by.
Cold is the hand of iron resolution
That, as one stops a maddened horse's flight,
Checked the wild fury of the revolution.
And flung back anarchy's destroying might.
The Attempt. 17
So soon forgotten all! bo soon forsaken ;
The crowds that gloried in the gifts he gave,
They foUow fortune, where new hopes awaken.
They waste no thought upon the exile's grave.
Forget, 0 France ! the weakened darkening hours,
Remember still the love he bore his home;
Spare from thy rescued paradise of flowers
O Italy! a chaplet for his tomb.
^ ^ E. J. 0.
^h ^oml mid the |tou£ltst.
Part I.—The Novel.
1. Its place in literature. We always find the voice of
song earliest in the literature of a country. It seems
natural to the early singer, in whom a great degree of
enthusiasm is necessary to be kindled before expression
flows; it seems necessary to the Ustener of these ruder
times, whose sense must be impressed while his soul is
being instructed. The favourite themes are the wonder¬
ful deeds of some great hero of his race, little more than
the biography of one much admired. The wild hyper¬
boles of early figures, become in the repeaters' mouths
mere exaggeration, and fable soon mixes with fact, until
doubt is cast upon both. Anon a wider interest, a more
national feeling, awakes, and the biography becomes a
history. Unconsciously there appears a moral, and an
illustration of the virtues as they appear to the singer in
the concrete form of virtuous men. In the gradually as¬
cending scale of the ballad, the narrative, and the epic,
we find an objective and subjective capability, which in
later times split off, on one hand, into the dramatic or
purely objective, and into the lyrical or purely subjective
on the other, leaving the epic a narrowed but more definite
sphere. In the dramatic, the author hides himself, and
though his varied characters can speak no higher than he
can, they do so seemingly on their own responsibihty, and
without a suggestion of his presence. It takes a manly
force to strike out characters thus ; lives that are spent
in the ever-present, whose existence is a line returning
into itself, and whose past becomes a present in repre-
JAKOABI 1874. C
18 The Attempt.
sentation, their words being ever ready for the doer.
And the subjective or lyrical has its own peculiar charms.
How its sweet singers feel! Swayed by every breeze,
suffering from every wound, kindled into rapture by every
delight, crushed into despair by every woe—they provide
a fund of soothing expression to every pent-up passion.
This, however, again splits off into two forms, the direct
and simple expression of feeling ; and the indirect or half-
hidden expression of bad-feeling—the ironical—the satire,
to which, by almost general consent, the name of poetry
is denied.
During the period in which these forms of poetry have
been developing, some philosophy has also arisen, which,
mingling in all of these, finds its fittest expression in the
epic. Parmenides and Xenophanes gave their concep¬
tions of Being in the form of an epic poem; and the
scientific treatises of such times are all in verse.
But a time comes in language when there is too much
to say, and too little leisure to say it in, to allow all
writers to attend to the intricacies of verse. Their good
every-day speech is sufficient for expression, since it has
been moulded into flexibility, and enriched by figures, by
its use in verse. It is found after all to be superior in
addressing the understanding, as it enters the avenues of
sense in attracting less attention to itself. And so the
historians, the biographers, the physicists, and the philo¬
sophers, all who wish to speak qiuckly, and to speak
plainly, learn to speak in prose. But the imaginative
writers for a long time retain the sweet leisurely expres¬
sion of verse, until the more highly-wrought language
strikes them as a medium of greater vivacity and flexi¬
bility in its common order, and the fictitious narrative, last
of all, appears in prose. And this latest novelty in litera¬
ture retains the name of the novel.
But it has its own history of development. Late in all
literatures, except Xenophon's Cyropcedia, the first Greek
writers of prose fiction were after the third century, Helio-
dorus, Achilles Tatius, and Longus ; though, in the second
century, in Latin, there were the Satyricon of Petronius
Arbiter, and the Golden Ass of Apuleius. The modern lan¬
guages seemed to lose this power in their remoulding, and
during the mediaeval period there was little narrative htera-
tiire, beyond the lives of the Romish saints. It was not
until towards the end of the fourteenth century, in Italy,,
that the tales which form the Decameron were collected
The Attempt. 19
and remodelled by Boccaccio; and Vaseo Lobeyra, a Portu¬
guese, wrote his famous Amadis de Gaul, " the Iliad of the
Prose Romances of Knight Errantry." These two types
had imitators, whose works have not lived so long, and
they were forgotten in the Pantagruelism that Rabelais
introduced in the fifteenth century. Li the sixteenth cen¬
tury, there was a return to the romance in a pastoral
form, opened by the Diana of MontemaytJr, a Portuguese,
who wrote in Castilian; and the novel of clever roguery,
called Picaresque, was introduced by Diego Mendoza, a
stateman in the reign of Charles V., who wrote the Life
of Lazarilh de Tonnes. Cervantes united all the previous
styles in his immortal Don Quixote, published in the open¬
ing of the seventeenth century. In Germany, meantime,
had arisen some tales of Demonology and Satiric Fables.
In our own country there were, even before the time of
Chaucer, legends of King Arthur, which were compiled by
Sir Thomas Malory, in 1485, into the Morte d'Arthur, or
History of Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, a
mine of wealth for romancers. In the sixteenth century,
appeared a number of short tales, travelling about in
chap-books. These have been collected and edited by
Mr Thorns, and have been called, " The Waverley Novels
of the 16th Century:"—" The Legend of Robert the Devil,"
" The History of Thomas of Reading," " The Story of
Friar Bacon." " The Story of Friar Rush," " The Life of
Virgil and his Death," " The Tale of Robin Hood," " The
Story of George-a-Green, the pinner of Wakefield," " The
History of Tom-a-Lincoln," " The History of Helyas,
the Knight of the Swan," and " The Life and Death of
Dr John Faustus." Well known at the time were " The
Seven Champions of Christendom," and " Jack the Giant-
Killer." Then came a period of translation, in which all
the foreign styles were introduced to our country, and
their great influence can hardly now be realised. The
political allegory, however, we may name an invention of
our own Sii- Thomas More in his " Utopia," which could
only have been suggested by Plato's " Republic."
At the end of the sixteenth century appeared Sir Philip
Sydney's Arcadia, the first native prose romance, which,
suggested by the Diana of Montemayor, has a grace and
beauty all its own. Though to modern readers it might
seem intolerably tiresome, people in those days had time
to get through a pretty long work before they found a
change.    It was nearly a hundred years before the next
20 The Attempt.
new romance appeared, in the Parthenissa of Roger Boyle,
Earl of Orrery, a sort of classic-heroic fiction, in which
Greek and Roman characters uttered very English ideas.
But a book, published almost at the same time, struck
home to the hearts of the people, and of all people, not
only more than all tales that came before, but than all that
came afterwards,—I mean Bunyan's Pilgrims Progress.
Allegory as it is, the wonderful personality of the charac¬
ters, the power of the style, the poetic ideality of the
descriptions, have given it an intense interest in the
realistic imagination, as well as the religious opinion. If
More invented the political allegory, Bunyan may be said
to have invented the religious allegory, though both have
their antecedents in Holy Writ. Nothing written since,
even by himself, has equalled the Pilgrims Progress. He
is supposed to have been uneducated, except by the Bible;
but I know one other book he must have read, and
known, and loved, and that is Spenser's Faery Queene.
Strange that the prose which most resembled Ihis poetry
was the farewell outburst of the purely ideal; the next
tales that appear, are those written by Mrs Aphra Behn,
fit only to be popular in such a period as that of the
Restoration.
Just at the opening of the eighteenth century, in the
year 1704, Swift, the English Rabelais, wrote his Battle of
the Books, and the Tale of a Tub, and twenty-three years
later appeared his Gullivers Travels, a new style of political
satire. But in 1719 Defoe, who had written, only to be
forgotten, some two hundred pamphlets, political and
otherwise, published his never-to-be-forgotten Robinson
Crusoe. Some other half-dozen tales he wrote, but surely
we would have heard of them had they been half as good.
The interest and probability of the plot, the clear forcible
style, that fixes the very date, and gives the verisimilitude
of truth, have made us much more interested in Robinson
Crusoe than in his reputed original Alexander Selkirk of
Largo. Later in the century we find Steele and Addison
writing shght sketches, but nothing yet appeared like the
novel proper of modern times, which satisfies the natural
feeling that in trivial minds degenerates into gossip, and
in great minds rises into the study of human nature. But
in 1740 Richardson, hardly knowing what he did, became
our first novelist proper. Like Columbus, he intended to
do one thing, when he set sail, and he did more than one,
though,  mayhap, he failed to reach the golden land in
I'he Attempt. 21
whose search he had set out.    And Fielding came, an
Amerigo to this Columbus, and bore away a palm-branch
from his fame; for if Richardson commenced the novel
proper. Fielding started the school of English humourists,
and with him shortly were associated Smollett and Sterne.
In 1759 appeared Johnson's Rasselas, whose tale was
only intended to give a thread of interest to a series  of
Johnsonian ideas,  and was rather a step back towards
More's Utopia than forward to our modern style ; but in
1761 Goldsmith's Vicar of Wakefieldwas put into the library
of all ages, by the side of Robinson Crusoe.    Its fidelity to
nature, and  its  beautifully simple English  style,   have
made it a model specimen of our literature.    Walpole's
Castle of Otranto, pubhshed not long after,  " an attempt
to blend the two kinds of romance, ancient and modern."
had a host of imitators, and an admiration for its style has
not yet utterly died out.    Every kind of tale we have
mentioned has numerous representatives in the present,
and the historical novel of Sir Walter Scott is the only
variety necessary to swell out the thirteen kinds of novel
mentioned by Professor Masson.    For the hundred years
that follow this period, and bring us down to our own
date, are the time of the flower and harvest of novels;
and we cannot even speak of it without both space and
time beyond what is allotted us.    We have looked at the
planting of the little seeds, and we would only remark
further, the relation the developed plant bears to the seeds.
The circle has almost returned into itself, or rather it has
. returned towards its point of starting, as a spiral does, a
little higher up.    The prose novel arose out of the central
thread of narrative that longest continued in the form of
verse ; but as it developed further, it returned back towards
its starting-place, and took in more and more of what it
once had thrown out—religion, philosophy, science, history.
It covers the whole sphere of what once was covered by
early literature.    But its chief differences are these—\st.
Its abundance, regulated by the diffusion of knowledge
and cultiu'e, rather than by the advance of intellect.    2d,
Its form, prose and free, regulated by the advancement of
the powers of language by that general culture.    3c?, Its
spirit.    Early literatures  claimed  truth for their  facts,
often without an appearance, and sometimes without a
possibility of truth; modern novels do not claim truth in
their facts, but in their generalisations from facts.    Their
tales   need   not    be   true,   but   they   must   seem   true.
22 The Attempt.
4th, Its contemporaneity. The old literature looked
always back on past timea; dead heroes, and old be¬
liefs attained grandeur in the mist of distance. But the
novel has made the grand discovery, that the vital in¬
terest to living men is present hopes, fears, thoughts,
and beliefs. That, again, has taught us that there is some¬
thing ill humanity that remains ever-present, the uni¬
versal, the unvarying element, by which we are human.
And thus, whether written of this year, or of a thousand
years ago, the novel cannot but take in the fullest life the
present knows.
Whether the novel can retain its place as a saturated
solution of all thought and life; or whether, having be¬
come, under unnatural conditions, a super-saturated solu¬
tion of many elements, it will shortly crystallize out some
of its contents, and remain a simpler and a purer form,
like the epic of the middle ages, the future alone can
tell.
Lute A Reseda.
{To be continued.)
§)m[   (l{hant  of Ih^  ^^IIs.
Ring out, ye glad bells, in this weary day—
Ring out, though the storm is raging;
Though the fitful air would silence prayer,
Strong hearts will be found unchanging.
Strong hearts will be found with their strength untried,
Till the storm shall burst in wailing;
And the strength of life shall be lost in strife,
Till strength shall be unavailing.
Tell us, sweet bells, the glad tidings that came
In the years that are gone and ended;
Remind us that peace, when the fight shall cease,
Is one with strife unattended.
And we will work on, though the work is hard,
For the Master we serve is holy, —
Till the light shall come from our upward home,—
Though the dawn be breaking slowly.
And over the land, and over the the sea,
The chant of the bells is going ;
The Attempt. 23
WTiile out on the deep, when Ave are asleep,
The wonderful wind is blowing.
Do they hear it and pause—those sailor-men.
And think of its strange, grand beauty ?
When the wild waves scream, in a terrible dream,
Does it keep them true to their duty ?
Ah! pray we it so, for the time shall come
When strength shall be found in weakness ;
And the proudest heart shall be torn apart.
And taught the lesson of meekness.
And science shall wane, and the world grow pale
To think of her sin and danger,
Wlien Cometh on high, through a tearful sky.
Our GOD-KIXG, born in a manger.
Naomi S. Smith.
Chriitmas, 1873.
=4-=
§1   ffiltntir   ^torg.
Deeds are done on earth
Which have their punishment ere the earth closes
Upon the perpetrators.    Be it the working
Of the remorse-stained fancy, or the vision,
Distinct and real, of unearthly being,
All ages witness, that beside the couch
Of the fell homicide oft stalks the ghost
Of him he slew, and shows the shadowy wound.
Walter Scott.    Old Play.
In days of yore, when travellers were few and high-ways
unfrequented, a single horseman was journeying along a
lonely road. It was in the depth of winter, and the short
December day had almost reached its close. On either
side the pathway stretched a wild tract clothed Avith fir-
trees, whose dark spectre-like trunks were sharply relieved
against the pale frosty sky. A desolate scene it was, and
so the traveller seemed to consider; for ever and anon he
glanced here and there, as if to be certain that no enemies
were lurking among the furze bushes, or behind the pine
columns which bordered the road. He was a substantial
citizen, to judge from his appearance, which betokened
comfort and respectability without much heed to orna¬
ment. And those who knew Roger the merchant would
have said that nothing short of important affairs could
have roused him from the indolent life he loved so well,
24 The Attempt.
or caused him to undertake a long and toilsome journey
at such a season. But self-interest was stronger than the
love of ease, and Roger was bound to York, where the
king then was keeping Christmas-tide, to petition against a
vexatious enactment lately passed concerning the impor¬
tation of wool from Flanders.
As he rode leisurely onwards, suddenly, through the
stillness and falling gloom, there sounded in his rear the
tramp of a horse. Sharp and clear came the measured
beat of hoofs, ringing on the frozen ground, and gradually
drawing nearer. Soon Roger could see the figure of man
and horse looming unnaturally distinct against the hori¬
zon. A thrill of distrust came over him, for he was all
unused to travel, and every little incident of the way dis¬
turbed him. The new-comer, whoever he was, had now
nearly overtaken him, and shouted in a frank voice,
" Good friend, lend me your company; it waxes late, and
the roads are dreary. Nay, you need not think to escape
me," he added, with a laugh, as Roger uneasily urged on
his horse. " I mean you no injury, but I shall stay by
you ; for two are better than one in these times."
Roger looked back; the stranger was a few paces in his
rear. Still doubtful of unknown companions, he hesitated
to draw bridle ; when, in an instant, Avith a mocking shout
of triumph, two men dashed suddenly forward from be¬
hind the trees, and flung themselves, sword in hand, on
the strange horseman. For one second Roger gazed; he
saw the commencement of the fray, the stranger dragged
from his horse, yet defending himself gallantly; he heard
his cry of " Help, sir traveller, help! the knaves are two
to one." Then terror seized him—wild, ungoverned terror
—and he fled. Fled fast and faster, not daring to look
again; not daring to think of the cry which, in its fierce
imploring agony, yet rang in his ears; but on—ever on—
till the keen air whizzed by him like a shower of arrows,
and earth and sky seemed to mingle in one mad whirl.
His horse stopped at length, with a shock that nearly
threw his master from the saddle, and he found himself at
the hostel where he intended to pass the night. Dis¬
mounting, he strove to recall his scattered senses; but
the impression of the scene he had just witnessed was too
intense—his haggard looks and incoherent words betrayed
the trouble of his mind, and Avhen he sougJit his couch,
the same visions of terror haunted his slumbers that had
well-nigh crazed his waking thoughts.
The Attempt. 25
Morning came, and men rose up cheered and refreshed
to their daily tasks, fortified against sorrow, stronger to
labour or endure. But to Roger the morning light brought
•no relief; rather, with cooler reflection, came the added
torments of self-reproach. Was it not his frantic tiight
which had robbed the victim of his last chance of life ?
" Two to one—the knaves are two to one I"—those fatal
words were ever sounding in his ears; reminding him that
he might have made the numbers equal—might have
changed the issue of the struggle. Was he not then a
partaker in the guilt %
Tidings of the murder were not long in reaching the
hostelry. Men spoke in whispers of the terrible fate which
had fallen on one well-known to them; for the slain man
was a yeoman of mai-k in the neighbourhood. They knew,
too, that he had incurred the enmity of a powerful and
lawless baron, which but too well accoimted for the man¬
ner of his death. But all this was expressed with caution,
by looks and hints, rather than in plain words ; for none
cared to draw down upon themselves the vengeance of
their dreaded lord. Roger heard, but took nn part in
what was passing; listless and heavy-liearted, it was not
till the day was far advanced that he summoned energy
to call for his reckoning, and then continue his journey.
Evening was drawing on apace, and nothing could be
seen distinctly through the white frost-fog that enveloped
the country, when again, through the silence, was heard
the tread of a horse. Tramp, tramp came the measured
Bound, as of some one steadily advancing, and yet, after
a few minutes, it appeared no nearer than at first
Trembling from head to foot, Roger looked back. As fai
as he could see, the straight line of road by which he had
come stretched away as if to join the darkening sky ; but
along its whole length not a living creature was to be
Been. Neither man nor horse could there be within a
great distance, and yet that mysterious sound had not
ceased, nor could it be mistaken for aught but the ring of
a horse's hoofs. The unhappy man shuddered with a
nameless horror; he paused—still the sound continued;
he went forward—and still it followed him, ceasing not,
nor changing. After a time, he looked back once more ;
when lo! against the sky appeared the shadowy outline
of a horseman seemingly close to the spot. The figure
raised its arm on high, shook it with solemn menace;
then with a flash of fire from the hoofs of the spectral
JANCAST 187S. D
26 The Attempt.
charger, vanished as suddenly as it had arisen, leaving
Roger prostrate on the groiind, and well-nigh insensible
throiigh remorse and fear.
By slow degrees he learned the curse that had fallen on
his life—the curse of the dead man whose fate he might
have averted. Henceforth, wherever he might bs,— alone
or mtli friends, on lonely roads or in crowded thorough¬
fares,—as surely as the shades of evening gathered round,
so surely sounded in his ears the fatal tread, every echo of
which seemed branded on his senses, as with a red-hot
iron; so surely the spectral horseman stood threateningly
over him, and vanished with a flash of flame. What
marvel that Roger, overpowered with the burden that
none might share with him, grew more haggard and
ghastly day by day. Sleep forsook him, the presence of
his fellow-men oppressed him, and his days were spent in
fearful anticipation, and no less fearful retrospection, of
the hour of his penance.
Winter came again, and once more men looked forward
to the joyful Christmas tide. There fell on Roger a
strange restlessness, a craving to revisit the scene of his
terrible adventure. He made up his mmd to yield to the
impulse, almost feeling as if some hope might yet be in
store for liim. This time he journeyed on foot; to him the
tread of a horse was like a death-knell. About noon on
the second day he entered the wild district so well remem¬
bered, where pine trees, tall and branching, skirted the
road. On a stone by the way-side sate an aged man, with
beard as white as snow, leaning both hands on a stafi:
His countenance was majestic, and his eye rested on
Roger with a glance of inexpressible tenderness and pity.
" My son," he said mildly, as Roger approached, " thou
art one, methinks, who bearest a heavy load of guilt or
sorrow ? "
" Of both, 0 my father," answered Roger. " But it is
in vain you Avould seek to aid me; I am forsaken of
heaven, and men also would shun me did they but know
my secret."
" Thou art never forsaken, 0 foolish one," replied the
hermit; " then least of all, when thou art humbled to the
dust, and abhorrest thine own unworthiness. Ever the
night is darkest in the hour before the dawn. But follow
me, that I may see what help or comfort may be found for
thee." And Roger followed him meekly along a narrow
pathway through the furze and heather, till they reached
The Attempt. 27
a little lonely cell, beside which stood a small chapel, built
with more architectural skill than might have been ex¬
pected in so rude a spot.
The hermit seated himself on a bench at the door of his
cell. Signing to Roger to kneel before him, he bade him,
in the same tone of calm authority he had used through¬
out, relate his history. Roger obeyed, already feeling
that a ray of comfort had pierced the darkness of his
despair.
" It is as I thought," said the recluse, when he had
ended. " Great has been thy punishment, 0 my son; but
great also was thy fault. For a moment the sacred
gift of life was committed to thee; thine it was to
bestow: but thou, poor child of weakness, didst fling
the occasion tar from thee, and thy flight wrought
triumph for the powers of evil I Be glad, then, that
tliou art even in this life permitted to expiate thy
guilt. And now, listen to what hath been revealed
to me concerning thee. In my sleep last night, there
appeared to me a winged messenger, and thus he spake:
" Kuowest thou wherefore the merchant Roger, who shall
cross thy path to-morrow, is tormented ? The shade of
him, whose death he might have averted, hath power over
him until the body is committed to the grave in peace.
The voice of the unburied one cries aloud; let him sleep
in consecrated earth, and the penance shall be ended I
W^herefore. 0 Roger, thus must thou do, Seek out the
remains of this hapless victim, which have lain unheeded
from fear of the bold bad man who ordered his death
Bear them to this chapel, and we will give them fitting
interment, where the shadow from yonder Cross may fall
on the grave." With folded hands, and eyes dim with
thankful tears, Roger still knelt on ; words filled him,
sight and sound and consciousness seemed absorbed in
the unutterable rehef which had been granted to him, and
he was like one entranced.
Ere long he roused himself, and went forth to his task.
His former feelings of dread and horror had left him, and
he thought, with trembling pity, on the fellow-being to
whom death brought no rest. But here, he felt, it was
ordered that he should make reparation ; that his hand,
which was never uplifted in life to save him, should yet
be the means of rescuing him from the doom of the lui-
buried. And thankfully he went on his way until tlie
scene of the catastrophe was reached.    Ay! sure enough
28 The Attempt.
there yet lay the bleached and ghastly skeleton, exposed
to the full eye of day, as though neither heaven nor earth
had pity on the slain. Slowly and reverently Roger bore
it back to the hermit's abode; then together they dug
the grave, close under the walls of the chapel, and with
solemn-sounding chants, audholy invocations, the mournful
relics were committed to the earth, and rested beneath
the shadow of the Cross. When all was over, Roger
entered the chapel, and cast himself down in lowly
penitence before the Altar.
Evening came on, and now no spectral horse-hoofs
broke the tranquil silence; but before Roger's awe-struck
eyes there stood the figure he knew so well; not as
hitherto, stern and menacing, but calmly smiling, with
hand upraised to form the sign of the Cross. And these
words seemed to float through tlie air: " Thou wert with
me in the hour of my death—thou hast been with me in
my awful penance—thou shalt be with me in this my
dreamless rest." The form faded away, softly and
gradually, and in meek acquiescence Roger bowed his
head.
At dawn of day, the hermit entered the chapel to seek
him; he lay outstretched on the stone step before the
Altar, his arms crossed over his breast, a peaceful smile on
his countenance, from which all the lines of care and
sorrow had departed. The spirit had passed away during
the watches of the night; the prediction was ful¬
filled. The hermit scooped out another grave beneath
the chapel walls; and on sunny days he loved to mark
how the shadow from the Cross fell athwart the turf-
covered mounds, and seemed to unite those in death
whose lives had been so strangely mingled. And often
as he sate before his cell did he muse over their mysteri¬
ous story ; in all humility reading therefrom this lesson—
that neither virtuous intentions, nor after regrets, could
supply the place of righteous action.
Enna.
The Attempt. 29
^5 it strikes a Southerner.
From time immemorial the very name of St Andrews calls
to mind visions of red coats, long, undulating, sandy
links, barefooted caddies, putters, and drivers, cliques and
balls, with all the other paraphernalia of the royal game
of golf. For, be it understood by Southern readers, that
St Andrews is the capital of that ancient game. Let no
one presume to go to that venerable city with any idea
of entering its social life, if he be not prepared to do
honour to the despot, whose emblems are, two golf clubs
transverse, and ball couchant on a field vert, with the
motto, " Far and sure."
Formerly Scotland's ecclesiastical capital, the ruins
of its ancient cathedral, and its archiepiscopal castle,
stand built out on the rocks facing the eastern sea.
As you wander at sunset through the remains of its
glory, strange visions rise of cowled monks, haughty
prelates, and white robed choirs; while the sound of bells
heard far out at sea, and the rise and fall of chant and
psalm, as daily matins and evensong by turns send up to
heaven their tribute of prayer and praise, seem to strike
upon the ear. Fancy paints the mariner looking grate¬
fully to the abbey, where, he trusts, his failure in devotion
is atoned by those holy men, whose lives are sacred to
God's service.
But now the scene changes; the visions of peace pass
away. Lurid from before the castle gate, rises the glare
and smoke of burning faggots. The upturned faces of
the crowd look fierce and stern, though here and there
are visible the signs of pity and disapproval; but none
dare to make plainly evident these marks of discontent.
On the flat roof of the castle keep, stretched on luxurious
cushions, arrayed in the full panoply of his order, and
attended by his sumptuous court, reclines at his ease the
Prince Bishop of St Andrews, A malignant triumph is
visible on his face, as through the castle gate, to the
faggot and the stake, is led George Wishart, a martyr to
the Protestant faith.
But again the scene changes. The castle is beseiged, the   ! ^
Btronghold yields to the assault, and the cruel persecutor
falls himself into the hands of his enemies—by his own
violent death answering for the burning of Wishart.
30 The Attempt.
Still and solemn enough now is the spot where those
visions rise. The only tenants of the sacred ground for
many ages have been the dead. The enclosure of Abbey
and Cathedral has long been used for the city burial
place; and a glorious resting place it is, with the sea
washing its base, and stretching far out towards the east,
that land of returning light. Here, removed from the
noise of the town, among the shadows of these ancient
ruins, lie the men of the present day side by side with
monks, prelates, and warriors of old, till time and sea shall
be no more.
You may long indulge your fancies in this spot with¬
out much fear of disturbance from the inhabitants and
visitors, whose resort is on the other side of the town,
where the sandy links, with their bunkers and golf holes,
are much more attractive than all the historical associa¬
tions.
St Andrews has been called the Brighton of Scotland,
but it has very little in common with that fashionable
resort. It is a quaint old town, with straight, regular
streets, quiet colleges, and many schools. It is a seat of
learning, and a great place for the education of boys,
which is here good and cheap. Like most Scotch
towns, it is not remarkable for cleanliness. By the
Castle and Abbey the rocks are high and precipitous,
but to the left the bay slopes inland, and instead of the
rugged cliffs, there is a stretch of yellow sand, firm and
pleasant to the tread, bordered with Ioav sandy downs,
which form the " links," the grand battle field of St
Andrews, where are fought the battles of golf This is
essentially a Scotch game, and is of little interest to the
onlooker, but Jias a great charm for those who practise
it; they will tell you it is the prince of games. As is
well known, it is played with a email hard India-
rubber ball, and a club with a flat wooden or iron head.
These clubs go by different names, but a correct list
would require one to be more fully skilled than can be
expected of an ignorant Southerner, as fifteen of these
clubs constitute a set, and to the uninitiated there seems
to be AJ-ery little difference between them. The game
consists in driving this ball with the fewest possible
number of strokes into round holes that are made in the
grass. There are eighteen holes in the course of four
miles, and the champion player has gone the round in
about ninety strokes.
The Attempt. 31
There is a club-house, which is very well conducted,
and altogether St Andrews is the paradise of golfers.
But it has one drawback, it is very difficult of access.
The train from Edinburgh is extremely slow, and you
have to make an immense number of changes in a very
short time, for there is the Firth of Forth to cross at
Granton, then you again catch the train at Burntisland,
and have to change once more at Leuchars, about four
miles from St Andrews.
There is little interest in the neighbourhood, but in
itself St Andrews combines much of what, with enter¬
prise, might make it a most attractive watering place.
The air is fine and pure, the sands are superior to ahnost
any southern resort, the bathing is good and safe, the
grassy links and golf necessarily have an attraction of
their own, and the old ruins and historical associations
are surely not without their charm ; while the bolder
rock scenery on the southern side, with the rough sea on
a windy day, dashing, foaming, and boiling in a mighty
tempest against their rugged cliffs, presents those sterner
features more welcome to some natures. Venture, how¬
ever, to suggest to a golfer the advisability of starting a
large hotel, like those foimd now in so many watering
places, a promenade band, etc., and he turns from you
with disgust, declaring that you will quite spoil the place.
But surely he coiild pursue his golf with equal pleasure,
while some amusement would be provided for those
benighted individuals who do not sufficiently appreciate
that ancient game to make it their whole occupation.
But he will tell you " No.    We don't want them.''
s.
OUR   LIBRARY   TABLE.
Taines History   of English   Literature.    Translated   from
the French, by M. Van Laun.
This book is well worth the attention of literary
students. It is good for us occasionally '-to see our¬
selves as others see us," and it enables us with the more
complacency to regard the representation, and accept the
criticism,  the   thorough   appreciation,   with  which   our
32 The Attempt.
beauties are admired. One suggestive remark to the
French nation may illustrate this : " Till we bury the
M. Jourdain that lives in the breast of every one of us,
we shall never understand Edmund Spenser."
A Trip to Skye.     By BelL and TiNA.
Though printed for private circulation, and therefore not
strictly amenable to criticism, this little brochure may
fitly be noticed here as the production of two young
ladies, alias " unprotected females," who set off, with a
resolution worthy of a nobler cause, unaided and alone to
visit the beautiful island of Skye. The writer of this
notice is personally acquainted with the principal dramatis
personce of the book, and in that capacity can testify to
the accuracy with which the characters of the two
heroines, as shown alike in speech and action, are
portrayed. Indeed, as was to be expected, the chief
amusement of the book lies, for those initiated, in this.
But the " true " adventures here narrated further afford
us proof, highly acceptable, doubtless, to admirers of the
Dickens school, that the ludicrous element is discoverable
in the most trifling incidents. If those in search of light-
hearted pleasure are but ready and willing to be amused
with their surroundings, entertainment is never far to seek.
Minerva herself, however, in the travelling dress and
manners of the ninteenth century, might look a little less
sage! And if we hint that the same may perhaps be.
said of Bell and Tina, all oflfence is at least removed
by such a comparison.
Waves and Caves.    By BASIL MONTAGU PICKERING, 1873.
The work of a young poet, we trust this httle work will
meet with the general perusal it deserves. We would
specially call attention to " Marlowe " (prize poem, Edin¬
burgh University, 1873). From the vigour and freshness
with which the subject is treated, we are led to expect
that what lies hidden there in embryo will develope into
greater and deeper thought.
The A ttempt. 33
On ihi 4r£cdom of thf  WiUl
The history of all philosophy, and, we may add, of all
religions, is full of this question. Is the will free ? is the
inner directing power, of which we are all conscious, in
virtue of which I now cause my thoughts to busy them¬
selves on this subject, is it indeed /, a certain definite
individual, who exert it in truth, or do I only appear to
myself to do so'? Is my present action and train of
thought in any way within my own control, or am I merely
determined to think and act in this manner, and no other,
by the conditions of my birth, and the circumstances which
have since then surrounded me 1 Am I, body and mind,
soul and brain, a mere necessary product of what has gone
before ? or am I indeed a person with something about me
not derived, something original, which may be even in
direct antagonism to the merely derived part of my nature,
and the force of surrounding circumstances'? Have I
power, and therefore responsibility ; or have I a mislead¬
ing consciousness of responsibility without any power.
Do consciousness and experience assure us that we our¬
selves are beings; individuals, substances, forces ; or is
there but one substance, one force, one power, one will, or
necessity; and is this consciousness of individuahty a
delusion that philosophy or revelation can dissipate i
Let us glance at the alternatives, for there seem to be
two—will or necessity. Although the fatalistic theories melt
and co-mingle together, and some on the border-lands
are hardly capable of being grouped under either of the two
heads I have ventured to suggest; still, as far as I see, the
division is practically useful, if not exhaustive. For under
one the Theisms range themselves, under the other the
Atheisms and other kinds of religious disbelief.
Supposing then, that our wills are not free, and that
our personality is merely an instrument f .r setting fa-th
some other force or power outside itself—Avhat is this
force or power? One answer comes ; the Absolute ; in¬
finite attributes of infinite substance, of which we and all
the phenomena of the universe are but finite modes. The
modification of this Absolute, the prime essence of which
may be called God, is no act of will; it is an act of inherent
necessity. We rejoice, we suffer under the law of inevitable
fate. Man, a mere mode of this All, has therefore no
hberty.    His acts are all evolutions of the motive force of
FEBRUART 1874. E
34 The Attempt.
a law, hidden from him, but utterly irresistible. " Nature,"
says a modern writer describing this theory, " projects
him into the world subject to conditions he cannot evade,
and when his little clockwork is run, he sinks back into
her womb, and merges his personality in the life of the
great All." There is no more real possibility of his guid¬
ing his own actions, than of a drop of water falling in any
direction but that imposed by the laws of gravitation.
The illustration will remind you that this form of fatalism
is held by many who persist in applying the laws of phy¬
sical science to metaphysical subjects ; who confound the
observer and that which he observes in the same category;
and apply to that which can be touched, tasted, seen, and
heard, and that which can be known only in the mind, the
same methods of investigation. But materialism is not
the necessary outcome of this theory, which has been held
by many idealist philosophers. It has a certain fascination
about it; it satisfies the craving for unity which lies at the
root of much philosophical research,—there is a sort of
calm in the contemplation of the vast sea of Being, of
which we and all around us are but transitory modes
formed by circumstances, as waves of definite shape rise
from the abyss of waters, and vanish and melt into it
again, when their brief period of divided oscillation is over.
This theory was familiar to many of the old Greek philoso¬
phers, and Spinoza is its great modern exponent; it is the
creed of many modern German thinkers, and of such of
our educated or scientific men as have broken with Chris¬
tianity and adopted Pantheism.
But those who deny Free Will are not all to be ranged
with the idealists who recognise a great All without
personality, will, or affections ; or the materialists, who
refuse to look beyond the chain of physical causality, or
phenonoma, to any noumena whatever. Where such
would say Necessity or Fate, this second class would say
£^[ an irrtsistible Divine Will, is the real power which mani¬
fests itself in all actions and modes of being. " There is
one God—all in all,"—says the Koran. " There is no
power or will, wisdom or pride, save his own." Palgrave
tells us that in Mahommetism, "the sole power, motor,
energy, and deed, is God: the rest is downright inertia
and mere instrumentality, from the highest archangel
down to the simplest atom of creation. . . . God is one
in the totality of omnipresent action, which acknow¬
ledges  no rule, standard,   or limit,  save His   own  sole
The Attempt. 35
absolute will. . . . All are alike tools of the one solitary
Force which employs them to crush or to benefit, ... to
truth or to error, to happiness or misery, quite independ¬
ent of their fitness, deserts or advantage, simply because
He wills it, and as He wills it. . . He burns one individual
through all eternity, and sets another amid the enjoyments
of Paradise, just and equally for His own pleasuie because
He wills it." A parallel development iu Europe, is a school
of divinity founded on that of St Augustine, but carried
by others beyond the point of that Father, notably by
Zwingle and Calvin, the latter being the greatest name
to be found among the Deistic deniers of free will.
The proposition asserted as the contradictory to those
fatalistic theories, the free action of the will, has been
obscured by such a mist of words, that I fear to approach
it, except under good guidance. It is often confused
Avith the act of deliberation and the act of judgment, which
belong to the intellect. But after judging and com¬
paring, I am aware in many cases that I am able to follow
a certain course, if I make a sujjjiciently strong effort; and
that, should I not sufficiently exert myself, 1 shall not
follow that course. And this effort, which may not
extend beyond my own mind, over which alone I have
any control, I feel I make myself, with s(')me power pecu¬
liarly and wholly my own, and not under coercion. '" We
come here," says M. Guizot, "to a new series of facts, which
liave their origin in the man himself, of which he looks on
iiimself as the author ; which Avould be other than they
are, if he chose to make them other than they are."
Here we perceive where fatalists have one factor, the
upholders of free-will have two. Call A the outer motives
impelhng the man in a given direction, we have, in the
first place, A again for the man himself, because what
he is, settles his action in a given position ; md he is
what he is by his derived nature, and by the irresistible
action of former motives. He thinks himself free, because
he thinks he does as he chooses, but he could not have
done otherwise; his thought is' a delusion. But we
assert another factor B, on which A acts—namely, the
man himself, the personality, the ego, revealing itself
in conscious action and effort. " And in the realisation
of this," says Ferrier, " man finds the counter-law esta¬
blished to the law of causality. If the law of assent to
man's derivative nature is known by tlie name of
causality, tlie law of dissent, which in man clashes with
3G Tlie Attempt.
causality is known by the designation of Will; this Will
embodies itself in acts of antagonism against the merely
natural being, and is the ground law of humanity." I
have no space here to pause on Ferrier's beautiful philo¬
sophy, except to recommend all interested in this subject
to read his " Introduction to the Philosophy of Con¬
sciousness." I proceed to assert, with M. Guizot, " that
we have the same sort of knowledge of our freedom as
of our existence; we feel and know we are free." Here
he claims for this belief, that it is one of the facts given
in consciousness. Of course it is open to any one to deny
this, and assert he has no such belief. On the facts of
consciousness there is no arguing—they are among the
original premises upon which all argument is based: but
the actions of men in general lead us to suppose that they
dobelieve they are free agents, and fatalists usually concede
that the belief is common, some say necessary, as a work¬
ing belief, but that it is a delusion that a clearer philosophy
dissipates. If so, all moral government is also a delusion;
all praise and all blame is illusive; and the robber who
shoots you can no more be found fault with, than the
pistol in his hand. This is all eo obvious, that of course
those who hold to fatalism have exhausted themselves in
efforts to explain away the difficulty, which is thus stated
by Locke:—"By denying freedom to mankind, and
thereby making men no other than bare machines, they
take away all moral rules whatever, and leave not a
possibility to believe any such, to those who cannot con¬
ceive how anything can be capable of a law that is not a
free agent; and upon that ground they must neces¬
sarily reject all principles of virtue who cannot put
morality and mechanism together, which are not very easy
to be reconciled or made consistent." This J. S. Mill
denies, saying it would make no difference to our admira¬
tion of certain clock-work paragons, or to onr abhor¬
rence of certain necessary monsters, if we knew that
they were in both cases quite powerless to act otherwise.
Here I can only say that I agree with Locke and not
with Mr Mill. There remains the difficult conscious¬
ness of responsibility; indeed, the awkward word; for
how, we may ask, did the word arise, if it correspond to
no idea ? Mr Mill helps us thus—" Responsibility means
punishment, expectation or fear of punishment," and he
explains how gradually the necessity of abstaining from
obnoxious acts has brought about the desire of abstaining
The Attempt. 37
from them. But is that all ? Will any amount of punish¬
ment, present or expected, produce in me a feeling of re¬
sponsibility for a circumstance or act over which I have no
control 1 Will entire immunity prevent me from feehng
responsible to myself, for actions over which I believe I
have control? Ko; responsibility, if we think it well
out, means power, infers power, demands power, and
without it, no one will acknowledge the burden of the
response or the answerahility for something.
Let us now contemplate this difficult question from a
higher point of view, and endeavour to w^ork ourselves
nearer to it by a discussion of some of the objections
urged in the abstract against the possibility of free-will.
First. Freedom supposes an actual beginning or initia¬
tion of action—inconceivable as being a beginning, and
absurd as the attribute of a mere unit in the great all of
Being.
Secondly. Moral freedom is incompatible with law, as
introducing disorder, caprice, and chance, into the uni¬
verse.
Thirdly. Freedom is incompatible with the foreknow¬
ledge of God.
The first two objections are urged by sceptic, and all
three by Deistic, philosophers. 1 have no time to dwell
now on the sceptical opinions; on what has well been
caUed the "white despair j" of a certain school of philosophic
thought. It is, we believe, but a half philosophy, insist¬
ing on applying the laws which it discovers in matter
to mental phenomena. I shall pause longer on the
Deistic objections, because I think a belief in a personal
Deity removes some of the difficulties of the question.
Fii'st, there is urged the impossibility of conceiving a
beginning, impossibility of supposing that the source or
initiation of any action should proceed from any individual
unit in the linked chain of existence. To this objection
tliere is the well-known answer of the equal impossibility
of conceiving no begiuning at all. All difficulties about a
beginning are merely postponed; far backwards as we
may go, the question still presents itself at every point:
and what is the cause of that, the cause of the cause
of the cause? But to those who believe in a per¬
sonal Deity this difficulty is lessened. Why should not
the Creator have made man in His own image, free, and
a person; delegating to him a certain limited portion of
His   power, a   flash of His   life, a spark of His reality
38 Tlie Attempt.
of being? Do we then, in our search for Unity, find
Dualism ? Yes, for it is in the temporary nature, if not
in the essence of things around us; though we may
hope that all is moving towards the triumph of free con¬
scious goodness, of full harmony, instead of barren
unison.
The second objection, that it is impossible to conceive
of the universe as the sport of chance, must next be
noticed. Those who believe in free-will, do not therefore
deny God's overruling providence, or believe that any
but a very limited power is in the possession of any
created being. A power shown too, in its own selt-
development and self-realisation, rather than in any dis¬
turbance of the order of things. The will of the Creator
overrules the disorderly wills of men; and expresses itself
also in those aspects we are Avont to call the laws of
nature. We do not believe that any mischief wrought by
man is more than temporary in its effects to all save him¬
self; it is his own fate, and not any other person's that each
holds in his power. All events in time, however brought
about, are, as we believe, overruled as a discipline, as a
school, as a trial it may be, but not as involving any
individual in permanent loss, save through his own
fault.
The third and chief objection against the possibility of
free-will is, though very recondite, undoubtedly the most
difficult to grapple with, because it deals with matters
quite beyond the human understanding.
How can a belief in the freedom of the will be reconciled
Avith a belief in the foreknowledge of God? But is this not
a destruction of the known by the unknown ? What do
we mean by free-Avill? Briefly, that there is in man an
original as Avell as a dcriA^ed element; that he has been
created a being whose oAvn co-operation is necessary for
his perfect development—a co-operation he may withhold,
and then he misses this perfect development. At least,
true or false, the notion is comprehensible. What do we
mean by the foreknoAvledge of God? That Avith Him
(succession, or Avhat we call time, is not; that there never
was a time when He Avas not. All human reason staggers
and fails Avhen it deals \Adth the Infinite. Pascal teaches
us that, to be rigidly logical, the Deist should say nothing
about God; for the idea of infinity, which rejects every
limitation, is, when we think it out, the denial of all attri¬
butes.    Infinite intelligence does not pass from one idea
The Attempt. 39
to another, but knows all instantaneously. To Him past,
present, and future are not, so He cannot remember or
foresee. " He is infinitely incomprehensible, since, having
no parts nor succession, He has no relation to us." It is
to this infinite unintelligibility, that some thinkers sacrifice
the belief in free will. Theologians tell us we cannot
speak of God without falling into anthropomorphism ; but
as Christians, we believe that the Creator has brought
Himself into relation with us through the incarnation of
His Word. However; infinite wisdom soars out of all
relation to our wisdom; we cannot even apprehend what
it is. But if wisdom, infinitely extended, surptisses our
faculties, still wisdom, knowledge—it remains. Far more
must holiness, however superhuman, remain holiness; far
truer is the relation here. Some have asserted the con¬
trary, and lent honoured names to a theory which, beyond
all others, has, I believe, driven men to infidelity. The
goodness of the Creator, they say, difl^ers not only in de¬
gree, but in kind, from that of the creature. What would
be intense cruelty in man, is righteous and good in His
Maker, We should call a man a cruel monster who brought
children into the world, intending, for u(j fault of theirs,
and in spite of any effort they can make to prevent it, to
torment them for ever. When we figure to ourselves an
Omnipotent Creacor thus acting towards millions of His
creatures, the thing is made none the less unrighteous
because of the scale on which it is done. But interpose
free-will, and once more we feel righteousness beneath
our feet, and a gleam of light falls on all darkness. The
creature who can ofier voluntary homage is, we feel, far
higher in the scale of being than a piece of clock-work,
however elaborate, that moves just and only as it is com¬
pelled ; but liberty is potential. " To create a free being
is to place before it the problem of its destiny,"—a glorious
possibility; a possibility also of failure, and, as long as
rebellion lasts, of loss. But deny free-will, and God is
responsible, not man, for man's worst acts. Nor have the
leaders of this school of theology shrunk from the conse¬
quences of their theories. Calvin writes on the matter
with the utmost clearness. " We assert," he says, " that
by an eternal unchangeable decree, God has determined
whom He will one day permit to share in eternal felicity,
and whom He will damn. In respect of the elect the
decree is founded on His unmerited mercy, without any
regard to human worthiness; but those whom He delivers
40 The Attempt.
up to damnation, are, by a just and irreprehensible judg¬
ment, excluded from all access to eternal life." Again,
"man's fall into crime is ordained by God's providence;"
and here is his answer to those who, as he says, complain
that it is not just that they should be punished eternally
for doing what he allows they can in no \vise help doing.
"When the wicked hear these things, they complain that
God abuses His inordinate power to make cruel sport
with the miseries of His creatures." But " what is man
that he should reply," and it is " perverse to measure divine
by the standard of human justice." Zwingle says—" God
is the author, mover, and impeller to sin; He it is who
moves the robber to murder the innocent." And Beza
tells us, the "Almighty creates a portion of men to be
His instruments, with the intent of carrying out His evil
designs through them." To this ghastly theology was
Calvin brought by his denial of man's free-will, because,
as his biographer M. Guizot says, " he imagined that man's
free-will was opposed to the idea which he had formed of
the omnipotence and omniscience of God."
Before leaving the Theological side of the question, we
may notice that the doctrine generally accepted through¬
out Christendom, is, that God is free, yet conditioned by
the laws of wisdom and holiness ; He manifests his free¬
dom by creation. Man is made free, and ought to be
conditioned by the laws of wisdom and holiness. God is
the author of man's whole being, and gives him in potentia
the faculties for manifesting his complete perscmality; and
these faculties he is free to use or not. He cannot give
himself animal life, for he is not the principle of life. But
he may, within certain limits, maintain it or not; he needs
food, or life will expire. He cannot give himself intel¬
lectual faculties, but he may develope them by assimilating
the intellectual material around him, or let them perish by
disuse. He cannot give himself a moral nature, but he
has moral capabilities given to him. He has also the gift
of grace; God's relation to his moral nature, as truth to
his mental, and food to his animal nature. *
In all these relations, man can employ his freedom to
intensify or destroy the connection. He may commit
suicide; he may prefer ignorance ; he may reject grace;
or he may fulfil the purpose of his being, and lead a right
life.     But there is no constraint;   the authority of the
* Abridged from Gould's Origin and Development of Christianity.
The Attempt. 41
Creator is not here efficient, but moral; it is action on the
conscience convincing men of responsibility.
I have hardly space to glance at the argument against
freedom, drawn from the general regularity in social
matters proved by statistics. Could certain actions^ as
marriages and suicides, be shown to vary with certain
circumstances, beyond the control of the agents, in exact
ratio, they say it might be proved they are cause and
effect, and that all human actions are the necessary con¬
sequents of necessary antecedents. This, however, we
cannot discover, will and circumstance are so inextricably
entangled in the actions of men. At the same time, the
order and regularity we observe, not only suggest an
over-ruling power, but also give us reasonable expecta¬
tion that the same motives will, on the whole, impel a
mass of men in the same direction. Freedom implies
power, and power is, of course, limited by strength,
opportunity, and position; and even a free man can only
take one step at a time in one direction.
To conclude,—let us glance at the facts of life, and see
whether this belief in free-will seems among the truest
things in it, or a mere delusion and source of delusions.
We are told by many necessitarians that theirs is not a
Avorking behef—that we must act indeed as though we
believed it not. A large admission. It is true that, some
hold this theory in a manner which does them no harm,
as a dusty bottle of poison stands undisturbed on a back
shelf. But take it dowm, take it to heart, act upon it, and
it too often results in a dark melancholy, or worse, a
kind of moral paralysis. It inspired the harsh and cruel
dogmas of the Moslem ; it is answerable for the narrow
bitterness which marred the work of some of the reformers;
and its gloom has shadowed and depressed almost to
madness, many of the finest spirits of ancient and modern
days. Yet the arguments for it seem all drawn from the
determination to see in man only the causality which is
seen in the plant or the stone; or from the hopeless
attempt to fit in all the great facts of the universe so as
to suit each other, like a Chinese puzzle; and this with our
purblind eyes and limited understanding.
Happily, men in general have a consciousness of
freedom beyond the reach of arguments. All government
proceeds on the assumption that men can control and
are responsible for their actions ; and there can be no
society without   government.      Law  assumes it, for it
FEBEUAKT   1874. P
42 Tlie Attempt.
punishes the malefactor for what he did when he could
abstain, and spares the madman Avhose actions are not
under his control, but impelled by irresistible impulse.
Philosophy reveals it, save when it confounds man with
the material universe, it recognises Will as the great fact
of human existence. Morality demands freedom for its
very existence. And religion, by all the exliortations to
virtue, and the testimony to the perfection of the Creator
it gives us. plainly declares it. The mystery indeed
cannot be solved, but there is light enougli to show the
truth, that
' Our wills are ours we know not how,
Our wills are ours to make tlieni Thine."
E. J. 0.
^hc Uaufl and the Uoucllst.
Part II.—The Novelist.
We have traced the novel, from its germs in early
literature, through its meagre growth in the middle ages,
to its rapid development in the past century. A mighty
and fruitful tree,—its far-spreading roots now absorb the
nourishment from the surrounding soil, and its thickly
entwined branches shade less thriving plants from the
invigorating sun of prosperity. This self-absorbing power
makes it take almost the place of the early epic, which
covered the whole field of literature, before the various
subject-matters were portioned off to various styles of
prose. It is peculiarly the literature of the f resent; it
expresses not only contemporary fun and incident, but
oontemporary research and discovery. It is the special
outcome of all the thought, art, and feeling of the day.
It is evident, then, that though some great things have
been done by little men, a great novel will require a great
novelist.    What goes to make its maker great ?
I. He must be an artist in the true sense of the word,
an idealiser of nature. He has pierced to the heart
of nature, and the surface will always recal the inner
meaning to him. Art is not nature merely seen through
sense; neither is it all nature ; but a selection of the
important and significant.    This selection must be care-
The Attempt. 43
fully distinguished from caricature, which has no meaning
in the roots of things, and is but a distortion of the
superficial.
II. He must be a poet. And though, in one sense, the
poet and the artist are one, varying in the form of expres¬
sion, still the poet has the wider sphere, in the application
of his genius to nature, both in feeling and expression.
The novel is the prose form of many themes of
verse ; narrative, for there is the chain of interesting deeds
his people do ; dramatic, ft)r these people must express
tit thoughts from their lips and his heart; and lyric, for
the bursts of feehng and susceptibility are little subjective
poems writ in prose.
III. He must be educated up to the full measure of his
own life and times at least; educated to a degree far
beyond what is necessary for the execution of any par¬
ticular design. For no one ever can write out to the full
circumference of his capabilities, no one can ever tell just
all ho knows. And very greatly by his knowledge is a
man's greatness measured. He cannot know too much ;
and the due balance of the required poetic taste will keep
him from telling too much, or from showing learning,
otherwise than in its results of force, richness, and
variety.
IV. He must be a philosopher. No mere education can
ensure this, though it may give him material and direc¬
tions. He must bo a logician ; for good so^^nd thirdiing
is needed in a tale to keep from fallacies in thought and
deed; a psychologist, for is not the sold the subject of
tlie discourse, the cause of every action ; a metaphysician,
for he must recognise the mysteries of being that lie
beyond both soul and sense, and the effects of this
superior world in the growth and development of char¬
acter below,—for otherwise the actions of his people
would He together in a confused heap, like bits of broken
glass, before the kaleidoscope shakes them into beautiful
and meaning patterns.
V. He must be a fine expresser. Loosed from the
bonds of poetry, he is not the less dependent upon well-
assorted diction. The beauty of expression in single
words, in rhythmical and musically-read sentences, in
suggestive figures, is as necessary to the great novelist
as it is to the great poet; and though it is but a ctmse-
quence of his other powers, it is one important enough to
be noticed for its own sake.    What fire, what vivacity is
44 The Attempt.
added, by nice adaptation of expression to description,
and to varied character.
I consider that George Eliot most clearly and most fully,
of any in our days fulfilling these conditions, is our
greatest novelist.
I. As an artist, she is unrivalled either in figure or in
landscape painting. Her representations of nature are
faithful, though generalised; the breadth of effect mag¬
nificent; the depth of conception marvellous. Her
figures live and move, and force a belief in their reality
upon every mind. The only waiter who has drawn
a life in like simplicity and force is Charlotte Bronte.
But clear and intense as she is, she throws out her
chief characters into relief by a mistiness and depres¬
sion in the background, which was doubtless forced
on her by her narrow experience of life. George
Eliot is not content with any singular interest, or
egotistic development of one much-noticed individual.
Her conceptions require space, and air, and light. She
shows the whole village, or city, and times in which
her chief characters are set, pourtrays the subordinate
characters quite as distinctly, though less prominently,
and gives them an interest in their own right, as well as
frojn their influence on other lives. She has wide-stretch¬
ing horizons, and far-sighted vision, yet she never forgets
the true perspective, the great never becomes little, nor the
little great. The very atmosphere of the time and place
breathes through her pictures, coming, as it does, in breezes
from every side to modify the climate of the spot. She has
no glaring colours or concentrated rays to attract attention,
but over all she sheds a wholesome, clear, and steady
liglit. The only one who has equalled her in breadth was
Walter Scott; but then she far excels him in the depth of
lier conceptions. I She penetrates to the hearts of her
characters; and hers are no mere superficies or photo¬
graphs of men and women as they appear in drawing-
rooms or promenades. Too many of the Society novelists
of the day are content to draw people as they seem to
be, not as they are; but in an artificial age, peojde are
not seen in a mere arrangement of dress, position, and
manner. Their faces have been trained to become part
of that dress and manner, masks or mirrors, as the case
may be, and not translucent windows opening into the
soul. Even Thackeray has often rested content in the
merely visible, accepting  signs as if they were things.
The Attempt. 45
But George Eliot finds both the signs and things before
she estabhshes their connection, or asserts the one to be
the meaning of the other. Hence, for the sake of artistic
consistency, she chooses scenes not antagonistic to the
appearance of character. And when she finds a unique
character, her wonderful selective taste can give it a dis¬
tinct individuality, without sinking into caricature, as
Dickens does, by working out a peculiarity till it becomes
deformity, or throwing false lights on a feature till shadows
make it an oddity. Above all artists, she treats her sub¬
jects calmly, clearly, justly.
II. She is a true poet: a lineal descendent of Chaucer,
Shakespeare, Milton. Her selections from English char¬
acter may become classic as those of the Prologue to the
Canterbury Tales. There is the same realistic imagina¬
tion, the same fidelity in detail, the same occasional wash¬
ing of her hands from the responsibility of their creation,
as if they had come to her in spite of herself. She has
much of the variety in character and thought of Shake¬
speare, and like dramatic energy. Kacy remarks on life,
powerful generalisations, recognitions of the unseen in her
works, are rivalled only by his; while she shares Avith
Milton a classic learning, and a tendency towards the dis¬
cursive treatment of the causes of things. And scattered
here and there are little lyric outbixrsts, that remind us of
Wordsworth and of Burns; sensuous descriptions, that
might have come from Keats; idyllic touches, that appear
the very spirit of poetry; and suggestive thoughts, that
spring from the recognition of the Ideal in every Real, of
which certain recurrences show her fervours.
Neither Thackeray, nor Dickens, nor any of their fol¬
lowers, are of her poetic school, but rather of the school
of the versatile and satiric Dryden.
It is her poetic sympathy with humanity that saves her
from the satiric mode of treatment. Not even on Tito
Melema does she flash the lightning of sarcasm, but faitli-
fuUy and pitifully compares the past with the present, tlie
possible with the actual. It saves her also from tlie
unrealities of romanticism and sensationalism, for she
finds interest enough in life without these. In the
opening of the second volume oi Adam Bede, she gives a
noble plea for the worthiness of truthfulness, though it is
hard to be attained; for the duty of accepting otxr fellow-
mortals as they are, finding interest in them, and ei)-
couraging love for them, shewing the danger of imagina-
4() The. Attempt.
tions that create a world so much better than our own,
that we turn cold eyes from our common green fields, and
cold hearts from real, breathing men and women that
can be chilled by our indifference. Hers is not the
worship of the ugly, which is only a new sensationalism
suggested by Victor Hugo, as a refreshing change, after
the long idolatry of the beautiful, but a 7'everence for the
real. Her sympathy with the common lot of man, rather
than with the sj^ecial lots of men, make her delight, as
she says, in many Dutch paintings, whose truthfulness,
perhaps, is expended upon an old woman watering her
flower-pot.
An adverse critic in an old a|uarterly, quotes this to
show the cause of her dulness—he does not care for any
amount of truthfulness coupled with old women ; he is
displeased at the printing of Dinah Morris's sermons and
prayers, and does not caro to know so much about Tom
and Maggie TuUiver. And he represents a large class of
modern readers,—those who must have a sensational
element in their readings. It is true that George Eliot has
not the dynamic energy of Walter Scott: she does not
force you, with quick drawn breath, to race, unpausing
over her pages. You can lay aside her books till the next
day, partly because you have met so much you must think
over ; and partly, also, it must be confessed, from lack of
curiosity stimidants. She does not feel herself bound to
drown character in a great flood of action; it is her people
she loves, and their deeds only for their sakes. Her poetic
and sympathetic temperament does not grudge delay
or detail, and her deep thought has led her to study the
motive to action, more than the action itself. Is not this
very so-called defect the cause of her intense realistic
power ? It is a noble reaction against the sensational
style. Naturally, in avoiding Scylla, she goes just a little
too near Charybdis, but I cannot feel it a dangerous " too
near." Poetic temperaments of kindred feeling must
appreciate, and all futurity recognise, how she has there¬
by distinguished the temporary and evanescent, from the
permanent and tlie real.
HI. Slie is Avidely educated. It is imposBible to con¬
ceive or execute what she has done, without a wide ex¬
perience of the thoughts of other minds in literature,
politics, art. science, and philosophy, besides the speeiaJ
education that comes thi-ough travel and observation.
Perhaps the greatest witness of her learning is "' Romola,"'
The A llempt. 47
as it is there expressed; but every boc'k she has written
hnpUes much more than is expressed. Though superior
to most novelists in general cultivation, I do not assert
that she is necessarily, in this matter, greater than all.
IV. But she is certainly the greatest philosopher among
all novelists past and present. In three ways chiefly is
her speculation shown—1st, In recognising Avhat is in the
soul ; 2d, In recognising wliat lies above and around the
soul in relations that affect it; Hd, In recognising that
souls have no fixed termination cf development as our
bodies have, but that tliey go on grcjwing for better
or worse, as long as we are in possession of healthfu],
intelligent life.
And through her speculations she carries a true logical
method, refraining from imperfect inductions. Thackeray,
for instance, may have observed society, and may have
seen many examples of the characters he has castigated.
But can he educe a universal from any enumeration of
particulars ? Can he turn and say. These are but given
as examples, but you, and I, and every one else, are just
the same. No; for many a reader may justly and indig¬
nantly exclaim. Thank God, it is not true! And we can
answer thus to many of the waiters of the superficial and
romantic schools. But, without prejudice and sloth, a
simple, earnest learner, George Eliot explores the soul
that is hidden from sense. She finds good and evil
there blended in various proportions ; she neither flatters
tlie one nor scorns the other, but notes both. When she
does generalize, it is from the fundamental. Deep down
she has discovered the true oneness of humanity, and
found the similar in the dissimilar. The Society novelists
are somewhat in the position of the botanists that stick
to the artificial arrangements of plants. They can only
classify them, under certain circumstances, as full-blown
and normal flowers ; even then their classification brings
together plaiils most unlike in other points, and must
at last find help from the natural system to classify plants
that have no floAvers. But George Eliot is indepen¬
dent of the flowering seasons of the plants, for hers is a
natural system, and she has found the connection between
types of root and stem, of leaf, of vessel of seed, though
the efflorescence may vary indefinitely.
As the result of her searching analysis of character, she
chiefly, nay rather, alone among the great novelists of
the day, has given its just place to religion, or at least to
\4 4 ^^l^h^iffewJrC^^^ V/Te^^Hi^tk,^^
that  hunger of the   soul   that can only find   its   satis-
^    j >' faction  therein.     We  knoAV  there  are  many Christian
.   novels, for the novel has been made the medium of the
- inculcation of all truth.    But these novels of a purpose l.- -
\ J[  J must be classified differently from novels of observation, j " ^
^    j "^ In Thackeray, Dickens, I?ulwer Lytton, Charlotte Bronte, U Jk
*   4 Trollope,   etc.,   there is  no true  recognition of it as a    W
"5>* psychologic   force   or  motive   power.      Certainly  it  is ^
I TE     •■ banished by etiquette frcjm the drawing-room couversa-
_^  _j^ tion, along with all other earnest realities; it is banished
- ^ by necessity from the haunts of vice ; it is often banished
'••> by scepticism from the thoughts of too eager students.^
• j^iHO     VJi      uww      v-coj^v
^r' AVhether these wanted tlie true talisman for its discovery f t
»^  ^-^a clear comprehension of what it is, or Avhether they chose 3 ;?
f-^v^^ to ignore it as inconvenient  or unnecessary, cannot be^.
f    ,'   ~ said ; but it remains a true fact, that it does not take its ^
\_ natural place among their forces. j(5U/V- <-- U ^SzU^ j j
George Eliot, as a philosopher, canhot pick and choose   J *
•-^ the   forces that aff'ect  character.    She cannot eliminate »^"^
,     tlie religious element from the soul, any more than she can
'^ eliminate love from the heart, or gravitation from matter.
■■ AVhatever be her own creed, her opinions and feelings are
"^ not made the measure of a man's goodness.    It may be
with her as in her own remark, "justice is like the king¬
dom of heaven; it is not without iis as  a fact, but it is
within   us as a great yearning! "    But Ave may say of her
what Romola said of her godfather Bernardo  del Nero.
" That seems to me very great and noble, that power of
respecting a feeling which he does not share or understand."
A confessed Christian is not synonymous with a knave or
■ a fool to her, as he  is to   Dickens.    Thackeray's anti-
.' snobbism is  certainly much -more suitable to the super-
"*, ficial   school,   than the   anti-Piu'itianism   of Dickens; for
Z snobbism rises and flourishes nearer the surface than the
;^ heart.    But the result of starting with any prejudice, is to
- '..■'make us seek, and find the food that nourishes its growth,
and increases  its  power  of  antagonism.    Her  freedom
from prejudice is a great ineans of her ability to remain
philosophic throughout.    Imagine Thackeray attempting
:^-: to paint Savonarola the enthusiast of the Romish Florence,
^V or Dickens meeting Dinah Morris, the pure young Metho¬
dist of the times near Wesley !    Thackeray woiild have
found some snobbism in the man, and Dickens made a
caricature of the woman—made her something other than
she seemed or was; and tAvo  of the most striking and
The Attempt. 49
beautiful characters of modern literature would have been
lost to us for ever. George Eliot knows how much of true
human life touches on the supernatural, knows how many
are restless and seeking a satisfaction for their souls beyond
the narrow round of fashion, and gaiety, or fame, beyond
even the sphere of learning and of art; hence her DincL.'-
and Romola, her Seth Bede, her Dorothea, her Maggie
Tulliver, And apart from the influence of revealed religion, ^
there is the recognition of the power of natural religion,
of the natural hope in a glorifying ideal; which is always
stru -k from the better characters or herself.    Even in the
company of two such unsuggestive associations as Nello
the   Barber,   and   Tito,   she   looked   up   at   the   Duomo
of Florence, and " the Campanile led the eyes high up into ,    ■
the clear air of the April morning ; it seemed a prophetic ''*•'-*
symbol, telling that human life must somehow and some- Irhu/:^
time   shape  itself into   accord  ^\atli   that   pure aspiring ^^j_^ *>
beauty."    And it may be noticed that her most wicked,'
characters are just those that have not such elevating ''•        -,
ideals or saving beliefs—as Tito Melema. > ..r?tZr^A
The natural effect  of recognising the forces that act .
on the soul, is to recognise its growth by them ; so that
characters ere long are found in action seemingly quite ,,:
inconsistent with their original description.   Most novelists^,,.   '
simply enumerate the 'jualitiesj of their individuals, and '\''
stick to the normal results of these qualities.    If brave, "^ ''' '
they are always brave; if gentle, always gentle; if hypo¬
critical, always hypocrites; if cowardly, always cowards.,        _ ,
Which   of   them   has   ever    pictured   a   character   like \        ■
'I'ito Melema,—not wicked, if by that we mean a prone-'^-i"*^'^'*^*
ness to do wicked deeds.    Soft, sunny, luxurious, but nof^^'-;^''"' t , ,
exorbitant in his demands; willing to let everyone share ,
his sunlight that did not shut it out from him ; admiring
the good and the noble ; quick too, and learned, with subtle .'. ;
perceptions   of thought and things;   not vain   or   self-
asserting therewith, but gentle and conciliating the love '
his nature needed, not treacherous nor callous by nature ;
yet what villain of the plays ever filled a blacker part than ^J^^ a__ -
he—and all by simply drifting on the easiewt way.    This ■
power of development she marks as empliatically in her fM>if^
women.    Very few men have the gift of imderstanding or
expressing women, and this advantage she'TrTay have, in
her sex.    It may be said, on the other hand, that women
cannot understand the characters of men, and to a certain
degree it is so, but not necessar^'.to such a degree.    For
rKBR0A»T 1874. _  ' . G
50 The Attempt.
men hve in a more natural and consistent sphere—they
are louder, and they strike themselves out more boldly
both into action and speech, so that a faithful representa¬
tion of a perceived man is more likely to be true, than a
mere representation of a perceived woman. There is a
greater repression of woman's thought, and feeling, and
individuality, and the connection between her thoughts
and deeds is more hidden. Yet they too hastily judge
the invisible from the visible, the unknown from the
known. Their best women are the thoroughly repressed
natures, their second best the shallow little souls like
Tessa. AVhich man would have conceived the purity, and
strength of Romola, the high-set ideals of Dorothea; the
volcanic seethings of Maggie TuUiver, the outspoken, witty
honestness of Mrs Poyser, the unswerving simplicity of
Dinah Morris ?
As a moral philosopher, she is firm in her belief that
justice and kindness, honesty and right, are best, what¬
ever follows. She sees it is the way in life, and she does
not try to apportion the suflFering to the sin, or the reward
to the desert; but she reminds us that to do right is better
than to be happy, though not always co-ordinate. She
has been blamed for being a fatalist and a necessitarian;
but greater philosophers than she have held the theory,
which I do not think she holds quite fully. At least her
necessity is that veiled form that lies within free choice.
In Tito Melema's course, she noticed, " he was experienc¬
ing that inexorable law of human souls, that we prepare
ourselves for sudden deeds, by the reiterated choice of good
and evil that determines character." Most certainly she
shows with power the force that presentations of good and
evil, wherefrom to choose, may become in the moulding of
character; and I fancy I can see with her the same natures
reappearing, oh, so different! under differing circumstances.
For she takes the elemental and the universal of humanity,
and grafts on it the temporary and the cii'cumstautial; and
while in the one she finds freedom and space to the
extent of the recognition that man makes not the circum¬
stances by which he first finds himself controlled, nor
those by which afterwards he is modified, she is a neces¬
sitarian.
V. Her expression is beautiful. Full of rich words,
powerful figures, and rounded sentences, her style is a fit
etfluence and companion of her other qualities. Her
readers are charmed unconsciously, as they would be by
The Attempt. 51
perfectly suitable dress which they feel, but do not see—
from its artistic congruence. It will be a classic test ere
long, of the highest possibility of the language of the day.
We realise most fully its charms in the few passages in
which she falls into an unconscious imitation of other
styles; and we are not pleased when the Featherstone
connection remind us of "Martin Chuzzlewit" and it jars
upon us to hear accents from " Vanity Fair," occasionally
mingliag with the more natural expression of her larger
simplex world. Her characters have each their native
speech assigned them, which fits them just as well as her
own style does their author. I know not one that fails,
from high-souled scholastic Romola to Nello the garrulous
barber of Florence; from stately Mrs Irvine to grumbling
Lisbeth Bede, and old Grandad Poyser. The pithiness of
her generalized remarks induce one to quote her as one
does Shakspeafe, and the musical rhythm of her longer
periods rings in our ears, along with harmonies from the
Master-Expresser himself. LuTEA Reseda.
^\\t UviXXi of the Itighi
Dying in the night. The night is the time to die.
Only the moon so white looks out of the blue black sky;
Only her quiet light stealeth down from on high
And they say, at the turn o' the night, my love will die.
Dying in the night, as the flowers pass away,
Tired with the rare delight of the sunshine and the day,—
When the dew, with never a sound, falls still, and cold, and
sweet.
As falls on the sun-burnt ground, the print of Azrael's feet.
Hush 1 for out on the night a spirit soon will go,
SUent will be its thght as the silent fall of the snow.
Out of the light of day into the dark unknown
Wending its quiet way unlit, unseen, alone.
Hush 1 for the pain of tears we will keep till night is past.
For weeping are long long years for peace, to-night is the
last.
Hush 1 poor heart, for the light will come again to the sky;
But they say, at the turn o' the night my love will die.
R.
52 The Attempt.
Jnduslrial  ©raininig  fax  %ixA\t%.
DOMESTIC ECONOMY.
It is much to be regretted that women are not generally
taught the principles of political economy, for in varioiis
of its departments they are actually, though often igno-
rantly, important agents. By their control of domestic
expenditure, they affect, in a great degree, the wealth
{i.e. surplus money) and prosperity of the nation; because,
though not necessarily engaged in remunerative employ¬
ment, they can, so to speak, make money by saving it;
and by well, and therefore economically, managing that
department in which they more immediately preside,
secure the best return for their outlay.
Soyer says that the morals of a people greatly depend
on their food. Reflection confirms this; and if we accept
as a fact Count Rumford's assertion, that " the number of
inhabitants who may be supported in any country upon
its internal produce, depends aboiit as much upon the
state of the art of cookery as upon that of agriculture,"
we must also concur with Soyer, that "it is to be regretted
that men of science do not interest themselves more than
they do on a subject of such vast magnitude as this ; for,"
he continues, " I feel confident that the food of a country
might be increased at least one-third, if the culinary
science were properly developed, instead of its being
slighted as now." Man, unlike other animals, requires his
food to be prepared, and on its due preparation depends
its capabilities to be assimilated to repair the waste of the
body. Badly prepared food is not only innutritious, but
in many cases positively injurious, provoking indigestion,
and all the bodily and mental evils which follow in its
train. Universal experience also shows, that food properly
prepared goes farther, and with less waste, than when
bungled attempts at cookery are made. This holds true
in every manual occupation. Tlie unskilful workman is
the one who wastes both material and time. Skilled
labour has its own value in the preparation of food, as
well as in the preparation of all other articles required by
man. It is, therefore, hardly to be estimated what the
Baving to the nation would be in money, in food, in health,
and even in life, if a thorough and systematic knowledge
of the   utilisation   of food  material  were  disseminated
Tiie Attempt. 53
%
among women of all classes. If man, the bread-winner,
has to devote time and energy to the learning of his trade
or profession, surely woman, the bread-dispenser, should
also bestow time and energy in learning her part of this
natural division of labour.
Such knowledge everyone will admit to be indispensable
among the wives of the working classes, who  require
themselves to select and prepare the food for their hus¬
bands and families.    I doubt, however, if the necessity for
such knowledge is  sufficiently recognised among those
who have servants under them, and who are too often
wholly dependent on their knowledge and skill.     The
days are past,when the mistress of a house considered
■ {jjf^mQ[f'xQ%^OTisM.e for every detail of its management,
^rr and was able to direct her servants in the efficient execu-
i w-'tion of every work assigned to them.   The proper manage-
•   ment of a house, and the proper care of the preparation of
.the food in it, may, in the long run, turn out to be an
accomplishment as useful,  and  calculated to secure as
much respect, as music, drawing, or the modern accom¬
plishments.
I propose in this paper to consider First, the necessity
for such training; and. Secondly, to suggest some means
of supplying the need.
It may safely be stated as a fact, that a knowledge of
such matters is not included in the programme of girls'
education, nor, in general, is it considered to be a necessary
part of their home training. Of course, there is no rule
without exceptions ; and this general assertion admits of
many notable exceptions, as regards home training at
least. Almost every woman, at one time or another of
her life, is called upon to assume duties requiring a know¬
ledge of cookery and housekeeping; and great woiild be
the saving in money, time, and even in temper, if this
knowledge were imparted at the natural period for learn¬
ing, instead of being practically dispensed with, or pain¬
fully elaborated by experience alone. The majority of
women marry, and are thus directly and permanently
called to assume the cares of hoiisehold management. In
Edinburgh a frequent preliminary to marriage is to take
lessons in cooking and pastry. This is doubtless excellent
in its way; but the mere learning to cook certain dishes
is far from sufficient to qualify a mistress to regulate the
supply, and direct the use, of the materials which pass
through  her cook's hands.     Ignorance of these points
S4 Tlte Attempt.
places a mistress at her cook's mercy, prevents her from
receiving due respect, and not only renders her unable to
detect, but is practically a strong temptation to waste and
dishonesty in her servants. The housekeeping difficulties
and mistakes of an inexperienced bride are graphically
described in many works of fiction, from David Copperfield
to A Very Young Couple; and they have, alas! but too
many originals in real life. No one can read the Questions
in The Housewife department of The Queen newspaper,
without being impressed, not otJy with the depths of
ignorance, but with the honest craving for teaching shown
by the majority of the enquirers.
Knowledge of her household duties is requisite for the
wife of a rich as well as of a poor man. If the establish¬
ment is a large one, the tact and discretion needed in its
guidance are by no means the universal talent many as¬
sume them to be. Comparatively few have the power of
efficiently managing a large household, made up of indivi¬
duals and wants varied, and often incongruous. If to the
absence of this natural talent, is added ignorance of the
principles and details of domestic economy, trying indeed
is the situation in which the mistress must find herself.
And to a conscientious woman, the sense of unfitness for
her position must prove a soui'ce of much distress and
self reproach.
If, on the other hand, the establishment and the income
are small, the need for intelligent superintendence is
infinitely greater. This must be evident to all. To a
mistress so placed, the prior training I have referred to
is an absolute necessity; for the comfort and well-being
of the family depend more directly on her, and ignorance
of her duties may lead not only to discomfort and extra¬
vagance, but even to difficulties and serious financial
involvements.
But, in these times, when so great an outcry is made
against women being ediicated only with a view to mar¬
riage, we must remember that these domestic duties
devolve not alone, though chiefly, on matrons. A large
number of single women are, from various causes, at the
head of establishments, and to these training is as essen¬
tial as to their married sisters.
Nor do these classes exhaust the number of ladies to
whom a knowledge of domestic economy is essential.
The sick room—an important province of woman's king¬
dom—is but partially served if the nurse, to a knowledge
The Attempt. 55
of other duties, does not add that of cooking. All who
have had any experience of sickness, must remember how
often an invalid will turn from an uninviting dish, pre¬
pared probably by an inexperienced cook, when the appe¬
tite might be tempted, and a motive for effort given, if
some palatable little dish were prepared and presented
by the deft hands of a loving sister or daugliter. The
refinement derived from tlie position and education of
ladies, should show itself in their culinary performances
as well as in other things.
Before passing to the second part of my paper, I wish
to draw attention to a new sphere opening to ladies, and
one in which a knowledge of cooking is indispensable to
all who  take  part in it.    In our Education Act for Scot¬
land, provision is made to teach sewing to girls in the
Board schools—funds and  teachers  being  supplied   for
this.    Permission is given to have other branches of in¬
dustrial training taught in these schools (subject to the
approval of the School Board), but  these other branches
must be supported and carried on by local efforts.    Now,
the bramch which is most feasible and natural to teach
girls, in addition to sewing, is cooking.   This has actually
been done in several instances; and should the subject of
industrial training prove an acceptable one to my readers,
I may, at a future time, give some account of these inter¬
esting and practical experiments.    The point I wish at
present to  draw attention  to, is that, in  each instance,
ladies have undertaken and successfully carried  on this
department of the schools  in which it has been intro¬
duced,   and  to   this  fact  those   who   have  watched its
progress attribute its success.    It may be years before
government    may    be    induced    to    provide    qualified
teachers on this subject for every training school, but in
the meantime, the teaching has been, and doubtless will
be, undertaken by ladies, who, themselves qualified, are
willing gratuitously to instruct others.   This will, to some
extent, provide for the preliminary instruction of cooks.
If ladies themselves receive corresponding training, they
will  often be saved the distress of having to part with
really excellent servants, by being able to instruct them
in some simple, though indispensable part of their work,
of which they were ignorant.    It is probable that com¬
plaints of servants' incapacity will continue  unabated,
until  ladies  receive  training  in   their   domestic duties.
Most social reforms originate with the middle classes, and
56 The Attempt.
it may be confidently asserted, that if young ladies were
systematically trained in domestic economy, the reform
would speedily spread to the working classes; and we
should hear less of the unreasonableness and extravagance
of servants, if mistresses could more generally gain their
respect and confidence, by justice, intelligence, and con¬
sideration.
If it is acknowledged that this evil of want of training
is so nearly universal, the question naturally arises, Is
there a practicable remedy for it I   If so, what is it i
The first of these queries may unhesitatingly be answered
in the affirmative.    The second admits of several replies.
The simplest and most effective mode of securing train¬
ing in domestic economy,isby home training in it becoming
customary. A girl wiU naturally take greater interest in
such teaching, and thus become best fitted for her own
probable position in after life. But, as the mothers of the
present generation have not themselves been taught, a
comparatively small number are fitted to give intelligent
and systematic teaching. Of this number some are unwil¬
ling to take the trouble, others j^rofess to have no time,
and others again say, that with the " cook of the period,"
the thing is impracticable. It surely should not be so
exceptional as it is for daughters to act, say week or month
about, first as their mother's pupils, then her assistants,
and then her deputies, in household matters,—thus gra¬
dually gaining important knowdedge and experience,
which will in no small degree affect their subsequent lives.
Failing this mode of instruction becoming general, the
next feasible plan would be for all boarding schools to
introduce teaching in housekeeping and cookery as a
regular part of the cui-riculum for girls. It is the opinion
of a lady, who is a high authority in Edinburgh in all
educational matters, that this, far from overstraining the
already well-taxed powers of a school girl, would prove a
beneficial relaxation from more purely intellectual studies,
and by the variety thus afforded, increase their powers of
application.
There would surely be no insuperable difficulty in the
way of some simple scheme like the following:—Let
several girls be told off each month to act under the
lady superintendent. By devoting a limited time each
morning, they would soon become acquainted "wdth the
average necessities of the household, with the duties and
requirements  of the various servants, with the selection
The Attempt. 57
and management of household linen. They would learn
to choose and purchase provisions, to adapt expenditure
to income, to keep and balance accounts, to order
dinner, etc. Then, to provide instruction in cookery, it
surely would not be a very difficult matter to allot one
hour a week to this. A qualified teacher could easily and
interestingly explain the effects of heat variously applied,
the chemical combinations and effects of food (see John¬
stons Chemistry of Common Life, and Liehig's Chemistry
of Food), the nutritive properties of food, etc. This
might be varied by practical illustrations conducted by
the pupils, and the course followed by examinations, an d
prizes as in other studies. If a few boarding schools
would lead the way by adopting some scheme such as
this, they would confer a great boon on the community,
and their increased popularity would speedily ensure a
return for the extra trouble and expense.*
There is still another method by which the general
principles of cookery can be taught: which is by public
lectures, with illustrations. This could not be so thorough
as either of the other methods, but it would aid and
supplement them, and has the recommendation of a much
more extensive applicability.
In the International Exhibition last spring, there was a
school of popular cookery, organised by H. M. Com¬
missioners for the International Exhibitions. It con¬
sisted of a series of lectures delivered by the well-known
Mr Buckmaster, with practical illustrations. These
lectures embraced not only the practical art of cookery,
but its scientific, chemical, and economic aspects. The
handbook used was a small one, specially compiled,
and only cost 3d. These lectures were honoured on one
occasion by Her Majesty's presence, and never failed to
attract crowded audiences of all classes, and of both sexes.
They were continued, two a-day, for twenty-eight weeks,
and the receipts not only completely covered the pre¬
liminary and current expenses, but produced a small net
profit. These lectures so effectually roused the public
interest in the much neglected subject of cookery, that it
was found advisable and practicable to establish a national
training school for cookery, which is at present in course
* Since writing the above, I have been informed that Miss Smith, matron of
the boarding house in connection with the Moray House Training School,
teaches her boarders domestic economy.
FEBBUAST 1874. H
58 Tlie Attempt.
of organization, the committee being headed by the names
of the Princesses Christian and Louise.
If there were a fair prospect of attendance, a local
committee might be formed, and arrangements entered
into to have a course of lectures on cookery in Edinburgh
next winter, the experience of the London committee
forming a basis for the arrangements here. The subject
is one worthy of mature consideration,—and as Edinburgh
prides itself on the advanced character of its educational
institutions, it would surely be more consistent with that
character to adopt domestic economy voluntarily as a
branch of education, than to wait tiU it is forced upon us,
as it will inevitably be, by the growing sense of its
practical utility.
Eta.
ilia J[t>i*i*^s:
A TALE OF THE FOETY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
nancy's   trtst.
A FEW evenings after the interview recorded in the last
chapter, Barbara, Nancy, and Alaster were all sitting
round the fire in the hall. The day had been chilly and
wet; and though it was now near the end of June, they
had gladly gathered round the great fire-place as the
evening closed in. Alaster was now nearly Avell, though
still strangely weak and languid; and his face, disfigured
by the long sword-cut scar, looked very pale that evening,
under the black velvet skull-cap which he wore, till his
hair should grow again. They had been sitting quietly
for some time, the girls busy wath their needles, Alaster
apparently buried in his own thoughts. At last he looked
up, and turned to Nancy.
" Nancy," he said gently; she looked up with the
bright, ready smile that always greeted him, " come here,
dear," he said.
Something in his voice restrained the lively retort
about his laziness which sprang to her lips, and she rose
and went over quietly and stood beside him.    He took
The Attempt. 59
her hand gently and held it in his for a minute without
speaking; then he said, in a low tone,—
" Nancy, dear, don't you think it is about time this
engagement of ours were coming to an end ? "
Barbara started, and the colour rushed violently over
her face.
Nancy blushed too, but it was a quiet, happy blush—
" To an end, Alaster f she said hesitatingly.
" I mean, of course," he said, smiling rather sadly, " to
its right and fitting end. Do you not think it is about
time we were fixing a day for our marriage?—that is to
say, if you still think you can make up your mind to
marry such a poor disfigm-ed wretch," he added sadly.
Nancy blushed brightly.
" You don't think the scar makes any difference, do you ? "
she said, looking up brightly in his face with her clear eyes;
" why, you foolish old thing, I'm prouder of that scar than
of anything else about you." He smiled and raised the
little hand he held gently to his lips, but the smile was a
very sad one.
" Well then, dear," he said, " if you are content to take
such a disfigured old fellow, when shall our marriage be ? "
There was none of a lover's eagerness in his tone, and
perhaps, for a moment, Nancy felt a sort of indefinite
disappointment; but she remembered how ill he had been,
and how weak he still was,—too weak, she persuaded
herself, to seem very enthusiastic aTjout anything. The
thought that he had ceased to wish for this marriage
never crossed her simple, trusting heart, and there was
no trace of pain or disappointment in her voice, as she
answered, blushing and looking down,—
" I don't know, Alaster, we must wait till my father
comes back, must we not? "
Then for the first time Barbara spoke, and her voice
had a strange, hard ring in it.
" No, Nancy," she said, " I am sure our father would
not wish you to wait for that; who knows when he will
be back ; he has determined to follow the prince."
" But how could I do it without him, iJarbara ? " said
Nancy, " it would seem so strange, would it not? "
" Not in these times," said her sister. " Papa will be
glad, I know, that you should have a protector as soon as
possible, who can take you away from Milla Forres; for I
know he does not think we are safe here. Let us write
and ask him about it at once."
60 The Attempt.
" But you, Barbara, what will you do ? " said Nancy, " if
Milla Forres is not safe for me, it is not safe for you;
if we go away you must go with us; must she not,
Alaster ?'
" Oh, never mind me," said Barbara; and there was a
suspicion of impatience in her voice. " I will take very
good care of myself; the first thing to be done is to
write to our father;" and so saying, she rose and left
the room.
Alaster and Nancy sat silent for some time after she
had gone. Nancy was puzzled. Why had Alaster not
responded at once to her suggestion about Barbara's going
with them, should they leave Milla Forres ? It could not
be that he did not want her, he had always seemed so
fond of Barbara. She thought that her sister had been
hurt by his not responding, and she felt inclined to be
angry with him, and half-disposed to say that she would
not leave Barbara for him; if Barbara were not to go, she
would not go either; but she looked at Alaster's pale face
that bore such traces of recent suffering, and she could
not find it in her heart to be angry with him; besides, it
was impossible, she thought, that he could really have
meant that they should go and leave Barbara.
" May I write, then, to your father, Nancy, and ask his
consent to our being married immediately % " said Alaster,
after a short pause.
" Yes," she said, looking down and blushing; " but,"
she added, looking up in his face, " 1 cannot leave
Barbara, Alaster; if we go away, she must go with us."
'• That and everything else shall be exactly as you and
she wish, dear," he said, drawing her towards him and
gently kissing her brow.
" Then you may write to my father," she said, and left
the room.
The following day the letter was written and despatched.
It was doubtful when an answer could be received, as
Colonel Forbes was following the Prince's wanderings,
and no one could exactly tell when a letter might reach
him. In the days that followed, Alaster was more than
usually quiet and grave, very gentle and tender to Nancy,
but without any of the exultation of a lover who sees his
happiness approaching. Barbara, on the other hand, was
restlessly active; she seemed never to sit down, or to
give herself a moment's rest or leisure. She said, when
questioned as  to  her  sudden burst of activity, that if
The Attempt. 61
Isancy's marriage was to be soon, the house must be got
in readiness for it; and if they should have to leave Milla
Forres, it was best to put things to rights first. So all
day long she was turning out drawers, and hunting in
closets and cupboards, unearthing all sorts of treasure and
trash that had lain quietly side by side for generations.
Elspet held up her hands in dismay at the " steer," and
Nancy laughed, and said Barbara seemed to think that
the world would come to an end when she was married,
and was " setting her house in order" in anticipation.
How often a hght word spoken in jest comes sadly near
the truth!
Alaster was the only one who made no remark about
Barbara's sudden energy ; he said nothing, but he watched
her closely, with a pair of sad, grave eyes. One day he
was sitting in the hall, while she was restlessly emptying
the drawers of an old bureau of the accumulated letters
of generations, tying them up together and docketting
them according to their various dates. Old letters, of
which the ink had grown faint, and the paper yellow,
records of thoughts and feelings that had once lived and
burned in hearts that had long ago mouldered into
the churchyard dust. He watched her for a time silently,
as she went on tying up her parcels of letters with quick,
nervous fingers. 8he had just tied up the last, and was
rising to go away, when a low " Barbara," from the corner
where Alaster sat, detained her. She turned towards him.
He was sitting Avith his elbows resting on a small table
before him, and his face buried in his hands. He raised
his head as she turned, and there was a look of blank,
hopeless despondency in his face that frightened her. She
hesitated, then stood still.
" Barbara," he repeated, in the same low, unvarying,
despondent tone, " must this sacrifice be completed, is
there no alternative % "
" Alaster," she answered indignantly, " you shall not
speak 80, you have no right to speak so about marrying
ISancy."
'• God knows I do not mean to speak slightingly of
Nancy," he said, sadly, " she is far too good for me, but
you know what I mean, Batbara; if you will not have
pity on yourself, or on me,' have pity upon Nancy. Is it
fair to let her throw away her young, fresh heart on a
man who has no heart to give her in return 1 Do think
of it, Barbara, it is not yet too late."    Tears trembled in
62 The Attempt.
Barbara's eyes, and her hand shook like an aspen, as she
looked up and said piteously,—
" Do you think I have not thought about it, Alaster ? I
hg-ve thought till I can think no more, till I don't know
what is right and what is wrong. Have pity upon me,
Alaster, and do not tempt me. I cannot think any more,
or change my mind now."
He made no answer, but buried his face again in his
hands, and Barbara went quickly out of the room.
Jeanie Morison.
(7b be continued.)
i^hc ^ija-{lr0|i and the |carl
Low in the shifting depths of ocean gloom.
Where sunbeams reach not, and where light gleams dim,
And glimm'ring through the greenness with a sheen
Of inborn brightness, dashed with rainbow hues,
Strange creatures dart, and slow athwart the sands,
Pale things, scarce life-endowed, yet beauteous all.
Float—rising, falling, ever wandering on,
And ever languid swaying to and fro.
Like opal-tinted flow'rs when gentlest zephyrs blow.
A drop from out the waters' slumb'ring mass
Had wept itself into a tear, and lay
Close crouched within a crevice 'neath a frond
Of sea-weed brown, that flung its arms afar,
As yearning wild for aught to cling unto ;
And " I, alas I " the crouching sea-drop wailed,
" All useless am in this wide ocean-world;
To it a drop,—naught but a drop am I!
It thinks not of me ; knows me not,—ah, let me die I
^^'hat am I to those waves that shake the rocks %
What am I to these ships that stately ride ?
\\ hat am I to the spray clouds toss'd to heav'n ?
Ah, let me die ! "    Then tremblingly it slid
From out the crevice; but ere yet it fell,
A shell-valve gently oped and caught it in ;      '
And, as love-sheltered in thai home it lay.
Slow changed its nature as dark time went on,
And, when the shell was rent, a gleaming pearl it shone !
The Atte.mpt. 63
Oh! doubting heart, that fret'st in thine unrest,
Is thine not as the sea-drop's discontent %
Dost thou not chafe to know thy Httle worth %
Dost thou not faint to find thy feebleness ?
Forgetful that in heav'n's all-reaching plan
Marked is each atom's place, and must remain.
Since work mosaic is marred -vvithout each part.
Then wake, oh heart, to effort; leave thy dream I
Thou, too, in life's dark shell, a glist'nmg pearl may'st gleaml
Melensa.
f he Isf of f ongs and other popular |oelri|
to a §istonatt.
Dr Arnold's definition of history, as the " biography of a
society," is one that not only enables us to trace more
definitely the life of a nation in its infancy, maturity, and
decadence, but it likewise assists us to the materials the
historian must use in order to complete the aggregate
biography. Understand the type, and we grasp the
whole; know the unit and the ten thousand will be
recognisable ; realise the entirety of the individual, and
we shall trace out the unity of the mass. It is natural to
the human mind to compare, so far as it is able, the things
which are above it with those that are within its ken. It
sees the points of contact between the small and the great,
and it rests the eye by turning away from the vast in its
wide expanse, and dwelling on its reflection in a limited
area. Thus a more definite idea is gained; even as with
the traveller who, on a map, traces his road over the wide
country he has traversed, or marks the bearings of the
points which he has viewed from a lofty mountain.
In applying this thought to the illustration of history
by biography, we feel that, as we know a man not so
much by the record of the events of his life, and of his
personal action with regard to those events, as by an
acquaintance with his thoughts expressed in words, either
spoken or written; so we understand the character of a
nation, not so much by its public acts, its changes of
government, its declarations of war, its negotiations for
peace, its commerce, its discoveries, its wealth, as by the
writings and speeches that have made the profouudest
64 The Attempt.
impressions, that have spread through the length and
breadth 'if the land, that have been echoed back from
amongst the people,—in other words, that have become
generally and lastingly popular.
Again, if the biographer wishes us to dive into the soul-
depths of him of whom he writes, and to discover the
Bprings of his action, and the impulses of his heart, it is
not to the set speech nor to the studied writing he would
refer, but rather to the playful or passionate words spoken
in domestic life, to the light and easy conversation of the
social circle, to the phrase of recurrence, so characteristic,
that we know beforehand what is coming, to the unstudied
ejaculations in the presence of calamity, or in the moment
of unexpected success. It is by these we learn not only
to admire the character, but to love it, on the one side,—
not only to contemn, but to hate it, on the other.
This likewise may be applied to the life of a nation.
We know the character of a people, not by the finest
oratorical displays in the senate house, nor by the volumes
of philosophical research that shall endure for generations,
nor yet by the poems, that become the property of the
world itself; but by the novels and tales of the period, the
satires in prose and verse, that have taken hold of the
public mind, the songs and ballads that, with or without
music, have been the delight of the school-boy and the
charm of the aged, and the hymns lisped by the infant and
murmured by the dying. These are the pulse of the
nation. They tell its heart-throbs, whether fever burns in
its veins, or whether circulation is slow. They are as the
feathers on the breeze, small things in themselves, but
marking the direction whence the great atmospheric
ciu"rents are blowing. They are as the pittings of the rain,
as the footmarks of the bird left in the sand of ages, that
reveal those characteristics of weather and animal life
which existed long before the intelligent beings, who
should study meteorology or zoology, were formed.
That circular progress so characteristic of the physical,
intellectual, and moral government of the universe, by
which cause produces effect, and effect becomes in turn a
cause, till we can hardly separate the one from the other,
is very noticeable in the connection between history and
popular writings. Story produces the writings, and the
writings give birth to story ; circumstances call forth the
poet, and the poet produces the circumstances; thought
IS the parent of words, and words are the genitors of
The Attempt. 65
thought; the demand causes the supply, and the supply
produces the demand. Thus the historian cannot always
decide whether popular writings have produced national
feelings, or national feelings popular writings; but he
sees that they act and re-act, that history elucidates
literature, and literatm-e, history.
We will consider the literature of songs and poesy
under the four heads we have already mentioned,—
novels, satires, songs, and hymns, and try to discover what
use the historian may make of them separately, in
recording the sentiments of a people, in describing the
life of a nation.
I. Tales, novels, stories, works of fiction—these form, in
quantity at least, the chief part of current literature.
They are generally written by those who mingle in every¬
day Hfe, and are, therefore, a strong contrast to the
monkish legends of olden time ; and to the historian they
are of far greater value. These legends sought to satisfy
man's natural craving for a story; but nearly all who
could then write, were isolated from home and kindred,
and spent most of their time in the retirement of the
monastic cell. Then story and history widely diverged,
and in most of these wild phantasies of the imagination,
the only fact the historian can gather, is the morbid
effect on the mind, of separation from the realities of
normal life, whether public, social, or domestic. He can
tell what monks dreamed about, what the people, in
ignorant belief, listened to, but he cannot gain from
legends what a diver into present day literature might
S(jon discover—the habits of peer and peasant, of citizen
and yeoman. As we leave the day, or rather night of
monkery, and pass on through the dawn, when Chaucer
sang and told the tales of his pilgrims to the Canterbury
shrine, we feel that we have met with a man who lived
in the real, and not the ideal world; and knowing how
gladly his works were welcomed, the historian may read
in them the rousing consciousness of the nation—the
loosening of the chains of slavery, the breathings of a
new life. In Wickliffe's works, the putting of the yeast
iuto the dough is what the historian notes ; in Chaucer's,
he observes the first symptons that it begins to ferment.
Passing rapidly onwards, we find the great dramas
in the reign of the mighty Elizabeth, These up¬
lift the curtain from the thoughts and manners of
men in high life and low,    Shakespeare's historical plays
FSBBUA&T 1874. I
66 The Attempt.
do not throw light on the history of Julius Csesar, of
John, and only scantily on that of Henry VIII., but they
show how, at that period, such histories were regarded.
' His tragedies and comedies are very unreal in their
incidents, and some of the characters purely creatures of
the imagination ; but we feel that their marvellous power
is in the reproduction of human nature, and it would not
be difficult for the historical critic to separate what is
true for all nations and all ages, from what specially
, illustrates the thoughts and manners of the Ehzabethan
era.
With the strong rule of Elizabeth, and the death of
Raleigh, the strength of poetic and inventive genius
seemed to pass away. Dramatic and all kinds of poetry
became increasingly licentious, effeminate, and artificial;
and the historian may read the deterioration of the people
under the Stuart dynasty, in the changed character of
their literature. There was a reaction during the
Commonwealth, and Milton's name stands forth in all the
strength of its poetry and prose; but his immortal
Paradise Lost was far removed from the popular poetry
of the time of the Restoration: the nation gave no
welcome to the grand creation of her most gifted son.
A very different, and equally wonderful work, was
produced at this period, the most remarkable prose epic
that was ever penned,—popular now as then,—like
Shakspeare's dramas of world-wide interest, but touching
a deeper chord of human nature, the religion of the
heart. Bunyan's Pilgrim^s Progress was the result of the
Puritan's struggle for liberty of thought, and, apart from its
deeper signification, the historian may find many allusions
to the persecutions of those days, and the various phases
of character they evolved. For example, we imagine the
description of the court in Vanity Fair, before which
Faithful was tried, to be true to the very life. If we
pass on to the eighteenth century, we find another story
that fastens itself in abiding popular literature, the
Adventures of Bohinson Crusoe. It illustrates two pro¬
minent traits in the British character—love of adventure,
especially sea-faring, and the indomitable "pluck" that ever
makes the best of circumstances, that never says die.
The modern novel or tale, which reproduces society in
all the phases of Hfe, as faithfully as a painter of the
Dutch school pourtrays the scenes he has witnessed, or
Avliich describes the ideal of life with a halo almost more
The Attempt. 67
than human, such as Raphael gives to the glorious
groups of his imagination, is of comparatively recent
growth. Those of the first school are invaluable to the
historian, in describing, not only as they might be
painted in a picture, the dress, furniture, physiognomy,
scenery, and occupations that characterise the time, but
also the maxims that govern, the manners that prevail,
the language that is spoken, the sentiments that are
cherished; whilst the writers who become popular—for
popularity is in this an essential,—in their endeavours to
paint society as it ought to be, are also of great worth.
They tell the longings, the aspirations of their readers,
they reveal the beau ideal to which they are stretching
forward.
II. Satires, political squibs, pamphlets, brochures,
either m prose or verse, especially those of an allegorical,
fanciful nature, may be classed as popular poetry, and
are of immense value to the historian who wishes to de¬
scribe the life of a people. A priori, their frequency at a
special time shows the nation is disturbed, but not by the
deepest feelings. They are not the production of a time
of real danger and crushing calamity on the one hand,
nor of thorough contentment and jubilant triumph on
the other. They rather testify to a feeling of annoyance,
but not an annoyance so deep as to prevent an element
of amusement; to use a homely illustration, the touch
which has awakened the people, has tickled as well as
scratched them, and half angiy, half pleased, they strike
no heavy blow, but shoot the satire, playful or stinging,
according to the proportion of amusement or annoyance
they have experienced. Political, scientific, and ecclesi¬
astical controversy, will call these forth; also surface
aspects of social life, and dangers standing at a respect¬
ful distance; not questions that are only answered by
civil war, or determined over the bodies of the martyred,
or settled by the fighting of international battles. We
have had examples of this in very recent history. The
great war between France and Germany did not literally
touch us, but it roused the feelings of almost all the
people, and in every family were those who sympathised
with the Germans or the B'rench. Then were thrown out
the brochure of Dame Europa's School, and the many
replies that followed, and these were sold by tens of
thousands. Had the sons of England been falling in the
fight, and her towns desolated, we should have felt this
68 The Attempt.
far too light a manner of treating the subject, and the
pamphlets would not have been tolerated. Subsequently,
a distant fear took possession of a large portion of the
public, that triumphant Germany might turn her arms
against England; something akin to the dread of earth¬
quake and Pompeian overthrow, that is lightly expressed
when a neighbouring quiescent mountain has been
declared an extinct volcano, that may again cast out its
molten lavas. Then the Battle of Dorking appeared, and
had thousands of readers. Had there been reality in the
alarm, the Englishman would have repudiated fear,
would have been the last to allow that his country was
in danger. Still, these brochures marked a quickening of
the pulse, a passing creep in the body politic; they
registered the feehngs of the people, more sensitively
than the speaking in parliament, or the record of diplo¬
matic negotiations.
III. The third division, songs and ballads, is perhaps,
more essentially popular poetry than either of the former.
They form the traditional history of a nation, and are
often the only records of very early periods. For
example, that—
" Kerty was a market town,
When Exeter was a furzy down,"
proves the probability of the higher antiquitj' of Credition,
though other records are wanting. Ballads are to the
writer of medieeval history, even of more value than
prose tales to the writer of modern. The " Battle of
Chevy Chase," is one of the best descriptions Ave have of
border warfare, and the misery it carried is pathetically
described in the couplet,—
" The child may rue, who is unborn,
The slaughter of that day."
We have before remarked that allegorical satires do
not express the deep feelings of the people. It is the
very reverse with songs. Their fervours, their de¬
pressions, their thankfulness and despair, find in song
literature, a self-registermg thermometer, and the
historian must consult it for changes in the political
atmosphere, as carefully as the meteorologist observes
the markings of his instrument. In the infancy of a
people, songs precede written documents in the ex¬
pression of national thought, as naturally as speaking
precedes writing with children ; and if the earliest songs,
2 he Attempt. 69
like the first words of babyhood, are common to all
nations, they very soon assume an individual character;
the Eastern separates from the Western, the Greek from
the Gothic, the British from the French, the English
from the Scotch. Of course, there are many points of
contact, as there are in personal thoughts and ex¬
pressions, and the nations that have mixed much in the
general family of man have not so many idiosyncrasies
of song, as those who, from geographical or political
causes, have lived a more separate life. Hence, we find
that the Scotch, the Irish, the Swiss, have, on the surface,
songs more characteristic than the English, the French,
and the German; yet if the song lore of the more cosmo¬
politan comitries is searched into, we shall find there are
the same differences in it, as there are in heart-feelings
between men bearing the same outward polish. For
example the national songs of Germany express devotion
to a fatherland; of France, admiration for " La belle
France," and the more sensational " Mourir pour la
patrie;" of Britain, the religious and loyal " God save
the Queen," " God bless the Prince of Wales." The English
have not, like their continental neighbours, many war
songs, BO far as the military service is concerned.
Tennyson's " Charge of the Light Brigade," almost stands
alone,—for their insular position removes them from the
battle field ; but this cause gives full compensation in the
animated sea-songs of the island descendants of the sea
kings. From the stirring notes of " Britannia rules the
Wave," to the solemn dirge, " Toll for the Brave, The
Brave that are no more," or the pathetic plaint,—
" There is in the lone, lone sea.
A spot unmarked but holy,
For these, the gallant and the free,
In their ocean bed lie lowly,"
we feel that naval life has brought out the strongest
martial feelings, and the deepest lamentations of the
people.
Again, if we look at two points of contrast between Scotch
and English songs, we shall see they also are very
characteristic of the national peculiarities of the sister
countries. In comic song, we contrast the admirable
dry humour of the " Laird of Cockpen," with the laughing
merriment of " Johnny Gilpin," whilst in the pathetic,
it strikes us, the most touching of the Scotch concern
the aged, of the English the young.     " John Anderson
70 The Attempt.
my Jo, John," " Auld Lang Syne," are examples of the
first, "Mary the Maid of the Inn," "We are Seven,"
'• The Graves of a Household," •' The May Queen," of the
second. Another feature of Scottish character, is
personal attachment to the sovereign or chief of the clan ;
of the English, intense love of home, and these feelings
seem also illustrated by song, in the popularity for more
than a hundred years of Jacobite poems, and of such
clannish ones as •' The Campbells are coming;" whilst
those that pre-eminently rouse and soothe the English¬
man, are the " Home, sweet Home" of the peasant,
the "Dulce, dulce, domum" of the schoolboy. These
are only specimens of many characteristics that might be
named.
Sometimes the nation has not produced the man, who
can weave with his magic shuttle the entangled threads
of thought into the beautiful and lasting M^eb of poetry,
and she finds in another land the fabric she is wanting,—
she brings it home, and uses it as her own. And the
historian may consider it as such; its foreign origin is the
accident of exigency, its national adoption is the voice of
the people.
Comparing, again, national life with individual, we may
say the mythical element, the stories of giants and fauies,
marks the childhood of a people,—the sentimental,
sanguine, and passionate, its youth,—the historical, the
philosophical, the didactic, its manhood,—the complaining,
the wearied, the morbid, its old age,—and the return to
nursery stories, its second childhood. Applying this to
the popular poetry of the present day, we hesitate whether
we should place that of England in manhood, or in old
age. Tennyson and Browning, with some others, make
us hope the former, but there is a school rising of croaking,
dissatisfied spuits, the " Idle singers of an empty day,"
that makes us fear the querulousness of senility may be
creeping over the country, and contracts painfully with
the manly words of the American poet,
" Let us then be up and doing,
With a heart for any fate,
Still achieving, still pursuing.
Learn to labour and to wait."
The tendency also to reproduce and to copy (this is
different to enquiring into) the myths of early ages, is not
the tendency that reassures us in a nation that we trust
The Attempt. 71
has yet a future of enhghtened manhood, and of calm,
wise, and dignified old age.
IV. One more department of national poetic hterature
remains,—the hymns, the psalms, the divine songs of a
country.     No  doubt   a  close  search into  these  would
reveal the shadings of colour that mark the differences of
nations and of ages ; but whilst distinct and strong lines
separate the hymns of diverse religions,—Greek, Norse,
Parsee,   Buddhistic,    Brahminic,    or    Mahometan,   only
blending  in  the  few   exceptional cases,   that seem the
outcome of the religion originally implanted by God in
the heart of man,—the chief thought that strikes us in
looking over the hymnology of the Christian church, is
not the diversity of the few, but the cathoHcity of the
mass of religious songs.    Does a church historian wish to
write  of the various  polemical  discussions, dogmatical
opinions, and ceremonious observances of different sects
and branches of the church ?    He must go to the creeds
and councils, to articles and catechisms, to dissertations
and pamphlets; but does he desire to discover the founda¬
tion on which the whole church is builded,—the one Lord,
the one faith, the one baptism, the one God and Father of
all, the permeating influence above, and in, and through,—
does he desire to detect the inner life, from which springs
the family likeness among the people of God, whatever be
their denomination among the churches of earth ?    Let
him go to the hymns and divine songs the church catholic
delights to raise, to the book of psalms that, for nearly
three thousand years, have been sung by the worshippers
of Jehovah in every land,—to the glorious Te Deum that
has sounded from the east to the west, and echoed onwards
to the east again,—to the " Rock of ages, cleft for me,"
translated by Toplady  from a hymn  heard in a Greek
service  at   Constantinople,—to  Cowper's   " There   is   a
fountain filled with blood," or Montgomery's " Prayer is
the soul's sincere desire,"—to the French Abba's " Jeru¬
salem the golden," or the English Elizabethan "Jerusalem,
my happy home,"—to Martin Luther's grand old German
hymns, or the beautiful paraphrases of Scotland.    He will
point to these and countless others, written in diverse
ages, in distant countries, and by those whose minds were
cast in very different moulds, and he will find that the
whole Christian world is akin; that penetrate below the
su^rface, reach the fountain whence religious life flows, and
tli^re that unity is  existent   which  shall  only be fully
known amidst the harmonies of heavenly song.
72 llie Attempt.
AVe have thus touched, but very lightly, each of these
branches of popular poetic literature. One thought
awakens another as to the service it may render the
historian.
Most  interesting  would  it be,  only  space and time
altogether  forbid  it,   to   carry out practically  the  idea
suggested,—to take the history of a period, to eliminate all
public   documents and historical records, and to gather
together its poetry in the four forms enumerated;  from
this, to frame our estimate of the progress or retrogression
of moral and mental power in the soul of a nation, and
then to compare the theories evolved with the record of
actual fact.      Such an investigation might prevent the
startling surprises  that  so often   occur  in  tracing  the
course of history.    We should then perceive the swelling
of the current  before it   broke  its barrier;   we  should
detect the polluted stream hastening to join the clear
water,  before  we   perceived  that  what  so  lately  was
pellucid and glowing,   has become muddy, and choked,
and stagnant;   we should watch the gathering of the
storm before we heard the thunder overhead ; we should
mark the dawn before we were dazzled by the sunshine ;
we should know the cause before we discerned the effects.
Aliqu^.
Mature  and  ^otri!.
To Her I Love.
Sunset bright with brilliant clouds.
Fading into gray—
Calls to me your various mood,
Grave, and sometimes gay.
Lilies fair and poppies red.
Forget-me-nots so true,
Violets, wood anemones.
Make me think of you.
All of loveliness and grace
Seems to you allied ;
My thought of you in nature's face
Is intensified.
Noli-me-Tangere.
The Attempt. 73
d^flrge  OJUot's   dfhararfers.
It is hard to give any permanent definition of a thing
that has not yet completed its development, so that a good
novel would be described very differently, in different
stages of its growth. Some people test its value as "the
Indians judge their muskets, by the force of the recoil,"
that being considered the best which fairly floors the
handler. But the strongly sensational, the horror-thrilling,
is becoming a little old-fashioned in better circles. Baron
Bunsen says it ought to be " a poetic representation of a
course of events consistent with the highest laws of moral
government, whether it delineate the general history of a
people (the Iliad as a type), or narrate the fortimes of a
chosen hero (the Odyssey as a type)."
But there is another definition than "the representation
of a course of events" contained in the development it
has reached under the hands of George Eliot. To her it
is a poetic representation of things, and not of deeds,
specially of the most important things in the universe, her
fellow human beings. She has grand descriptions of
scenery too, but it is chiefly pi'esented as the fitting
frame-work, or fragmentary education, of her characters.
To pourtray them faithfully, suggestively, instructively, is
to her the mission of the novelist. With this considera¬
tion in our minds, we shall not find her works so unequal
as they seem when we consider them as perfect wholes, or
in relation to their plots alone,
The " Scenes from Clerical Life " only suggested her
future successes, yet, in the little series of three short
tales, she has revealed all the peculiarities of her concep¬
tion and treatment, her interest in ordinary and real
humanity, and her searching analysis of its secret springs.
" The Sad Fortunes of the Rev. Amos Barton" comes
first. The eminent mediocrity of the reverend gentleman,
—who can hardly be called the hero, so much as the subject
of the tale,—is brought out so powerfully as almost
to ^ create aversion for him. But his well-meaning
insignificance is glorified to himself and to us by the
self-sacrificing love of his devoted wife, Milly. There
are other sketches of character in it that suggest a future
and fuller treatment. The selfish and superficial Countess
Czulaske might have come into Thackeray's pages, and
KiRca 1871. K.
74 The Attempt.
been worse treated; and Mrs Hackit is, I am sure, a first
cousin of the immortal Mrs Poyser, "Mr Gilfil's Love-
Story" is a beautifully suggestive way of seeking the
romantic in the unromantic, and finding the causes of the
present in the past. The passionate devotion of his
youth had spent itself on one object; but healthy natures
do not die of a broken heart—they live on and hide the
scar often only too well, so that it is neither guessed or
respected. The same scene and the same characters
appear in it as in the " Rev. Amos Barton," earlier in type,
later in period. " Janet's Repentance" is a touching
description of the effect that one noble nature has upon
another through its comprehension thereof. Janet, per¬
haps, would nevei have hoped, and without hope would
never have tried to save herself, had not Mr Tryan
revealed the secret of his self-devotion, and the depths of
his repentance for past error. It was necessary that a
deep sympathy should be established between these two,
and we feel satisfied with the poetic justice that gives
them a short period of such happiness. The less im¬
portant characters in the tale, powerfully and truly as
they are described, do not touch us, or affect us much, we
are so absorbed in what concerns Janet. But with all the
marks of genius in the book, I do not think the author
would have found much fame from it alone. I believe
that voluminousness is in reality both a cause and an
effect of a writers greatness. Certainly practice for
himself, and continued attention from the public, are
elements in winning fame, at least. But when the
practice results in greater power, and the attention is
rewarded by increasing interest, then a writer becomes
truly great. And this George Eliot became through
"Adam Bede," her first, though not her last great
work.
"Adam Bede" contains a marvellous description of the
life of a country district. We must picture the village
where the blacksmith laboured, and the green where
Dinah preached; the cottage, a little to the east, where
the Bedes lived; the substantial farm of the Poysers
some fields off; the grand old woods of the Chase still
beyond; and away to the west, the abode of Mr Irvin, the
pluralist—the admiring son—the sympathetic brother—
the affectionate pastor. The grand character of the book
is Dinah, introduced as she is to the notice of Colonel
Townley,  " who knew but two types of methodist—the
The Attempt. 75
ecstatic and the bilious." There is a wonderful charm in
the description of her simplicity and unconsciousness as
she mounted the cart on the village green, and turned
her grey eyes on the people. " There was no keenness in
the eyes, they seemed rather to be shedding love than
making observations; they had the liquid look which
tells us that the mind is full of what it has to give out,
rather than impressed by external objects. She stood
with her left hand toward the descending sun, and leafy
boughs screened her from its rays; but in this sober light
the delicate colouring of her face seemed to gather a vivid¬
ness, like flowers at evening. It was a small oval face,
of a uniform transparent whiteness, with an egg-like line
of cheek and chin, a fall but firm mouth, a delicate nostril,
and a low perpendicular brow, surmounted by a rising
arch of parting between smooth locks of pale reddish hair.
The hair was drawn straight back behind the ears, and
covered, except for an inch or two above the brow, by a
net quaker cap. The eyebrows, of the same colour as the
hair, were perfectly horizontal, and firmly pencilled; the
eyelashes, though no darker, were long and abundant;
nothing was left blurred or unfinished. It was one of
those faces that make one think of white flowers with
light touches of colour on their pure petals. The eyes had
no peculiar beauty beyond that of expression; they looked
60 simple, so candid, so gravely loving, that no accusing
scowl, no light sneer, could help melting away before
their glance. Joshua Rann gave a long cough, as if he
were clearing his throat in order to come to a new under¬
standing with himself, Chad Cranage lifted up his leather
skull-cap and scratched his head; and Wiry Ben wondered
how Seth had the pluck to think of courting her."
Then came the simple prayer, the natural address,
during which the city traveller had been chained
against his will by the charm of Dinah's mellow treble
tones, which had a variety of modulation like that
of a fine instrument touched with the unconscious
skill of musical instinct. " The simple things she said
seemed like novelties," " but the village mind does not
easily take fire, and a little smouldering, vague anxiety,
that might easily die out again, was the utmost effect
Dinah's preaching had wrought in them at present," all
except Bess Cranage—and the few who were of the
society like Seth Bede, had heard her, wondering, but
unmoved.    The touching scene on her homeward way^
76 The Attempt.
when Seth Bede pleads for love—but she found " her
heart not free to marry;" she " seemed to have no room
in her soul for wants and fears of her own, it had pleased
God to fill lier heart so full with the wants and sufferings
of His poor people;" and he begs even for hope to wait,
lest there might be "a new leading," but still she
answers,—" Let us leave that, Seth. It is good to live
only a moment at a time, as I've read in one of Mr
Wesley's books. It isn't for you and me to lay plans,
we've nothing to do but to obey and to trust; farewell."
And then " he chose to turn back along the fields through
which he and Dinah had already passed; and I think his
blue linen handkerchief was very wet with tears, long
before he had made up his mind that it was time for him
to set his face steadily homewards. He was but three-
and-twenty, and had only just learned what it is to love,—
to love with that adoration which a young man gives to
a woman whom he feels to be greater and better than
himself. Love of this sort is hardly distinguishable from
religious feeling. What deep and worthy love is not
so?"
" Our emotion, in its keenest moments, passes from ex¬
pression into silence; our love, at its highest flood,
rushes beyond its object, and loses itself in the sense of
the divine mystery. And this blessed gift of venerating
love has been given to too many humble craftsmen since
the world began, for us to feel any surprise that it should
have existed in the soul of a Methodist carpenter, half a
century ago, while there was yet a lingering after-glow
from the time when Wesley and his fellow-labourer fed
on the hips and haws of the Cornwall hedges, after ex¬
hausting limbs and lungs in carrying a divine message
to the poor. That after-glow has long faded away; and
the picture we are apt to make of Methodism in our
own imagination, is not an amphitheatre of green hills,
or the deep shade of broad-leaved sycamores, where a
crowd of rough men and weary-hearted women drank
in a faith which was a rudimentary culture, which
linked their thoughts with the past, lifted their imagina¬
tion above the sordid detail of their own narrow lives,
and suffused their souls with a sense of a pitying, loving,
infinite Presence, sweet as summer to the houseless needy.
It is too possible that to some of my readers Methodism
may mean nothing more than low-pitched gables up
dingy   streets,   sleek  grocers,   sponging   preachers,   and
The Attempt. 77
hypocritical jargon,—elements which are regarded as an
exhaustive analysis of Methodism in many fashionable
quarters. That would be a pity, for I cannot pretend
that Seth or Uinah were anything else than Methodists—
not, indeed, of that modern type which reads quarterly
reviews, and attends in chapels with pillared porticoes,
but of a very old-fashioned kind. They believed in
present miracles, in instantaneous conversions, in revela¬
tions by dreams and visions; they drew lots, and sought
for Divine guidance by opening the Bible at hazard;
having a literal way of interpreting the Scriptures, which
is not at all sanctioned by approved commentators; and
it is impossible for me to represent their diction as correct,
or their instruction as liberal. Still—if I have read religious
history aright—faith, hope, and charity have not always
been found in a direct ratio to the three concords ; and
it is possible, thank heaven! to have very erroneous
theories and very sublime feehngs.
And these sublime feelings carry Dinah through the book.
Going always where she was needed, respected by all who
met her, loved by all who knew her—the one girl Mrs
Bede could bear about her—the one human being that
could aid poor Hetty's shallow soul to form any conception
of a Deity ; set almost too far apart from humanity by her
high standard, at last the woman's heart found its hunger
and its satisfaction in her love of Adam Bede. And this
strong, true, manly Adam Bede was a man Avithout the
visionary dreams of the Methodist, but with a consciousness
of the Divine presence in all things that a Methodist would
accept; as he said, " there's the speerit o' God in all things,
and at all times—week day as well as Sunday—and i' the
great works and inventions, and i' the figuring and the
mechanics," and hoAv he believed " a good solid bit o'
work lasts, if it's only laying a floor down, somebody's the
better for it being done well, besides the man who did it,"
" for from very early days he saw that good carpentry
was God's will, was that form of God's will that most
immediately concerned him." A man so able to keep
to his own ideal, that he gets just a little of the
hardness of the elder brother in the parable—to his
father and to his mother, and to Arthur Donnithome;
yet a man, often taking himself to task for it, medi¬
tating—" They that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of those that are weak, and not to please
themselves—there's   a text wants no candle to ehow't •
78 Tlie A ttempt.
it shines by its own Hght. It is plain enough you get
into the wrong road in this life, if you run after this and
that, only for the sake o' making things easy and pleasant
to yourself. A pig may poke his nose into the trough,
and think o' nothing outside it; but if you've got a man's
heart and soul in you, you can't be easy a-making your
own bed, an' leaving the rest to lie on the stones."
With all this Saxon ethical feeling, Adam Bede was a true
Saxon in his relation to woman; watchful to his grumbling
old mother; respectful to Mary Burge ;   loving, Avith the
timid reverence  of a first love, the beautiful face that
enchanted him;   worshipping, with the deep love of a
sympathetic soul, the woman he trusted and believed in,
and yet found true,    " Beauty has an expression beyond
and far above the one woman's soul that it clothes, as the
words of genius have a wider meaning than the thought
that prompted them : it is more than a woman's love that
moves us in a woman's eyes,-—it seems to be some far-off
mighty love that has come near us, and made speech for
itself there; the rounded neck, the dimpled arm, move us
by something more than their prettiness—by their close
kinship with all that we have known of tenderness and
peace.    The noblest nature sees most of this impersorial
expression  in   beauty,   and for this reason the noblest
nature is often the most blinded to the character of the
one woman's soul that the beauty clothes."    "And good
Adam had no fine words into which he could  put his
feeling for Hetty: he could not disguise mystery in this
way with the appearance of knowledge; he called his
love frankly a mystery, as you have heard him.    He only
knew that  the  sight  and  memory  of her moved him
deeply, touching the spring of all love and tenderness, all
faith and courage within him.    How could he imagine
narrowness, selfishness, hardness in herl    He created the
mind he believed in out of his own, which was large,
unselfish, tender."    How his true nature suffered, but out
of his truth how a light arose, a hope and a better love
than the old—for it was no dream of his own, but had an
objective reality to justify it.    There is no doubt that
Dinah brought him a deeper sympathy and an enlarged
being.    "And it's a feeling as gives you a sort o' liberty,
as if you could walk more fearless, when you've more
trust in another than  y'have in yourself    I've always
been thinking I knew better than them as belonged to
me. and that's a poor sort o' life, when vou can't look
The Attempt. 79
to them nearest  to  you t'help  you with  a bit  better
thought than what you've got inside you a'ready."
He deserved a second love, for he used his first one
well.    No wonder that the strong true man loved the
frail shallow girl, for " Hetty's face had a language that
far transcended  her  feelings.     There  are  faces  which
nature charges with a meaning and pathos not belonging
to the single human soul that flutters beneath them, but
speaking the joys and sorrows of foregone generations;
eyes which tell of deep love, which doubtless has been
and is somewhere,  but  not  paired with  these  eyes—
perhaps paired with pale eyes that can say nothing, just
as a national language may be instinct with poetry unfelt
by the lips  that  use  it."    We must all have felt this
strange  incongruity between  the   outer and the inner
man.    Yet how gently we are apt to judge the beautiful,
till they become quiet and graceful in the consciousness
that their charms are fully acknowledged, and then we
flatter them for new graces that we ourselves have given.
Poor little Hetty! she was not so very wicked.    She had
not a  thought of evil against any one—not even her
plague, Totty, if she would  only keep  away from her.
She only  wished  to be  free  from   every  disagreeable,
embellished by every adornment, and lapped in every
luxury.    But others have had such day-dreams, and not
been punished so.    George Eliot traces it to the utter
want of any religion to equahse and balance her one¬
sided nature, the utter absence of any appreciation of the
moral sense—the entire idolatry of sense, and callousness
to  any higher thoughts.    This  is beautifully illustrated
in the scene in the two bedchambers in the attic of Mrs
Peyser's farm, in one of which Dinah felt it "borne in upon
her " that Hetty might some day be in trouble and need
her; and so  she entered the other, where a suddenly
extinguished candle enabled Hetty to hide, by a veil of
darkness, her frippery and  adornments.     Then  Dinah
spoke the words of a true  and loving friend, from the
depths of her own heart;   and Hetty cried, and Dinah
thought she had touched her feelings.   But the sweet voice
responded querulously,   " Don't   talk to me so, Dinah!
Why do you come to frighten me ?    I've never done any¬
thing to you;   why can't you let me be?"    No wonder
that Dinah went away, silenced but not estranged.    And
yet when "the trouble" came, the shallow soul did think
of Dinah as the one human being she could face; and it
80 The Attempt.
was Dinah alone that in her cell moved her to confes¬
sion, and touched her with the first sense of personal
responsibihty. Yet even then her material nature clung
to the tangible friend, and her darkened soul cried rather
to Dinah's spirit than to the Judge and Father of both,
that stood in the Unseen beside her, waiting for her voice.
Painful as is her ending, it is almost well that she died
free before her friends saw her. Oh ! the shock they
would have felt. The round, girlish cheeks, changed by
the years and the toil into haggard hollows; the peach-
bloom gone, the hair thin, and perhaps grey, and the
great lustrous eyes left without the sunlight of hope and
youth, like sunless tarns amid bare craggy rocks. And
how they would have haunted them and followed them,
for, let them be as kind as ever they would, she could not
have been spared pain. Like one restored from the grave,
she would find no place vacant for her.
We must not miss that good-looking woman, Mrs
Poyser, not more than eight-and-thirty, of fair com¬
plexion, sandy hair, well-shapen, hght-footed, with a
suggestive family likeness to Dinah, that might have
reminded a painter of Mai'tha and Mary. It is amusing
to hear her pleading with her niece to stay with her,
bringing forward a list of earthly woes that cannot be
avoided without her,—" All because you've got notions i'
your head about religion, more nor what's i' the Cate¬
chism and the Prayer-book." " But not more than what's
in the Bible, aunt," said Dinah, " Yes, and the Bible too,
for that matter," Mrs Poyser rejoined, rather sharply;
" else why shouldn't them as knoAvs best what's in the
Bible—the parsons and people as have got nothing to
do but learn it—do the same as you do ? But for the
matter of that, if everybody was to do like you, the world
must come to a stand-still; for if everybody tried to do
without house and home, and with poor eating and drink¬
ing, and was allays talking as we must despise the things
o' the world, as you say, I would like to know where the
pick o' the stock and the corn, and the best new milk
cheeses 'ud have to go." " If you loved your neighbour
no better nor you do yourself, Dinah, it is little enough
you'd do for him."
Forced at last to underrate herself, to try a last
appeal to Dinah, she says she might stay with an aunt
" who was none so good, but she might stand better¬
ing."     Her racy  remarks  scattered  through the  book
The Attempt. 81
we can only exemplify:—" Folks must put up wi
their own kin as they put up wi' their own noses—
it's their own flesh and blood;" and after the descrip¬
tion of the woes of farming, meant to turn away covetous
eyes from her farm, the winding-up " at the end of the
year, it's like as if you'd been cooking a feast, and got
the smell of it for your pains." " It's all very fine hav¬
ing a ready-made rich man, but may happen he'll be
a ready-made fool; and it's no use filling your pocket
full o' money if you've got a hole in the corner. It'll do
you no good to sit in a spring-cart of your own, if you've
got a soft to drive you ; he'll soon turn you over into the
ditch." " Wi' them three gells in the house I'd need have
twice the strength, to keep 'em up to their work. It is
like having roast meat at three fii'es ; as soon as you've
basted one, another's bm-ning." " There's nothing you
can't believe o' them wenches; they'll set the empty
kettle on the fire, and then come an hour after to see if
the water boils." Or to poor Molly, who spilt the tea—
"You'll do no good by crying and making more wet to wipe
up." " I know the dancin's nonsense; but if you stick
at everything because it's nonsense, you wonna go far i'
this life." " It's hard work to tell which is old Harry
when everybody's got boots on." And her ready wit,
even to the annihilation of well-educated, bitter-tongued,
woman-hating Bartle Massey, who said sneeringly, " The
women are quick enough, they're quick enough. They
know the rights of a story before they hear it, and can
tell a man what his thoughts are before he knows 'em
himself." " Like enough," says Mrs Poyser, " for the men
are mostly so slow, their thoughts mostly overrun 'em,
and they can only catch 'em by the tail. I can count a
stocking-top while a man is getting his tongue ready, an'
when he outs wi' his speech at last, there's little broth to
be made on it. It's your dead chicks take the longest
hatchin'. Howiver, I'm not denyin' the women are
foolish; God Almighty made 'em to match the men."
The triumphant way in which she had her say out to
the Old Squire, vocalizing the wrongs of her neighbour¬
hood and her family, and her clear understanding of all
the fair-seeming plots of his narrow nature. Had her
neighbours been of an enthusiastic temperament, they
would have made a demonstration in her favour. Just,
but hard in speech, her own husband and Adam Bede
seemed the only two just perfect enough to make  her
KABca 1874. L
82 The Attempt.
keep the peace before them; yet there is a beautiful
touch of character in the way in which she imexpectedly
is found most lenient to poor Hetty in her disgrace.
What a fine picture of a bachelor clergyman is Mr
Irwin, with his magnificent mother and insignificant
sisters dependent on him, and never made to feel depend¬
ency. " And perhaps he was the only person in the world
who did not think his sisters uninteresting and super¬
fluous ; for his was one of those large-hearted, sweet-
blooded natures, that never know a narrow or a grudging
thought;" and though his conscience forbade him to deny
the charge of '■ dumb dog " and " idle shepherd " that the
once enthusiastic Will Maskery called him, yet not care¬
less or indifferent as to the cares of his parish, or the
benefit of his hearers. So liberal to Dinah, so tender to
Hetty, so gentle to Arthur.
Poor Arthur! how his ordinary insignificant young life
becomes tragic from one wrong deed—becomes, perhaps,
ennobled however through thought and sorrow. Some
souls need hard teaching, some never seem to receive any.
But we cannot even mention all the characters in this
book; each is a study—Bartle Massey, Lisbeth Bede,
Seth Bede, the Poysers, father and son, and Mr Craig,
the gardener, of whom Mrs Poyser remarked, " P'or my
part, I think he's welly like a cock as thinks the sun's
rose o' purpose to hear him crow," LuTEA Reseda.
{To be continued.)
flu Enltnouiu ^aini:
A STORY OF THE LAKE OF ORTA.
The Island of St Giulio lies in the Lake of Orta, the smallest and perhaps
the loveliest of the north Italian lakes. It consists of a small cluster of
houses terraced down to the water, dominated by a fine cathedral of the ninth
century, containing the relics of St Giulio, Bishop, wlio in his youth is said to
have slain a dragon which infested these shores. The interior of the church is
decorated by a series of frescoes by Gaudenzio Ferrari and other artists of the
fifteenth century ; and one of the finest of these represents a young knight in
full armour, of whom further.
PART I.
Pilgbim's Song,
" Hail to thee, St GiuHo!
Pilgrims from afar we come
Singing to thy festa now.
Floating to thine island home:
The Attempt. 83
Where the dragon wrought such woe
Long ago and long ago-:—
Hail to thee, St GiuUo I
" When the sullen waters slept
Undisturbed by flashing oar,
And the slimy monster crept
Glistening, on the shuddering shore,
Victor o'er the fiend wert thou.
There thy shrine is shining now,—
Hail to thee, St Giiilio !
" Hail to thee 1 in forest brake
Nestles now the village spire.
And across the Garden Lake
Peals the music of the choir;
Corn is waving—flowers glow—
Vines with fruit are bending low,—
Hail to thee, St Giulio !"
It was the feast of St GiuHo,
Many a hundred years ago ;
Orta's lake is blithe with song
As o'er the waves the people throng;
For St Giulio's towers arise
From an island on the lake,
Waves that mirror southern skies
Round the the terraced margin break,
Midway across the waters deep
The purple mountain shadows sleep,
That all the lake enclose;
On lowest rocks the vineyards cling,
And then the forests shadowing.
And then the riven peaks that spring
Up to eternal snows.
The boat is by the marble stair.
So white above the water shine
It dazzles in the daylight glare ;
The pilgrims seek the door-way fair
And the cool shadow of the shrine.
Within the massy ancient wall
Only the wind's complaining sound
They hear among the arches tall,
And the low wavelets plashing round ;
Through the crimson drapery flows,
84 Tlie Attempt.
All the sunshine, colour-stained,
Through the windows, jewel-paned,
On the marble's cool repose—
On the walls' transcendent glory.
For in lovliest hues they shine
Bright with many a frescoed story.
Still we trace those forms divine,
Fair beyond the race of men.
Fading now and waning fainter.
But the pilgrims watched .them then
Coloured by the eager painter.
Gaudenzio Ferrari's name!
They love it still, these valleys lone ;
Not for gold and not for fame
Toils he in the church alone;
Could he but make the dim wall flame
With heavenly visions of his own,
That blaze before his dreaming eyes
Illumined from Paradise.
The pilgrims passing to and fro
Pause lingering where the frescos are;
One peasant maid no more can go
But gazes at them from afar;
And still the master toils, but glances
Adown the aisle, and seems to wait
Until a youthful lord advances
Attired in glittering arms of state.
" The Marquis comes !" the people cry,
" Our brave young lord, so fresh and fair,
So royal in his dignity ;
Hail to the Marquis debonair!"
" It is the Marquis, as I prayed,"
The painter muses, " he shall stand
For the last fresco in the arcade,
A prince to inspire a master hand:
And then, farewell my pictures all!
Live changeless in this sanctuary;
Storms rage without and thiinders fall,
Youtli fades and splendour passes by.
But the old church stands firm and strong
Like the great hope that bade it rise ;
And, pictures mine, to you belong
Art's wondrous immortalities ;
The Attempt. 85
Give to this weary world for long
Borne far faint glimpse of Paradise."
" Marquis," he said, " my task is done,
When thy fair portrait fills this space,
The people will rejoice that one
Of the old brave ancestral race,
Whose SAvords were wont the land to ward
Shall stand their patron's shrine to guard."
" Yes," said the Marquis, " paint us here
Some saint of warlike mien,
Where dwelt the wife of Berenger,
Gisla, the dauntless queen;
She woke the island from repose
With trumpet blare and crashing blows ;
Defied the Pope and Emperor,
And made this church a refuge for
The bravest of their foes.
Who blames her %    Not St Giulio dread.
Who smote the writhing dragon dead.
A grimmer snake, with deadlier coil
Assails our land to-day :
How long shall it be only spoil
For ravening things of prey?
0 Italy I our Italy!
To fight for thee in toil and pain,
To pant my young life out for thee
Upon some dusty battle plain.
Seems but a little thing to me—
A life not all in vain."
Beneath an arch the Marquis stands.
In all his pride of youth and grace ;
The painter works with rapid hands
His image on the wall to trace.
Fairly now the colour lies ;
Years may come and go again,
Generations fresh may rise,
Still, the joy of other eyes
Shall that frescoed wall remain.
Where are those who watched it then ?
Even their carved tombs, defaced
By the feet of many men.
Hardly on the floor are traced;
Centuries have rolled away,
86 The Attempt.
Art has triumphed o'er decay,
And that sweet, immortal smile
Brightens still St Giulio's isle.
In silence wrapt, the painter stands;
Marta, the peasant girl, draws near.
Holds her breath aud clasps her hands.
Gazes as the forms appear.
Till she dares to whisper low,
"Isthesaint St GiuUo?"
The master paused,—" My child, in truth
What saint this is I cannot say ;
St Giulio is no warrior youth ;
He is a bishop, old and grey.
And this is no St George, although
His bearing is as brave and high,
Unconscious yet of any foe,
Or toil, or hard-won victory;
Too joyous for Sebastian calm,
Whose blessed memory can charm
The pestilence from the land;
Too young for Maurice, guardian now
Of those great hills where, long ago,
He poured his blood upon the snow.
Chief of a glorious band.
In truth, I know not; thou, my boy,
Thou hast a glorious work to do.
And noblest gifts, and high employ—
Thou art thy people's hope aud joy,
Be thou their honour too :
Leave the fair fame that never dies;
And so when other times arise.
And these bright hues are faint,
The people may have loving eyes
For my poor picture, where they prize
No more an unknown saint."
The sun has set—the golden stain
Dies on the convent height;
On shadowy hill and vine-clad plain
Descends the warm, blue night;
And down the terrace to the lake
The painter and the Marquis go.
And there a gay farewell they take;
And two light boats the mirror break
That lies so calm below.
The Attempt. 87
Across the widening water rings
In mournful notes—prolonged, untaught,
An old wild air, with sadness fraught,
Some song from Tuscan vineyards brought,
The peasant Marta sings;
The two boats pause upon the wave.
The friends are listening to the strain ;
And then a light adieu they wave,
And never meet again.
Song.
" Methought my love was noble, full of grace
As the knight's statue in the market-place ;
Yes, like the angels tliat the pictures show.
To me seemed Giulio.
" I gave my love the ruddy generous gold ;
My love gave me the lead so dim and cold,
But I loved all his gifts, I loved him so,
Was he not Giulio ?
" I gave my love a true heart beating warm,
A prayer to guard him from all scathe and harm.
The ring my mother left me long ago—
It was for Giulio.
" My love gave me a careless word and glance,
A hand to lead me to the evening-dance.
An idle love song when the sun was low,—
Yet it was Giulio.
" I gave my love carnations—roses true;
My love gave me the vervain and the rue.
Rank herbs he gave for sweetest flowers that grow ;
Could it be GiuUo ?
" The statue, fair in form was marble all;
The angels painted on the cold hard wall,
I had but loved a shade—an outward show—
There was no GiuHo I "
END   OF  PART  TIEST.
E. J. 0.
88 The Attempt.
ilia <^orri{s:
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XXIX.
MBMACKAY'SHELP.
The letter from Colonel Forbes came sooner than the
little party at Milla Forres had dared to expect. It
arrived in less than a fortnight after the despatch ot
Alaster's letter to him. Its contents, however, were some¬
what different from what they had expected. Courteous
and dignified as usual. Colonel Forbes wrote that nothing
could give him greater pleasure than the fulfilment of his
daughter's engagement to one for whom he had so much
regard as Captain Macdonald (Alaster had attained to
that rank during the late C9.mpaign), and who had so
greatly distinguished himself in the good cause; but
in the present dangerous and difficult aspect of public
affairs, he thought it hardly prudent to allow his
daughter to link her fate with one who, like himself,
was almost an outlaw. As he saw at present little
prospect of his own return to Milla Forres, and did not
like the idea of his daughters remaining there without
a protector, he begged Alaster to ask his cousin. Lady
Macdonald, to give them and old Elspet house-room at
Carrick Castle, where Alaster might see Nancy as often
as he liked, till he should himself be able to return, and
himself give away his daughter.
A strange look of relief crossed Alaster's face as he read
this letter. Barbara, on the contrary, seemed vexed ariH.
impatient at the disarrangement of their plans ; she would
have liked the thing over and done with, anything seemed
more tolerable than this suspense and delay. Nancy
seemed a little glad, and a little sorry; it was hard to tell
which feeling predominated. Old Elspet looked grave.
" It's aye an ill-willy thing pittin' afF a marrying," she
said, " there's nae kennin' what slip there may be atween
the cup an' the lip whan folks wait ower lang for their
kail to cuil."
She had never quite got rid of her fear of " the shadow "
yet, and every delay seemed to her a confirmation of the
dismal prophecy.   " You see 1 was not so far wrong after
The Attempt. 89
all," said Barbara, " in putting my house in order, as
Nancy called it; it is just as well I did so, since we are
to leave MUla Forres."
" Ay, ay, Miss Barbara, it's a sair thoclit leavin' the
auld bit, e'en for a month or twa; I haena sleepit outside
its walls this forty years," grumbled Elspet.
" But you know for whose sake we are going, Elspet,
you haven't forgotten the Prince's ring ? "
" Na, na, guid gang wi' him, he's a braw gentleman,
an' a bonny, forbye bein' the lawfu' king o' Scotland, an'
weel he kens a guid bannock when he sees't, an' gin I
thocht it wad advantage him ony, I'd gang barefit tae
John o' Groats, but whatna guid will't dae the Prince my
sleepin' out o' Milla Forres, think ye ? "
This question was more than Barbara could answer.
She was herself more than unwilling to leave the old
house to which her heart clung, Avith all the tenacious
conservatism of her nature, especially just now, when she
felt as if she would like best to creep quietly into some
old familiar corner and die. She had not forgotten old
Mr Mackay's sermon, nor given up her hopes of " over¬
coming ;" but the battle was raging hot about her, and
the old longing to give it up and creep away and die,
often came back to her. It was not yielded to as it had
once been—she had it always before her mind's eye that
it was a battle, and that she must fight it, but sometimes
" flesh and heart " did " faint and fail ; " it was the old,
old story of Christ's soldiers in all ages, '' the spirit was
wilhng, but the flesh was weak."
She particularly disliked also the thought of taking up
her abode at Carrick Castle. Lady Macdonald was a
kindly, hale -hearted, gossiping woman; and Barbara,
with her whole heart sore and shrinking even from the
gentlest touch, could not bear the thought of the good-
natured, spying eyes that would be always upon her, and
instinctively quailed at the thought of the agony which
the rough fingers of her kind-hearted, but uncompre¬
hending, friend were sure to inflict upon her. In this
dilemma her mind reverted to old Mr Mackay, and his
offer of assistance, should she ever need it, on the day she
met him at Peggy's grave. She had often thought of the
kind old man's offer of help before. When in her dire
pain she had felt as if she must speak to some one or die ;
but, though once or twice she had even started on her
way to old Mr Mackay's, she had always turned back
MARCH  1874. M
90 Tlie Attempt.
again. A feeling that to tell anyone, even kind old
Mr Mackay, of the state of Alaster's affections, was a
sort of treason to Nancy, had always restrained her, and
she had turned back to consume her own heart in silence.
But now she felt she might safely ask his help without
telling him anything that could injure Nancy. She might
tell him, without assigning a reason for it, that she wished
very much to avoid going to Carrick Castle, and ask him
to put her on some way of doing so. She knew that he
would trust her, and ask no questions. A dim idea, too,
kept hovering in her brain, that perhaps she might turn
this new aspect of affairs into a means of fulfilling her
promise to old Peggy,—if she could leave Nancy at Carrick
Castle and go herself, or with Elspet, to see what traces
she could find of the lost girl. It would give her occupa¬
tion, and interest, and change of scene. She would throw
herself, mind and body, into the pursuit, and perhaps she
might so run away from her own heart. Vain thought,
when " care sits behind the horseman."' At all events, she
made iip her mind that she would go and ask Mr
Mackay.
So the morning after the arrival of her father's letter, she
set out to call upon the old minister. The glen was in all
its full summer beauty as she passed along, and half-uncon-
Bciously its sweet, peaceful influences crept into her
restless heart, and soothed its pain. The soft hum of
insect life, the slumbrous ripple of the burn, the fitful carol
of a bird now and then, the soft, dreamy, sunny haze on
the hills, the solitude and peace everywhere, enwrapped
her, as in a robe of majesty and quietude. Insensibly
the look of pain passed from the broad, white brow, and
the soft, dreamy light came back to the eyes that suffer¬
ing had made so intense of late. Barbara's face had not
looked so peaceful for many a long day as it did when she
knocked at the old minister's door. She found him
surrounded as usual by his books and papers, and he
rose from a big dusty folio to greet his fair visitor with
Highland courtesy.
" Take a seat, my dear," he said, drawing forward the
great easy chair, the one piece of luxury in his bare, Httle
study, " it's long since I've seen you. You young people
should remember that a look of you is refreshing to old
eyes like mine, that have grown dim peering into musty
old books. How's all with you at Milla Forres ? I trust
Captain Macdonald is gaining strength ? "
The Attempt. 91
" Oh yes, thank you, he is nearly well again," said
Barbara, in an abstracted tone. "Mr Mackay," she went on,
plunging at once into her errand, " do you remember saying
to me that if ever I wanted help I was to come to you ? "
" Yes, my dear, yes, surely," said the old man in a
soothing, fatherly tone, for he saw that the girl was
troubled, " can I help you now 1 Just trust me as if I
were your father."
Then Barbara told him of her present difficulty. That
her sister's marriage was to be delayed till her father's
return, and of her father's desire that, in the meantime,
Milla Forres should be shut up, and she, Nancy, and
Elspet should go to Carrick Castle, and, she added pas¬
sionately, " I cant go there,"
The old man asked no qiiestions, he saw there was
some reason in the girl's mind for her aversion, which
she did not care to tell him, and, with true kindness, he
spared her all questioning, and set himself to consider how
the difficulty was to be remedied without enquiring how
there happened to he& difficulty.
" Let me see, my dear," he said, "let me consider; there
is no house in the neighbourhood to which it would be
suitable for you to go, unless, indeed," he added, after a
few moments thought, looking up at her with a kindly
smile, "your father would suffer you to accept an old
Presbyterian minister's humble hospitality."
A bright colour flushed into Barbara's face, and she
looked up eagerly as she answered,—
" Oh, Mr Mackay, how delightful that would be."
Poor Barbara; this quiet little manse, with its old
books, and its kind, fatherly, old master, seemed to
her a sort of haven of refuge where she might flee
and forget, in its peace and quiet, all the passionate
pain of the past. But in a minute the light of hope
faded out of her eyes, and the impossibility of gain¬
ing her father's consent to such a project rose before her.
She knew that he would never consent to her taking up
her abode with one of the hated Presbyterian ministers;
besides, what excuse could she make for declining Lady
Macdonald's hospitahty and accepting his? The thing
was clearly impossible, so she gave up the pleasant
prospect with one long-drawn sigh.
" I'm afraid it wouldn't do, Mr Mackay. I should like
it, I can't tell you how much, \mi what excuse could I
make to Lady Macdonald ? "
92 The Attempt.
She did not speak of her father's objections to Presby¬
terians, but the old man understood her.
" Perhaps not, perhaps not, my dear; it would have
been a great pleasure to me to have had your company,
but we miist try to think of something else."
Then Barbara told him of old Peggy's last words to
her, and of the promise she had given her to seek for her
long-lost daughter, and give her her dying blessing. The
old man listened attentively, and when she had finished
her story, he said—
" I am rejoiced to hear it, my dear young lady, I am
rejoiced to hear it; it was the one thing that greived me
about that saintly woman, that I feared she had died
without forgiving that poor, wandering child of hers, and
now you have set my mind at rest upon that point.
The Lord be praised for all his mercies!"
He was silent for a few minutes, with a look of great
joy shining in his kindly old eyes. The thought of the
dying woman's forgiveness of her erring child had, for the
time being, driven the thought of the practical bearing of
Barbara's story altogether from his mind. In a few
minutes, however, he recovered from his abstraction, and
turning his eyes (which had been looking absently before
with him a rapt expression during the last few minutes)
with a look of kindly interest on Barbara, he said,—
" Yes, my dear, yes; and you would fain fulfil her
wishes."
" Yes, Mr Mackay, I promised, you know, I could not
rest without doing what I can, at least, to keep my word;"
then she told him, as briefly as she could, wdiat old
Lauchlan had told her of the particulars of Maggie's
disappearance, and of her own wish, if possible, to find
Maggie's old lover and learn from him where he had lost
sight of the fugitive. Mr Mackay listened attentively,
then, when she had done, he sat a few moments as if in
thought.
"Near Scone, did you eay, young Macdougal's farm
was % " he said at last.
" So old Lauchlan thinks, but I do not think he was
quite sure about it, and then it is all so long ago ; he may
have gone away or died years ago."
" Very true, my dear, very true; it is but a slender
chance, still, if you wish to try, I think I see a way to
manage it."
" Oh, do you, Mr Mackay ?    I shall be so glad, and then
The Attempt. 93
I shan't have to go to Carrick Castle at all," exclaimed
Barbara eagerly.
" Wait a little, my dear, wait a little," said the old man,
" I think I see a way, but I must think the matter over;
I will let you know in a day or two what can be done."
" Oh, thank you, dear Mr Mackay. I knew you would
help me; and, indeed, you have helped me before, more
than you know," she added impulsively.
•'How so, my dear? I am very glad if it is so." said
the old man, taking her hand kindly, for she had risen
to go.
" Yes, indeed you did," she said. " You remember that
sermon you preached a few months ago about ' over¬
coming? '"
" Yes, my dear, yes."
" Well I was just about giving up, and that prevented
me, —that's all. Good-bye," she said, shaking hands with
him hastily, and abruptly turning away before he had
time to answer her. A look of serene happiness beamed
in his face as he looked after her while she hastened
down the garden walk, and he turned back into his bare,
old study with a strange shining on his face, and kneeling
down amongst his old dusty folios, he thanked the " Good
Shepherd " who had allowed him to " feed His lambs."
Jeanie Morison.
{To he continued).
% (J[^m Remark.') on the f uidish ^^kcnsing laitis.
So much has been written and spoken on the subject of
the Swedish Licensing Laws within the last twelve months,
that it might seem needless here to enter into a detailed
account of their working, were it not that the writer finds
this subject has as yet engaged the interest of but a com¬
paratively small number of ladies. A sketch, therefore,
of what has been done and is now doing in Sweden, with
a statement of what it is proposed to do in Scotland, may
not be out of place in this magazine.
It is not necessary that we should be total abstainers in
order to admit that the- greatest amount of misery is
caused to our country by the extent to which drinking is
indulged in.    Without pausing to draw pictures of the
94 The Attempt.
degraded state of a large portion of the population of our
towns, and some of our rural districts,—pictures, the
originals of which are doubtless painted in the memory of
most of my readers, whom errands of mercy have led at
times into the squalid dens of our Old Town, or elsewhere,
I think I may take it for granted that we are all agreed
as to the advisability of something being done to lessen
the consumption of alcohol.
Indeed, it has been ascertained and certified by men of
authority in the clerical and medical professions, and by
others holding office as judges, magistrates, and poor-law
guardians, that " two-thirds of the crime, one-half of the
pauperism, one-third of the disease, and three-fourths of
the insanity of the country can be clearly traced to intem¬
perance." A growing belief in the minds of many of our
statesman, that some steps must, if possible, be taken to
reduce this enormous amount of drinking, has already led
to several amendments in our licensing laws, but there
is still a great call for exertion. How this call should be
responded to is the question. Shut up all public houses,
withdraw all licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquors,
make it illegal to sell a drop of spirits, wdne, or beer,
except for medicinal purposes, say the total abstainers.
Pass an act giving power to two-thirds of the rate¬
payers in any district to shut up all public houses within
its boundaries, say the siipporters of the Permissive Bill.
Educate the young, and bring all possible moral and
religious influences to bear on the masses, till they shall
be so convinced of the sin and folly of their ways, that
they will voluntarily abstain from over-indulgence in
drink, say some hopeful moralists. Introduce the Swedish
Licensing Laws, says Mr Carnegie, of Stronvar, who has
studied them deeply, and watched carefully their working
and effects in Sweden, and is now exerting himself to
aroiise the interest of the people of Scotland on their
behalf.
There is, I think, a great deal of good to be drawn from
all these answers. Even from the total abstainers, the
members of the United Kingdom Alliance, Ave need not
scorn to draw some good. If, instead of shutting up all
public houses, we modify their advice, and shut up some ;
if, instead of withdrawing all licenses, we withdi-aAV some;
if, instead of making it illegal to sell a drop of spirits,
wine, or beer, we regulate the hours at which it shall be
sold, and insist that whatever is sold shall at least be
The Attempt. 95
unadulterated, we shall, while rejecting what is exagger¬
ated in their views, accept a great part of their advice.
As to the Permissive Bill,—if we give to the majority of
the ratepayers, not the despotic power suggested by its
supporters, but the election of a board which shall have the
right at once to shut up all unnecessary public houses, and
so to bring those that remain under rules and supervision,
that their power for evil shall be reduced to a minimum, I
think we shall have accepted what is best, while we reject
what is unjust in their bill.
Then, as to the gentle moralists,—certainly let us take
all their advice; let us educate the young, and try the
power of moral suasion, and the sweet influence of religious
teaching to the uttermost; let us, I would add, give the
people many opportunities of innocent amusement; let us
give them concerts, where their hearts may be cheered and
their taste refined by the beautiful songs of their country;
let us give them, if it be possible in these degenerate
days, well-regulated theatres, where their moral nature
may be raised and educated by scenes of true nobility and
gentle virtue ; but, while we do all this, let us not leave
other things undone. But, argue the moralist, you cannot
make a people virtuous by legislation,—virtue is an
inward growth of the soul, and will not be forced from
without. True, to a certain extent, but legislation can do
a great deal in paving the way for further improvements.
It can say that every subject born within the last twelve
years, or to be born in the future, shall be taught to read
and write, and so raised to a platform from which he may
rise to higher things ; and why may it not say, in like
manner, that the sale of intoxicating liquors shall be so
regulated as to lessen the temptation to which our
poorer brethren are exposed at every step, and thus, at
least, raise many to a platform of ordinary sobriety, from
which they may rise to an enjoyment of the higher
pleasures of life, which, in their present degraded state,
they are unable to appreciate.
To frame such a law, the provisions of which, while
keeping its direct end in view, shall be perfectly just to
all concerned, has much exercised the minds of our
statesmen for the last few years.
Sensible people will not only make their own theories
on the subject, but will look about to see what other
countries have done in this matter, and with what
amount  of success.    It  is  this  which  Mr Carnegie, of
96 The Attenipt.
Stronvar, urges us to do. He bids us look at Sweden,
which country affords us in Scotland a specially good
example, for, in many respects Sweden resembles Scot¬
land. Its climate is cold, which, while rendering out-of-
door amusement impossible daring a large part of the
year, greatly increases the attractions of alcohol, to the
consumption of which the Swedes, like ourselves, are
much addicted.
In Sweden, till within the last twenty years, the trade
in liquor might fairly be called Free Trade ; and I think
if those in this country, who are so very " advanced " in
their views as to urge upon us Free Trade in this com¬
modity, will investigate what were its results in Sweden,
they will pause in advocating its introduction into Britain.
Every landowner might distil spirit for private use on
the payment of a nominal fee, every buyer had the right
of retailing spirits, while all and sundry might sell it in
quantities of one kan, i.e., three-fiftlis of a gallon and
upwards. It has been estimated that the amount of
spirits sold annually was 30,000,000 gallons, or about
10 gallons per head of the population. Now, if we take
from the population not only the young children but
most of the women,—for I am glad to hear that in Sweden
an intoxicated woman is a rare sight,—we shall have some
idea of the amount of " brunvin," as their spirit is called,
which was consumed by the men.
Such a state of affairs at last called for investigation,
and a committee for this purpose was appointed hy the
Diet in 1853-4. I find the following passage from their
report in an able pamphlet of Mr Carnegie's, to whose
energy and enthusiasm the cause of licensing reform
owes so much:—" Seldom, if ever, has a conviction so
generally or unequivocally been pronounced Avith regard
to the necessity of vigorous measures against the
physical, economical, and moral ruin with which the im¬
moderate use of spirits threatens the nation. A cry has
burst forth from the hearts of the people, appealing to all
who have influence,—a prayer for deliverance Irom a
scourge which previous legislation has planted and
nourished." Acting at once on the promptings of this
report, the ministry introduced a bill, which is the basis
of the present Licensing Laws of Sweden. This Bill
provided for the abolition of all the small domestic stills,
and of the right of unlicensed persons to sell brandy in
quantities under 15 kans (8f gallons); also provision in
Tfie Attempt. 97
it was made for a large reduction in the number of
licenses, which licenses were no longer to be had
for a mere nominal fee, but were to be put up to
auction by the town or county authorities, and sold to
the highest bidder, the money thus gained being duly
apportioned between the county treasury, the county
agricultural society, the town treasury, and the
parishes of the county. It was further enacted that
no brandy should be sold in the country within a
distance of three-quarters of a mile from any place
where a large number of people are brought together as
by a pubHc auction, mihtia muster, etc., except at meal
times, and to tliose who are really eating solid food.
No sooner had these laws come into existence than a
most marked improvement took place in the drinking
customs of the Swedes in all country districts, and, as Mr
Carnegie remarks, " Since the country population of Sweden
comprises -Jths of the whole, the new legislation ha8
succeeded in effecting a very great reform in the drinking
habits of the Swedes, who may now be called, com¬
paratively, a sober people, instead of the most intem¬
perate in Europe." Certainly, if any approximate idea of
the amount of drinking in a country may be drawn from
its number of distilleries, we should be inclined to put
entire confidence in the above statement, when we find
that in 1850 the distilleries in Sweden numbered 44,000,
whereas in 1869 they had been reduced to 457.
But while this great reformation had taken place
throughout Sweden generally, it was found that in the
towns drinking was undiminished. This was not un-
natiu-al, for though reduced in number, the public-houses
were still there, opening their inviting doors, not only
to the townspeople, but to all visitors from the country,
whose only chance in many cases of a good carouse,
since the passing of the new law, was an occasional visit
to the nearest town.
The first town which recognised the necessity of
further steps being taken in the matter was Gothenburg.
In 1865 the town council (as I may call it) of Gothen¬
burg, appointed a committee of some of its most active
and philanthropic members to enquire into the cause of
the widespread pauperism in the town. This committee
found, as I think such a committee in any of our Scotch
towns would find, that drink was the main cause of the
misery of the lower classes.
" They found," in the words of a writer in Macmillan
MARCH  1874. N
98 The Attempt.
on this subject, "that the poorer classes were being
preyed upon and demoralized by an inordinate number
of liquor sellers, whose self-interest led them to stimulate
in every way the consumption of strong drink, while at
the same time, by combination and trickery, they con¬
trived to cheat the town of a considerable portion of the
duty Avhich ought by law to have come to it from their
Bales. A great deal of drink, too, was sold on credit,
with the natural result that many an artisan, after
settling his week's score at the pot-house, had not a
farthing of his wages left to take home; and, still worse,
many went bo far as to pawn clothes and furniture with
the publican, and starved wife and children to satisfy
their craving for alcohol."
What was to  be  the cure   of this dreadfid   state  of
affairs'?    It  was  clear  that the  liquor traffic must  be
entirely re-organised.    To do this a system was adopted,
based on the four following principles :—
" I. lliat no private individual, either as proprietor or
manager, under a public-house license, should derive any
private gain froin the sale of spirits, thus abolishing all
temptation unduly to extend the consumption.'' Notice, my
readers, no individual is to be one penny the richer by
what another man drinks, thus it will be no one's
interest to tempt a man to take an unnecessary glass,
or indeed any glass at all, though at the same time the
liberty of the subject is duly respected, for a man may
buy for himself, and drink on the spot as many glasses
as he pleases, till he is, as the Swedes so well express it,
" ofverlastad,'' (overloaded), when a subsidiary rule comes
in forbidding the manager of a public-house to sell any
more drink to an overloaded man. When you think of
it, this principle, that no individual shall make profit by
the sale of intoxicating liquors, involves a great deal.
Its introduction into England would involve the buying
up of immense vested interests, and in Scotland too,
though to a less extent than in England, owing to the
difference in the licensing laws of the two countries, con¬
siderable compensation would be demanded by the
licensed victuallers. How such a demand could be met
will be explained further on.
II. " The sale of spirits on credit, or on the security of
pledges, shall be stringently prohibited." It had before been
the law that no debt incurred for spirits could be legally
recovered; but this was not sufficient to put a stop to
pawning for drink.
Ihe Attempt. 99
III. ^'^ All houses in which the liquor trade is carried on
to be well-lighted, roomy, airy, and cleans This at least
secures that no man can, by reason of the darkness,
hope to hide his disgrace; if he be determined to be
drunk, he shall be so in the full light, and, let us hope,
meet with some of the wholesome contempt which he
deserves.
IV. " Good victuals, at moderate prices, shall he always
procurable in drinking houses." Thus no house would pre¬
sent only drink as a temptation to customers; for though
at one end of the room a coimter would be spread with
glasses of the purest brdnvin, at the other end, or in closely
adjoining rooms, there would be tables spread with
hot meats, bread, vegetables, tea, coffee, etc., the pleasant
sight and savoury smell of which might well hope to com¬
pete with the brdnvin,—backed up, too, as they would be,
by a polite host, whose interest it is to sell this tempting
fare, for on its sale depends his profit, while he has no
interest in pressing the sale of his brdnvin.
These, then, are the four chief principles on which the
Gothenburgers determined to act as soon as they could
procure from government a charter giving them the power
to buy up the licenses of all public houses, and to manage
them by a legal company, in the usual form of a limited
liability company, with the one slight exception, that while
the company was to become answerable for the expenses,
it was to receive none of the profits which might accrue
in the future, but all such profit was to be for the good
of the community. Not even for their time and trouble
were they to be paid—these they gave freely for the
benefit of tJtieir fellow-townsmen, as 1 am sure we should
find some trusty burghers in every town in Scotland
willing to do, were this law introduced.
As soon as the royal charter was received, the company
began its work. It at once took into its own hands all
the licenses, excepting those previously sold by the town
by auction to private individuals, whose licensing terms
were not expired; but as these fell vacant, the company
took them up also, so that, in the course of a few years,
they had possession of all the licenses in the town, sixty-
one in number, always excepting a certain number of
grocer licenses, of which I shall say more presently. Of
these sixty-one, it was determined to make no use of
eighteen, thus at once reducing the number of licenses in
operation to forty-three. These forty-three were disposed
of as follows :—
100 The Attempt.
\st. Twenty-six Public Houses.
2d. Seven Retail Shops, for consumption off tho
premises.
3c?.   Eight Restaurants; and Two Clubs.
I may pass over the second and third divisions, merely
mentioning that the retail shops are under the manage¬
ment of women, who make no profit on what they sell,
but are in the pay of the company, and receive from
£25 to £55 per annum as salary ; and that the restaurants
and clubs are in no way connected with the company,
except in so far as they are bound to buy all their spirits
and wines from it at the tariff" fixed by the company, and
are only allowed to sell hrdnvin with meals.
It is in the public-houses that the four principles of the
Gotheuburgers come fairly into play. The manager of
the public-house has no rent, and generally no heating or
lighting to pay. He makes, as ah-eady stated, no profit
on his sale of spirits, but is allowed to sell coffee, tea,
soda-water, cigars, etc., on his own account, as well as
the hot meals which he is bound to provide for his cus¬
tomers when asked for. This, in nine of the j^ublic-houses,
is found to give sufficient remuneration to the managers,
but in the other seventeen, less advantageously situated, the
company pays the manager a small salary to make up any
deficiency. The directors of the company, having the
choice of managers in their own hands, select men of good
character, and invite their co-operation in trying to keep
down intemperance, and it is not, I think, too Utopian to
hope that men will give this co-operation when they can
have no possible private interest in withholding it.
Mr Carnegie reports on the system thus,—" The
results of the working of this system were at once
apparent in a most striking reform in the conduct and
habits of the working classes, exceeding the most sanguine
expectations; and it is evident to all that a great social
problem has been solved—a great success achieved. This
is universally acknowledged. The governor of the pro¬
vince, the chief constable, the medical men, the clergy,
the inspectors and visitors among the poor, the members
of the town council, all whom 1 met during my recent
visit to Gothenburg, all, without hesitation, declared to me
that there is really no comparision between the former
state of things and that now existing, and I was long
enough there to see it myself." For the sake of those who
put more trust in statistics than in the general remarks of
even  the most  scrupulously correct. I may add that, in
The Attempt. 101
1864, there were in Gothenburg 2164 persons fined for
drunkenness, which number steadily decreased till, in 1868,
there was only 1320 persons so fined; the cases of delirium
tremens decreased in like proportion.
Since 1868, the number of convictions for drunkenness
has been slightly on the increase, which has given those
who, for private reasons or from prejudice, desire to see
this system put down, some excuse to point the finger of
scorn at its promoters. In reality, however, this increase
is more than accounted for by the combination of two
circumstances : -1st, The great increase of the population
of Gothenburg, which, since 1867, has increased 28 per
cent., the new-comers, moreover, being mostly working
people from the country, who, when first exposed to the
temptation of easy access to pubHc houses, are apt to
exceed. 26?, The great rise in wages which has taken place
of late years in Sweden, as well as in our own country.
These circumstances are of themselves sufficient to
account for a greater increase of drunkenness than has
taken place; but there is another circumstance which I
must now mention, which has clogged the steps of the
company from the beginning of its operations, and has
greatly counteracted its good effects. This is the con¬
tinued existence of those grocer licenses to which I before
referred. When the company started, it was thought
sufficient to grant them the control of all public-houses,
clubs, and restaurants where hranvin could be purchased
in small quantities, but the grocer licenses were still
kept by the town, and sold, as formerly, by auction.
These grocer licenses only allow of spirits being sold
for consumption off" the premises, and in rather large
quantities, but when men Avant to drink, they become
wonderfully ingenious, so perhaps it ought not to sur¬
prise us to hear that the consequence of this exception
was the springing up of a system of " saining," greatly
to the injury of the working of the company. " Saining "
consists of a number of men clubbing together to buy at a
grocer's shop the quantity which is beyond the means of
a single man, this is conveyed to some secret corner, and
shared by all. Unless the grocers in Sweden are unusually
high-minded men, they will naturally encourage this
system. However, I am glad to be able to state that, in
April last, the whole subject underwent a thorough exami¬
nation in the Diet, when the good work done in Gothenburg
was fully acknowledged, and an Act passed, enabling the
grocers, as well as the public-house licenses, to be handed
102 The Attempt.
over to a company. This Act will come into operation
next October, when the days of " saining " will be at end,
and the Gothenburg company, and all other such com¬
panies throughout Sweden, will be relieved from its evil
counter-influence.
The results attained by the Reformed Licensing Laws
throughout Sweden within the last twenty years, may be
briefly summed up in this one statement,—the annual
sale of spirits has been reduced from 10 gallons per head
of the population to 2 gallons, and in estimating the
drinking habits of the Swedes at 2 gallons per head, it is
only fair to refer to the very usual custom in their country
of ladies and gentlemen alike beginning dinner with a
single glass of hrdnvin; this of itself accounts for a large
amount of the spirits used, and leaves a comparatively
small proportion to be drunk in a discreditable manner.
Now, to speak of matters at home. When Sweden has
done so much, why should not Scotland do at least as
much ? By as much, I do not mean to suggest that we
should reduce our drinking by 8 gallons per head, for a
considerable smaller reduction than this would place us
in the very novel position of drinking no spirits at all.
What I mean is, Why should we not do as much in pro¬
portion—the Swedes now drink a fifth part of what they
did twenty years ago—why should we not reduce our
drinking to one-fifth part of what it now is, which would
really make us a most respectable nation? At least,
after seeing what has been done in Sweden, no one need
say it is useless to legislate in the matter, only obstinate
blindness and obstinate deafiiess can refuse to allow that
a great work has been done in that country.
In England, where the vested interest in the spirit trade
is enormous, and the licensing laws are very different
from those in Scotland, many difficulties (though not
apparently insuperable) will arise on any attempt to
introduce the Swedish laws, the chief being the immense
compensation which would be rightly demanded by the
spirit dealers. In Scotland, the case is much more hopeful,
for spirit licenses are only granted for the year, and there
renewal may be legally refused. Still " use and wont " has
so established that licenses shall always be renewed, except
in cases of misconduct, that the licensee would naturally
consider himself unfairly used were the renewal refused.
Therefore some compensation would be necessary in
Scotland as well as in England. But a company, as in
Gothenburg- p'-^^+qinino- in itself the whole  spirit ti'ade,
The Attempt. 103
with a right also of fixing its own tariff, is so profitable
an affair, that not only reasonable compensation would be
forthcoming for all persons injured by its means, but, in
the course of years, a considerable surplus would arise,
which, finding its way into the coffers of the local
authorities, should reappear in the shape of man}- im¬
provements for the health and recreation of the people.
In Gothenburg, the profits have been such as to cover all
the poor-rates, and, as Mr Carnegie asks, " Is it not
peculiarly appropriate that the local liquor trade should
pay the cost of the local poor-rate ? " This does seem a
most legitimate use of the profit on drink. It is drink
mainly that fills our poorhouses, and, to a great measure,
our prisons and lunatic asylums; surely, then, it is more fair
that the profit made on this dire cause should pay for its
most expensive results, rather than go to enrich certain indi¬
viduals, while the whole community is left to pay the cost.
In short, I think the more we look at the Swedish
Licensing Laws, either from the high, moral stand-point,
or from the practical ground of the Utilitarian, the more
we shall find them in every respect worthy of our support.
I should like to go more into detail as to hov/ it is
thought these laws could be best applied to Britain, but
must content myself with a brief outline of the bill which
Sir Robert Anstruther hopes to bring forward this
session, if only a night for its second reading can be
secured, from a government pledged already to the con¬
sideration of so many affairs. It applies only to Scotland,
and is called The Spirituous Liquors (Scotland) Bill. It
is in two parts, the first consists of compulsory clauses,
referring to the restriction of the number of new licenses
to be granted, and limiting the term of years, after which
no grocers' licenses are to be renewed. The second part
consists of permissive clauses, corresponding very much
to the Swedish laws as adopted in Gothenburg; in them
the necessity of compensation for all injured by the new
laws is fully recognised, and the following rules for the
division of the profits are laid down:—Two-thirds to be
applied for the diminution of the debt incurred at
starting, the third to be available for providing innocent
amusement for the working-classes, sanitary and town
improvements, public parks, or other objects approved
by the local authority. On the extinction of the debt,
two-thirds to be retained by the local authority for the
above purposes, and one-third to be paid to the imperial
exchequer.
104 The Attempt.
For further details I must refer my readers to the Bill
itself. It is possible, when it comes into Parliament, that
some of the voters in the late elections may find that it is in
vain they have thrown their weight into the Conservative
balance, and that the friends of temperance are to be
found on both sides of the House. Des Eaux.
A CHILD was toiling in the dim grey dawn,
He toiled, grew weary, then he sat and wept;
And all his labour, joy, and pain appeared
As phantoms that through gloomy caverns crept.
Heartless and soulless all around him seemed,
Reflecting but the glimmer of his brain.
As ghosts of dismal dreams that he had dreamed,
The way they wandered tracing back again.
He almost thought himself a phantom too.
And wondered if, as such, he could not die,
When suddenly a ray of heavenly hue
Showed him a face against the brightening sky.
It was a face he might have seen before
In that fair world where infant angels meet;
Its glorious eyes into his spirit bore
Long, voiceless messages of import sweet.
He gazed unspeaking ; and that angel face,
That looked alone primeval, infinite.
Lit up a day about the darksome place>
And nerved his arm, and made his heart grow light.
Quick to realities the phantoms grew,
The dawn's despair was merged in happy day,
That angel love its light; he turned to view
The vision ; it was vanishing away.
" Part not!" he cried ; the eyes upon him gazed
A speechless longing in their look expressed ;
As if to fix then- meaning unerased
In his fond memory and aching breast.
Then vanished; " And was this a phantom too ?
Ah, no I " he cried, " such joy was ne'er in vain ;
Memory and hope will hold the heavenly hue
Before my spirit till it come again 1" Proola.
The Attempt. 105
Part II.
Maggie Tulliver, of The Mill on the Floss,—the queer
little dark-complexioned girl, who wanted to run away to
the gipsies, because all her blonde relatives found fault
with her brown  skin,—is  perhaps  the  most  intensely
interesting of all George Eliot's characters.    The loving
child,   " with   quick-eyed   acumen   and   blind  dreams,"
always falling into mischief, and blaming herself more
than any other could blame her; without anything that
might be called training or culture or guidance, except
what was supplied, in a crude form, by her steady, hard,
honest brother,—developes wonderfully, but consistently.
" Maggie, in her brown frock, with her eyes reddened,
and her heavy hair pushed  back, looking from the bed
where her father lay to the dull walls of this sad chamber,
which was the centre of her world, was a creature full of
eager, passionate longings for all that was beautiful and
glad; thirsty for all knowledge; with an ear straining
after dreamy music, that died away and would not come
near to her; with a blind, unconscious yearning for some¬
thing that would link together the wonderful impressions
of this mysterious life, and give her soul a sense of home
in it.    No wonder, when there is this contrast between
the outward and the inward, that painful collisions come
of it."    The narration of these " collisions " is the story of
the book, whereof come sad troubles, but she triumphed
at the last.    No wonder she was not comprehended by
the slow minds of St Ogg's; her soul was fathomless to
their measuring  lines;   her language  and  deeds  were
foreign to their ideas.    Her very faults were more noble
than their perfections.    Her simplicity, truth, and tender¬
ness won her an adorer in the sensitive, deformed Philip ;
her beauty, freshness, and honesty gave her a lover in
Stephen   Guest,  her  cousin's   admirer.     Poor Maggie!
We know she had the struggle; but in the hazily-defined
Stephen Guest, we cannot see the cause of it    George
Eliot has nowhere succeeded so badly in sketching  a
prominent figure, unless she meant to do so—unless she
intended us to draw upon our imagination, and fill up
AFEU, 1874. O
106 The Attempt.
perfections, as Maggie did, from the fulness of her imagi¬
nation. Yet, after all, a girl accustomed to the censures
of " the aunts and uncles,"—to the hardness of Tom, to
the moodiness of her father, and the weakness of her
mother,—might have felt all the charm in the one satisfied
need of tenderness and strong support.
What an antithesis was Tom ! " A character at unity
■with itself,—that performed what it intended, subdued
every counteracting impulse, and had no visions beyond
the distinctly possible—strong by its very negations."
So he was strong in punishing his little flighty sister; in
swearing to fulfil his father's will; in determined inde-
pendqnce of aunts, uncles; in the resolve to pay the
dividend of his fiither's debts, through self-denial and
hard labour; in crushing his love for Lucy, when he knew
it to be vain; in threatening, and finally, disowning his
sister in her time of trouble. And yet there are gleams
of brotherly tenderness, made possible only to him by
the sweet, unquenchable affection of his ill-understood
sister; and when the web of all their lives was tangled
and knotted together, one almost feels content that they
should go down to death in such a flash of resuscitated
feeling,—brother and sister locked in one last embrace,
so that, in their death at least, they were not divided.
There is a remnant of old Danish superstition in the
river that could be angry, and a trace of the Danish
power of hate and revenge in old Mr Tulliver, with his
proud, blundering honesty, and hatred of " Raskills." He
found the modern world "too many for him," as his
daughter did. They both came a thousand years too
late into this scene of things. Had they tried the old-
world simplicity, they would have been happier by far.
The cumbersome mildness of his wife is a suggestion to
men who seek mates "conspicuously their inferiors in
intellect," and come of a good Dodson family. The
history of this connection is sometimes named wearisome,
but beside its power as a description of a well-known set
of modified family resemblances and differences, it is
necessary to illustrate the " circumstances" that had so
powerful an effect on the lives of Tom and Maggie
TuUiver.
Bob Jakin is the only unique character that rises out
of the background of spectators and subordinates. His
firm adherence to Tom for his very slight kindness—his
chivalrous  devotion   to  Maggie,   and   affection  for his
The Attempt. 107
mother and Mumps, his wife and child,—give a charm to
his story such as few packmen ever won.
Silas Marner has a different plot and scene; but again
appears the trusting, sensitive nature, loaded with unjust
blame, disappointment and treachery, till all life was
crushed out of his heart and soul; and he seemed to know
not God nor regard man. The dawning light of life, that
re-kindled with his growing gold, was quenched only to
be re-lit by the golden curls that took its place upon his
hearth, and thawed his long-frozen ice into a current of
strong-flowing, happy, protective love. And the child
that he took into his heart and home clung to him till the
last; the attractions of her rustic lover could only be
tolerated if they did not draw her away from him; the
great promises of a wealtliy, high-born father were
unheeded becaiise they must do so. Surely " the wicked
cease from troubling and the weary are at rest" some¬
time, even in this world; and the time came at last to
Silas Marner.
Squire Cass and his motherless boys—oh! "what is
home without a mother." We can hardly wonder
at the errors of the heir and the sins of Dunsey. And
though one looks with mixed feelings at the quarry,
whose waters held the secret of Dunsey's death for bo
long a time, one cannot but feel a sort of retributive
justice, both in his fate and his brother's. For though G od-
frey did win the sweet Nancy Lammeter, through the free¬
dom that was opened to him by the death under the hedge
and a new chance in hfe ;—for the disowning of his natural
ties, he received a reward that he himself recognised as
just, " his hearth was desolate for evermore."
Though the good people round have their points of
interest, Silas is the only powerfully-drawn character in
the book. Indeed, as a whole, it does not come up either
to The Mill on the Floss or Adam Bede. These three,
indeed, descended in the scale. But ebb and flow shows
no poverty in the sea; the writer was but gathering
strength for the high spring-tide of Romola, which she
has not yet surpassed. It was no chance choice that led
her back to the Florence of that day, but the recognition
of a crisis in life, the effect of the great wave that swept
over Europe, after the taking of Constantinople by the
Turks in 1453, when something fresh and powerful was
mixed with the dustiness of mediasval life.
She carries us back with her to the Florence of 1492,
108 The Attempt.
the year when Christopher Columbus was finding new
space for the lives of men—the period when the old, efiete
life of Europe was awakened, and even the pagan Re¬
naissance seemed a revivification to better beliefs, as it was
to truer thought, than the old see-saw of Scholasticism,
so that men sometimes threw off" the semblance of belief
in monkish Christianity in their satisfied pleasure in the
theogony of Homer. But the stream of mysticism and
asceticism, that had flowed apart from the turbid current
of the polluted Church, had collected all its forces round
the great Savonarola. He showed a living heart under
the wrappings of superstition ; he swayed the people by
his powerful voice; he caused a reformation in Florence, as
great as Luther did on the larger sphere of Europe ; he
believed in himself, and his belief spread to others.
George Eliot has a firm grip of his character. Let
me quote some of her analytical remarks : " The real force
of demonstration for Girolamo Savonarola lay in his own
burning indignation at the sight of wrong, in his fervent
belief in an unseen justice that would put an end to the
wrong, and in an unseen purity to which lying and
uncleanness were an abomination. To his ardent, power-
loving soul, believing in great ends, and longing to achieve
these ends by the exertion of his own strong will, the
faith in a supreme and righteous ruler became one with
the faith in a speedy divine interposition, that would
punish and reclaim." " His need of personal predomi¬
nance, his labyrinthine, allegorical interpretations of the
Scriptures, his enigmatic visions, and his false certitude
about the divine intentions, never ceased, in his own
large soul, to be ennobled by that fervid piety, that pas¬
sionate sense of the infinite, that active sympathy, that
clear-sighted demand for the subjection of selfish interest
to the general good, Avhich he had in common with the
greatest of mankind." Doubtless he believed in visions,
in which his inferiors saw nothing but ordinaiy dreams.
But " the relative greatness of men is not to be gauged
by their tendency to disbelieve the superstition of the
age they live in." The multitude appreciated them,
" and no man ever struggled to retain power over a
mixed multitude without suffering vitiation; his stan¬
dard must be their lower needs, and not his own best
insight." Yet look at the firm way in which he sent
back Romola to her duty and her ties, not accepting the
conventual robe as a  sign of the sacrificed heart, not
The Attempt. 109
taking the Church's maxim as to worldly ties, but Christ's
maxim.     And her proud soul yielded to the truth he
uttered, yielded to the force of his nature.    " It Avas the
first time she had encountered a gaze, in which single
human fellowship expressed itself as a strongly-felt bond.
Such a glance is half the vocation of the priest."    Romola
returned to her duties, but, hard as they were, how much
simpler were they than his.    His success could not last;
he had ahenated the party whose vices he had exposed,
he had excited the party whose hopes he had raised by
promises of miracles, and his enemies had liim at bay.
Excommunicated,  offered  the  ordeal by fire, shrinking
from it, he had nevertheless to die.    And then he ques¬
tioned himself.    He could not explain his conduct satis¬
factorily.     " Our  naked feelings make haste to clothe
themselves in propositions which he at hand among our
store of opinions; and to give a true account of what
passes within  us, something  else  is  necesKary besides
sincerity, even when sincerity is unmixed."    No doubt he
was sincere.    " ^Vhatever falsehood there was in him had
a fall, and not a purpose—a gradual entanglement in
which he struggled, not a contrivance encouraged by
success."    But the torture wrung from him the dreams
of worldly power that latterly had mingled with his better
hopes—dreams, however, that were all to bless mankind.
He confesses, " If I had been made pope, I would not have
refused the office ; but it seemed to me that to be head
of that work was a greater thing than to be pope ; because
a man without virtue may be pope, but  such  a work
as I contemplated demanded a man of excellent virtues."
" The worst drop of bitterness can never be wrung on to
our lips from without; the lowest depth of resignation is
not to be found in martyrdom, it is only when we have
covered our heads in silence and felt, ' I am not worthy to
be a martyr, the truth shall prosper, but not by me.'"    In
his humility he said to himself, " Thy heart Avas lifted up
at the beauty of thine OAvn deeds, and throiigh this thou
hast lost thy wisdom, and shalt be to all eternity nothing."
He had wished martyrdom, but he only noAV saw before
him death, as he said,  " I count as nothing, darkness
encompasseth m e, yet the hght I saw was the true light."
But was he less a martyr because the Avorld knew it
not?    He died, because he sought to make the world
better.     "Men were wont to chalk the sacrifices they
offered to Jupiter, that the victim might seem unspotted
110 The Attempt.
white ; let us fling away the chalk, and boldly say—The
victim is spotted, but, nevertheless, it is not in vain that his
mighty heart is laid on the altar of men's highest hopes."
A wonderful description of a man—a description that re¬
minds us of Kenan's idea of the God-inspired man of Israel,
whose heart was lifted up in pride, and fell into falsity.
The description, again, of the enthusiasm for the new
learning in the upper circles of Florence, especially in
Bardo, the bhnd old scholar that makes us think of Milton;
but  more  blessed  than  he in   his  tender  self-devoted
daughter, the presence of whose beauty he knew only by
the dim shining of her hair, as of a   glory through his
bhndness; the unrecognised devotion of her self-repressed
and  colourless   young  life,   spent  upon   a  father  who
mourned in bitterness for the son that had deserted him,
and who lived to love only the treasures of learning that
were hid from his sight; what wonder that a morning
glory rose upon it by the appearance of the Avarm-tinted
and beautiful young Greek, whose worshipping admiration
satisfied her maidenly pride.    The beautiful simplicity of
the expression of her desire for marrying Tito.   " I did not
think I could  care  so  much  for anything  that would
happen to myself," show how unselfish she was.    Tito
loved her—her father loved Tito ; he would replace the
lost Dino, and would help her father with the great work
that was to bless posterity.     Sweet, guileless Romola,
with  all  possibilities   of beauty,   and hope,   and   truth
wrapped up in her capacious heart,—was it wonderful
that very soon an aching void was felt there ?    How sadly
she questioned herself,—had she failed in a duty?    Did
she want a charm % or had she any right to expect Tito
to love the old man, her father, as she loved him I    He
was  never   unkind,   always  pleasant,   always   smiling,
always attentive, yet she was disappointed.    " Love does
not simply aim  at the conscious good of the beloved
object; it is not satisfied without perfect loyalty of heart;
it aims at its own completeness."    Then came the horrid
meaning of these hidden questionings, the father dead,
the library was sold.    Her words, " You are a treacherous
man I" were no cry of passion, but the uttered reason of
the death of her love.    Some may think her just a little
hard,  but we  may easily   see  that  no   submission,  no
tenderness from her could have saved him; he was on
the glissade of a glacier, and could she have crushed her
moral nature, and gone on loving him just the same, she
The Attempt. Ill
would only have been dragged with him into the abyss.
One can guess the horror of the fallen idol that made her
flee from him, yet rejoice in the struggle -with her con-
Bcience before Savonarola, who bade her return.    " You
are seeking your own will, my daughter, you   cannot
break your bonds.    My daughter, every bond of your life
is a debt, the right lies in the payment of that debt, it
can lie nowhere else."    " Your life is not a grain of sand
to be blown about by the winds."    Then she goes back
to Florence, finds herself helpless to aid her husband, but
not powerless to aid her fellow-citizens.    She submitted
her nature to her advisers, and entered into communion
with the church, because in this way she had found an
immediate  satisfaction  for  moral  needs, which  all the
previous  culture  and  experience  of   her  life  had   left
hungering.     Fra Girolamo's voice had waked in her a
reason for living, apart from personal enjoyment and per¬
sonal affection, but it was a reason that seemed to need
feeding.    And so all the sufferings of the  Florentines
became hers, and she did the work of the church, hoping
that thereafter she might believe the doctrine, for she was
of Pagan   upbringing.     But when   her   last   personal
human trust was taken away in the execution of Bernardo
del Nero, and the inconsistency of Savonarola, she fled
away once more, and tried to shut out existence in the
little boat on a darkened sea.    Drifting through sleep in
a helmless bark, borne to a new mission of good, in the
pestilence-afilicted village;  after the one work is done,
stirred by a desire to go back to Florence, where new
human sympathies awaited her,—where Savonarola has
need of strength, and his people of friends,—where her
husband had met his fate at the same hands that had
blessed his life ; and Tessa and her children were waiting
for the padre, who would never come ; in the care of these,
and the worthy Monna Brigida, Romola at last found a
moonlit evening peace.    " It is but once that we  can
know our worst sorrows,  and Romola  had known hers
while life was new."
But the most wonderful character in the book was Tito.
Suddenly relieved from an unpleasant sense of gratitude,
and the monotonous and exacting demands of a loving,
but uninteresting old man, we can imagine him revelling
in the very freedom of the streets of Florence. His kind
receptions forced him to say something as to his ante¬
cedents,—" he   had   been   shipwrecked,   his   father  was
112 The Attempt.
drowned,"—then came good sale of his jewels, employ¬
ment at the pubhshers, employment with Bardo, delight in
the sight of Romola. Was it necessary, after all, that he
must give up all this pleasant, congruous new life, and
go away and search for a man who, if found, (a chance
hardly to be expected), would fill his life with incon¬
gruities and difficulties, and who was, very likely, dead
after all. If ever anyone was lost by dehberation, Tito
was. "Some madman, surely!" was his exclamation,
when the living Baldassare unexpectedly clutched his
arm. " He hardly knew how the words had come to his
lips. There are moments when our passions speak and
decide for us, and we seem to stand by and wonder.
They carry in them an inspiration of crime that in one
instant does the work of premeditation." A falsehood
might have saved him, for Dino was dead, and he might
have said he believed that Baldassare had been drowned.
" But Tito was experiencing that inexorable law of human
souls, that we prepare ourselves for sudden deeds by
the reiterated choice of good and evil that determines
character." " He would still have been glad not to have
given pain to any mortal. He had simply chosen to make
life easy to himself, to carry the human lot, if he could, so
that it should pinch him nowhere, and the choice had at
times landed him in unexpected positions. The question
now Avas not whether he should divide the common
pressure of destiny with his suffering fellow-man; it was
whether all the resources of lying would save him from
being crushed by the consequences of that habitual
choice." " The motives wliich might have made him
shrink had been slowly strangled in him by the successive
falsities of his life. Our lives make a moral tradition for
our individual selves, as the life of mankind at large
makes a moral tradition for the race; and to have acted
once greatly, seems a reason that we should always be
noble." Tito sadly felt the effect of an opposite tradition,
and sunk from bad to worse. " Our deeds are like childi-en
that are born to us, they live and act apart from our own
will. Nay, children may be strangled, but deeds never;
they have an indestructible life, both in and out of
consciousness, and that dreadful vitaKty of deeds was
pressing hard on Tito for the first time."
Wonderful touches suggest his character through¬
out, the very suggestion of the rough old painter,
Piero di Cosimo, that he had the kind of face that would
The Attempt. 113
suit a traitor, because a true traitor must have a face on
which vice can write no lines; the timid way in which
Romola tells Tito that her nature was less forgiving than
his, but that even he would find it hard to forgive the
brother who had left her father for conventual life, and
then his answer, " You are right, my Romola, you are
always right, except in thinking too well of me;" and
the spark of genuineness that lay in the words, his pallor,
his trembling, and his beauty, were largely interpreted by
this large-souled woman. Ah! the time was yet to come
in which the interpretation of signs would need another
key than love, and she would see another being than the
one lover of her youth.
Do we wonder, then, at the attraction to Tessa ? " Tito
felt an irresistable desire to go up to her and get her
pretty trusting looks and prattle,—this creature who was
without moral judgment that could condemn him, whose
little, loving, ignorant soul made a world apart where he
might feel in freedom from suspicious and exacting
demands." " When all the rest had turned their backs
upon him, it would be pleasant to have this little creature
adoring him and nestling against him. The absence of
presumptuous self-conceit in Tito made him feel all the
more defenceless, under prospective obloquy, he needed
soft looks and caresses too much ever to be impudent."
Eighteen months show a great change in him. " It was
that change that comes from the final departure of moral
youthfulness, from the distinct self-conscious adoption of
a part in Ufe. The lines of the face were as soft as ever,
the eyes as pellucid; but something was gone—something
as indefinite as the changes in the morning twilight."
" Under every guilty secret there is hidden a brood of
guilty wishes, whose unwholesome, infecting life is
cherished by the darkness. The contaminating effect of
deeds often lies less in the commission than in the con¬
sequent adjustment of our desires ; the enlistment of our
self-interest on the side of falsity; as on the other hand,
the purifying influence of public confession springs from
the fact, that by it the hope in lies is for ever swept
away, and the soul recovers the noble attitude of
simplicity." It was in consistency with this opinion that
she makes the failure of Tito's attempt at conciliation, in
the outhouse of Tessa's home. He went with a lie in his
hand—it was not possible that lies could now smooth his
pathway—and therefore he failed, and left it worse than
APRIL 1874. P
114 Tlie Attempt.
t was before. He often wished he had done otherwise,
wished everything had been different. "But he had
borrowed from the terrible usurer Falsehood, and the
loan had mounted and mounted with the years, till he
belonged to the usurer, body and soul."
And yet, but a few years had he spent in Florence.
He entered it at 23—and he was little more than 28—
when he meant to escape from the toils he had woven
round himself, and begin a new, and perhaps a better
life, elsewhere. But punishment overtook him. The
Baldassare that had fed him, loved him, educated him,
that he had neglected, denied, scorned—the Baldassare
that nursed his waning faculties, to feed his bitterness with
revenge, at last attained him—a surer destiny than the
river, because a conscious one ; and the last deed of the
embittered life was to crush out the life he had fostered.
They died and were buried together, and Florence
mourned not, and Romola wept not, and only the ignorant
little Tessa suffered and grieved for a little while, for the
fraction of his better self had been enough to satisfy her.
little short-sighted heart. But she became happy too, in
her wonder at the genius of the children.
We should have noticed the good-hearted fun of Nello
the barber; the gossipy interest of Bratti; the moodiness
of Piero di Cosimo ; the large-hearted nobility of Romola's
godfather, Bernardo del Nero—a whole host of Florentine
individualities, but we cannot now. LuTEA RESEDA.
{To be continued.)
A STORY OF THE LAKE OF OKTA.
PART II.
A FEW of all the many years
That hide from us these days of old
Have gone, with all their hopes and fears;
The old are dead—the young are old.
The frescos have a mellower grace,
The old cathedral knows no change.
Though other pilgrims throng the place,
Beneath the changeless mountain range.
The Attempt. 115
But she is in St Giulio's nave,
The aged Marta—lone and poor,
She has no joys nor quiet, save
Within St GiuHo's sculptured door;
But when the organ peals out brave.
And the sweet voices heaven-ward soar.
And fragrant clouds of incense roll.
The dim roof mistily caressing.
She is not poor, her mind and soul
Are filled with radiancy and blessing.
In poverty she dwells alone.
Strange to her youth the people are,
Husband and children all are gone.
Her grandson sails the seas afar ;
But the familiar frescos seem
To haunt her solitary days,
Their lovely forms, as in a dream.
Hover about her lonely ways;
Through the dim woods at eventide
For her the bright winged angels glide;
Or—guardian of her lonely road.
When evil things are all abroad.
And she is worn and faint,
The visioned champion comes victorious.
In form the youthful warrior glorious
They call the " Unknown Saint."
She watched that picture's beauty grow
Beneath the master's hand.
Long has it rested, still and low—
'Tis fifty weary years ago;
The Marquis is forgotten now.
And wandered from the land.
The land is vexed, the harvests fail.
And battle smoke broods o'er the plain.
Thro' vineyard foliage glimmers mail
And chargers tramp the ripening grain;
Scathed by the murky torch of war
Are field and hamlet, tower and town,—
Would that the Marquis from afar
Would come again and shield his own !
In panic with their treasures now
Across the lake the people row.
116 The Attempt.
Within the island shrine they crowd
And fill with wail and clamour loud,
The arches of St Giulio;
For Hugo, Wolf of Appenine,
Is come to gather spoil to-day,
He will not pause for saint or shrine,
Or baulk his blood-hounds of their prey;
In cruel wars beyond the sea.
Known as a champion fierce and bold,
He leads a band of lances free,
Who sell themselves for gold.
And see! his men have seized the boats,
The band are crossing o'er—
Wild trumpets fling their scornful notes
From startled shore to shore.
And shout and shriek the isle arouses,
As fire by night in sleeping houses
Bursts forth the wild uproar.
St GiuHo, St Giulio 1
No storm of earth can break his rest,
It is so far to Paradise,
Tho' in the crypt his body lies,
A skeleton with empty eyes.
In gorgeous raiment dressed;
And precious jewels roimd him shine,
But he has little care,
Tho' Hugo, Wolf of Appenine,
Has torn them fx-om the costly shrine.
And all is wild despair.
A fierce old man, with whitened hair.
Yet vigorous and strong,
He whirls his flashing sword in air.
Pursues the trembling throng ;
But sudden, by the frescos fair
He stops and pauses long.
Then draws the aged Marta near.
Forgot her lowliness and fear.
For she recalls the attitude—
The blazoned arms with gold engrain,
The air of grace and hardihood;
Her youth is brought to life again ;
She sees again the warrior bright
Of fifty years ago ;
The Attempt. 117
And in a flash of withering light
He, too, recalls St Giulio.
Sinks on the floor his threatening brand,
The gems drop from his nerveless hand,
A silence grows o'er shout and brawl.
Before him does the woman stand
And points the frescoed wall.
Calm in the queenhood of her age
She dominates his headlong rage,—
" Strike there," she says, " that pictured face.
Let it no more our church disgrace—
Ah well Ferrari never knew,
A robber in this holy place,
'Mid holy things he drew."
There stood before him like the ghost
Of one long buried, one whose grave
Is overgrown and sunk and lost,
His former self, his boyhood brave ;
So strong and fair he used to be,
A vile thing now to look upon;
Shuddering he turned, and feared to see,
A dart above him threateningly
Poised by a fleshless skeleton.
He dared not glance, in panic fear
He left the church and sped away,
The trembling crowd a passage clear,
And the wild plunderers quit their prey.
f
He went, but still was haunted by
The old bright self that he had slain,
And deeds of ghastly memory
That could not be undone again.
And when he slept, above his bed
The long dead friend Ferrari leaned,
And in a fearful whisper said—
" 'Tis strange how hard I strove to paint
The image of a warrior saint,
And lo ! a mocking fiend."
Oh! bright ideal, oh, dark decay ;
How had he wandered far away I
Now in the idle drift.
Now in the current's head-long sway,
Resistless, furious, swift—
118 The Attempt.
Hurling its captive down and down.
Gone steadfast faith and fair renown,
His arm and honour given for gold,
His knightly falchion bought and sold :
Lost every glorious gift.
And now among the saints for ever,
His portrait stands alone,
Only a portrait there, for never
That chivalry of high endeavour
Will such a recreant own;
And the long night draws on apace.
But yet it pleads, that beauteous face
For all that's lost and gone.
At last, by Orta's convent gate,
A wrecked and worn-out man he stood.
And craved to be received so late
In the secluded brotherhood ;
And there they hid his broken pride
Within their grim monastic wall;
The days wained dim, and eventide
Narrowed and calmed and darkened all.
Yet evening is a blessed time.
The daylight cares and toils are o'er,
The church bells from the village chime.
The boats are drawn upon the shore.
The sheep within the fold are pent.
The red lights twinkle in the shade.
The soldiers sing before the tent.
The lovers linger in the glade ;
The mother lulls her child to rest.
The father chats his cares away;
The sunshine looks its lovliest.
Before it fades in twilight grey :
T'is of all hours the sweetest, best,
To those who work all day.
And sweeter is life's even-time
To brave hearts that with ill have striven.
The shadows black of noon-day's prime.
Are softened now with blue of heaven ;
Old frets and sorrows hurt no more.
The fields are cleared, the harvest done,
The Attempt. 119
The fruit is garnered in the store,
The battle-field of life is won ;
And passion's storms have lost their power,
A radience hghts the gloomiest past,
The storm-wind sinks at sunset hour,—
The brightest hour and last.
And even when on the wasted day,
The still sad night descends.
Yet, touched with gleams of youth's bright dreams,
The last low evening twilight seems,
"When vain disquiet ends :
The evening brings all home at last,
The birds to nest, the beasts to lair,
Night gently hides the broken past,
Hope, deathless angel, hovers there ;
Though all below is wrapt in gloom,
And quivering in a brief despair,
Is there not time, is there not room,
Long ages—endless vistas fair !
So thinks that monk, who waits the bark
To gain his cloister on the shore.
In sunset glow a shadow dark,
He stands beside St Giulio's door ;
The oldest monk—yet last professed—
Of Orta's convent white that shines
Ablaze with sun-beams from the west,
A light amid its shadowy pines ;
The convent bells to compline call.
The ferry-boat is drawing near
To bear him to the cloister wall;
The boatman's song is sweet and clear.
" Listen!" the aged Marta says.
Who sits upon the marble stair ;
Her hands that ward the sunset blaze
Are rough with toil of many days.
Her face is lined with care.
Yet all her words vibrate with joy—
" Listen, it is my sailor boy.
Come home from Genoa and the sea.
My grandson—all that's left to me,
Now is my old age satisfied.
Oh, holy friar, your bounty free
120 The Attempt.
Has given me light at eventide.
He sings so sweet, that earth and air
Seem listening to the strain.
The maidens say the sirens fair
Have taught him on the lonely main;
But I sang in the days long gone,
That you remember still,
With even such a voice that won
Music from every hill.
Gone with the days, but soon in truth
My voice may come to me once more,
Where blooms for us eternal youth ;
And that fair form you had of yore,
That in our chapel still endures.
Though no one knows but me.
It once was yours—may yet be yours—
When death has set us free."
Song.
She sailed away in the month of May—
Ships sail well when winds blow fair—
We watched her gliding far away.
Her sails were rounding to the air ;
Her pennons fluttered bright on high.
Like ebon and gold her bulwarks shone.
She dashed o'er the water gallantly—
Away o'er the seas our ship is gone.
So long away,—on a wintry day,
A missing ship at the harbour bar,—
The winds have torn her pennons away.
The waves have wasted hull and spar;
All her pride and grace are gone.
Yet we welcome her joyously ;
We whose eyes have weary grown
Straining over the desert sea.
She has come back, oh, leave the rest.
Let the bells of the city ring.
When happier ships from east and west.
The treasures of far-off countries bring;
She has come back, in safety now.
Battered and poor she has gained the shore.
Turn to the port the wandering prow.
Furl up the sails, the voyage is o'er.
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 121
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XXX.
Barbara's Joubnet.
Immediately on receipt of Colonel Forbes' letter, Alaster
had made up his mind that after seeing the girls fairly
settled with his cousin, he would himself return to Castle
Ronald. His father's death at Culloden had left him
master there, and there were many arrangements to be
made. The pursuit after those who had taken part in
the rebellion was too hot for it to be safe for him to go
there openly, but he had many friends among his humble
neighbours, in whose cottages he could conceal himself,
while he transacted the necessary business. He felt, too,
that lingering in the neighbourhood of Carrick Castle
might expose his kindly cousin there to annoyance and
trouble; also, perhaps, like Barbara, he dreaded the spying
eyes and uncompromising tongue of his well-meaning
kinswoman. So, all things considered, he decided that as
soon as all arrangements had been made for Barbara and
Nancy's comfort, he would liimself return to Perthshire.
Perhaps the impossibility and hypocrisy of pretending to
make love to Nancy, ivhile his heart belonged to her
sister, weighed with him too in this decision. He had
resolved, as Barbara thought it right, that he would keep
his word and marry Nancy ; but his whole truthful nature
shrank from the necessity of making protestations of
affection to her, which in his heart he knew to be false.
When they were married it would be different he thought;
all that would be taken for granted then, there would be
no need for him to tell lies. Of course he would be kind
to Nancy, poor little, pretty thing, he could not be other
than that; besides, he was very fond of her in a way, only
it was Barbara he loved. He would keep aloof as much
as possible in the meantime, and after they were married
there would be no need for love-making. He saw at
once that Barbara did not much like the prospect of her
sojourn at Castle Carrick, but it seemed to him there was
no way in which it could be avoided. He was quite
taken by surprise therefore, when, a few days  after  the
APRIL   1S74. Q
122 The Attempt.
arrival of her father's letter, she came into the room one
morning with a look of quite unwonted gladness on her
face, and an open letter in her hand.
" See here," she said, " dear old Mr Mackay has written
to an old lady, a cousin of his, who lives in Stirling, to
ask her to receive me, and I am going to pay her a visit."
" To Stirling, Barbara," said Alaster, " what do you
want to do at Stirling'? are you not going to stay at
Carrick Castle till your father's return % "
" Oh, I forgot you did not know about it," she said,
" I forgot you were away when old Peggy died."
Then she told him the story of poor Maggie, and of her
own promise to find her, and of her interview with Mr
Mackay, and the kind help he had given her. Alaster
listened uneasily. He did not like the idea of Barbara
risking herself on so long a journey in the unsettled state
of the country, and yet be could not help confessing to
himself that perhaps it would be good for her. He saw
that in spite of her brave heart, the girl was restless and
unhappy, and perhaps change of scene and society, and
an engrossing pursuit, might be the best restoratives;
but he would have been more than human, if the thought
that the change and interest of her new occupation might
drive him from her thoughts had not sent a jealous
pang through his heart.
" You will write to my father, will you not, Alaster,
and tell him it can be done safely % " she said entreatingly.
" Yes," he said gravely, " on condition that you take
old Elspet with you, and let me see you safe to your
journey's end."
She hesitated. " I had thought of taking old Elspet,"
she said, " but"—
" You need not be afraid of me," he said, smiling sadly ;
" I am your brother, you know."
" But will it be safe for you f " she said.
" Oh yes, safe enough, safer than it would be for you
to go alone. I will only write to your father on condition
that you let me see you safe to Stirling."
" Very well, if you wish it," she said doubtfully.
" I do wish it," he replied, and so the matter was
settled.
A week later saw Nancy comfortably established under
Lady Macdonald's wing in Carrick Castle, and made as
snug and happy as that fussy, kindly housewife's best
care could make her; and it saw Barbara, Alaster, and
The Attempt. 123
Elspet on their way to Stirling. The idea of the journey
had been a very terrible one in Elspet's eyes; that she
who had never before been ten miles away from Milla
Forres, should be called upon at her time of life to set out
upon an expedition so formidable, in the midst too of such
troublous times, when every road was beset with soldiers,
and every traveller ran no small risk of being taken by
one or other party for a spy, and suffering according,
almost overpowered the old woman's courage. It was
only her loyal devotion to " the fiimily " that prevented
her declining the mission, but " it shall ne'er be said as a
Forbes o' Milla Forres had nane o' her name to do her
biddin' among the south voners, while auld Elspet kens her
recht hau' frae her left," said the old clanswoinan, and so.
in spite of her fears, she followed her mistress. She did
not do so, however, without first making all preparations
as for a journey from which she never expected to return.
She astonished and alarmed Nancy the day before they
started, by coming with a mysterious air, and giving into
her hands a curious, old-fashioned blue bag, containing
twenty sovereigns and two keys, accompanied with the
explanation, that " Gin she ne'er wan back to Milla Forres,
she hopet Miss Nancy and Miss Barbara (gin s^e wan back)
wad tak' the money atween them, for a' her kith an' kin
was deid an' gane, an' she wad like the bit siller to stay
i' the name ; an' as for the twa keys, the ane was o' the
kist wi' her blue flannel kirtle an' her scarlet cloak, an'
four pair o' brau-new, blue worsted stockings, an' she wad
like them gien to Meg Macfarlane, an' the kirtle to auld
Jean Macintosh, an' the cloak to Chirsty MacLauchan;
an' the ither key was o' the wee box that wad be fand
under her bed, wi' her deed-claise in't, a' o' her ain spin¬
ning, an' she wad like to be berrit in them, gin sae be the
Lord was pleased to let her dee no ower far frae Milla
Forres." The idea of the possibility of returning to Milla
Forres alive never seemed to cross her imagination, and
she seemed almost insulted when Nancy said she hoped
she might live to give her own legacies in person, and
turned away with a solemn shake of the head, as if she
looked upon Nancy as an extremely light-minded young
person.
In spite, however, of old I^lspet's fears, the travellers
made out the really rather dangerous journey without
adventure, and at the end of two days and nights of
wearisome  travelHng, found  themselves safe under the
124 The Attempt.
shadow of Stirling Castle. Those were not the days of
luxurious first-class railway carnages, and all three sat
side by side in the coupe of the jumbling old stage coach.
Alaster and Barbara were very silent in the enforced com¬
panionship of this journey, so much so, that Elspet began
to wonder if they had " fallen out," and more and more
called herself an old idiot for the fancy she had taken
during Alaster's illness. Elspet's presence had something
to do with their silence, no doubt, but I think the real
reason of it lay deeper. These two, who had so much to
tell each other, and who f3lt that they dare say nothing
of what was really passing within them, how could they
talk about the passing trifles that would amuse and
interest ordinary acquaintances ? So it was that they,
who mutually spent so many of their happiest hours of
soHtude in imagined conversations with each other, when
they actually sat side by side, had little or nothing to
say ! Both looked forward -wiih a sox-t of dreary pain to
the parting at the end of the journey, and yet I do not
know that they greatly enjoyed the intercourse of the
present. Something had come into their relations, which
had destroyed the frank pleasure tliey had once had in
each other's society, Mdthout substituting anything
warmer and closer in its stead; and the feeling that
warmer and closer relations would have been possible
between them, interposed a restraint and barrier on the
innocent enjoyment of the existing relationship. So they
travelled on in silence, and Elspet marvelled at the folly
of her late siispicions !
The cousin to whom Mr Mackay had consigned tliQ
care of his young friend, was an old maiden lady of his
own name, who lived in a small house under the very
shadow of the castle rock. She was one of that class of
old Scotch ladies, alas, now nearly extinct!—shrewd,
quaint, and original, with many acute angles, even for the
days when people were allowed to have their own peculiar
angles, and were not all rubbed smooth, and even, and
common-place, by the constant friction of modern life,—
at once snell and kind, with a sharp tongue and a
warm heart,—a good friend, and rather a terrible foe. But
we must leave further accounts of Barbara's hostess till
the next chapter.
The Attempt 12 5
CHAPTER XXXI.
Maggie's   Lover.
" Co:me your ways  ben, my dear, ye  must  be  sair for-
foughten wi' a' this travellin'," said a little neat old lady
dressed in black, with a spotless cap, and equally immacu¬
late kerchief folded over her bosom, as Barbara alighted,
tired and dusty, at the door of the little house under the
shadow of the castle rock.  Alaster had left her before they
entered the town.   It would not have been safe for him to
be seen in Stirling, so he had a horse waiting for him at
a cross road a little out of the town, and there he had left
the coach, committing Barbara and Elspet to the driver's
care to put them down safely at Miss Mackay's door.   The
parting had been very quiet, and almost cold ; a simple
" goodbye," as those two, whose lives were bound up with
each  other,   took  each   their   separate   road.    Both  felt
dreary and chilled to the heart, as they went their ways
alone, but for both, for the time at any rate, the possibility
of anything like strong feeling seemed paralysed.    The
night was cold, and Barbara shivered, chilled outside and
in, as she landed at old Miss Mackay's door.    Everything
seemed dark and hopeless to her that night; her mission
itself,  in which she believed so   enthusiastically  in  her
brighter  hours,  took  now very much the aspect of a
" wild goose chase;" and as  she  saw old  I'jlspet  also
looking cold and miserable, she reproached herself for
putting the old woman to so much fatigue and incon¬
venience in so very doubtful a search.    It was the first
time, too, that she had gone among total strangers quite
alone, and a numb feeling of despondency seemed to  be
settling  down upon  her  heart.    Miss Mackay's  bright,
withered old face, and the cheery fire burning in the grate
of the little parlour, where a cosy tea was laid  out  on  a
little round table, covered with a spotless home-spun table
cloth, somewhat revived her drooping spirits.   The kindly,
brisk, old lady fussed over her young guest, whose journey
from Aberdeenshire to Stirling seemed a more formidable
undertaking in her eyes than a journey round the world
would seem to us  now; and by  the time the  tea was
over, and they sat down together by the bright little fire
with their feet on the fender, Barbara felt as if she had
known her hostess all her life.    Miss Mackay had many
questions to ask about the state of affairs in the north.
126 The Attempt.
and the Prince and those who followed his wanderings,
and also about her cousin, the old minister whom she had
not seen since he was, as she told Barbara, " a muckle
hafflin's laddie." She was evidently both touched and
pleased by Barbara's enthusiasm for the old Presbyterian
minister. Miss Mackay was a Presbyterian also, and like
all Presbyterians in those days of recent persecution, much
more emphatically Presbyterian than in these present
times of universal toleration we can easily understand.
The idea of having an Episcopalian and a Prelatic as a
guest under her roof, had been a terrible " exercise " to
her mind for some days after the receipt of her cousin's
letter asking her to receive Barbara, and it was only the
strong Highland instinct of hospitality, joined to the fact
that Barbara came accredited by a Presbyteiian minister,
who was into the bargain her own " first cousin only three
times removed," that induced her to consent to receive
her as a visitor. When she did come, the sight of the
girl's pale tired face called out all her hospitable instincts,
and almost banished from her mind the fact that she was
a " Prelatic; " and when Barbara spoke in glowing words
to Miss Mackay, of her cousin and his preaching, the ice
melted altogether, and the stern Presbyterian, who in the
abstract looked upon all Episcopalians as the specially
accredited emissaries of the devil, to be shunned as we
would shun their master, was willing to take this little
concrete bit of Episcopacy into her very bosom. So it is
we misjudge each other when we stand aloof and look
from afar off, and so such misunderstandings melt away
when we stand heart to heart! Before they went to
bed that night, Barbara and Miss Mackay were fast
friends.
Next morning Barbara began her mission. Brisk Httle
Miss Mackay, in spite of her seventy years, was all interest
and excitement in the search. The first thing, clearly,
was to find out where the farm of Margaret's Clench, to
which old Lauchlan had said Maggie's lover had come
after he left Aberdeenshire, was situated. A few enquiries
soon elicited the fact that there ivas such a farm about
fourteen miles from Stirling, in the direction of Scone; and
the milk woman, who was their informant, added, that
there was " an auld man leeved there o' the name o'
MacDougall; she kent little aboot him, he keepit himsel'
to his sei', an' wasna thick wi' ony o' his neebors; he
wasna muckle likit she thocht i' the country side, but he
The Attempt. 127
aye gied her guid milk, and a guid pennyworth o't. so
she had nocht to say agin him."
So the following morning Barbara took Elspet with her,
and carrying with them many instructions and good
wishes from old Miss Mackay, besides a Avell stuffed
basket of provisions, they set out to drive to Margaret's
Cleuch.
It was the height of midsummer, and the glorious
Perthshire hills stood out in all their majestic beauty
against the clear deep blue of the sky. In spite of the
constant sadness at her heart, Barbara's spirits rose
as they drove through the lovely scenery, all so new to
her. She was young, and life is strong and hopeful in the
young. She could not believe under that bright sky that
life was to be to her such a hopeless and dreary thing as
she had pictured it to herself during these last months,
not even perhaps altogether a battle. Might there not be
for her even yet, without that supreme happiness which
could never be hers now, some pleasant quiet days, enjoy¬
able enough, perhaps, in a placid sort of way % Barbara's
face had not looked so like its old self for many a day,
and old Elspet began to think that perhaps her young
mistress's " daft-like " expedition might have some good
in it after all, if it began by making her so like her former
self. About noon they reached Margaret's Clench, a
pretty farm house nestling under the shadow of the
mountains. The situation was picturesque, and the house
looked clean and comfortable, but there were none of the
little niceties, outside or in, that betray a woman's hand.
Outside, the farm yard was scrupulously clean and orderly,
but there was no little patch of bright flower garden.
Inside it was the same; on Barbara asking for Mr
MacDougaU, the sonsy farm lass who opened the door
shoAved them into a stiff, tidy parlour, well furnished and
neat (for Mr ]\IacDougall w^as a " been " well-to-do man),
but prim and cheerless, for want of the little homely
touches that only a woman can give. After they had
been seated for a few minutes, in this grim apartment,
which felt chill for want of occupation even on that bright
midsummer day, the master of the house entered—an
old worn man, with snow white hair, and stooping sadly
as he walked—a man coming on to seventy, as old
Lauchlan had said, but looking ten years more. He
saluted his unexpected guests with all the ease of his
race, and in toaes which nearly forty years absence from
128 Tlie Attempt.
his native shire had not robbed of one whit of the
northern dialect. Barbara could hardly believe, as she
looked at this old, bent, worn man, that he was the same
person that had sought for poor Maggie so wildly, and
mourned her so passionately.
She began to explain her visit, by telling him who she
was. When she- mentioned " IMilla Forres," she noticed
the old man start, and a taint colour flush into his
cheeks; and when she spoke of old Peggy, he clenched
his hands firmly together, as if repressing strong emotion.
When she told him further of Peggy's death, and her
dying charge to her, and that she was here now—had
come all the way from Milla Forres—to see if he could
help her to keep that charge, the old man broke down
entirely. His whole bent frame trembled like an aspen
leaf, and big tears rolled down his withered cheeks. " My
poor Maggie, my poor bonny Maggie," he sobbed at last.
" Thank God her mither cam' to forgie her, or the end; as
for me, I hae forgi'en her this mony a year. I hardly
think I ever needed to forgie her, I loved her thatmuckle."
Barbara could believe it now,—this aged man, with the
gray hair and the faded eyes, was Maggie's lover still, as
much her lover now, as when he had striven to woo her
for his bride under the shadow of Benvorlish. She
questioned him as to that sad search of his, and how he
had lost sight of the fugitives ; and he told her sub¬
stantially the same tale that old Lauchlan had told her
already, that he had traced them, step by step, to Aber¬
deen, and there they had disappeared, and he could track
them no further.
" But was there no clue; nothing to give you any idea
where they had gone ? "
The old man shook his head sadly, " There was a ship
sailed that day for France, but I could hear o' naebody
like them on board," he said.
" Still it is possible." said Barbara, " they might have
disguised themselves."
" Ay, I thocht o' a' that at the time ; an' gin I could hae
gotten a ship, I wad hae gane ower to see, but just then
there was a stoppage o' the traflic, on account o' war, an'
afore that was ower, there wad hae been nae hopes o'
findin' them, e'en gin they had sailed in her, an' I had nae
reason to think they did."
" Well," said Barbara, rising and shaking hands kindly
with the old man, " It is a very slender clue, but it is all
The Attempt. 129
we have, so I must try to fallow it.    Do you remember
the name of that ship, Mr MacDougall %" •
" The Mary Jane," he said. " The Lord bless you, my
dear young lady," he added. " I fear it's a bad job, but
He'll no forget that ye tried to find my poor Maggie ; an'
as for me, I'm an auld man noo, Miss Forbes, but gin an
auld man's blessin' can do ocht for ye, ye hae it frae the
bottom o' my heart. My bonny Maggie," he went on, as
if talking to himself, " my wee, bonny lamb, I think gin I
could see ye ance afore I dee, I could say like auld
Simeon, ' Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in
peace.'" Jeanie Morison.
(To be continued).
(Bxhibiliou of the |lopl ^cottislt Jtntdfimn.
Part I.
The Exhibition this year seems to be considered by many
as hardly up to the usual average. This may partly be
caused by some large inferior pictures occupying impor¬
tant places, and distracting attention from numbers of
meritorious little landscapes and pretty bits of genre. In
noticing the pictures, however, we find a few prominent
ones, that stand out from the rest, and at once command
our admiration. " Oskold and the Elle Maidens," Sir J.
Noel Paton's only contribution, is perhaps the more inter¬
esting from being about the only picture of the ideal or
higher imaginative school this year, the Exhibition con¬
sisting almost wholly of genre pictures, landscapes, and
portraits, with a very small sprinkling of historical sub¬
jects. And in this picture there is a wonderful beauty,
which we think can hardly be fairly realised in the crowd
and light of its present situation. It needs isolation, and
even looking at it through a tube brings out much more
of its latent loveliness. How spiritual are the faces of
the maidens, even through the disappointed fury of those
the knight has left behind him, and the deceitful sweet¬
ness of those who still hope to bar his way. Wonderful
is the prismatic play of elfish light round the floating
figures, contrasting so wildly with the calm of the fading
twilight, beyond the great old trees. The painting of the
knight's armour seems simply perfect, and tlie roughened
ATKIL 1874. 1^
130 The Attempt.
coat of his charger, showing against the mingled lights,
is masterly. The harness is stiff with encrusted gems,
burning and glowing in a radiance all their own, that
recalls the power over pure rays of light which charac¬
terizes the early Italian school, and which has seemed for
centuries well nigh lost. The intelligence and fire of the
horse's head, and the ascetic energy of the knight's ex¬
pression, should also be observed. But this is essentially
a cabinet picture, and at a distance loses its effect, which
would, we think, be greatly enhanced, were it in a smaller
room.
Quite otherwise is it with Herdman's " Conventicle
Preacher," 361. The clever grouping, and pleasant har¬
monious colouring, are especially effective at a distance;
nearer, we confess to feeling something of conventionalism
and want of individuality about all the figures, except
that of the old Covenanter himself—a regular personifica¬
tion of mingled pride, temper, defiance, and honesty.
One cannot but respect him, while feeling what a very
disagreeable member of society he is likely to be.
" The Fair of St Olaf, or Extremes Meet," 204, is
another remarkable picture. The contrast between the
sombre old cathedral, that has changed so little with all
the changing centuries, and the fleeting fancies of the
evanescent fair beneath its towers, is repeated in the
quiet, pure evening sky, still luminous with the long
northern twilight, and the glittering flaring candles in
the many coloured booths. In fact, not only is this a
beautiful landscape and figure picture, equaUed by very
few, if any, in the Exhibition, as a painting, but, in
vigorous power and poetry of idea, it stands alone and
unapproached among the landscapes this year. The
management of the different lights is a triumph of skill,
and the solidity of the solemn towers rising above the
flimsy follies of the fair, is beautifully rendered.
Taking the pictures more in their order, and beginning
in the northern or Avater-colour room, our eye is soon
attracted by the truthful 750, " St Andrews," S. Bough.
But it must be confessed it is a shivering truth. Mr
Bough has been out in tlie rain of late. His solitary oil
picture, 215,—alas, that we should have but one from
him this year ! —represents one of the worst days that
ever drove ordinary mortals indoors. Why drag us out
in such weather ? It is as clever as possible; the tossing
of tlie tormented trees,  the  mad  dance of the  whirling
The Attempt. 131
leaves, the wretched wind-bufFeted passers by, the positive
motion that seems quivering across the picture, are most
powerfully rendered ; but we are disposed to question the
real beauty of all this. Of course there is spottiness and
want of repose in the picture, it is perfectly natural that
it should be so, but is it delightful ? Can realism in
landscape not be carried too far ? Even more miserably
depressing is 806, " A Wet Village." It is far too true.
There may indeed be people who have such irrepressibly
high spirits, that they enjoy decorating their walls with
these melancholy scenes, or they may be destined to
feast the eyes of inhabitants of the plains of India during
the hot season, on sloppy pavements and running gutters ;
but we trust Mr Bough will not wield his powerful brush
too often for them, but touch his mists as he well knows
how, with sunny gleams, and let a little light cheer up his
far wistful cloud horizons.
Close to the dripping village is another cold, clever,
miserable sketch, 809, "Loch Ard." 1014, "Gathering
Storm," 1023, "Loch Achray," and 817, "Cottage on the
Moor," also dreary and disconsolate, but all so natural, one
might catch cold by looking at them. No. 12 is another
fine example of bad weather, and there are a good many
more grim climateric effects, only not so well painted,
scattered through the Exhibition. In inferior hands, such
subjects are simply ugly, though it is much easier to
load on a heavy horizonless sky above a dark muddy
landscape, than to play with the subtle light, which is
the real business and domain of painting.
966, A clever head called " Tito." But is this, except
in colour, the right type ? Was not Tito's face of the
pure straight-lined Greek cast, whereas this is decidedly
Italian, with a slightly Roman nose, and a firm pronounced
chin. 98, " The Open Window." We can imagine how
long the wise, noble-looking Newfoundland has been
watching and waiting on the steps, growing anxioiis now
as he listens in vain for the " footsteps of the children."
There is much pathos in the silent deserted look of the
house, and in the little garden tools that will never more
be wanted, tossed aside beneath the steps. Not far off is
a delicious terrier's head, " Skye," full of life and spirit,
easy and eveille, painted with wonderful dash, and
apparently without an effort, by S. Bough. There are
many nice dogs this year in the Exhibition ; indeed, we
are inclined to think them often more fortunate in their
132 The Atteiiipt.
portraits than their masters and mistresses, but we think,
in some respects, we prefer little " Skye " to them all.
In the next room, we find. No. 33, " Trawlers Waiting
for Darkness," a remarkably fine piece of sea painting.
It is like opening a window that looks over a twilight
sea. The ripple of the water is charmingly rendered,—
we almost hear it lapping and plashing among the low
rocks and sea-weed. There is the feeling of life and
motion, and yet of quiet repose that calm weather brings
to the vast expanse of the sea. The tone of the colour is
very fine, ranging through neutral greys from dark sea
green to golden saffron yellow; not a discordant tint
anywhere to break the complete harmony of sea and
rock, boats and sky. No. 40 we would venture to call
the best portrait in the Exhibition. The face is full of
character, and the flesh-tints are really very fixie; trans¬
parent and glowing with life, yet with no touch of
coarseness or smudginess. Some of the other portraits
look as if they had been drawn and painted in exact
imitation of waxwork models, so dead and opaque is the
colouring, so hard and conventional the outlines. " A
Ravelled Hank," 41, a picturesque old woman, whose
weary, withered hands are hopelessly tangled in her yarn.
Her house looks bare and dreary. Altogether, though
very well painted, the picture seems another of the too
numerous class that are not altogether pleasing; we like
old women in pictures to be quite cosy and comfortable,
though this is a much more interesting dame than the
old body winding up her clock, with her back turned to
us, or the witch at the wash tub (No. 304), and various
others that may indeed exist, but have no reasonable
claim to be painted.
" Bargains To-day," 72, John Faed, is, on the contrary,
a most pleasant picture. There is a struggle on the
comely old dame's face between tlirift and admiration of
the pedlar's store ; but we can read, in his insinuating
countenance, his hopes that he will do a good stroke of
business before leaving the pretty cottage room. Of
course, critics might say that the whole scene is too
pretty and smart, and especially the pink short-gown of
the dark haired lassie; but when years have somewhat
melloAved Faed's pictures, will they not, with their delicate
hues and graceful feeling, be worthy to rank with the
more refined of the old Dutch pictures which have now
such a fabulous value ?
The Attempt. 133
83, " The Graves of our ain Folk," we observe is much
admired, and the light falling on the solitary bxn-ial place
among the hills seems very well managed; but there is a
good deal of waste ground, pictorially speaking, so barren
of interest, that we cannot help thinking more concentra¬
tion, and more depth and variety of background, is much
wanted.
In 92 also, " The Fisherman's Haven," the sentiment
and general feeling seem superior to the execution, which
is rugged and unfinished; but there is much charm in the
contrast of the restless sea, with the little old church in
the foreground—whose walls are built like a fortress
against the wear of wind and weather on the Avild coast.
A pretty effect of misty noon-tide sea and wet sands is
hit off in 102, "Bait Gatherers;" and near it is a power¬
fully executed little picture of an inveterate old gambler—
a man-at-arms,—sitting at ease on a table, " Calculating
the Chances." The good work here contrasts well with
the sketchy carelessness of a somewhat similar subject in
105. We may observe the fine broad touch in "Peasant
Girl Knitting," 115; the nasturtiums grow most naturally,
and are neither laborious copies of separate leaves, nor
mere vague hints of vegetation.
" The Pet Lamb," No. 5, is a very pretty little picture,
the child unaffected and innocent, the colour soft and
waiin. The quiet saffron light of early morning is well
rendered in 22, " Shaking the Nets," a very telling
picture when seen, which is not altogether eatsy, from the
right point of view. The " Parting of Guinevere and
Lancelot," 125, is also not well placed, but as far as we
can make out, has real poetical feeling. The rougli
ways, and uncivilized-looking trees, recall the days when
knights "rode endlong and athwart wild forests seeking
adventures;" and the low colouring and melancholy-
looking solitude, are in harmony with the two lovers
riding so sadly away, parted for ever.
" Our Ain Fireside," 23, is a very pleasant picture of
domestic bliss. The importance of the dog of the house
in this country finds frequent expression in Scottish art.
Abroad, the dog is generally represented as a hunter, or
as a mere appendage to other pe(.)ple, but in Scotland the
collie or the terrier appears as the family friend, the
trusted guardian, and is indeed often the hero of the
picture. Such a one is the bright-eyed " Foxie," 32, and
still more emphatically, 120, "Oscar," by Gourlay Steell.
134 The Attempt.
We are inclined to envy his proprietress; both dog
and picture must be delightful possessions. His wise
expression and dignified manner seem rendered to the
life; he looks so sagacious, one would like to ask him
if he approves of his own portrait. Comment on the
staring picture beneath him, placed curiously enough
in one of the best positions in the rooms, is really
unnecessary. Let us pass, with a sense of relief, to 137,
" The Hinteesee," under the archway, by a foreign
artist, and see what a conscientious landscape ought to
be. Of course, there is the advantage here of a very
beautiful scene. But in this the trees in the foreground
are worked out sufficiently for us to look with interest at
the details of their form ; the grass and the rocks are not
mere conventionalisms, to suggest such objects to the
mind, but really like enough for the eye to rest on them
with pleasure; and the same may be said for the mountain
details, in the distance. The peculiar greenish blue of
these mountain lakes is very finely rendered, and we
feel we are looking at a real view, and seeing more and
more in it as we look, not at an " effect " dashed in with
evident paint.
In the corner of the " Great Room " there is quite a
group of pretty little pictures—" Lola," by Mrs Charretie,
cannot be passed over; "The Milk Maid" is a sweetly
painted little cabinet picture. There is an admirable
" Portrait of ]\Iajor Fraser," 151, above ; we think one of
the best in the Exhibition, and two very pretty little
things by Farquharson, 153, "Resting," and 160, "The
Trysting Tree." One, a lady reclining easily on a sofli.
the other a pretty girl seated on a fallen tree in a wood,
with a glint of sunshine shining on the mossy trees and
her light dress. Both figures have a charmingly un¬
conscious ease and grace—they represent thorough
ladies, and the indoor shadow of the one, and open-air
brightness of the other, are well rendered. " John
Anderson my Jo," 156, a most pleasant old couple, happy
in all their surroundings, and especially happy in each
other. The delicacy with which all the various textures
are rendered, make one forget entirely the means by
which the charming effect is reached. Such pictures
teach us that the language of painting, the power of
representing surface, ought by many aitists to be more
studied,  and more fully acquired, before they  attempt
The Attempt. 185
such little genre subjects as this, which become full of
interest and beauty in the hands of Faed.
Mr Cassie, in 159, well recalls the soft, relaxing, misty
summer days by the western sea. It seems too hot to do
anything but bask. Tlie whole scene is somewhat idle
and sleepy in effect, but none the less expressive of one
of nature's moods. In 178, "Beating to Windward," all
again is breezy and active; the pretty picture is very
hke many others by Crawford; as 173, " Age and Infancy,"
is like others of Cameron's. He is very fond of depicting
old women, and does so witli great skill; but we greatly
prefer this granny, leading the blooming child so tenderly,
to the " Study," 179, which is, however, of acknowledged
merit. There is something in the face of the old dame
sitting before us, with crossed hands, of faihng and
senility; there is the quiet, but not the dignity of age,
which latter is its most valuable characteristic in a
picture.
Conspicuous among the portraits is the charming
idealised group of " Three Sisters," 240. Though very
original in treatment, there is nothing strained or affected
in the attitudes and expressions of the two pretty girls
and rosy child, who seem wholly occupied with each
other, and not, as is often the case in portraits, posed
with a view to spectators. The white muslin dresses are
most skillfully painted, and the dim woodland back¬
ground is pleasantly suggestive of light and space.
The artist has, we think, arranged the costume in
accordance with the real principles of beauty, so that
it will never look awkward or outre; and the whole
picture has about it a kind of airy grace that reminds
one of the works of Angelica Kaufmann.
{To be continued.)
E. J. 0.
13G The Attempt.
My sister, since God haa so blessed thee,
Should we deter thee ? or say " God speed thee! "
Thou hast strength, and because thy hand is strong,
Shall it less tenderly dry the eyes that weep I
Or less softly close those which God has dried ?
Nay, we will trust this hand so strong, so pure,—
Let it go forth to bless, and to be blessed,—
Let the fever'd, the trembling, the stain'd ones
Of thy sisters rest gently on this palm,—
Let soul and body know the healing of its touch.
The strength that flows to weak and weary frames
From out a strong, true woman's sympathy.
There are who upbraid thee, who misjudge thee,
Ever the greater they upbraid, not the lesser :
For lo ! she passes, the " busybody," the " tattler,"
And she, the busily selfish, and th' idly selfish ;
And she, the man's toy and plaything.
These all tread their narrow way mid'st silence, for thee.
Thou wilful chooser of a broader path,
The world reserves its bitt'rest term, " unwomanli/J'
And some there are who blush for thee, my sister,
But, when thou standest by tlie sacred dead.
As thou must oft, eyeing God's workmanship
With wond'ring rev'rence, with holy rev'rence.
Shall not thy feet then rest on higher ground
Than that where lies earth's blushes and impurities.
With knowledge beck'ning thee, with sufTring pressing
What ear or time hast thou f )r lower voices'?    [thee,—
And some there are who wait for thee,
Ardent and brave thou answ'rest to their call.
And if the Christ within thee brightly shine.
Uniting strength with tenderness,
All knoAvledge with all purity,
AVho can deter thee ?   Who will not join the cry
Now issuing from many lips,—" God speed thee ! "
Frucara.
The Attempt. 137
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XXXII.
STRICKEN.
The bright summer day had become overshadowed
before Barbara and Elspet left Margaret's Clench;
and old Mr MacDougall would fain have supplied
them with haps of all kinds, in case of a showier, but
Barbara, thinking of the inconvenience to which it might
put Miss ]\Iackay to return them, and not greatly caring
for a few drops of rain, declined to take them. As they
drove on, however, they began to perceive that they
would have been "wise to have followed the old farmer's
advice. A steady down-pour began when they were
little more than two miles on their way, and continued
with unabated violence till they reached Stirling. Bar¬
bara, who was dressed in thin summer muslins, was
soaked to the skin. Elspet"s clothes were thick, but even
they were hardly any protection from the drifting rain.
Barbara was anxious about Elspet, who was rheumatic,
and much regretted her obstinacy in refusing the old
farmer's repeated offers of plaids and wraps; for herself
she had no fear. With a grand natural constitution, and
hardily brought up among the hills, what was a little
wetting to her ? Miss Mackay was shocked, however, at
her thoroughly drenched condition when they arrived, and
wished to order her off at once to bed, Avith a tumbler of hot
toddy to take the chill off her. Barbara drank the toddy
submissively, and changed her wet clothes, but laugh¬
ingly declined to be put to bed, " like a naughty child,"
as she said; and when she had changed her dripping
clothes, she sat down and wrote a long letter to her
father, telling him of the slender clue she had found to
Peggy's lost daughter, and begging him when he went
to France, where she knew he meant to accompany the
Prince, to allow her to go with him, and there prosecute
her search. The letter t(jok some time to w-rite, for
young ladies, in those days, were not in the habit of
scribbling off half-a-dozen notes of a morning, as girls do
now, and when it was done, and sealed up, she turned
from the table to take up her work; but a sudden shiver-
MAT 1874. S
138 The Attempt.
ing and dizziness seized her, and she was obliged to hold
on by the table for support.
" What's wrang wi' ye, lassie ?" exclaimed Miss Mackay,
looking up from the other side of the table in alarm.
" I—don't—know," said Barbara, faintly. " J am cold,
and I can't see right. I think—I'll go to bed."
Thoroughly alarmed, Miss Mackay rang for Elspet, and
between them they helped her to bed, and sent the little
maid-of-all-work in hot haste for the doctor. Before he
came, Barbara was in a high fever and quite delirious.
He looked at her and shook his head,—" There is violent
inflammation," he said. " I fear it may go hard with her;
you had better send for her friends at once."
Elspet wrung her hands in despair. From the first
moment when the doctor shook his head she gave up
all hope. " Aye, aye, it's the shadow, it's the shadow," she
muttered. " Oh ! to think o' her deein', an' her sae far frae
Milla Forres."
" What d'ye mean, Elspet, gangin' on that gate, an'
talkin' o' deein'," exclaimed old Miss Mackay, impatiently.
'" Dinna let me hear sic a word oot o' yer mouth. Deein'
indeed, quo' she," she mutiered defiantly; but her own
kindly, withered old face was pale, and her hands
trembled nervously as she took down the doctor's
directions, and then sat down to write short notes sum¬
moning Barbara's father and sister.
" An' Maister Alaster," said Elspet; " ye maun send for
him; I'm thinkin' she wadna dee easy wantin' liim."
So a letter was written to Alaster too. None of the
letters could go till the following morning, when the
northern coach Avould take the one to Nancy, and also
that to her father, which must be sent to Nancy's care.
Alaster's would be sent by a messenger on horseback,
for there was no direct communication otherwise with
Castle Ronald.
"I'se warrant he'll be here the first o' them a',"
soliloquised Elspet. Somehow the old instinctive con¬
viction of the real feelings of these two towards each
other, which her observations of late had partly dissipated,
returned in full force now that Barbara was stricken down.
It seemed as if Alaster were the first and fittest person
to be sent for. They watched by her bedside through
two weary nights and one long summer's day, while the
girl's mind wandered through scene after scene of the
past.    Now, she was among the courtly society that sur-
27ie Attempt. 139
rounded the Prince in Edinburgh, and snatches of
Jacobite songs, sung in a weak, tremulous voice, were
mixed with courtly compliments and brilliant badinage.
Again, she was in the little Presbyterian kirk, at Milla
Forres, listening to Mr Mackay, and the faint voice had a
ring of triumph in it, as over and over again she repeated
" Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world." Again,
she was at Margaret's Cleuch trying to find out from old
MacDougall some clue to the lost girl. Again, she was at
Milla Forres, under the great birch tree by the burn, and
she clasped her hands in entreaty, and the cold perspir¬
ation of agony stood upon her brow, as such words as
these broke from her parched lips, " Do not ask me, do not
tempt me, 1 cannot do it." It was strange how through
all the wild vagaries of delirium the girl kept her secret.
The " ruling passion" seemed strong to keep the poor
wandering mind from betraying what, in its reasonable
hours, it had so jealously guarded, as it is said to be
"strong in death." The doctor came in twice .during the
day, and the last thing before he went home at night;
but each time it was only to shake his head and turn
away. The fever was as high as ever. "Slie is young,"
he said, and it was all the hope he gave them.
At day-break, on the morning of the second day, a hot
and dusty rider alighted from a hard-ridden, reeking
horse, at the door of the little house under the Castle
Rock. It was Alaster. He had got Miss Mackay's note
at Castle Ronald late the night before. Ten minutes
after its receipt he was in the saddle, and he never drew
rein till he reached Miss Mackay's door. Like Elspet,
from the moment he heard of Barbara's illness, he gave
up all hope; his only thought was, would he be in time 1
It was his first question when Elspet opened the door to
him in the dim morning twilight. "Ay, ay, Maister
Alaster, ye're in time," sobbed the old woman, as she led
the way upstairs to the sick-chamber. Barbara was
tossing uneasily on her pillow as they entered ; she had
been tossing so all night, and the visions of her delirium
seemed to have been more than usually painful. Many
and many a time during the past hours the hot white
hands had been clasped as in an agony of supplication,
and the big drops of anguish had stood upon the broad
white brow. But the moment that Alaster entered the
room, a change seemed to come over the troubled spirit
of her  dream.    The little  feverish hands gradually re-
140 The Attempt.
laxed their convulsive clasp, the fair knit brow unbent
itself, and over the intense burning eyes there seemed to
fall a soft dreamy haze. She turned her head quietly on
her pilllow, and a soft half-smile hovered about the
scarlet lips. She was utterly unconscious, but it seemed
as if there were electric power in his presence, which,
unconscious as she was, quieted and soothed her. She
began to speak rambling words again, but now she
Beemed to have left the painful scenes that had haunted
her during the night, and to be back again as a little
child, playing with Nancy at Milla Forres. By-and-bye
the sweet eyes opened wider, and a bright smile broke
over her face, and stretching out both her hands, she
eaid, *• Yes, mamma, I've been a good girl, and said my
prayers ; I'm not frightened in the dark, good-night, I'll
go to sleep," and she closed her eyes, and lay quietly on
her pillow.
Alaster stood by the bed watching her; he was very
quiet and calm, but there was no light of hope in his face.
The doctor came in and looked at his patient, and
said, " The pulse is much lower, and the fever is leaving
her, it may all be well yet, if only her stiength holds
out;" but no word, or look of eager questioning came
from the silent man by the bed. or broke for a moment
the quiet, settled despair in his face. From the instant
that Miss Mackay's note was put into his hand Alaster
Tiad felt that this was the end ; and no hopeful words of
the doctor could alter the settled conviction that had
taken possession of him.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
THE    VICTORY.
All the long hot hours of tAvo summer days, Alaster
sat by her bedside, and his presence seemed to act as an
anodyne. If for a moment he left the room, she became
restless and uneasy, and whenever he returned to it, the
quiet contented look came back to her face. She was
quite unconscious, and did not seem to know him or any
one else about her, yet his presence seemed to have a
sort of mesmeric influence over her. The long hot hours
had worn themselves out at last on the second day, and
the cool of the summer's evening had set in. The doctor
had been in and looked at her, and felt her pulse ; he
The Attempt. 141
looked distressed and puzzled. " The fever has quite left
her," he said: " if only she had a little more strength—the
Dulae is strangely feeble after so short an illness, in one
so young; it seems almost as if her constitution had
been severely tried before this illness began." He
looked inquiringly at Alaster, but he made no response.
He was thinking bitterly enough of the mental strain of
all those months, so bravely borne at the time, but which
seemed so likely to weigh down the wavering balance
now.
The doctor had come and gone, the sun had set in
gold and purple behind the Castle Eock, the sunset
colours had almost faded from the sky, and the first star
was twinkling in the far-away heavens. Since the
twihght had crept into the room, Barbara had seemed to
doze, as if the coolness and darkness of evening were
refreshing to her after the long hot summer's day.
Seeing her so quiet and comfortable. Miss Mackay and
Elspet had gone away to snatch a few moment's rest,
before the watching of the night began, and Alaster was
left alone in the sick-room. He was sitting with his
elbows leaning on the table, and his face buried in his
hands, lost in bitter thought, when he was disturbed by
a faint whisper from the bed. " Alaster,"—the tone was
so low that he hardly knew whether it was Barbara's
living voice or a voice in his dream. He looked up, how¬
ever, towards the bed, and met the great blue eyes
looking at him with a gaze of love unspeakable. He
went up to the bedside, and bending low over her, he said,
"Do you know me, Barbara?" The feeble arms went
round his neck, as she answered—
" Know you ? of course I do, my own Alaster." A sob
broke from the strong man as he held the feeble form to
his heart. " Don't cry, dear," she said, " it's better so, it
could never have come straight in this world, perhaps
now it will—up yonder," and she pointed to the darken¬
ing blue of the sky, where the evening star was growing
brighter and brighter in the deepening twilight.
" Oh, Barbara," he moaned, " my darling, my darling,
how can I live without you 1 "
" Oh yes," she said, " you will, dear ; you will be brave
and strong for my sake. Remember I give over my charge
of Nancy to you, you will have to give me an account of
it when we meet up yonder. You will take care of her,
will you not, for me ? "
142 The Attempt.
" Yes, yes," he sobbed. She lay quiet for a few-
minutes with her eyes shut, and a gentle contented
smile playing about her lips. Then she opened her eyes,
and laid her little transparent hand on Alaster's.
" Alaster," she said, " there's one thing I think I was
wrong in, and you w^ere right. I didn't see clear at the
time, but many things look clearer now,—or perhaps it's
only that now it is possible, and it wasn't then. I think
3^ou should tell Nancy the truth, Alaster, before you marry
her. The truth, I mean, about you and me. I don't think
Nancy will be angry, or let it make any difference;
perhaps it wall hurt her, poor little Nancy, I am sorry to
do that, but then it is the truth, and truth is always best.
You will tell her, Alaster ? "
" Yes, my darling, yes."
" Poor little Nancy," she'went on : " if I had been going
to live, I don't know whether I should have been brave
enough to tell her. It would have been the right thing to
do, I think, even then, but it would have been very hard.
It is much easier now-, now that it need make no
difference."
" Oh, Barbara, don't talk in that way, you will break
my heart," sobbed Alaster.
" No, my dear," she said, tenderly stroking his clasped
hands with her own little feeble fingers. " It won't
break your heart, dear, God will keep it from breaking.
I thought mine would break last winter, but He didn't let
it. He sent old Mr Mackay to preach to me, and to makq
me see that we aren't sent into this world for our own
pleasure, but to fight and to ' overcome;' He has over¬
come already, and He wall help you to overcome too."
She paused a little, and then went on,—" I thought the
battle would be very hard, but you see He has not let it
last long; He has given me the victory very soon, perhaps
He will give it you soon too. At any rate, it will be all
straight up yonder. One thing more I w-ant you to
promise me," she said, after a little pause, " I w^ant you to
help me to keep ray promise to old Peggy. I got a sort of
clue to poor Maggie—I can't tell you about it," she added
feebly, " but I told papa in the letter I wrote before I got
ill; will you follow it out for me when I am gone 1 "
" Yes, my darling, yes, I will do anything you wish," he
sobbed.
She drew a long breath of satisfaction, and said, with a
faint smile, " You see I am leaving you all my unfinished
The Attempt. 143
work to do—to help me to keep my word to my mother
and to old Peggy, to take care of Nancy, and to find
Maggie," She shut her eyes with a satisfied smile. The
next time she spoke she was wandering again, and her
mind was away back to the old days of her childhood,
when she and Nancy were plucking flowers by the burn
at Milla Forres.
Next day Nancy arrived, and with her Dr Brown.
Instantly, on hearing of Barbara's illness, he had offered
to escort her sister to Stirling, and they had posted all
the way.
Poor Nancy's grief was simply frantic at first, when she
saw the terrible change in the beloved face, but by and
bye it quieted down into a sort of dazed bewilderment.
Dr Brown came and looked at her sadly,—this woman whom
he had loved so truly. His practised eye saw at once that
hope was past, and that all the most loving skill could do
was to watch the last faint fiickering of the feeble taper.
His sorrow had nothing selfish in it; she was as near him
now as she ever would have been had she lived, and yet
it seemed to him that, when she should be gone from it,
this world would have lost all interest for him. All
through that day she was insensible, and Elspet and
Alaster began to fear that she would pass away without
one word of recognition or farewell to the sister she had
loved so fondly.
But it was not to be so. During the early hours of the
night the feeble pulse had grown so much feebler that
Dr Brown said quietly that those who wished to be with
her at the last had better not leave the room. So they
were all assembled there,—Miss Mackay and Elspet,
Dr Brown, Nancy, and Alaster.
About midnight, the great blue eyes opened widely,
with a look of recognition in them. They fell at once on
Nancy, and a bright smile lighted up the dying face, on
which the death dews were already gathering. She put
out her hand to her sister, and as Nancy drew near her,
sobbing, she put it tenderly on her head, and said, " My
little Nancy, don't cry—it is better so—Alaster will tell
you—he will finish my promise to my mother—he'll bring
you safe home to her and me up yonder," and the blue
eyes looked away out of the window to the distant
starry sky. Then her eye caught Dr Brown standing by
her, and she said, " Dr Brown, are you here ? you are very
kind,—thank you, and goodbye."    She put out her hand
144 The Attempt.
silently to Elspet and Miss Mackay; then the death film
began to cloud the lovely eyes.
" It's dark," she said,'' I can't see. Alaster!" He went to
her and raised her in his arms, and her head fell back upon
his breast. "Rest, rest," she murmured, "Alaster, take care
of Nancy for me, and teU her—the—truth; don't forget.
* Be—of—good cheer—I—have —overcome—the world.' "
The last words Avere lost in the failing breath ; the fight
was over—she too had " overcome."
CONCLUSION.
It only remains now to tell in a few words the sequel of
the little fragment of a life which I have been trying to
bring up before your minds.
Colonel Forbes arrived the day after his daughter's
death; the letter had not reached in time for him to come
sooner. In his quiet dignified way he grieved for her,
and he at once acceded to Nancy's request, suggested by
Alaster, that she should be taken home and buried at
Milla Forres, beside the mother whose dying wishes her
life had been devoted to fulfil. So they took her back,
and laid her down in the bright sunlight of an August
day iu the little churchyard by the side of the burn, under
the shadow of Benvorlish. At Alaster's suggestion, also,
old Mr Mackay assisted at the funeral. Mr Bennett read
over her the solemn words, " I am the resurrection and
the life," and the old man concluded the service with an
extempore prayer, that faltered as it ended with her own
last triumphant words, " Be of good cheer, I have over¬
come the world." Alaster and Dr Brown were tfie only
mourners invited by her father, but all the poor people
of the neighbourhood had gathered round that youthful
grave, and many a tear fell upon the upturned sod.
Alaster kept his word, and told Nancy the truth; and
dear, humble, trusting, loving, little Nancy only clung to
him the more, because he had loved Barbara and Barbara
had loved him. She looked on him now as more than
Alaster,- as Alaster and Barbara in one. No thought of
jealousy of the love that had been given to the dear dead
sister, the love that was that sisters still, and would be
hers for ever, crossed the generous, trusting, simple child¬
like heart. And for Alaeter, he too loved Nancy, not
passionately, as a lover, but with a quiet, grave, protecting,
fatherly love—had not Barbara left her to him as a legacy!
The Attempt. 145
About a month after Barbara had been laid to her long sleep,
Alaster and Nancy were quietly married. They knew she
would have had it so, and that was enough for both of
them. After their marriage, they went with Colonel
Forbes to Paris, and Alaster set about keeping the other
half of Barbara's commission, to find Peggy's Maggie.
After long search, he succeeded in finding in a wretched
hovel in one of the lowest parts of Paris, an old decrepit
woman of sixty, who had once been Kob MacDougal's
"bonny Maggie." It was the old story,—ruined, betrayed,
deserted, then dragging out a weary life of poverty, and
want, and hard work. Deserted by her faithless lover,
she had toiled on and earned a precarious livelihood by
needlework, till sickness had deprived her of the power of
working; and when Alaster found her, famine was staring
her in the face. Those long years of distress and poverty
had not, however, been without their blessing; they had
brought the poor wandering outcast to the blessed Feet
that long ago were bathed with tears by a " woman that
was a sinner." Old Peggy's silent prayers had not been
unanswered: her wandering lamb had come back to the
fold. She wept tears of joy and sorrow when Alaster
placed the old well-worn Bible in her hand, told her
of her mother's dying commission, and of the young
life that had been nipped in the bud when trying to
carry out that commission. Some months later, Alaster
and Nancy returned to Scotland, taking Peggy's Maggie
with them, and leaving Colonel Forbes at the Prince's
court. Shortly after their arrival, the bells rang for the
strangest marriage ever witnessed in Milla Forres. The
bridegroom was an old bowed man of seventy, and the
bride a care-worn decrepit woman past sixty. But there
was a look of quiet happiness on both the worn faces as
they stood up to plight their troth to each other, which is
not always seen at younger and fairer weddings. It was
old Rob MacDougal taking his " bonny Maggie " home
at last.
Dr Brown never married, nor did he ever leave Milla
Forres. He had off"ers of preferment elsewhere, which
his friends marvelled at his declining. He gave no reason,
but he was firm in his refusal. Perhaps, if his friends
could have followed him day by day, as he went when his
work was done and stood beside a little grassy mound by
the burn-side, they might have divined his reason.
Alaster and Nancy lived much at Milla Forres, and by
MAT 1874. T
146 The Attempt.
and bye there were children's voices ringing again through
the long corridors. The eldest had great blue dreamy
eyes, and hair with a thread of gold in it; and her name
was Barbara ; and I think the hearts of both her parents,
and of old Elspet, now nurse to the third generation, clung
to her with peculiar tenderness.
And so I think my story may end. It is the story of a
little fragment of a young life, cut short long ere its
noon-time, with all its high purposes unfulfilled, its work '
left for others to finish, its aspirations unattained,—just
the sort of story that puzzles one as to why such things
should be. May the answer not perhaps be found in
the beautiful words of a contemporary writer,—" In¬
complete because immortal, unfinished because scarcely
even begun." Jeanie Morison.
THE END.
^ 0 n n u 1.
On a Statue of Ariadne in an English Garden.
Far from the myrtles, and the purple skies—
'Mid the dim verdure of an English grove.
Where branches twine, and fleeting shadows rove—
Fair relic of the art that never dies,
A Grecian maiden stands; and to our eyes
Her simple garb, serene and noble face,
Show the pure lineaments of antique grace.
The stranger views her with a sweet surprise;
And all things love her; autumn winds and rains
Have touched her softly with grey weather-stains;
Long trails of ivy kiss her garment's hem.
And e'en the saucy thrush—as on some stem
Of woodland growth—has poised upon her hair.
As though the sculptor's hand had fixed him changeless
there. Enna.
Indifferentism is at a discount. Earnestness is one of
the foremost watchwords of the day. And this earnest¬
ness in one of its phases is obviously set forth in the
eagerness of the universal query, How can we accumulate
the largest gains ?    It is asked in public and private, by
The Attempt. 147
men and w^omen, by petty tradesmen and merchant
princes, in the corridors of banking-houses, in the news¬
rooms of clubs. All that can even remotely bear on the
answer is scrutinised with matchless acumen. During
the working day, when a crowd of engagements jostle one
another through its livelong hours, the business man yet
finds time to study the monetary articles of the papers.
And in reply to the anxious question, commerce daily
projects fresh schemes of enterprise, offers tempting
investments to capital, and increased advantages to
skilled labour. As the results of our enthusiasm for
finance, we point to the ships that bear our merchandise
to every corner of the globe,—to our railways, our tele¬
graphs, the wealth and luxury of our cities. And as the
crowning reward of indomitable energy, we are by
universal consent enthroned monarchs over the world of
matter.
Labour is man's duty, and the fruit of labour his right;
and rational men cherish no grudge against the march of
material progress, but in quiet moments the question
thrusts itself into the mind. Whither does the influx of our
prosperity tend % We who, in the centre of the shouting
crowd, strain every nerve to gain a livelihood, or make a
fortune, are in no position to give an impartial reply.
But let us suppose the denizen of another planet, where the
science of finance is unknown, to alight upon this earth.
The eyes of the stranger are undazzled by the rise and
■fall of commercial enterprise. His judgment is unbiassed
by the prospects of net profits, in which he has neither
part nor lot.
Let us do our best to identify ourselves with the
dispassionate intelligence of this onlooker as to him we
put the question, AVhither tends the tide ? " As I stand
on your wharves," he replies, " as I visit your warehouses,
and walk through your crowded streets, viewing the
ministers of this vast temple of commerce, and moving in
ceaseless restlessness from its banks to its exchanges, from
its treasures in specie to its treasures on paper, I am filled
with admiration for the fruits of intelligent toil. But
when, from the great arteries of industrial life, I pass to
the heart of the commonwealth, there I find moral decay
manifesting its presence in the phenomenon of a hand-to-
hand struggle for larger incomes, larger factories,
larger investments,—not as an end to something beyond
them, but as an end in themselves.
148 TJie Attempt.
" No longer attracted, but repelled by surface splendour,
I am taught by the unlovely spectacle of the production of
wealth, regarded as the supreme object of existence, that
in gaining the world you have lost the dominant qualities
which entitle you to possess it,—have becomes the slaves
of matter, instead of its masters. On every side I see long
trains of the inhabitants of this planet, with their eyes
fixed persistently earthwards, until, in obedience to the
law of assimilation, they lose the power of looking up,
and all caring for the brightness above and the beauty
around. The mud and filth in which their treasure is hid
suffices for them, and when they die rich old men they have
only known this fair world as " a dirty road to pick up
money as they walked along." As a people, you profess
to believe that in the next world there is no buying and
selling, but that there will survive the souls of buyers and
sellers ; yet, to the majority, the material interests of the
day are of paramount importance in comparison with the
individual destinies of a measureless future, and every¬
where ineradicable self-interest keeps churlish watch over
the out-goings of the pockets, although each one knows
that the " robe without pockets" is spun and fashioned,
which wiU inevitably enfold him at no distant day.
Again, as a people, you point to the Bible as the secret of
England's greatness, but in practical life that famous
dictum resolves itself into empty bombast of the declama¬
tory type that tickles the ears of the multitude. For,
in daily life, such Scriptural axioms and commands as
militate against pre-arranged rules of life are discarded
without comment. The social theories of the Gospels
are treated as sentimentalisms, too fine spun to bear the
action of the shrewd thought of hard-headed men in this
busy day. The enthusiasm of humanity as set forth in a
genuine sympathetic bond of nobly dependent brother¬
hood, is derided and trampled under foot; while indepen¬
dence, in all its artificiality, is set on a pedestal as a virtue
men may almost Avorship. But, to my view, there is
nothing intrinsically great or good in this vaunted inde¬
pendence ; which I regard as a morbid growth of over¬
wrought materialism, and the fruitful source of the class-
feuds that spread over the land as a tide full of future
menace in its advancing encroachments; as well as of
the pauperism that defies your efforts to overtake it, and
keeps pace at one end of society with the growth of
luxury at the other.     And let it be remembered that,
The Attempt. 149
although poverty is a necessary element in the life of a
people, pauperism is not.
" There were great differences of rank in Israel,* when
every man sat under his vine and under his fig-tree, but
there was no pauper class, properly so called; and
pauperism is a much more serious thing than the exist¬
ence of an unpropertied class at the base of the com¬
munity. It means an absence not of the comforts, but
the necessaries of life; it means a despairing acquiesence
in want as something inevitable ; it means the existence
of a class that feels itself disinherited—so incapable of
the duties, as to be deprived of the rights of society ; and
thus, in the long-run, it means not only class misery, vast
and untold, but general disorder. Political concessions
do not readily heal wounds which are felt daily and hourly
in a struggle, if it still be a struggle, for existence; and
a sympathy, only issuing in the elaboration of a com¬
munistic paradox, is no more calculated to grapple with
pauperism, than the amateur director of a festive perform¬
ance of county miHtia is fitted to conduct a campaign on
the Gold Coast."
But the whole-hearted dependence, the one upon the
other, of the brotherhood of man can arrest the advance
of the consuming cancer of pauperism, that poisons the
well-springs of the land, and trace a sharp frontier line
between it and the masses of honest poverty that are
perpetually shading off into its fatal embrace. And this
dependence, in its noblest, highest sense, is also, in my
apprehension, the solution of the vexed question of class-
antagonism. One need only consider the harsh discipline
required to enforce the lesson of independence, to ascer¬
tain that it is a quality foreign to humanity.
Let a man, by a series of misfortunes, be reduced to
beggary. Obeying a natural instinct, he stretches out his
hands imploringly for help; but no sooner has the cry
for succour burst from his lips, than cruel words
are pelted at him from all sides, until his heart
bleeds. Even the brothers, who have gathered round
the same mother's knee and Usped " Our Father"
in concert, join in the cry of contemptuous upbraid¬
ing, and scout him for the degradation of depen¬
dence. Thus he learns it is easier to die outright than
obey the impulse that prompts him to ask help of his
fellow.    And even when the help he prays for is vouch-
*  Vide Liddon's Pauperitm and the Love of Ood.
150 The Attempt.
safed, he loses caste in accepting it; or is laid under
a weight of obligation that cripples his manhood (that
there are exceptions to such cases proves the rule).
And when the bitter knowledge, that nothing alienates
the nearest and dearest. sooner than clamant poverty,
becomes a part of the poor man's creed, he learns to con¬
ceal his penury as a badge of shame, under a surface-
decency of dress and talk.
Ah I the conventional type of pauperism, dramatic and
self-advertising, that caters for sympathy, exhibiting its
emaciation in the streets, is sad enough, but not so sad as
the pathetic reticence of independence. Secret, silent,
unrepresented to the senses by rags and tatters, or a
whining tale, it is found in many a pastoral home in these
islands. Week in week out, the minor clergyman of one
of your voluntary churches feeds his flock with the finest
of the wheat, while they on their part refuse him
sufficient maintenance. In the financial march of pro¬
gress the clergyman has no share. The golden flood is
partial, fertilising the rich man's broad acres, but leaving
the poor man's field bare as before. Prices rise, and the
incomes of masters and servants increase proportionally.
On all hands it is admitted to be the right of man to
demand full wages for a full day's work, but, as society is
constituted, the minister is refused this common privilege ;
his congregation are cowardly enough to take advantage
of his silence. The stipend remains at the old inadequate
standard; and under the folds of his preacher's gown,
care eats away his heart,—care looks out of the eyes of
the house-mother,—care is suggested by the faces of his
ill-clad children. In the course of his lectures he comes
to the text, " It is more blessed to give than to receive,"
but the charity sermon is preached in a hopeless spirit;
more often than not his impassioned appeal has resulted
in his richer hearers buttoning up their pockets all the
tighter, grimly suspicious the parson is trying to " do "
them out of money. And so the harassed life goes on
until death comes—a messenger of joy, to convey his
weary soul to the country where there is neither profit
nor loss, but unmeasured gain,—and his family of half-
educated sons, and helpless daughters are left to fight
their way as best they can, through a world of closed
doors, that only open to golden keys.
No candid mind pondering such cases can hesitate to
conclude, that  the boasted   accumulations   of   national
The Attempt. 151
capital, and increase of individual wealth, serve to show
the moral loss incurred in storing them, and to point to
that unloveliest form of penury—poverty of heart. For
who can challenge the assertion, that the heart of a people
is very poor which, in the midst of external abundance,
refuses a suitable maintenance to many of its clergy,
deifies the sickly independence of national corruption, and
crushes out of sight the noble dependence of true brother¬
hood which recognises the obligation of bearing one
another's burdens, and by the universality of the recog¬
nition overmasters the pseudo independence that silently
starves %
But how vain to point to the social theory of the New
Testament as the antidote to the banes of humanity, when
men speak of commercial and industrial enterprises as of
a " last sacrament of regeneration to renew national life;"
when the higher wages of the workmen are devoted to
deeper potations, and richer living, while his daughters ape
a class above them, in the showiness of their attire, and the
customary penny of hard times is dropped into the plate
at the church door, but not an extra farthing is given to
relieve God's poor; how vain, when the handsome profits
of the commercial man are lavished in the increased gor-
geousness of his home, and the costliness of his entertain¬
ments, so that when the collector for some charity calls
for a contribution, he learns that the scale of the
family expenditure leaves an infinitesimal margin to give
away. Disappointed, he turns from the rich man's door,
sadly reflecting that the superabundant wealth that rolls
on every side, like the waves of an inexhaustible ocean, is
in reality a mirage unblessing and unblessed.
But again, I take heart, and am persuaded I do not
plead for impossibilities in imploring you to carry the im¬
patient contempt which the sight of poverty provokes into
practical action, by thrusting its presence from your hearts,
where it is most of all out of place. And to obey the
generous impulse that prompts to relieve distress, is surely
no such hard method of ridding you of the incubus you
most of all despise.
But there is a higher law to obey in regaining the
ascendancy over matter, than obedience to the broad
principles of benevolence; namely, the obligation that
lies upon each to distribute surplus income, after the
wants of the household have been fairly supplied.
On this point St Augustine expresses himself without
152 The Attempt.
limitation, " Whatever remains, except for reasonable
purposes of food and clothing, let it not be reserved for
luxuries, but laid up in the heavenly treasury of alms¬
giving. If we fail to do this, we invade other people's
property." And Gaudentius writes,—" We are stewards
of our Master's goods for our own moderate use, and
for distribution among our fellow-servants. Hence, it
is not lawful for us to alienate them by any super¬
fluous expenditure ; since of our mode of spending them
we must give account." And St Th. Aquinas holds, that
the obligatiim men lie under to give alms rests on two
principles, either of them sufficient to.bind the conscience;
on the side of the rich man, from his abimdance ; on the
side of the poor man, from his need. " The poor man
shall never cease out of the land, 0 rich man, that
thou mayest always have somewhat to do with ^thy
wealth, some sluice to exhaust thy plenty, and prevent
the access of thy fever. See, then, the genealogy of alms¬
giving. Covetousness, oppression, and rapine brought
in beggary and want. And God willed to continue it
there, to employ the treasures and exercise the charity
of others; thus charging a suitable provision for the
poor upon the surplus found in the rich man's store,
as He charges the provision for the stars upon the
deluge of light wherewith He hath enriched the sun.
Hence the obligation to give rests not so miich on the
poor man's necessity, as on the rich man's abundance."
But here is the difficulty, you reply. Have we this
abundance? The world has reached so great a height
of luxury that we find even with doubled incomes it
is a hard matter to live as befits our station. And if the
demoralised state of society as regards dress, costly
entertainments, fine equipages and palatial houses, is
taken as a rule of life, there will be no balance left for
almsgiving. The sublime lessons of the world's Reformer,
in which He forbids over-solicitiide about food and
raiment, are contemned, and spiritual life is extinguished
under the mass of materialism, which is virtually declared
to be " far better."
Beyond question, it is the rich man's duty to maintain
his position with due credit. But it is one thing for him
to conform to luxurious practices, which his candid judg¬
ment reckons abuses, and another to appropriate to his use
all that is needful for the generous support of his household,
reserving nothing for mere purposes of aggrandisement.
The Attempt. 153
And while the obligation to give their superabundance
rests on the rich, an obligation equally pressing rests on
those Avho are not rich. When even but a crust remains,
the duty is clear to share that crust with him who has
none. Then you give what is your own. So long as
you give the surplus only, you give what is not your own.
The superfluities of the rich, says St Augustine, are the
poor man's necessaries—
" Give! as the morning that flows out of heaven ;
Give ! as the waves when their channel is riven ;
Give ! as the free air and sunshine are given ;
Lavishly, utterly, joyously give.
" Not the waste drops of thy cup overflowing,
Not the faint sparks of thy hearth ever glowing,
Not a pale bud from the June roses blowing ;
Give, as He gave thee Who gave thee to live."
" You have asked me," concluded the stranger, "whither
tends the tide of your material prosperity; and from
unbiassed obsei'vation I have drawn the inference that it
tends to poverty,—from which internal penury I pray
this country may be delivered, or ever, to its everlasting
shame, it becomes hopelessly bankrupt."
M. A. Palmer.
(Hxhibitiou of i\\i lloiiat Scottish Jiratlcmu.
Part II.
TakiXG up our remarks on the pictures at the point where
we left oif, Faed's " When the Day is done," 261, though
it has already appeared in London, is too salient to be
passed by. Were it the first of the kind, how we should
admire it! But we, the ungi-ateful public, know the cottage,
and the man, and the old woman, and the sentimentality,
and the dirt, well already; and while acknowledging the
technical skill and harmonious effects, we would like some
new ideas. 260, " On the Beach, Holy Isle," a most un¬
ambitious study of a coloiu-less English day, a boat drawn
on a flat shore, and a woman sitting by it, quite success¬
fully represented. " For the good of the Church," 268.—
The old monk, who has been poaching, probably, for that
especial branch of the Church he represents in person, is
walking through a copse, simply painted, yet suggestive
May 1S74, U
154 Tlie Attempt.
of the depth and mystery of dim underwood. A Httle
further on, 279. "A Sea-bird." By a sweet, sunny sea, tM'o
(•harming chikh-en play with the hmg wing of a dead sea-
bird, the dog lookiug on with great interest. Amid much
mediocrity, this picture shines out as a little gem.
In the next room, 379, " After you," a picture of the
genteel comedy class, should be noticed, for its good
drawing and colour, and thorough expression of exagger¬
ated etiquette. And here we may mention three comic
Irish scenes by Vallance,—245, " Irish Whispers ;" 967,
"Bothered;" 989, "A Home Ruler/'—all, though very slight
in execution, possessing true humour. Of some comic
pictures in this exhibition, the less said the better; but
399, a very cleverly-drawn dog and donkey, may be con¬
sidered a successful joke. Beyond it, in " Muerte del
Matador," 416, we come to a fine picture. The subject is
so painful that, unrelieved as it is by any noble feeling in
the personages, it may be a question if it is well chosen;
but of the power and skill of the painting, we think there
cannot be two opinions. The man lying in his death
agony; the good-natured, sympathetic, yet somewhat per¬
functory priest, listening to his last words; the indifferent
surgeons, aAvare that all is over, and there is no use taking
more trouble about him; the agony of the woman's face,
all painted in the shadowless clearness of a light interior ;
while through the door we catch a glimpse of the arena
where the brutal sport stiU goes on in the daylight glare,
without interest, without even splendour ; each and all
of these details are given witli a masterly vigour Avhicli
compels oiu' admiration, even if we would not care to
dwell long on the scene. 435 is a well-painted, dirty old
man, " Past work," and past painting too, we think ; for
were we in the beautiful scene, that squalid figure would
be to us the blot in the landscape,—though, doubtless, to
some tastes the painting might redeem the subject.
In the South Koom (485), a very pretty girl is " Think¬
ing of the laddie that lo'es her sae week" She seems but
a lassie yet— very young for such thoughts. Near her
are two rather ugly, but very natural, children " Going
for Bait," 488; and in 489, " How he kepte hys tryste,"
we have a glimpse into dreamland in the stately mediasval
sentiment of the picture, trifling as the subject is.
Rich eastern colouring is given us in 550, '' Water-seller
of Morocco;" and 541, the half comic " Street Sermon,"
has much good drawing and point in it.    But there are
The Attetnpt. 155
few pictures in this room that call for remark; perhaps
fewer in the Octagon Room, where, among the best, are
two pictures by ladies,—673, " La Belle Bouqueticre," a
ftuished beauty, surrounded by flowers as smoothly and
highly painted as herself. Surely her half sad, half
anxious expression, cannot be for want of the custom,
such a stall and saleswoman would be sure to attract.
681, " Wreck of the Hesperus," represents well the stormy
dawn just lighting up a tm-bid sea, while the pretty
drowned child is swept in to the feet of the fisherman.
The painting may be a little timid, but shows feeling,
and great promise, if by a young artist.
The terra cotta statuette of "Venerable Bede," 582,
represents well the languor of approaching death, and
the quiet dignity of the old monk, still engrossed in his
best-loved occupation. The shadow thrown by the cowl
(jver the wasted features is very effective. There is
another fine animated statuette of " Minna Troil," 586;
and 584, " Magnus Troil," is a good companion to it.
Such small-sized statuettes, when spirited and truthful,
form such excellent ornaments for our dwelHng-houses and
entrance lialls, that we are glad to see that our artists
are lately devoting more attention to their production,
instead of giving us only busts or full-sized statues,
more generally suitable to public buildings. The ideal
bust of Viola, 600, represents a remarkably sweet face,
and, with the reserved pose expression we would imagine
to be characteristic of that heroine.
In a short notice of a large gallery, we feel, wherever
we leave off, we have a great deal more to say. Many
pictures are passed over that our readers' attention ought
to be drawn to, many criticisms omitted, because we feel
it to be somewhat presumptuous in us to offer them. But
as far as in our power lies, Ave have picked out those
pictures in which we find most to admire. How if we
were to try the reverse?—if, like those toys of our child¬
hood, which showed off a different set of prints according
to the Avay in which you turned the first page, we were to
review the pictures below par,—should we not give a voice
to the disappointment that many feel in this Exhibition '.
We allude especially to the figure subjects. It is seldom
tliat a landscape attempt does not give us some interest¬
ing fact or effect, even if the general result should not l)e
successful. But there are some figure pictures here tliat
seem really not well enough drawn or coloured for |iuMic
156 Tiie Attempt.
exhibition, and others whose worst faults are not even
being out of drawing and ill coloured, but a poverty and a
vulgarity of conception, that makes perhaps their want of
pictorial attraction not to be regretted. Some of the
worst type of Dutch pictures have an almost unfortunate
fascination about them, for the power of the painter in
depicting surface; and the beauties of light and shadow,
make us delight in representations of drunken boors and
other kindred subjects. From this danger the pictures I
allude to are free. The great example of Wilkie has
perhaps induced Scottish artists to aim frequently at
painting half-humorous, half-sentimental scenes of peasant
life,—excellent when successful, but dangerously difficult
of achievement. Something of Wilkie's charming taste
and thoughtfulness, if not of his genius, is necessary for
the conception, apart from the realisation of such subjects.
Doubtless, in French or German exhibitions, we find,
among many successes, many failures in colour and in
interest; but we question whether such failures in figure
drawing—the part of the art which can really be acquired
by study,—or such failures in artistic instinct and feeling
for beauty, without which painting is no art, would be
tolerated in a high-class picture-gallery elsewhere. Cer¬
tainly, our best artists are sometimes apt to show their
chief strength in London; but it is not of the want of
good pictures, but of the presence of very bad ones, that
we complain. There must be something in the artistic, as
distinguished from the natural conditions of the country,
which is partly the cause of this; but be this as it may,
it is certain that the enjoyment of the numerous good
pictures this year is, to many, somewhat marred by the
inferior ones that hang alongside.
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 157
Jesus talld a little child unto §im."
He.
" When autumn in her glory stood
Crowned by her sister queen,
Who, passing through the blushing wood.
Left tears where she had been ;
When faint, soft roses, fell and died,
And leaves grew ruddy to their prime ;
When gentle breezes came and sighed
A thought about the winter time,—-
A little child was born on earth,
Born from the angel band.
And we were thankful for its birth
In this our waiting land."
She.
" But when there came a chilly air
That froze the river bed.
And, trembling till they rested there.
Sweet forest leaves lay dead ;—
We thinking of the angel's hymn.
And that first Christmas long ago
When in the darkness soft and dim
A Perfect Life began below;—
Our httle child was born again
Back to the angel land,
Rescued from sin and care and pain.
Safe in the Father's Land."
Both.
" Safe in His Hand—and so secure—
Our child utill—jet living where
The very atmosphere is pure
And sinless as the dwellers there,—
Our little one—who, maybe, stands
To watch the heavy gate unrolled,
Wlien he may stretch his bab^y hands,
And welcome tis within the fold."
Naomi S. Smith.
158 The Attempt.
Pabt III. —Conclusion.
The novel of Felix Holt, as a whole, does not rise to the
level of the rest. There is an exaggeration, unusual and
unnatural to George Eliot, in the descriptions of character,
a prominence in peculiarities, and a slight confusion in the
tout ensemble. Mrs Holt's peculiarities are rather too much
for us, on other pages than Dickens; and there is a sug¬
gestion of "superficial", treatment in Harold Transome
and Lawyer Jermyn. Three types of Radicalism are
brought before us here, painted in strong colours : the
blind unreasoning mass, swayed by pots of beer and
stump oratory, moved by blind unreasoning feeling; the
cold reasoning gentleman, Harold Transome, sitting in
a luxurious arm-chair, and " very particular about his
sauces," moved by hidden calculations of political possi¬
bilities ; and the grand ideal type, where feeling and
reason corrected and enlarged each other, where there
was plan, patience, and self-control. In spite of a thorough
conviction that there never was a Felix Holt (a conviction
seldom possible to retain long in the company of any of
George Eliot's characters), we become much interested in
him. How different he is from the Barnaby Rudge type
of men! He descended to the level of his fellows that he
might be able to raise them to his own; and he remained
there freely, though wealth lay within his grasp, and love
promised to cheer him in a new and easy life, opened
before him in a tempting vista. But he resolved to keep
his mmd simple, his purpose single,—the wealth was flung
away, and the love only welcomed when it became a help
and not a hindrance to his plan of life,—that he might do
as much good as in him lay, by precept and example, to
the great masses of the ignorant, the oppressed, and the
self-oppressing.
There is a great charm in the simple, rusty, con¬
scientious Methodist preacher, Mr Lyon, with his high
thoughts and poor success; with his one romance of
passionate love locked out of sight, at once his glory and
his shame; with his self-questioning affection for his step¬
daughter Esther, who unconsciously betraj^s inherited
thoughts and tastes little akin to his. But her little
feminine fripperies .and vanities, sentiments and imagina¬
tions, are remoulded by the power of the stern masculine
The Attempt. 159
resolve of Felix Holt, the Radical. She met him at the
right time. Riches, refinement, ease—the longing of her
life—when in her very grasp, she flung away, because
her hand could not retain his love along with these.
Women can do these things at times; and Esther, un¬
likely as her previous education was to fit her for such a
sacrifice, did it freely and open-eyed, and never named it
sacrifice at all. There seem to be grounds given here
for Mr TuUiver's fixed opinion, that all lawyers must be
'' raskills," for they are painted so, in all shades, from
Jermyn to Johnson.
One cannot but admire the skill in painting the character
of Mrs Transome, and the retribution that was weighed
out to her. We feel glad that Esther spoke kindly to
her, and yet we might have felt it hard to have done so
ourselves. There was a fierceness and hardness, resulting
from years of self-repression and loneliness, that might
have petrified kindly interest at once. And yet this
" grey-haired Eve," with the misery of twenty years
looking out from her haunting eyes, had once been
young and queenly, admired and loved. A touching
proof of the attraction of the better side of her nature
may be seen in the faithful affection of her admiring
waiting maid, Mrs Dennis.
George f]liot's last great work, Middlemarch, would take
a volume fully to discuss. It shows still the same power
of analysing character, of range of thought, and of vivid
expression; but there is a dissipation of interest which
alFects even her ardent admirers, a direct inculcation of
opinion that attracts attention to itself, and an occasional
return to the flippant and satirical style of writing that
is so unsuitable to her and hers. Amusing as is the
Featherstone connection, it reminds us rather too much
of Dickens. And whether she has given up questioning
in despa,ir or not, there is much less of the religious
element, or appreciation of religious motive, in this novel
than in any previous one. Life does not seem now like
" a campanile rising to the bine sky,'' but a wheel revolv¬
ing in weary monotony or enforced trammels on the
dusty highway. One good advice, however, she still
holds out to all in time of doubt, and that is the power of
work, and the safety that lies in the path of duty,
endurance, self-control, and benevolence.
The two characters freshest on her pages, are those of
Mr Bulstrode and Dr Lydgate.    What a careful analysis
160 Tlie Attemj)!.
of character, motive, and circumstance is shown in the
first! One seems to grow into a strange sympathy with
the man, who was not so much a hypocrite as a self-
deceiver ; a man who longed after things great and good,
but could not strip himself of the heavy weights that
clogged his aspirations,; a man to whom remorse came
always too late, when " there seemed no place for
repentance." Many a more hardened sinner has flourished
blameless in the eyes of men. It was his vacillating desire
to make, like Balaam, the best of both worlds, that
wrought his disgrace and fall. Who knows but that this
fall was his best good t When " the hope in lies is for
ever swept aAvay," men may rise, through new steps, to
a higher and a simpler life, especially wlieii aided by a
faithful wife. " Strange piteous conflict in the soul of
this unhappy man, who had longed for years to be better
than he was,—who had taken his selfish passions into
discipline, and clad them in severe robes, so that he had
walked with them as a devout guise, till now that a terror
had risen among them, and they would cliaunt no longer,
but threw out their common cries for safety." " The
quick vision that his life Avas after all a failure, that
he was a dishonourable man, and must quail before
the glance of those towards whom he had habitually
assumed the attitude of a reprover,—that God had
disowned him before men, and left him unscreened to
the triumphant scorn of those who were glad to have
their hatred justified—the sense of utter futility in that
equivocation which now turned venomously upon him,
with the full-grown fang of a discovered lie;—all this
rushed through him with the agony of terror that fails to
kill, and leaves the ears still open to the returning
wave of execration. The sudden sense of exposure after
the re-established sense of safety, came not to the coarse
organism of a criminal, but to the susceptible nerve of a
man whose intensest being lay in such mastery and pre¬
dominance as the conditiims of his life had shaped for
him." No wonder that he shuddered specially at the
nnveiliug of liis shrunk proportions before the eyes of
the woman he had taught to honour him as something
greater and better than herself. " But this imperfectly
taught woman, whose phrases and habits were an odd
patchwork, had a loyal spirit Avithin her. The man
Avhose prosperity she had shared through nearly half a
life,  and Avho had unA^aryingly cherished  lier—noAV that
The Attempt. 101
punishment had befallen him, it was not possible to her
in any sense to forsake him. There is a forsaking which
still sits at the same board, and lies on the same couch
as the forsaken soul, withering it the more by unloving
proximity. She knew when she locked her door that
she would unlock it, ready to go down to her unhappy
husband and espouse his sorrow, and say of his guilt, I
will mourn and not reproach. But she needed time to
gather up her strength; she needed to sob out her fare¬
well to all the gladness and the pride of her life. When she
resolved to go do^^^l, she prepared herself by some little
acts that might seem mere folly to a hard onlooker:
they were her way of expressing to all spectators, visible
or invisible, that she had bc^gun a new life, in which she
embraced humiliation. She took off' all her ornaments
and put on a plain black gown, and instead of wearing
her much-adorned cap and large bows of hair, she brushed
her hair down, and put on a plain bonnet-cap, which
made her look suddenly like an early Methodist." But
we cannot but be touched by the scene in the parlour,
when she said, " Look up, Nicholas !" and their eyes met,
and no further word of excuse or blame was said.
Of very different material was Dr Lydgate, who inte¬
rests us in a painful degree, when we see his high hopes
defeated, his stainless honour impeached, his tender love
paralysed. A worshipper of science, the siren Rosamond
charmed him away from his single-minded devotion; but
bravely he struggled under all disadvantages to be a
helper to the suffering, an honest man to the world and
himself, and withal a tender husband to Rosamond. Yet
when he discovers the unlovingness and shallowness of
her nature, the self-will, the deceit, who can blame his
passionate feelings ? " There are episodes in men's lives
in which their highest qualities can only cast a deterring
shadow over the objects that fill their inward visions.
Lydgate's tender-heartedness was present just then only
as a dread lest he should offend against it, not as an
emotion that swayed him to tenderness. For he was
very miserable. Only those who know the'supremacy of
the intellectual life—the life which has a seed of
ennobhng thought and purpose in it—can understand
the grief of one who falls from that serene activity into
the absorbing, soul-wasting struggle with worldly annoy¬
ances." Poor Lydgate! ,what a man he would have
been with Dorothea, when he was man enough not to be
MAT 1874. X
162 The Attempt.
ruined by a Eosamond. Pity 'tis, that in the world are
so many of such fair-seeming exteriors that have no heart
within, no worship but of self
We would almost say that it was a strange providence
to have given Rosamond to Lydgate, had it not evidently
been tlie providence of the bo.tk that men and women
should not marry the being others would have chosen for
them, but the being that needed them most. This is
expressed in words when Fred Vincy tells Mary that
" Farebrotlier would have made her ten times a better
husband than he could," and Mary answers serenely,
" Of course he would, and so he can better afford to do
without me."
Middlemarch specially shows that marriage is not the
end of life, but the beginning of a new life, which can
never more be simple and independent. The element of
complexity may have varying proportions, according to
the consistency of the partners, but there always must be
a resolution of forces, a reconsideration of the aims of
life, a modification of its hopes, for " character is not
cut in marble, it is not something solid and unalterable.
It is something living and changing, and may become
diseased as our bodies do."
No doubt ]Mr Casaubon's character even was changed by
his marriage, which he did not find so entirely charming
as might have been expected, considering what Dorothea
was. What a grand nature was hers! a St Theresa, a
Romola,—strong, self-devoted, single-minded, even to
peculiarity, faithful to all duty to the last. How should
we wonder that the strange course of circumstances should
have led Will Ladislaw to love her, and to be ennobled so
by his love, that his better self Avas ahvays chosen for her
sake, till he made himself worthy of his love 1 There is
a strange pathos in his interview with Bulstrode, where
he scorned to touch the money that he thought unclean;
where he strove to keep free of stains in connection, but
"he found a stain he could not help," and adds, "it ought
to lie with a man's self that he is a gentleman." And
when this woman, worshipped afar off, descended from her
pedestal, gave up rank and riches to share his life and
bless it, even his heart, so long kept hungering after love
and home, and rest and peace, must have been satisfied.
" Dorothea herself had no dreams of being praised above
other women, feeling that there Avas always something-
better which she might have done, if she only had been
The Attempt. 163
better, and known better. Still, she never repented that
she had given up position and fortune to marry Will
Ladislaw, and he would have held it the greatest shame
as well as sorrow to him if she had repented. They were
bound to each other by a love stronger than any impulses
that could have named it. No life would have been
possible to Dorothea which was not filled with emotion,
and she had now a life filled also with a beneficent
activity, which she had not the doubtful pain of discover¬
ing and marking out for herself." It was a wise touch,
this reduction of her fortune, for it satisfied Will's pride,
and occupied her in '* learning what everything costs."
As powerful for good, though in a different way, was
the influence of Mary Garth over Fred Vincy, both before
and after marriage. One example of a marriage of two
equable tempers, and delightfully agreeable common¬
place dispositions, is given us in the happy union of
CeHa and Sir- James Chettam. With the lady's uncle
and guardian, that characteristic Mr Brooke, I can only
conclude, saying,—" I have had ideas, you know, about all
that sort of thing; but ideas are troublesome, and when
one has gone mto a thing, it is rather hard sometimes to
get out; one can say too much, you know."
LuTEA Keseda.
^\\t   1 aun11?d   |iOfhs.
A CHILLY, uninviting morning, a ghostly fog hanguig over
sea and land, accompanied by soft drizzhng rain. Tom
Kelly is loath to leave his warm fireside to begin his day's
work ; but " there's little to earn and many to keep," so
he pushes away his chair and steps to tbe door of his
cottage. There he stands, leisurely hghting his pipe
before starting; a fine-looking man he is, over six feet in
height, with great broad shoulders, and a face tanned
with exposure to the weather, Hght brown curly hair, and
fearless Saxon eyes. A picturesque looking man, too,
dressed in his long fisherman's boots, his blue trousers
and jersey enlivened by the red braces across his
shoulders and the red knitted cap on his curly head.
But we must not keep Tom standing there in the cold,
but  follow  him awav  over  the drearv  shore.     He 1ms
164 The Attempt.
flung his creel across his back, and is stepping easily over
the slippery sea-weed. Tom is not, however, walking so
gaily and hrmly as he usually does, but slackens his pace
from time to time, as if uncertain whether to proceed or
not. To tell you the truth, he is afraid to go on I A
great burly man like that afraid % 1 know you scarcely
believe me when I say so, and you would be more aston¬
ished if you knew all the tales that are told of Tom
Kelly's valour. When the winter winds have lashed the
waves into ungovernable fury, and they come rolling into
the bay, bearing along with them some unfortunate
vessel, which they dash upon the rocks and triumph over
as their new victim, then a little band of fishermen meets
upon the beach, and they try to launch the life-boat,but fear
to risk their lives in it. They stand gazing at the awful
waves, and think how many little ones will be left father¬
less if the life-boat should be swamped. Tom Kelly
steps from among them, saying—'Will none of the
Haven men come with me ? I have led you through
many a storm, and with strong hearts and arms we will
easily save that ship. Come on, the town life-boat will
be in before us, and say we were afraid."
Many a crew Tom has saved by iirging the other men
on to their duty; and once, when a steamer ran on the
Ness rocks, at a place where no boat could reach her, he
climbed the jagged rock, threw the rope, and saved the
passengers. Brave man as he is, there is one thing he
gives way to, and that is superstition. Tom has often
sailed from the Haven when other fishermen would not
have dared to do so ; and yet, when wind and tide were
most favourable, he has stayed on land because a cat
jumped across his path when going down to his boat.
Across the shore, to which in the cold early morning he
was steering his steps, some grey rocks may be seen
looming through the mist ; those rocks of late have
got rather a bad name, for some have said they are
haunted. Tom had set his traps there and caught many
large lobsters, but a whisper about the rocks being
haimted had reached his ears last night; so that is why
Tom is afraid to proceed. He walked along medi¬
tatively for a time ; then having come to the conclusion
that some one who is jealous of his getting such a high
price for his lobsters has spread those reports, he made Tip
his mind to proceed. He knocked the ashes OTit of his
pipe, flung back his shoTildere, and whistling a merry tune.
The Attempt. 165
set off' at a brisk pace for the Haunted Rocks. He soon
reached them and drew in his lobster pots. Great was
his delight on finding three of the finest any fisherman
could wish for, and as he prepared to bait the traps again
he thought how he would send his little Ned over to the
Point House, as the mistress there had promised him as high
a price as he got in the market for them. A pleasant smile lit
up his face as he thought how proud his boy would be of
the money, and very thankful he was that he had come.
Suddenly, however, his face changed, the smile fled away,
and a scared look took its place. He was bending down
on one knee baiting the last trap, when his acute ear
caught the sound of something grinding against the rocks.
What is it! Tom looks cautiously round and sees a black
object creeping along the shore towards him dragging
behind it a long chain ! With a cry of fear Kelly hid his
fa<;e in his hands, and a dreadful thought took possession
of his mindo Why had he ever come to those haunted
rocks! Oh, had he not heard old Moore say that the
Devil would come with chains to bind any man who
fished there ? And the prophecy had come true, for he
heard the dreaded being give vent to a loud growl of
dehght, and spring from rock to rock, clanging the chains
behind it. Tom had sunk on his face on the stones a
cold perspiration breaking out overhim ; those few moments
seemed hours to the prostrate man, till witli another
growl he knew that the black object stood beside him, he
felt its breath on his neck and something cold sniff'ed at
him. A new idea sprang into his mind, he leapt from his
lowly posture in despair, and with doubled fist Jht his black
enemy, then turned and fled for dear life. Quick, Tom,
quick ! one false step now and all is lost. Never before
did man fly over the slippery sliingle at such a pace, for
fear lent speed to his strong limbs. Ever behind the
black demon kept; clang! clang! clang ! echoed the
heavy chains on the rocks. Just as Tom reached the door
of the first cottage in the haven it sprang on him, and tore
away the sleeve of his jersey. Another step and Tom is
saved! the door of the cottage barred and Kelly gasps out
his story to the astonished inmates. The news that Tom
Kelly had been chased by the Devil from the Haunted
Rocks soon spread through the hamlet; a party of men
at last took courage and ventured forth to reconnoitre.
The mist had cleared away now, but nothing could be seen
but Fury, the Point House watch-dog, rushing about in a
166 The Attempt.
very excited manner, and dragging behind him a long
piece of chain. It happened that about a week before,
while Fury was taking his constitutional swim, an acci¬
dent had happened to his chain, and it had been very
insecurely mended. Early next morning a great cackling
arose in the hen-house, and Fury came out of his kennel
to see what the noise meant. Fearing lest some tramp
should be about he lay down, and only pretended to be
asleep ; but when pussy, returning from a good night's
hunting, came within the bounds of his chain, the dog-
made a dash at her, and she only saved herself by scramb¬
ling over the garden wall. The chain, unable to withstand
the strain put upon it, gave way, and Fury found himself
free. Some wise people tried in vain to convince Kelly
that it was Fury and not the Devil that chased him over
the shore ; but the lobsters, if they only knew it, might
feed and play in perfect safety under the Haunted Rocks,
for never again will Tom Kelly or any other Haven fisher¬
man set his traps there.
E. V. Lynne.
2Vte above is founded on fact.
II in b in? I hi s.
How frequently you find among people who have a
predilection for making observations about the outward
man, that they are apt to assume its status in life may be
pretty accurately defined by one special adjunct of its
general " get up," and that a most important char¬
acteristic of man's individuality, viz., the umbrella he
carries about with him. According as it is fine and soft
in make and material, or of homely and substantial gingham,
universally designated " Gampish," so these differences
of manufacture, we are told, are more or less indicative of
the social differences which exist between their owners.
If you wish to discover whether a man is a close
and vigilant disciple of " Mrs Grundy," whether he is
careless of the position he may possibly attain for
himself in the eye of favour which the fashionable world
has it at her option to bestow, or whether again he is so
secure in worldly or learned renown, that he takes a
peculiar pride in making that eye affect to wink at his
The Attempt. 167
iudifference to its withering potency, you have only to
notice, with ready acumen, the manner and style of
folding or unfolding, furling or unfurling with which he
manipulates his umbrella into the smallest possible
compass, or strapping it carelessly round, leaves it to
bulge out in an ungainly fashion that sets all criticism at
defiance.
You never find one of this latter class in the tenderly
nurtured hand of the " lady-killer," or the more seasoned
palm of the " man about town," nor in that of the
parvenu, who is awaiting the "open sesame"into society as
he treads upon the balance of its opinion,—no, they are
only too careful about the right adjustment and the
smooth envelopment of the spokes of their umbrella, as
they hold it with all the necessary soup^on of swagger
and display of well-fitting glove, which it is incumbent
upon them to exhibit if they would acquire a certain
studied air of following in the wake of the beau monde,—
they cannot afford to lose the prestige which this im¬
portant part of their equipment lends to their appearance.
Have you ever watched for the business man of early
punctual hours, when you have been looking out of
your window over the morning newspaper %—the man
with the stout square-toed boots and small shiny leather
bag in one hand, and a thick double-twilled umbrella
in the other (except on a very bright warm day in
summer you never see him with a walking stick), who is
as careful to hold it firm and fast as though he were
engaged in some lucrative negotiation with a promising
client. Then there is the little dapper old gentleman,
who always carries his hidden in a long black case
of shiny American leather, seemingly newly purchased
at the umbrella-maker's, and looking as methodical and
precise in point of wrappage as you feel sure he must
be in every respect himself. Also the big, burly, genial
man of our acquaintance, who swings his recklessly
along with such hazardous evolutions in the air, as
nearly cause it to come in perilous contact with the heads
of people of lesser frame and build, and passing it through
the bend of his arms, keeps it in the same horizontal position
while he arrests your progress for a few moments, looking
for all the world like a trussed fowl of pantomimical pro¬
portions. You may be quite sure that this genus
is of the thorough-going, practical sort, calculated to
inspire   any  young   " Tite   Barnacles"   with   no    small
168 The Attempt.
amount  of wholesome dread by his  non-observance of
order and convenance.
Once more, there is the pedant, the man of pro¬
fessional repute, who is as much a part and parcel
of the town he lives in, as the College and High Street
are its centre and backbone. His umbrella usually
lags in the rear of his advancing footsteps, and sometimes
even drags along the pavement in such moments of
absence of mind, when its possessor may be generally
surmised to be lost in a maze of problematical solutions.
Seldom or never is there a button or elastic—unless it
might be a piece of coarse twine or tape—to gird the
flapping folds in seemly order together.
You may have likewise observed how almost invariably
this erudite portion of humanity is addicted to the
obsolete fashion of wearing large gaiters. Should there be
a button or two amissing from these, as if their defalcation
countenanced the loose deportment of the umbrella, you
may make a tolerably correct surmise as to his being an
unmarried professor—disdaining the kindly and efficient
offices of a wortliy helpmeet's administration in his
domestic affairs, greatly preferring to maintain his own
single course, to say nothing of the unshackled umbrella.
Let me add, for the benefit of those of my readers who
are given to the solution of every-day problems, a remark
which an old friend of mine, of professional notoriety,
once put to me, and for which I have never yet found an
answer. I had been wondering during a quarter of an
hour's unbroken silence on his part—which I had done
my best to dispel—what had occupied his thoughts in
such an engrossing manner^ " Is it a very knotty point,"
I iirged at length, " that you cannot be prevailed upon
to come out of this terrible fit of abstraction ? "
" My friend," he replied, gravely, almost reproachfully,
at my persistent importunity, " can you tell me why
umbrellas—no matter what their form or size—have
never more than eight spokes ? "
Semper Idem.
The Attempt. 169
I. Oldest Period.
The ancient Greeks took beauty for their ideal; the
Romans worshipped order; and we may say of the
Germans, both ancient and modern, that they have had
for their ideal, profundity,—profundity of heart and mind,
with an utter disregard of the external conditions of form
or beauty. These, in their eyes, form not indispensable
accessories. In contrasting the ancient German poetry
with that of the Greeks, we at once see a proof of this.
Homer first wins by the immortal forms of beauty in
which his verse is clothed; through these we pass as
through marble vestibules, to contemplate, and to be won
by. the heroes whom he enshrines in classic fame. But he
who would admire the ancient German poems, must already
have their heroes in high esteem. The unity ot the
national heart presupposes a kindred pulse in every
reader.
Strength was the companion of profundity in the com¬
position of those works; and by strength of language and
of lung their form was determined. So rich was the
ancient Saxon language in forms of expression, that one
word was not enough for each common object; thus, for
the idea mari, there were eight different forms of expres¬
sion. Adjectives were equally numerous and equally ex¬
pressive ; and, compared with those old forms, the present
language seems weak indeed. Yet the language, if
enervated, is also refined. We must take into considera¬
tion that the ancient poems were composed to be sung, or
rather to be declaimed. The accent was invariably laid
on the principal words in each line, which were as often
as possible connected by alliteration. Often the poems
were declaimed into hollowed shields, that the mighty
reverberations might give force and weight to the expres¬
sive language.
And of what state of mind were those ancient lays the
expression ? Of a state which has perhaps had a share in
the creation of every heart-stirring poem the world has
seen,^—namely, hero-worship. Hero-worship was then tied
down to limited conditions. Uncivilised man is man
limited in occupation, in idea. What men want in variety
is compensated in unity.    The nation is one, its interest is
JUNE 1874. Y
170 The Attempt.
one, and one poem suffices for all. It flows out of one heart
straight into the heart of the many, and there it remains
and satisfies. There is hardly to be found an early poem
of a barbarous, unchristianised age in any country, that has
not warlike deeds or field-sports for its theme. Muscular
barbarism was the universal fashion then; muscular
Christianity, or indeed Christianity of any kind, was as
yet unknown.
The unity of barbarism was followed in Germany by
the unity of Christianity. Heralded by a struggle, it
embraced the whole nation, gave it new life, inspired the
writings of its first classic period. But ere this, there
was a long period during which the unchristianised poetry
of a barbarous age luxuriated, like the flowers of a vast
prairie, in undimmed and unmitigated splendour. From
the middle of the fourth to the middle of the twelfth
century, this ancient period of German poetry extends.
Across this long era, the migration of nations cast its
broad shadow. The Huns came like a sirocco, subduing
only to subdue, and exercising no elevating influence
over the tribes they conquered. Their cruelty is well pour-
trayed in the " Lay of the Nibelungs," that time-hallowed
possession of the nation. Then came the reign and the
christianizing influence of Charlemagne, A similar influ¬
ence was exerted by his son, who showed the zeal of a
novice in destroying all the old heathen romances and
poems his efforts could reach. The time was not yet for
the blending of the pure element in nature with the
leaven of Christianity.
All good things have a forerunner and a herald, and
in the very beginning of this period, there sounded forth
a voice which was to find an echo at its close. The
light of three successive centuries, during which appeared
no other like him, was Ulfila, an Arian of Maesia. He
translated (360-380 A.D.) the Bible into Gothic,—a lan¬
guage superior to the German of the present day in all
but fluency and variety of construction. Not till the
sixteenth century were his manuscripts discovered;
of the Old Testament in his translation, only a very small
fragment is preserved. The oldest piece of Gothic
rhyme occurs in his translation : it is, literally rendered,
" We mourned to you, ye have not wept; we piped to
you, ye have not leapt."
Next in antiquity to the writings of Ulfila, are two
legends that are well known stiU.    Belonging to the fifth
The Attempt. 171
century, or to an even earlier date, they are at the
present day as deeply ingrained in the mind of the
nation as they were then. One is the story of the
horned Siegfried, who, whUe yet a boy, made for
himself a sword at a magic forge in the centre of an
ancient forest. With this sword he slew the dragon
Fafnir, and liberated the amazon Brunhilda from a
burning castle, afterwards falling himself by treachery.
All this tells of imagination and national pride, as yet
unchecked by the inroads of foreign oppression. And this
legend, modified afterwards by the sway of the Huns and
of Christianity, became the first part of the Lay of the
Nibelungs.
The other of these legends, Reynard the Fox, lives
now in the version of the greatest German poet. It
tells of the tendency inborn perchance in some, to
idealise animals, and to make them act a human part.
This tendency arose from the almost childlike intimacy
which existed, in those remote ages, between men and
beasts. That this legend of Reynard is of German, and
not of French origin, is proved by the name Reynard or
Reginhart, which, in old high German, means a counsellor,
and which has, in the French language, completely super¬
seded the old word goupil. The many tales in which
animals are made to speak and act like men, are all relics
of Reynard the Fox and similar old legends ; and the
stories of the Three Bears and Little Red Riding Hood
may have been told for the first time round the blazing
fagots in a primeval forest, where wolf and bear ven¬
tured near to enjoy the warmth, in common with their
superior, man.
The time of noble beneficent heroes like Siegfried, and
of wonderful animals like Reynard, passed away ; and now
come the ninth and tenth centuries, with their migration
of nations. Foreign heroes come to attack the liberties of
Germany; and German heroes arise to defend those
liberties. They all have poetic lays framed about them,
and Charlemagne and the convents collect these and write
them down, along with the older ones. But many of them
are lost, partly owing to the religious efforts of Louis the
Pious, partly to the ravages of time. Of that period, we
have now but three of these songs remaining, belonging
to the ninth, but in the dress of the thirteenth, century. One
of them is in old high German, one in Latin, one in Anglo-
Saxon.   The first (about the year 770), Hildebrand and his
172 The Attempt.
son Hadubrand, shows how the warrior makes fighting his
glory and liis one idea. Hildebrand has been thirty years
absent with the king of the Huns, and had left a young
wife and an infant son at home on his departure. On his
return, his son Hadubrand meets him, and immediately
prepares to knock him down, thinking that the best thing
to do with an old man. Hildebrand tries to convince him
of his identity, but the son is determined to believe that
his father his dead. So the old man is obliged to fight,
and while they are in the middle of a terrible combat,
piercing each others' shields, the poem breaks off". Yet
the end of the story is well known ; the wife of Hildebrand
rushes in and separates the combatants, compelling the
eon to recognise his father ; and they go home peacefully
together, and atone for all over a banquet. This legend
has been reproduced in several forms, one of the best
known of which is called " the father and the son," by
Caspar von der Roen.
The next, in Latin, dating from the beginning of the
tenth century, is " Walter of Aquitaine." Hero-worship
revels here in the description of an invincible hero,
and blood-thirstiness delights in the wounds he inflicts.
Single-handed, he defends a narrow pass against twelve
Burgundian foes in succession, and conquers them all.
Different weapons, and a different mode of attack, are
employed each time. At the end King Gunter has lost a
foot, Walter a hand, another an eye and part of his teeth;
but these losses, far from rendering the heroes miserable,
only give them a theme for amusing comments. Thus
the absorbing adoration of the god of combat can make
every loss, even that of life, seem sweet in his service.
The poem, after this stormy beginning, has a peaceful
end. Walter spends the last thirty years of his life in
quiet, maintaining the laws, and thus showing that he
esteemed the god of War as but a guide to the temple
of Justice.
The third of these lays is in Anglo-Saxon. "Beowulf"
belongs rather to English than to German literature.
The ancestors of the practical English did homage in
verse to a practical hero, who helped his country by
ridding it of a terrible dragon. The poem is remarkable
for its poetical delineations of nature, and faithful descrip¬
tions of the hero and his achievements. In spite of
translations, it remains in many parts obscure.
The period of the Carlovingians, from the year 800 to 919
The Attempt. 173
A.D., embraces the transition from heathendom to Christi¬
anity. The first introduction of Christianity into a country,
welcome as it must be to all, when viewed in the hglit of
religion and morality, is, from a purely hterary point of
view, a cause of grave apprehension. For its first feeling
towards the existing literature is that of disapproval; its
first action that of repression. This we have already
seen exemphfied in the efforts of Louis the Pious; we
have now to look at the rehgious poems which, at his
command, were substituted for the destroyed legends.
They do not cast off the classic forms of the older epics,
but clothe themselves in them. Alliterations, old epic
forms, strong, manly expressions, are rife in the prayer
of " Wessobrunn," and in " Muspilh,'' a poem on the end of
the world. The beginning of the former sounds like a
poetic adaptation of Scripture. "This I have heard
among men as the greatest of wisdom: when the earth
and the heavens were not, nor sky, nor tree; when the
sun shone not, and the moon shed no light; when there
was no sea, no end, and no bound, then was Almighty
God." The other, too, is a sublime poem, though but a
fragment.
Superior to both is a Gospel Harmony, written at the
command of Louis the Pious, by several Saxons. This
poem is evidently penned by recent converts to Christi¬
anity, so warm are the expressions of feeling, so com¬
pletely are the terrors of the law eclipsed by the tender
glories of the gospel. The beginning of the Sermon on
the Mount is thus described :—
" Close around the ruling Lord, God's Child of Peace,
stand the wise men whom He, the Son of God, chose for
Himself; farther down, the hosts of the people are en¬
camped. The faithful await the word of their King;
musing they await, in reverent, expectant silence, that
which the Kuler of the Nations shall declare to the
assembled tribes. And the Shepherd of the land, God's
own Child, sits opposite the men, to teach the praise
of _ God in wise words to the people of the kingdom of
this world. He sat there and was silent, and looked long
at them, and was friendly in His heart towards them, and
in His mood, the Holy Lord of the people; then He
opened His mouth, the all-ruling Prince, to those whom
He had called there together, and taught who are they
among the nations of the earth, who are the most
precious  to   God:   blessed  are  they  who  are   poor in
174 The Attempt.
this world by humility, for God will give them in the
fields of heaven, on the green meadow of God, unfading
life."
In this extract, and in other parts of the work, we find
the Messiah Germanised. The ardent heart of the Saxon,
in endeavouring to bring nearer to itself the image of
the Saviour, has commissioned his fancy to clothe that
image in the garb of those with whom he (the Saxon)
daily associates. The few vivid touches of reality which
he finds in the gospels must be supplemented from his
own imagination, and thus we find these histories con¬
siderably enlarged and spun out, while the actions
of the Messiah are like those of a highly idealised Saxon.
Such an appeal to the sympathies of the nation was
enough to make the work a great one; it bore an
analogy in this respect to the old epics, which had sprung
from the heart of the people.
The newer, or subjective style of writing, was fore¬
shadowed in the Gospel Harmony of Otfrid, a Bene¬
dictine monk. This work appeared thirty years later.
It is less natural, more artistic, more self-conscious,
and even more spun out, than the other. The repu¬
tation which its contents failed to acquire, was secured
by its form and language. In it, for the first time,
rhyme is substituted for alliteration ; and on this ground
alone it stood forth as a model to later writers.
So ends this oldest period of German literature, which
heralds, in tones more or less distinct, the brilliant
outburst which is to follow it. It has an interest and a
mystery peculiarly its own, as the dawn of a day the
splendour of which seems to follow naturally such an
auspicious beginning. Procla.
{To be continued.)
The Attenipt. 175
National Gallery^ London.
GrVE thanks, Murillo, for thy glorious art,
As now I thank God for thy art and thee,—
As now I thank Him for the scene I see.
Which wakes strange musings in my hidden heart.
Oh, holy Child-Christ, touching with each hand
The links that bound Thee to the human race.
Thy foot on our earth, but Thine upturned face
Gazing with love into Thy Fatherland.
What dost Thou see there ?    Glory ? angels ? God ?
Ay, more than ever mortal brain could dream.
The depths of being in one vision seem
As in one mighty scroll unrolled abroad.
The twelve years have not passed o'er Thy young head
W^hen startled doctors bow before Thy lore,
And still far off the thirty years before
Thou turnest priest and dost Thine own blood shed.
Peace is upon Thy brow while Thou dost wait
The tit time that Thy Father will decree,
That Thou, by death, the restoration be
Of those that owed Him death as their due fate.
Thy mother, the first Christian on the earth.
Gazes on Thee with deep-set, reverent eyes,
Waiting for each new wonder that doth rise
Still to attest the wonder of Thy birth:
Gazing in awe on Thee, proved still her son
Through birth, through life, in every filial way ;
By love, by meek obedience day by day.
Her Son and Saviour—Judah's Promised One.
Thy foster-father, clasping Thy left hand,
Looking upon the world, with manly face.
Where comfort, joy, and holy pride have place,
That he should thus be chosen from the land.
17(> The Attempt.
To labour for His Lord, to give Him food,
To find Him clothes, to build o'er Him a roof,
To teach Him by example and reproof
How in his trade to be a workman good.
His eyes wear not the shadow of the sword
That pierced his Mary's heart, his pleasant mouth
Wears yet the simple, manly smile of youth,
He knows not ihe full secret of His Lord.
But who can know it %    Can God be a child ?
Have all His vast resources by His side,
And be a tempted human soul beside']
Yet so it is—and that no fable wild.
He willed to lay Omnipotence aside.
His Omnipresence chained to one small spot,
His Providence is taken from His lot.
But His Omniscience, dreadful gift, how hide ?
Does that young Child see all, hear all, know alVl
Is all His woe kept ever in his heart"]
Are all His sorrows of each breath a part ?
Do past and future to His present call'?
This seems to me the greatest mystery,
Yet for that too we must accept His word.
That in assuming flesh the mighty Lord
Became a very man, as weak as we.
Drank some strange Lethe, and forgot the heaven
Absent from which He here sojourned a space.
And, like a mortal, for His daily race
Prayed for His daily help, and it was given.
Ere Adam fell might have been men like Him,
After He rise such men may be again,
And purer, cleansed by Him from earthly stain,
Than if no sin had breathed their mirror dim.
In God's own image man had first been made.
Yet in that image all our woe begun,
So God put on the image of a man.
To temper its full powers that need not fade.
He was a Child, and hence all children learn
From Him how childhood can be good and sage,
A youth, a man, and though He reached not age,
Old men may in His youth their guide discern.
LUTEA  RkSEDA.
The Attempt. Ill
Js it \\\i, guti| of ^oman to gai) gwat
attention to 'Qn^s ?
DEBATE PAPER—NEGATIVE SIDE.
This is a question on which we cannot fail to feel an
interest, on account of its great practical importance. It
concerns the current of our thoughts, as well as the
apparel of our persons—therefore what makes character
as well as appearance.
I feel strongly that, when considered in its full bear¬
ings, I can only answer it by an unqualified negative,
for great attention to dress has ever marked the ages
and countries whose people were frivolous in their habits,
circumscribed in their views, and little in their acts.
Great attention to dress, whether in man or woman, is
the characteristic of the little, not of the enlarged mind ;
it is the weak, not the strong point of an individual. At
first, you are inclined to demur as to my position, because
you feel that the neglect of dress is a glaring fault, discover¬
ing a want of propriety, and destroying the symmetry of
a well-ordered nature. I grant it. 1 give no quarter to
those who neglect dress on principle. It is unwomanly—
disorderly. But more unwomanly and more disorderly
still—for it displaces the dictates of the higher, rather
than the instincts of the lower nature—is the paying
great attention to that which is intended to hold a sub¬
ordinate place. I know that the great majority, perhaps
all, present, are ready to support the opposite opinion;
but let us proceed in the question, step by step, until we
discover where we are not agreed.
First. As to the legitimate meaning of the enquiry—
Is it the duty of woman to pay great attention to dress 1
The words are carefully chosen, and avoid all ambiguity.
The subject is placed on high ground ; it is not made a
question of pleasure or of profit, it is one of right, and
more than that, it is a question of right, as it affects our
own practice, in one word, of duty. It is duty as it
concerns woman, distinguished from man, women of all
orders and degrees, from the Queen in her palace to the
drudge in the scullery. The question is not one of
general attention to neatness, order, and propriety in
every department under her  charge, but  it is that of
JI7NE 1874. Z
178 The Attempt.
paying great attention to DRESS. Dress may be, I think,
fairly distinguished from clothing, as being clothing in
the order and orderliness of its arrangement, in its
{esthetic aspect. When we say a person dresses well
or ill, we do not mean is clothed in abundant or thread¬
bare garments, but is dressed tastefully, becomingly,
neatly, fashionably, or the reverse. I do not think
that interest in Dorcas societies, or physiological en¬
quiries into what is sanitary in the way of dress, is the
subject of our discussion, for had it been so, clothing
would have been the more appropriate word. Then, as
to the relation between woman and dress. It is the duty
of paying great attention to it. Attention is a quality of
the mind, which loses in intension as it increases in exten¬
sion. If we want to pay Paul, we must rob Peter. In
proportion as we give attention to one thing, we with¬
hold it from another. Is it then woman's duty to give
a great proportion of this non-elastic but most valuable
quality of the mind to dress f That this is the clear
legitimate meaning of the question is a point on which I
think we are all agreed.
There is no extreme mentioned or necessitated on
either side. I am sure neither my opponent nor any one
here would for a moment say that dress should be the
fiirst object of a woman's life, and, on the other side, I am
far from allowing that she should give no attention to it.
The opposition is between great and moderate. If she
gives moderate, she cannot give great; if she gives great,
she cannot give moderate. I contend that a woman is
perfectly justified and ought to give moderate, but is not
justified in giving great attention to dress. I would first
argue the question on the higher ground of rightness, and
then descend to the lower one of utility. Why then is it
not right of a woman to pay great attention to dress ?
First, Because there are many things that demand and
ought to receive greater attention. I shall not dwell on
the duties we owe, to our God as responsible, immortal
beings,—the objects of a love we cannot fathom, bound
by every feeling of gratitude to devote ourselves wholly
to Him. The God of Christianity permits woman's service
•of love, and none of us would theoretically make sub¬
servient to dress this our bounden duty.
Neither are we isolated beings, standing alone in a
world where we have no wide sympathies, no general
interests.    Humanity is a large brotherhood.    As Cln-is-
The Attempt. 179
tians, we may be called the elder childi'en of that human
family,—those who have been taught their Father's will,
and for whom there is an absorbing interest, an incum¬
bent duty to help the weaker. The whole world is at
present agitated in a way we can hardly realise. Japan
and China are throwing off the traditions of unknown
ages, and are learning from the west her religion and her
civilisation. India,—with her 300,000,000, our fellow
subjects, as well as fellow creatures,—is awakening to
fresh energy, and urgently calling for our help, as British
women, to forward the education of our many eastern
sisters, who have hearts to love, and minds to understand,
but who are morally degraded, mentally neglected, and
spiritually unmoved. Central Asia, too, is shaking herself
from the lethargy of ages. Never till now did Persian
sovereign visit Em-ope since Xerxes crossed the Hellespont,
in that mighty struggle between oriental despotism and
the freedom of the Greek. Turkey has begun to care for
the education of her daughtei-s; and Africa is explored,
not only in the interests of science, but in those of
civilisation, and Christianity.
The whole earth seems ready to spring into newness
of life. It is not with her the day of nature's rest, when
winter breathes his icy breath, and each new form is a
crystallisation that shall dissolve and pass away. No,
this is the day, when the " winter is past, and the flowers
appear on the earth, when the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the turtle is heard in the land;" it is
the day when the breath of spring tide is felt, and on the
bare trees of the forest the young green appears in
budded lovehness, which shall unfold in the fulness of
beauty, till ten thousand times ten thousand leaves shall
clothe the branches with their summer glory. We are
living in this crisis, watching, it may be, the dawn of the
day " foretold by prophets, and by poets sung," and our
help, the help of British women, is needed. Have
we time, with such realities enacting, to give great
attention to dress ?
But we will naiTow our view, we will think only
of our own land. Is it sleeping now ? Are the
masses of society slumbering? Are there not rather
great movements at work, which are gathering in force,
and are ready to pour down either in blessing or in
devastation over our island-home % Is not the grow¬
ing influence of woman one of the great questions   of
180 The Attempt.
the day ? Do we not feel, whether we desire it or not
that an impetus has been given that must raise her
pohtically and socially, that she must henceforward take
a governing part in the education of her country, and
have a voice in its legislature, that her education must
be different to what it has been, that occupations shall
be hers that were not thought of a few years ago % We
cannot help these things. We need not determine
whether we wish them to be otherwise; but are we not
resolved to be found worthy of the fresh opportunities
awarded % Are we not resolved to show that we have
the capacity for what shall be placed before us as a dutyl
And would we that great attention to dress should inter¬
fere with this ? Think we that it demands more thought
than the mighty movements of which we cannot see the
end ? If we do, surely we are like the child that plays
with its castle of sand, and does not observe that the
advancing tide is separating it from the shore all around,
and is ready to overwhelm it.
But there is a yet narrower though not less important
field of duty, which demands far more attention than dress.
I speak of our domestic ties. We are almost all placed in
families (artificial sisterhoods seem to me to have no war¬
rant, either of scripture or of nature), and in these families,
there is husband, or child, or parent, brother, or sister,
or friend to whom certain obligations are due. Is the
wife to give great attention to her dress before she
thinks of cheering her husband"? or the mother, before she
tries to influence her child ? the daughter, before she gives
her parent the help that needs, or the sister, the com¬
panionship that her brother requires ? In the neglect of
any of these duties, is it sufficient excuse to say, "My
dress required greater consideration ? " I am sure in this
also we are agreed.
There is hardly time to touch on the question, as it
affects women in different positions in life. The amount
of fortune makes a great difference as to the style in
which Ave should dress, and the amount of money we
should spend, but very little as to the question of great
attention. The slatternly servant, who goes with stock-
ingless feet and unkempt hair, is not more reprehensible,
than the lady whose negligence of attire is a subject of
annoyance, sometimes, we may almost say, of disgust, to
those around her; nor is the attendant, who thinks of
flowers and flounces, and, giving great attention to dress,
The Attempt. 181
is not able to do her proper work, neglecting her duty more
blameably than the young lady who gives up what are
incontestably prior duties for the vain show of fine
apparel. It sounds paradoxical, but we know that these
two extremes, slovenliness at home and fine dress abroad,
often co-exist. That milliners, dressmakers, and ladies'
maids should pay it great attention, because it is their
livelihood, the duty they have undertaken, we are all
agreed. The practical question is, what should we our¬
selves do ? we, who have leisure at our own command ?
Are there any other pursuits, not in the position of
duties, that may demand from us greater attention than
the fashion of dress ? Surely all branches of intellectual
improvement may, as has already been implied in the
question of social advancement. Surely the mind is
better worth garnishing than the body ; surely know¬
ledge is of more consequence than satins, and wisdom of
more value than rubies.
And is there not more of true sesthetic charm in music,
in painting, in sculpture, in architecture, than in dress ?
If there is time for these things, are they not the higher
art % Do they not elevate the soul to a higher level % do
they not gratify the taste in a far less self-engrossing
manner ? I really know of nothing, in moderation right,
to which great attention is more objectionable, except
eating. The gourmand is a character for whom I have
less sympathy than the votary of fashion. Are we not,
then, all agreed that there are many things which demand,
and ought to receive, greater attention than dress %
Second, Another argument I would bring forward is,
that it induces the direction of much thought to what
is comparatively vain and frivolous.
The love of beauty, whether in things material or
spiritual, is right. It bears upon it the stamp of His
image, who spoke Kosmos out of Chaos, and pronounced
the work of His hands very good. Some have con¬
tended that beauty is the highest standard of perfection,
and though we may not agree absolutely in this, yet
we feel that where right is, there is beauty, and where
beauty is, there is right. Therefore, as the arrangement
of dress is one phase of beauty, we do not deny that
attention to it in some degree is right. But in what degree?
What is its worth % How does it weigh with the beauties
of virtue,—with patience, kindness, truth, benevolence,
gentleness, prudence, industry ?
182 TJie Attempt.
Again, how does it weigh with the excellencies of the
understanding—Avith good information, clearness of
judgment—a sound mind ? Or does it hold the scale in
comparison with the beauties of creation, ever teaming
with fresh objects for our admu-ation—with the starry
heavens, flooded with aurora rays, or silvered with the
beams of moonlight,—with the spotless snow, sparkling
with a brilliancy no fuller on earth can attain—with the
plumage of the flitting bird, or the painting of the gorgeous
flower f " Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow,'"'
and He who formed them, who knows their design, the
delicacy of their texture, who sees the costliest raiment to
be in comparison but as sackcloth, has with unerring
wisdom pronounced, that Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these. Should, then, attention be
great to what at best weighs so lightly in the scale of
beauty %
But it is not only that dress is vain—it also leads
to frivolity of mind. As the stream cannot rise above
its course, so great attention to dress leads the mind
to what is only outside beauty, to what ministers to
vanity, self-consideration, jealousy, and envy. We value
a thing according to the attention we give it, and if, by
this means, dress grows high in our esteem, will it not
re-act upon our thoughts and tempers ? By much
attention we have reached, as we suppose, excellency in
our style of dress,—is not such conscit)usness likely to
lead to vanity as to our personal appearance, and vanity
to self-consideration, or, if others come in the way of this,
to jealousy or to envy?
Again, does not much attention to dress induce much
conversation on the subject, and what discourse, except
scandal or untruth, is more unprofitable than a discussion
on the varied attire of those with whom we meet ? Does
it improve either head or heart? He Avho valued the lily
above the rarest clothes, said, " Take no thought for
your raiment, what ye shall put on, for after these things
do the Gentiles seek."
St. Paul, the greatest of His followers, has penned more
regarding woman than any other writer in Scripture.
He knew her weakness and spoke no words of flattery;
he knew her value, and gave her truest dignity in
mentioning her amongst those who laboured with him in
the gospel; he, recognising her high calling, and knowing
her greatest dangers, said, "Let women attire themselves
Jlie Attempt. 183
in modest apparel, not with braided hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array, but which becometh women
professing godliness, with good works." And St. Peter's
language is similar, when he sj^eaks " of the ornament of
the meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great price." Is there not in these verses an antagonism
between great attention to dress, and what God values'?
We do not lay stress on the gold and pearls and braided
hair, but we do on the magnifying the importance of
attire, whither it be the nun's sombre hood, the quaker's
russet bonuet, or the extravagant costume that must be
of the latest fashion.
If you have gone with me so far, no more words are
needed, but we can aiford to take lower ground. There
may be some who, unable to argue that great attention to
dress is right, are still persuaded that it is useful, that it is
ajsthetically beneficial, that it does in some points exalt
Avoman's character, and that it raises her in the estimation
of the stronger sex. Is it aisthetically beneficial? Are
the people who pay greatest attention to -dress those
who dress with the greatest taste ? The primary requi¬
site for good dressing is good taste, and without this
neither a great expenditure of money, of thought, nor of
time will secure tasteful, becoming attire. Why is it that
the taste of one-half of the world is offended by the dress
of the other ? Why is it, when we look back on the
style that prevailed ten or twenty years ago, we say, is it
possible people ever dressed in such frightful costume %
And yet it was not want of attention. The wonderful head-
dressing of our great-grandmothers was one of the chief
occupations of their lives, and much personal inconvenience
did they suffer that the adornment might not be disturbed.
Fashion, not artistic rule, is the usual standard of dress,
and fashion does not endorse the truly aesthetic and often
quoted, but" seldom practised judgment of the poet,
" When unadorned, adorned the most." The artist feels
its truth. Ho seldom adorns his beauties in the earrings,
necklaces, frills, and furbiloes that occasion so much
anxious thought.
We do not often hear what people say about OTir own
dress, but the various remarks passed on others, often on
those whose dress shows great attention either to art or
fashion, are of so disparaging a character, that we may
well exclaim, " What guerdon when their work is done ? "
Every  one  makes  their  own  taste in this  matter the
184 The Attempt.
standard; and, if it be often true, what is one person's
food is another's poison, so what is one person's admiration
is another's abhorrence.
And does attention to dress, in any way, exalt a woman's
character? We have seen that it does not raise her
out of female weaknesses and foibles; that it does not
deaden vanity, envy, and jealousy, but you allege it
increases self-respect. Is it not rather that good dress
is the natural product of self-respect, industry, and
orderliness, and not the cause ? Surely we must respect
ourselves for what we are, rather than for what we wear.
Does attention to dress place us on a higher level than
the Indian squaw bedizened ^vith feathers, or the African
queen with her necklaces of beads ? Is there much
difference between the civilised lady, who has set her
heart upon a new and exquisite dress, who has teased her
husband, or saved her own money to purchase it, who
has worried herself, because after all the sleeve was not of
the right cut, nor the skirt of the requisite length, or
because another lady is dressed in a costume provokingly
like or still more provokingly handsomer,—is there much
difference between her and the captives of the harem, who
give the long day to dress as their great consideration,
and who seek to vie with each other in the beauty of their
attire I You will not, cannot say that in any way great
attention to dress exalts the character of Christian,
civilised woman.
And does it raise her in the estimation of the stronger
sex % Yes ; of such as themselves think much of dress,
but whom force of public opinion has forbidden to sport
ruffles and embroidery, and who, bending to necessity,
wear the conventional black coat and beaver hat; and of
such (there are yet too many) who would look on woman
as the child looks on her doll—who thinks she is made to
be his plaything, to be dressed up. Such do measure
women by dress; but would we that they should ? Do
we not want something better than dress to raise their
estimation for us ? Do we not wish them to feel we are
their companions, not their toys ; that we have interests
as high, occupations as important, as their own % that if it
is a question they would not entertain for a moment—
" Should men pay great attention to dress ? " so is it one
that we will throw overboard without hesitation; and
while we will not neglect that moderate attention that
is fit for a man as well as for a woman, we will not be the
The Attempt. 185
vexed votaries of fashion,—we will not concern ourselves
greatly about the raiment we put on ; but we will allow
religion and benevolence, domestic duties and social
enjoyments, intellectual interests and artistic occupations,
to be our chief pursuits,—those things in which there is
virtue and praise, on which we may well think, and to
which it is woman's duty to pay great attention.
Aliqua.
Is gouih the iapifst iimc of life?
Poets have sung to us of the joys of spring time, both of
the spring of the year, when all nature is budding into
beauty, and the spring of early manhood, when all the
faculties are opening to influences from without. They
bid us look back on the joys of youth, they paint for us
scenes of early happiness—scenes which are indeed very
fair when beheld in the subdued light of distance, with
all the hard outUnes softened by the touch of time, and
the very defects endeared to us by the associations they
suggest of people and places who have passed out of our
lives. It is only in very exceptional cases—and how
unutterably sad those cases are—that youth, regarded
from a distance, does not look like some joyous, beautiful,
sacred time. Even the man who has had a prosperous,
happy life, who in public has been honoured and in private
loved, cannot look back on his early days but with a tender
feeling of half-regret. When he meets a comrade of his
boyhood, with whom he competed in the class-room and
fought in the playground, his heart glows vdth pleasure,
and he gives him a welcome such as he accords to few of
his friends of later days. When a woman surrounded with
a family of loving children, for any one of whom she would
gladly lay down her life, whose pleasures and duties are so
well proportioned that her cup of happiness seems full to
overflowing, whose wide-reaching interests are not limited
to her home affairs, Avhich, though forming the centre, are
yet not the circumference of her circle,—when such a
one meets, in middle life, the companion with whom she
studied Lindley Murray and Whately in the schoolroom,
or Avith whom, a few years later, she shared the pleasures
of her first ball, what happy talk of past days ensues!
how tenderly all the little incidents of by-gone years are
JUNE 1874. 2 A
18G The Attempt.
recalled ! It is as natural for age to look back as it is
for youth to look forward. As middle-life seems to the
youthful mind a goal much to be desired, when, with full
powers and perfect freedom, such deeds are to be per¬
formed as will make the world resound with applause;
so youth seems to the matvtre mind—weaiy, sometimes,
with perpetual Avorking—an enchanted era.
In all this there is much sentiment, true natural senti¬
ment, but still such as casts a halo round matters of fact,
dazzling our sight, and confusing our judgment. Let us
look at the question in a calm, judicial sort of a way. Is
youth actually the happiest time of life? You see the
question is not—Is youth as happy a time as any other ?
but is it the happiest ? If I can prove that middle, or old
age, is as happy, I shall be satisfied, though in the course
of the few following remarks I may aim at a little more.
Novelists, by giving us so many pictures of charming
young girls, endowed with every conceivable virtue and
talent—who, by the way, are generally set off by the
presence of very silly mothers, and weak aunts—have
spread the popular fallacy that young people are more
interesting than old. In novels it is generally the young
people who are long-suffering, patient, brave, wise, and
forgiving, while the old people are selfish, silly, and stupid.
Why this strange perversion of truth should be so general,
it is hard to say. Is the ordinary young girl, prettily
dressed and pleasant-looking, as interesting a companion
as one who is her senior by twenty or thirty years ? Is
her innocent little life of gaity, tempered with a few hours
daily devoted to keeping up her accomplishments, more
happy than the fuller, freer life of her who has " put away
childish things," and is following out a hfe of active work?
The young girl may be, and often is, bright, intelligent,
and good; but if so at tAVenty, Avhat may she not become
at forty? John Stuart Mill Avrites as follows of his wife,
who. when he first met her, was in the twenty-third year
of her age :—" It is not to be supposed that she Avas, or
that any one at the age at which I first saAV her could be,
all that she afterwards became. Least of all could this
be true of her, with AAdiom self-improA^ement, progress
in the highest and in all senses, AA^as a law of her nature;
a necessity equally from the ardour Avith Avhich she sought
it, and from the spontaneous tendency of faculties Avhich
could not receive an impression or an experience without
making it the source or the occasion of an accession of
The Attempt. 187
wisdom.* What is true in this respect of a woman, is even
more strikingly so of a man. 1 know there are many
manly young men, who, if any great occasion called for it,
would buckle on their armour and do valiant work; but
in ordinary every-day life, I think all must allow that the
young men whom we meet are less interesting than those
who are either in the midst of their toil, or who, better
still, having rowed hard, sometimes with the stream, but
oftener against it, are now resting on their oars, ready to
cheer on a younger generation with advice and sympathy.
It seems to me that in youth we may be more joyous
than in later years, certainly our animal spirits are
higher, the intense joy of existing, the feeling of the
young, strong life within us, which can scarcely be re¬
strained from making us run when we should walk, and
dance when we should run,—this exuberance of joy is ar
characteristic of early years, though in some enviable
cases it lasts longer than in others ; it is generally, I think,
changed into a more sober gladness by the advent of the
first sorrow of life. But this extreme liveliness, though
in itself a joy, does not constitute happiness, it is a part
of happiness, but only a small part; to put it logically—
the notion happiness contains this joy, but they are not
not co-ordinate.
Another characteristic of youth is its disposition to look
at things in a very strong light; what is good, seems to
it to be very good, and what is bad, to be very bad.
Youth knows no medium, recognises no extenuating
circumstances, allows for no differences in disposition and
education, calculates on no mixture of motives—thus, the
most generous youth is apt to be a harder judge of his
fellow-creatures than a man of mature years. As years pass
on, the mind enlarges and sees regions far beyond the youth¬
ful ken; what before seemed isolated facts of great beauty
or of deformity, gradually fit into their places, the beauti¬
ful becoming more beautiful by the recognition of their
true place in the divine harmony of things, and apparent
defects prove to be only such when taken singly, apart
from what precedes and follows after them. Does this
gradual recognition of order, this growing belief in a
Divine Mind working throughout the universe, ordering
all things aright, even though only partially understood
by us—add nothing to our happiness? Youth may not
have perplexed itself with questioning as to the govern-
* Autohior/rapliy, chapter vi., page 185.
188 The Attempt.
ment of the universe, it may have been content to sun
itself in the joy of existence without asking the purpose
of that existence, what should be its aim, and will be its
end. Still when youthful troubles come, as they will come
even to those happy young creatures, do not these troubles
seem very hard to bear, very strange, very unaccount¬
able, just because the mind has not grasped the idea of
a Perfect Being ruling all things? Does the youthful
spirit not rebel angrily at being thwarted, does it not fight
furiously against its destiny, as though, with its impotent
arm, it could throw aside an authority it cannot under¬
stand %
In youth there is an intensity of joy and an intensity
of sorrow,—the world either looks very bright, as though
no cloud could overshadow the sky, or very dark, as the
light could never again penetrate the gloom. Gradually
the feelings become more equal, and if we can no longer
trust in the perfect joy of anything in this world, if, in our
very rejoicing, there is mixed some trembling, at least
we can acknowledge that no sorrow is for ever, that even
the darkest " cloud has a silver lining." Does this add
nothing to our happiness? Some people speak of the
hardening effect of years spent in the strife of this working-
day world, of the loss of generous impulses, of warm
affections, of faith in one's fellow-creatures, of the gradual
wearing away of the poetry of youth in the realities of
middle life. But is all this the necessary result of living
the life which we have been given to live, and which must
be meant for our improvement, and not for our detriment?
In some cases, where youth has been spent in trifles, and
worst trifle of all, in trying to preserve itself beyond its
natural term, middle age may present a hard, xinlovely
appearance; but where, as is much oftener the case, youth
has given place gently and naturally to advancing years,
as the blossom gives way to the fruit, as morning to mid¬
day, we find a wider charity, a greater depth, if, perhaps,
a less display of feeling ; the character is altogether richer
and more mellow than in early years, or, to quote from one
of the writers in this magazine,—
" Oh, greet na for the dawnin'
Grown into day,
Greet na for Spring-time ripenin'
To Simmer gay ;
Spring's made but for the Simmer,
Dawnin' for day.
Youth's Apri I's the forerinner
O' riper May."
The Attempt. 189
Had you need of a friend to help you in doubt and
difficulty, with patience and sympathy, would you turn to
one just entering on manhood, full of untrained feelings
and untried theories, or to one who had learnt by years
to allow for your weakness, and to sympathise with your
doubts I I think you would not hesitate, but go straight
to your elderly friend, who, though busy with a thousand
affairs, would think it no loss of time to turn aside and
give a hand to one just entering on the work of the
world. Does this giving of sympathy, this imparting of
strength to the weak, add nothing to happiness—is it
" more blessed to give " or " to receive % " Of course, I do not
mean to assert that any time of life is without its draw¬
backs. I know that middle age, though happy in the
earnest pursuit of what is best in life, is often wearied and
over-driven, at times almost despairing of seeing its work
prosper, and tempted to sit down on the wayside and let
the busy traffic go on unheeded; the road seems so steep,
steeper than when looked at in the morning light, and the
end so far away. But a gentle upbraiding voice is heard,
" What, wearied out with half a life? " and ashamed, we
rise to pursue our way.
It is the middle-aged who do the work of the world;
the young, by their hopeful, unflagging spirits may infuse
new vigour into it, and the old, by their tried experience
and gentle sympathy may do much, but it is the middle-
aged who "bear the burden and heat of the day." Surely
there is more happiness in doing, than in only looking
forward to do.
The aged, as having done their active work in the world,
rightly deserve the large share of happiness that falls to
their lot. It is right that they who have done should
be more loved and honoured than those who are only
doing, or hoping to do. That they should have " love,
obedience, honour, troops of friends," is their due—a tribute
rendered most gladly, most lovingly, most reverently, by
those who, in the midst of their work, love to snatch a
quiet hour for converse with men and women, on whom
the glad, bright light of heaven seems already shining.
To some young people, old age seems a time to be
dreaded; they shrink from the thought that some day
they will lose the strength they glory in, and have to
sit still while others move around them; they have yet
to learn that bodily strength is not all happiness, that as
it fails, the spirit is often brighter and purer, the heart
190 The Attempt.
softer, the affections deeper, the whole mental vision
clearer than in former years. What seemed in middle-
life hard to understand, is now bright and beautiful;
doubts have been cleared away, and faith in our fellow-
creatures strengthened.
" Would ye be young again ?
So would not I ;
One tear to memory given,
Onwjurd I'd hie.
Lite's dark flood forded o'er,
All but at rest on shore,
Say, would you plunge once more,
With home so nigh ?"
Speaking on this subject the other day to a con¬
temporary of my own, and expressing my admiration for
people considerably older than myself, I received the
rejoinder, that she was sorri/ for old people. Sorry! the
very word seems almost an impiety ; surely an old age
crowning a long and well-spent life is very far removed
from our pity. I can imagine how, from the haven of rest
which the old have reached, they could smile to hear us
speak of pitying them, something as those who have
passed to a higher state of existence might smile to hear
poor mortals pitying them; but it would be the kindly,
gentle smile of those who are looking on us with " larger,
other eyes than ours, to make allowance for us all."
If advancing years are dreaded as coming to steal
from us some mere outward graces, if we look with
horror on the advent of a few white hairs, if we cannot,
as a novelist has well expressed it, " grow old with
dignity," then indeed our youth has been misspent, we
have trifled away our early years, and can only look for
a small portion of the happiness of age.
Lovely, loving, loveable old age did not seem to the
poet Wordsworth a time to be dreaded, as he penned
these words,—
" Thy thoughts and feelings shall not die,
Nor leave thee when grey hairs are nigh,
A melancholy slave ;
But an old age serene and bright,
And lovely as a Lapland night,
Shall lead thee to thy grave."
Des Eaux,
The Attempt. 191
3fhc %ttt\\\ djhurrh dfonurfiss,
Edinburgh has within the last month been the scene of
a gathering of unusual interest. The Scottish Episcopal
Church, following the example of her English sister during
several years past, has held her first Congress, and has
laid the first stone of her new Cathedral. This ceremony
has been looked forward to for a considerable time, and
as it was certain to bring together a good many persons
from a distance, and to unite in a common work many
who seldom cross each others' paths of life and lines of
thought, there occurred to some one the brilliant idea
of holding a Congress, which should band them to¬
gether for longer than the purpose of a day, and which
might produce for the Church at large some perma¬
nent and valuable results. We do not know to whom
the credit of the idea is due, but we think he may really
lay some claim to the possession of genius; for even if, in
anticipating the success which has so abundantly justified
the experiment, he only made a lucky guess, such a guess,
as Miss Austen's "Emma" truly says, has always some
talent in it. He has shared, with the other promoters of
the scheme, the fate of many other people in advance of
their times. Cold water has plentifully besprinkled it,
dismal predictions and sarcastic remarks have not been
wanting, and even those well-inclined to the project have
been chary of anything more encouraging than Punch's
celebrated Advice to those about to marry—"Don't!"
But the Congress has taken place, and the result must
be such as to gratify completely the hopes of those who
proposed, and carried out so well, what seemed to many
a hazardous, unwise, and even a presumptuous experi¬
ment. This is not the place for a defence of Congresses
in general, nor do we propose to give a detailed report of
the proceedings, which may be read elsewhere; but we
should like to suggest to the readers of this paper,
comprising, as we know they do, members of various
religious communions, some thoughts on the meeting
which has just closed among us, with the humble desire
of furthering, in our own small circle, some of the good
work which we believe the Congress has done, and will
do, with a larger public.
And, first of all, as many have probably felt already,
what a change does the mere fact, even apart from the
192 The Attempt.
success of which we have spoken, show in the temper of
the times. May we not look upon it as really a landmark
in history? In this respect, its interest is unique and
unrivalled by any English Congress, because of the utterly
dissimilar present circumstances and past historical asso¬
ciations of the sister churches. Such a gathering, as we
witnessed on the 21st ult., would have been utterly impos¬
sible less than a generation ago, when Scottish Churchmen
never dreamt of bringing their Church's tenets or cere¬
monies into prominent view, knowing well that, though
legal penalties were no longer to be apprehended, public
opinion would grant them a rough, and probably very
unfriendly, reception. The reasons for this change are so
obvious as scarcely to need mention. The increased
intercourse in modern days of the many minds of many
men with one another, has much to do with it, but we
believe that English people have little idea how complete
and hoAV recent it is. The present writer well remembers
the indignation, scarcely twenty years ago, of an old
Presbyterian nurse, at her young ladies' patronage of a
poor woman, who joyfully accepted the washing of what
she termed " thae rags o' Popery," in which the choir
boys, of a newly-erected church near Edinburgh, were
arrayed. What would have been the good woman's
feelings if she had beheld the white-robed throng gathered
on the cathedral site % We can guess that they would
not have been of the most pacific description, and they
would once have been shared by most persons of her
class. The absence of all unfriendly manifestation, and
the quiet and orderly demeanour of the people at the
evening meetings of the Congress, as well as during the
ceremonial, proves what a change has come over the
spirit of Presbyterianism,—partly through the enlarged
intercourse of which we have spoken, which is doing so
much, in conjunction with other influences, to recast the
national beliefs and forms of worship, and partly, may not
Scotch Episcopalians fairly say, through the good work
which has quietly and unobtrusively been carried on for
many years by the once despised and persecuted remnant.
The troubles of that Church, her early rise, her gleams of
prosperity, her dark days of trial, her fallen condition and
almost total extinction up to a very i-ecent period, form a
page in our country's history which is little read,—even
well-informed persons, who would be ashamed of not
knowing all about the Huguenots or the Lollards, often
The Attempt. 193
betraying an astonishing degree of ignorance concerning
matters much more nearly connected with their own
country and times. This is true of persons on both sides
of the Border; and some of our late visitors at least have
probably had their minds greatly enlightened by the two
very interesting addresses on the Past and Present
Position of the Church, with which the Congress opened.
Those who listened to Dr. Stuart's account of the Church
in mediaeval times, must have felt that the fearful state of
corruption which he described deserved the bitter retribu¬
tion which was afterwards endured. That retribution
bore, with crushing severity, on comparatively innocent
sufferers; but it was instrumental, under God's good
providence, in purifying her from such hideous evil, as
fully accounts for the utter revulsion of the most active
and powerful minds among the reformers, from the Church
in her ancient form. This detestation of " Prelacy," which
is so fast dying out, had a natural and most reasonable
origin, and though of course it has long ceased to be
deserved, such feelings often survive for centuries the
events which gave them birth. It has often astonished
many people, who have harshly condemned it, not knowing,
or having forgotten, that while the English Church inherits
the veneration of ages,—shame, contempt, and hatred were
the portion of her Scottish sister.
Dr. Grub took up the subject where his predecessor
dropped it, and brought out clearly the fact, which is
ignored in popular histories, based as they are on the false
or inaccurate information of Covenantmg authorities, that,
at the time of the Revolution of 1688, there was no such
pressure on the part of the nation for the establishment of
Presbyterianism as is commonly supposed. The audience
which listened to the simple account of the Church's suffer¬
ings during the century which succeeded the Revolution,
probably contained few non-Episcopalians. To the
descendants of these sufferers for conscience sake the
tale may have been a familiar one (though we doubt if all
Scottish Churchmen are as well informed as they ought
to be in their Church's history), but we believe that, to
many of our English visitors, it was as new as it is
certainly touching. Even outsiders may be moved by a
feeling of generous 8.ympathy for those who, counting the
Avorld but loss, clung to the ministry of their Church and
to her worship, with a steadfastness and loyalty which
has  never  been  surpassed.     The evil spirits   of  sloth,
JDSE 1874. 2  B
194 The A ttempt.
avarice, and ambition must have been thoroughly purged
out of the hearts of those who, seventy years ago, took
Scottish orders, for though, after the repeal of the severest
statutes in the year 1792, they had no longer the fear
of prison and banishment before them, there can, as a
historian of the Church has obsei-ved, have been no worldly
inducement whatever to lead them to accept a position
which involved the loss of all temporal gain and honour.
Bishop in the Church of God, and the humble pastor of a
despised few in some obscure corner,—such was the
position of many who might have played a distinguished
part on other stages, had they sought honour one of
another. Not that they were wholly without that best
honour, which is based on reverent affection;
" The memory of the just
Smells sweet, and blossoms in the dust ;"
and the names of Jolly, Skinner, Low, and Torry are still
remembered with the love and respect which their blame¬
less lives won from all who knew them. There seems, in
the present day, some decay of their spirit in Scotland's
sons, who, as was observed more than once in the Con¬
gress, prefer apparently the ease, prestige, and more
brilliant possibilities of the English establishment, to the
obscurity which is still the lot of a Scottish pastor. May
the inspiration of some, with a different and a better
spirit, be one of the results of this and of future Congresses.
The attendance in the hall ebbed and flowed, after the
opening papers were read, according to the expectations
which people entertained of being interested, and Church
Finance was probably considered a painful subject in
these days of stationery incomes and high prices; but Irish¬
men can get some fun out of most things, and the Arch¬
deacon of Lindisfarne and the Dean of Kilmore certainly
enlivened a dry topic very successfully. We hope that
many interested in work among the masses were present
during the meetings of Tuesday afternoon and evening.
To whatever religious body they might belong, they must
have gained valuable hints from the very striking address
of the Rev. Erskine Clarke, who, if he comes near to his
own ideal of a well-worked parish, must certainly be the
model of a parochial clergyman. In the General Assembly
of the Establishment, the same sort of needs and difficulties
are discussed under the Report of the Committee of Chris¬
tian Life and Work, and no one who has listened to those
debates, or concerned themselves, to however small an
The Attempt. 195
extent, in Avork among the poor, could have failed to be
interested.
Organization and matters of practical detail were the
afternoon's topics; the evening meeting struck a deeper
note.    The work of the Church in fulfilling her Master's
last command,—the preaching of the everlasting gospel,—
the conflict of the powers of evil,—the extension of His
kingdom over the world which He has redeemed: the
large audience listened fer into the night with the closest
attention to the speakers, who addressed them in glowing
words on this great subject.    Three of these were engaged
in  London's   great Twelve Days' IMission,   early  in the
present year, and gave their experiences of the great and
blessed  effects  produced  by such  missions.    We  hope
that    the   beautiful   and   thoughtful  addresses   of Mr.
Pigou and ^Ir. Maclagan will be widely  read.     A still
graver and more earnest spirit seemed to pervade the
Assembly  during the  first discussion  next morning, on
"The Quickening of Spiritual Life," aided by a few timely
words from the President, the Bishop of Edinburgh.    On
questions  concerning the most cherished inward convic¬
tions, there will always be differences of opinion in minds
differently constituted and educated, but the real concord
which  may, nevertheless, exist  among those who press
forward to one goal, was unmistakeably felt and appre¬
ciated.      Once   more  we  refer   our  readers   to  the full
reports for the  warm and stirring words by which the
Rev. W. Maclagan and other speakers moved the hearts
of those before them.
The deliberations of the Congress on education drew
a large audience, as the subject was sure to do, and
the merits or demerits of School Boards, the desir¬
ability of only secular teaching in schools, were discussed
vdth great earnestness,—the one thought running through
all being the question,-—How is the Church best to fulfil
her mission to the young % How may she most success¬
fully maintain her hold on the rising generation ? It was
a. very practical conclusion at which most of the speakers
arrived, namely, that the best way to command success
is to deserve it. Let our schools be made thoroughly
efficient, and there is no fear that they will not be filled.
The evening of the second day filled the large hall
with an attentive audience, who followed, with unflagging
interest, the very weighty addresses which were made on
a subject   of  the  highest  importance.     If among  that
196 The Attempt.
crowd there were any of doubtful mind, who, without
weapons of defence at their own command, are perplexed
and troubled by the voices of unbelief around them, to
which none can be wholly deaf, who cannot see how the
attacks from which they shrink can be turned aside, or
faith in the Living God, His word, His work, or even
His being, preserved from loss, they must have been
encouraged. There may have been such, rich or poor,
young or of ripe years, man or woman, Avho must have
felt gladdened and strengthened by the manly undaunted
tone of every one of the speakers, who, with no timid
concealment of difficulties, and with the utmost readiness
to accept all the ascertained facts of science, showed
how intellectual progress is perfectly compatible with
Christian faith.
We must hasten to a conclusion. Although, as we have
said before, we are not concerned to defend Congresses, in
general or particular, from their detractors, we may
suggest some answers to several of the questions which
have lately been asked. What is the use, say some, of
any euch meetings, and especially of a Church Congress ?
Lord Cockburn, in his recently published journal, tells us
that he was contemptuously inclined towards the first
meeting of the British Association held here some forty
years ago, but, like a sensible man, he was not ashamed to
own himself mistaken when experience had shown him to
be so. His sagacious mind discovered in that gathering
three uses which, with slight alteration, we think Church
Congresses may also claim:—\st, the promotion of inter¬
course by the mere assembling of men, sharing a common
interest in one class of subjects, and the convenience of
opportunities for conference; 2J, the real progress towards
useful results, more readily attained by an hour's conversa¬
tion, than by weeks of study or volumes of explanation; and
?>d, the diffusion of a growing taste for the subjects treated
of by tlie gathering of an evening crowd which, if not
instructed, was at least interested by what was said. Let
us hope that the aff'ectation of science which he detected,
calling it the sting in the tail, is avoided by Church
Congresses in matters concerning religion. A Congress
claims and possesses no legislative j^owers whatever; it
simply aims at the promotion of brotherly intercourse
and free discussion among those who have mutual
interests, and individual experience, which may be useful
to their neighbours, and who are likely to be all the wiser
The Attempt. 107
by understanding one another better. It has been a
great pleasure, and something more than a pleasure, to
many, to see some of those whose names are before the
world, and whom they are not likely to meet under any
other circumstances. Some have formed new and pleasant
acquaintances, and enjoyed an innovation on the ordinary
routine of society ; while our English visitors have seen,
some of them for the first time, Edinburgh in all the
loveliness of an unusually lovely May ; and that that is a
good result of the Congress, no loyal citizen, not even the
sternest opponent of " Prelacy," will surely be disposed
to deny. Irene.
|l a i I at a g   ^ o b.
A   TRUE   STORY.
I HAVE often wondered that I have never seen a history
of " Kailway Bob " amongst the lives of remarkable dogs.
Everybody knows hoAv " Peeler," the dog of the police,
devoted himself to the profession of policeman, out of
gratitude to one of that body for having saved him from
being worried at Kingston. " Bob," of Her Majesty's
Scots Fusilier Guards, is also well known. He had a
mania for a soldier's life, and attached himself to the
regiment, accompanied it to the Crimea, was present at
some of the greatest battles, and, in the words of his
biographer, speaking of him after death, " he sits in a
glass case, wearing a collar of white leather, such ae
soldiers' belts are made of. On one side is Napoleon's
horse " Marengo," and many another relic of battlefields
lie all around him." " Bob," the firemen's dog, is another
•well-known character. He "had a nose for a fire like
another dog for a rabbit," and always accompanied the
engine whenever it was needed.
My hero was named, like many an illustrious dog,
Bob. Who was his master, and where he came from,
has never been discovered. He is supposed to have
journeyed south with his master, a drover, to assist him
in keeping the sheep and cattle in order at a fair. Perhaps
it was because Bob had spent all his life in the country, and
being unaccustomed to the bustle and trafiic of the town,
that he got confused and lost his master.    He wandered
198 The Attempt.
about for some weeks looking for him, and at last found
his way to the railway station. While standing dis¬
consolately there, he attracted the notice of a kind-hearted
guard, who, stooping down, petted him, saying in a cheery
voice, " Well, old fellow, you have lost your master, have
you? Here, take this bread if you want it, and come
along with me to the refreshment room, and see if we can
get any scrape there." Gladly did the poor half-starved
Bob obey the kind invitation, and very thankful he was
for the plateful of meat his new friend procured for him.
Bob took such a fancy to his benefactor, that he persisted
in following him into the van, and when the train had
left the city far behind. Bob was lying curled up at the
guard's feet, thinking what was to be done next. He soon
made up his mind that the best thing he could do, was to
get out at the next town, and continue there the search
for his master. Poor fellow ! how could he know that the
drover h;vd gone north again, mourning over the loss of a
well-trained dog. After making this resolution, our hero's
life was very unsettled for several months. In a short
time he had searched all the principal towns in England
for his master, going between them always in the train.
In this manner a year of Bob's life quickly flew by, and at
the end of it, we come upon him again Ij'ing basking in
the sun on the railway platform ; judging by the lazy way
he is stretched out, you would imagine that he is sound
asleep; he is not asleep, however, but thinking on the
events of the past year. He has come to the conclusion,
that it is useless ti^ try any longer to find his master. All
his diligent searching has been in vain. What is he to do %
To teU you the truth, in journeymg from one town to
another, a great love for railway travelling has been
growing in Bob's heart. In fact, I believe he would
hardly care to go back to sheep-driving again, and he has
firmly made up his mind to devote the remainder of his
life to the railway. He thinks he cannot do a better
thing, as he has now no master, and has always been
treated with kindness by the railway ofiicials, wherever
he has met them.
Bob is a dog who, when he has once made up his mind
to do a thing, sticks to his determination; so he rises up,
shakes himself, and humming in dog language, keeping
time with his tail,—
" Rattling fast and rattling free,
A life on the line is the life for me !'
The Attempt. 199
waits patiently for the next train. From that day till his
death. Bob faithfully served the iron steed. Soon, up and
down the line, from the station-masters to the merest
menial, Railway Bob was known and loved.
Sometimes he sat in the van, sometimes on the engine,
just as it suited his fancy, being sure wherever he went,
of meeting with a kindly welcome from all. If he had a
particular fancy for a station, he would remain there for
a week at a time, but he generally preferred changing
from place to place, so as to give everybody the benefit
of his company. He has altered greatly in personal
appearance since we first saw him. He is transformed
into as fat and glossy a collie as anyone could wish to
see,—very different from the lean, mud-be-spattered, stray
dog who owed a meal to a kind-hearted guard, and 1
may add, never forgot it.
One cold wintry night, a gentlemen was pacing wearily
up and down the platform of one of the largest stations in
England. He did not care to go into the waiting rooms, as
they looked cold and cheerless, so preferred loitering along
the platform. In his walk, he several times passed the
lamp-room, in which porters, engine-drivers, and stokers
were warming themselves, before they dispersed on their
night duty. They talked and laughed merrily, as they
sat round the blazing fire, and the whole room looked so
cosy and cheery, when compared with the world outside,
that the gentleman could not resist the temptation of join¬
ing the circle. He was well-known to all present, as he
travelled much on the line, so they give him • a hearty
welcome, and the best seat by the fire.
" What were you all talking about so merrily when I
came in ? " asked the traveller.
" Oh ! " replied one of the engine-drivers, " we were
wondering where Railway Bob is now, as none of us have
seen him for so long."
" Who is Railway Bob %" asked the gentleman, in
astonishment.
" Why, sir," exclaimed the man, " surely you who
travel so much on this line must have seen our Bob.
Have you never noticed a black and tan sheep-dog going
on the engine or in the van ? " Then he went on to tell
all he knew of our hero since he had joined the line, and
how they all loved and petted him; how he never wanted
a meal, as they were always ready to share their dinner
with him.
200 The Attempt.
Bob's life so amused and interested the traveller, that
after he returned to his home, he told it to us all again.
They were still talking of Bob and his ways when some
of the porters were called away on dnty.
" Going on by this train, sir?" asked one with an eye to
business. " I'll see all the rugs safely in, and get a foot-
warmer for you. No need to leave the fire yet, sir, they
wait here for fifteen minutes." So saying, away bustled
the porter, just as the train came thundering into the
station. The people streamed out of the carriages, and
hunted after their luggage, wondering why the porters,
instead of attending to their duty, were gathered round
the engine, listening to the driver, with scared, sad faces.
FoUow the tall guard into the lamp-room, and hear
him tell his tale. It is the same guard who once
so kindly fed Bob, when he for the first time
appeared on a railway platform. He steps into the
room and stands irresolute, on the threshold, as if
unwilling to break into the cherry circle there. " Why,
Brooke, what is the matter ?" cried a stoker, as he
caught sight of the guard's distressed face; " Not been
any accident, has there ?" " Accident! accident enough,"
replied Brooke, " we'll never have Bob to cheer us again
in the lonely nights." "Whatf they all ask, "is Bob
hurt?" Is he killed?" "Poor Bob!" sobbed the guard
drawing his coat-sleeve across his eyes, " he was coming
with ou]' train and somehow got into the crowd, and as
it was starting, he made a jump for the engine, missed
it, and was run over!" The cruel train was waiting
impatiently to start again, and the traveller was forced
to leave the warm fire to take his seat in the carriage.
" Well, sir, you have heard the first and last of our
Bob," said the porter, as he shut the door, " we will miss
him sorely." At every station where they stopped
the news of Bob's death was received with sorrow.
Soon all his friends knew of his untimely end, and
mourned much for him. Poor Bob! it does seem hard,
after he had served the iron steed for so many years,
that at last it should crush him beneath its iron hoofs,
and hurry on A\dth shrieks of triumph.
E. V. Lynne.
A Prize is offered for the Best Poem appearing in the August,
September or October No. of The Attempt.
The A ttempt. 201
flu (Biirli) (g^irs uf (B^rmann.
II. Old Period : from the Middle of the Twelfth to
THE Middle of the Fourteenth Century.
First Classical Period, 1190-1300.
the lay of the nibelungs.
Where poetry does not flow from the heart aud brain by
inspiration, it proceeds from the brain alone, and is pur¬
sued no longer as a divine impulse, but as a mechanical
art. The periods during which it is produced in this
form, though in themselves of less importance, are useful
as a preparation for those more brilliant periods which
are to follow. They originate and render familiar the
forms in which future genius is to clothe its works.
While the form is being prepared by patient labour, the
poetic impulse is, at the same time, waiting to clothe
itself in that form at the earliest beck of circumstance.
Though the genius of Christianity had seemed only to
graft its works upon the stem of the older literature, it
was destined to form the very root and impulse of the new.
Never did poetry boast of a happier era, than that in which
religion aud knight-errantry met on common ground, and
animated with their spirit the Crusades. Religion, to the
German nation, was then simply a matter of the heart.
It was new and life-giving. Doubt was considered sinful;
not one of the steps that lead from childlike faith to full-
grown rationalism had yet been trod. This poetic and
elevating element overspread the whole nation, and
seemed to give rise to new national epics. For this new
literature a new language had been framed. Heinrich von
Veldekin, a poet of the transition period, was one of the
first to use short rhyming lines instead of the old alliter¬
ative strophes, and also a middle Low-Rhenish dialect,
less perfect than the modern tongue. A version of
lieynard the Fox and the Song of Roland belongs to this
transition period, the poetry of which still resembled that
of ancient times more closely than it did modern poetry.
As the poetry of the oldest period consisted chiefly of
heroic epic and sacred epic, so that of the old period may
be divided into the nature-epic and the art-epic. The
source of the epic may be traced to the intercourse which
JLLT 1S74. 2   C
202 The Attempt.
man, in his primeval state, holds with nature. No influ¬
ence has as yet spiritualised his ideas ; sight, sound, form
the elements of his creed; great feats of nature are
ascribed to living heroes, fabulous beings. The greatest
epics are those which combine the feats of the several
heroes of a country. The heroic epics of Germany have
no hero above the rest, because they are composed of a
number of shorter poems, which gradually become one in
the mouths of the singers. There are also the traditions
of animals, which we have already mentioned as descend¬
ing from primeval times.    These are exclusively German.
Thus the first classical period in German Hterature had
its nature-poetry and its art-poetry. The nature-poetry
sprang from the heart of the people ; the art-poetry was
chiefly the result of the solitary meditations of courtiers
and nobles. The second classical period, which occurred
in the latter part of the eighteenth century, had only
art-poetry,—that of pure nature had been left far behind.
Each race of ancient Germany had its own cycle of
tradition. Four of these cycles flowed together to
form the Nihelungenlied, or Lay of the Nihelungs. These
were :—
1. The Rhenish cycle of tradition, with Siegfried for its
hero.
2. The cycle of Burgundy, with Gunther, Gernot,
Giselher,—all kings,—their mother Uta, and their sister
Chriemhild; also Gunther's wife Brunhild, and their
vassals Ilagen and Volker.
3. The East Gothic, with Dietrich von Bern for its hero.
His dwelling at Bern, or Verona, obtained for him the
title of Dietrich of Bern.    His chief vassal is Hildebrand.
4. The cycle of Attila, or Etzel, king of the Hmis.
Etzel lives at the Etzelburg in Hungary, now called Ofen.
These four have flowed together into the Nihelungenlied.
Before giving an account of the story of it, we shall
briefly mention the other two cycles of tradition, viz.:—
5. The North-German, or Frisian-Danish, representing
sea life. Its scene is Friesland; its heroes King Hettel,
King Horant, his follower and uncle Wate, and Hettel's
daughter Gudruu. The Song of Gudrun is, next to the
Nibelungen, the noblest piece of German epic poetry.
6. The Lombard.—King Rother, King Otnit; the scene,
the Lago di Garda. It is supposed to be the youngest
cycle of tradition.
The story of the Nibehmgenlied, or Lay of the Nibelungs,
The Attempt. 203
is a faithful picture of human life, manners, and opinions;
a possession of which the Germans are proud, and of
which they never speak without enthusiasm. Some of
the characters are historical,—as, for instance, the three
Burgundian kings. The destruction of a whole race of
kings by Attila is also true. The drawing up of the poem
in its present form t')ok place about 1210. The best
version of it is by Karl Simrock, who has done much to
throw light on its composition. The story runs as
follows :*—
In Burgundy, in the ancient palace of the kings, there
dwelt a noble king's daughter, who, after her father's
death, grew up into a blooming maiden, full of grace and
loveliness. Dreams of foreboding hover around the
thoughtful head of the lovely Chriemhild in tliat silent
solitude, in which, according to the custom of the time,
she spent her childhood and early youth. She dreamt
that she had brought up a falcon, and kept it under
her care for many a day, when suddenly two eagles
swooped down, and squeezed the tender bird to death
with their claws. Awaking in sore distress, the maiden
tells the dream to her mother. " The falcon," so the
mother explains the anxious forebodings of her daughter,
"the falcon is a noble man for whom thou art destined;
may God preserve him, that thou mayest not lose him
early." " Why do you speak of a husband, dear mother ? "
replied the daughter. "I will rather live without the
love of a hero, than have my love rewarded only with
suffering." "Be not so hasty," returned the mother;
" cast not away thy happiness ; for if thou art ever to be
made glad at heart, it will be through the love of a man.
Thou wilt become the wife of a noble hero." Thus, as a
gentle whisper from afar, the first presentiment of futui-e
unutterable woe sounds forth from the heart of the tender
maiden, and the shadows of this dream stretch themselves
henceforth across the cheerful sky of her life and of her
love. Darkly and ever more darkly they hover over the
spring days of the first and only love; darkly and ever
more darkly over the cheerful wedding-feast. With a
pale, sickly gleam, the sun of her life shines through the
unearthly twilight, until, red as blood, he sinks towards
the horizon, and at last sets in blood-red splendour, leaving
an endless night behind.
Strong in his ycnith and manly courage, Siegfried has
* Adapted from Vilmar's "Deutsche Literaturgeschichte."
204 The Attempt.
in the meantime grown up at 8anteu on the Rhine. He
is the son of Siegmund and Sigelinde, and the boy is
already a hero. He has traversed many countries to try
the strength of his gigantic frame, when at length he
hears of the lovely maiden at Worms, on the Upper
Rhine; and the bravest and manliest of the youthful
heroes of his time leaves his home with his followers to
woo at Worms the fairest and the most graceful and
virtuous maiden to be found in any country. With his
father's warnings and his mother's tears, and laden with
rich gifts from both, the son departs with his retinue. The
strangers arrive at the gate of the king's palace at Worms,
giant-like in their strong manly youth, unrivalled in the
splendour of their accoutrements and the beauty of
their horses. No one knows who they are, nor who is
the kingly youth, their leader. Then Hagen of Tronic is
sent for, who knows all strange lands; but even he has
never seen these heroes; they must be pi'inces, or the
envoys of princes; they are certainly noble knights.
Then he adds,—" True, I have never seen Siegfried, but
I believe that none but he could ride in so stately a
manner; it is Siegfried, he who has conquered the race
of the Nibelungs. who has won from the stern race of
Schilbung and Nibelung the costliest treasure of jewels
and gold, and taken possession of the lands and vassals of
the conquered; who, in the thick of the fight, snatched
from the dwarf Alberich the tarn-cap, which can make
him invisible; the same Siegfried who killed a dragon,
and bathed in its blood, until his skin became invulner¬
able as horn. Such a hero we must receive kindly, lest
we draw down upon us his terrible hatred. So Siegfried
was courteously received and entertained with splendour.
During the tournament which is held in the court of the
palace, Chriemhild secretly looks out at a window, and
iaecomes so enamoured of the youthful Siegfried, that she
forgets all her maidenly occupations, and even her com¬
panions. Yet Siegfried has spent a whole year at the
court of Burgundy ere he has once beheld the maiden of
his choice. Under the banner of Burgundy, as a servant
of the king, he goes to many a combat, passes from the
Rhine, through Hesse, into the land of the Saxons, whose
King Liutger, with King Liutgast of Denmark, had
declared war against the Burgundians. Siegfried is the
mightiest and the most victorious in battle; he takes
prisoner the Danish king; and the Saxons, awed by his
The Attempt. 205
courage, surrender to his arms.    Messengers come to the
Rhine to announce the victory, and one of these appears
before Chriemhild,    " Now,  give  me  good news," says
Chriemhild, " and if you tell me true, I will give you all
my gold, and will be your friend for life."    " No one,
says the messenger, " has ridden more bravely to battle
than he of the Netherlands;  Siegfried has gained the
victory; his hand was first in the combat; the hostages,
whom you  will  see   arriving  from  Saxony,  have been
captured and sent hither by his valiant arm."    The royal
maiden  gave   the   messenger  ten  marks   ojF   gold   and
ten suits of splendid clothing for his tidings, which were
welcome to all, and to none welcomer than to the secretly
enamoured maiden.   Then she stood silently at the palace
window, to watch the return of the heroes to the Rhine.
At last the victorious army appears, and the maiden sees
the joyous commotion at the palace gates, and among the
many heroes, him who is honoured and admired abt)ve
all; but not yet has the  eye  of Siegfried beheld her;
modestly she remains in her narrow chamber.    At last a
great tournament is held,  and  two  and thirty princes
come to the court  of the king  of Burgundy.    Now  at
last, by the side of her mother Uta, guarded by a hundred
sword-bearing chamberlaiiis, and a InuKlred richly dressed
ladies and maidens, Chriemhild is allowed to appear for
the first time in public; and she  comes  forth   like  the
dawn from dark clouds, in the  gentle  bloom  of youth,
beauty, and silent love, as the moon, in tender radiance,
shines with the stars through the cloiids of night.    Sieg¬
fried stands afar.    •' How could it be," he says, " that  I
should woo thee ?    That is a vain hope, and yet I would
rather die than  leave  thee."    Then, in  courtly fashion,
Gunther  bids   Siegfried  advance   and   greet   his   sister.
And   the   knight   steps   forward   and   bows   gallantly
before the maiden;   they are drawn to one another by
adoring love, and exchange secret glaijces.    But yet no
word is spoken, till, after the mass with which the tourna¬
ment has begun, the maiden thanks  the  knight for the
valiant help he has given her brothers.    " That was done
for your service, Lady Chriemhild," replies  the  knight ;
and now, " after the tongue has trusted itself to speak,"
he remains twelve days, the whole time of the tourna¬
ment, near the lovely maiden.    Then the strange guests
depart, and Siegfried also prepares to return home, " for
he trusted not himself to ask for that which he desired,"
20G The Attempt.
Yet he was easily persuaded, by the entreaties of young
Giselher, to remain longer, where, as the poem naively
says, he loved best to be, and where he daily saw the
lovely Chriemhild.
Now there was a queen who dwelt beyond the sea;
glorious in wonderful loveliness, and in almost unearthly
strength. She challenged the men who sought her love
to throw the lance, to hurl the stone ; she sprang, wath
bold and active speed, after the stone which she had
hurled; he only who should surpass her in these three
feats, was destined to win her hand. He whom she con¬
quered must lose his life. Many a hero liad vainly gone
to seek the love of the strong amazon Brunhild, and had
never returned; then KingGunther of Burgundy resolved
to venture his life for her love, and challenged Siegfried to
help him in his wooing. Siegfried agreed, on condition
that Gunther would give him his sister Chriemhild to
wife; Gunther vowed to do this, as soon as he should
have won the fair Brunhild. This agreement was con¬
firmed by an oath, and the ship was prepared for the
voyage. Gilded shields and rich garments are carried to
the shore, and from the windows the eyes of loving
children watch the heroes, who, under swelling sails, sit at
the helm of the ship on the Rhine. For Siegfried, the
skilful sailor, guides the helm, and Gunther also seizes
the rudder. After twelve days sailing they arrive at the
Isenstein, where Brunhild reigns. In strange, mysterious
splendour, eighty-six towers rise from the sea shore,
enclosing three vast palaces and a large hall, all built of
green marble. To Siegfi-ied alone is this distant land,
with its wonderful palace and its proiid mistress, already
known. Andthe haughty maiden knows the hero who
approaches her only too well. " Welcome !" she says,
without asking who he is, " welcome, Sir Siegfried, into
my lands ; to what end your journey ? that I would fain
learn." " There," answered Siegfried, " stands Gunther,
a king of the Rhine, who wishes to gain thy love ; he is
my master, I am his man; for thy sake we are come
hither." Then the trials of skill begin ; but Gunther, un¬
able to maintain his ground against the superhuman
strength of the maiden, allows Siegfried to take his
place. The latter envelopes himself in his tarn skin,
(the covering which makes him invisible), so as to fight
for Gunther unseen; Gimther is only to appear to
fight.    The queen Brunhild calls for the gigantic lance
The Attempt. 207
which she used in combat, with its heavy handle and
broad steel, which cuts with its three sharp edges; into
the scene of combat is also brought a round hurling
stone, which requires twelve knights to cany it. She
rolls up the sleeves on her white arms, seizes the shield,
raises the lance, and the combat begins. Gunther,
to whom Siegfried is invisible as well as to the others,
trembles before liis terrible, yet sought for opponent,
then Siegfried approaches, and taking Gunther's shield,
directs him only to appear to fight; and how glad
Gunther is when he observes the helpful presence of
Siegfried ! The amazon now hurls the spear, and sparks,
like flames driven by the wind, fly from the shield of her
opponent, which she strikes with the spear; Siegfried
staggers, but he quickly regains his footing, and hurls
the spear still more violently towards the maiden. She
receives it on her shield, but falls. " Thanks for the
blow, cries the mighty one, springing at once to her feet,
thanks, noble knight Gunther!" And angry at being
conquered, she seizes the stone, and hurling it to a great
distance, springs after it, and far beyond it, so that her
armour resounds. But immediately Siegfried seizes the
stone, and throws it far beyond his adversary, springing
with Guuther under his arm, still further than the
amazon had done. She then turns at once to her
followers. " Maids and men, come hither, ye shall all be
subject to King Gunther." They then prepare to return
home, aud after Siegfried has visited his kingdom of
the Nibelungs, to collect his treasures and his men, the
heroes journey back to Worms, Siegfried going first to
announce the victory. The object is gained; Brunhild
is betrothed to Gunther, Chriemhild to Siegfried ; the lovely
maiden sinks into the arms of the hero, and, in presence
ef the kings and numerous followers, the bride gives and
receives the kiss of betrothal.
Brunhild sits opposite to them, aud weeps ; and on.
Gunther's asking the reason of her tears, she says that
she is weeping because Chriemhild has been given not to
a king but to a vassal. Gunther consoles her with the
promise, that some day he will tell her how it is for his
sisters happiness that he has given her to Siegfried,
The real reason of Brunhild's distress is, that she has
formerly been attached to Siegfried, and that her old love
is now reawakened. Hel-e, and here alone, in the whole
Kibelungenlied, do we find traces of more ancietit tradi-
208 The Attempt.
tions. Brunhild is one of the Walkyriae, or warrior maidens,
of the God Odin, who, by his powerful wand, has cast her
into a sleep, and as a punishment, surrounded her with
flames. Then approaches the powerful god of the sun
and of spring, Siegfried by name, who awakens the
imprisoned beauty from her trance, and espouses her.
But their happiness is short-lived; Siegfried parts for
ever from hie young bride, as the year leaves its spring
behind, to wed the summer, its second love.
This same legend, after undergoing great trans¬
formations, has survived until now in the form of the
tale of " The Sleeping Beauty," which the Germans call
Dornroschen, and which Tennyson has, with the wand of
poetry, again invested with the charm of novelty.
Brunhild is now conquered; but herjealousy is awakened,
and her spirit is untamed.    Even after her wedding, she
continues to fight with Gunther, who calls in the aid of
Siegfried to conquer her.     The sight   of Siegfried   in¬
creases her jealousy,  and her vindictive spirit resolves
on his death.     She engages Hagen, during a visit  of
Siegfried and Chriemliild to Worms, to do the  deed.    A
false rumour of war is spread, and all the heroes accoutre
themselves.   Before they go, Chriemhild beseeches Hagen
to protect hei* precious husband, and innocently betrays
to him that Siegfried is invulnerable, except in one place.
Hagen begs her to make a mark on Siegfried's garment
to show this one place, and she unsuspectingly does so,
thus   sealing  her husband's doom.    She sews  a  silken
cross on his garment just between the shoulders behind.
And now, instead of going to war, the men are invited to
a great hunt.     Siegfried and Chriemhild part sorrowfully
from  one another.    The hunt is over;   and the weary
huntsmen, arriving at a brook, seek to quench their thirst,
Siegfried stretches himself by the side of the brook, first
laying  aside his  weapons;   and  while  he  is   drinking,
Hagen seizes the hero's  own  lance, and pierces with it
the  cross  upon  his   back.     Siegfried,   feeling   himself
mortally wounded,   seeks  his weapons,   but  the   orafty
Hageu has removed them;   only his shield is at hand.
With this he deals heavy blows at his adversary, and
knocks him down.    Then his strength begins to waver,
and after a few words of scorn exchanged with Hagen,
he dies, with the name of Chriemhild upon his lips.    The
cruel Hagen is inhuman enough to leave the body  of
Siegfried before Chriemhild's window, so that she may
The Attempt. 209
see it when she rises in the morning. The sight of her
husband's bi)dy is almost maddening to her devoted
heart; and on the ceremony of the Bahrrecht being gone
through, Hagen comes forward and touches tlie body,
and the wounds bleed afresh at his touch. Chriemhild
now knows who is the murderer, and her whole being is
concentrated in the one thought of vengeance. She re¬
mains at Worms,—the scene of the beginning and the end
of her love,—leaving her only son to grow up without a
mother's care, so devoted is she to the memory of her
husband. To effect a reconciliation, her brothers present
her with the whole of the Nibelungen treasiire which
Siegfried had won, sending it in twelve waggons to
Worms. Chriemhild is reconciled to her brothers, but
not to Hagen, their vassal; that can never be. Slie
expends the newly acquired wealth in charity to the
poor. Hagen's jealousy is thus awakened ; and, fearing
that she will gain too many friends, he casts the treasure
into the Rhine. The frequent mention of red gold in this
part of the Lied, shows what weight was laid upon it in
those times, as its name was even identified with that
of a king : ring-giver, gold-spender, are ancient names
for a king. Here, too, we again stand on the threshold
of mythology. Gold was anciently held to be the pro¬
perty of subterranean powers, and from this the name of
the Nibelungenlied is taken. Nibelungen means the
sons of mist, and Nilflheim, the kingdom of mist, is, in
northern mythology, the name of the kingdom of death.
^Vhoever, therefore, gives himself up to the love of gold,
becomes subject to the spirits of the lower world, and
becomes a Nibelung, doomed to death ; and the treasure
is not destined to remain in the possession of men, but is
sunk into the Rhine, to be again claimed by subterranean
powers. Such a profound idea of the powers of nature
lies at the root of the northern mythology, and forms a
dark background, against which the figures of the ancient
epic are more clearly seen.
After thirteen years, Chriemhild marries Etzel, or Attila,
King of the Huns. Her one motive in this step is
vengeance, now the sole aim of her life. The story ends
dismally. Gunther, Gernot. and Giselher, the brothers
of Chricmhild, and her uncle Hagen, are all invited in
seeming friendship to the court of Etzel. After a few
days' stay there they are murdered. No one having dared
to take Hagen's life, Chriemhild seizes the sword of her
JULY 1874.
2 D
210 The Attempt.
husband and strikes oif his head. The old Hildebrand,
seeing this, says,-—" Such deeds shall not go unavenged,"
and immediately wounds Clixiemhild in the side, so that
she falls down dead. Thus ends this tale of life and love,
hatred and envy. As ■ full of passion as many more
modern tales, it has in part a deeper foundation in truth.
The three Burgundian kings, and also Dietrich and Attila,
are all real characters. The time of action reaches from the
year 451 to about the year 500. The best rendering of the
poem into modern German is that by Karl Simrock.
During the 14th and loth centuries, it was thought to have
been held in small repute; but, by degrees, twenty manu¬
scripts of it have been discovered in various places, so
that it must have been one of the most popular works.
Long before it was written dcnvu, it was in the mouths of
the peojjle, rendered familiar by travelling minstrels. An
edition of the Nibelungenlied, published by Miiller,
a teacher in Berlin, called forth from Frederick II. the
following adverse remarks:—" You have by far too
favourable an opinion of these things. In my estimation
they are not worth a shot of powder, and I would not
suffer tliem to bo in my library, but cast them out."
These words are to be seen in Zurich, in a glass frame,
forming a sad proof of the benighted condition, not only
of Frederick himself, but of thousands of others at that
period. Under the romantic school, the mind of Germany
Avas tlioroughly awakened to the value of these treasures,
and the researches which Freidrich von der Hagen began,
lave been pursued, with great success, by later scholars.
Procla.
( Jb he continued.)
Piss   'I jr s 10}?.
Whex it became known that a marriage was contemplated
between Miss Hyslop and Walter Langham, several astute
young men of his acquaintance decided that Langham
liad done not a bad thing for himself in securing Miss
Hyslop; which would seem to argue, that he had been
actuated by prudential motives, or at all events, that in his
position, there lay a clear advantage. Miss Hyslop was
a  lady of great worth, and handsome also;   but, then,
The Attempt. 211
imperatiye and decisive in manner and speech as she
was, she had no charm for Walter Langham, no grace in
his eyes. Miss Hyslop had thirty thousand pounds of
her own, with the chance also of inheriting another
fortune. Xow, although men are agreed to call gold
dross, filthy lucre, and other hard names, there are still
left some people, a few eccentric individuals here and
there, who have a favour for it; but Langham, of his very
nature, could never be of this number. So her money
had not influenced him, it had had no part in bringing
about the existing state of things. In truth, he had
simply drifted idly into this engagement, through want of
will and purpose; the same force had been at work
which settled most of Langham's actions—circumstances.
He had come to the town a young man not very well
known, and Mr. Hyslop, thinking well of and liking him,
had befriended him, helping him when it lay in his power,
and had, moreover, always made him welcome at his
house. The two young people, j^retty well dependent
on one another for entertainment upon the occasions that
Langham was there, had become great friends; and
finally, one evening as they stood under the rose-
mantled verandah, in the sweet dusk and hush of a
summer night, they had grown sentimental, and Lang¬
ham soon had spoken words which settled his future.
Partly the subtle influence of the hour and scene weie
to blame; and partly with his susceptibility to the
opinion in which he was held, Langham had felt instinc¬
tively that he was by no means regarded with aversion
by his companion. Again, Miss Hyslop had been that
evening unusually gentle and agreeable ; and all working
together, the poor fellow had got himself involved.—had
flung about himself a chain, which then in its new
assumption had seemed pleasant and easy to wear.
But as the days went by, that light chain came to
weigh more and more heavily upon him. Every week
he felt the tie, which he had forged so thoughtlessly on
that summer night, growing more intolerable. Oh,
terrible tongue ! most potent instrument for working woe,
why are we poor ignorant mortals left helpless with ye ?
The roses were gone, and snow held possession of the
earth, when, one evening in early winter, Langham, going
to dine with the Hyslops, was being slowly driven in his
cab through Hilbury. The roads were clogged and heavy,
so that his advance was exceedingly slow, yet he took the
212 The Attempt.
delay with a toleration rare and admirable,—human nature
haying its limits of endurance in a man on his way to
his beloyed's presence, and his dinner. But with time,
eyen that deliberate method of progression landed him at
his destination—a large house, set a few rods back from
tlie road, which road was known as Sumner Road, and
which house as Sumner House. In answer to the man's
pull at the bell, the gate swung itself open, apparently
without human interyention, in a manner quite in keeping
wath the still and shrouded scene, the ghostly cheerless-
ness of which Langham soon exchanged for the comfort
of a warm and bvilliantly-lit drawing-room.
The windows of that great room were now thrice
barricaded in defence from the cold; but were those
curtains, blinds, and shutters swept aside, it would haye
been seen that although the front of the house was
divided but by a very small territory from the common
road, the back commanded a fairly large garden; on to
which the principal rooms looked, and when in summer
the windows of the ground-floor sitting-rooms were open,
the verandah was almost regarded as a portion of them.
Langham came to hate that verandah, and cast quite a
grateful glance on the intercepting screens even now as
lie waited with his back to the fire; remaining in solitude
f)r a moment or two, and then the rustle of a silken
gown was heard, and Miss Hyslop stood before him,—
Miss Hyslop looking handsome and majestic, dressed in
a heavy, somewhat sombre dress. She was always so
clad; and her taste in thus arraying herself was indis¬
putable, for it resulted in a pleasing and harmonious
appearance. Langham himself would often watch her
approvingly as she swept across the room with erect
head, stately in her rich substantial robes. She was
handsome undoubtedly, but her beauty consisted wholly
in excellence of form, the element of grace was wanting
in face and figure.
They greeted one another quietly,—Miss Hyslop rarely
condescended to sentiment. She inquired about his day,
and told him the events of theirs, both remaining the
while standing before the fire. Even so simply talking,
their dissimilarity was patent, but in this fact, merely of
their unlikeness one to anotlier, was little to be deplored ;
it was in their relative feeling that the entanglement and
sad confusion rested. She laughed at him, dictated to him,
differed from him on every possible subject, and loved
The Attempt. 213
him. He behaved towards her with the utmost kindness
and ccmsideration, and rarely showed the profound
weariness that occupied his heart.
But on this special occasion they had not very long to
try one another, to agree or disagree, for presently a
servant brought in a note, which he handed to Langham
with the information,—" James said, sir, as messenger
said you must have it iramejiate."
Langham took the note, opened it, and having glanced
at the contents, inquired,—"Is James waiting? Ask him,
please, when it came."
" He mentioned, sir, d'rectly you had started," said the
man, closing the door.
" It's an awful worry, dear," said Langham in the most
cheerful voice, addressing himself now to Miss Ilyslop ;
" it is a summons I must attend to."
'' Oh ! impossible! who is it % What nice writing: it is
a lady's," exclaimed Miss Hyslop, looking with frankest
curiosity in the direction of the letter.
For reply, and for her satisfaction, he held the open
sheet of paper before her. She read in an instant every
word of the brief note :—" My dear sir, the child is worse
to-night, I fear; I should be greatly obliged if you would
call and see him. Regretting to trouble you so late, yours
very truly,—E. N. Coates."
" I see nothing very pressing there," said Miss Hyslop,
turning her gaze from the note to Langham's face. " But
should you feel obliged to go, after dinner we will —"
" I must go at once ;" he interrupted her to say. " I
did not think, dear, your rule was pleasure first, business
anytime."
" Nor is it," said Miss Hyslop quickly, anxious to
vindicate the soundness of her principles. " If the case be
serious, go by all means without delay."
Langham, having gained his point, declined in warmth,
" I do not know that I can do much, but they will be
looking anxiously for my presence ; people will beheve
that we doctors hold the threads of life in our hands."
" A much better and wholesomer belief than your belief
in no manner of doing being of much use."
" I hope, Katherine, no one can prove indifference or
neglect against me," he answered gravely. " I would not
hold so great a trust as I do to abuse it."
" I do not suppose so," she retorted ; " it is only your
way of talking, as thoiigh you held that everything in the
214 The Attempt.
world would come right, if we do not spoil the arrange¬
ments with meddling, and it exasperates me."
" All because I cannot"—think as you do, he was
going to say, but midway altered his speech, framing it
less personally—" because I cannot share the comfortable
conviction of some people, and believe that one is
indispensable to the world."
" But that is just it, one is indispensable to the world,—
or ought to be, so long as one is in it."
" That decides the matter," said Langham, smiling;
but he knew what her trouble was, what she was striving
to give expression to. For with his greater habit of
analysing emotion, he comprehended how they acted and
reacted upon one another; how her practical turn of
mind and intense energy had the effect of enfolding him
for the time being in a complete suit of quietistic opinions ;
and again, how his coolness and easy sentiments reacted
upon her, producing the more feverish eagerness and
activity.
" Who are these people ? " she enquired, as her eye
again fell on the note which had originated the late
discussion.
" I do not know much about them : Mrs Coates is a
widow, and terribly wrapped up in this sickly little
fellow. She came here to see what the air would do for
him ; they are in lodgings in Clarendon Place. She is
remarkably handsome," he answered, ringing the bell to
order his cab.
" Remarkably handsome ! " Miss Hyslop exclaimed, her
mind flying back jealously to the consideratit)n Langham
had expressed for her anxiety.
" Yes, something quite out of the common. You rarely
see such beauty," he replied, with the unguardedness of
supreme innocence.
"Ah! under such interesting circumstances, your con¬
cern is easily understood."
" Don't be absurd, Kitty! Do you know that she is
forty, if she is a day old, possibly more."
" Why did you not say so then at once." said she with
some irritation, conscious that she had been on the verge
of making herself ridiculous.
" I did not know that you were interested in the poor
lady's age, else I would have been prepared with reliable
information upon the subject," said he, enjoying his
advantage over his bride-elect, but peacefully disposed on
The Attempt. 215
the whole, in thankfulness for having got so easily off
duty for the night. " I think the cab must be waiting.
Make my excuses to Mrs. Hyslop."
" How soon can you be back, Walter ? "
" I shall be too late to return here, dear. I shall have
to put up with a bachelor's chop to-night."
" Nonsense, you must return," she said, resting her
hand upon his arm to detain him. " Your dinner shall be
laid for you in the morning room."
" Upon no account shall so much trouble be taken. I
will see you to-morrow."
" It will give no trouble; be back as quickly as you
can."
" Thank you, dear ; but I should be too long."
She still insisted though upon his return, and as usual
carried the day. Langham sighed and yielded, then made
his preparations for departing, while his victor issued her
final mandates.
CHAPTEE II.
Miss Hyslop was vexed and disappointed at Langham's
desertion, yet contrived nevertheless to make an excellent
dinner. He, meanwhile, had reached Clarendon Place,
and was entering the prim lodging-house parlour with
the indifference of a man thinking solely of his work, and
all unconscious that he was about to meet his fate. But
on his entrance his eyes were greeted with a vision of
such sweet and girlish loveliness, that he, expecting only
to find the staid figure of Mrs. Cootes, or a tenantless
room, was startled for an instant.
The fair apparition itself, however, quitted its seat at
the table, and advanced towards him, and immediately
the mystery of its occupancy was dispelled, "Mr.
Langham ?" He acknowledged his name, and the girl
went on,—" My sister, Mrs. Cootes, is expecting you; I will
call her."
But he had recovered his senses by this time, and felt
tempted to seek to detain the unknown beauty a minute
or two.    " Is the child worse % " he inquired.
" I think not," she answered. " I see no change, but
my sister believes there is some."
" She is too anxious, but it is a critical time with the
httle fellow."
That effectually arrested her ; the pretty innocent face
216 The Attempt.
saddened with the idea his words suggested, and she
asked with childish simplicity,—" Is he dangerously ill ? "
Langham explained to her that the present illness was
not so much, as it was the boy's delicate constitution
which made the case serious.
" Poor little Sidney !" she murmured, and the sweet
mouth and eyes looked none the less sweet for the gravity
resting on them. But Langham cast about to find some
consolation for the tender heart.
" We shall pull him through this, though," he said, " and
he will very likely be much stronger than he has ever
been."
She looked up comforted and radiant; at his confident
tone the sunshine was restored to the guileless face. " I
will see where my sister is," she said, smiling prettily and
frankly from the doorway, and then she was gone.
That was all; and next Langham had to attend to his
work, which he did, and in due time was back at Sunnier
House; but throughout the night there dwelt with him a
clearer recollection of those blue eyes and that sweet face
than was by any means necessary, considering that the
regal Miss Hyslop—and a very fair share of womanhood
she was too—was all his own.
And the w^orst of the matter was, that as time went
on, that fair image only took deeper hold of his
imagination. Not that his fancy, his sentiment for her,
was reared upon much tangible food, for on bis subse¬
quent visits to the house, he rarely saw more of her than
on that first occasion. He learnt her name—Helen Bath ;
sometimes won a sweet smile and a few gentle words;
sometimes had no more than a glimpse of the bright
young face; sometimes she was not visible at all,—
and these were marked as very dark days in his calendar.
Such was the scant fare upon which his love fed and
thrived.
Now, while he was thus preoccupied with another
woman, Miss Hyslop could hardly advance in his favour.
Indeed, he began in these days to be careless about many
attentions he had always yielded her. She was
aggrieved at these omissions, and he chafed more and
more under the yoke, so that they were often upon the
eve of a qviarrel, which hitherto had never, owing to the
completeness ot her love, and the soundness of his
temper, occurred. But at this time, when he felt daily
more rebelhous, and she  sat at home,  vexed and dis-
The Attempt. 217
appointed, a serious division seemed imminent. Not
that a ray of the truth dawned upon her,—she accepted
as a fact his plea of having "no time," and only
questioned its necessity. " No time!" she would
exclaim ; " of course you have no time, nor ever will have,
while you liave so little despatch in you. I can guess
how jo\i go mooning about your work, loitering and
talking on, and finally turning round on the doorstep to
ask the only question of importance."
" Of whom ? the footman or the housemaid, as the case
may be ?" In her speech had been the little grain of
truth which it is imparts bitterness. It was his weak
point : he was clever and an enthusiast in his art; but he
was a man of no business capacity, and he knew it.
So it was with a little more sharpness than usual that
he spoke.
" If you would profit by my remarks, instead of
criticising them, it would be of advantage to you and
myself," quoth she.
" Well, never mind, dear, you have energy enough for
both of us."
That " us," tliat association of themselves, always
struck as fresh sweet music upon her ears, and a soft and
tender expression came now into her eyes, and went not
unmarked by Langham. But she resumed his amend¬
ment with laudable perseverance; not her worst enemy
could have accused Miss Hyslop of ever neglecting an
opportunity of setting peojile right, or of using any ambi¬
guity or mistaken gloss of speech on such occasions;
but perhaps she was harder upon Langham than upon
anyone else,—harder, to cover the weak tenderness she
was conscious of feeling.
"You have energy enough if you would only use it ;
but you are so light-minded, you get absorbed in every
passing matter."
" Why should one take things so terribly severely'? I
cannot see."
"Life is short," she told him, as though it were a
fresh truth she had discovered; and many thousands of
human beings had not said it over with their lips, and
disbelieved it in their hearts—until its ending.
" So cme should go posting through it ^ I shall remem¬
ber. How different we are ! Do you know, dear, that
you and I ought to think one another perfect"?" he
added, sadly.
JDLT 1874. 2 E
218 The Attempt.
" Nonsense ! but be so, and I will give you all credit
for it."
" We are very unlike ! I think sometimes it would be
best for your happiness if I gave you up," said he, mak¬
ing a wild effort at freedom, as he would occasionally, in
his disquiet,—seizing a reed to knock off his strong
fetters.
•' Ridiculous! Besides, you are steadily improving
under my charge," Miss Hyslop made reply, with spirit,
yet a little startled at the dismal idea his words had
suggested ; and then she melted, being betrayed by the
mere thought of a separation, into unwonted sentimental-
ism. "Do I seem unloving and hard? you need never
doubt my regard though, dearest."'
'• I can never awaken her," thought he, " she has not the
smallest suspicion of the truth." He answered nothing ;
audibly, and she went on in her softest tones, " I know,
dear, that I am not always very pleasant—that I am
given to be too harsh ; but it is all outside, and I love
you—ah ! it is no use saying hftw truly. Be patient with
me for the sake of my faithful love," she said, trying to
smile, but her mouth was tremulous Avith emotion, and
her' eyelids drooped to hide her gathering tears. When
j\[iss Hyslop did unbend, her tenderness appeared most
pathetic, her humility was most touching.
What could Langham, remorseful at the scantness of
his own love, do, except lull her with kindly words, with
professions of aftection ? But as he walked home, he
wondered what would be the end of it. " I suppose the
farce must be played through now ; what a fool I was to
get into such a dilemma !"
Sometimes only were his reflections on the matter as
just as this last conclusion. At other times, he would
nurse a sense of his wrongs, and fall into reverie
about sweet Helen Bath. Ah! how blissful it would
have been had he been free to have sought her.
Surely it would not have been hard to have taught
so young and gentle a creature to have loved him,—,
in the interval he had considerably improved his
acquaintance with her. But he had a conscience,
and he would make no sign to Miss Hyslop, but
would see the play out; and if he went through his
part a little stiffly and formally, it must be remembered
that it was very credital)le in him to hold to the engage¬
ment he had so rashly made.    Ah I  many of us can make
The Attempt. 219
a sacrifice, can carry out a hard matter, but it takes
veritable generosity to go thrmigh with such with grace.
The end came, when least expected : an apparently
trivial circumstaijce brought it about. Langham and
^liss Hyslop were returning from a walk one bright
morning, when, as they were skirting the last square
before turning into the quiet road in which Sumncr
House was situated, they perceived advancing in their
direction the figure of a slight young girl. No need for a
second glance at the countenance for Langham to make
sure of that blossom-like face; and it was noticeable
enough, in its youthful loveliness, to arrest Miss Hyslop's
attention. A little enthusiasm even was kindled in her
practical mind, and manifest in her tones, as she exclaimed,
" What a beautiful girl." By this time they had got
level with her, and the pretty creature had bowed to
Langham, and smiled one of her radiant smiles, with the
same innocent frank gladness of exj)ression with which a
child might recognise a friend, and had passed on.
"Who is she, Walter?"
" She is a ]\Iiss Bath."
Helen Bath it was, looking as fair as a rose, with the
blue eyes shiniug from exercise, and the pretty pink flush
deepened with the fresh cool air.
" Bath, Bath; I don't recollect the name. Where have
you met her ? " said Miss Hyslop, turning looks of simple
enquiry upon Langham; but something in his expression
she straightway distrusted. "Who is she, Walter?" she
asked peremptorily, in sharpened accents.
The colour Avas mounting steadily in his face ; he was
conscious of it, and answered irritably,—" I don't know ;
how can I tell ? I have seen her in a house where I have
a patient,"
" Walter, there is some mystery about that girl. You
have betrayed your own secret."
" There is no mystery nor secret, Katherine."
" Why deceive me ? "
" I am not deceiving you; Miss Bath and I are very
slightly acquainted even."
Miss Hyslop kept silence, an ominous silence ; but by
this time they had reached the gate, and Langham
calmed himself to bid her farewell. "No," said slie>
otherwise ignoring his outstretched hand ;  " come in,"
" I wished to speak to you," she said, when they had
gained the refuge of the drawing-room; and by her manner
220 The Attempt.
Langham knew that a storm was brewing. He made no
attempt to avert it, perhaps, did not even wish to avert
it.     '* Now, tell me all."
" Tell you all what ? I don't know what it is you wish
to know."
" I want to know about that girl," she persisted.
" Miss Bath ? " said he. " I will get up her bi igraphy for
your satisfaction. I have no doubt she will be only too
glad to furnish the necessary data when she learns that
Miss Hyslop honours her by being curious respecting her
history."
She made an effort at self-control, although stung by his
mocking tone. " Don't make me angry I Don't be foolish,
AValter; the happiness of both ot us may be at stake.
This is not an entirely fresh thought of mine ; somehow
this occurrence flashes back a light upon the past, and
makes clear a good deal which puzzled me, and 'which,
perhaps, I gave too little heed to,—too little heed to,"
she repeated mournfuhy.
" Don't let us talk any more about it, Katherine," said
he, smitten to the heart by something in her tone ; " a
trifle ouglit not to divide us after all these months."
" Better   get  right  late   than   never.      Look   at   me,
Walter,   and tell the whole truth,—in mercy to   me, in
mercy to us all, the whole truth.    Do you love that girl?*
and have you ceased to love me 1"
He'had better have spoken out at once, and for all; but
his weak and tender heart failed him, and he equivocated,—
" How strange and mistrustful you are, Katherine. In
what do I not satisfy you I "
" Walter, Walter," she said, smiling slightly and pain¬
fully, " it is your Avay ; but what is the use of crying-
peace, peace, where there is no peace ? Speak out! this
suspense is hard to bear," she went on in quickened,
trouble-laden accents ; her awakening seemed as thorough,
now that it was come, as it had been slow in its approach.
" Speak out, and save us both misery. Did you never love
me ■?    Answer me; answer quickly."
She was gazing up, with eager eyes reading every
varying shade of emotion as it swept over his face. At
this last appeal his head drooped, and he turned away to
avoid looking at her, as he slowly gave his subdued reply.
" I think we made a great mistake."
There was a chair near,—instinctively she sought for it,
and sat down, as one who had suffered a blow and was
The Attempt. 221
hurt.    Presently she lifted her two  hands, and in them
hid her face.
Langham watched her with mute concern and self-
reproach. Afrer a few minutes of such watching he ven¬
tured to touch her, and gently to clasp one arm. At that
she shivered all over, and at last spoke to him. " Go! "
she said, speaking hoarsely, " go ; I will see you to¬
morrow."
So dismissed, he turned away, and without attempting
word of remonstrance or farewell, took his way slowly
and with careful stillness from her presence.
Once outside the house, he could pause to collect his
thoughts. AVell, it was all over, and he had his freedom,
without seeking on his part, or the shadow of dishonour ;
he had his freedom, and yet he was not altogetlier happj'.
Ah! wliich of us having his heart's desire, finds it altogether
what he anticipates. Then suddenly, as he pursued his
Avay, there swept across his mind's sight a fair blossom¬
like face, with innocent blue eyes, but he thrust back the
tempting vision. Then, fresh from the presence of the
woman whom he had wronged—no, hardly wronged ; the
woman Avho had suffered through himself, he could not
straightway revel, even in fancy, in the smiles of another.
Only, somehow, while meditating with due remorse and
penitence on that lonely figure sitting, in its silent misery,
on the chair beside the hearth, there would intrude a
passionate, tumultuous gladness, that now he might seek
fairly and honourably, and might win for his own, that
other fair, sweet Helen Bath.
The morrow came, bringing the inevitable interview
which both dreaded, but which Miss Hyslop had awaited
"with a sort of impatience. In the interval she had passed
tlirough various phases of feeling, but perhaps the reign¬
ing sensation was one of indignation ; and this was her
frame of mind when, about noon, Langham was announced.
She felt indignant with him, but she reserved the chief of
her wrath and contumely for poor innocent Helen, and
before their council had proceeded very far, she had said
some hard things of her. Now Langhom had come pre¬
pared to soothe her, to heal, as far as might be, the wound
to her self respect, but the line she took made him angry,
and he forgot generosity, and was chiefly intent upon
shielding Helen.
" Then you mean to say," she said, wlien she was
beginning to   comprehend that Helen liad small share,
222 The Attempt.
and that an innocent one, in the issue of this business.
" Then you mean to say you do not care for her."
" No," he answered, '' I do not mean to say that, for I
do love her, like my own life ; but I tell you tlie truth, the
actual truth, in saying that no word of k)ve has passed
between us."
She scanned him curiously, then curled her lip, and
said half scornfully,—" You are very far gone indeed,
Walter." Afterwards she added, in a different voice,—
" I suppose, if the whole were known, you never- cared
forme?"
" I think we were unsuitod one to another."
" That is no answer. \Yere you once sincere ? " she
asked, with quiet pertinacity.
" Why do you drive me to it, Katherine? I mistook
my own feelings for a time, I believe."
" What an injustice you did me! And you would have
gone on and completed the wrong "
" I regret it bitterly, Miss Hyslop; more bitterly than
you can do."
She smiled to herself, and held out her hand in token of
ftirewell.
•' Forgive me, at least."
" Oh ! I forgive you, if I have anything to forgive,"
she said coldly; and then the colour came rushing into
her face, and burned there with an inward struggle going
forward. "Walter, I hope you will be happy; she looked
an innocent little amiable creature; not good for"—the
queer honesty or perversity of the woman put in,—"not
good for much use, or wear perhaps, but an innocent little
amiable creature. I hope you will be happy,—I hope,"
she concluded after a short pause, speaking with great
sweetness, " I hope you will both be happy."
Well done ! Miss Hyslop.
CHAPTER III.
Although Katherine Hyslop had so clearly taken for
granted, and so plainly inferred his irresistibleness,
Langham was to speed none too successfully with his new
wooing.
He had the grace to take no step for a short while in
the direction of the new love; giving the three days
immediately following upon the foregone conversation to
the due mourning and decent bmial of his old love.    But
The Attempt. 223
these expired,—his conscience permitted him to pay a visit
in Clarendon Place.
His heart beat high as he ascended the staii-s. It was
impossible not to feel exultingly glad ; not to be conscious
that his position towards Helen Bath was a new one ; not
to wonder how it would feel to be free to note all the
grace and sweetness of the pretty young creature ; to give
himself up to the charm of her innocence; to resign his
imagination unchecked to the witchery of her sunny
smiles. Thus his heart beat high with expectation, as he
neared her presence,—but once more a surprise awaited
him on the opening of that door.
He found the number of the members of the little
household augmented by the addition of a tall fair young
man, who was commended to his attention as " Mr.
Mattox." Concerning this alien addition, Langham
quickly, with a little observation, conceived something of
his relation towards them. He was helped to this con¬
clusion by his own feverish passion and jealous regard ;
but some subtle change in Helen, her brightened colour,
her quickly drooping eyes, and a sort of tender agitation
or subdued excitement of manner, gave room for mistrust.
But he would leave the matter in no doubt, he would
put an end to suspense. So presently, when the obnoxious
young man, who had come so early and so suddenly to
dispel his dream, had made off on the plea of " post,"
Langham found an opportunity of taking Miss Bath aside;
and then and there declared his passion.
" I know I have no right to speak in this sort of way
to you, Miss Bath ; but if you would only give me a word
of hope. Suspense is very hard upon one : I do not expect
an answer, but if you would only give me a word of hope
to hve on."
Miss Bath was looking fixedly at him, with the most
disconcerting blue eyes of calm wonder; she offered not
the least remark, and he went on.
" You are thinking I ought not to have spoken," the
poor fellow resumed, very much in earnest, and very
much in love, despite somewhat of a failure in eloquence ;
and Miss Hyslop would have wondered, could she have
heard the tongue which had made such fluent love to her,
go stumbling over the sentences. " You are thinking
I ought not to have spoken, I have known you such
a short time ; but I could not keep silence longer. If you
would give me one word of hope, a single word of hope
224 The AttemjA.
I have not known you very long, but all that time I have
loved you."
" Oh hush ! you do not mean it," said she, raising her
hand also to enjoin silence. " Do not go on ; oh, I am
so sorry."
" If there is no one else, give me a chance, that is all
I ask. Let me try and win you ; have some mercy. I
have taken you by surprise, I will wait."
" No, Mr. Langham, it is best that I should explain to
you at once. I hope I am not to blame for this. \V e
looked upon you as a friend : you were so good to poor
little Sidney, we can never be grateful enough to you,
I hope I have not misled you in this way ; but you know
sometime I am to be married to—to Mr. Mattox; not for
a long while, not for ages,"—she put in as an important
extenuating circumstance,—" but still, still sometime it
will be," and then she flushed up crimson and finished.
" That is enough. Miss Bath ; do not put yoiu'self to
the pain of saying anything more; I thank you for
being so candid.    Good-bye."
" Good-bye," said she, putting out her hand, and
raising her lovely eyes over-brimmiug with tears. " I am
so sorry."
Miss Hyslop was avenged.
She never married; but whether that were due to a
cherished remembrance of the blighted romance of her
youth ; or that she never had leisure enough in her busy
life for an undertaking of such frivolity as matrimony,
does not appear.
Probably the latter, for she was a woman of many
hobbies, which she exercised well; but she was also
a woman of much influence and helpfulness; in part
through her abimdant means, but in a greater degree
from weight of personal character. A warm friend to
many, Langham's wife and cliildren (when in due time,
after all his misadventin-es, he secured those advantages)
had no better friend than Miss Hyslop. She was far
from being unhappy; it was but a slight dift'erence.
In the one career she would have been despot of a small
realm; in the other, she held a mild presidential sway
over a wide republic.
Sara.
The Attempt. .     225
g utn  ;in (I  Jillt  in  i r^£ s s.
Is it the Duty of Woman to Pay Great Attention to Dress ?
This question, which was answered in the negative in the
preceding number of this Magazine, is, we think, possibly
more fitted to call forth an answer in the affirmative.
If such an answer can enable us to look at an
old practice in a new light, we shall undoubtedly gain
something by it. The question seems plain enough
at first sight, yet it is metaphorical. " Is not your
very attention, says Carlyle, a stretching to ? " Tliat is, a
figurative leaning over to examine an object, in order to
obtain a thorough knowledge of it. But this meaning is
merely preliminary to that which the word has gradually
acquired. It has come to apply also to the course of
acti(m to be adopted towards an object which we have
previously examined. And thus, as in the case of many
other words, its primary has been merged in its secondary
meaning. The word as it stands in the above question,
gives an emphatic illustration of its modified meaning.
If it be the duty of woman to pay great attention to dress,
woman is surely doing that duty very well, if we take
the word attention to mean a series of actions with regard
to dress. But, if we take the word in its primary significa¬
tion, the answer is not so satisfactory. How often is dress
bought and worn without any previous examination of its
use and suitability? Forethought is a great economiser of
time : five minutes of it will often save hours of labour.
And thus, great attention may be paid by means of a great
effort of mind, extending over a short space of time. The
plan is made by the master mind; it remains for paid
workers to carry it out. The degree of attention of this
kind is sure to find its equivalent in the resulting degree
of perfection ; and if women are to think of their dress at
all, why should they not do so thoroughly, deeply, and
practically ?
At this stage of the inquiry, we are met by the word
duty. Does that " divine messenger and guide " acknow¬
ledge this matter to be under his sway ? Has duty at
any time hinted to us, that we are to consult him on the
subject? Yes;—and on our taking or not taking these
hints, hinges all the difference between the true and the
false in dress.
But the  question contains something more :   it is a
JOLT 1874. ^  F ,
226 7'he Attempt.
question of the day. /*■ it our duty, at the present day
in particular, to attend to this matter? Yes, for many
reasons. There are great abuses in the matter of dress.
Nature and art are, in many cases, alike neglected in it.
Many pay it great attention, it is true, but of the wrong
kind, and in the wrong kind;—that is, in action regarding
it, with no earnest thought beforehand. Such persons
are changing themselves into clothes-screens, as Carlyle
calls the devotees of dress. In them, as in the dandy
whom he describes, " the immortal is sacrificed to the
perishable, eternity is blent and identified with time, but
in the reverse order."
Ill almost nothing are we greater slaves to custom than
in dress, and it requires thought, insight, and courage, to
discover and to rectify the mistakes that we and others
have made in the matter. AVhile there are many who
would do well to divert their already great attention to
dress into another and a truer channel, there are, on the
other hand, not a few who have not yet had their judg¬
ment convinced that such attention is in any great degree
necessary, or binding upon them as a duty.
Woman, they say, is coming more to the front in the
battle of life ; the widening of her existence by varied
culture must also widen her influence. " While taking a
governing part in the education of her country, and
having a voice in its- legislature, she must also lend a help¬
ing hand to those benighted creatures, who, on far distant
shores, are yearning for a share in European civilisation,
and in the blessings of Christianity."
If, then, she is indeed to come to the front, and to take
such a conspicuous place, I think it is all the more neces¬
sary that she should be properly dressed. If she is to take'
part in politics, she must be aware of the " individuality,
distinctions, social polity," given us by dress, and of the
influence it exerts in political economy. If she is to lend
a helping hand to pining barbarians, she must also offer
them a type and an example of one of the victories of
civilisation over barbarism, namely, the substitution of
tlie useful and the artistic combined, for the " painting
and tattooing which supply to barbarous men their first
spiritual want, namely, decoration."
These objectors may again come forward with the
remark, that woman (representative woman they mean,
evidently), cannot afford to give much time or thought to
what is comparatively vain and frivolous.
77ie Attempt. 227
I answer, Is attention to dress a vain and frivolous
pursuit? Is it not even more essential to a representa¬
tive, typical, improved woman, than to her dear, amiable,
humdrum sister? In its narrow and self-centred aspect,
decidedly it is frivolous ; but in its wider and world-
regarding aspect, it is certainly not so.
This aspect will be best seen by looking at dress,— first,
with regard to some of its essential characteristics.
Carlyle's clothes-philosopher tells ns that all clothes are
emblems. " Clothes, from the king's mantle downwards,
are emblematic of a manifold cunning victory over want."
He then goes on to tell us that all visible things are but
emblems of things invisible : man himself is an emblem ;
his body is the clothing of his divine Me. " Language is
the clothing of thought;" and, carrying this train of
ideas to its utmost limits, the Earth-spirit in Faust calls
Nature, the living, visi/de garment of God.
" 'Tis thus at the roaring loom of Time I ply,
And weave for God the gamient thou seest him by."
After dilating for some time on this sublime philosophy
of clothes, the philosopher stops short, leaving to each
reader to glean fjr himself, from the chaotic heap of hints
thrown out in the book, some intelligent system of thought
and practice.
And surely we have gleaned now, if we had not done
BO before, the belief that visible man is the emblem of
the spirit that animates him. Sometimes he is only a
mask, to waylay all tokens of that spirit; but in his true
state, he is its emblem. Such a thought cannot but
inspire him with self-reverence. Supposing that nature has
done her wonderful part in always putting the right soul
into the right body, man has his meaner part to perform
in providing that body with a suitable dress, of which the
inner soul may have no reason to feel ashamed. As the
human being in his elemental form is a thing of beauty,
and every woman, hoM-ever unlovely, should give nature
credit for some elemental ideas in her creation, she must
strive to clothe that form in such a way. as not to mar
the lines of beauty, nor to distort its expression.
Some of Coleridge's remarks on beauty might be trans¬
lated into a whole chapter of rules for dress. " Beauty,"
he says, " includes, in its most comprehensive sense,
expression and artistic interest. These are referred to
two elements, viz., lines and colours. The first belongs
to shapely (forma, formalis, formosus), thus  to law ; the
228 The Attempt.
second to lively, free, spontaneous, self-justifying. Recti¬
lineal lines are lifeless, cycloidal express function; these
are the language of nature."
The idea of dress having any expression may perhaps
excite a smile; but if lines and colours can produce
expressi(^n, and even interest, we have both, ready to be
disposed of at our will. There is no garment more
expressive than a Spanish cloak; it can vary its folds to
suit the mood of its wearer, and express every note in
the scale of feeling—from the deepest grief to the highest
exultation. It can give artistic interest too,—veiling its
wearer in mystery; making the stout man seem slender,
the short man tall. Why should not the representative
woman of the present day adopt some such garment as
the Spanish mantle or the cloak of Boadicea? She might
hold her pamphlets concealed in it, as Boadicea held her
dagger, and veil in mystery fi-om the vulgar gaze that
countenance lit Avith passion from a heart that beats in
unison with the pulses of mighty empires. And would
she not glory in a garment, which in its cut would need
no alteration,—in its adjustment, only very moderate
attention ?
For all, however, whether they are typical beings or not,
dress has a double function to perform, viz., to express
us physically and mentally; if possible, it should do so
artistically too. The lines should reverently copy nature,
hinting at, not contradicting, her graceful curves. The
colours may express the tone of mind,—whether gay and
lively, or gloomy ^iid Puritanical; soberly dutiful, or
ardent and impulsive.
But it may be objected, that in order to attain to such
perfection of taste in dress, we must study it as an art,
and that such a study would be a waste of time. Pro¬
ficiency in any high art will render comparatively easy
one so low down in tlie scale as dress. According to
the theory of Comte, " the arts may be classified by the
decreasing generality and increasing intensity, which
involves also increasing technicality, of their modes of
expression." Comte places poetry in the first rank,
because it is the most general and the least technical.
We suppose that the word general applies to the subject
dealt Avitli, the word technical to the manner in which it
is dealt witli, by the art. Music comes second, being
equally general with poetry, hut having more technicality.
Next in the scale comes painting, then sculjpture, and
The Attempt. 229
then arcliitecture. Dress certainly possesses the virtue
of being general, but in a very material way ; and its
technicality is so great, that it must inevitably rank very
low among the arts. Its only prospect of rising is by a
decrease in technical uniformity, and a corresponding
increase in artistic individuality. And this can never be
accomplished unless reflective and able minds arc willing
to devote to it some considerable share of time and
thought.
Why should they not do so ?    The still lower art of
cookery   is   having   its   whole   system   expanded   and
improved by  the  energetic efi"orts of Lady  Barker  and
others.     The stimulus given by the school  for  cookery
which they have founded,  Avill not die away until its
effects have been felt in every part of Great Britain.    It
would be a great benefit could a similar training-school
be   formed,   not  for  milliners  and  dressmakers,  but for
dress inventors.    Some prospect of escape we might then
have from the tyranny of ignorant fashion.    These drcss-
inventors might be  taught the elements  of design and
colour, with their adaptability to various specimens of the
genus humanum.     Ought they not also to acquire some
knowledge of anatomy, in order that they might design
shoes  and  other  pieces of dress  which  would  not   be
injurious  to   the   human   frame ?     After   having   gone
through the necessary course of instruction, they might
receive certificates of merit, with the permission to practice
their art.    These functionaries ought certainly to exist
both  as men and  women; for men also, at the  {)resent
day, would not suff"er from a  good deal of attention paid
to their dress.    Could they only know how refresliing it
would  be  to  ladies,  and   to   all  artistic people,   to   see
them walking about in   a Vandyke costume, or in any¬
thing  not   hideous,   they  would   certainly  adopt  some
alteration without loss of time.    To return to the dress-
functionaries above mentioned.    Their duty would be, in
return  for  a  small  consulting fee, to  plan  for any in¬
dividual, who had neither leisure nor invention to devise
his own dress, an artistic and thoroughly suitable toilet, in
which he might mirror himself forth, body and soul, to the
admiring gaze of a public, daily becoming more apprecia¬
tive from the increase of opportunity.    Need I say that
these useful individuals must also have some knowledge
of the human mind and heart ?
Second. The accidental characteristics of dress may be
230 The Attempt.
of use in throwing hght upon it in its wider aspect. One
of these characteristics is fashion,—caused mainly by the
love of novelty and the desire to excel. A new fashion
would remain for ever absurd and fantastic, were it not
for tlie diversity of taste produced by the association of
ideas.
Thus the accidental circumstance of fashion is the
means of forming our taste for the moment, and the mode
in which it influences us, is mainly determined by the
elegance of those by whom the fashion has been adopted.
In the case of those who are rough and inelegant, the
incongruity which we perceive to exist between their
persons and their apparel is enough to disgust us with
the new style of dress which we see them wear. The
sceptre of fashion is thus wielded by those who are
elegant in appearance and manner. Let us hope that
they may, in the future, wield it more Avisely than they
have hitherto done.
In spite of many faults and absurdities, costume has
improved greatly in Britain since the time of Boadicea,
with her coloured tunic and torque of gold ; nay, even
since the time of Queen Anne. The Saxon gunna or gown,
which the Normans called a robe, has, by its shortness,
gained in practical perfection, though it has lost iu beauty.
But the long robe will never become extinct. The
bonnets of the present day, though much abused for
their size, are much less deserving of ridicule than the
horned head-dresses of the time of Henry V., and the
steeples or fontanges which adorned the female head in
the days of Edward IV. It is thus a great mistake to
fancy that, by copying ancient forms, whether Greek or
Roman, or old English, we should attain to greater per¬
fection in dress. Past generations have not saved us the
trouble of thinking on this subject, any more than on
any other. Excessive attention to dress seems to have
prevailed equally in bygone times. Of the want of atten¬
tion to it we hear less, though it is upon the whole a
more unusual quality. Great attention of the right
kind, was, and remains still, the most unusual of all.
Do the remarks which we have now made upon dross
in its wider aspect, in its essential and accidental qualities,
throw any light upon attention to it as a duty ? If they
tend to self-respect and regard for others, they do. Two
moral qualities such as these are necessary to real per¬
fection in the art of dress.
Tlie Attempt. 231
Self-respect can never permit us to despise externals,
nor to ignore their importance. The mission of art is to
transcend reality, not by spurning it away, but by making
eternity shine through time, and spirit through symbol.
She therefm-e, who, "thinking little of dress, is occupying
herself solely with religion, benevolence, intellectual and
artistic pursuits," is, though a praiseworthy, yet an incom¬
plete human being ; because, in attending to the soul, 'she
is neglecting the body, the soul's emblem, and dress, the
emblem of both. The shabby careless dress of the pious
and benevolent, is often a means of shocking the artistic
soul, who would fain be of their number, and placing in an
unfavourable light their noblest efforts. Thought and art
have also a tendency to abstract the mind, and make it
indifferent to dress. Such abstraction we may forgive,
nay even admire, in a man. But woman, alas ! meets with
no pity if she falls into these habits ; for it is of the essence
of womanhood to be carefully dressed. And is it not for
tliis, in part, that she has been endowed with quicker per¬
ceptions and truer instincts than man, that she may be
able, on all occasions, to perceive quickly, and to carry out
perfectly into details, the ideas of beauty and of fitness.
Regard for others is, or ought to be, an equally strong
motive with self-respect. Coleridge tells us that " refined
pleasures have, by the fficility in the means of their enjoy¬
ment, a pre-eminence over all others; but when we bring
in moral feeling, a larger sweep of thoughts will ac¬
company the enjoyment, which will thus become more a
pleasure of the whole being." The sight of perfectly
ordered and tasteful dress is, without doubt, a refined
pleasure, yet one of such a kind, that its contemplation
should take place in an almost insensible manner, so as
not to draw away our thoughts from higher occupations.
We should like it—in harmony, in tone of colour, in grace¬
ful lines—to be to us, in a lower degree, what a true
picture or a noble strain of music is,—something that
satisfies our idea of the pure and the true in colour and
in tone. And our wishing it to be so, is a moral reason
why the wearer should make it so. Yet it is even more
to us tlian this.
A picture represents to us a distant scene, perhaps,
with something of the artist's own thought and feeling
thrown into it. if he be a true artist; and a strain of music,
too, must, by the spirit of melody, prove itself to be allied
to the sister spirit of feeling.   Yet these are distant scenes,
232 The Attempt.
and fictitious or bygone feelings, and their influence is
not so great as that of one or more people in whose
society we are at the moment. Our companions speak,
they smile, they frown, or look sad,—and instantaneous
echoes of these moods arise in our breast. So powerful
is the spell of society, that everything about it must
influence us. Its dress cannot fail to do so. Are we with
a person dressed from a purely utilitarian point of view %
Our artistic eye is pained, and roves around dissatisfied.
Or is it a votary of fasliion % The result is still less edify¬
ing. Or is it a nun or a quaker ? She is too bizarre to
])lease us altogether; though we admire her neatness, we
shrink from her peculiarity.
Something is wrong in morality, as well as in taste, in
the dress of all these persons. Setting their particular
errors aside, the general error among women is, that they
are too self-regarding; they forget that they dress more
for others than for themselves,—their dress is more seen
by others than by themselves, and thus it cannot fail to
form a constant source of either pleasure or dissatis¬
faction.
Those who wish to study in detail the moralities of
dress, and the practical remedies for the mistakes of
fashion, will find these subjects exhaustively and
amusingly treated in an article in St. PauVs Magazine for
January 1873, by M. E. Haweis.
The foregoing remarks may now condense themselves
into the following: If we love our neighbours and our¬
selves truly and intelligently, that love will not fail to
show the degree of its intensity even in the article of
dress. Great attention to dress for the sake of others,
as well as for our own, cannot fail to put an end to all
vanity, and to give this subject its true position, both in
our own opinions and in our practice.
Procla.
A Prize is offered for the best Poem appearing in the August,
September, or October number of The Attempt.
The Attempt. 233
%\\t (BarIII (Bjjics jj{ djjjrmani).
III. Old Period : from the Middle of the Twelfth to
the Middle of the Fourteenth Century—continued.
First Classical Period, 1190-1300.
G U D R U N.
Of the third, or East Gothic cycle of tradition, with
Dietrich of Bern for its hero, we have two smaller epics,
dating from the thirteenth century; namely, Ecken
Ausfart, or the Adventures of a Knight named Ecke, and
King Laurin. The first of these is compiled in what is
called the Berner Ton, a strophe of thirteen lines, in a
rapid and lively metre, and contains, in its traditions
of giants, some passages of real poetic merit. The story
is simply that the giant Ecke, hearing of the great
exploits of Dietrich, resolves to sally forth against him,
and is slam by him in single combat. The poem is still
extant in the form in which it appeared in the thirteenth
century, and in which, until the seventeenth century, it
still remained in the mouths of the people. The
other. King Laurin, is a story of dwarf life in Tyrol.
Laurin, a king of the dwarfs, had a garden enclosed by
a silken thread instead of by a wall. Whoever dared to
break through this thread was doomed to have hand and
foot cut off. Dietrich resolves to attempt it, and is
cast into prison by Dietlieb of Stiermark, a compulsory
vassal of the dwarf. He escapes, however, conquers the
dwarf, and carries Laurin captive to Bern or Verona.
This romance furnished Fouque with the subject of his
romance of the Magic Ring; almost the only German
romance which enters thoroughly into the life and
feelings, joys and sorrows of the Middle Ages.
We come now to the northern cycle of tradition, which
has its scene on the shores of the North Sea, in Friesland,
and which boasts of the only other poem worthy to be
placed side by side with the Nibelungenlied, viz., Gudrun.
These are both epics of the highest order, woven out of
the oldest and grandest traditions, which have owed their
origin to the depths of the deepest minds. Yet we
must keep in view that these were as yet barbarian minds,
and were inspired by nature with a wonder and an awe
ACODST 1874. ^  Q"
234 The Attempt.
which ignorance fanned into a flame of blind and undis-
criminating adoration. The story of Gudruu embraces
three generations, and runs as follows:—
Hettel, king of Friesland, wishes to marry Hilda, the
daughter of llagen, king of Ireland, and sends ambassadors
to woo her. The ambassadors are Horant, Frute, and Wate.
AVate, after his arrival, is seated in a room with the queen
and her daughter, when they ask him, in jest, whether
it is more agreeable to him to sit beside ladies, or to fight
in open battle? He answers, unthinkingly, it is good
to sit in the presence of beautiful ladies, but much better
and pleasanter to fight in the thick of the battle. Then
the queens laugh aloud, and ask if this man has wife and
child at home ? Thus the wooing begins to find favour ;
and in the evening, Horant sings so beautifully, that the
royal maiden says, "Dear flither, bid him sing once more."
And again, the next evening, he raises his voice so that it
sounds clearer than bells; and while his song was heard,
the labourer ceased to work, the sick no longer felt their
sickness, the cattle in the forest left their pasture, and
the worms in the grass, and the fish in the wave, ceased
their restless wanderings. And the singer gains the
maiden for him who has sent him to woo her, and she
steals aAvay, goes with him to the ship, and becomes
the wife of Hettel.
Their children are Ortwin and Gudrun. The latter
is wooed by Hartmut, the son of a Norman king;
but an old enmity between the races destroys the
success of his suit, and Herwig, the king of See-
land, \vins the love of the fair Gudrun. She is be¬
trothed to him; but soon afterwards, her father and
her betrothed, having gone, on a warlike expedition
to a great distance, the Norman Hartmut, with his
father Ludwig, comes and carries off Gudrun. Her
father and lover pursue them, and overtake them at an
island in the North Sea. Here a bloody fight ensues,
during which Hettel is killed ; and Wate, enraged at the
fate of his master, makes a new sunset after the sunset in
the sky has disappeared, by means of swift strokes of the
sword on the helmets of his enemies. Meanwhile, the
darkness of the night causes friend to attack friend, and
the combat is decided. During the night, the Normans
fly with their prey; the king's daughter is threatened
with immediate death in the waves if she suff"ers a
cry of complaint to escape  her.     No forces are left to
The Attempt. 235
pursue the enemies, and Wate is forced to return in
silence to the forsaken castle, which he has so often
entered with shouts of victory. " Where is my dear
lord? Where are his friendsf" asks Queen Hilda in
dismay, on seeing Wate re-enter so silent, and Avith his
shield hewn in pieces. " I will not deceive you; they are
all slain," is the short answer of the stahvart hero.
" Wheu the children of the countrys are grown up, then
will come the time of vengeance for Ludwig and Hartmut."
Sadly Gudnm gazes on the coast of JS'ormandy, and
the castles on the sea-shore. The old king says Iviudly,—
"If thou,,noble maiden, wilt wed Hurtmut, all that thou
belioldest shall be thine." But Gudrun answers,—" Sooner
tlian wed Hartmut, 1 will die. Had it been so ordered
Avliile my father lived, it might have been ; but now 1 will
rather yield up my life than break my troth." She spoke
in earnest, and the fierce Norman commander became so
angry, that he seized her by the hair, and threw
her into the sea. Theieupon Hartmut sprang into
the sea, and drew her by the hair again into the ship.
The mother of Hartmut, named Gerlinde, receives
Gudrun kindly at first, but when slie finds that persuasion
is of no use with the maiden, she proceeds to threats and
violence. Slie who ought to wear a croAvn, must perform
the duty of the lowest servant, light tlie fire and wasli
linen on the sea-shore. T3ut her heart remains patient and
faithful, even through many years of humiliation and ill-
treatment.
At last the time comes when, in Gtidrun's native land,
an army can be raised for her deliverance. After a long
voyage the Frisian heroes reach an island, from tlie high
trees of which they can see the Norman castles. Gudvun,
as she has for years been used to do, goes to the shore
every day to wash linen, Avhen an angel in the form of a
bird appears to her to comfort her; and what comfort
does she ask for % To be delivered from servitude, and
from hard usage and blows, "Lives Hilda yet," she
asks, " the mother of poor Gudrun ? Is Ortwin my
brother yet alive? and Her wig, my betrothed? and
Horant and Wate, the faithful servants of my father,
do they yet live ? " Yet no hope of her escape; she
talks all day to her companions about the dear ones
at home. On her return to the castle she is upbraided
by Gerlinde for spending the whole day over her
washing; and the next morning, though a. deep snow
236 The Attempt.
has flillen dnring the night, she is obhged to go at dawn
barefooted throngli the snow to the wild sea-shore,to finish
her washing. On this very morning Ortwin and Herwig
come in a small bark near to the place where the king's
daughter, trembling with cold, her fair hair streaming in
the March wind, is occupied in washing. The two
wamors approach the maiden with a friendly greeting,
such as she has not heard for long, for dame Gerlinde is
sparing with her kind words. They do not recognise
Gudrun in her present mean attire, and learn from her, in
reply to their questions about the country and people,
that the country is well defended, and that the people
live in dread of only one enemy, namely, the Frisians.
During this long conversation the maiden stands trembling
with cold, and, on the warriors offering her their cloaks,
Gudrun answers,—" God forbid that any one should see
man's clothes upon me I " Then her brother Ortwin asks
if one Gudruu had not been caxried off and brought hither,
and Herwig repeatedly compares the features of the poor
maiden with those of his former bride ; he also calls Ortwin
by his name. " Ah," said Gudnm, if " Ortwin aud Herwig
still lived, they would long ago have come to release us; I
am one of those who were carried off; but poor Gudrun
has long been dead." Then the king of Zeeland holds out
his hand, and says, "If you are one of the captives, you
must know the ring that I wear on my finger; my name
is Herwig, and with this ring Gudrun was betrothed
to me."
Then the eyes of the maiden sparkle, and though she
would fain have concealed her servitude, yet she is
overcome. " Well do I know the ring, for once it was
mine; so do I also wear this ring that Herwig sent
to me." Yet the brother and the betrothed do not doubt
that she has long been Hartmut's wife, and are horrified
at her performing such menial offices. Wden they hear,
however, why she has for so many years had to perform
these duties, Herwig wishes to take her away at once.
Bvit this is not permitted. The manners of a time which
we think barbarous, are too severe and noble for that.
" What has been taken from me in war," replies Ortwin,
" I will not carry away secretly: rather than steal that
which I must win by the sword, I would, if I had a
hundred sisters, let them all perish here."
The two princes return to their fleet, and prepare to
attack the castle of the Normans.    Gudrun, in her joy at
The Attempt. 237
what had happened, and in glad expectation of being
saved by the hand of a hero, instead of washing the
linen, throws it into the sea. Gerliude's wrath is stirred
at this ; and, to escape blows, Gudrun consents to become
the wife of Hartmut, knowing very well that in the
morning, things will look very different.
When Herwig and Ortwin, on their return to the army,
proclaim the ill-treatment of Gudrun, the heroes all cry
out loudly against it, but AVate bids them serve the
king's daughter in another way,—by dyeing in red blood
the clothes that she has washed; and in the middle of
the night, by moonlight, the attack upon the castle is
commenced.
The morning star is still high in the heavens when one
of Gudrun's companions looks out at the window, and
sees the fields glistening with helmets and shields ; and
immediately the watchman cries out from the tower,—
" Ho ! ye brave heroes, to arms ; ye knights, to arms; ye
Norman heroes, up, ye have slept too long!" The figlit
begins; the Norman king, Ludwig, falls beneath the
sword of Herwig ; the wrathful Gerlinde would fain have
slain Gudrun for this, and already the sword gleams over
her head, when Hartmut, who sees from below the mur¬
derous purpose of his mother, nobly prevents the crime.
Hartraut is taken prisoner, and the angry Wate makes
his Avay into the female apartments to take vengeance
on Gerlinde. Gudrun w^ould fain prevent him, but in
vain; Wate finds out Gerlinde, and cuts off her head,
and that of a servant of Gudrun's, who had tormented
her mistress to please Gerlinde. " He knew," he said,
" how to manage women ; for that reason he was chamber¬
lain." Tlien follows the journey home, and a threefold
marriage takesplace,between Herwig and Gudrun, between
the Norman king Hartmut and flildburg, one of the
companions of Gudrun, and between Ortwin, Gudrun's
brother, and Ortrun, the daughter of the Norman king,
who alone had been kind to Gudrun, and comforted her
under her deep humiliation.
The character of gloom, which is so largely present in
the Nibelungenlied, is scarcely found at all in Gudrun.
Even the idea of a northern people dwelling on the sea-
coast gives an air of cheerfulness to it; and as we advance
into the story, we find the various characters very dis¬
tinctly marked. The constancy of Gudrun is the pearl of
the whole;   the  firmness  with   which  she   refuses   to
238 The Attempt.
become Hartmut's bride, and her patience in bearing the
privations and hardships to whicli she is subjected,—
these give to the story its chief interest Its happy
ending gave rise to a naive division of German heroic
poetry into two principal parts.—(1.) with a sad ending,
as >»'ibehmgen, etc.; (2.) with a happy ending, as
Gudrun, The promiscuous marriages at the end suggest
a decidedly confused state of mind in the heroes of the
piece; the wholesale slaughter of enemies may have so
dulled their ideas of meum and tuwn, that the son or
daughter of an enemy may have come to be considered a
suitable choice as a helpmate. The fault may, however,
have lain in the inventi.)n of the writers; having brought
the story so near to a close, the triple marriage may have
presented an easy and ready mode of finishing it. It
would have been more true to the course of the narrative,
and infinitely more effective, had the onlv marriage been
that between Herwig and Gudrun, and had the Norman
princess not consented to join her fortunes with those of
the man whose sword was stained with the blood of both
her father and mother.
The preservation of this second great epic is due to the
Emperor Maximilian I., who caused it, along with the
Nibelungenlied and a number of others, to be written out
on parchmeJit, and carefully preserved in the royal
library of Castle Ambras, in the Tyrol. The best modern
version of it is that of Keller; it is in the same metre as
the original, and will bear comparison with Simrock's
rendering of the Nibelungenlied. Yet even this ver¬
sion lacks much of the freshness and delicacy of the
original.
Three other short epics of the twelfth century complete
the number of the chief national epics of this period.
They are the stories of King Kother, King Otnit, and
Hug-and-Wolfdieterich. We shall not go into the details
of these stories, having already found ample specimens
of the national poetry of Germany in those wliicl) we
have more carefully studied. Siiffice it to say. that every
one of the poems, which have been mentioned, is the work
of one or more unknown authors, a fact sufficient of itself
to show that they have flowed out of the heart of the
nation. Of them the German Heldenbuch is composed,
containing all that is noble in ancient Saxon tradition.
Procla.
{To be continued).
Tlie Attempt. 239
^ XT 1 ^ r ft e.
The evening shadows darken, but enchantment fills the
night,
For music wakes and leads us far to regions of delight;
To each a different wonder-tale of glory does she tell,
Flinging o'er weary thoughts and lives her own mysterious
spell.
Now falls a tender cadence, sweet as a perfumed breeze.
And lo I the Italian moonlight glows between the Cyprus
trees;
And now in graver splendour the widening circles ring.
And booming over ancient seas th e storm seems wakening:
A change—a wild bacchante whirl of satyrs in a wood :
A change again—with chanted dirge glides a dark brother¬
hood ;
Or in the great cathedral peals the solemn mass on high.
Or pure far hills in loneliness rise in a pure far sky;
Or all the pictures fade in the magnificence of tone,
And music in her splendour reigns triumphant and alone !
Has   no   one   solved  the  mystery  that  first old Jubal
pondered,
That in the rushes lurked when Pan beneath Parnassus
Avandered,
Aud laughed because the reeds replied, and all the world
was brightened!
With   Organ   and  with  Orchestra  we   scarce   are more
enlightened.
Whence are you, voices of the air, prisoned in measured
cells—
From what far country do you come, where all perfection
dwells ?
Interpreting in ordered thoughts, and lovely mysteries,
Earth and her myriad voices, and the spirit of the seas.
Unearthly in your loveliness as some angelic greeting.
No stigma of this world you bear, except that you   are
fleeting;
For all the glory leaves us as the last vibration dies;
And in the gloom we stand, without the gates of Paradise.
E. J. 0.
240 '     The Attempt.
goiti io I hxm i\\t ^iblc to ht \\u Witix^ 4 (Bod ?
BEING A LETTER FROM ONE WHO DOBS SO BELIEVE TO ONE WHO DOES NOT.
Dear .—You ask me how I know this book which I
hold in my hand to be indeed the very Word of the hving
God, who made heaven and earth; to be the record of
His plan of creation, and providence, and redemption ; to
be His history of the human race—of its past, its present,
and its future, from its cradle in the garden of Eden, till
the day when the " heaven and earth shall pass away,"
and there shall be a " new heaven and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness ;" to be the written code
of laws given to mankind by the " Judge of all the earth,"
by which to guide their life on earth, and according to
which sentence will be pronounced upon them at the
last. You say there are difficulties—difficulties of many
kinds—historical, chronological, scientific ; numbers which,
added up, will not make the right sum total, dates, which
geology pronounces to be impossible, proved verbal errors,
and last and most serious of all, a revelation of a God
whom you pronounce less merciful than the creature
He has made, a God who "visiteth the miquities of the
fathers on the children," a God who " taketh vengeance."
" Why," you ask, '• should you claim for this book, with its
proved errors and inconsistencies, with its doubtful facts,
above all, with its (to your mind) imperfect deity, exclusive
authority, as in very truth the Word of God ?
AVell, I will try to answer your question, not as pro¬
fessing to remove all difficulties, or solve all enigmas, nor,
indeed, as believing that these difficulties and enigmas
are meant all to be solved, yet humbly hoping in some
measure to be able to give a " reason for the hope that
is in me." In the first place, then, I shall try to cut the
ground from under your feet, by boldly asserting that I
believe it to be a part of God's plan, in giving us a
revelation of Himself, that such a revelation should be
surrounded by those very difficulties of which you com¬
plain; that the Bible itself anticipates these difficulties,
and gives the reason for their existence. What, my dear
friend, is the fundamental requirement, the very key-note
and foundation stone (on man's side) of God's will con¬
cerning us, as revealed in this book ? Is it not faith ?
" We walk by faith, not by sight."    And how is this faith
The Attempt.  • 241
defined? Is it not as "the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seenV If we had sight, where
would be the necessity or the opportunity for this faith ?
The Bible does not profess to clear up for us all puzzles,
all enigmas. It says distinctly and at once, " There are
puzzles, there are enigmas,—they are beyond your solving,
leave them in your Father's laands. ' Blessed are they
which have not seen, and yet have believed.' It is not to
the ' wise or prudent' that this book promises ' the
kingdom,' it is to the ' little children,' ' for of such aro
the kingdom of heaven.' Its language throughout is not
' Behold,' or ' Understand,' but ' believe.' "
You see thus I do not hold the Bible in any way bound
to answer all your difficulties; nay, as I have said, it
would do away with its very fundamental requirement
were it to do so.
" But," you say, " that may apply to some of tlie
difficulties, but how can it apply to errors in matters
of fact ? The Bible distinctly declares its God to be
a God of truth; must not then His word—if it be indeed
His word, be true?" Yea, verily. But let us look at the
nature of some of these so-called errors. You say there
are expressions used in the Bible which the advance of
science has now proved to be false; periods which
geology declares to have been centuries, spoken of as
" days," and I wot not what other scientific enormities.
Well, my dear friend, to save trouble, let us grant them
all, and Avhat does it amount to? Simply this. The Bible
does not profess to teach you science: it tells its story of
higher things than science, in the ordinary u.nscientific
language of the times in which it was written, of the
people for whom it was written. Is there any ex¬
pression in the Bible more grossly false to scientific truth,
than the one that passes our lips every day, when we
say the sun rises and sets? Yet no one accuses us
of untruth, or even of ignorance, when we say it; every
one knows that we know as well as they do, that the
eartli moves, not the sun. But we speak in ordinary
unscientific . language, according to appearances, not
according to scientific realities. I said " Let us grant all
those scientific difficulties,"' and yet I cannot grant them
all, for has not science herself in her onward Y^rogress
swept away many of the most formidable which she
herself has raised? and if so, may we not at least have
the   modesty   to   suspend our judgment   on those that
AUGUST 1874. ^   H
242 •     The Attemjyt.
remain ? We know so little; dare we dogmatise or say that
aught is impossible ?    I trow not.
But, you say, there are blunders in chronology as well
as in science,—proved discrepancies between one part of
the I^iblc and another. Well, let us grant that too, and
see what the admission amounts to. Errors of copyists—
explanatory notes gradually creeping into the text; the
thousand mischances which might so easily befal a
manuscript handed down througli all these ages. May
these not very probably explain them all'? But, you say,
would not God take care of His OAvn Word ? would He
not preserve it from these mischances'? would He not, if
He is the omnipotent, omniscient God which yom- Bible
describes, so guard His own Revelation, that His people
should have it as He uttered it? Yes, I say, in all
essential matters God ivould so guard, and has so
guarded His written Revelation of Himself; but you
remember that' I began the argument by boldly asserting
that I beheved God did not mean that all difficulties
should be cleared away. It may be that he has allowed
these very errors and discrepancies in dates, and names,
and minor things, to creep into His written Word, for
the very purpose of trying his people's fiith. But sup¬
posing even that some of these errors cannot be so
accounted for, that we must believe that they existed in the
manuscripts as originally penned by the inspired writers
themselves, even then, the question which it would raise
in my mind, would not be as to the feet of these men
being commissioned by God to write His message,—not
as to the fact, but as to the nature of the inspiration. It
may be that that inspiration which secured that God's
message should be delivered, did not secure that the
messengers should be free, even in the delivering of it,
from their natural human fallibility. That such fallibility
could in nowise be allowed to interfere Avitli anything
in His message which God cared should be delivered,
follows necessarily, if we believe that He is omnipotent
and omniscient; but I see no reason for refusing to admit
that He, for His own wise purposes, may have allowed
the human imperfections of the writers to be apparent in
their delivery of His message, any more than that He
should allow errors at a later date to creep into the
written Word. But, you say, all these, after all, are but
minor difficulties ; to your mind, the great, the insuperable
difficulty, lies far deeper, in the very nature of the God
The Attempt.       ' 243
which the Bible professes to reveal,—a God by whose com¬
mand whole nations were extirpated, a God whose anger is
so implacable that He cannot forgive without a propitiation.
Well, my dear friend, let us take your first objection first,
for the two are quite distinct. It is true, as you say,
that we read in the Bible that God commanded the
destruction of Canaanites and Perrizites, and all the other
dwellers in the land which He had promised to Israel
His people; that they should be cut off "root and branch,"
young men and maidens, old men and children,—and I
grant the mystery. But, my friend, just look around
you. You are not an atheist, you do not believe that
Chance or Blind Force is the only father of, were it in¬
deed so, how orphaned a universe 1 No, you say, there
are marks of design all around us, which prove beyond a
doubt, to your mind, an Intelligent Author of all things.
In short, you believe in a God. Well, then, as I said, just
look around you—whether you can account for it or not,
do you not see the very thing you complain of happening
around you every day ? Do you not see the " sins
of the fathers visited upon the children"—the inno¬
cent suffering with the guilty ? You are constrained
to answer yes. Well, then, does not the very same objec¬
tion which you make to the God of the Bible, apply also
to the God of the World—to the God of Providence?
You may not be able to reconcile it with the idea you have
formed of the character of God, but when you can
obliterate these facts from the world around you, then,
and not till then, will you have a right to raise the
record of such facts as an objection against the identity of
the God of Providence and the God of the Bible. On
the other hand, are they not, in truth, a proof of that
identity? Let us look now at your other objection.
You say you cannot believe in a God so implacable as to
need a propitiation. If He be God, you say, can He not
forgive? Besides, you say, supposing justice to require
the punishment of the offender, what justice could there
be in the innocent suffering for the guilty ? I feel, my
friend, in attempting to answer this question, as I think
Moses must have done when he heard the words—" Take
off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place where thou
standcst is holy ground;" and I know not whether I can
make you understand the answer which to me is so satis¬
fying. You say could not God, if He be God, forgive
without an atonement 1   and I answer No, for the very
244 The Attempt.
reason that He is God ; because He is holy—because He
is just—because He is as holy and just as He is merciful;
because it is not against Him, as a person, that the offence
has been committed, but against the eternal right, Avhich is
His nature. But, you say, supposing justice did require
satisfaction, what justice is there in the innocent sufFering
for the guilty ? Here again, my friend, I know not if you
will understand when I give my answer, for I speak of a
great mystery. It was not one innocent man condenuied
to suffer for a guilty world—my friend, it was the Judge
that died.
But, though I have glanced at those difficulties of yours,
you must remember that I set out by telhng you that I
did not believe they were meant to be so solved, still less
that I could solve them.    Let us acknowledge that there
are difficulties, and let me try to tell you why, in spite
of these difficulties, I still believe the Bible to be indeed
the Word of the living God.    I believe that ultimately
we must always fall back for the reason of our belief on
internal evidence.     I believe that no external evidence,
however conclusive, will ever convince any one in this
matter, any more than any external difficulties, however
great, will ever really make any one, who has this internal
evidence, for a moment doubt it.    " The spirit witnessing
with our spirits that we are the sons of God."    Let us
suppose, by way of illustrating what I mean, a child gets
a letter from her mother.    The letter is not signed; it
comes with a strange post-mark, from a town where she
did not suppose her mother to be staying.    You come to
her and say, how do you know that letter is from your
mother;  it's  not  signed,  and  it comes from a strange
place ?    " Yes," says the child, " but I'm sure it's from my
mother;  / hnoio her hand, and besides, she tells me all
sorts of things about myself which nobody could know
hut my mother."    Do you think you will be able to shake
that child's belief that the letter is really from her mother ?
I trow not.    Well, you ask me, how do I know this Bible
to be God's letter 1    I give you the same answer—" /
hioio my Father s hand."    I recognise in this God,  who
reveals Himself to me in this Book, tlie Being whom I
was  made to worship and to serv(^—the Nature before
whom  my   natiire   bows  as  its  Author   and  example.
I road my own history in its pages.    Who but his Creator
could so know what is in man ?    I find here a solution
of the otherwise insoluble mysteries, in my own heart, in
The Attempt. 245
the world around me,—the satisfaction of all the wants and
cravings and aspirings of my heart. The promise—nay,
not the promise only, but the gift of a salvation, beginning
with pardon, and going on to perfection. I have been so
hungry, and here is the bread of life ; I have been so
thirsty, and here I find " living water springing up unto
everlastmg life." Do you think you can convince a man
who has eaten of this bread, that he feasted on apples of
Sodom; who ha s drained this cup of salvation, that he
has but drunk at the mirage of the desei't? You ask
how I know the Bible to be the Word of God, and I
answer you in our Saviour's words,—" My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them, and they follow me."
Jeanie Morison.
Ctars in ^ob's pous^.
0 Thou, Who markest all the tears of men.
Dost Thou mark those that fall within Thy House
When brother handeth brother into death?
Not the vile only, but the pure, the true,
The earnest seekers with the thoughtful brow
Whose feet refuse the narrow'd, beaten track
Where priests have vailed the God their souls desire.
(Poor bleeding feet, a weary way ye've trod,
Cut by that stone where brother's toxich grew cold,
Or that, where parents falling on their knees,
Craved pardon for the unbeheving child.
Whose chief crime was that he beheved too much.)
How great their hunger, and their thirst how great I
t'or righteousness, for fearlessness, for truth ;
They turn aside from creeds unsatisfied;
Yet all creation sends them copious streams.
They gaze on children with a look of peace,
And God's dumb creatures have a voice for them,
In all their beauteous forms and loving ways :
Heav'n's winds touch them as Avith a mother's kiss,—
The moon, the stars, the " everlasting hills, "
AVhisper th' eternal message—" All is well. "
246 The Attempt.
Yet " Chrietless " they are named I they who tread His
steps,
Who tend His sick and poor ones with such love!
Not for reward, but that their hearts beat with
The measure of His Own, which throbbed for all.
*****
E'en such we hear condemned within Thy House,
Reckoned among the outcasts fi'om Thy love:
Some hear it with the curling lip of scorn,
Some weep—and dost Thou mark these tears, 0 God?
Frucara.
Joltinri.') from :in 6Id P;iid's OJxperifuci's.
CHAPTER   I.
The bell had ceased ringing when I entered the room,
and the chairs were already occupied, so that I shrank
into my seat Avith the uncomfortable consciousness that I
was looking nervous and embarrassed. When at length
1 summoned up sufficient courage to glance round, it was
to find the landlady of the establishment regarding me
with a steady smile, which gradually grew into a gentle,
nodding assurance of afiftibility; as if she were keeping
time to the long grace wliich was being droned forth from
the other end of the table.
"Miss Nick ell" announced the landlady, a little im¬
patiently, I observed, for she made a quick involuntary
movement with her hand, as though it would sweep
aAvay all the forcible expressions of unworthiness which
characterised the grace her worthy spouse was giving
us. But I foimd she was merely indicating a liew
presence among her household, with whom she ex¬
changed my introduction as rapidly as the warm flush
of colour darted into my face, when I found myself
following the wave of her hand, wliich I did in the most
helpless, nervous manner possible ; and I was only too
thankful when I saw the knives and forks of the boarders
coming into play. That is all I can remember of my
first day's experience at Mrs Fairbairn's  boarding house,
The Attempt. 241
estabhshed in a quiet quarter of one of the oldest towns in
Scotland.
But perhaps before I go on any farther, I had better
say a word or two as to how I came to be located
there.
It was not from choice, certainly, that I relinquished
the handsome suite of rooms, where I had lived in comfort
for so many years, but from a grievous necessity !    One of
those periodical commercial failures swept away half of my
fortune, which I had trusted was securely invested,   so
that there only remained to me a small jointure of my
mother's.    It was many a long day after that I ceased to
regret the peaceful seclusion of my pretty   apartments,
and the sweet faint odour wafted in from the fragrant
boxes of pale mignionette which were my especial care.
By-and-bye the nervous embarrassment I felt at first wore
itself wholly away.    The strange faces grew into familiar
ones, which I learnt to miss when a change in their lives
carried them elsewhere.    The eager   busy hum of con¬
versation at meal-time, chased away any lonely thoughts
that were lingering after those wishes which dwell in the
Past, and erelong I felt myself invariably amused, and
borne along with the incessant ebb and flow of discussion
in which I was often induced to claim a   share.    There
were  two   or  three  other ladies,   about the  same  age
as myself,—that is to say, we had arrived at a time of life
when, if called upon to exercise a cliaperonage over any
young  girl, our  looks   and  years  fully  qualified  us   to
do  80.    The interest  of these pages will not  therefore
relate to myself, but to younger, fresher lives—lives that
had more vitality, more colour in their chromatic changes
which had run through them, than had ever dwelt in the
five-fingered exercise mine had been set to, with never a
flat or sharp to ring a subtle change in its melody, only a
solitary accidental now and then.   There was the German
doctor, with his brown scrub beard and sharp observant
eye, who rarely spoke, except to launch forth  contemp¬
tuous words about "womankind, " and, as he declared, their
mock pretence of assuming an air of " injured innocence,"
or to indulge in some plain unvarnished statement of the
last startling theory of Darwinism.    If any unguarded re¬
monstrance were offered him, he took flight in all the wind¬
ing intricacies of his native metaphysical style, or, knitting
his broad wrinkled brow, burst forth into a complication of
similes, which it were utter bewilderment to follow.    Mrs.
248 The Attempt.
Fairbairn was wont to exercise a more especial surveil¬
lance over him. All foreigners, and " strangers in a strange
land," she thought, needed an extra share of her good
offices. Perhaps, too, a seasonable word from her averted
more misunderstandings than they were aware of, between
him and certain of her household, who had narrowed
themselves in by a bodyguard of insular prejudices.
There were three crescent lines which lurked near the
corners of the thick-set scrub-beard, and I used to know
by the rapid spasmodic curves into which they would,
rise and fall, that the landlady had given him.—a " check."
" Ach Himmel I check again," he would sometimes exclaim,
with a faint growl of displeasure, " and by a woman."
"Fortunately," he added, after a pause, " there are women-
Idnd and womenkind."
"Pray tell me, Mrs. Fairbairn, what is it he means
by check ?" I once asked the landlady, because I could
never satisfoctorily account for the sudden jump and
rapidly muttered exclamation which used to startle me
so much at first, until I grew accustomed to this pecu¬
liarity of his.
" My dear Miss Nickel," she replied, " I don't mind
telling you: we two are English, you see, and don't take
so much offence at his flights of fancy as some people,
but whenever he comes to a foreign idea, which I
know his tongue should keep to itself, why, I just poke
his elbow, and when that won't do, which I must say is
generally the case,—I tread upon his feet, hard or soft, as
the occasion may be. You see the reason now, I daresay,
why it is best for the doctor to be beside me, though
some of them do talk of my sliomng him too much prefer¬
ence over the other boarders," and the landlady's kindly
features fixed themselves into an expression of momentary
sternness, as though she were mentally resolving how
many battles she had fought for him, and how she
would be ready to meet any that might be looming in the
future.
My left-hand neighbour was a lively bright-headed
young man,—very facetious, very chatty, who worked
all day long in a public office, and invariably made a
point of rousing the doctor to retort upon him. He
always reminded me of one of those busily-humming flies,
which do not sting, yet nevertheless vex the nerves by their
perpetual "buzz," and irritate the skin by the very light¬
ness with which they settle upon one.    Though you may
The Attempt. 249
ronse yourself to shake them off, again and again they
return to hover and hum about you. " Now sir, " said
this young man, addressing the doctor opposite, some¬
time after grace had been said, '.' how do you regard the
ladies ?—the fair sex in general %" he added, his boyish
face brimful of mischievous glee, as he tried to catch a
glimpse of my right-hand neighbour, a single lady of
somewhat severe aspect. "We call her the decorous
one," he whispered to me one day, in his ready impulsive
way. "It's not a case of misplaced—ahem !—confidence, I
hope? " he added playfully. The doctor frowned, lookedup
hastily, and encountered the provoking air of self-assurance
with which the young clerk met his lowering glance. At
the same instant he felt Mrs. Fairbairn's inevitable '• poke,"
and I saw an angry gleam of annoyance gather in the
doctor's deep-set vigilant eye. A "foreign idea" is
coming now, I felt certain, by a curious twitching of the
table-cloth near the landlady. Moreover, there was a
rapidly executed change of position on her part towards
the extreme edge of her chair. My secret belief was, she
would tread " hard" this time. I was correct in my
surmise, for I heard several untranslatable and unintel¬
ligible German articulations. It was rarely indeed that
he indulged in his native language, and beyond a few ex¬
clamations I never heard him, during all our intercourse,
express himself in any other tongue but English, which
he spoke well, and with unusual fluency. What he first
of all intended to say, we never knew. lie controlled
himself with an effort, smiled gravely back in answer to
the landlady's appeal, and vented his wrath, if there Avere
any there at all,—in the following couplet, which I met
with many years afterwards in an old magazine,—
" Oh woman, whether lean or fat,
In face an angel,—in soul a cat."
The " decorous one" looked somewhat aggrieved, droAv
her head-dress slightly forward (her invariable prelimi¬
nary to administering correction to an offender), but ap¬
parently thought it more consistent with decorum to
observe a dignified silence. The head-dress was sum¬
marily pushed back again to its original position. The
landlady claimed everybody's attention just then by a
dexterous manoeuvre with the pudding spoon, which she
happened to be wielding at that moment.
" Listen to me,—everyone please, " she mged autliori-
ACGCST 1874. >^   I
250 The Attempt.
tativcly. In an instant we were all attention. " A new
boarder will be here to-morroAv. Now, I am sure," and
the landlady's sonsy face shone with the spirit of tender
charity which reposed there, and sprang from the depths
of her motherly nature, " that you have all good hearts,
though some, 1 know, pretend they don't possess such a
thing. (I wonder if she gave a " soft" tread this time ?)
I want you all, as a personal flxvour to me,—if you will let
me put it in that way,—to refrain from any appearance
even of saying sharp uncomfortable things. I have not
been able to find an opportunity before to tell you
about this newcomer, who, I hope, will be with us by to¬
morrow." The landlady's voice hesitated perceptibly, and
sank into a softer key. She played with the salt-spoon
which lay near her a little nervously, I fancied, before she
took up her words again. " This lady," she continued,
looking direct at the doctor, who never lifted his eye
from her all the while she was speaking,—perhaps she
involuntarily compared the two in her own mind,— "is not
strong and well-formed "—she paused gently but firmly
on the last word,—" in body and limb as we are. She has
a weak delicate frame ; and I have heard it said by people
wlio were wise and thoughtful in such things, tliat those
who are afflicted in that way are very easily hurt by a
careless word. Perhaps I need not say any more;
perhaps I have said too much, but however it may be,
I think you all understand me, and will not let me have
any fears or misdoubts that the new Boarder will regret
coming amongst us."
CHAPTER   II.
She was seated at the further end of the table when we
entered the long dining-room the next day. Mrs. Fair-
bairn had given her a place beside the tall sturdy German
doctor. Did that worthy woman think this was the
greatest proof she could give, that she believed and
ti'usted in him ? that he had an honest true-heartedness
about him, albeit soured discrepant utterances crej^t up
occasionally froni it? Was it her offering of reparation
for last night's " check ? " My eyes involuntarily sought
the doorway. I would fain watch and see what effect the
landlady's gentle diplomacy would produce on him, and,
I think, the others were all secretly on the alert to bear
diiwu their  scrutiny upon his surprise,  should he give
The Attempt. 251
them a chance of beholding it. It was just as I might
have expected. His face preserved its habitual ex¬
pression of calm impassiveness; but I fancied I could
detect a covert sneer settling roimd the heavy dark
moustache, as, in Avalking towards his seat, he caught
sight of more than one expectant glance. He, however,
defied their vigilance, and disappointed them all by
leisurely reaching his chair just as the grace began, then
removing his table-napkin, he never lifted his eye from
off the soup-plate until the servant cleared it away.
" This is Dr. Hirschfeld, my dear," (the landlady gave
us nearly all this affectionate prefix), " and that is Miss
Winnie Fraser," turning to him, " who has come' to our
town for music lessons. You will find the doctor can
give you as many hints about them as the best masters,
my dear," she added.
The eyes of each boarder were fixed curiously upon
them, as Miss Winnie Fraser returned his stiff l)0w with
a graceful acknowledgment of her head, and then, per¬
haps, ftmcying he was so much older than the others of
his sex there, she held out one of her tiny white
hands towards him. The doctor merely stared for an
instant at the timidly proffered hand, which was as
timidly withdrawn when she saw he refused to notice
her frank offer of friendship, and a pale pink flush of
modest shame dawned over her sweet gentle face ; while,
with quick sympathy, I caught the sudden glitter of a
shining tear, before it was resolutely forced back from
where it had sprung unbidden. The boarders looked
askance at each other, then speedily busying themselves
over their plates, forgot the matter altogether. Not so
sensitive Miss Winnie ; she cut the plateful of viands
which lay before her into a hundrecf odd shapes and
forms, and every time the landlady looked at her, hastily
placed one at the end of her fork.
"_My dear," expostulated Mrs. Fairbairn at length,
" will you have an egg instead ? perhaps you find the
meat a little tough."
Then it was for the first time that we heard Miss
Winnie's pretty bell-hke voice: it moved us all to listen,
and even the young clerk arrested himself when he was
at the top of his speed in one of his very best stories.
It sounded tremulous and constrained at first, but it
gained in clearness and sweetness as she went on.
" You are very good; but it is just what I like," she
252 The A ttempt.
answered, in tones that seemed to caress their words,
although they were common-place enough, after all.
" Only I am not very hungry. I daresay it is the long
journey I have made to-day—at least," she corrected
herself, smiling up at us all, " it is a very long one for me.
Besides, you know,"—she added, lowering her voice
to the landlady next her, " I have never been
alone before among so many new people," and her
lips trembled slightly as her glance fell upon the heavy
crape trimmings and black dress she wore. The
doctor caught her Avords, I could see by the change
which crept over his face, and I thought of the two
shining tears which his ungracious repiilse had drawn
from their hiding-place; alas ! too many had fallen already,
and sorroAvfirlly caressed the pale cheeks of the child¬
like little woman beside him. Apparently he had not
bestowed upon her more than that cursory glance at the
outstretched hand he had slighted. Now, when some
secret impulse bade his eyes seek her face, I saw a
twinge of keen remorse start into life, a look of genuine
pity. And he had Avounded this fragile little woman's
heart in the pride of his perversity. Nay, it still
smarted at that very moment, he told himself, as her
soft brown eyes encountered his, only to shrink away
with a mute reproach that made the doctor wince.
Again a pink flush spread a delicate tint over the little
woman's pale face. What shoiild he do ? what could he
say to make her forget ?—he was sure she wn:)uld forgive,
her gentleness told him that. Biit Avould she ever
forget, he Avondered again and again to himself. She
Avas the last to rise, and by-and-bye, AA'hen Ave learnt to
know her Avays better. Miss Winnie confided to good
Mrs. Fairbairn, hoAv she could not bear to go up to the
draAving-room with e\'ery eye, as she fancied, sending
pitying glances towards her poor misshapen body. So
Ave alw'ays hurried up quicker to oin* rooms Avhen Ave
knew that it Avas her Avish, and Ave often Avaited to hear
her light footfall pass along our doors, before we took
our places at the table. I never heard her real age, but
some of us guessed it to be about thirty, not from the
child-like face, that always looked more youthful than
its years, in spite of its delicate frailness, but from
occasional remarks she let fell from time to time. Her
fair broAvn hair Avas marvellous in its Avealth, and soft
Avavy texture, and slie had those Avonderful large  eyes
The Attempt. 253
you meet with once, rarely twice in a lifetime, that have
a far-off wistful radiance in them, like the unrest of infinite
longing, as though the soul which dwelt beyond them,
were striving to pierce the shadows of eternity itself.
"Miss Winnie," said the young clerk one day, "have
you ever seen our cathedral ?" He always lowered the
exuberant tones of his healthful voice, when he addressed
her. " You like places with ' a dim mysterious light,' as
the poet says, and windows with purple-robed saints in
them, and all that sort of thing, you know," he nodded
across the table to her.
"Ah!" said Miss Winnie, drawing a long breath, "but
I have so often wished to go there," her big eyes waking
slowly up out of their wistfulness, at the lad's sprightly
accents. " Many a time when I have heard about its great
beauty, I have comforted myself with the thoughts that
I have seen it in my dreams, far more beautiful than
earthly hands could ever make it." The doctor started
forward uneasily on his chair, and spilt his soup, and Mrs.
Fairbairn, occupied in pondering over Miss Winnie's
words, forgot to scold him. " But I cannot go alone,"
pleaded the little woman abruptly, after a moment's
pause; " some day perhaps Mrs. Fairbairn will take me."
Now, I knew our landlady's few hours she could call her
own were very precious to her, and she was anxious to
devote them to her large circle of friends.
" Miss Winnie," I said, " if you would trust yourself
to an old woman's care, who will be only too glad to
go with you, we could see it much better than in the
short time Mrs. Fairbairn can spare you, and I should
like to look once more at the beautiful stained
windows."
So Miss Winnie agreed that I was to accompany her,
and we started together next day in a cab. We spent
two hours of quiet peaceful enjoyment under the grand
arches of the beautiful cathedral, and watched for a stray
sunbeam or two, to give a deeper lustre to the " purple
robed" saints, while Miss Winnie I could see was but half
satisfied to leave the long shadowy aisles behind her; but
I told her she was under my care, and we must gather up
our shawls to return homcAvard. As we left by a side
porch, we found, to our dismay, big round drops darkening
the pavement before us, and in another few minutes down
came a compact pitiless shoAver of rain.
" I am afraid we shall be  late for dinner," I began
254 The Attempt.
to ray companion, when I spied a yellow omnibus
turning round the corner, which I knew Avould set
us down at our destination. " There is not a cab
to be seen,—do yon mind taking a seat in there, Miss
Winnie ?"
She shrank into the shelter of the porch, her pretty
mouth working and trembling with a strange sensi¬
tiveness, and 1 wished the question had never passed
my lips. Presently I felt her small hand creep gently
into mine. " Of course we will take it. I was nearly
beaten, but I have come off victorious now, I think,"
she cried bravely, her face turned to meet mine with
an air of innocent triumph I had never seen it wear
before. It was the doctor who helped us in, and tenderly
placed the little fragile woman in the far-off corner,
where no one need brush her by in passing in and out.
I cannot remember how it was he came and helped us
so opportunely. I think he must have been in the
omnibus, and sprang out to our aid. Sometimes I had
wondered would she ever speak to him again ? I knew
she did not harbour any feeling of resentment about
their first meeting, but still she always avoided any
possibility of coming in contact with him. Opposite to
me sat a tall thin man, dressed in semi-clerical garb,
who pulled out a parcel of tracts, and aj^parently sought
a particular one from among them. After steadily re¬
garding ]\Iiss Winnie for a few minutes, he presented it
to her with a short admonitory nod,—I suppose to
induce her to accept it. Now Miss Winnie had told me
only a day or two before, that she had a great aversion
to tracts, and this one, given in public as it were, over¬
whelmed her with a painful confusion. The doctor
deliberately took it out of her restless fingers, read the
title, shrugged his big square shoulders, and tossed it
quietly out of the window, then lifted up his paper,
without even glancing at the offender, who contented
himself with looking sternly at Miss Winnie. The
doctor rustled his paper, shook it violently once or
twice, till I thought I must beg of him to desist from
making such a terrible crackling in my ears. At last he
succeeded in relieving Miss Winnie from any further
annoyance, by extending half of it before her, and
thus intercepting the intrusive gaze of the outraged
tract-giver. You should have seen Miss Winnie's
face    kindling   and    smiling    with   grateful   uncertain
The Attempt. 255
surprise at the doctor's simple r^ise; while ho, on his
part, unbent from his wonted gravity, and looked
pleasantly down upon her. His strong arms lifted
her carefully out, and set her down Avondering and
astonished on the door-step. For the first time since
I knew Miss Winnie, I saw the wistful dreaminess in
her eyes die away, and an eager sparkle of happy
hght broke over her face, as she strove t(j recover
from the breathless consternation into which this un¬
usual mode of transit had placed her.
When the winter evenings began to draw in, and the chill
winds of the season turned  frosty with the  biting  air
they brovight from the north, the boarders would leave the
privacy of their rooms, and begin gradually to drt)p into
the warm-lighted parlour downstairs.    Miss Winnie, too,
became less shy of us, and sometimes brought a specimen
of her pretty handiwork for us to admire, and let the
clear-ringing tones of her cooing voice be heard in the
cliatter and discussion that rarely flagged.    One evening
she was there before us, coaxing soft melodies with her
lithesome fingers out   of the  old-fashioned  high piano,
which I had never seen open before.   To our surprise she
did not break off abruptly, as perhaps we half-expected
her to do, but, as if by some sudden inspiration of genius,
she played the queerest quickest piece of music I have ever
listened to,—the maddest, merriest fairy dance,—a perfect
maze of spirited intricacies.    Her slender fingers hastened
over the thin yellow notes faster than the eye could follow
without being fairly dazed.    One and all we stood breath¬
less for  a moment,  and then with a little proud smilo
of pleasure  she  turned  away to   the  ruddy  fire-light.
'* Miss Winnie, Miss  Winnie ! " ave cried, " Avhy did you
not play to us before?" aiid even "the decorous one"
reproached her faintly, from her favourite corner close to
the hearth, Avhere she sat shielding her faded complexion
Avith an enormous Indian fan.    And every evening after
that she would play first one air and then another, as each
present asked for his or her piece they loved best.    Once
I fancied I heard a muffled footstep  pausing near  the
door.   Could it be the doctor? I Avondered.    IfitwercAvo
never kncAV, and he never once alluded to Miss Winnie's
playmg.
Peeping over the bannisters one morning, to try and
catch a glimpse of any letters lying on the hall table
beloAv,   I  caught sight of the doctor's big round head
256 Tlie Attempt.
lowering itself in close proximity to Miss Winnie, who
had slipped down also after the postman's knock.
" You must take care of yourself this bitter weather.
It is all very well for some people to rush about this
Avindy town of ours for music lessons, but it won't
do for you. Take my advice, and let the master come
here," he added, in his hasty, brusque way, a little
less so perhaps, because mindful of the fragile little
woman.
She smiled, pleased at the interest he seemed to take
in her. "And yet you were advising me, a few weeks
ago, not to cover myself up from these cold bracing
winds of our climate."
The doctor frowned, and was evidently perplexed,
then perhaps thinking of milder countries,—" You should
have plenty of warm air and sunshine if I had my
way."
" Yes," Miss Winnie replied, " tliat would be better,
much better,—plenty of sunshine, plenty of flowers, and
then I could always have my favourites, the sweet-scented
tea-roses." The expression of his face must have caused
her to put the next question, for she stopped suddenly
with a little sigh. "The cold winds are cruel to me, as
you say, but why did you tell me differently a few weeks
ago I quick, tell me why ?" she half-pleaded, half-com¬
manded, her large eyes waxing larger with the growing
shade of wistfulness that haunted them.
"Only, because I did not know then what great care
you need. I have an appointment," abruptly changing
his tone, " Good moiming;" and seizing his hat, he hastily
let himself out of the front door.
Miss Winnie generally breakfasted at a later hour
than those whoso business called them away betimes.
I Avas busy searching for an advertisement in the Scots¬
man the next morning, when she entered the room.
A little paler, I thought, she looked ; certainly a little
thinner the last few days, remembering the doctor's
words. She scarcely noticed my nod of salutation, and I
was struck by the eager haste she made to gain her seat.
Her footsteps quickened in their pace as she reached it,
while a crimson flush darted over her face, and such a
bright look trembled across it that I marvelled curiously
what could have moved her so. It seemed to me as if I
could trace the light of an old joy come back again.
" And all this is the Avork of a single tea-rose," I thought
The Attempt. 2bl
to myself, " the handiwork, I suppose, of that eccentric
German doctor. Maybe," I reflected gi'avely, glancing at
this fragile little woman, "I can foresee a trouble coming
to them both, sadder and more hurtful than either of them
have yet known." But I kept my forebodings to myself,
and every morning afterwards I saw a pale yellow tea-
rose nestling its fragrance beside Miss Winnie's plate.
CHAPTER   III.
" Ah ! but womenkind are so inconsistent," began the
doctor one day at dinner, in allusion to some playful
remark of Mrs. Wylie's, a young married lady, whose hus¬
band Avas in India. " Why, I know of a case, quite lately,
within my own experience, of a girl who sent her lover 'to
the dogs,' just because he would play chess on a Sunday,
and occasionally went to see a cock-fight, which she
declared was a grievous sin. He had no other vice about
him. And yet, only a few months afterwards, she married
a notoriovis roue, because, forsooth, she needs must credit
herself with sufficient powers of fascination to restrain
him. Bah ! the young man avIio went to see a cock-fight
was a babe in evil-doing compared to him."
" Well," rejoined ]\Irs. Wylie, " she certainly did not
act wisely, but I think every one must own that a cock¬
fight is one of the lowest and most revolting pastimes
that exist. It has often surprised me to find how
some refined and even intellectual men of my hus¬
band's acquaintance apparently take a real pleasure
in it."
" Men will stand gaping at anything," quoth the
" decorous one," tartly, in her most ascetic tone of
voice.
" I don't think," urged Miss Winnie, after a pause,
her thoughts still dwelling upon his first remark, " it
is altogether the best or wisest plan to set up a stand¬
ard that we should always be consistent, to make the
whole of our actions have one aspect only. It seems to
me, the greatest and happiest way after all, is to be true,
simply true," she repeated firmly, lifting her grand eyes
towards the doctor, to see in what spirit he would receive
her words.
He  seemed   to  ponder   unwillingly   for   a   moment
AUGCST 1874. ■^  K
258 The Attempt.
at this gentle appeal of hers, then a sudden freak, a
foreign idea evidently came over him. " True ? " he
questioned half bitterly, '' true'? who in all the vast
breadth and depth of this universe can tell how much, or
what thing soever, in this world, be it an actuality or
chimera,—is true ? The J, the soul that looks out from its
dwelling-place, fettered by the sordid weaknesses of the
flesh,—does not its narrow-barred cage crush out the better
parts of its vitality % warp it into hollow, down-trodden
grooves, fashioned by popular prejudices; and those tyran¬
nic devices of a cunning observance of customs, of"—but
here he broke off abruptly—perhaps sullenly, would be a
more fitting word,for probably ]\Irs. Fairbairn had dealt him
her warning; at anyrate he observed rather savagely—
" How do I know, Mrs. Wylie, that you, for instance, to
take an example, are what you seem to be ? May not
that wedding-ring be an imposture, a delusion? May
not the word ' husband' you have just uttered be but
a name only—a myth ?" The decorous one held up
her hands in scandalised amazement before she shifted
her cap, but ere she could give vent to the horrified
expression of her countenance, he burst forth again.
" May not yoii even, madam, be a deception—a dis¬
guise—a man in the garb of womankind % " This last
speech proved too much for our elderly friend, who,
gasping and breathless as she was already with what
had gone before, rose and made a vigorous movement
towards the door with a glance at Mrs. Fairbairn, which
seemed to say that, in spite of the landlady's strenuous
endeavours to restrain the doctor's " flights," she would
no longer remain an inmate of her iiouse. I need
scarcely add, the whole table was convulsed with laughter,
in Avhich Mrs. Wylie and Miss Winnie joined as heartily
as the rest.
The winter season Avas unusually severe that year;
a keen frost had set in during the last fcAv Aveeks,
and the young clerk devoted all his spare moments
from the office to frequent skating on the nearest loch.
His enthusiasm Avaxed so great upon the adA^antages
likely to accrue from the use of this exercise, that he
once offered to give me an hour's slide in a chair, if
I Avould entrust myself to his care, which it is need¬
less to say I briefly declined. He next attacked the
doctor, and endeavoured, ineff'ectually howcA-er, to per-
I'he Attempt. 259
siiade  him" to   try   his   success  with   skates,   alleging
that  the  latter   was   getting  too   stout   and " mopy;"
a  remark  wliich the said person seemed by no means
to  relish,   if one   could judge  by the amount   of vin¬
dictive   force  he    expended   in   some  very  deep-based
gutturals.    And while the days grew shorter, and a crisp
cold  air stung our faces  to  a reddish-blue  colour,   we
began to see less and less of Miss  Winnie.    Those queer
tricksy harmonies of hers, which entranced us all by the
strange wildness of their measure,   ceased to ring  out
their rapid changes.    A tall awkward-looking vase kept
guard over the  down-shut lid of the piano.    She  had
moved to a room on the first floor now, and somehow it
came about that it was always the grave doctor  who
used to wheel her into the parlour in the large low arm¬
chair, which was the only comfortable resting-place Avlierc
her poor aching body could obtain a little ease.    You
could not fail to observe that he Avas wonderfully changed
of late, and yet it would be difficult to point out where
the difference lay.    He was still often short and abrupt
in liis manner, as was his wont, but a certain coldness of
glance, which had lain in his sharp searching eye, had
lately disappeared, and in its  place had crept a  look,
half restless, half fearful, which seemed to be directed
towards Miss Winnie, as if it were asking that gentle
little woman for the reason of its disquiet.    A certain
wildness of tone would at most times pervade this man,
and I used to fancy, as I sat watching them, that she was
surely its regulator, its key-note, upon which it turned.
" Doctor, give Miss Winnie a tune," said the young clerk
one evening,  after he  had been telling  her  about  his
skating experiences.    "Can't you  strike up something;
I am sure you would like  it," he continued  to  urge,
addressing her.     We  had  often  heard of the doctor's
musical powers, and occasionally I had stopped to listen
to a snatch of melody,—some stray air that, waif-like,
floated at odd intervals across  the hall into which his
room entered; but he had never been known to volunteer
any amusement of that kind, nor did I gather, from the
expression of his countenance, that the young clerk's pro¬
posal was altogether an acceptable one to him.    It was
only when Miss  Winnie, in   her  simple,   coaxing  way,
besought him to yield to their wishes, that he rose and
complied.
260 The Attempt.
It seemed to me it was some caprice, eminently German,
lie played,—harmonious discords, I should say, were the
best definition to give it. There came an impressive
movement, quick and soothing,—probably from a sonata
of one of the old masters,—and yet none of us, I am
thinking, grasped its meaning, except Miss Winnie, who
folded her hands tightly, and followed every note with
that wistful gaze of hers. Presently the notes ceased for
a few moments. He paused, endeavouring to recall some
little refrain of music which was dear to him, and which
he wanted for Miss Winnie's pleasure,—a little fitful air,
that spoke and pleaded for itself through all the murmur
of accompaniment, which seemed at times to strive to
quell the passionate restlessness of its plaint. He closed
the piano with a quiet haste as he ended, and went close
to Miss Winnie's chair.
" Have you nothing to say to me?—not one word for
the poor burdened little melody that tried to wing its
way to you in that last piece ? "
Miss Winnie's eyes drooped till their long dark eye¬
lashes cast a greater shade of transparency upon her
pale thin cheeks. " You might have guessed," she
replied gently, "it was its rare beauty, its exquisite
pathos, that forced me to be silent. My want of words
is a poor, and yet, perhaps after all, the best ac¬
knowledgment I can offer you." Then she added
quickly, raising her eyes to him, " Tell me what name
you give it?"
" In our land," he replied gravely, "we call it ' Sehnen
und Fragen,'" while his voice sank to a whisper;
" in yours,—can you not guess something of its mean¬
ing?—or, stay, Avere it not better perhaps to tell it
you in other words,—longing, questioning, asking."
It is a longing wo all know; it comes to us again
and again in our lives, until something hushes it: not
the fulfilment, perhaps, but something which brings
our lives out of discord into harmony, so that there
is no more the jar which hurt us before, and often
"what seems discord to us, is only the great stretch of
chord which harmony requires,—and from out the fret¬
ting miserere of notes, there grows the truest, divinest
music.
ji» « «
Is it not better to close these pages thus—to leave it
The Attempt. 2G1
tmtold, how, in spite of tlie doctor's love and care of,
his fragile httle wife, and the healing influences of sun¬
shiny, warmer climes, our "Miss Winnie's" gentle spirit
was fain to succumb at last,—how, for a brief space, it
seemed to renew its strength in the summer of life, ere
it grew tired and lay down to rest.
Semper Eadem.
Far in the lonely glade
The breezes murmur in the wmd-god's ear,
Blest and content, tho' none but he can hear.
Beneath the cataract
The pool lies quiet, that on it may look—
With calm delight—tho spirit of the brook.
Upon the rocky ledge
The rose hangs all her beauty to the sun.
Looks on him only till the day is done.
And I, for thee, beloved.
Trail my rich garments o'er the marble floor,
Thinking to please thee entering at the door.
For thee each raven tress
I smooth and braid, with oft-returning care.
For thou art happy, seeing I am fair.
Ever I stretch to thee
My being, as the rose to sunny ray;
Thou lovest beauty, I have heard thee say :
Talk not of others, they are nought to me.
My love I I will be beautiful for thee I
Procla.
262 The Attempt.
J[rj3m  lUrluuitll  to Siflbcrmoiin.
I ROSE at five on Tuesday morning, August 19th, at
Kirkwall, Orkney, under the shadow of that solemn
cathedral which Norwegian piety, seven centuries ago,
dedicated to the memory of Saint Magnus the Martyr. A
hurried walk through the antique streets (flagged, save a
narrow line of pavement running along the middle) brought
me to the handsome iron pier, through whose interstices one
sees the pure emerald-green water underneath, and I went
on board the St. Magnus steamer, bound from Lerwick in
Shetland, to Granton, My voyage, however, was only
from Kirkwall to Wick, in Caithness, and occupied about
five hours. AVe coasted this indented eastern side of the
Orkney " mainland," passed by the islands of Copinshay,
with its attendant " Horse of Copinshay," Bu'rray, South
Ronaldshay (the most southern of the Orcadian Archi¬
pelago), and the Pentland Skerries. Keeping outside
the entrance of the dreaded Pentland Firth with its
whirling tides, we had a view of John o' Groat's House
and Dunnet Head, the northern extremity of Great Britain,
rounded Duncansby Head, its north-eastern point, and
finally steamed into Wick Bay. I went ashore in a boat,
and found myself in the " herring capital," the centre of
an enormous and perilous industry. I saw the ruins of the
great breakwater lately demolislied in a tremendous gale
from the east, by the shock of a few successive rollers, a
lamentable victory of ocean over man. The bay (as the
name " Wick " imports) lies open and entirely imsheltered.
(The M.P. for the Wick burghs, not long after I was
there, narrowly escaped drowning, in coming ofl:' during a
storm from the shore to the steamer, his boat being in
imminent danger of being swamped.) In a basin,
approached by a very narrow entrance, multitudes of
herring boats were lying packed as close as could be,
many of them still half full of herrings caught during the
night, gleaming with all the colours of the raiubow.
Along the shore the preparation and salting of herrings
was going on in all stages with extraordinary vigour. I
refer anybody, who desires a minute and vivid account of
this singular scene, to the clever pages of Wilson's
Voyage round the Coasts and Islands of Scotland.
Women in crowds were hard at work iip to their elbows
The Attempt. 263
in herrings, a spectacle not in itself attractive, but to my
eyes far more beautiful than that of many of their sister
Avomen, yawning over novels   as the  only refuge from
the   dullness   of their  aimless unemployed lives.    Leav¬
ing behind  this   busy  hive, I directed  my  steps   from
Pulteneytown   to    Wick   proper,   and  spent   tlie   rest
of the day at a hotel.    My object Avas to reach Portree,
in   Skye, in  time to  catch   the   Clydesdale  steamer   for
the island of Mull on AVednesday evening, and in order
to do this, it Avas  necessary to  travel all night by the
coach to Helmsdale, in Sutherlandshire.    At ten o'clock
at night tea, Avith herrings (in perfection, as they ought
to be at Wick), Avere brouglit to my room, and by half-
past eleven tlie coach from Thurso Avas heard thundering
up the silent street.    It is a survivor of the nearly extinct
race of old-fashioned Avell-appoiuted mail coaches.    I took
my seat at the driver's side, and Ave struck at once into a
country road black Avith darkness.    The landscape A\'as a
mystery.    For some time all Ave could discern Avas the
dark sea on our left, glimmering Avith innumerable lights,
for cA^ery herring-boat is by laAv obliged to shoAv a light.
NoAV and then Ave stopped at some little post-office, Avhere
a mail-bag Avas handed in at  the AvindoAV, and  on  Ave
galloped tlirough the darkness.    Tavo or three hours from
Wick lamps Avere seen flashing along the road ahead, and
the coach from the south clattered up.     Both vehicles
stopped.    " Any neAvs at Helmsdale ? " asked our driver.
" Anything neAv at Thurso f " asked the driver of the other
coach, Avhich bore the letters for Wick, Thurso, and inter¬
mediate  places,  and  also   those   destined  to  cross  the
Pentland Firth to-morvoAV morning, Aveather permitting,
to the Orkney Islands, to be delivered in the afternoon at
Stromness and KirkAvall.    By degrees the cfvercast sky
became clear, the stars glittered Avith an CA'er  keener
brilliancy, and at last an indefinable hint of daAvn might
be detected in the north.    What it Avas   one could not
liaA'e  said;   but there  Avas  something  Avliich told that
night Avas Avaning.    " The night is far spent; the day is
at hand."     Still the  stars shone brighter, the  crescent
moon rose Avith a more distinctly earth-lit " old moon in
her arms " than I ever saAV before, and Venus, " the bright
and morning star," blazed a resplendent queen  among
the host of night Avhich had not yet begini to pale.     One
of my companions remarked, " he Avished he Avas in bed."
" I'm sure / don't," said the other, " I can be in bed any
264 The Attempt.
night I " and with him I entirely sympathised. I did not
envy the sleepers behind closed blinds in the houses we
passed, when I had the privilege of seeing the glittering
glories of that midnight, the solemn loveliness of that
dawn, the delicate gradations by which that " shining
light" shone "more and more unto the perfect day." I
witnessed, in perfection, during the fifty miles' drive, all
those mysterious processes by which night changes to
dawn, and dawn grows to sunrise, about which, in general,
we know so little. A moment came, ushered in by
changes too fine for the eye to note, when the seven
brilliant stars composing the plough seemed suddenly to
have dwindled in size. Then the stars became fewer.
One by one those of lesser magnitude went out. The sea,
which had always hitherto been dark against the sky,
gleamed a wan white, reflecting the dawn. The land¬
scape had become dimly visible. In the faint twilight of
a new day, we descended by a sharp curve into the lovely
valley of Berriedale, there the morning star seemed to
hang like a jewel on the edge of the wooded hill. Light
now increased rapidly, and at last the moon and Venus
Avere left shining alone in the clear, cloudless gray sky.
" The night is dying slowly
In the sky,
And the sea looks calm and holy,
Waiting for the dawn of the golden sun
That draweth nigh."
When we left Wick it was a warm night, but by this time
it had become intensely, piercingly cold. It was fully
daylight, cool and ashen, when we reached the highest
part of the " Ord of Caithness." Yet the first warm glow,
harbinger of sunrise, was only just beginning to kindle
in the east, so long, in northern latitudes, does light
precede the sun. We were now driving over fine
heathery moors, high above the sea, and rabbits were
running about in scores. The cold on these exposed
table-lands was nearly unbearable. I felt in danger of
being frozen. The driver said, " he had often seen the
coach lying in a snow-drift for a week at a time on the
Ord of (/aithness, and the mails had to be carried on by
men." High posts here and there serve to indicate the
road in snow. He told me that in winter he never sees
the sun, for his driving is all done in the dark, and he
goes to bed before sunrise, rising for his night's work
after sunset.    Many a hard night he must have known.
Tlie Attempt. 265
" But it is the last year of the mail coach,"  he   said,
" within   twelve  months  the  railway  will  be   open  to
Wick."    The Ord is intersected by several deep  glens
running seaward, and in crossing these, the driver invari¬
ably urged his splendid horses to a full  gallop.    There
was something very exciting in the rattling speed with
which we tore down the steep descent, swept round the
abrupt curve at the head of the gully, and up  the other
side.    One might even have felt it perilous if the reins
had been in less skilful hands.    At five o'clock—the moon
and Venus  thinned  now to   ethereal  thinness,   all but
" melted away into the light of heaven," which was fast
overflowing the eastern horizon,—we saw before us, in a
purple Sutherlandshire glen, the white steam of a loco¬
motive, that seemed walking up and down to keep itself
warm.    This was Helmsdale, and this the northernmost
outpost of railways.*    Straight from London, in twenty-
four hours, one can come hither, 700 miles' journey by
train, direct from King's Cross to Helmsdale, from the
roar and smoke to the dreamy quiet and pure heather-
scented air, leaving more thoroughly behind, with every
northward   mile, the bustle, the noise, the crowd, the
worry, the strain, the whirl, of what has well been called
" an asphyxiating civilisation."    The little shed and the
single hue of rails looked perfectly harmless, and quiet,
and rustic; they had not scarped the hills or injured the
glen, the railroad at this, its far extremity,  had lost its
most disagreeable features.    I had hoped to find a fire
here, but there was none, nor was there any time to
circulate my congealed blood by walking about, for the
train started at once to Dingwall.    And almost immedi¬
ately the sun came forth,  " as a bridegroom out of his
chamber."
" Out of the sea came he,"
touching with gold the waves, as they ran in long curving
lines up the gleaming sands, reddening the brown sails
of the herring boats that were coming slowly to shore,
laden with the night's spoils,
" Daily miracle of morning."
If   circumstances   ever   compel   me to  rise  at  unusual
hours, I always regret that, in ordinary life, one loses the
* Note.—The railway has just been opened (July 1874) to Wick and Thurso,
AUGUST 1874. 2 L
266 The Attempt.
loveliest aspects of nature by sleeping till the hues of
unfolding morning, and the exquisite freshness and purity
of sunrise, have faded " into tlie light of common day."
" O ! timely happy, timely wise,
Hearts that with rising morn arise !
Eyes that the beam celestial view !
That evermore makes all things new.
" Why waste your treasures of delight,
Upon our thankless, joyless sight ?
Who day by day to sin awake.
Seldom of heaven and you partake."
Fresher, lovelier sunliglit I never saw than that which
gilded the tops of the Sutherlandshire hills, and the
woods round Dunrobin Castle. But though I never felt
the least inclination to sleep as long as I was on the top
of the coach, in the sharp, stimulating air, no sooner was
I pent in a railway carriage than I became oblivious.
After passing Bvora and Dunrobin, I saw little till we
reached Tain, except a beautiful dream of Loch Shin,
lying absolutely unrippled in its mountain setting. The
blue waters of Dornoch and Cromarty Firths flashed in
the morning splendour, and to me, just come from
Orkney and Shetland. Easter Ross, with its wealth of trees
and ripened corn, looked " the sunny south." I arrived at
Dingwall at about nine o'clock, and had an hour to wait
for the train to Strome. I no longer wished for a fire now,
for the sun was hot enough to Avarm one through and
through. Tourists, in stylish summer costumes, looked
askance at me in my thick " pilot-coat" and serge dress,
which bright suns and salt Avinds had nearly deprived of
colour, and my universally knocked-about aspect. But I
felt an inward sense of superiority, Avhich rendered rae
impervious to their contemptuous stare, for I knew none
of them had come from Ultima Thule !
At ten, I started for the west coast, by the Dingwall and
Skye Railway, and plunged at once into gorgeous High¬
land scenery,—visions of loveliness and grandeur! Glens,
lakes, mountains, torrents, waterfalls! Loch Luichart, a
mirror of molten silver, reflecting the beauty of wooded
hills and the majesty of rocky mountains, was a picture
never to be forgotten. Then rose the bald peaks of
Torridon and Loch Maree,—domes, pyramids, cones,
nearly white against the cloudless blue of heaven.
Lastly, after  winding its way through exquisite Glen-
The Attempt. 267
can-on, this unequalled route terminated in the radiant
loveliness of Strome Ferry, Thence I looked across to
the Isle of Skye, where the multitudinous mass of the
Coolin Hills, peaks piled above peaks, in celestial blue,
filled up and perfected the picture.
This day, which broke so ideally, was glorious through¬
out ; it was a day of a thousand, a day that breathed of
paradise, one of those rare days that look as if rain and
gloom could never gather more. Every shadow was
violet. AVhen it is fine in the Highlands it is fine, and
one such day compensates for many wild and wet which
may have preceded it.
After three hours' tedious waiting, I left Strome in the
" railway steamer" for Portree. We kept close to the
coast of Skye, and in the clear evening the magnificent
forms of its mountains were seen to the utmost advan¬
tage. The pinnacles and precipices of Scuir-na-Gillean,
one of the most beautiful of mountain shapes, in its
serrated, fantastic outlines, were catching the last violet
radiance of sunset when we entered the harbour within a
harbour, at the head of which is the pretty village of
Portree.
On landing I secured a room in which to wait till
the Clydesdale came from Stornoway. It was now forty
hours since I had left distant Kirkwall, one long day as
it seemed, without the intervention of a night's sleep,
and the varied successions of scenes and experiences
following each other without the usual break was quite
bewildering. I went to bed at ten, and slept till half-past
three, when I was aroused by the arrival of the Clydesdale.
I had paid for my lodging overnight, and had left my box
at the steamboat-ofiice on the pier, so I had nothing to do
but to go straight out. What an exquisite scene! What
rare, poetic, and spiritual loveliness ! Night and day were
mingling; night still reigned, but a new day would ere
long claim the sceptre. There was not a cloud in^the sky ;
not a ripple on the water, where lay the reflections of the
dark headlands, and of the lights on a few anchored
vessels, and the green hght of the Clydesdale. The sky
was full of brilliant stars. Orion, partly risen, glittered
over the island of Raasay; dawn was kindling, pure and
white, above the northern clifi", and Venus
"Flamed in the forehead of the morning sky,"
268 The Attempt.
casting her tremulous image on the water. Again the
young moon carried " the old moon in her arms." Well
was it worth being up at an unaccustomed hour to see
such unearthly beauty,—
"And this is in the night! most glorious night
Thou wert not made for slumber ! "
I enjoyed, however, a refreshing sleep on board the
good Clydesdale, hearing, as in a dream, the bell ringing
before we left Portree, and when next I woke, we were
anchored at the head of Loch Nevish, in Inverness-shire,
taking in a quantity of wool. At eight in the evening of
the same day, we entered the serene bay of Tobermory,
in Mull, a nearly landlocked harbour enclosed by hills
wooded to the water's edge. It is a little gem, contrasting
strangely, in its soft home beauty, with the barren
scenery around. Honeysuckle, rowan, ferns, wild roses,
literally wave over the salt water. Cascades are seen in
all directions glancing through the woods, from the moor¬
land river, which thunders in a broad sheet of foam over
a cliff, and then brawls seaward down a tangled glen, to
the rivulet, which leaps straight into the sea in a shower
of bright drops, musical as the drip of a fountain.
Here was the end of my journey, thus I made my
way from northern Kirkwall to my familiar resting-place
on the shore of the Sound of MulL
Omoron.
TJie Attempt. 2G9
%\\t (Bar11) (g})i c.^ of 6n*manij.
IV.—Old Period : from the Middle op the Twelfth to
the Middle of the Fourteenth Century—continued.
First Classical Period, 1190-1300.
the  akt-epic.
Next in order come the art-epics, produced chiefly by
nobles, during the same period. These consist for the
most part of poems on the four following subjects:—
1. Charlemagne and his Heroes.
2. The Holy Grail and its Defenders.
3. King Arthur and his Knights.     (Some poems
combine the Grail and King Arthur in their
narratives.)
4. Lives of the Saints.
The poems of this order are all written in short rhym¬
ing couplets, and only in one or two instances do we find
a strophe.
I. Charlemagne and his Heroes.
The song of Roland, or the battle of Ronces-
valles, is the chief production bearing on Charlemagne
and his Knights. The subject is unimportant, almost
trivial; but the story has, notwithstanding, been re¬
produced in the Latin, English, Italian, and Icelandic
languages. The idea of Roland seems to have identified
itself with that of Charlemagne, for in many old towns in
Germany a gigantic statue of Roland still remains, to show
that the right of putting to death exists in that town :
this, no doubt, comes from its having been the sole right
of Charlemagne. The story of Roland is simply that he
joined an expedition to Saragossa, to relieve the German
garrison, and was slain on the way home in an affray
with some Spanish troops. The German form of it was
translated from the French original by a priest named
Conrad, at the desire of Duke Heinrich the Lion, between
1173 and 1177.
The German poet begins with an invocation of God,
which was imitated by many later poets, until it became
almost typical.    It runs thus :—
SEPTEMBER 1874. ^   M
270 The Attempt.
Creator of all things,
Emperor of all kings,
Highest Priest and Judge,
Teach me Thyself Thy words,
Send into my mouth
Thy sacred record,
That I may avoid lies,
And write the truth
Of a beloved man.
How he gained God's kingdom.
He was the Emperor Charles.
He is before God,
For with God he overcame
Many a heathen land.
And thus did honour to Christendom.
To the cycle of Charlemagne belong several less im¬
portant legends,—as William of Orange, by Wolfram von
Eschenbach, remarkable for its highly finished style. The
Heymonskinder is a poetic legend, but the German
version of it is poor. Flos and Blankflos is also related
to this period, but belongs in reality to a later time.
2. The Holt Grail and its Defenders.
The legends of the Holy Grail have their scenes of
acticm laid in a highly romantic and poetic region.
Chivalry arms itself, and undergoes all possible privations,
for the sake.of being permitted to see the holy emblem of
religion,—and happy the man who is permitted to guard
that emblem.
These legends may well be called typical of higher
things; and those of them in which King Arthur and his
knights are allowed to figure, and in which the worldly
and ambitious spirit of Arthurs knights is merged in the
quest of something pure and holy, are undoubtedly the
noblest legends of the Round Table. The story of the
Grail runs thus :—
Deep in the mind of ancient heathendom, in the myths
of Hindostan, is rooted the tradition of a place on earth
which, untouched by want and care, yields unlimited joy
to him who approaches it; of a place where wishes cease
because they are satisfied, and hopes rest because tliey
are fulfilled; where the thirst for knowledge is quenched,
and peace of mind is undisturbed. This is the tradition
of the earthly paradise, which is reflected in the divine
refections and sun-tables of the pious Ethiops, of which
Homer and Herodotus have told us: as in the blessed
groves of Cridavaua, in the Sitanta mountains, resound-
The Attempt. 271
ing with tlie sweet singing of birds and humming of bees,
of which the Hindoos speak as the silent abode of all
wisdom and peace. Gradually, in the course of ages, the
ideas of men regarding paradise became more and more
indistinct, and the ideas of God and of themselves grew
more confused. At last nothing of paradise remained on
earth except one solitary jewel, seemingly a holy relic,
yet furnished with divine powers. This relic was some¬
times, like the goblet of Hermes, in the mysteries of
Dionysius, supposed to be a precious vessel, out of which
the golden gifts of heaven were still poured as richly as
in happier bygone days. Sometimes it was looked upon
as a holy thing, as the visible arm of God upon earth,
superior to decay,—the symbol of paradise upon earth, like
the Kaaba at ]\Iecca. The Ethiopian's dreams of the sun-
table, which covered itself with fruits and dainties,—do not
these play a part in the fairy tales of our childhood ? Is
not the search for the stone of wisdom a token of the
unsatisfied longing for the lost jewel of paradise ? These
traditions were formed, by the spirit of Christianity in the
Middle Ages, into a Christian mythology, the most pro¬
found and the most nearly related to the root of Christian
faith and confession which has ever been formed from
the reflections of Christian minds. It is, as it were, the
fable of redemption and of tlie Christian Church, which
has been handed down to us in the legend of the Holy
Grail and its Defenders.
A jewel of wonderful brilliancy, thus runs this Christian
myth, was wrought into a vessel, which was in the pos¬
session of Joseph of Arimathea. Out of this vessel our
Lord, on the night of His betrayal, gave to His disciples
His body and His blood to partake of; into this vessel
was received, from the side of the Crucified One, the blood
which had flowed for the redemption of the world. This
vessel was therefore supposed to be endowed with the
powers of eternal life; and it was said that whoever looked
at it even for one day, could not die in the same week,
even though he were sick unto death; and wlioever looked
at it constantly, his face could not turn pale, nor his hair
grey, though he looked at it for 200 years. This vessel
is called the Holy Grail (Grail means vessel or dish), and
it symbolises the redemption by the blood of Jesus
Christ, offered by means of the church to the human race.
Every Good Friday, a pure white dove carries the host
fi-om heaven, and places it in the Holy Grail, which is
272 The Attempt.
supported in the air, now by hovering angels, now by
pure virgins; and thus the holiness and the marvellous
powers of the Grail are renewed. To be the keeper of
this relic is esteemed the highest honour of humanity.
But not every one is worthy of this honour: only the
faithful and self-denying, who are trampling down all
pride and self-seeking; and to be king and guardian of
these keepers only he can aspire, who, among these
humble and faithful ones, is the humblest and most
faithful, the purest and most saintly man. The keeping
of the Grail is a spiritual knighthood of the noblest kind,
which distinguishes itself, as by purity and humihty, so
also by strong manliness and undaunted courage; as by
faithfulness towards the Lord of Heaven, so also by faith¬
fulness towards women ; as by self-denial and simplicity of
life, so also by the highest wisdom. These knights, in
virtue of their guardianship of the Grail, are called
Templars, and they are intimately connected with the
Knights Templars, being, as the latter afterwards were,
the ideal of ('hristian chivalry. For many years after the
(4rail had been brought into the west by Joseph of
Arimathea, no one could be found worthy to keep it, and
it was supported by the hands of hovering angels, until
at last Titurel, the traditional son of a traditional Christian
king of France, was guided to Salvaterre, in Biscay, where,
on the hill Montsalvage, he built a palace for the keepers
of the Grail, along with a temple for the relic itself, and
founded the sacred knighthood of the Grail. The face of
the hill, which was of onyx, was polished smooth, and
upon this, by the power of the Grail, the foundation plan
of the palace and temple were drawn during the night.
The building was circular (hke the buildings and churches
of the Knights Templars), and was 600 feet in diameter.
On the rotunda stood seventy-two choirs and chapels, all
octagonal; between every two chapels rose a tower, thus
making thirty-six towers surrounding it, each six stories
in height, with three windows, and a winding stair visible
from without. In the middle arose a tower twice as high
and twice as thick. The building was covered in by a
vaulted roof, supported on iron pillars, and the arches
were carved and inlaid with gold and pearls. The arches
were of sapphire, inlaid in the centre with emerald, and
this was enamelled with the lamb and the banner of the
cross. All the altar stones were sapphires, symbohcal of
the blotting out of sins; green velvet coverings were
The Attempt. 273
spread over them. All kinds of precious stones were to
be seen in the decorations over the altar and the pillars;
the sun and moon were represented in the vault of the
cupola by innumerable diamonds and topazes, so that the
temple shone even at night by its own dazzling splen¬
dour. The windows were not of glass, but of crystal,
beryl, and other precious stones of various colours; the
floor was of crystal, clear as water; and underneath this,
made of onyx, were all beasts of the sea as if alive. The
towers were of precious stones, inlaid with gold; the
roofs of the towers, and of the temple itself, were of gold
and blue enamel. On the top of every tower stood a
crystal cross, and on this an eagle of pure gold, with
outstretched wings, so that, at a distance, where the
crystal cross was invisible, the eagle appeared to be
flying. On the top of the principal tower was a carbuncle,
which sparkled so brilliantly at night that it served as a
guiding star.
In the very centre of this temple, just below the cupola,
the whole building was repeated in a miniature model,
still more resplendent with precious stones.    This model
was the ciborium or sacrament-house, and in it the Holy •
Grail itself was kept.
This description resembles, after a German fashion,
that of the New Jerusalem in the Apocalypse. The
building, as described, is to be seen to this day, as Charles
IV. caused the Karlstempel, near Prague, to be built after
this model. The Bohemian Insignia are kept there, but
not the Grail. The latter still exists, however; it was
long in Paris, and is now in Genoa.
This temple was enclosed on all sides by a palace with
countless towers and walls, and this palace, in its turn,
was surrounded by a forest of ebony, cedar, and cypress
trees. To penetrate this forest required a journey of
sixty stages, and no one could pass through it uncalled,
even as none can come to Christ uncalled; and Avhoever
stood unmoved before the Grail, was shut out from the
community of its keepers, thus showing that he who asks
not for salvation, cannot receive it. For many centuries
this temple, in all its splendour, stood in the west; but at
last, by its increasing godlessness, the west was considered
unworthy to retain it longer, and the Holy Grail, along
with the temple, was borne by the hands of angels into
the east.
This legend, in its Christian form, originated in Spain •
274 The Attempt.
in France and Germany it obtained its poetic dress ; yet
in Germany it nowhere appears as an independent legend,
but always in connection with King Arthur and his Round
Table.
The poems in which the legends of the Grail and of
Arthur are combined, are Sir Percival, Titurel, and
Lohengrin. The first of these is by Wolfram von Eschen-
bach, a noble poet, who lived in the end of the twelfth
and beginning of the thirteenth centiiry. He wrote much
at the ^Vartburg, the residence of his beneficent patron,
Hermann, Landgrave of Thuringia. He also visited at
other courts. His poem of Sir Percival was dedicated
to a lady whose love he wished to gain. His strong and
deep mind seized hold of the legend of the Grail as a
subject on which he could compose an epic far superior to
most epics then known. The story of Percival, which he
records in verse, is not intended to be a story of merely
human joys and sorrows, but of the joys and sorrows of
the soul;—of the struggle betAveen the world and the
spirit, between pride and humility, as this is seen in the
history of the inward purification of Percival. its hero.
As a history of the struggles of the human soul, Percival
has perhaps but one equal in German literature, namely,
Goethe's Faust. If the latter has more stirring moments,
more rapid action, Wolfram's epic, on the other hand, has
more fulness, more visible development. If Goethe's
drama is afraid to pronounce the climax, "which it takes
for granted, Wolfram's epic marches calmly, in the con¬
sciousness of Christian truth, up to its close. Goethe's
Faust is the picture of a time strongly agitated, Avhich
had sought peace, and had not foinid it; Wolfram's epic, on
the other hand, depicts an age when men had truly sought
and gladly found that Avhich was to set their souls at rest.
The fable of Peredur, or the French Percival, is to
Wolfram merely the skeleton which he is to clothe with
flesh. King Arthur is portrayed as the type of worldly
splendour and self-satisfied enjoyment; Percival, on the
other hand, is the wandering, imcertain spirit, denying
both God and the world, and at last, only by the deepest
himiility, attaining peace, and the possession of a
spiritual kingdom. But this contempt of the world is not
carried so far as to become asceticism; this would accord
neither with the truthful spirit of the thirteenth century,
nor with the outward magnificence maintained by the
keepers of the Holy Grail.
The Attempt. 275
Percival, the son of Gamuret, of the royal house of
Anjou, was, after his father's early death, brought up by
his mother in a desolate part of the Brezilian forest.
Having lived exactly as a hermit, he had hardly ever
seen the face of a man, until, while wandering one
day in the wood, he heard the sound of horses'
hoofs, and saw three knights approaching. This
awakened the desire to travel, and to become a
knight. His mother, deeply distressed at this wish,
gave him, instead of a knightly costume, a fool's dress
made of sackcloth and calf-skin. Thus, many possessed of
deep minds appear to be fools on their first entrance into
the world. The mother's heart breaks at parting from
her son, and her eyes close for ever. Percival rides to
the court of Arthur at Nantes, where a lady who had
never laughed, cannot forbear laughing at his appearance.
He excites favourable observation by his remarkable
though untutored bravery, and is afterwards drilled by a
knight named Gurnamanz. His first valiant deed is to
liberate a lady oppressed by haughty suitors, the Queen
Conduiramur. He marries her, and soon after goes on an
expedition to see his mother, of whose death he has not yet
heard. As he rides onward, without guiding his course
in any special direction, he comes to a lake. A fisherman
rows him across the lake, and directs him to a palace near
at hand. He enters the palace, and is dazzled by the
splendour which he there beholds. Within the hall are
assembled four hundred knights ; a king suffering from
severe wounds is also there. The door opens, and ladies
and princesses enter the hall. The king gives Percival a
sword, and tells him that he is wounded, but Percival asks
no question about his wound. He is in the palace of the
Grail, but he knows it not, and asks no question. On the
following morning he finds his clothes and his sword in
readiness, and his horse awaiting him. The halls are
deserted. He rides away, and a squire at the palace gate
scornfully asks him why he has not asked where he was,
for he alone could have healed the wounded king, '
Immediately afterwards he meets a maiden, whom he
does not at once recognise to be his cousin Sigune ; she
also tells him how greatly he has erred in not seeking for
the happiness to which he had been so near, and ends
by cursing him for leaving King Anfortas in his suffiering.
In deep thought, Percival rides away; till, on seeing
three drops of blood upon the snow, he falls to thinking
276 The Attempt.
of his absent spouse Conduiramur. He thinks of her in
tears, when two tears were in her eyes and one upon her
chin, and ie seized with an ardent longing to see her
again. ]\rany years were to pass ere this wish should be
gratified; but it was in the same place where he first
beheld the three drops of blood that he afterwards saw
his wife Avith her two sons, lying asleep upon a couch.
So that the three drops of blood, and the three tears,
and the three long lost loved ones found again, are all
mysteriously connected together, and all recur fre¬
quently in this history.
" Thus we recognise the dreams and thoughts of
childhood Avhen they come back to us in advanced life;
or thus it is tliat an old man, looking at the rising sun,
secretly remembers that he has once before seen it
exactly so in his childhood; he knows that he has seen
it shine beft)re he was born into the world, and thinks
that it will soon shine upon his grave." *
He then comes to Arthur, and is about to be received
into the Round Table, when the witch Kundrie comes and
curses him. He gives up the worldly knighthood of the
Round Table, and devoting himself to the Grail, rides
away sorrowfully, despairing of God's help.
For four years he wanders about, far from God and home:
this is the time of doubt.   At the end of this period, during
which he has not asked after God, he meets a knight clad
in grey, who directs him to the higher end of his being.
He finds   a holy hermit in a wood, who tells him that
without humility he shall never win the Grail, and that
King Anfortas, for his pride, has been wounded with a
poisoned spear, and can be kept alive only by looking
at the Grail.    He also tells him that a knight is expected
to come and ask the king about his sufferings and about
the Grail, which is to be the sign that this knight is to
succeed him as king; and he, Percival, is this knight.
After this he gains the victory in several combats with
Gawein and another, and is admitted to the Round Table,
but still continues in quest of the Grail.    On  arriving
there at last, he is told that he is to be King of the Grail;
by asking, he releases the king from his sufferings, is
crowned king, finds his wife and   two  boys  again, the
younger  of whom, Kurdeias, he  makes  ruler  over   his
worldly  possessions,   wliile  the elder,  Lohengrin,  is   to
succeed him as King of the Grail.    Henceforth it is a law
* Grimm, Altdeutsche Walder, I. 5.
The Attempt. 277
that the knights of the Grail, when sent out, are to allow
no questions regarding their origin. Lohengrin marries a
princess of Brabant; she asks him whence he comes, thus
breaking the compact between them, and he leaves her
immediately.
The poem requires several readings in order to be
appreciated. This arises from the number of persons
introduced for the sake of thrt)wing light on the customs
of the period, and the consequently frequent losing sight
of Percival for a length of time. The poetry of Wolfram
von Eschenbach was not appreciated by many of his con¬
temporaries, most men being at that time imbued with a
worldly spirit far removed from the spiritual tone of these
writings.* Wolfram also wrote the history of Titurel, and
of Tschionatulander and Sigune; these are in the Nibclung
strophe of seven lines. The latter is very highly thought
of. The poem of Lohengrin is worked out from the close
of Percival; it is founded on the legend that races of
great heroes had their origin in the sea. This legend
transfigures sometimes a woman, and sometimes a man,
into a swan. It is very ancient, and has been current in
many countries, like that of the Grail, Avhich existed in
French metrical romances as early as the year 1191. The
German romance of Percival appeared between 1205 and
1220; in the following centuries it was the chief romance
of knightly poetry. It was one of the first printed works,
being printed in the year 1477 ; and several translations
of it have been made into modern German, the best of
which is that by Simrock.
The poems of the Grail are almost all composed, in part,
of legends of the Round Table, the character of which is
subordinate to the spiritual character of the legends of
the Grail.
Proola.
(7b he continued.)
* An English translation of Percival is about to appear, by Gostwick.
SEPTEMBER   1S74.
2n
278 The Attempt.
A DRAMA.
Antonio de Herezedlo, Advocate of Toro.
Leonor de Cisneros, his Wife.
De Soto, Jesuit Monk of the Inquisition.
Dona Dolores, Prioress of the Convent of San Marc.
Moiihs—Nun—Man and Women of the Crowd.
Scene I,
\A room in a house in Toro, elegantly furnished and decorated
loith rare flowers,—Leonor standing by the table putting
the   last  rose   in   a  vase,  and  carefully   arranging  its
leaves.']
Leonor. There—now the chamber's perfect.    Let him
come
Soon as he will, he cannot come too soon.
WJien can he come too soon for Leonor?
—My Anton !    Hark, I hear his step I—Nay, 'twas
The dead leaves blown against the pane.—Fancy
Is fond—
(Goes restlessly to the windozv and uncloses the lattice.)
Would he were here 1    Now that the room
Is decked to greet his birth-night, the fond fears
Its decking kept aloof awhile, return;
The night is dark.—Ay, but our Holy Church
Hath cat's eyes, that see best when't's darkest.—Nay
It is he ! now may God be praised.
(The door opens quickly, and Antonio enters.)
Antonio!
Antonio (taking her in his arms).
My Leonor, my own, my dove, my wife,
Look up and say thou'rt glad thine Anton's come I
Leonor. Glad!  (aside)  Did'st but know!   (aloud) Nay,
how should I be glad ?
Thou com'st too soon.    I had a mind to deck
The chamber for thy birth-night—over soon
Thou com'st.
Antonio (sitting doivn disappointedly).
Nay, Leonor, can'st think I reck
A chamber's greeting?   Greet my birth-night thou.
Five minutes more of thee outweigh to me
The Attempt. 279
Ten thousand gilded chambers.    I hasted so,
Longing for thee to bless my birth-night—how
Couldst say " Wait till the room is decked?"
Leonor {laying her hand lightly on his hair).    Antonio!
Ah, foolish Anton—hast no eyes ?    Look up.
Antonio {raising his head and looking round the room).
Nay, it is decked, and with rare woodland flowers
Not grown in Toro's gardens.    And thou too.
My Leonor, {holding her from him, and looking at her dress,
sparkling with jewels, and rare flowers in her hair and
bosom),
Arrayed as mystic bride,
Adorned for her husband!—all for me 1
And I—ungrateful—saw it not!    Forgive,
My Leonor.    It hurt me so that thou
Should'st say I came too soon, when I could scarce
Draw rein, or give poor Toro breatliing space,
Hasting to thee.
Leonor {drawing his arm round her).
Nay, Anton, 'twas but jest—
How could'st thou come too soon for Leonor?
Ah, foolish Anton!   dost not know I needs
Must deck the chamber—seek in furthest woods
The fragrant cistus—don my gold and jewels—
To grace thy birth-night?    Yea, but rather far
To fill the long hours thou wert gone with thee,—
To still my heart from bursting with the fear
That evil might betide thee!    Why, Antonio,
I dared not sit at work at home.    I tried
To read the blessed word thou taught'st, thinking
To quiet my heart so—but the letters swam,
And I was fain to wrap my mantle round,
And seek, in the dim shade of far-ofli" woods,
The flowers that love the cool of forest glade,
Or side of brawling burn, or mossy bank,—
That finding flowers I might lose fears awhile.
Dost think noio that thou cam'st too soon ?—Nay, but
I prattle like a child, so glad I am
To see thee safe, I e'en forget to ask
How thou hast fared, and what news from Seville ?
Antonio. Sad news, my Leonor.    Dost thou recall
The widow Maria, her at whose house
The brethren aye found welcome and relief?
—Mysterious are the ways of God.    He hath
Seen fit to smite His faithful handmaid mad;
280 The Attempt.
And yesternight, men whisper, she hath said
Words, in her ravings, she had rather died
Than knowing utter.
Leonor. 'Las ! what words, Antonio?
Hath she denied oin* Lord?
Antonio. Not so, my own ;
Yet words fell from her—sparks they say may light
Another Auto.    Names—
Leonor. What names ? not thine ?
Oh, Anton, say she did not speak of thee ?
A ntonio. Nay, nay, my own, I know not whose the names.
Men do but whisper that our Holy Church
Hath pricked up her long ears to catch the words
The poor unhinged mind forgot to hide.
And yet, in sooth, they say good Dr. Zafra,
Who useth his qualificator's place
Ever to shield the brethren, hath so well
Hoodwinked the Holy Office, that withal
Its myriad eyes are like to bats by day—
Light all around, yet seeing nought.
Leonor. Thank God I
Antonio. Amen, my Leonor—and yet this tale
Of how one little unmeant word, babbled
By poor mad lips, might prove a spark so fell
As light again the flames San Roman proved,
Hath set me thinking.    Leonor—my wife—
God grant it come not—yet if it should come—
Were ours the names Maria's babbling hps
Had spoken—were the myriad glaring eyes
Of Holy Office—open—relentless—
Whose light is caught from fires of Auto's—fixed
On us as tiger's on its prey,—could we
Meet them unflinching?    Think, my Leonor.
'Tis a cruel thought to speak to one so young,
Tender, and fair,—and yet the time might come.
Leonor. Nay, Anton, why such gloomy words ? thou eaid'st
But now, good Dr. Zafra had hoodwinked
The holy fathers, left them all a-wagging
Sagely their old bald pates—thinking they saw,
And seeing nothing.    Where the danger, then,
Or why such gloomy words ?    Thou art but tired,
And through the fog of thine own fantasy
See'st men as goblins!    Come, I'll sing to thee,
And so dispel these dismal vapours.     What!
(Afoving towards an organ at the further end of the room.)
The AttemiJt. 281
Wilt have me sing?
Antonio {taking her hand and detaining her).
Nay, answer, Leonor.
Think, could'st thou die—young, fair, beloved,—for Him
Who died for thee?
Leonor {lightly).—Ay, an' thou died'st with me.
Antonio. Mine own!    Yet tell me, Leonor, for Him—
Not me.—Dost love Him, Leonor?
Leonor. Love Him ?
Ay, sure.    Dost not thou love Him?   Hath He not
Given me thee ?   His blessed word have I
Not learned from thy lips ?    How could I choose but
Love him ?
Antonio. Mine own !—and yet—
Leonor. Come to my song.
What shall it be ?    Wilt have " The Fairy Fountain ? "
Antonio. Nay; not to-night.    'Tie eweet with dropping
water
Falling amid the leaves in woodland glades.
Yet now I'd liefer have " San Roman's Hymn."
Leonor. As thou wilt—yet I think " The Fairies' Font"
Were best for chasing vapours from the brain.
{Sits down at the organ and sings.)
" When storms beat on a rock-bound shore,
When billows foam, when breakers roar,
Birds scream and wheel, with spray-flakes blind ;
Like spirit of unrest, the wind,
Lashing the waves, moans without cease,
In ocean depths is peace.
" So tempests howl about my life,
Contentions bitter, war, and strife
Are gathered round.    The Future lowers,
Dark spectres from its unknown hours,
With forms half hid, glare without cease,
And yet, within is peace.
" Peace ! 'twas the legacy He gave,
Our Lord, —from brink of opening grave.
Last gift of love to those behind ;
A calm unmoved, a quiet mind.
He said not that the storm should cease,
But gave a heart at peace.
" Oh Saviour Lord, that gift divine
Make mine indeed !—Thy will be mine !
Knowing it wisest, kindest, best.
To Thee, liord, will I leave the rest.
Amen, so all my strife shall cease,
'Thy will is mine,' is peace."
282 The Attempt.
Scene II.
\_A cell of the Inquisition—Leonor seated on a truckle bed—
De Soto, Jesuit monk of the Inquisition, seated in front
of her.^
De Soto. I doubt it not, my daughter; Don Antonio
De Herezeulo ever hath indeed
Been held in high esteem hy Holy Church.
Nay, 'tis even this so strongly lu^ges me
To this my mission, you so loudly calls
To yours.    Dost not recall the words our Lord
Spake to most blessed Peter, when assailed
By hellish darts,—" Simon, Simon, Satan
Desireth thee, yet have I prayed for thee."
If then the darts of hell could even assail
Peter the Blessed, is it wonderful
The enemy, who like a lion roars.
Devouring, still should seek the best as prey ?
And in this, too, our Lord ensample gives.
Teaching, by prayer and penance due, to break
The devil's snares, and bring deliv'rance sure
To tempted ones.    My daughter, think awhUe.
Impenitent—Whitsunday next—this day
A fortnight—surely shall thy husband pass
From fire of earthly Auto, straight to fire
Of endless purgatory.    For nor mass,
Nor prayer, nor vigil can avail for those
Blaspheming Holy Church who die unshriven ;
But fire—fire endless, everywhere—never
Again to see thy face—to hear thy voice—
Nor look on Mary, our most blessed Mother I
For sole companions—worms that never die.
My daughter, think.
Leonor {trembling and wringing her hands).
But I—what can / do ?
He said that to recant were foulest wrong,
Ay, treason to our blessed Lord.
I)e Soto. Ay, ay,
My child, the snares of hell do wrap him round,
Even as a cloak.    Hast not read in that Book
Which heretics permit to eyes unlearned,
—(Against the wisdom of our Holy Church,
Which would expound its mysteries, lest the simple
Drain from the fountain-head a draught too strong,
The Attempt. 283
And perish)—hast not read of men who proved
" A strong delusion to believe a lie ? "
So is it with Don Anton Herezeulo—
Delusion deep as hell.
Leonor. But what can / ?
De Soto.   Much—aU—my child,   think—will  not  love
like yours
Avail with Holy Mother ?    Will not prayers
And penances from heart so full as thine
Melt hers?    Will she not, pardoning thee, pardon
Thy husband too ? her woman's heart knowing
Full well 'twere mockery of pardon else ;
—Or, at the last, seeing thee penitent,
Think'st thou he will not seek thee, but prefer
The fierce embrace of flames to thy soft arms ?
Leonor. But, father, art thou sure that Holy Church
Would then forgive him %
De Soto. Sure ?   Why not, my daughter ?
Doth not our Holy Church, as brooding hen.
Call back her scattered brood to sheltering wing ?
Doth not her heart beat warmer aye to welcome
Each straggler home ?    I say not he shall 'scape
All penance, but, to penitent, penance
Is pleasure ; then after some few months more,
—Slayhap but weeks—and back to happy Toro
Together, thou and he.
Leonor (^looking ujj and pressing her hand to her brow).
Leave me, my father,
Alone a while ; give me a little time ;
I cannot think or make thee answer now.
De Soto. I go.—Yes, think, my child,—ay, and remember
'Tis choice between th' embrace of Auto's fires
And Anton's arms—and not for thee alone,—
For him.    Farewell I may our most Holy Mother
Guide thee aright.
{Going to the door of the cell.    Aside.)
Ay, ay, she's safe ; who stops
To think o'er such a choice is sure. [Exit.
Leonor {cilone, clasping her hands over her eyes).
To Toro,—
Yes, " back to happy Toro thou and lie,"
'Twas that he said—oh, Anton I could it be %
Old sunny Toro ! —nay, I seem to see
The long low latticed window, where so oft
I watched his coming,—how the sunlight lay
284 The Attempt.
In golden streaks on the verandah floor,
And made the dark leaves of the passion-flower,
Wreathing the portico, ghsten hke satin,—
How the cool fountains rose and fell in clouds
Of ghttering spray,—how the hot fragrant air
Breathed from the cistus and arbutus beds
Heavy with perfume,—how the bulbuls sang
In Anton's grove of cypress, and the air
Teemed with the drowsy hum of insect life,
—And thou with me—Oh, Anton !  can it be
Such bliss may yet be ours once more %    He said
It might—the holy father-—did I but
Recant, kneel to the Holy Mass ; one prayer
Repeat to Mary, Mother of our Lord!
—But Anton said 'twere to deny the Lord
That bought us—yet I knew not how 'twere so—
Our Saviour, sure, would never grudge one prayer
Said to his blessed Mother,—one short prayer,—
If not, the fire,—the fire !    Whitsimday next,
—One little fortnight—and my Anton there !
Ah, I can see the flames !—I dare not think—
My brain goes round—
{Putting her hands over her face, then looking up suddenly)
No : and I icill not think I
The holy father said one way there was
Of saving Anton,—only one, and I
Could do it.—If'tis wTong, our blessed Lord
Will not be very wroth—'tis done for love—
Doth not the Bible say His name is Love ?
Or if His anger burn, He'll punish me,
Not Anton,—so be't, so my Anton 's safe;
—I'll think no more, but when the holy father
Returns, I'll answer him as he desires.
Scene III.
[A cell   in   the  inner prison   of the   Inquisition—Antonio
de Herezeulo—De Soto—two Monks holding two yellow
dresses, one uiith flames painted on it pointing downwards,
the other ivith flames pointing upicards^
De Soto. Which shall it be. Signer Antonio,
For the last time ?    Don but this dress—'tis all
I ask.    Sure there's no treason there ?    Canst find
The Attempt. 285
One word in all your Bible that commends
One dress above another?    {Antonio remains silent^
De Soto. (impatiently/) Answer me.
Antonio. 'Twere to betray my Lord.
De Soto. Betray thy L ord i
How can that yellow robe rather than this
Betray him ?    Can a robe recant ?
Antonio. Not so.
Yet in the wearing it 'tis I recant
Proclaim myself a penitent for that
Wherein I most do glory.    Father, cease,
Thou mov'st me not—dost with thy vain words but
Disturb my last few hours on earth.
De Soto. Signor,
One other word—Antonio de Herezeulo,
Thy wife, she hath recanted;—wilt leave her
To prove what mercies Holy Office hath
In store for penitent whose husband hath
Unto the death defied her 1
Antonio. Oh, my God !
May this be false 1    Nay, it is false; thou liest,
De Soto. God will keep them that are His.
My Leonor—my wife—I know thy heart I
Thou said'st thou would'st not fear to share the flames
AVith me for Him !    Shall I misdoubt thee, then,
Or weigh this liar's words with thine ?
(Turning to the Monks) Give me
The yellow garment where the flames turn upwards—
Hasten !—the time goes all too slow.    Once more.
One moment, I shall see thy sweet face here.
My Leonor, and then—Eternity
With Christ and thee !    What though one paltry hour
Of flames between ?
De Soto (inockingly).    Ay, ay, my Don Antonio,
Thou shalt indeed behold thy Leonor
One moment, and adorned with this same robe
Thou scoutest.    For the rest " Eternity
With Christ and thee," etcetera.    Should'st say
One hour of earthly anguish to prepare
For tenfold flames of endless purgatory
For thee.    For her—thou has assayed tlie bowels
Of Holy OSice, and canst guess—wilt still
Don yellow robe with flames turned upward ?
Antonio. Ay,
SEFTEMBEB   1S74. ^   O
28G The Attempt.
Were every He thou speakest truth itself,
l>e Soto. Fool!     To   thy prayers; another hour, and
prayer
Is past for thee ! \ Exit Be Soto.
1st Monk. {Moclcingly holding out the yellow garment)
'Tis fitting bridal robe !
Don it—this other that thou scorn'st shall deck
Thy bride most meetly.    I will hence with it
To her, soon as thou art arrayed.    Kare luck,
Groomsman and bridesmaiden, and all in one!
Antonio. 'Tis bridal robe—ay, and for double bridal,
With heavenly Bridegroom and with earthly bride.
Hasten—time lags too slow.
(They put o?i the yellow robe with the flames
pointing upwards.)
\st Monk, {turning him round mochingly)    Oh worshipful!
Oh gorgeous bridegroom !    Oh appropriate robe !
Its flames do well denote the flame of love.
Now will we finish thine adornment
With this brave mouth-piece—since thy robe so well
Bespeaks thy passion thou'st no need of tongue
Other than those—{pointing to the flames, and producing the
gag-)
2d Monk. Nay, not so fast.    The father
Bade give one hour for prayer—shrift short enough.
{To Antonio) And thou—make thou what peace thou canst
with heaven.
(7b the other Monk) Leave him at peace.
Antonio. Nay, I need no delay.
My peace is made, was made upon a cross
Hundreds of years agone.    The same who walked
Fourth in the fiery furnace—even now,
As I am speaking, standeth at my side.
I neither fear for body nor for soul,
Nor for the strength steadfast to stand—they all
Are in His hand.    I know that He can keep
My trust unto that day ; yet will I pray
For thee and for thy fellow.
{Kneeling down) Lord—
2d Monk, {furiously) Gag him ;
I'll none of this—thou vermin, reptile, worm,
Would'st dare? {to the other Monk)
Gag him, I say ; an' thou dost not,
De Soto, ere this night, shall know thou sought'st
Prayers from a heretic!
The Attempt. 287
Antonio. Father, forgive—
—My Leonor—{they gag him.)
\st Monk. To the square ; there, scorpion, thou
Shalt prove the flames thou lov'st.
{They lead him to the Grand Square, where an immense con¬
course of people is gathered, and fourteen persons, some
men and some women, in yellow rohes, are standing on
a   platform,   monks   and  friars  gathered  round   them
gesticulating and urging them to kiss the cross.     Twelve
of the fourteen kiss it, and are taken aivay to be strangled
before being burnt.    Aiitonio and another remain   un¬
moved; and are  led towards  a scaffold, at the foot of
which are assembled the penitents, in yellow dresses, with
flames turned downioards, and among them Leonor.)
Ist Monk, {as Antonio passes her)    To double bridal
Said'st thou ? here's first instalment—it may hap
Thou'lt find second the same !
{Antonio passes on to the stake.)
1st Woman in the crowd. A-well-a-day,
They're gone, poor souls!    Did'st see, as he passed here.
The look on Don de Herezeulo'e face %
What was't so moved him "?    It was calm as face
Of holy Stephen in the altar piece,
Whiles they "were buffeting and mocking him.
What changed it so in passing here ?    Dost think
'Twas sight o' the stake ? and yet 'twas not like fear.
Nor yet like pain—only it grew more sad
Than aught I ever saw on earth.    Did'st thou
Not note it, Juan %
2d Woman. Ay, poor soul, 'twas sad.
Small wonder—on his way to the Brasero !
But look, where think'st thou are they taking yonder
Pale woman ?
Is^ Woman. But he should have looked sad all
The way; 'twas but in passing here—-his face
Till then seemed glorified as martyr Stephen's.
2d  Woman.   Look,   look,   the  woman   struggles!    can
they be
Taking her too to the Brasero ?    Heigh,
Neighbour Juan, can'st tell who 'tis ?
Juan. They say
'Tis Dona Leonor de Cisneros,
Wife to the Don Antonio de Ilerezeulo,
Just past on's way to the Brasero.
1st Woman. 'Lack,
288 The Attempt.
'Twas that then moved him, tender soul, pitying
Her pain more than his own !   Well, his pain's past
By now—the Holy Virgin shorten her's—•
She's out of sight—Heaven help her! though she be
Heretic she's a woman still.
Juan. Nay, dame,
They take not her to the Brasero.    Did'st
Not see her 'mong the penitents ?    She hath
Recanted—yet I heard them say that now
She struggled hard to join her husband.
\st Woman. 'Lack,
Poor soul, 'twere better to have died with him I
{Aside)—Ay, ay, that 'twas then made his face so sad!
Scene IV.
\Nine years and four months after, Leonor sitting alone in a
turret room oj the Inquisition, xoatching the sunset.']
Leonor. Nine years now and four months since I last saw
The sunset, and for me 'tis now earth's last.
To-morrow, ere this time—oh happy thought!—
My long voyage will have ended on a shore
That needs nor mm nor moon to lighten it!—
Ah ! now the Heavens are all aglow—purple.
And red, and gold with the departing glory.
It seems sad—^just a little—does it not,
Never to see another sunset, even
In Heaven ?    Those colours are so fair, they seem
Worthy of Heaven even ; ah ! I forgot
" There is a rainbow round the throne of God."
We'll have the colours, only the sun changed.
{Remains silent and thoughtful a few minutes, gazing at the
sun disappearing behind the hills, drawing a long breath
as he disappears entirely.)
There now—he's gone—I've seen the very last
0' the poor old sun.    Mayhap 'tis better so—
I think I see now what God meant—letting
Me fall so for.    I've often wondered—now
I seem to see—this last eve's sunset 'twas
That taught me.    " No more sun, for"—mark the for—
" God's glory lightens it, and the Lamb's the light
Thereof."    That's it, that's why he let me fall.
He saw that Anton was my siin—that Heaven,
His Heaven.itself, were scarce a Heaven to me,
The Attempt. 289
Anton not there.    And in God's Heaven can be
No sun save God—they need none other there.
'Twas that he meant to teach me—and has taught.
He taught it me before to-night, and yet
I think 'twas this last sunset showed me how
All through 'twas this he meant.    My God—my sun—
No other sun save Him—that's Heaven—ay, that
Can make Earth, Heaven—-the Inquisition even.
{Sits silent a few minutes?)
—We'll have the colours though—I'm glad of that—
All the bright colours—crimson, gold, and blue,
And all the rest.    " There is a rainbow round
The throne."    I'm glad of that—I think I know
What that means too—or might mean—just as I
Only in loving Anton, all the world
Loved more for loving him.—Just so is God
Heaven's sun—but not a rayless sun—there is
A rainbow round about His throne.    'Tis not
The sun shining alone in cloudless sky,
But like the sun to-night—where the great clouds
Were piled to watch its setting, and each cloud
Caught its bright colour from the central sun.
And glowed purple and red because He shone.
I think that's how God means that we should love—
Shall love in Heaven—Himself love's centre, yet
Loving all others more because we love
Him most—and knowing what we love, even
In them is radiance caught from Him—His truth,
His love. His tenderness. His majesty,
Mirror'd in them-—just as the rainbow's but
A watery cloud, until the sun impregnates
It with glory.—Will not the bow be bright
When God's the sun ?—Yes, let me think.—Do I
Love Anton less than when I loved him more
Than I loved God ?    Not so, not less, but more—
More—more—far more.    How my heart leaps to think
To-morrow eve I'll see his face again—
The dear old face.    But not with that look on't
It wore when last I saw it—that look, how
Its sadness haunted me for months and years !
I knew how soon 't had passed from thy dear face
—Melted i' the light of God and of the Lamb;
Yet many a day its sadness lived with me—
That's gone too, melted from my heart by tliat
Same light, though yet but as a " hope of glory."
290 The Attempt.
—Ay, Heaven is Heaven without, and yet I think
'Twill be more heaven to thee, Leonor there—
Just as the heavens are fairest, when great clouds
Catch kiss o' the sun.    Strange, is it not, to think
All this to-night ?    To-morrow is the Auto,
And not once have I thought about the flames
Last time I dreaded so.    San Roman felt
Just so, I fancy, when he wrote his hymn—
The hymn that Anton loved.    'Tis long since I
Have sung it—I could not—it hurt me so—
So 'twined it was with thoughts of Anton—but.
Now that there's but one night 'tween him and me,
Now it is glad, not sad, to think of Anton.—
{Begins to croon in a low voice)
" He said not that the storm should cease,
But gave a heart at peace."
That's it: I sometimes wondered when the rack
Was at its worst, my heart felt quietest then—
{Sings)
" Peace ! 'twas the legacy He gave.
That's true—(a knock at the door)—
Come in.
Enter Dona Dolores, Prioress of San Marc.
Prioress. Lady, Father de Soto
Hath sent me to entreat, for the last time,
The Doua Leonor de Cisneros
Mercy to show to soul and body both—
And to advise her that no more of penance,
Or Inquisition dungeon shall reward
Her recantation ; but a quiet home
In the adjoining convent of San Marc,
Where she may end her days in prayer and peace.
If not—the flames to-morrow !   Lady, think,—
It is my convent—/have begged this favour
Of De Soto,    Think—thou may'st teach us all
The better way.    Thy patience and thy words
Have moved my heart—ay, and have moved the hearts
Of others too.    Thou may'st work for the Christ
Thou lovest so, among us.    For our sakes,
If not thine own, yield, I entreat.    Thou art
Too young to die.
Leonor. {smiling)    Thanks, Dona Dolores,
For the kind words—for all thy kindness—thanks
To God too, thou dost say poor words of mine
The Attempt. 291
Incline thy heart to seek Him whom I love.
But for the rest^—say this to Monsignor.
I was too young to die—at least not ripe—
Kine years now and four months agone.    God saw,
And left me here to ripen,    l^h' Inquisition's
Not a bad forcing house.    He knows the time,
And now he comes to pluck me—glad to be
Gathered.    Staying, thou say'st, I might perchance
Work for my Lord.—Nay, Lady, God will care
For His own work—what recks the worker ?    His
Work must needs be done, and will be.    'Twere not
To work for Him to leave the task He sets—
My work's to die.
Prioress. Lady, is't your last answer ?
Leonor. The very last.
Prioress. Alas !    Then farewell, lady.
Leonor. (Going up to her and kissing her)
Nay, not " alas "—nor yet " farewell."    We'll meet
Again up yonder, thou and I.    The work
That God begins He ends.—And for " alas,"
Yes, it has been " alas," but that's past now—
It was "alas" nine years agoue—mayhap
It was "alas"—a little—on the rack
Sometimes—now it will never be " alas"
Through all eternity.
Prioress. Not in the flames %
Leonor. Not in the flames; for I am dead already—
Dead, and my life hidden with Christ in God;
Flames cannot touch it tliere.
Prioress, {iveeping and kissing her, and trying to say farewell)
For a while then.
Farewell, dear lady. [Exit Prioress.
Leonor. Lord, bring her too home
In Thy good time.    Now I'll to sleep, lest I
Be weak to-morrow.    We 're but dust, you see.
(^LAes down on her bed., crooning in a low voice)
" Amen, so all my strife shall cease,
' Thy will is mine,' is peace."
[Sleeps.
Scene V.
[Midnight after the Auto—The Prioress's Cell in the Convent
of San Marc—Dona Dolores on her knees before a
Crucifix. [A knock at the door.
Prioress, (rising) Enter !    (^l nun enters).
292 'Hie Attempt.
Has Juan come I    Is't over then ?
Nun. Ay, madam, ere sunset, at five o'clock.
Prioress. Did she endure unflinching to the end ?
Nun. Unmoved; nay, Juan saith he ne'er beheld
Aught like the radiant peace upon her face.
Prioress. Doth Juan say she spake ?
Nun. Once she essayed,
But the monks drowned her voice.
Prioress. . Heard he no word
Then?
Nun. None; but one who stood close by the stake
Saith, when the fire was lit he heard her say,
(Fixing her eyes upon the sun, which neared
Its setting) " No more Sun, God and the Lamb
The light thereof—and there's a rainbow round
The throne of God!"    'Twas her last word, he said.
She smiled, and her head sank.
Prioress. Alas—yet no.
She said she would not we should say alas.
With her 'tis well; she's gone into God's light;
'Tis we are left in darkness.    Beatrix,
Go fetch the Book—thou know'st the secret spring
Unlocks the Avail where it is hid. [JExit Nun.
Dark! dark!
She said it speaks of One who is the Light.
Jeanie Morison.
lints Q\x  nothing.
We're poor with nothing, so 'tis said or sung,
And yet from nothing all creation sprung ;
The fair and smiling earth, with swelhng tide,
Emerged from nothing, like a radiant bride,
Adorned with gems, and flowers of richest hue,
W^ith all that cheers the heart and charms the view.
At balmy evening let thy vision fly
Along the blue and tranquil summer sky,
Where not a cloud, perchance, obscures the sight,
Save one of softly-shaded pink and white,
Tinged with a golden ray from Sol's bright face,
A parting glance ere Luna takes his place.
Then view the treasures of the richest mines,
Where gold is glistening and the ruby shines,
The Attempt. 293
Or sapphhe, like the blue forget-me-not.
Or fairest gem concealed in pearly grot;
Examine well the blossom of the rose.
As timidly its blushing leaves luiclose,
And see the jessamine with scented head,
The modest violet in its fragrant bed.
The primrose peeping from the shady dell,
The stately oak, the simple heatherbell;
And list the sound of sylvan waterfall,
The cooing music of the dove's soft call,—
Then say that nothing can surpass them all I
The greatest sages that the world e'er saw,
Found nothing as it should be—without flaw !
While ancient bards, who sang inspiring lays.
Thought nothing sweeter than the highest praise.
In nothing do we see extremes unite
Of beauty, weakness, ugliness and might;
Extremes of size and colour intertwine
Harmoniously in nothing, and combine ;
Nothing is blacker than the blackest sloe,
Nothing is wliiter than the purest snow.
Nothing more frightful than the Gargon's face,
Nothing can equal the Apollo's grace,
Nothiug is frailer than a fading flower,
Nothing surpasses Samson's strength and power;
But nothing's perfect! who can say as much
Of anything we ever see or touch!
It is indeed of all things most sublime,
For nothing stands when all is felled by time;
But then to fate's decree it too must bend,
or nothing in Eternity will end !
Jane B. Ballantyne.
(IbXi   \\\t   l^igilts.
Switzerland is very full this year. To those who
remember when Swiss railways were not, or were few
indeed,—when one tourist came for fifty who come now,
—it needs all available benevolence and philosophy to
hope that a wider-spread, if lower, enjoyment to a greater
number may compensate for the general overcrowding,
and the jostling with many people who don't know why
SEPTEMBEK  1874. ^    "
294 The Attempt.
tlicy came, and are quite out of place, that beset the
enthusiastic Swiss traveller now. Where are the little
rustic inns, where the landlord had a cordial greeting
for the returning guest, and the few sympathetic tourists
made such a pleasant little society'^ Where are the
lonely footways—the remote wilds ? Fewer every year,
and harder to find. A huge, dreary barrack, like a
hundred others, replaces the characteristic little inn; the
kindly, if not wholly disinterested landlord is changed
into a company for screwing the last "sou" out of tourists,
and represented by a crowd of waiters, who rush in a
body on the traveller, all speaking a more or less unplea¬
sant jargon, which passes for English. And, by the way,
how amusing it is when these waiters, all unconscious of
the very queer phrases they have picked up, with smiling
civil obsequiousness, tell you to " come along directly,"
or remark knowingly, " We'll see," just as if they were
saying the right thing in their own courteous language.
Instead of a welcome guest, you are now a mere number;
93, or something equally undistinguished ; and, at the
long table d'hote,—amid hosts of ,over-dressed Americans,
much occupied with their clothes, and uncultured excur¬
sionists, indifferent to the scenery, but fondly anxious
about the dinner,—only a few of the old sort are seen
here and there—those who come for love of the moun¬
tains, and long to explore their secret recesses. There
are some little inns still, where the foot of Cook has never
trod, where the twang of the Yankee is unknown, where
the real Alpine traveller—the stalwart member of the
Alpine Club—is welcomed by name year after year. But
to no printed book, not even to our own dear confidential
Attempt, would I confide the name of such sweet retreats
as I know of, lest an ill breeze should blow it to the ears
of mine host, and the greed of the Switzer should wake
within him, and the barrack should be built, and the
waiters hired, and the stream of excursionists turned on,
and peace fly further afield.
But, though the tourists are so numerous, mountaineers
have not, we think, increased in proportion,—and, indeed,
are apt to be despised as half-crazed enthusiasts by the
majority of a company in a great hotel. Are they not
rough in their attire—sometimes red and blistered in
their complexions? Have they not their own interests
and excitements, so apart from the watering-place gossip
of the many, that they are dull company for the smart
The Attempt. 295
loungers in the big caravanseries ? Do not a number of
respectable and cautious people, both in Switzerland and
at home, consider all the so-called first-class mountain
expeditions worse than foolish,—positively blameable and
foolhardy'? It is certainly a subject on wliicli two oj^iuions
are possible, and having been well plied myself with the
cautious views of late, I feel incited to try and say a
word in defence of Alpine Club expeditions, even while
admitting that a certain degree of risk does attend them.
Of course it is a question of degree, and instances of
real unjustifiable foolhardiness may be found among the
votaries of mountaineering ; but there are always people
who carry every pursuit they engage in to excess, ride
the hobby of the moment to death, and bring absurdity
and discredit upon things in themselves excellent. But
we must allow, I think, that there is a certain small
degree of positive danger, of real unavoidable risk, in
Alpine expeditions; also a considerable amoimt of what
one might call latent danger, that is, probability of acci¬
dents i/proper precautions are not taken, and ?/people
unfit to cope with the difficulties go into places too
difficult for them.
A great authority in Alpine literature, Mr. Whymper,
allows the existence of only one unavoidable positive
danger, and it is peculiarly Alpine, namely, the risk of
the fall of ice pinnacles or stones. Sucli falls are constantly
.occurring among those wonderful mountains, often pre¬
cipitous beyond the point of stable equilibrium, constantly
mouldering and disintegrating from the action of the
weather on their crumbling surfaces. Such a fall is pos¬
sible in too many places for the traveller to be able to
avoid passing them all; though the guides know the
more dangerous places, and hurry across them. Few,
I think, can have climbed among the mountains, without
having had tlie sensation of experiencing one or two
escapes from the mountain cannonade of boulders of rock,
bounding and crashing down from some height, down
over rock and bush and tree, till they find their level far
below, perhaps shattered by the last shock into a thousand
fragments, and exploding almost like a shell. Ice, of
course, is always changing. It is curious to observe on a
glacier the stir that succeeds at noon to the frost-locked
stillness of the early morning; the cracking and grind¬
ing of ice, the thundering rush of avalanches, the
dashing and gurgling of the wild waters below, giving
296 The Attempt.
certainly a feeling of instability and insecurity to the
way. But it is generally easy to avoid walking under
impending ice crags; indeed, I should suppose it is
scarcely ever done, except by the very rash, or perhaps
by pioneers of a new route finding out what to avoid;
and though falling stones bring a positive risk, it is a
very small one. During the last thirty ye<j,rs, two or
three people have been thus killed in the valleys,—one
hunter on the mountains, but no single tourist on the
mountains, has thus lost his life.
As to avalanches, in summer travelling the unavoidable
risks connected with them may fairly be included in
those of sudden changes of weather. Compulsory
Avinter travelling is different; it may force the traveller
into real danger of being overwhelmed by an avalanche.
There are certain spring avalanches which regularly fall,
and sweep all before them in a known tract; till these
have fallen their track ought to be avoided. Places liable
to be swept by avalanches have certain characteristics,
which mark their danger to the experienced mountaineer,
even if a stranger to the district; but inexperienced
travellers, Avandering on the heights alone, may easily
get into very dangerous places exposed to avalanches, or on
to snow that is unsafe and likely to slip away with them.
A very sudden change of weather may cause a quite
unexpected avalanche, and this brings me to a second
danger, which seems to me real and unavoidable,
although not noticed by ]\Ir, Whymper. That is, a
sudden and extraordinary change of weather, which may
bring an element of great danger into an otherwise
safe expedition. This must not however be estimated
too highly ; in general, the experts know what weather
to expect in the High Alps, and those Avho persist in
going on, when experienced guides counsel their return,
make the danger themselves, and must accept the risk.
There remain some latent dangers, or rather tlie
conditions that imprudence, rashness, weakness, and
inexperience, may convert into dangers. Such are ice
climbing, rock climbing, snow slopes, precipices, etc.
Different people are, of course, in different degrees, safe in
those more or less difficult positions; the guides have
plenty of experience, and it is amusing to see how soon
a really good one Avill gauge the capabilities of a traveller,
and advise him accordingly. No doubt some of the rank
and file of guides care only for their pay, and will start
The Attempt. 297
Avith any one for any place, but such, generally, are the
first to be ready to turn back, and are pretty safe com¬
panions. Many people feel dizziness near precipices;
unless they feel that this diminishes on greater acquain¬
tance with them, and in no way interferes with their power
of moving wherever they have hand and foothold, excur¬
sions on the heights are not for them. They incur a
hundred dangers, where none exist for the firm-headed
and sure-footed. Then the imprudence of bold moun¬
taineers, who are too idle or too rash to take proper
precautions, may often convert these conditions into risks.
They will perhaps traverse a snow slope because it is an
easy short cut, knowing it to be dangerous from fresh
fallen snow or some such reason,—an accident occurs, it
is put down by the unlearned to the credit of Alpine
excursions, when it is simply owing to the rashness of
some particular party. In the same way a man will
sometimes cross a glacier with concealed crevasses alone,
which with three people roped together would not be
dangerous, trusting to the chance of not slipping in, and
so perishing. Such accidents do occur, and ought never
to occur. Keasonable precautions must not be neglected
in Alpine travelling; but is that saying anything against
it ?    I think not.
Having allowed a certain element of danger in Alpine
excursions, that is some slight unavoidable risks, and a
good many dangerous possibilities that prudence, apti¬
tude and strength prevent from developing into actual
dangers, comes the next question,—Are we justified, for
recreation or amiisement, for anything short of absolute
necessity, in getting into any danger at all—any danger,
however slight % But when are we out of danger %
Fancy, before we undertake anything, sitting down to
calculate the danger! A certain percentage of railway
travellers meet with accidents,—shall we, therefore, limit
our journeys to the strictly necessary? The average
number of people killed in the streets of London, by being
run over (exclusive of all injuries from accidents not fatal,
of course the large majority) is in the year more than four
and less than five a week. Well might Jean Tairez, a
first-rate Chamouni guide, who accompanied a friend of
ours to London, exclaim, that these streets were the most
dangerous walking he had ever tried. Shall we, therefore,
never attempt a London crossing ? Shall we never go to
sea, because of wrecks? nor in a boat, for fear of squalls %
298 The Attempt.
Never bathe, for fear of drowning '? Never ride, because
of many bad chances ? Never drive, because of a few 'I
AVhat shall we do ? Where, in this world of mortality and
accidents and chances, shall we draw our timid line? Kound
our kitchen gardens, or our own arm-chairs ; sit there till
we believe we are made of glass, and die of rust, inertia,
and disuse? No. I believe the habit of morbidly dwelling
on possible risk is a thoroughly bad one; risk is unavoid¬
able, one of the ever abiding conditions of our mortality,
and whether in business or in pleasure ought not to trouble
us overmuch.
But further—to the muscular frame is affixed the con¬
dition  which holds good of the intellect, of the affec¬
tions, of the mind,—use it, or you lose it.    High physical
health and strength are not to be had without strong
exercise ; and where strength exists, there is generally
found a craving to use it.    The young male animal ought
to have active play ;   and it is no small point to secure to
it innocent play.    And as to the workers,—the recreation
of the   man, whose work  strains his  muscles, may be
diversions which employ the mind, but leave the body at
rest.    But the recreation, the real life-giving rest of the
brain-worker, implies bodily exertion, calling into exercise
the powers a too sedentary life is apt to enfeeble and
destroy.    All this will be generally allowed; but if it is,
we may surely see how  excellently  excursions in  the
High Alps fulfil all that is required in these respects.
And  firstly, owing to that abused element of possible
danger.     Courage,   endurance,   quickness   of   resource,
presence of mind, are excellent qualities; but in the hum¬
drum routine of our safe, easy-going, machine-made, over-
civilised  life, years sometimes pass without any oppor¬
tunity  of exercising them,   unless   in  travel,  or in the
vicissitudes, of field sports.     In France,   there  is now,
among the upper classes, very little rough travelling or
out-door athletic amusements; and the consequence is,
their young men, compared with the same class here, are
wonderfully deficient in resource, self-reliance, and energy.
It  was  remarkable,  for instance, in the late war, what
difliculty was found  in  the   conveyance  of  despatches,
across even their own country, when partially occupied by
the enemy.    In every English county, I believe we could
find at least one girl capable of riding across country in
the  dark   near her  own home—so   much   resource  and
energy does habitual hunting call. out.    The remarkable
The Attempt. 299
coohiess, dash, and self-reliance of our young officers, the
learned in these matters greatly attribute to hunting,
which is unquestionably more dangerous than most
Alpine excursions, possessing as they say, half the excite¬
ment of Avar, and one-fifth of the danger. Hunting is
practically too expensive for all but those of A'ery easy
means, or those Avhose business lies among horses ; but
the element of danger that underlies Alpine traA^el, as well
as hunting, is admirably suited for calling out those good
qualities so apt in our ordinary life to rust for Avant of
use. It is not an expensive amusement; the hard-
worked professional man can often save money for an
Alpine tour, Avhen a horse Avould be beyond his means.
It has this great superiority OA-er all field sports, that it is
pure enjoyment to all concerned. No animal slaughter
or misery ministers to our pleasure in it; Ave do not
" blend our pleasure and our pride, Avith sorroAv of the
meanest thing that feels." More than that, the object of
these excursions is to bring us face to face Avith
nature in her grandest forms, her freest, most glorious
developments—to take us far aAvay from the littlenesses
of daily life, and minor cares and troubles, into the fresh
splendour of mountain life. They are most poAverful in
the excitement of emotions of wonder, delight, and
exquisite enjoyment of beauty. Away AA'ith all defences
and all apologies for a recreation so Avholesomely delight¬
ful to mind and body! Let us dream ourselves back into
one of those blissful days they have illuminated, and at
the risk of stirring up too wistful a longing for the free,
glorious heights, Avhere the Alpine roses bloom, recall
some of those past delights.
It is still dark, perhaps only three in the early summer
morning, for the sun must not have been sliining long
enough on the upper snoAvs Ave have to cross, to make
them heavy, nay dangerous Avalking before we arrive.
Out from the sleeping inn, through the little broAAn
village, so quiet under the starlit sky, Ave folloAV our
silent guide, half solemnised by that deathly feeling that
just precedes the daAvn. Hark! a bird is stirring,
another ansAvers, the eastern sky grows clearer, the stars
groAV fainter, and as Ave pursue our way up the pine
• Avood the birds are all aAvaking On the dcAvy pastures
beyond, the goats and cows begin to shake their bells in
a morning carillon, the stars have all faded at last in a
saffron sky, and still the fair landscape seems all anti-
300 . The Attempt.
cipation—waiting   for   the   master—the   sun.      Higher
still, he has not reached us yet, but the great snow peak
far in the   sky, which has hitherto loomed out a pale
solemn ghost, has caught the red rays, and glitters with
the brightest tenderest rose tints.    Now he lights crag
and   forest,   and   mountain   range;   we  rejoice   in  the
shadow in which we still Avalk through the dew and the
flowers.    The exhilaration of all nature infects us too—
the glory of living, the splendour of the world we live in
seems to fill our hearts with delight.    Higher—the sun
has caught us now, but no matter, the air is so bright and
keen we are fresher than at starting, for we are in the
snow and glacier world.    We have left the woods, for
the trees have dwindled and ceased, and this is the last
pasture; down to it come streaks of snow, alongside rise
the icy spires.    Only ice and rock are beyond us, and the
bold flowers, set here and there like gems in the grey cliffs
and yellowish brown mosses.    Halt for a second delicious
breakfast, and then, with the guide, now om- leader and
master, in advance, ice-axe in hand, we  engage on the
ice and snow part of the route, the featm-e which gives
the intense interest to these explorations that cannot be
approached where there is not perpetual snow.    For we
enter  a new region  of sparkling snows and ice-jewels,
gaping blue  crevices,  and  pure  white  stretches  of un¬
trodden snow.    Every day the practicable path alters;
every minute some new intricacy to be traced out, some
new difficulty to be solved presents itself.    The air is
exhilarating beyond description, the interest and delight
of the fresh effort needed to get over each new impedi¬
ment as w^e reach it, intense.    And then, when we pause
and look roimd on the splendid solitude, how it thrills
one all over with rapture.    Such moments are marked
with an aureole in our lives, they are stored away like
costly treasures to be looked over with truest pleasure in
duller times, but they cannot be described.
Alpine climbers, by a kind of freemasonry, can hint
them to each other, but to be understood, they must have
been experienced. And granting that the way up the
mountain has needed the utmost caution, the exertion of
all wholesome effort; skill on the part of the guide,
acti-saty and deftness, at least, from the travellers ; are
they tne worse for the stimulus 'I No, certainly not; the
idea that carelessness might be fatal, only adds a zest to
the cautious enjoyment, with which people, suited for such
Tlie Attempt. 301
expeditions, surmoimt a difficulty. Then comes the
descent, with its sense of achievement, the return to the
lower sweeter world, lichened, rock flowers again,—and
what flowers! We have seen the pink and blue flowers
on high rocks, blooming in quite solid masses Avith no
stalk, like jewels lying (m the ground, of a size and
intensity of colour, our best gardening efforts cannot
approach. Once more the pastures in the sleepy after¬
noon light; far as the Avalk has been, the pure light air
that waves that wealth of grasses and flowers—tall
flowers now, lilies and campanulas—gives us fresh spring
and diminishes fatigue ; and so back to the lower valley,
to fruit trees, cultivation and corn, chestnut trees, perhaps,
and trellised vines, with, it must be owned, the joy of
dinner before us, and the welcome rest to mind and body,
after a day of delicious exertion and excitement. And
shall we condemn such enjoyments as these, because of
the dangerous possibilities we have alluded to ; because
they are to some people, especially to light-hearted young
men, whether guides or employers, most enjoyable when
there is a spice of daring about the excursion, and it fully
taxes the energies of those concerned % No, Avould come
as the answer, not only from those mere holiday-seekers,
Avho find in them the purest, brightest holidays in the
"world, but even more emphatically from such people as
chiefly constitute the Alpine Club ; hard-worked men of
the learned professions, over-strained lawyers, over¬
worked clergymen,—men compelled, perhaps, to live in
great cities ten months of the year, who come, however,
season after season, to refresh their weary spirits, and
brace their highly -wrought nerves on the pure sweet
Alpine heights. Happy for them that they can there
become boys again, and delight once more in the physical
exercise and healthy excitement of climbing ; while ever
more delightful to their maturer minds are the wonderful
scenes they explore, which to all save those who win
those difficult heights, are the unknown glories of the
liigh Alps.
So much for the boys, young and old ; and the girls,
too, we would recommend to quit the beaten track for
the grandes courses, as far as their strength permits;
because, to sum up my argument, it is really good to
employ what strength and activity they have, and also
there are mountain wonders and mountain glories reserved
for the climbers alone.    But we do not wish to under-
SEPTEMBER 1874. ^   Q
802 'J'he Atteiiijit.
value the more accessible scenery, open to the less strong
and active. In many places, the glacier world borders
on the easy bridle road, and even the lounging walks
round some of the baths, where invalids congregate, are
full of sublimity and beauty. What can be more delicious
also than bowling along one of the great passes into
Italy, in a comfortable open carriage, drawn by four or
five gay horses, with jingling bells and flying tassels.
]\Iagnificent scenery around, and full of exciting change;
rising from sweet pastoral Switzerland to the barren
heights Avhere the snow mountains only are above, and
lichens only grow, under the long desolate refuge galleries
all mantlbd with the snow that used to sweep the wild
path in former days, through rock and forest, down many
a mile of sharp zig-zag into a warmer climate; amethyst
hills, trellised vines. Avhite Campanile rising out of the
chestnut trees, and that Avonderful indescribable expansion
and flowering of all nature, which tells us we have entered
Italy. There all is changed; floating luxuriously in
the cushioned boat, on one of the lovely Lombard lakes,
under the purple mountain walls, past the bright villages
nestled in rich Avoods, past the proud palaces, where the
water plays round the marble stairs, and reflects the
wealth of luxurious bloom of flowers and fruits hanging
over it, Ave feel that we need bring no exertion or thought
of our own to enhance our enjoyment. For the moun¬
tains demand physical effort for their full appreciation,
and art requires mind; but Italian scenery gives us all for
nothing, and remains the very ideal of a whole holiday to
mind and body, of lazy, languid, delicious rest.
E. J. 0.
il n n (I.
She doth not see, for a crown of pain
On her beautiful browns doth rest.
And mars the loveliness we would fein
Did every guerdon of earth contain;
But God^He knoweth best.
So He laid His hand on the lids that close
The Attempt. 303
Like the tender leaves of a soft June rose,—
0 fair and blind! 0 fair and blind!
But still she sang, as she groped her way
In that night of hers that was never day,
" That God is kind, that God is kind."
II.
She never saw the gladsome step
Of the laughing, bountiful Spring,
As with sunny smile and a merry shout
She chases the weary Winter out.
And all the grey weirdly trees about
Her bright green tassels swing.
The summer roses they bloom apace.
But they bring no smile to her patient face ;
The autumn passion-flower faints and dies,
And calls no tear to her calm blue eyes,—
0 fair and blind!  0 fair and blind!
And yet the wafts that her ringlets stir
Have a tenderer message perchance for her,
For God is kind, for God is kind.
m.
Apart she sits with folded hands,
Like some meek and holy saint.
The dim eyes big with tears unshed,
A shadow on the bowed head
Old masters loved to paint;
For well she knows, not now nor here.
But in some far-oft' mysterious sphere
Fair blossoms sweet in the promised land
Are planted now by a Father's Hand,
Which will guide her steps in the sweet amaze
That will thrill lier soul in the first full gaze,—
0 fair and blind !    0 fair and blind !
As she seeth the flowers for the first, fresh time.
And treadeth on mosses and clover and thyme.
And looks on the valleys whose glories have birth
In the untrod paths of the new-born earth,—
For God is kind, for God is kind.
;-)04r "The Attempt.
IV.
When night, that nurse with the kindly arms.
Has folded her children away,
And the calm, sweet breath of the whispering night
With the fainting fall of the fading light
Is soothing the sobbing day ;
There dwells no more on her sleeping lips
The sadness born of her life's eclipse,
For God hath opened the boiinden eyes
To gaze on His glorious mysteries,—
0 fair and blind ! 0 fair and blind !
And night—(to us but night it seems)—
To her is a rapturous day of dreams,—
For God is kind, for God is kind.
V.
0 fair and blind, what it all shall be,—
The untold rapture of ecstasy,
The dazzling waves of the crystal sea !
Tlie first sight to burst on thy wondering eyes
The glorious gardens of Paradise !
And the earliest rays on thine orbs to be
The Light that lightens eternity !
Martyn Hay.
The A ttempt. 305
IV.—Old Period : from the Middle of the Twelfth to
the Middle of the Fourteenth Century—continued.
First Classical Period, 1190-1300.
THE   ART-EPIC. •
3. King Aethur and hib Knights.
The poems which treat of Arthur and his knights alone,
may be called art-epics of a secular nature. The first of these
is Tristan and Isolt, by Gottfried of Strasbourg. It forms
a contrast in almost every respect to Wolfram's Percival.
Its short lyric metre suits its theme, the loves of mortals.
The sensuous beauty and voluptuous imagery which it
paints, lead to a dreamy satisfaction Avitli present things,
and a neglect of the soul and a spiritual world. The
poem of Wolfram is a rough diamond, less attractive
without, by its form, but shining with a pure and
spiritual light when looked into. Gottfried's poem has
but its form and present delight, which fade away of
themselves before the gaze of the reader, just as the
hero and heroine were consumed by lire in the height
of their happiness. The gay Gottfried despises the
monk-like garb of Wolfram's poem, unthinking that
posterity will repay to his own poem that contempt
with interest.
The poem of Tristan and Isolt, the greatest work of
Gottfried von Strasbourg, Avas composed about the year
1215, and finished after Gottfried's death by Ulrich von
Tiirheim, about 1240, and Heinrich von Freiberg, about
1300. Its story is only indirectly connected with the
legend of King Arthur. Tristan, when he is grown up,
goes out on adventures, and comes to his uncle, King-
Mark in Cornwall, who intends to marry the beautiful
Isolt in Ireland. Tristan, who had formerly killed her
cousin, and then, disguised as a player, had by her been
cured of his wounds, and become her teacher, undertook
the task of gaining her for his uncle. He slew a dragon
in Ireland, and was there recognised by Isolt, who
accepted the suit of Mark, and witli Tristan set sail for
Cornwall. Her mother having secretly given her a love-
charm for Mark, she and Tristan drank it unconsciously,
and fell violently in love with each other.    They now
OCIOBIE 1874. ^  R
306 'The Attempt.
try to deceive Mark, are several times banished from his
presence, and live in a lovers' cave. At last Tristan is
obliged to fly, and the story says that he finds another
Isolf with white hands, with whom he falls in love, and
reproaches himself for doing so. Here ends Gottfried's.
part of the poem. In the continuation Ave read of
Tristan's further adventures; his marriage with the other
Isolt, his life with Arthur, his renewed connection with
Isolt, for which he nearly loses his life, his fighting for his
brother-in-law, his wounds, and the death of both lovers.
Mark does not find out the cause of their attachment till
after the death of both lovers, when he grants them
burial, and causes a rose-tree and a vine to be planted
on their grave.
The next of these romances of the Round Table is
Iwein, by Hartmann von der Ane. Uninteresting as the
story of it is, it is here told in such an easy natural
way, with such a pleasing alternation of jest and eai-nest,
that the reading of it is sure to fascinate, on account of
the style alone. Iwein, or the Knight with the Lion,
Avas the last Avork composed by Hartmann von der Ane.
Iwein, one of the Knights of the Round Table, killed,
in the vicinity of a famous well, the owner of the Avell,
then married Landine, the Avidow of the man he had
slain, went abroad to seek adventures and forgot to
return, became mad and recovered, liberated a lion, and
at last, after many adventures, Avas reconciled to Landine.
This story, under the title of the Lady of the Well, Avas
translated by Lady Guest, and published in the Mabin-
ogion, from Avhich source it has been again rendered into
German by San Marte.
The legend of Erek, a youthful production of Hart-
mann's, is much less easy in form, though the story is of
more interest. Not till later did Hartmann OA'^ercome the
stiffness of his earlier productions; and his style culminates
in lAA^ein, Avhich, in the excellent edition of Lachmann and
Beneke, serA-es as an introduction to the language and
poetry of this period. Lady Guest giA^es Erek the name
of Geraint, by AA^iich it will be recognised by English
readers as the same legend Avhich Tennyson has so
attractively clothed Avith poetic imagery and named Enid.
Other legends' of the Round Table, of this period, are
less attractive. Lancelot of the Lake, about 1212, by
Ulrich von Zazichoven, is far from having the same
purity of style as the poems of Hartmann. Among the
Aveakest are Wigamur, or the Knight Avitli the Eagle, and
The Attempt. 307
Gabriel von Muntavel, or the Knight with the Goat, both
composed about the middle or latter half of the 13th
century.
The excellence of these poems grew gradually, like all
earthly things, from the merely elegant poems of Erek and
Iwein, to the original and deeply thoughtful epic of Sir
Percival, and the rich poetic imagery of Tristan and Isolt.
The poets who succeeded the authors of these productions
were unfit for a flight of imagination equal to theirs, and
contented themselves either with bare narrations, like
those of the poets who had preceded Ilartmann and
Gottfried, or with imitations of the latter, vastly inferior
to the originals. And so this knightly poetry, like many
other things before and after it, had its gradual rise, its
day of glory, and then, by degrees, its dechne.
4. Legends op the Saints and Didactic Poems.
The life of the Virgin Mary, in three books, was composed
by Wernher, a monk at the Tegernsce, in the year 1173.
It possesses the stiff character of the old epics, and has
likewise in many passages much grandeur and simplicity.
The Golden Forge, by Konrad von Wiirzbrug, is one of
the best productions of that poet. He represents himself
to be a smith, employed in making ornaments of gold and
precious stones, to be worn by the Virgin Mary. After
showing in a series of hyperboles the difficulty of suffi¬
ciently praising the Virgin Mary, he enlarges iipon the
purity, humility', and eternal glory of the mother of God.
For two centuries this poem remained the admiration and
the model of all who directed their efforts towards the
same subject.
Two other remarkable legends are from the pen of
Conrad von Wiirzbrug; one is that of Saint Sylvester,
the Pope at Rome, who, to vindicate tlie Christian religion,
restored to life a wild bull which had been struck dead by
the head of the Jewish Church, and thus led Helena, the
mother of Constautine. to adopt the Christian rehgion.
The other is that of Saint Alexius, which, though full
of exaggerated sentiment and popish superstition, has an
interest peculiarly its own. Alexius, the son of a wealthy
Koman, was mamed to a noble lady, named Adriatica.
At the banquet succeedhig the wedding, the easily
extinguished flame of a candle suggested to his mind
the transitory nature of earthly things ; and rising from
the table, he drew the wedding-ring from his finger,
returned it to his bride, and departed.    The care of his
308 The A ttempt.
soul now seemed to him the only object for which he had
to live. His bride wept, and then fainted away; yet he
departed with unshaken purpose. He went to Pisa,
thence to Edessa, and lastly to Palestine, in which
country he remained for twelve years. Returning to
H-aly, he came to Lucca, and entered a church; on
which all the bells of all the churches in that city
began to ring of their own accord, in honour of the holy
man who had arrived. To escape the honours heaped
upon him, Alexius took ship for Africa; but a storm
arising drove the ship back to Rome. And now he is
brought not only to his own city, but into the house of
his own father, who does not recognise him, but provides
him with a beggar's couch beneath the stairs. Here he
had much to endure from the taunts of the servants, but
still more from daily seeing his parents and his bride pass
by, unconscious of the presence of one so dear to them.
When they asked after their lost one, he related his own
history; and to his bride's anxious inquiries whether
Alexius remembered her, he replied—" Yes, he thought
often of the ring he liad given thee at parting, and of thy
grief; and his heart was full of sorrow for his father and
mother, and for thee, yet he had willingly renounced all
for the sake of eternal life. Did he never repent of his
pilgrimage 1 Never. Then I can but commend him
to the goodness of the merciful God." Thus they daily
spoke together, and the sorrow of the bride was renewed
on each occasion; but he Avas comforted by the sight of
her constancy.
At last he died; and the bells of the Lateran, and of all
the other churches in Rome, began to toll of their own
accord. In the hand of the dead man was found a letter,
which no one, not even the Pope himself, could disengage
from his grasp. At last Adriatica came forward, and the
hand opened to her touch. Great was the weeping and
Availing which followed the discovery of the dead man's
name. Not long after this, his parents died also, and
were buried on either side of his coffin. At the death of
Adriatica, the coffin of Alexius was opened to receive her
remains, and the dust of ,the dead man moved once more
in its resting-place to admit the body of his beloved.
To call a Avoman thus treated his beloved, seems but a
mockery ; yet such Avas the esteem in Avhich selfish
asceticism Avas held, that the loA'e of felloAv-men and the
duties of relationship seemed vices compared to it. The
trial of the deluded man Avas much easier to bear than
The Attempt. 309
that to which his bride was subjected ; for while he was
daily increasing her sorrow by telling her of her lost
love, his own giief was being daily lessened by the sight
of her constancy.
The simplest form of this story, by an unknoAvn poet of
the first half of the 13th century, is much superior to the
version of it by Conrad von Wiirzbrug.
The well-known legends of St. Elizabeth also belong
to this first classical period. They are so familiar to all,
that it is unnecessary to dwell upon them.
The Legend of Pilate is one of the oldest in the German
language, and is remarkable for the peculiar combination
of Christian, German, and perhaps also Celtic elements,
which it presents. A German king, named Tyrus or
Zirus, who reigned over the rivers Maas, Rhine, and
Main, had a younger son who slew his brother the heir,
and, in punishment, was sent by his father as a hostage
to Rome. Here he committed another murder, and was
sent to Pontus (the word Pontius being thus rendered in
the Old Saxon Gospel Harmony), where his valour in
subduing the barbarians caused him to be afterwards
promoted to rule over the Jews. The poetic fragment of
the 12th century stops here, but the legend continues
thus:—After the death of Christ, on being called to
account for his unjust sentence, Pilate committed suicide
in Rome, and his body was thrown into the Tiber. But
by disturbing the water, it caused such disastrous
inundations, that it was sought for, taken out of the Tiber,
and sunk in the Rhone. Here too, however, the evil
spirit of the con demner of Christ caused such surging of'
the waves, that the body was taken up again and sunk in
the lake beneath Mount Pilate in Switzerland. So this
mountain was named after him, and there his body will
lie till the end of time, causing storms to blow round the
mountain's brow, and making the water heave wildly when
anything is thrown into the lake. The blending of this
Roman legend Avith the German one may OAve its origin
to the 22d Roman legion, which, soon after the destruction
of Jerusalem, was sent to Mayence. With this legion, the
first Christians may have come to Germany, and identified
the Pilate of Palestine with the wicked German prince
who bore the same name. Yet the close of the story
hints rather at some connection with those Celtic myths
which tell of rivers, wells, and lakes haunted by evil spirits.
We have now traced the history of the more remark¬
able early epics of Germany.    Like one mighty river we
310 The Attempt.
have seen them flowing on, receiving tributary streams
from every region of the vast empire. Thus the epic in
its unity was a national possession, reflecting the image
of its author—the people. And now the 13th century has
arrived, and found it in the zenith of its fame, a noble
representative of the nation. Yet the height of its
attainment is the herald of its decay. The course of the
stream is broad and deep, and men are now trying to
turn it into new channels. Fresh poets arise, and choosing
out a small portion of the true epic, dilute it with a vast
quantity of would-be ingenious fiction, until it has attained
undue dimensions. Like the novelists of the 19th century,
these writers chose one hero, one event in that hero's
life, and detaching this from the mass of tradition, make
it the subject of a new epic. Like a musician devoid of
inventive genius, they took one little theme from the
Avorks of that great master, the nation, and wrote long
and wearisome variations upon it.
And the result was this. In the latter half of the
thirteenth century, the poetry of Germany sank to a
much lower level than it had before occupied. It now
depended for its e.veellence, not on some noble and time-
honoured legend, but on the taste and talent of indi¬
vidual poets. Yet even this, had the poets been true,
need not have lowered their art. It was the aim they
set before them that lessened the value of their works;
they sought, not to exhibit art in its truth and simplicity,
but to fascinate for a moment, and to provide amusement
for a vacant hour.
Thus the poet ceased to be an artist, and became a book¬
maker. Aud the liistory of book-making is not that of
literature. The epics of Germany were replaced by epics
of individual Germans. The ashes of those noble legends
Avere scattered far and wide, and subjected to mock
resurrections in the inflated spectres of lifeless creations.
Our task is not to follow them through these transfor¬
mations, but to lay the laurel on the tomb of their
youthful beauty, and then to trace their original form iu
its latter reproduction by the simple and faithful render¬
ings of profound and unambitious scholars.
Procla.
Note.—Books consulted for these sketches :—Kurz, Literaturgeschichte ;
Goedeke, Umriss ; Pisclion, Leitfadeii ; Taylor's Historic Survey; Hallam's
Middle Ages ; Weber's Northern Antiquities ; Gostwick and Harrison's
Outlines of German Literature ; Vilmar's Literaturgeschichte, etc. The
narratives of the Epics are adapted, and some parts of them translated, from
Vilmar's Literaturgeschichte.
The Attempt. 311
Jt <Pnnori| cf the |lorth Mind.
0 BREEZE of magic, breathing forth
So bright, so cool, from yon clear north I
0 breeze of ecstasy, that brings
All joy and radiance on thy wings I
0 summer rapture, sweet as rare !
0 bluest sky, and purest an*!
0 light celestial, didst thou stray
From Heaven's own gates, ajar to-day ?
So calm the wave, so clear the sky;
So soft the violet shadoAvs lie ;
So lavishly the sunbeams pour
On gleaming bay and blissful shore !
Ah, linger yet! thy heavenly smiles
Too scantly cheer our wearied isles :
Ah! s^^are us yet, glad northern breeze,
The l)rief, bright Sabbath of our seas I
Still paint the dawn with loveliest hues,
Still gem the flowery hill Avith dews ;
Still let the glittering noontide sea,
With smile unnurobered, flash to thee :
Still let the farewell beams of day
Die from the purpled peaks away ;
And brightening moon, with mystic light,
Blend glowing eve and starry night!
Enchanter! let thy glamour blest
Yet on our woods and waters rest!
While magic air and radiant skies
Prolong the di'eam of Paradise !
—But no ! the spell dissolves to-night!
For whence those clouds in ragged flight ?
And heard I not the long, low wail—
Dread prelude to the hurrying gale ?
Far down the vexed Atlantic born
It hastens on ; with break of morn.
312 The Attempt.
The drowning rain attends its path,
The treacherous sea awakes in wrath !
Yes ! from the fierce south-west once more
The tempest bursts, with maddened roar;
And hour by hour the turmoil swells
In heavier boom and wilder yells !
O fierce south-west! can nought assuage,
From moon to moon, thy tireless rage't
While storm on storm exhaustless pours
Thy fury round our battered shores?
0 beauty ! whither art thou fled,
Leaving no print of thy fair tread
On shrouded hill, and angry seas.
And drenched and tortured Hebrides ?
Yet not in vain, to bless my sight.
Unclosed, for once, the gates of light;
There lives, in memory's secret shrine.
One glimpse of Heaven, for ever mine!
Omicron,
1 (! H 0 n (I.
" Tired and petted !" said an earth-child to the Angel of
the Night-Watch.
So tired and petted that she Avould neither look at
the Curtain of Dreams which trembled in his grasp, nor
the Deep Slumber that lay gathered in heavy folds
behind him.
" I am past them both," said the earth-child restlessly.
" Show me further than these—is there not something
more behind them ? "
" What would jaw have ? " asked the Angel in return,
as he bent nearer to shut out their view.
" Something that leaves its quiet in my keeping after
it passes on. Slumber and Dreams only bring rest just
while they stay ;" and the earth-child spoke as if she had
been hardly dealt by.
" So soon," said the Angel sadly, while his wings
drooped softly together.
The Attempt. 313
" Yes, I suppose it is soon—far too soon—as some
people say," was the reply. " If I Avere older, perhaps
they might not think so. AVhat is there that a young
life should have so greatly to complain about ?"—it
ended in a sharp tone that was like the copy of another
voice. Then she paused a moment, and in pausing lost
■those strange accents, as she turned doubtfully towards
the listening Messenger, " even my Dream-Angel thinks
witii them."
But the wings spread themselves lovingly over her
head as a hush to the querulousness, and the action told
better than the words which followed how the lines and
premature thoughts of a child's sorrow needed straighten¬
ing and comforting, just as sorely as the troubles and
grievances which crowd in upon a fuller and older life.
So she asked him again, with a little trembling thrill of
hope, " Can you show me something to hold my spirit
quiet?    Not the passing Dream nor the heavy Slumber."
" I cannot show you," said the Angel gently, " but I can
tell you," and the child lay back and closed its eyes from
very gratitude.
'• I have watched the trouble of your spirit," began the
answer to her request, " and I have prayed that it miglit
pass from you as one did from a life I met in other years.
I would not liave you wait for a light to clear it away
until the eye was almost blind with looking for it, and
the ear scarce heeding aught around it, because they
strained too hard to learn its meaning, for this life could
not believe it might be an easy burden it had to carry
after all. That was the difficulty, you must knoAv, which
prevented the light of Peace from shining early upon it,
the Peace which is not of this world, and which God will
only grant in His own good time."
The child unclosed its eyes, and looking into the Angel's
face, beheld a light shining there steadfiist and true, for
in the heart of the Angel d^velt a chord of Love attuned to
humanity's wants and errors. One of the notes of that
chord she had touched, and it vibrated so that the light
trembled.
" Tell me about it," cried the child eagerly, while the
tender beams swept over its soul.
" There is something of Heaven, something of Earth, in
what I am going to tell you," repHed the Angel, " for we
can never reach the innermost wants of the heart unless
we   mingle   the   two—human   and   divine;   they   must
OCTOBKR 1874. ' ^   S
314 Tlie Attempt.
always go together, even as God created them in the
beginning.
" Fretted and tired," repeated the Angel, going back to
the earth-child's greeting. '• How many say that every day
of their lives, who cannot believe that God's ear is bent
towards them, who Avill not incline tlieir words towards
it, because they are ever driving them back into their
own distrustful hearts. Years ago, it is many years now,"
he continued, " there lived upon this earth one with a life
resembling yours in some ways, only it was an older life;
perhaps that made it feel things more keenly, or it might
be, because it learnt to pity itself more than you do. A
pleasant home and a kind home it had, but not a very
loving one, father and mother, brothers and sisters,"—
" AVasit well-favoured?" hurriedly interposed the child's
voice. " Somebody said I was ' ill-favoured' the other day.
What is favour ? I asked, and they told me ' grace.' Then
I wondered—did they mean I was not a child of grace?"
The light in the Angel's face quivered, and its rays
seemed to multiply and sparkle with renewed lustre for a
moment, as he responded, " whatsoever they were, it
maketli no matter to me. God accepteth no man's
person."
" I sxippose most people think it's safer to let that text
lie by in the Bible—some things are better for keeping—
only people so easily forget that they ought to bring the
meaning out noAV and then," said the child to itself in the
voice that was a copy. Perhaps the Angel did not notice
it, for he went on with what he was saying.
" The brothers and sisters Avere happy and contented
enough, knoAving neither pleasure nor pain in any of their
extremes. They Avondered sometimes among themselves
—not miderstanding this nature—Avhy it Avas that the life
I am telling you of Avas silent and sorroAvful, Avhen they
could not find any cause for it. 'Why expect too much,
AA'hy not take things as they come,' they Avould say, 'surely
life Avas given us to enjoy as much of it as AA^e can? ' For
if you take the ills and the good together, life has so
much more of happiness to offer you than if you separate
them, and balance them grudgingly one against the other.
You Avill only make a continual bitterness to yourself if
the OA'erdiie seems so rarely to fall to the good."
" There may be a false weight in the balance, though.
I have thought of that sometimes," returned the child
quickly.
The Attempt. 315
" Yes, that is man's false estimate of things; he puts it
in the balance, and miscalculates the result, and then
casts up a wrong reckoning with his IMaker."
Were the Angel's thoughts with the Past, or was he
thinking of what might come to the child in the Future 'i
" When this life grew up, when the brothers and sisters
had each been attracted elsewhere by the claims of earth
and its duties, what was to become of the power of love
treasured up so jealously from childhood, which had never
appeared to be needed and sought for by those around it,
and which had shrunk and compressed itself into a kind
of scathing want ? ' What is the use of it—why is it given
me,' was its daily cry."
" That is it," whispered the child eagerly, " where am I
to place it to get rid of this feeling of tiredness I The
months, and even the years, seem to be coming round
swifter than I remember before, and yet I do not feel I
have come to anything that wants it.
" She should have sought for a place to lay it in before,"
she continued presently, finding that the Angel was keep¬
ing silence, and Icjoking down intently upon her ; " but
perhaps she grew tired of seeking and waiting for some¬
thing big enough to hold it."
"Whatever was nearest, whatever was closest, it should
have been," added the Angel, " but to wait any time—to
let any part of time wilfully go by without tracing some
love upon its course, is a sorry thing. Why are you
keeping yours so silently and hardly," he urged, " till it
sounds like a hurt in your voice and a trouble of your
soul?"
The child's eyes grew dark with coming tears. " Yes,
it does hurt to put love by, to see others finding a place
to rest theirs; but then why did God make me ill-
favoured—w^hy is my balance always weighing unequal ?
—that is what I ask ? "
" Because one of its scales weighs lightly with you,"
came the grave answer. " You do not adjust it fairly
when it lies in your own hands."
"How did the life end then? did it find what it
wanted ? " interrogated the child once more, after she had
pondered over the Angel's words.
" Yes, where its dim mortal sight had long refused to
look, there had been from all time the love it needed,
ready and waiting, missing its rightful share through
many days and years."
316 The Attempt.
"Where—where?" came the entreating cry, for the
Angel's figure made as though it would depart.
" In God's love and truth : in His Peace which passeth
all understanding."
" Do they bring rest beyond Dreams and deep Slumber? "
" These are but their image, the shadow of the sunshine
of infinite rest which remaineth for everlasting."
The child's face was turned full towards the Angel,
wondering as she scanned his presence. It seemed fading
into dimness—was it the tears in her eyes, or was it the
Veil of Dawn (to mark his retreatj that hid him at length
from her view'?
Semper Eadem.
^ u r fl r a.
All through the silent hours the yearning night,
With steps slow pacing dark athwart the sky.
Hath decked with richest gems her beauty wild.
And on her breast, in pale efiulgency.
Her casket's queen, the glistening moon, she wears,
To clasp the silver fringe her sweeping mantle bears.
Oh! tenderly she watcheth o'er the world,—
The world she loveth, though her love is vain ;
She wooelli it with sighs breathed soft and low,
And tremblingly her dewy kisses rain
Upon its slumb'ring eyes, as from above
She gently stoops and whispers, "Wake, oh! wake,mylove!"
But ever sleepeth on th' unheeding world.
Deep dreaming of the luscious longed-for light,
For earth, Tithonous-like, the dawn doth love,
And deathless life draws from her presence bright;
And slow the weary night, sad ling'ring on.
Drops one by one her gems, and faints with watching wan.
Then, far where eastern skies bend o'er the wave.
There glimmers dim a radiance soft and grey,—
The trembling of Aurora's eyelids pale.
Ere yet they rise to shed the golden day ;
And sentinel leaves, on wind-tossed branches high.
Cry, " Lo ! our watch is o'er, the dawn, the dawn is nigh!"
The Attempf. 317
And, from the shadows of their rustling gloom
Come twittering bird-sounds, rich with joy and sweet,
And downy wings are plumed for happy flight
Out in the orient air, the light to greet;
And low the laden grass, with dew-mist hoar.
To starry wild-flowers whispers, "Wake, the night is o'er! "
And ocean dark, that wailed its midnight song.
And told to callous shores its secrets dread,—
Of where the simk rocks hide, and hearts that throbbed
With hope and love, thick strewn around lie dead.
Now shimmers into beauty, and in pride
Bears high the bounding ships that on its bosom ride.
Then, from behind the purple hills, a flash
Of crimson darts, and dyes the waveless mere
That murmurs to the lilies on its breast,
" Your petals spread,—the morn, the morn is here !"
And warm the life-pulse of the glad world beats
Responsive to the gleam its opening eyes that meets.
And mourners, who through darkness lone have wept,
Look out upon the glow with tear-dimmed sight.
And hopeful cry, " His children yet He loves.
Still is He good,—the God who gives the hght! "
And ere death's shadow dark be round them drawn,
The dying, thankful, smile, when comes the Heaven-sent
dawn. Melexsa.
m\t |sU flf Pan.
'' A sweet little Eden on earth that I know,
A mountain islet pointed and peak'd ;
Waves on a diamond shingle dash,
Cataract brooks to the ocean run."
—Alfred Tennyson.
One of the first names that attracts the attention of
children, when examining the map of England, is that
of the Isle of Man, lying, so far from land, like " one of
the pieces of a child's puzzle map which has strayed to a
distance from the adjacent shores." This island, about
thirty miles long and ten broad, lies in the Irish Sea,
between the shores of Scotland, England,   Wales, and
318 The Attempt.
Ireland. The etymology of its name is disputed. Train,
in his History of the Isle of Man, says that the inhabitants call
it "Mann-in," "in" being an old word for island, "Mann"
signifying middle. Another authority says "'Manninan'
was an ancient Irish name for Neptune, and Man may
have been applied to the island as the supposed residence
of this god." Taylor, in his Words and Places, says it
derives its name from a " Celtic word Man, a district,"
the island being divided into districts. Man is not the
only name the little continent is known by. In a map of
the island, of as late a date as 1595, it is called Mona (from
the Latin monus, alone, or the Cymric mon, separate), a
name given to it by the Roman period, as well as to
Anglesea. Mona is the name it is generally called by in
any of the poetical effusions usually to be found in the
corner of the Monas Herald or Manx Times. Castle Mona
is the name of its largest hotel, and many inns bear the
title of the Mona Arms, etc. Elian Vannin is the name
for the island in the Manx tongue. Castletown, its
capital, long bore-this appellation, which is, however, fast
becoming obsolete.
The armorial bearings of the island are very singular.
They are, gules, three-armed legs proper, conjoined in fess,
at the upjjer part of the thigh, flexed in triangle, gar¬
nished and spurred, or, with the motto " Quocunque jeceris
stabit," " Whatever way you throw me I Avill stand."
Train says, " The legs in mail denote the power of self-
defence, and the spurred heels, speed to resent any
insult that might be offered by any of the surrounding
neighbours."
The history of the island begins in the end of the third
century. Before that time it was shrouded in mystery.
The natives say that long before the Christian era fairies
dwelt on it, and it was hidden from the ships that passed
by a blue mist. Many legends are told as to how the
fairies were conquered; the spell was broken, and the
mist rolling away, Elian Vannin was left " sparkling
bright in Nature's glee." Brule, a Scot, conquered it
about A.D. 300, and in time his descendants were suc¬
ceeded by a Welsh dynasty of kings, who reigned from
517 to 877. After the Welsh, the line of Ketill reigned in
Man, but they were in their turn dethroned by Gorree or
Orree (now spelt Orry), a roving viking, supposed to be of
royal Danish blood. His descendants ruled for more than
a century.    After these came Guthreds, Goddards, Olaves,
The Attempt. 319
Reginalds, and Harrolds; but Orree,the founder of the race,
^vas the most famous of all the kings of Man. Ho made
many just and good laws, which won for him the people's
reverence, and in their hearts he holds the same place
" that Alfred does in that of an Englishman, or Bruce in
that of a Scotsman." After the race of Orree came that
of Goddard Crovan, son of Harrold the Black of Iceland,
who conquered the island about 1066. They reigned
nearly 200 years, and, being feudal vassals to tlie Nor¬
wegian crown, when the last died Man was ceded by
the King of Norway to Scotland. The island changed
masters many times for the next 150 years. Sometimes
it belonged to England, sometimes to Scotland. In 1344,
while in the possession of the English, the Earl of Salisbury
was made king of Man. He was beheaded for treason,
and the island was given to Henry Percy, Earl of
Northumberland, who, in his turn, being committed for
treason, forfeited Man. After this it was conferred on
on Sir John Stanley in 1406. The family of Stanley,
on whom the Earldom of Derby Avas bestowed, held the
island for 300 years. They ruled under the title of king,
but in 1505 the reigning Earl, in liis own words " ' preferr¬
ing to be a great lord rather than a petty king,' relin¬
quished the royal designation, and thereafter assumed
only the title of Lord of Man." *
In 1736 the male line of the Stanleys became extinct,
and the Isle of Man, Avith the other property belonging
to the family, passed to the Duke of Athol, grandson of
Lady Amelia Stanley. Under the rule of the Dukes of
Athol, the island became such " a thorn in the side of
Great Britain, as a nest for smugglers and other question¬
able refugees, that she resolved to take it into her own
hands."t The Duke reluctantly sold his island heritage ;
and finally, in 1829, the kingdom of Man came under the
direct sway and guidance of England,
The laAvs of this independent little territory were
scarcely changed, so that the Manx yet retain many laAvs
peculiar to themselves. Train says,—•" The Manx exhibit,
perhaps, the only example in history of a people preserving
their ancient laws and forms of government unchanged
under the rule of successive conquerors. Like the willow
Avhich bends to the blast, but which resumes its former
altitude when the stormis over, the Manks legislature
* Train's Isle of Man, vol. i., p. 167.
Memoir of Edward Forbes.
318 The Attempt.
Ireland. The etymology of its name is disputed. Train,
in his History of the Jsle of Man, says that the inhabitants call
it "Mann-in," "in" being an old word for island, '■'Mann"
signifying middle. Another authority says "'Manninan'
was an ancient Irish name for Neptune, and Man may
have been applied to the island as the supposed residence
of this god." Taylor, in his Words and Places, says it
derives its name from a " Celtic word Man, a district,"
the island being divided into districts. Man is not the
only name the little continent is known by. In a map of
the island, of as late a date as 1595, it is called Moua (from
the Latin monus, alone, or the Cymric mon, separate), a
name given to it by the Roman period, as well as to
Anglesea. Mona is the name it is generally called by in
any of the poetical effusions usually to be found in the
corner of the Monas Herald or Manx Times. Castle Mona
is the name of its largest hotel, and many inns bear the
title of the Mona Arms, etc. Elian Vannin is the name
for the island in the Manx tongue. Castletown, its
capital, long bore'this appellation, which is, however, fast
becoming obsolete.
The armorial bearings of the island are very singular.
They are, gules, three-armed legs proper, conjoined in fess,
at the upper part of the thigh, flexed in triangle, gar¬
nished and spurred, or, with the motto " Quocunque jeceris
stabit," " Whatever way you throw me I Avill stand."
Train says, " The legs in mail denote the power of self-
defence, and the spurred heels, speed to resent any
insult that might be offered by any of the surrounding
neighbours."
The history of the island begins in the end of the third
century. Before that time it was shrouded in mystery.
The natives say that long before the Christian era fairies
dwelt on it, and it was hidden from the ships that passed
by a blue mist. Many legends are told as to how the
fairies were conquered; the spell was broken, and the
mist rolling away, Elian Vannin was left " sparkhng
bright in Nature's glee." Brule, a Scot, conquered it
about A.D. 300, and in time his descendants were suc¬
ceeded by a Welsh dynasty of kings, who reigned from
517 to 877. After the Welsh, the line of Ketill reigned in
Man, but they were in their turn dethroned by Gorree or
Orree (now spelt Orry), a roving viking, supposed to be of
royal Danish blood. His descendants ruled for more than
a century.    After these came Guthreds, Goddards, Olaves,
The Attempt. 319
Reginalds, and Harrolds; but Orree,the founder of the race,
was the most famous of all the kings of Man. lie made
many just and good laws, which won for him the people's
reverence, and in their hearts he holds the same place
" that Alfred does in that of an Englishman, or Bruce in
that of a Scotsman." After the race of Orree came that
of Goddard Crovan, son of Harrold the Black of Iceland,
who conquered the island about 1066. They reigned
nearly 200 years, and, being feudal vassals to the Nor¬
wegian crown, when the last died Man was ceded by
the King of Norway to Scotland. The island changed
masters many times for the next 150 years. Sometimes
it belonged to England, sometimes to Scotland. In 1344,
Avhile in the possession of the English, the Earl of Salisbury
was made king of Man. He was beheaded for treason,
and the island was given to Henry Percy, Earl of
Northumberland, who, in his turn, being committed for
treason, forfeited Man. After this it was conferred on
on Sir John Stanley in 1406. The family of Stanley,
on whom the Earldom of Derby w^as bestowed, held the
island for 300 years. They riiled under the title of king,
but in 1505 the reigning Earl, in his own words " ' preferr¬
ing to be a great lord rather than a petty king,' relin¬
quished the royal designation, and thereafter assumed
only the title of Lord of Man." *
In 1736 the male line of the Stanleys became extinct,
and tbe Isle of Man, with the other property belonging
to the family, passed to the Duke of Athol, grandson of
Lady Amelia Stanley, Under the rule of the Dukes of
Athol, the island became such " a thorn in the side of
Great Britain, as a nest for smugglers and other question¬
able refugees, that she resolved to take it into her own
hauds."t The Duke reluctantly sold his island heritage ;
and finally, in 1829, the kingdom of Man came under the
direct sway and guidance of England,
The laws of this independent little territory were
scarcely changed, so that the Manx yet retain many laws
peculiar to themselves. Train says,—" The Manx exhibit,
perhaps, the only example in history of a people preserving
their ancient laws and forms of government unchanged
under the rule of successive conquerors. Like the willow
Avhich bends to the blast, but which resumes its former
altitude when the storm is over, the Manks legislature
Train's Isle of Man, vol. i., p. 167.
Memoir of Edward Forbes.
320 Tlie Attempt.
appears to have adopted a course of policy in effect the
same. The oath of office before alluded to,* taken by the
insular placemen, to maintain the ancient laws and
customs of the island unimpaired, seems to have been
the tiller by which they have steered their little vessel
through many a political storm."
" The civil government of the Isle of Man is vested in
three estates; the Queen in Council, the Governor and
Council, and the House of Keys. These last two estates
together constitute a Court of Tynwald, and the conniv¬
ance of the three is necessary to every legislative act."t
The Court of Tynwald was introduced by the Norsemen.
Their Things in Iceland, Norway, and Denmark have long
ceased to exist, or grown, as in this country, into the
House of Commons; but the Manx, through all their
changing dynasties, have held by their Tynwald. Tiling,
in the Scandinavian tongue, means the assembly of the
deputies of the people, and icald, a wood,—the court in
the wood. No wood now remains round Tynwald Hill,
but oidy a grassy mound, with three circular seats, like
three steps, which diminish in circumference as they
ascend in height. The Court of Tynwald meets every
year, as it has done for the last eight centuries, to hear
the laws read Avhich have been made during the past year;
" nor is a statute of Queen Victoria's held binding in the
Isle of Man till it has been proclaimed in Manx and
English." The governor, as the Queen's representative,
sits on the highest step " of this grass clad forum," " on a
chaire covered with a royall cloth," while round him are
ranged, on the lower platforms or steps, the next officers of
rank in the state, and the commons stand " without the
circle of the hill."
Thus far as to the name, arms, kings, and laws of Man.
Now for its inhabitants, their customs and superstitions,
their tailless cats, and a hurried glimpse at Manxland
itself, — its rocks, headlands, green glens, sparkling
streams, shining bays, picturesque towns, old castles, and
" its green hills by the sea."
The Manx are, owing to the many races from diiferent
countries that overran their domain, the vikings that
settled there, and the refugees wlio sheltered in this quiet
* On admission to office, every member of tJie Governor's Council and of the
House of Keys is required to nir^ke oath " that he will use liis best endeavours
to maintain and defend the ancient laws and customs of the island, with the
prerogatives thereof."—Johnstone's Jurisprudcnce.
t Quiggin's Guide to the hie of Man, p. 77.
Tlie Attempt. 321
nook, a very mixed race. They are a combination of
Celtic, Icelandic, Norwegian, Danish, Welsh, Scottisli,
and English. The old Celts took refuge in the hills
and upland farms, where their descendants to thi3
day are found, " a simple, primitive, intensely super¬
stitious but kindly people, marrying amongst tliem-
selves, and keeping aloof from other races." As a
rule, the Manxmen of the present day are fair, tall,
and strong. There is one small village, lying south of
Port St. Mary, perched high on the hill, approached only
by a road evidently seldom used for traffic, where the
people are dark eyed, swarthy skinned, altogether a
complete contrast to the brown haired, blue eyed Manx¬
man. Near this isolated hamlet rises a bold rocky head¬
land, Spanish Head by name, " one of the ocean grave¬
stones of the wrecked Armada," and the dark inhabitants
of the little village on the cliff will tell you that they are
the descendants of those who escaped from some of the
stranded vessels of the defeated Spanish fleet. They,
like the Celts, keep aloof from those around them, avoid¬
ing marriage out of their own circle. "The l\Ianx are," says
Bishop Wilson, " an orderly, civilised people, and courteous
enough to strangers; if they have been otherwise repre¬
sented, it has been by those who knew them not."
Farming is the chief occupation of the upper classes ;
and of late years, tinder good management, nearly all the
waste and moorland has been reclaimed, and now yields
fine crops, like the rest of the well-tilled lands. The
Manx farmers were once very averse to innovations,
but the Scotchmen who have settled in the island have
shown them how to cultivate their lands to better
advantage, improve their breeds of cattle and sheep,
and save useless outlay in the way of labour by tlie
introduction of machinery. Living surrounded by the
ocean, and having the blood of the Norse sea kings
still tingling so freely in their veins, it is no wonder
that the greater part of the Manx turn fishermen.
The lower class of the population trust mainly to
the herring fishery for their winter food; and a bad
herring season is to them what a bad harvest is to an
agricultural people. So much depends on the fishing
that, in the reading of the litany in the churches cf the
island, after the words,—" That it may please Thee to
give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the
earth," they add, " and restore and continue to us the
OCTOBEE 1871. "   T
322 The Attempt.
blessings of the  sea,  so as in  due time we  may   enjoy
them."
Popular notions, rites, and observances are longer
retained on an island than on the mainland, where the
people mix with other nations and forget their old forms,
usages, and traditions in their intercourse with strangers.
There are many customs descended from very remote
times still peculiar to Elian Vannin, for
" Manksmen love their native vales,
Island songs, and island tales."
Hunting  the  wren  is  an   old  custom   in  Mona.     The
Manx say that a most beautiful faiiy used to make all
the men follow her, and when she had collected a sufficient
retinue,   the siren   led  them into  the sea,   where  they
perished.    So many of the male population were lost in
this manner, that at last a "Joold Manxman determined to
destroy the wicked fairy.    After pursuing her for a long
time he had nearly succeeded in catching her, when she
assumed the form of a Avren, and thus escaped.    Since
then, that unfortunate bird has had a hard time of it on
the island.    On  Saint  Stephen's day the poor wren is
hunted, pelted, and pursued, and when at last killed, after
being paraded about, " it is laid upon a bier and cai-ried
in procession to the  parish  churchyard, where, ■\vith a
whimsical kind of solemnity, they make a grave, bury it,
and  sing  dirges over it in the Manks  language, which
they call her knell."*    On midsummer's eve, on the hills
of Man, fires are lighted, and cakes put out of the cottage
doors for the fairies.    These fires are the remains of old
Phoenician times and worship—the tires being consecrated
to Baal—called still the Betane fires.    The feast of the
Mheilla.t or, as we would call it, the Harvest Home, is
fast dying out.    They still deck with gay ribbons the last
handful of corn that is cut, but they no longer bear it up
" in procession to the top of a neighbouring hill, and there,
while the queen of the Mheillea waves the corn or kern
baby over her head, the reapers express their joy in loud
huzzas."     There   are   few   Mheillea   dances  now,   the
labourers   getting  only an  extra  dram   or  extra wages
after the gay Mheillea sheaf is bound up in the  farm¬
house kitchen.
As regards superstition, " it would seem indeed as if
the hngei-ing remnant of the cloud of supernatural beings,
* Train, vol. ii., p. 126. t Pronounced MeUa.
llie Attempt. 323
grim or gentle visitants from demonland or fairyland,
who once roamed at their will over Europe, now, as one
by one from shore to shore ' the parting genius is with
sighing sent,' delay their return to spiritland for a brief
season among the kindly and credulous peasants of Man."*
A more superstitious race than the Manx it would be
difficult to find. They firmly believe in the existence of
fairies—some good, some evil. If the butter will not
churn, if the hens do not lay, or if anything goes wrong
with the cattle, the blame is laid on the fairies' shoulders.
Any trees that happen to grow near the cottage doors
are whitewashed far up their stems, to ward ofi" these
mischievous sprites. The Fliynnodderee, a " wild satyr-like
figure," is one of their fallen fairies. He was turned out of
the fairy court, and sentenced to remain on Manxland till
the end of time. He is covered with long hair, from
which he gets his peculiar name, which signifies the hairy
one. He is a combination of the Scotch Brownie, " the
lubber fiend of Milton," and Shakespeare's Puck, It was
he
" That gather'd the sheep from the coming storm,
Ere the shepherd saw it lour,
Yet ask'd no fee, save a scattered sheaf
From the peasant's garner'd hoard,
Or cream bowl pressed by a virgin lip,
To be left in the houshold board."t
Many wonderful tales are told of this mischievous, good-
natured phynnodderee. The fishermen have numbers of
signs and omens which they implicitly believe in. Bad luck
or disaster will be their fate if a cat or hare crosses their
path while going down to their boat. Some of them are
called lucky men, for whatever herring lugger they are in,
they are sure of unusual success. Sometimes in the very
height of the fishing season, you will see a fine lugger
drawn up high, and dry on the beach, dismantled as if
for its winter sleep ; and if you ask why it is not out,
the men will tell you it is an unlucky boat, that the
fairies have bewitched it, and that the owners having had
little success, have given it up and gone off on board
some boat where their lucky comrades are.
The sturdy Manxman, tramping home at night, will
inform you that while passing by the churchyard he
became intangled in an invisible crowd, which he takes as
* Memoir of Edward Forbes,
t Mrs. E. S. Craven Green.
324 The Attempt.
a warning that his own or a friend's funeral is not far
off. Or sometimes he will tell you that a phantom bier
was laid on his shoulders, from which he conjectures that
he will be soon called upon to act as coffin bearer at
a real burial. Train says,—" One person, who assured
me he had been served so, told me that the flesh of his
shoulder had been very much bruised, and was black for
several weeks after." Ghosts, too, are very prevalent in
this singular island; and Peel Castle is haunted by the
spirit of Eleanor, Duchess of Gloucester, who was im¬
prisoned and died there. " Her troubled spirit is seen
gliding along the battlements, gazing intently from a
watch tower till cock-crow announces early dawn,"
This old castle is also haunted by another ghost, who
will be familiar to the readers of Peveril of the Peak.
This is a " fiend or demon in the shape of a large shaggy
black mastiff." The name of this " spectre-hound in
Man" is the Mauthe Doog or Moodre Dhoo. The Manx
have a firm belief in the efficacy of charms for curing
diseases. Even now, although in cases of illness they
call in the medical practitioner of the district, they still
resort to these charms, and believe in the cures effected
by their own seers. The Manx occasionally think that
their heads sink between their shoulders; and to be cured
of this wonderful disease, peculiar, I believe, to the island,
they call in the help of a woman who is famed for her
knowledge of this imaginary ailment. One woman I
know told me she had cm-ed many who had suffered from
this mythical illness, but the charms she used to effect its
cure were a secret, as well as the manner in which she
discovered her patients were ill; for to other eyes their
heads seemed as erect as ever.
The tailless cats and hens are among the ugliest and
most singular things to be seen in Manxland. The former
are gaunt hideous animals, some having a stump of a tail,
but the true rumpy has not the vestige of one. In
colour they are commonly yellow or gray, but I once
had a pure rumpy snow Avhite. As mousers, they surpass
all other species of cats. The tailless hens are pleasaiiter
objects to look at than the stubbie* cats. As they fetch high
prices, the natives often pull the tails out of then' common
fowls and sell them as rumples; but the true tailless hens
are easily known, as in appearance they greatly resemble
guinea fowls.    There are rumples in all kinds of breeds,
* Manx for rumpy.
The Attempt. 325
the black Spanish ones being the most common. Both
the Manx cats and hens are rapidly disappearing, as the
tourists buy them and take them away. The native
ponies, sheep, and pigs are now all but extinct.
The island is almost destitute of growing timber, but
still its scenery is very beautiful. Once it used to bo
thickly wooded, as is proved by the fact that trees of
large size have been dug iip, and that many of the names
of places yet imply that the island was formerly
wooded. ' Darragh' (oak trees), ' Eary Kelly' (the
open wood or forest), and many other names, point to this
fact. Train laments the want of trees as he says, " What
a difference in scenery would this little island present if
the horizon were skirted by a fringe of wood, and the
foreground ornamented by waving groves." Still Manx-
land looks wonderfully beautiful as you approach it from
the sea. First you notice a faint outline far away in the
distance, and as the packet steams nearer you see the
frowning cliffs, rocky gullies, sandy bays, and white home¬
steads and villages glistening in the sunshine, the well-tilled
lands, with the patchwork of fields, creeping far up the
mountain sides, and above all, the purple heather-tipped
hills standing out clearly against the blue sky beyond.
The roads are very steep and hilly, but kept in capital
repair. The hedges or dykes that skirt them, and divide
the fields, are grassy banks high and broad, on which the
gorse and bramble grow, and in spring the pale primroses
and droaping violets find there a resting place. Some¬
times they are yellow with the flower of the whin, ajid
purple patches of heather appear here and there. In the
autumn these Manx dykes look their best, as the tall ferns
that grow in profusion on them turn to a bright golden
hue, and the leaves of the brambles are of all shades
of russet brown, and various tints of red. The bright dog-
hips grow amongst the golden colours around, and the
winds whisper among the tall grasses.
Last year the first railway was opened in Man—from
Peel to Douglas,—and in a few years the network of lines
bids fair to spread over the whole island. The Manx
rustics gaze with amazement as the train hurries by,
circling round their hills, dashing along their valleys, and
" through the black tunnel and down by the sea." It
puffs along the cliffs, and the wild gullies are bridged
over so that it may rush on, " mingling its shriek with the
ocean's roar."
The sea that lies around this little island forms one of its
326 Tlie Attonpt.
chief beauties and attractions. However for out in a boat
you are, the waters are so clear that you can see to the
bottom. Looking down through the crystal tide, you can
w^atch the fish skimming through their submarine forests.
Exquisite sea-weeds float about, truly '' not weeds, but
flowers of the sea." Away deep down you see the sand
and pebbles glistening under the clear waves, and the
Manx fisherman, without ever having read the '' Water
Babies," believes in the existence, and will tell you he has
seen, fairy people and fairy towns in that w^onderful region
under the shining sea.
The four principal  towns are Ramsay,   Peel, Castle-
town, and Douglas, the two former being the northern,
and the two latter the southern towns.    Kamsay is built
on the margin of the sea, like all Manx towns, and has
narrow and irregular streets.    Peel is interesting, owing
to the old castle that lies on  a rocky little islet of its
own.    Holme Town   or Peel itself exhibits some of the
characteristics of an old Scotch fishing village.    Old nets
are spread over the roofs of the houses to keep down the
thatch, and old inverted boats are ranged alongside the
walls, off"ering shelter to poultry and pigs; wliile rumpy
cats may be seen basking in the heat of the sun by the
cottage doors.    Douglas is the largest of the tow^ns, and
situated on one of the most beautiful bays imaginable.
It is growing in size every year, and is a rising watering
place.     Some of its old crooked streets are to be pulled
down, so Douglas will be transformed into  a completely
modern town.     The  bay,   "with unusually transparent
waters, lies embedded, like a crescent moon, in the south¬
west shore of Man.    The tip of either horn is a headland,
the southern one crowned by a lighthouse.    In the centre
of the bay a peculiarly picturesque tower of refuge stands
on a reel',*—a beacon and shelter for the sailor.    On tlie
south-western   curve of the   crescent lies the  town  of
Douglas, dear to us as the birth-place of Edward Eorbes.f
Its foundations are laid in tlie delta of a small river, but
it has climbed the heights encircling the bay, and spread
itself over  the gentle terraces  and  broad  undulations
which overlook the sea.    The more striking eminences
are occupied by stately castellated buildings, and behind
all the lofty domes of Snaefell and the sister hills stand in
array  against the  horizon."    Steamers  from   Liverpool
and Barrow arrive  every day at one or another of its
♦Called by the inhabitants "Connister Kock."
t This description is from the Memoir of Ed. Forbes.
The Attempt. 327
stone piers, crowded with tourists. Sometimes in the
height of the season two or even three boats leave
Liverpool all fully loaded, but in winter only three boats
a-week run. These packet boats bear island names,—
such as the "Mona's Queen," the " Tynwald," and the
"King Orry." This Manx Brighton boasts, like most
sea-side watering-places, of its promenade, iron pier,
donkeys and bathing machines. To me, Douglas in
summer seems anything but a desirable place of resi¬
dence,—crowded with not over-polite tourists, and infested
by hurdy-gurdies, brass bands, and other similar horrors,—
so to the noise and bustle of Douglas I prefer the sleepy
quiet of Castletown. The grey houses cluster round the
old castle, while on eitlier side stretch the long green
peninsulas of Langness and Scarlett, and from the
distance Castletown is a very picturesque-looking little
place. The bay is a large circular one, the southern
boundary being finished off by the Stack of Scarlett, a
huge round rock cut off from the mainland, except at
low water ; while on the other sides are the jagged rocks
of Langness. The shores of the bay are rocky, but here
and there they are varied by stretches of golden sand.
Kushen Castle, in the centre of the town, "is a consider¬
able fortress, founded, according to tradition, by the
famous King Orry about the tenth century. To Manxmen
it is dear as having been the palace of their ancient
rulers, and the House of Parliament of the estate of the
realm." This grey old fastness is said to be exactly
like the Castle of Elsinore. The town itself is small,
rejoicing in very narrow streets, and a market-place,
Avhere some lazy Manxmen are generally to be seen
lounging about and gazing at the tourists, or stopping a
passing friend to have a gossip with him. This old
capital, like the sleeping beauty, seems to have been
asleep for a hundred years, and shows no signs of waking
from its present dead-alive but altogether pleasant
existence.
The chain of Manx mountains runs from Manghold to
Brada. Snaefell, the highest point, derives its name from
two Norse words, maer (snow), and/a^M (a hill)—the snow-
hill. The hills next in height are north and south Barrule,
—the apple-shaped hills, as their name infers—Baare Ocjle,
in the Manx language, signifying the top of an apple.
From Snaefell five once independent kingdoms are seen,
namely, Scotland, England, Ireland, Wales, and last and
least, ]\Ian.   The compiler of Edward Forbes' Memoir speaks
328 The Attempt.
as follows of the view obtained, after an easy ascent from
Snaefell,—" On its green summit, the spectator, lifted two
thousand feet above the sea, stands, as it were, in the
centre of the British Isles, and on a summer day looks
down upon three thousand square miles of land and
ocean. Skiddaw and Snowdoun, Criffel and the hills of
Morne, greet him from England, Wales, Scotland and
Ireland. The lesser eminences and lower grounds on the
distant mainlands, with their endless diversities of hill
and dale, and their shifting shadows, recede in long per¬
spective towards the horizon, whilst the nearer points,
mapped out in bird's-eye view, are seen as the eagle sees
them. Between the visible shores spreads the blue sea,
studded with ships of all nations, and dotted near the
land with fishing boats, hovering like birds over their
\\ \ln the winter time the white-topped billows run f;xr up
the jagged gullies, dash furiously on the sandy shores,
boat themselves against the cliffs, and cover with spray
the projecting rocks, till the whole island is girt about
with a frill of foam. In the summer, however, it lies with
the blue sky overhead, and the blue waters all around.
The murmuring wavelets gently kiss the " shell-girt shore,"
" And the fair isle shines in beauty,
As in youth it dawned on me,
My own dear Elian Vannin,
With its green hUls by the sea."
Any one who has visited thy shores, thou " beautiful
isle of the sea," will bear away with them, I doubt not,
pleasant memories of days spent among thy "wild heath
covered hills, the haimts of fairies; romantic glens, with
their babbling brooks flashing like silver between the
trees that bend over them; rude hamlets; fishing villages ;
busy towns; rural palaces; ancient churches; war-worn
castles; ruins, older than history; light-houses, sleeping in
the sun till their hour of night-watch returns; harbours,
busy with the stir of seafliring men;" bold headlands; steep
cliffs; pebbly coves; sandy strands; and the clear ciystal
tide that forever breaks on thy varied shores.
The " King Orry," steaming out of Douglas Bay, leaves
the bright white town and its golden beach far behind, and
as it swiftly cleaves the blue waters, the island fades into
the dim distance; and those on board with heavy hearts
bid farewell to thee, old Manxland.
E. V. Lynne.
The Attempt. 329
Supposing that the Lord should say,
" The fight is won.
Thou hast not laboured half the day
But work is done."
Suppose the Lord had closed mine eyes,
No more to weep,
And, with a dream of Paradise
I fell on sleep.
Supposing that the Master said,
" Though thou hast ftiiled,
My life thy life has hallowed ;
I have prevailed."
Supposing that His hand the door
Had opened wide,
And my tired feet had pressed the floor
On the other side.
Suppose that round the angels trod,
In robes of white,—
The smile ineffable of God
FiUed all with light.
Supposing that the Mother smiled
Out of her bliss,
To welcome home another child
Where comfort is.
Supposing all the harps should ring
Around the sea.
To praise the Saviour, Master, King,
For saving me.
Supposing through the light I crept,
(The light so sweet),—
With tears that sorrow never wept
Lay at his feet—
ociObek 1874. ^ U
330 The Attempt.
And kissing, glad, yet half afraid,
His garments' hem,
I saw the wounds the nails had made,
And kissed them.
Suppose—suppose,—but tears will come,
And will not stay,
And yet we too shall win our home
Another day. R.
Jit i\\t Dunncus.
A   SKETCH   FROM   NATURE.
Noon Avas glowing on the mountain peaks, but it was
tolerably cool in the vast shady forest that clothed the
lower slopes of the valley, through which ran the bright
stream, that further on became a mighty river, with a
grand name and history. And what a forest that was of
splendid pines, and oaks, and chestnuts, and cork trees,
now varied by rugged ferny crags, now opening into
glades of sunny grass, whence you could see the noble
Pyrenees rising into snowy peaks, and suggesting new
and wilder lands beyond the Avoodland solitude. Through
this solitude, a few years ago, two travellers were riding.
Martin, mounted on a handsome light-grey mare, was
chiefly remarkable for the scarlet mantle strapped before
him, so eminently becoming to the colour of his horse.
Marjorie, on a gay alzan or chestnut horse, dressed in brown
Holland and blue, also became the colour of her steed.
Her slender luggage was strapped on the off pommel, and
a waterproof cloak, which could be drawn over everything,
completed her equipment. They rode in eager discussion,
rather nearly dispute, while a few paces in advance, as is
the custom in these parts, their trvisty Gascon squire rode
his fiery young grey horse, carrying their little saddle
bags. Siro Aramitz was the owner of these horses, and
some ten more, and he rode and loved them like the born
cavalier he was. liong of limb, handsome in aspect, with a
hooked nose and bright black eyes and black moustache,
he had among other guides somewhat the air of a baron
The Attemjjt. 331
among vassals, and perhaps not without reason.    Always
gay and good-humoured, beguiling the way with songs
and stories, guarding his travellers in strange inns, among
grim, uncivil Spaniards, he added much to the brightness
of a very bright journey.    For though scenery as beautiful
may be found elsewhere ^vith more ease and at less cost;
for the romance of travel, there are few places to compare
to the frontier lands of France and Spain.    There are still
only  bridle  roads,   so  they  are  unspoilt  by  shoals   of
tourists and excursionists; the beauties of the scenery are
very available from their concentration in a comparatively
small space, and they are besides rich in historical associa¬
tions, from Roland to Wellington.    The travellers Avere
now bound for one of the carriage roads, meaning to make
a  short excursion by   diligence,  and this   it   was that
brought unwonted strife between the brother and sister,
till they appealed to their guide.
" Siro Aramitz," said Martin, " is there such an inn as the
'(rolden Stag' at Montant?" naming the little town whither
they were bound per diligence.
"There is," he answered, "but I don't know it—the
' Popte' is the best."
" Yes, the ' Poste' is Murray's inn," said Martin, " and the
inn we should go to, only Madame is bent upon the 'Stag.'"
"Because" said Marjorie, "a dear friend of mine was
once there, and liked it."
" Only 500 years ago," said Martin, "and his name was
John ii'roissart."
" There may have been changes in the last 500 years,"
said Aramitz, " the cuisine may be altered; five years does
that sometimes. In those days you might have asked my
ancestor, the Seigneur Siro D'Aramitz, who lived then, and
could have judged well, for he, they say, was a great lord,
for all we are poor people now. You must know that
my name is more than uncommon, it is unknown except in
our family; but it is in the golden book of Toulouse; and
there came a gentleman here, learned in these matters, who
told me many things about my ancestors, and said the
descent was good, and that I could have blazon and coat
armour if I liked—but, bah! ce ne sont que des sottises
now-a-days."
_ '' Let us forget modern times," said Marjorie. " Here,
riding through the vn\d wood, we might ba in the heart
of the middle ages ; it would be pleasant, but no surprise,
to see St. George's flag floating from the next fortalice,
332 The Attempt.
and  receive   a   gay  welcome  from   our  own  war-like
countrymen and their French allies."
"The chances are that, at the next table d'hote, we shall
find countrymen squabbling over the bills of French allies,"
interposed Martin; but Marjorie continued, ignoring the
interruption.
" And the last news of the Court of Prince Edward
at Bordeaux we should hear. We might have been
riding with your ancestor Aramitz; or would he have been
an enemy?"
" No, no, Madame, my ancestor was a friend of the
English, and followed the fortunes of the Captal de
Buch. With him he went into far lands, and fought in
aid of some knights, called Teutonic knights. There he
became brother-in-arms to an English kniglit; I have it
all written down by the antiquarian, but more of it later.
Here is the sunshine, we had better go mi gallop to the
village."
The forest had opened, and a little ancient Spanish
town lay piled a brown heap by the sparkling river;
an old woman driving a small bullock, yoked to a
bundle of wood, filled up the narrow track ; hustling to
one side, the riders cantered gaily through the intense
sunshine into the narrow, shadowy Calle Major, or High
Street. Most of the little unglazed windows had a rude
balcony, and out of most windows a head peered to see
the foreigjiers. Flashing black eyes, under gaudy hand¬
kerchiefs, sinister-looking countenances on every side;
graceful men, half-wrapped in brown cloaks, and burnt-
sienna coloured children, half-draped in a few rags,
tlu'onged the street, all with that lounging, sombre,
unalert air, so characteristic of Spain.
They dismounted at a little posada, and were received
with chilling courtesy as usual, for the host's grand manner
is his own ornament, not put on in honour of his guests, as
he makes them feel. They were ceremoniously ushered into
a little, grim, black room, and served with all there was,—
tolerable bread, and wine of the most fantastic and unusual
taste and appearance, both in the bottle, when it appeared
like a bloated pig with its legs extended, and in the glass,
when it resembled house paint.
With a sudden craving for a respectable inn,
Marjorie exclaimed, when they were left alone,—" I say,
Martin, when we are at Moutant, let us go to the best
hotel.    I give up Froissart's inn."
The Attempt. 33
" I am thankful to hear it," said ]\Iartiu ; " old Sir John
himself knew better than to ask where Roland had put
up ; but you are incorrigible! Who wanted to stop in a
hut in the middle of a salt marsh at Teste, because of the
Captal de Buch? Who wanted to embark at Aigues
Mortes, which now is not even a sea-port, because of St.
Louis?    Who" 
"Truce, truce!" said Marjorie. "Who always gives
lip in the end, as I do now my especial hope—Froissart's
inn?"
Our travellers soon rode on, and made the rest of their
afternoon halt, far from the dirt of the little town, close to
the frontier of France and Spain,—so close, that it was a
question in which country they dined oif the provisions in
their saddle bags. It was in a little open glade; the
snowy head and broad shoulders of the Maladetta Moun¬
tain showed over the top of the fir trees, while the path¬
way leading down the steep hillside behind them soon
plunged into a thicket of box and myrtle, hiding the roots
of the forest trees. Wolves were said to be there at
times ; and perhaps the scent of them prevented the
unbridled horses from straying beyond the little natural
meadow, where they grazed near their riders. At the
edge of the path, where the precipice plunged abruptly
down into a shadowy darkness the eye could not pene¬
trate, stood a little way-side cross. There a bride, in the
fulness of life and joy, was riding one day with a merry
wedding party—her horse was startled—the fatal, false
step was made—in one moment all was over, and she was
carried hence to her funeral. Such sights, reminding one
of the frailty of all earthly strength and joy, come strik¬
ingly before the travellers wandering for pleasure over
those southern hills. Far better, surely, that the warn¬
ing should be there for all, than that, as with us, every¬
thing of the sort should be carefully hidden away, as if it
Avas bad taste to be aware of it. No doubt, there is
something in the mountain gloom that harmonises with
thoughts of the fleeting feebleness of the wanderers
under their shadows. Our travellers sat and talked, till a
little song bloomed out of their surroundings—the moun¬
tains and the cross.
There 13 a shudder of warning
Darkening over the sky;
Is it the gloom of the fir-trees,
Sombre and still and hi"h ?
334 Tlie Attempt.
Is it a thunderous loominj;,
Brooding over the hills?
Is it the earthquake's presage,
Coming in shuddering thrills ?
Is it the glacier torrent
Loosed from its icy chain,
Hurling the mountain ruins
Far to the distant plain?
* * * *
O sweet and joyous sunshine!
O fragrant, friendly flowers !
We bask and sport and rest with you,
For time and life are ours.
O strong and solid mountains!
O  bright familiar sky !
All ours, this little moment;
The moment glances by.
Step forward—in an instant
All, all is past and gone;
The world—the sky—the sunshine—
And we are where ? alone.
O where ? the hills re-echo,
The depths have no reply ;
O whither does all vanish ?
And what is it to die ?
The voices of the ages sound.
Like waves on a silent shore ;
They question, " Shall the past return ? "
They answer, "Nevermore."
We do not give the name of the frontier town near
which our travellers halted, nor the exact name of their
guide, though those who know him may recognise him.
We purposely confuse the geography of our authentic
narrative to save the credit of Froissart's inn, which may
not deserve our dark suspicion. Suffice it to say, the
road is there, along which they continued their journey—
the beautiful bridle road, winding high above the torrent,
biit ever descending towards it into the narrow dark
valley down which it sped to the sweet plain country
from the snows of the Maladetta. And the guide told
the following story about his ancestor, which it was
easy to believe, told in that credulous evening hour to
riders through the twilight forest, by one of the same
name as the hero, however nonsensical it may appear in
the common daylight of print:—
The Attempt. 335
" My ancestor, the Sieur D'Aramitz," he said, '• after he
returned from  Germany, went to his own castle  in the
Val d'Aure, of which I could shoAV you the ruins, and held
it for the English king against all comers.    Somewhat for
himself also, for  being   a   preux   chevalier,   and   always
victorious, he demanded that all passers-by should stop
and salute his castle, and pay toll to it also.    The English
brother-in-arms had promised in former days to visit him,
but long years went by and he never came: but news at
last that he had fallen in the wars.    One night the sentinel
called the baron, with the tidings that  travellers  were
passing through the valley, who had refused to halt; and
sure enough, in the misty moonlight, he saw a cavalcade
passing slowly onward.    Hastily he armed and mounted,
and rattling down the hillside encountered their leader, a
man in a peaceful gown, riding a tall horse.    ' Halt and
do homage, and pay toll,' shouted the Seigneur D'Aramitz.
' Never!    We owe you neither homage nor toll,' was the
quiet answer.    ' Then defend yourselves,' said the knight,
as, sure of an easy victory, he pricked towards their leader.
But he, casting off his cloak, appeared in shining armour,
and met the baron with a force equal to his own.    Long
the combat lasted, for the broken spears were cast aside and
swords drawn ; but at last the stranger stood as victor over
the flxllen baron, and as he threw up his vizor showed the
features of his English brother-in-arms.    ' I have come to
visit you, D'Aramitz, for the love I bore you,' he said,
' but I must go further now; rise, my old friend, but first
swear to me to give up the evil custom of your castle, or
we shall never meet again.'    ' I swear it readily at your
request,' answered the baron ; and the other let him rise,
himself mounted, and waving farewell, rode slowly away.
His train were gone already, no one knew where, and when
the baron and his followers hastily folloAved, seeking to
detain them and offer hospitality, all had vanished, and the
valley seemed utterly dark and lonely.    So most believed
that the English knight was indeed dead, but had come to
rescue his friend from the demon of pride which possessed
him.    From that day the Seigneur Siro D'Aramitz was
a  changed man,—gentle as well as valiant.    "When the
English finally lost Aquitaine, the  family  declined and
became obscure, and their once great name survives only
in  our  peasant family, though  ice are  known  as good
hunters and b]-avo soldiers still."
"And most distinguished-looking men," said Martin in
336 The Attempt.
EngHsh, as Siro Aramitz rode forward caroling some
patois song, which soon changed into a sweet, mysterious
modern ballad, well suited to the darkening forest round:—
" Si tu veut, faisons un rove,
Montons sur deux palefrois;
Tu m'einmenes, je t'enleve,
L'oiseau chaute dans les bois.
" Allons-nous-en par I'Autriche,
Nous aurons I'aube a nos fronts ;
Je serai grand, et toi riche
Puisque nous nous aimerons.
" Nous entrerons ^ I'auberge
Et nous paierons Thotelier
De ton sourire de viergc
De mon bonjour d'ecolier.
" Tu seras dame, et moi comte ;
Viens, mon ccEiir s'cpanouit,
Viens, nous conterons (je conte
Aui etoiles de la nuit."
That night Martin and Marjorie took the diligence, and
at three in the morning were turned out, in the bewilder¬
ment of their first sleep, on the pavement at Montant.
An officious porter seized their bags, and as they murmured
something about the " Poste," said eagerly,—" Oui, oui,
par ici, monsieur et madame" and hurried them down a street
and under an archway. ]\Iarjory looked aboye it, and in
the dim starlight saw something, \Vas it not a golden stag
defined against the sky? However, she made no remark,
keeping to herself the delightful conviction that fortune had
declared for her, and landed them in Froissart's inn. They
stumbled up a dark staircase into their little rooms, and
soon resumed their interrupted sleep, only lulled by the
rain and the wind, that now sighed round the old gables,
and creaked the rusty posts whence ^the golden stag
had beamed a welcome to so many generations of
travellers.
E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
The Attempt. 337
J|iiir   Jlniut.
A TALE  OF  THE  TIMES  OF CHARLES XH.
TRANSLATED TROM THK SWEDISH.
OXE evening, towards the end of October 17—, a
solitary horseman took the road which, winding along
the shores of Lake Malar, leads to Salem Church, in the
vicinity of Stockholm. The sun was setting, and the
dark clouds Avhich had covered the sky all day were
gathering closer together, longing, as it were, to pour
down their contents on the earth. And, indeed, this hap¬
pened not long after, for a heavy fall of snow mixed with
hail covered the hard-frozen fields in a short time. The
severe gale which had been blowing during the whole day
was increasing, and violently shook the high fir-trees. In
spite of this, our rider proceeded on his way with the
greatest equanimity, hardly aware of the raging of the
elements.
" A nice end to the sport," he muttered, smilingly ;
" splendid hunting weather, truly. How the poor fellows
will seek for me ! Bah ! they have nothing else to do ;
and besides, blowing upon the bugle will do their lungs
good. I only hope I am upon the right track," he con¬
tinued, uneasily, and strained his eyes to pierce through
the darkness which rested upon all around him. At this
moment the rider's horse began to neigh loudly.
" Ah, ha, Ajax! you scent something, I perceive," said
he, and patted the beast kindly upon the neck. " We
shall see if you have prophesied truly;" and he soon
found this to be the case, for, in a few minutes, a
feeble light appeared in the distance. The rider now
accelerated his horse's pace, and soon stood before a
small dwelling, from the windows of which the guiding
light had shone. He quickly alighted from his foam¬
ing steed, and led him by the bridle to an adjoining
shed. All his movements showed that this was not
his first visit to the place. After having fastened the
bridle, he hastened towards the little house, and knocked
at the door. He had not waited long before his listening
ear distinguished hasty footsteps, and a sweet voice
asked, tremblingly,—" Who is there ? "
"It is I, my own Anna!" he answered, cheerfally.
A scream of joy was the reply, and, a moment after, tlie
SOVEMBEK   1874. ^   ^
338 The A ttempt.
door was opened. A young girl, hardly sixteen years of
age, whose face expressed the joy she felt at meeting
again, looked up to him, while, unmindful of the discom¬
fort so wet an embrace might give, he clasped the maiden
in his arms.
" Wicked one!" cried the girl, quickly disengaging her¬
self from him, " do you wish to drown me entirely ? "
" Heigh ho ! are you beginning to scold me already"?"
Baid the young man, half in earnest, half in jest. ''Is
this my reward for having come so far for your sake,
alone, in such weather? But you are quite right,—I
am as wet as a wolf; we shall soon mend that, however."
With these words he threw off his light cloak, and stood
before her in a blue coat with brass buttons. The bright
lamp, which the maiden had placed upon the floor of the
passage, threw its rays upon a truly beautiful couple.
They both seemed to be aware of it, for they looked at
each other for a minute very tenderly. At last the
youth broke the silence, and, throwing his arm round the
young girl's slender waist, asked, caressingly,—" Now,
my lovely Anna, what have you been about lately ? "
" It is fully eight days," answered she, with a reproach¬
ful look—" fully eight days."
" If I could have come before, I would have been here
long ago."
'• If you had ivished to come, you should say."
" How can you doubt that f Look into my eyes, and
tell me if you think I could deceive you?"
" No, no ! you are right; but if you only knew how
much I have been longing for you. And poor mamma
too—you cannot think how ill she Avas."
" How is she now ? "
" Better, thank God!    But won't you come in ? "
" Willingly, and then I can shake hands with her."
" Thank you, Charles," said the girl, and pressed his
hand gratefully, " but she is already asleep." With these
words, she opened the door of the little room, and they
both entered with soft steps for fear of wakening the old
woman, who slept in the next room.
The youth seated himself in a high arm-chair beside
the blazing fire, while the young girl placed herself on a
footstool at his feet. " Only fancy, Charles," she began ;
" I had quite a presentiment of your coming to-night."
" Perhaps you had heard that the king was to hunt in
this neighbourhood to-day, and so you imagined that I
The Attempt. 339
Avould take advantage of the opportunity to come and
see you."
"Ah, no I I dreamed of you last night, but it was a
bad dream. I thought that you and I were sitting
opposite to one another—just as we are now—and we
were both so happy. Suddenly it grew quite dark
around us. I saw you no more ; and when the darkness
disappeared, I could not find you—I was alone."
" Dreams go by contraries," the youth said, smiling,
and laying his hand tenderly upon her golden ringlets.
" Yes, so you say," answered the maiden, sadly ; " but,
do you know, 1 wept the whole night thinking over it."
" You have been weeping?" and he looked searchingly
into her blue eyes, and covered her face with kisses.
The young girl threw her arms round him and
regarded him with radiant looks. " Ah, Charles ! you do
not know how much I love you.    Should you  ever  turn
from me—deceive me—then, then ," and she hid her
face in her delicate liands.
" Anna," whispered the youth, as he pressed her closely
to his heart, " whence come these thoughts ? Have I not
sworn to be true to you? In life and death you are
mine. I deceive you ! never! Mine you are, and shall
ever remain so. For your sake I can and will risk every¬
thing. Watch over yourself"—and a cloud came over
his brow—" that you do not break your vows and
promises."
" Charles !" she whispered reproachfully.
" Then I would never love another woman."
"I faithless to you ! oh, never !'
"Very well; let us never speak of it again. Sing me,
rather, one of your simple songs."
" Willingly," answered the maiden ; and began, with a
trembling voice, the following refrain:—
Thou—thou art my love ; and I've sworn to be true,
In grief and joy, ever to thee ;
With thee my life's journey is entered anew—
In life and in death thine to be.
II.
At the first flush of morning to thee my thoughts fly,
Swift and sure as the bird to its nest;
And when soft tints of evening illumine the sky,
Thou, love, art my soul's only guest.
340 The Attempt.
III.
As on one slender stem two fair roses may flower,
So our lives, love, together are kuit \
If one withers, the other drags on but an hour
The life it for ever would quit.
IV.
Yes ; sooner the sun from the heavens may fall,
Than aught our true love may divide ;
What forget means thou never shalt learn, for though all
Else may change, yet our love shall abide.
And if never on earth I may claim thee my own
(Though in spirit thou ever art mine).
Before God above I will wed thee alone,—
There, for ever, my love, thou art mine.
" Thanks, thanks, my Anna," said the young man, and
a tear glistened in his eye; " you are my good angel;"
and he pressed a kiss upon the singer's lips.
A distant bugle-call sounded at this moment. The
youth rose. " Farewell, my beloved," he said, and clasped
her in his arms, " one more parting kiss. Farewell I in
a few days we shall meet again." With these words
he threw his cloak over his shoulder, pressed Anna's
hand tenderly in his own, and hastened away. In an¬
other instant he had moimted his horse, and was galloping
wildly away in the direction whence the bugle-call had
sounded.
CHAPTEK   II.
Six months later, Count Piper, King Charles' favourite,
was seated in his study. A brightly burning lamp by
his side lit up the room, throwing its rays over the fine
paintings and handsome furniture that decorated the
apartment. His piercing eyes gleamed strangely, and
a sardonic smile played upon his lips.
" Oho!" murmiu-ed he softly between his teeth, while he
placed his slender, aristocratic hand upon a newly-
opened letter, " our young king, who formerly only cared
for Diana's game, has now got entangled in Amor's net!
And a girl of the people, a poor organist's daughter, in
the parish of Salem, is the object of his tender passion.
He has, says my unknown correspondent, whom I
heartily thank for his information, carried on this love
affair for some time, and the tongue of scandal, Avhich is
The Attempt. 341
never idle, has not once whispered it in my car. He
often steals away from the hunt to go there, and forgets
time and the cares of government over the foolish talk of
a girl.
" I should say nothing," he continued, " did I not
know his character so well. If he once gets an idea into
his head, he will follow it out. If he loves the girl—and
from the letter I have received, that seems certain—he
is also capable of sharing with her, in spite of the whole
world, his sceptre and crown. A second Catherine
]\Iausdotter,—as if we had not had enough with one !
Were he an ordinary youth, I should consider it a youth¬
ful folly, and say no more about it; but a man of his
indomitable will,—the thing is very different. We must
therefore proceed cautiously. Indeed I have already
taken proper precautions," he continued, after a short
pause. '" I have sent for the Pastor of Salem, who shall
give me further information; and so, God willing, we shall
succeed."
At this moment the door opened, and an old servant
entered noiselessly, and whispered something into the
Count's ear.
" What! has he come already 1" exclaimed Piper, with
great satisfaction: "so much the better! Let him enter
at once. Welcome, my dear pastor," continued he,
turning kindly to the approaching clergyman; "you
come at an appropi-iate time, you are heartily welcome."
" Your Excellency sent for me," returned the other,
with a low but dignified bow.
" Yes, so it is," answered Piper, a little embarrassed,
for the pastor's bearing had somewhat disconcerted him.
After a moment's pause, during which the courtier
endeavoured to read the clergyman's thoughts in his
face, he began again: "You are a widower, my dear
Colhnius, are you not"?"
'•- Yes."
" And should you wish to marry again ? "
Collinius looked at the speaker in astonishment, at the
unexpected question.
" I know what you are going to say," continued Piper,
" with your small living you find it hard to keep a wife;
but the pastorate of Jiirna is free : it is yours if you
wish it."
The clergyman did not answer, but regarded the
speaker in mute astonishment.
342 The Attempt.
" It only depends on you, I give you my word for
it," began Count Piper anew.
" I do not know," answered CoUinius slowly, " what I
have done to deserve such kindness and favour."
" What you will do to deserve it. Nothing is easier ;
only agree to the marriage I shall propose to you, and
the pastorate of Jiirna is yours."
Collinius coloured slightly, and his countenance ex¬
pressed deep displeasure. " Your p]xcellency is pleased
to jest," said he at last, with a faltering voice.
"And Avhy so, my dear Collinius ? I offer you a better
income, a beautiful wife—for so I am assured she
is." At this a slight smile stole over the favourite's lips.
"And that you call a joke? a good joke, upon my
honour."
" I thank you once more for your offer," said Collinius,
" but you will excuse the poor pastor for refusing it. I
am weak and ill, my days are numbered, and it behoves
mo to turn my thoughts to the grave, and not to
marriage; and besides," he added, very gravely, " I can¬
not give my hand where I have not given my heart."
" You misunderstand me, my friend," broke in Piper,
quietly, " and I also was wrong in my opinion about
you. Kead this," and he gave him the newly-opened
letter.    Collinius obeyed, and returned it after a while.
" Now, what do you say to that ? "
" I am very much astonished, your Excellency. The
king, our beloved master, loves a low peasant's daughter."
" Yes, as you see," answered Piper, impatiently. " Now
it is our duty to check this passion."
" But can you rely upon the truth of the story ? "
" The letter is from a well-informed person, to whom
the king has confided his secret."
" I shall speak to the girl."
" You know her then?"
" Very well."
" And she is "
"Beautiful as angel, and as innocent and good," said
the pastor, much moved, "Anna is the best girl in the
Avhole parish."
" So much the ivorse for us."
" I do not understand."
" Then you do not know the king. This love will
lead him to the bruik of a precipice."
" Anna is virtuous."
The Attempt. 343
" So much the worse, I tell you. The king is obstinate,
and will, if he pleases, make your low-born parish child
the Queen of Sweden. And what will be the con¬
sequence of that? The great and powerful in the
country, already irritated, would then lift up their heads
in scorn."
" God forbid it."
"Collinins," continued Piper, "your conduct has proved
that you are a man of honour. I thought at first you
w^ere one of those sneaking priests wdio w^ould do any¬
thing to secure themselves a good living. I erred. I
therefore speak to you now, as one honest man to another,
and ask you whether you know of any means of averting
this misfortune ? "
" Anna is a good, sensible child; she will understand
everything when I explain to her "
''That won't do," interrupted Piper, hastily: " if she loves
him, she will not care for your hne admonitions. Even
if she Avere wise enough to refuse him, the king would
say, ' ] iviU,' and then everything w*ould be lost. No, I
come back to my old plan: the girl must be married to
someone else.
" And if the king's love is a true one, why, is he not
sure to forbid this marriage? "
" If he learns that she will give her hand to another,
then—/ knoiv it—he will forget her. He has won her
love unknown; and so his ch-eam, to be loved for his own
sake, will disappear. For, wath him, to doubt is to
despise."
Collinius kept a thoughtful silence. " You are right,"
he said at last; " that is the only escape."
" You consent to it then ?"
" I must first speak to the girl. If she consents to it,
then all is right."
" That she must"
" If she does it of her own free-will, yes; but no force,"
insisted Collinius.
"And when will you let me know the result ? "
" To-morrow, for I mean to speak to her this very
evening."
" Capital, my dear pastor! As to my pi-omise, that
remains the same."
Again the blood mounted to Collinius' temples. " I
see your Excellency does not yet know me," he said,
gravely.    " What I do, I do without expecting the least
314 The Attempt.
reward. As the pastor of Salem I have lived happily,
without wishing for a better lot. My flock loves me, that
is all I covet besides the grave near the church in which
I preach God's holy word. And now allow me most
humbly to take leave." Saying this, he bowed, and
hastily left the room. Piper looked after him a moment
silently; "A truly honourable man," said hq, softly;
"would to God my country could boast of many such!"
Helexe MiJLLER.
{To he continued.)
I £ n s £ £ s-
I
A stillness in the laden air;
A peace and quiet from the heat,
Wild flowers clamber here and there
With hidden feet.
Sea poppies gird the sandy cliff
Their crimson sisters streak the rye,—
Out in the waves a little skiff
Rocks lazily.
Lost in the blue—the far, dim blue.
Where waves and clouds appear as one,
Where both wax scarlet when they view
The rising sun ;
I lie and dream of other lands.
Of other fields and pastures fair,
Whose flowers are strewn by tiny hands
That shelter there.
II.
Two angels in the pretty shade.
Where neither golden sun doth rise,
Nor stormy cloud hath overlaid
Its perfect skies.
" Hark !" they whisper, " a human heart
Is breaking silently below.
Striving to bear (from all apart)
Its bitter woe."
The Attempt. 345
They hurry through a brilliant throng,
And pass without a golden door.
Leaving behind the harp and song
They held before.
Poor human heart I Yet those anear,
Who lived and loved as friend to friend.
Who thought they held it passing dear
Unto tlie end,
Knew nothing of the pain and grief
That made it pine, and droop, and die;
Only the angels bare relief
That heard it sigh.
They knew it all, though far away.
They gathered it from out the sward.
As fragments of an honoured day,
To give their Lord.
Naomi S. Smith.
|ii!C£nl iTvCfjcarrhffi in  Ivcman 'ijifitorn.
Part I.—Romax History ; The PEOPLiNa of Italy ;
The Foundation of Rome.
Should a traveller be seized with the desire to mark tlie
windings of the Rhone throughout its course, he would
first take his stand at the foot of Mount St. Gotthard,
and view the tiny stream issuing from some hidden source
beneath the Glacier de la Fourche. Standing then in
Republican Geneva, he would strive to descry the imder
current of the river that passes through the lake, yet
lends no roughness to its surface. Passing to Lyons, he
would there see the river joined by another stream, that
yet flows sluggishly on one side of the channel, while
the arrowy Rhone rushes bravely on, never paiising till
its waters, mingled with the brine of the deep, are
borne towards the distant shores of many lands. Thus
may the seeker after truth view the object of his quest,
springing from beneath the icy masses of oblivion and
neglect, pass unchanged through the lake of romance
and fiction, and, hurrying on, heedless of the streams of
error and falsehood which accompany its course, rest not
NOVEMBPR  1871. ■"   Y
The Attempt.
until the waves of time have borne its waters in triumph
to the home of every people under heaven.
Truth is the plant which takes deepest root in the
garden of the mind. The fascinating weed of fiction may
appear to choke it, and command admiration, but only for
a time. Men have never ceased to long for truth, and
civilisation does not fail to foster and satisfy the longing.
New forms of truth are ever awaking, and coming forth,
phoenix-like, from the embers of perished traditions.
And thus has it been with the history of ancient Rome.
Fair and beautiful Avere its fictions, and as fictions Ave
may cling to them still, but only prejudice can treat them
with confidence and belief.
And what were those beautiful legends which are now
doubted and condemned ? Imperfect they must be,
for tiiey are but rescued relics of a lost whole; yet
they are fair and noble even in imperfection, and
transmit to us the spirit of the early Roman heroes.
The marvellous story of the twin brothers nourished
by a she wolf, their wonderful reappearance to found
tlie city; the slaying of one, and the supernatural
disappearance of the other; the nightly meetings of the
heroic Numa with the nymph Egeria; the death of
Tarpeia ; the contest between the Horatii and the Curiatii;
the noble actions of Scaivola and Cloelia; the battle of
Regillus, with the feats of Castor and Pollux;—these,
with many others, in spite of M. Mommsen's denial of the
poetic faculty to the Italians, still seem to point to a
lost ballad literature, which must have been one of the
richest and most marvellous in the world. For that the
ancestral exploits were recited in verse by boys at the
banquets of the Romans, is quite certain. And that these
ballads, if written, as they may well have been, were lost,
there can be no doubt. As Niebuhr says, there are but
three ways by which a nation can perpetuate its early
history :—either by itself possessing the art of writing, or
by the writings of others, or, lastly, by oral tradition.
That the primitive Romans possessed the art of writing,
is doubtful; but even had they done so, the writings,
which would be kept by the Pontifices aTnong the
archives, must all have been destroyed at the time
of the Gallic invasion, about the 360th year of Rome.
That many of these traditions hint at facts, and are but
the embodiment in particular instances of general facts,
seems very probable.
The Attempt. 347
The recitation of these legends in verse at their
festivals was the means by which the Romans kept
up the raemory of the exploits of their forefathers. And
the literature of almost every nation has begun in a
similar way. In Palestine, Greece, Spain, Scotland,
Scandinavia, there were early ballads, sung by bards.
What had the history of Greece been without an Iliad,
and a Homer to recite that Iliad j What were Scot¬
land without its Ossian and its Border Minstrelsy ? or
AVales without its harpers, who sang of Arthur ? And
while many of these countries still possess their ballad
literature almost entire, the loss of that of the Romans
must remain a subject for regret. True, many of the
legends remain. But these are all gleaned from the
pages of authors who lived centuries after the events
had taken place, and whose only authority "was the
variable one of oral tradition.
Ennius, who did not write until the period of the
Second Punic War, is the earliest Latin poet on record.
Up to the close of the 17th century the credited history
of Rome was drawn mamly from the works of Livy and
Dioiiysius. The first of these works, being that of a
Roman, was written with enthusiasm, and abounded in
marvels. Dionysius, being a Greek and a foreigner, put
into his history more of the mind than of the heart,
and enlarged on statistics and antiquities. For cen¬
turies, no higher authority on the subject was asked
for than that of these authors. But at the period of
the revival of learning, a fresh spirit of inquiry broke
forth. Perizonius at the end of the 17 th century, followed
by Bayle, de Pouilly, Levesque, and others in the 18th,
ca'fet grave doubts on the Roman traditions, and pro¬
pounded new theories with regard to the peopling of
Italy. At last, in the tliirteenth year of the present
century, Niebuhr gave forth the first volume of his
History. Though ignorant of many of the works which
had preceded his, Niebuhr brought forth theories in many
respects identical with theirs. He ascribed the early history
hitherto believed to oral tradition, handed down through
popular poetry, threw new light on the Agrarian laws,
and propounded a new opinion with regard to the peopling
of the Peninsula. Arnold, a few years later, followed in
nearly the same track, giving, however, a full account of
the legends before casting discredit on them.
The still more recent work of M. Mommsen is based on
348 The Attempt.
yet latei" rosoarclies. Some of the statements of Niebuhr it
leaves unnoticed, as being already fully established; with
regard to the population of Italy it differs from him entirely.
The theory of iS'iebuhr on this subject, which arises from
mere conjecture, must meet with rejection when we learn
the opinion of M. Mommsen, being, as it is, the result of
long and patient research. Niebuhr upholds that the earlier
inhabitants of Italy Avere Autochthones, and, regardless of
any resemblance existing between the ancient Greeks
and Italians in language and customs, founds his theory
upon an analogy drawn from the vegetable world. He
declares that the inhabitants, if immigrants from Greece,
would probably have transplanted specimens of the Greek
flora into Italy. As the plants of Italy, however, were, even
in ancient times, wholly distinct from those of Greece, the
likelihood, according to him, is, that both inhabitants and
plants were natives of the soil. ^Vere a similar analogy
to be accepted with regard to every country, it could not
fail to lead to gross mistakes. Mommsen, on the other
hand, after a careful examination of the early languages
of both peoples, draws the population of Italy from the
followmg sources:—the gradual increase of the human
race, and the consequent migration of numbers, actuated by
the spirit of adventure and the need of space. To these
sources the peopling of Latium is ascribed; and this
immigration is accompanied by improvement in the various
pursuits of nomadic tribes, and the adding to these of new
pursuits, as occasion may have suggested and required.
Much similarity has been found between the Greek, and
Italian or Latin, languages. Slany words expressive of the
simpler wants and earlier occupations of man, are alike in
both. The words for clothing, dwelling, food, are almost
synonymous, and in science and religion some similar ex¬
pressions are also to be found. Tliough this likeness
extends to the Avords referring to agriculture, yet in those
which express nautical ideas, it is wanting. The inference
drawn from these discoA^eries is, that the Greeks and
Italians had migrated together from the cradle of the Indo-
Germanic nations, and for a period led a pastoral life in
common; that the Italians had gradually penetrated by land
into Italy, and, pressing southwards by degrees, had finally
peopled the Avhole Peninsula. From this theory it is to be
inferred that tJie dAvellers in the south of Italy Avere the
earliest immigrants.
It  is   not  Avithout   surprise  that Ave can believe the
The Attempt. 349
Greeks and Italians to have sprung originally from the
same stock. The differences between them in succeeding
centuries were as strongly marked with regard to language
as in any other respect. In religion, in character,in customs,
and in acts, they differ widely. When we look at the respec¬
tive aims and consequent actions of these two peoples,
which of them shall we judge to have best fulfilled, its
destiny, or advanced ftirthest in true culture ? The
Roman, training himself to such a conformity to civil
law as that he may resemble in character one of the
straight-cut columns in a row ; or the Greek, yielding his
imagination to all influences of the Beautiful, and thus
growing into fitness to be a member of that community
where confusion is order, and whose law-giver is nature?
In religion, too, the contrast is equally striking. We see
the Roman seeking only a divinity that might " shape his
own ends," striving to find in birds and animals the
prophets of his own fate, and thus driven by necessity to
worship ; and we see tlie Greek, loving nature for her own
sake, finding a presiding genius in every grove, mount,
and stream, and placing human action equally under
the guardianship of the gods. He invoked the presiding
spirit of every action, and in his pantheism made Elysium
teem with the life of the gods.
Though the march of civilization has proceeded far
in many countries, yet no race has attained such universal
excellence as to deserve the name of the greatest nation
the world has seen. Each has in some way excelled all
others; none has excelled in all things. If extreme
reverence for the dead prompted the Egyptians to erect
to their memory such monuments as, for splendour, have
never been surpassed, an equally extreme regard for the
comfort of the living led to the great luxury and magni¬
ficence of the Assyrians and Persians. The Greeks,
inuring the bodily frame to hardship, preferred minister¬
ing to the mental and aesthetic nature of man ; while the
Romans, holding both in abeyance, used their efforts to
perfect the constitution of the State. The records of
these nations are ours by inheritance ; by how much,
then, ought we to be wiser than the men of old ? Even
the scantiest gleanings of the history of olden days reveal
treasures to us. We learn, through seemingly tedious
details, to look on ancient times with more famihar eyes.
We thus discern some ])ortion of the truth, and learn
to blend it with our being, as we do the influences of
350 The Attempt.
actions done and words spoken aroinid us.     To
degree of effort after such a result, the spirit of research
has been striying to lead us.
Besides the population of Italy, Niebuhr and Mommsen
diff'er widely on another point, namely the foundation of
Rome. And here also the theory of Mommsen, as bearing
traces of deeper research, seems more worthy of credit.
Niebuhr harbours successiyely two theories. 'Jlie first is,
that Rome was a colony of the Tuscans. To this idea,
however, he does not long adhere. The other supposi¬
tion is, that two towns, named Roma and Remuria, became
united under the subjugating power of the Cascans, •
neighbouring tribe. To the fact of the city having arisei
from two towns with such names, lie ascribes the origin
of tlie fables of Romulus and Remus, and deduces from the
same cause the later division of the citizens into patri¬
cians and plebeians. The symbol of this twofoklness he
finds in the god Janus. The theory of M. Mommsen,
evincing a deeper study of the early manners of the
Italians, is as follows:—Several Latian clans, inhabiting
each a hamlet, and all together a canton, and living on the
produce of their fields and herds, possessed in common,
instead of a capital, a stronghold. The strongholds, which
were situated on the summits of rocks or hills, were used
as places of conference. Here the public business of the
canton was transacted, and here enemies were repelled.
Gradually cities began to arise in Latium ; the owners
of strongliolds either fortified their strongholds to resist
attacks, or built cities round tlieni. Three neighbouring
tribes, the Ramues, Tities, and Luceres, united their
eff'orts to build a city. From the former of these it took the
name of Rome. (With all respect to M. Mommsen, we
cannot but be very sceptical as to this last statement.) Thv
city must at first have possessed three strongholds, one foi
each tribe ; but in after times only the Tarj^eian Hill went
by the name of the stronghold rock. It has been a matter
of surprise to many, that a city founded like Rome, in a
marshy district, with bad air, should have been so pros¬
perous. ]\I. JMommsen partly answers this question by
remarking that the position of Rome, commanding as it
did all the slope of land along the banks of the Tiber to
the ]\Iediterranean, offered every advantage for commerce.
The researches of these two authors into the agrarian
laws of the Romans have thrown much new" light on
these  laws,   and   shown   them   to   have been based,  in
The Attemjit. 351
many respects, on sound principles. The first settlers in
Italy seem to have passed from pastoral to agricultural
husbandry before the period of their settlement there.
In founding their cities, the site of the walls was marked
all round by means of a plough. During the early con¬
stitution, the clans or gentes possessed portions of land
in common, and the produce was divided among the
households. Under the later or Servian constitution, a
large portion of land might become the property of one
individual. Any portion of land won in battle was con¬
verted into a farm, and Avas tenaciously guarded against
foreign inroads. This added greatly to the wealth of the
Romans, and increased the number of fidly-armed soldiers ;
for every man possessing a hide of land was expected
to appear in the ranks in complete armour. Those
possessing one-half, three-fe)urths, or one-fourtli of a
hide wore less armour in proportion to the smaller size
of their freeholds; those who possessed one-eighth were
only armed Avith slings. We see thus how, with the
Romans, the arts of peace exerted a strong influence over
the art of war.- From the due cultivation of the soil arose
much of the comfort which the nation enjoyed in peace,
and much of its strength in war. The field was the school
of the senator and the soldier. The relations between
landlord and tenant were friendly, and advantageous to
both. The tenant paid no rent, except a portion, of the
produce of the ground. In case of his failing to pay this
tribute, it was in the power of the landlord to eject him.
A good description of the relations then existing with
regard to landed property, is given by Macaulay's poor
Roman, after he had recounted the exploits of Horatius:
" Then none was for a party,
Then all were for the state ;
Then the great man helped the poor,
And the poor maa loved the great.
Then lands were fairly portioned ;
Then spoils were fairly sold ;
The Romans were like brothers
In the brave days of old."
Though occurring in a ballad founded on fable, we think
that even M. Mommsen, after his most careful researches,
would not fail to corroborate every statement which the
stanza contains. We thus find that the agrarian laws of the
Romans were the means of cementing a union between
rich and poor; of fostering the truest and happiest life,
352 . The Attempt.
viz., life in the country ; and lastly, how they were the
means of originating military rank, and, in course of time,
the political power which sprang from military rank.
Procla.
{To he continued.)
"There can be no farewell to scene like thine."—Childe Harold.
Only a piece of wood-sorrel I a little fern-leaf I a common
pine-cone!
True! but the cone lay under the pines of Aberfeldy;
the wood-sorrel was plucked by a Highland road-side;
the fern-frond flourished in a sheltered crevice beneath
the enow peak of Ben Lawers.
It seems almost incredible now, thinking it over in the
familiar home haunts, but it is nevertheless a feet; and
so they are speaking to me all this Avliile in a pleasant
language of their own, which, like a cipher, would not
have much meaning for other people. It is like holding a
shell to one's ear, and listening to its whispers of its
ocean home.
This handful of withered relics suggests all sorts of
delightful memories ; spring days, the fresh breath of the
mountains, lake and falling waters, ruined castles, with
romance and ivy clinging about them in equal portions,
dream-pictures come to life, lingerings on green hill sides,
grave talk, bright fancies, and a fragrance of friendship,
kind feeling, hospitality, making a sunshine of all which
ought to warm life's shady places for many a day.
What a road that was where the wood-sorrel grew I It
cools one even now to think of the cloister-like shade, the
green living arched arcade of that avenue of sycamores,
only varied now and then, just by way of relief, with
the dark tints of scarcer horse-chestnut. Then the
glimpses one got peeping through, as it were, out of a
verdant nave into widely disproportioned side aisles of
fertile country. Sometimes you saAV a rocky crag-
fashioned into a natural fortress, upon which the conqueror
larches seemed waving victorious banners; sometimes
tempting little woodland paths ascended gentle slopes,
as if they were trying to lure one into finding out whither
The Atlempt. 353
they led; often it was an undulating stretch of pasture-
land which met the gaze, with noble trees here and there
grouped into haughty little islets ; or again Avooded hills
and deer forests, giving one a choice of every variety of
foliage, lest some should fail to please. In this early
spring-time it would be hard to find fault, 1 think, Avith
any of the lovely tints nature chooses to wear, whether
in crimson budding oak, or dehonnair lady birches; in the
Puritan-like sternness of the pine trees' sombre garb, or
where the verdant rain of the larches is arrested in mid¬
air. All alike are fresh and beautiful. Some of the trees,
indeed, seem scarcely used as yet to their summer raiment,
wearing it shyly, with the bashful pride of a girl in her
first silk dress. These living things (I cannot help
fancying) have their harmless vanities like ourselves.
Depend upon it they are not so unconscious as we imagine
of all the loveliness about them; even now they seem to
be bending and bowing, complimenting their neighbours
upon their splendid appearance, winning perhaps a little
panegyric for their own new robes. Dc^ Ave beings of
superior race dare to blame them '?
But the Avood-sorrel'? Well, its special part in this
favoured spot was a sheltered nook under a mossy stone¬
wall, where Ave found and appropriated it. Ff)rgive us,
little floAA-^er! It wasadmiration that prompted the kiAvless
deed. Indeed Ave love and Avonder OA^er your beauty, the
tender veining of your petals, the delicate pose of your
fragile head upon its stalk. A Avild-floAver, and such trouble in
the fashioning! AVe should not think it worth ivhile to
labour so for an out-of-the-Avay place like this Highland
road-side, Avhere fcAV pass by to see ; but the UiAane Artist
accounts no remotest comer unworthy of His finishing-
touches.
The home of our little relic lay about midAvay betAA'^een
Crieff and the gates of Drummond Castle, Perthshire, in
the traversing of which two miles we passed a pleasant
hour of a spring noon not so long ago. The day began
Avith pastoral loveliness; we were in the midst of an
Arcadian idyll of Avaving trees, balmy breezes, song of
mavis, and Avhistle of merle ; but it passed through tender
modulations from gay to grave, and ended at last in a
mournful minor of saddened tones. By rugged hills,
where the sheep find difficult footing; by groves of
densest foliage; by slopes f)ine-croAvned to the summit,
Ave enter upon the very haunt of silent  solitude.    Yet
SOVEMBEK 1874. ■"   Z
354 Tlie Attempt.
kindly nature never fails to remind us of gentler things,
for even here, in the very wildest and most rugged parts,
the traveller lights sometimes upon a little cheerful tuft
of primroses set in the midst of gloom and loneliness, like
a smile on a grave face. The constellations of star-
flowers are plentifully sprinkled all along the banks of
this noisy Earn river, which, eddying round rock and
boulder, murmuring, making a fuss over every small
obstruction, occupies us with its vagaries until at last we
reach the shores of Loch Earn.
There is something here at St. Fillan's of a less sombre
life;—the rustic inn, ■with an ostler or two moving about
—our post-boy going down to water his horses in the
loch—a picturesque bridge spanning the river, suggestive
of wayfarers coming and going. It is really a relief to
the feelings after the gloom we have left behind. In
sunshine, perhaps, the aspect of things would have been
different. What cannot the royal sunshine do? Why,
even this passing gleam of light upon the loch, too faint
to be called sunshine at all, is invaluable in softening its
severity. For it is severe. Not rippling with sunny
smiles like Loch Katrine, not calm with the bright
tranquillity of Loch Lomond, so content as it seems to
bear upon its bosom that treasure of happy isles. Here
the purple mountains tinge the water with their own
sober hues, turning it into a grey sad-coloured lake, over
which a heron flies solitary,—the only living thing.
On the further side of the loch, somewhere hidden away
among the trees between us and the hills, lies the old
house of Ardvoirlich, the Darnliuvarach of the Legend of
Montrose. Here belongs the tale of the terrible banquet
served to the poor lonely Chatelaine by the cruel Children
of the Mist; and what wonder? The mountain wall,
which includes the mighty form of Ben Voirlich, might
hide any number of dark deeds from the world beyond.
Lochearnhead being gained presently, we are greatly
tempted to turn aside from our prearranged programme
for the Braes of Balquhidder stretch away to the west¬
ward, and that is Hob Roy's especial country, and in
Balquhidder kirkyard is his grave. I take an interest
in Rob Hoy. It dates from nursery days, when we pur¬
chased him as a halfpenny scrap, and coloured him
laboriously (with many lamentations over the paint which
would smudge) in a fancy tartan such as sure was never
worn by any Scot, "Lowland or Highland, far or near,"
The Attempt. Zbl
except in the cloud-land of our imagination. It culminated
when, in maturer years, we held our breath over the recital
of his adventures in the thrilling pages of Scott's novel.
And so I fain would stand beside the last resting-place of
the turbulent spirit; but time presses, and we sleep at
Killin to-night.
On to Killin then we go, by a pass of wild country,
where our train seems a sort of anachronism, crawling
untimely through some prehistoric age where it has no
business. Killin will live in our memory, I think, while
memory lasts. Oh, the beauty of the scene we come upon
there !
It is cmly now, after all this long day, that the truant
sun begins to show us any favour. But he soon makes
up for lost time. He not only reveals himself to us in all
liis majesty, like a monarch who, on the eve of abdica¬
tion, robes himself yet again in his full splendour, but he
calls about him a magnificent train of attendant clouds,
gorgeous in crimson and gold, and so parades before us.
One cannot wonder that Ben More there hastens to mirror
the glory in his snowy peak I
In great cities the people flock to see a royal proces¬
sion. Behold windows at fabulous prices ! Behold hurry
and bustle, and surging to and fro of curious multitudes !
Yet what, I should like to know, is a procession of all
the royalties of all the quarters of the globe compared
with this imperial magnificence ?
And now Ben More is mirrored in hie turn. The Dochart
river receives in its broad silver stream an inverted
picture of the snow-capped summit, with all its brilliant
cloud-company floating about it. The water is opaline
already in the tender evening light; and now comes an
eff'ect as of fire flashing out to complete its resemblance to
the gem. Just the opal's indefinite tint is there ; neither
blue nor green, but something of botli.
Plash, splash! as we go, falls the water over a thousand
shallow shelves, till one wonders what all the hurry can
be about. Is not the silly stream content in its mountain
home at the foot of these glorious hills? No; restless as
an impatient lover, it,hurries on, getting its own way,
tripping itself up with its eagerness, till a little later, at
the outskirts of Killin village, we find out the wherefore,—
for there another stream comes up from the west to meet
it, and the two, joining company, sweep away together,
and get lost in the broad bosom of Loch Tay.
ooG 'J'he Attempt.
The inn at KilKn stands upon the banks of the river
Lochy, and is everything' to be desired for a night's
lodging. We are evidently the first tourists to invade it
this season, and get about sucli a Avelcome as the cuckoo
does when he first lifts his voice to tell us of the spring.
We receive a monopoly of attention; mine host meets us
in the porch rubbing his hands; the chambermaid, decked
in a new white cap, conducts us to the freshest and neatest
of sleeping apartments.
Perhaps we were a little disappointed that there
Avas notliing especial in our surroundings to remind
us that we were actually in the Highlands. There
"vvas something a little tame in sitting down to tea
and beefsteak decently served, as one would do in one's
own home circle. But when a cock's shrill clarion had
sounded a reveille at four o'clock in the morning just
beneath our window; when it was followed by innumerable
twitterings from a dozen different throats; when, finally,
the bird voices had persuaded us up and out into the
bracing mountain air, Avhen we had climbed a huge hill
close by before broiikfast (that exploit is a triumph to this
hour), and seen Loch Tay spread out before ns in the
morning light—oh! then it was very different from what
would have happened at home.
This hill—which seemed a very mountain to us low-
landers—had excited our ambitious longings over night.
It proved a Hill Difliculty; but excelsior I We Avere
determined not to gi\"e in, and in half an hour the climb was
a fait accompli, and the vieAV a rcAvard worthy of the toil.
I Avish it had been our fate to behold it in sunshine!
Alas! all the time we remain the lake and everything
around is grey, uncompromisingly grey. Mountain-top
after mountain-top shoots up its sad summit; they seem
as the spires of many temples set for Avorship throughout
the land.
And noAv, tAvo hours later, breakfast is also a
fait accompli; Ave have said ffircAvell to Killin and its
comfortable night's halting-place, and are upon the
northern shore of Loch Tay, posting Keumorewards.
Our road lies half-Avay up the hills, so close to the snoAv
upon Ben LaAvers that Ave seem treading upon the skirts
of Avintev, Avhich, like a fashionable lady, she leaA^es trail¬
ing over the mountain-tops long after she is out of sight
herself. It certainly is intensely cold, and Ave are a trio
of chilly mortals.    Sometimes, to be sure, we forget the
The Attempt. 357
cold in the scenery, but often, I am ashamed to own, the
scenery is forgotten in the cold!
And yet there is so much to look at—this rough-hewn
stone wall, for instance, as usual, carelessly piled together,
but making a picturesque boundary between road and
pasture far more beautiful, to my thinking, than our close-
cropped hedges. There are fern-treasures here of every
variety, and among them once flourished the withered
little frond which is helping to recall these recollections.
On either side, all about us, rocky crags lie scattered in
wild disorder. Sometimes a mountain stream comes
tumbling down among them upon a nature-hewn stair¬
way, leaping from step to step and sprinkling the ferns
and flowers along its margin. Delicate primroses star
the banks of streamlet of the present, and dried-up water¬
course of the past; baby blechnums, tiny, elegant fernlets,
adorn every possible crevice of the mossy stone wall.
Talk of a Kentish bank of wild-flowers ! Why, what has
even the Garden of England to compare with all this
wealth of beauty ? And this is but the basement storey
of an edifice whose topmost pinnacle is crowned by the
glorious snow-diadem of Ben LaAvY-rs !
I must confess that our enthusiasm for mountain scenery
is chilled for the moment by the time we gain the outskirts
of the grounds of Taymouth. We are quite thankful foi*
the pines' warm shelter, and admire with a delightful
sense of gratitude the lithe larches and tree-trunks
hidden away in a mass of clinging ivy, where underneath,
upon a mossy carpet, the deer browse peacefully. They
are not so shy as one would imagine; or is it that, with
so much else to admire, they are not afraid we shall stare
them out of countenance ? Graceful creatures I They
come down to peep at us ; they cross the road just before
our carriage wheels ; they scamper up among the crags.
The Taymouth estate boasts of game of every description,
from the fallow-deer we are admiring just now to the
American bison, which ^ve are not lucky enough to come
across.
Only we see a splendid capercailzie sitting majestic on
a bough by the road-side. The sight is a rare one, and
we rejoice thereat.
Upon Kenmore Bridge Ave pause a moment for a part¬
ing look at the hoary head of that white serenity, Ben
More. It is like saying faj-ewell to a friend. Then comes
a seven-mile drive along the banks of the Tay river, amid
358 'The Attempt.
birchen green and beechen green,—neither so dense as
yet but that we can detect among it the slender tracery
of stem and bough.    And here we are at Aberfeldy.
The great, indeed the only, objects of interest here are
the triple Falls, overhung by the Birks which Burns ha8
immortalized. But these are a host in themselves. How
gracefully the trees pose themselves upon the brink
of the stream, not a whit behind the most ardent ot
tourists in their eagerness to peep at the waters ! Fresh
and verdant round their silver stems spreads a carpet ot
oak-fern and wood-sorrel; sweetly below sound the mur¬
mur of the burn and the far-off plash of the felling water.
'' The hoary cliflFs are crowned wi' flowers,
While o'er the linn the burnie pours,
And rising, weets wi' misty showers
The Birks of Aberfeldy."
It is all said for us. Pages of description could not
equal that, sung of them in their own tongue by their
own especial laureate.
What more is to be told of our two days of travel ?
It did not quite end here. I mi^-ht tell of our farther
journey ; of a peep at Schiehallion—no ! of his j^eep-
ing at us over the shoulders of nearer hills; of a
glimpse at Ballinluig; of Killiecrankie Pass stretching
away into sunlit loveliness ; of the junction of two grand
rivers swearing a bond of amity under our very eyes ; of
Dunkeld and Dunkeld's cathedral, backed up by noble
wooded hills ; of fair Perth, unlovely as any other place
in its station-aspect; of railway adventure, and a step
unpleasantly near danger to life and limb; suspense, com¬
posure thoroughly English, and inward perturbation—a
picturesque confusion in the evening dusk—lanterns flit¬
ting about in invisible hands—universal tapage—a medley
of voices, timid, reassuring,—our train to the rescue,
like a friendly life-boat drawing up beside a stricken ship
—a final bearing away into the darkness of sundry
wrecked passengers,—and some thankful feelings, which
belong elsewhere. But this would be Avandering too far
from the threefold text of these memories, which have
already taken up too many pages.
Thanks, little treasures, for your eloquent Avhisperings I
You have done your work, and now we will put you by
again in safe keeping ; precious hostages for that part of
our hearts Avhich we left behind us in the Higldands.
Gratia.
The Attempt. 359
labour and ^ou^.
Beat, beat, beat, saith the smithy over the way,
'Tis work and sweat and  turmoil all through the busy
day;
'Tis beat, beat, beat, till the metal is tested pure.
No shrinking from the furnace, but bravely to endure.
Tight drawn must be the  muscle,   stern  clenched   the
brawny hand,
For the strife is long and mighty throughout this labour
land;
Until in the even-tide the quick pulse beateth slow.
And the sturdy voice by the anvil is all subdued and low.
* * * »
Spin, spin, spin, said the little wife at home,
'Tis spinning for Johnnie and Pollie, and idleness can I
none;
'Tis spin, spin, spin, though the children be all at play.
And through  the   open  window  wafts in  the  scented
liay,—
For in spite of weary fingers, and a throbbing, aching
head,
There is work to be done for the laddie, and the children
must be fed.
Then when father comes at evening, and I lay my spin-
_ ning by, _
He will praise the bonnie children, and look with ap¬
proving eye.
So as life is what Ave spin it, and we must spin for bread,
Faster she plies the distaff, faster and faster the thread.
« « « *
'Tis love, love, love, say the children, clustering near,
Around the parent knee,—
And a hand is tenderly
Stroking one curly head.
For life is love to the children,  they are simple and fresh
from God,
Christ breathed that love in the children, when on earth
of old He trod.
When they flocked around Him trustful, and " Forbid them
not," He said.
Erica,
3G0 The AIL nipt.
A   SKETCH   PROM   XATURE.
(Continued.)
Montant is not a very pretty town, though very char¬
acteristic.    There is something about it remote and grim,
and it feels further from our home than many a more
distant place that lies more on the world's highway.    No
railway whistle rouses its quiet echoes; no station omni¬
bus wakes it into life.     The  diligence rattles over its
rough pavement twice a day, and changes horses at the
" Poste," bringing with it a passing stir and bustle, but
leaving Froissart's   Inn   to  its  local  patrons.    Montant
feels like a wicked place; fierceness and discontent are
in   the   air.     In  the   calm,   western  provinces   of the
Gironde,  crime is   almost  unknown;   but  the  statistics
blacken rapidly as one moves eastward, and perhaps the
worst population in Southern France is to be found on
the skirts of the Eastern Pyrenees.    Montant lies towards
this fiery east, and has a wild history of its own.    In the
wars of the Albigenses the town was burnt to the ground,
and the oldest buildings in the present one date from
after that period.    The J^lack Prince afterwards ruled it
Avith a strong hand,  and  the wandei'ing knights of his
time,   doubtless, found   here  many  wrongs  to   redress.
Then when the religious wars of the Kith century broke
out, Montant Avas a Huguenot town and fought well, and
can still show its " Priests' window," Avhence the Catholic
priests Avere tossed doAvn into the ri\^er fiir beloAA^ during
the massacre; the churches lost their carving and their
stained glass—in fact, all their beauty—at that time; and
the soldiers played at ball with the skulls of the saints—
supposing, indeed, there CA'er were  saints in  the  place.
Then came fierce reprisals, Avhich left, hoAvever, a large
proportion of Calvinists to this day among the popula¬
tion ;  so CA'en virtue appears here in a  somewhat grim
form.    Now, the toAvn seems quiet  enough ;  few peo^jle
pass in the silent streets, that lie exposed to the intense
glare of the southern sun; the houses, somewhat mean
in size, and coA'^ered Avith dazzling white-AA'ash, Avith deep
black arches leading into little sordid courts, and grey-
stone roofs rising into  as  blue a sky as ever delighted
The Attempt. 361
the eye of a painter, are yet neither picturesque nor
homelike : the whole place reminds one of the crater of
an unextinct volcano, where the fierce, wild elements
might at any moment start again into sudden flame. A
bright river runs swiftly by the walls, as though in a hurry
to leave the place, where, indeed, no stranger stays who
can help it. Beyond—across a wide plain, where tracts of
stony ground alternate with woods—the noble peaks of
the Pyrenees rise high above the horizon, and close by
the ruins of an old castle crown an eminence, so steep
that one hardly can tell, on looking up at the precipice,
which is battered wall, and which is native rock.
Martin and  Marjory had made a  distant  expedition,
and only towards  evening returned to the little  town,
where   they  went   to   the   diligence   office,   near   the
" Stag," to secure places back to the mountains.    There
were many  loungers  at  the  door,   and some  difficulty
in getting change for a large bank-note ; and Martin gave
the number of his   sister's   room, which  he   chanced  to
recollect, as  their address.     Then   they Avere   glad   to
take shelter fi*om the glare of the sun in Froissart's Inn,
which  pleased  Marjory more  than  it  did  Martin.    No
doubt it was  very  old; it was built round a dirty inner
court, whence a short staircase led to a corridor running
all round, into which the bedrooms opened.    This wooden
balcony   was   so    black   with  age  that   the  ladies   of
Froissart's   time might have leant  on it, watching the
knights mounting their horses below.    Now there were
only chickens stirring in the court, and no knights more,
unless some chevalier was among the seedy-looking men
who never ceased all day knocking about the billiard balls
in  the cafe on • the ground-floor.    The  rooms were  low
and  dirty,   with tiled  floors   and  heavy  beams   across.
Froissart probably dined in the small salle a manger, where
a nice little dinner was served up; and the dusty bottle of
wine proved to be of a better vintage than is often met
with in hotels of more pretension.    Marjory was  trium¬
phant when they settled  into   her  room  to spend  the
evening.    Like Martin's, it opened into the balcony and
looked into the street;   the rooms   communicated  Avith
each other ;  and there  Avas besides a third door in  her
room, opening evidently into the next room on the other
side.    This   door had a mysterious  unchancy air.     The
hinges and sides, and a little trou de Judas in the middle,
were stuffed up with toAv, but it Avas seciired by a strong
KOVEMBEE 1874. "   A
362 The Attempt.
wooden staj^le, which they shook, and found fast. As they
chatted in the twilight, a noise drew them to the open
w^indoAv; the dull street had weakened into life, an angry
group was collected, a row^ was going on beneath the
"Golden Stag." The landlord was in it, the waiter was in
it; the landlady rushed out, her capstrings flying behind
her; the trim chambermaid, hands in her pockets and
chin in the air, was there, and many more ; lastly, the cook
dashed out, apparently transported with fury, andbrandish-
ing some kitchen weapon in the air, and they were all at
each other's throats. Then came the gendarmes, stiff
and trim as tin soldiers; one wrote something down in a
note-b;)ok, others entered the fray, whence, gesticulating,
shouting, and scolding, they dragged the waiter of the
" Stag," hauled him off, and silence and night came
together on Montant.
" Froissart's Inn seems still to have a warlike flavour
about it," remarked Martin, while Marjory rang for a
long time, till the smart maid appeared, somewhat fluttered
still, but smiling and obliging. She deponed that there had
been a quarrel, and that the W'aiter had been taken to the
prison for the night; and a good thing too, she added, "r?«
quil est horrihlement fort et horriblenient mechant." Night
came on, and Marjory as usual locked her door, and also the
one leading into Martin's room, knowing his carelessness
about locking his own, and went peacefully to sleep. The
night was deep, when a slight shock of the bed, as of some¬
thing striking against it, roused her in a moment. She
could see nothing but the square glimmer of the window,
but she heard—yes, distinctly—besides the creaking of the
" Stag " outside, some stealthy movement in her room ;
and then a chair grated on the tiled floor, as if the thing-
had run up against it. This was too mlTch ; to sprhig up,
throw on jacket and skirt, and fly to Martin's door, was
the work of a moment; then, fearing to defy absolutely
whatever prowled in her room, she shouted, " There is
an animal in my room! wake up, and come." A hind is
always sentry over a herd of deer; is the master stag as
amioyed as mankind usually are at an alarm given in the
middle of the night by the weaker sext Martin at any
rate was very cross, and Marjory had found her matches,
lit the candle, and discovered—nothing, before he emerged
half dressed and incredulous.
"Is it the  ghost  of Sir Espaigne de  Leon, or Count
Gaston's famiUar, or a rat, that has frightened you ? " he
The Attempt. 3G3
asked: " the rat I hear myself." In truth, a great scratch¬
ing and scrabbling, as of a giant rat, was heard in the
next room, and though they sought in vain for a rat hole
or hiding-place, Marjory began to be much ashanied of
herself; and Martin, with many sarcasms, was just return¬
ing to his room, when both happened to glance at the
inner door opposite his, and saw that all the tow round
the edges had fallen out. That door had been opened
since evening. A further examination of the staple
showed that it ran under a catch, which yielded to the
slightest pressure, so that the door, certainly locked noAV
on the other side, could not be secured at all on the side
of their apartment. They looked at each other in amused
consternation.
" You are responsible; you know all about it," said
Martin: " wliat is the correct thing to do in a robber inn
of the olden times ? "
" You sit up all night, with your weapons before you,
straining eye and ear."
" Of course you went about armed in those days,—
arms offensive and defensive. What is the use of sitting
up all night with an umbrella ? This inn is a wretched
anachronism, ^larjory, and I Avish we were well out (jf it;
but stay awake I neither can nor will, nor should you,
but I will arrange it so that he shall have to ring a
bell when next he comes."
No sooner said than done; the tin hot-water jug was
poised on the lock, so that opening the door would be
sure to make it tumble Avith a grand clatter into the basin
placed on the floor; and then the travellers, whose nerves
were braced by their wanderings, resumed their sleep,
which lasted till morning. Then they examined the smart
maid, who denied that there was a rat in the house, but
only shook her head with gloomy intelligence on hear¬
ing their story—"■Non," she said, " <^e ne sont pas des rats."
They next went into the room into which the suspected
door opened,—it was a big, dusty, empty, slmt-up salon.
No one had been there the night before, said the damsel,
and no light was thrown upon the matter, except that it
Avas very easy to open Marjory's door from that side.
Perhaps some evil lounger at the diligence office
came after the change for the bank-note—perhaps the
inn Avas haunted—perhaps it was a robber den; but they
never found out more, thcnigh they passed another night
there under the protection of their tin battery, and early
3G4 The Attempt.
tlie  following  morning  drove  off,   nothing loath,   from
Froissart's Inn.
And though IMarjory's delight in hunting up places
of historical interest did not diminish, she did not again
urge risking their comfort on such very old testimonials.
But so it often is ; we seek out some place that to us
is a shrine, consecrated by a splendid association, half-
forgetting, when we reach it, that it has led its own
perhaps sordid life for centuries, and that in the little
Avorld round it all that gives it interest to us is past and
forgotten. The " peasant who whets his scythe on Runy-
mede" thinks only of the crop, and convicts have for
many years picked oakum in the great hall of the knights
at Mont St, Michel.
Marjory was, however, consoled that very day by
coming in for as bright a little picture of the France of
olden times as can perhaps be found. Who, as the driver
of the diligence said, has not heard of the Fair at Uax?
who did not know that this was the third and merriest
day, the day of the '^Courses aux taureanx piirement J^cmdoisJ'
where neither horses, bulls, nor men are tormented or
slain; but where the jeunesse may show forth great
feats of skill and daring. The road grew gay and crowded
as they approached Dax; here a cart, drawn by
bullocks, their heads a mass of waving fern, was filled by
peasants gay in their Sunday suits; here a prosperous
farmer caracoled along on his active pony, with red berret
and sash, his wife alongside mounted also, and astride,
reining in her pretty little horse with ease and grace.
Then a humble group mounted on donkeys, the donkeys
themselves often wearing old trousers on their fore-legs
as a protection against the flies, Avhich gave them a
marvellously human and disreputable appearance. So
before reaching Dax our travellers had quite entered into
the humours ofihefete, and were delighted withthegay and
crowded aspect of the cheerful old town. In the centre
of the little place or square there is a pool of perpetually
boiling Avater some twenty feet square. Round it are
troughs where washerwomen toil and chatter, and further
back bath-houses, where since the time of the Romans
invalids have bathed, often emerging wonderfully spotted
and disfigured from the chemical properties of the spring.
The fair was held beneath the large trees between the
river and the old Roman Amphitheatre noAv used as a bull¬
ring.    There were all sorts of booths, ordinary and extra-
The Attempt. 36t>
ordinary ; among the latter was a small theatre, where a
sort of Bible mystery was announced for the evening, and
a good many angels belonging to it, big and little, male
and female, in white or blue robes, with coronets and wings,
promenaded about, to promote apparently the sale of
tickets. ]\Iar]'ory and Martin, with the rest of the crowd,
found themselves gravitating towards the circle or bull¬
ring, Avliere they secured good seats. The scene was very
pretty: Moorish decorations and flags, some with virtuous
mottoes in praise of industry, decorated the great circle,
which was so crowded there seemed scarcely i-oom for
another person. Thousands of well-dressed peasants and
respectable hourgeoisie sat rourd,—few real grandees, and
no rabble. Though the blue sky was cloudless above,
most of the arena was shaded by the large trees
that grew close outside. It was certainly too crowded
for comfort, but in the open air and shade one can endure
a great deal. About twenty peasants in their usual smart
costume, a little brightened in colours, and worn more
coquettishly than usual, occupied the arena, and to them
entered bull No. 1. A long rope was tied to his horns, and a
man he never seemed to think of running at, ran or was
dragged at the other end. This rope was a check on the
bull at dangerous moments, though of course it could not
absolutely prevent a catastrophe. The peasants by turns
excited and defied the bull, who dashed at them, and the
point was to let him come as near as possible before in
the least avoiding him. Some did so by a turn of the
waist only, some jumped over his head, some would stand
on their caps to receive his charge, and avoid him by a
dexterous twist; audit was marvellous how they escaped.
As soon as a bull was at all tired, he was lured back to his
stable by a master ox, who seemed quite official, and to
know all about it; and another took his place to the
nxunber of twelve, two or three being cows, at least as
wild anddashing, though not so obstinate, as their brothers.
No bulls were hurt, but some were cowardly, and glad to
get in from a storm of hisses; Avhile others objected to
going away, and broke out again and again to charge
with more fury than ever. Several men were slightly
touched by the bull's horns, and had their clotlies torn.
One was tossed, happily not with violence ; but no one was
seriously hurt, and it was all fun for the bulls. The three
bulls Avho had worked best {truvailU le ndeux) were
brought at the end to tlie president of the sports, a gaily-
3()6 The Attemjjt.
bedizened official, to be crowned. He eyidently did not
like this office, as these were the fiercest bulls, dragged
with great difficulty, but with much serious desire that
they should be properly croAvned, towards his seat. After
a good deal of anxious consultation upon the difficulty,
the crowns of flowers were at last passed through the
ropes, fastened on the horns of the victors, and then jerked
carefully and gradually doAvn on their heads amid the
applause of the multitude. The first prize was so gallant
and fleet that Marjory only hoped he would not one day
leave his life in some bloody Spanish arena. The men,
who made points as in the game of curling, received more
substantial prizes of rouleaux of francs, and the people
began to stream out of the amphitheatre in high good-
humour at the sport, which, if it had not the excitement
and glitter of a bull-fight, had nothing of its sickening
cruelty and bloodshed.
The Hotel de Commerce at Dax, though you enter
it through the kitchen, in which a staircase leads to the
upper rooms, is an excellent little inn ; and as the antiqui¬
ties of Dax or De Aquis are mostly Roman, the hostess
has no doubt that it dates back to the days of the Romans,
though she is uncertain if it is quite as old as Froissart's
time. But Marjory no longer considers this any great
disadvantage, as she now believes an inn may be too old
as well as too new. For the rest, should any of our
readers ever find themselves in the toAvn and the inn
described, let them look to the bolts, for they may chance
to visit both, although ]\Iontant is not the name the town
has   on   tha map, and   the   sign   of the inn  is not the
" Golden Stag."
E.J.O.
(Cojicluded.)
The Attempt. 367
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Memoirs op Sara Coleridge,
The liistory of our own time is like a great picture, of
which parts are left merely in outline, roughly sketched
in, till by degrees, one by one, these episodes are filled
up, the faces look forth distinctly from the canvas, and
the details are complete. This comparison suggests
itself as years pass on, and famous men leave us. Their
nam.es perhaps were known to us formerly; but now we
are admitted into closer intimacy, and learn the charac¬
ters, the very thoughts and feelings, of those who have
left their mark on the age.
The life of Sara Coleridge may be considered somewhat
in this light, as tilling up our knowledge of a gifted
family and circle. Probably most of us have been
occupied of late with these Memoirs, and have been
charmed with the portrait of the graceful girl maturing
into the pensive widow of later years. It may be interest¬
ing to consider what impression has been made upon iis.
It is a disappointment to learn so little that is new of
the choice spirits who found a home by the English Lakes
something like seventy years ago. True, the little Sara
was brought up at the feet of her father, her uncle
Southey, and Wordsworth, their friend and neighbour.
But the fragment of autobiography breaks off when she
was still quite a child; and she seems to have seen little
of her father in after life, though she cherished the most
devoted love and admiration for him. She inherited a
large share of his genius, softened and made feminine
(just as Schubert is said to represent the feminine side of
Beethoven). She has his keen and incisive power of
criticism, his fearless soaring into regions of abstruse
speculation, and much of his charm of expression and
delicate ear for language. Had she written more poetry,
she would, I think, have taken a high place. It is re¬
freshing to read her opinions on poets of the present day,
and to see how she insists on beauty of language and
rhythm as well as original power ; while yet her very admir¬
able critique on Keats shoAvs that no mere gifts of expression
368 The Attempt.
conld tempt her to forget the higher duty of a poet.
Indeed, she excels above all in criticism. With clear insight
she seizes upon the very heart of the position, and in several
instances, such as her remarks on Ruskin, she has seen by
intuition what the world has taken years to discover.
She had, indeed, every right to a fine power of literary
insight, her mind having apparently been formed by inter¬
course with her father's writings and with Woi-dsworth's
society. She continually speaks of all she owes to the
latter; and what he thought of her may be gathered
from his beautiful lines in the Triad. There is a lette»"
to Professor Reed, of Philadelphia, near the close of th-
second volume, in which she gives a very interesting sketcj
of him, and happily compares his conversation, beside
that of Coleridge, as Latin to Greek.
It is curious that her estimate of Dante differs much
from that usually formed by people qualified to judge.
She thought the Divina Commedia the least attractivcf
of all the great poems of the world. But then she
Avas repelled by its materialism, one of the subjectt»
on which she is most earnest being the entirely spiri¬
tual nature of a future state. In spite of her excep¬
tional advantages, I cannot help thinking she loses
herself in the realms of speculative theology; there
is a want of depth, of repose; and we follow her
through pages of eager special pleading without feeling
convinced.
The Attempt. 369
A TALE  OF  THE TIMES OF CHARLES XIL
TRANSLATED FROM THE SWEDISH.
CHAPTER   III.
Quiet and industrious as usual, Anna sat the same
evening in her little room in the organist's dwelling near
Salem Church. How actively the little foot moved,
and how quickly the wheel turned! Yet it was easy
to perceive that other thoughts occupied her mind.
'• Another evening passed, and he has not come," she
whispered, and a half-smothered sigh escaped her. "He
is not coming, the wicked man I and yet he did promise
it so faithfully. But perhaps I am wrong,' she con¬
tinued, after a short j^ause. " On Monday he was here,
and promised to come back on Thursday. Wait I
Ah, dear me I this is only Wednesday, and I have mis¬
counted the days. How slowly time passes ! So sadly,
so sadly ! But he is sure to come to-morrow," and with
increased vigour she began to turn her wheel. At the
same moment there was a knock at the door. " That
is he," she cried, joyfully, and with nimble steps she
sprang to open it.
But it was not he whom she had expected. It was
Pastor CoUinius, who, true to his promise, had, immediately
upon his return from the capital, hastened to the young girl.
" A thousand times welcome," stammered Anna, and
raised his hand to her lips.
" Good evening I" answered the clergyman, and stept
into the inner room, where he seated himself in a well-
cushioned arm-chair, and looked earnestly at the girl,
who, without knowing why, reddened, and cast down
her eyes.
A minute passed in continued silence, which Anna
broke at last by asking if the pastor would like to speak
with her mother ; because if so, she would wake her.
"It is not necessary, my child," he answered, and
passed his hand thoughtfully over his brow. " Anna," he
continued kindly, " do you still trust me as formerly ?"
" Ah I always, always !"
" I prepared you for the Lord's Table," he went on.
'■ I have loved you as a father loves his child, and surely
you will not give your teacher pain: is it not so?"
DECESIBEr. 1874. " B
370 Ue Attempt
Never, but tell me-
"Sit down beside me and I will explain it all to you.
Only answer me uprightly and without evasion, distinctly
and clearly.    Is your heart free i"
The girl looked up to him imploringly at this fatherly
question.
" Are you in love with some one ? yes or no ? "
'• Yes," stammered she.
" And with whom ? Tell me all, and fear nothing.
Where and how did you meet the friend of your heart f
"It Avas last year, soon after midsummer," answered
the girl, Avith'faltering voice. " I had gone into the Avood
to gather strawberries, and "'
" Go on."
'• As I stood near a fallen fir-tree Avhich had been
struck by lightning, I observed a young man avIio AA'as
sitting upon its stem, apparently in deep thoiight.
Alarmed at snch an nnexpccted meeting, I Avas turning
back, Avhen he suddenly rose, hastened after me, and
detained me."
" Do not fear, my good child," he said in a voice so mild
and kind that it Avent to my inmost heart; "do not go
away; and pray, let me hwj those straAvberries that you
have in your basket." 1 gave them to him, and then he
began to ask me questions about various things. He
asked me hoAV old I Avas, if my parents Avere alive ; and
at last told me that he Avas in the young king's service.
When Ave parted, he wished to give me a silver daler
for the  strawberries."
" And afterAvards f
" After that Ave met repeatedly. He came here and
spoke to my mother."
'• He said at last that he loved yoii—was it not so f
"Ah, yes!"
" And do you not love him in return ?"
A half-smothered sigh Avas the answer.
" And do you know AA^ho he is, poor girl ? He deceived
you Avhen he said that he Avas in the king's service."
" DeceiA^ed me I Oh no ! he cannot deceive !"
" Then hear the truth I He Avhom yon love, and Avho,
as you say, loves you in return, is not, as you think, a
man of no consequence, whose Avife you might become,—
he is the king I"
" The king?" cried Anna, and the crimson on her cheeks
changed to the Avhiteness of the lily; " it cannot be I "
The. Attempt. 371
'• It is as I tell you," answered Collinius, earnestly.
" Ah. then it is all over!"
" It is all over, and must remain so. Or do you believe
that such a mighty prince as he is could give a poor girl
his heart I "
" Ah, yes I I believe it, I am certain of it I " cried the
girl, and her eyes flashed fire. " He loves me ; he has
told me so a thousand times."
" Do you really believe that he will make you his
wife ? "
" He has sworn it to me. ' Remain true to me,'
he has often said; ' and if the whole world should say
no, in spite of that you sliall be my bride.' All, much that
he said to me, and that I could not understand then, I
now see."
" On the vows of youth one cannot depend with con¬
fidence, at least upon those of the great," warned Colhnius;
" but even if it were so,—and I will speak openly to you—
there is ground to believe that it is so, and of how much
misery you would be the cause. I do not laugh at
your dreams, child; I know that they may by realized, for
everyone knows that what the king icills, will take place.
No, I speak to you only as a father to his child: you
are not born to wear a sceptre or a crowai. The king
would be hated by the nobles if he so far forgot himself;
strife and discord would arise, and all for your sake."
'• Oh my God ! "
" You say that you love him ? Prove it then; break ofi"
any connection you have with him, for it can only bring
him pain."
"What shall I dor'
" Bestow your hand upon another."
" Upon another I never I Shall I break the oath that 1
have sworn to him I love i "
" Only in that Avay can you save yourself and him. If
you are free, he will fulfil what he is resolved upon ; if
you are the wife of another, he will reward forgetfulness
with forgetfulness."
" And his love will change into contempt ? "
" Yes, Anna, this is the only way to happiness. It is a
hard trial for you, but Avith God's help you will overcome
it. Anna, my child, attend to my counsel; it comes from
a father's heart,—give him up."
The young girl covered her face with her hands and
sobbed bitterly.
372 The Attempt.
" Yes, weep, weep," said Cohinius, with trembling
voice; " tears are balm to tlie wounded heart; but do not
forget that God is good, and that He will strengthen you
in tliis hard struggle I "
After a time Anna raised her tearful eyes.
"Father! for so you have given me leave to call you,"
whispered the girl, with quivering lips, " I am ready;
command and 1 obey. But," she continued, her grief
bursting forth anew, " do Avith me what you will, but
never ask me to belong to another. I can give my heart
but once."
" Neither shall you give your heart," said the pastor
consolingly ; " only in the eyes of the world shall you be
the wife of another,—nothing more. He to whom you
shall give yourself only asks for your hand to save you
from danger and misery, and does iiot desire the love of a
bride. Will you not under these conditions give your
consent i "
'' Who is it ? " asked Anna, softly.
" I," answered Collinius. and a tear was trembling in his
eye. " Are you afraid to share the old man's solitude, and,
like a good daughter, to cheer his old age ? I am in want of
a kind hand to smoothe the wrinkles from my forehead,
and of one who will give a mother's love to my motherless
child. She, like you, is called AnnaJ With me you shall
lind peace. You are unhappy, and in want of a friend to
whom you can open your loving heart. With me you
may dream of the happy days of your love; yes, we shall
often speak of them together. Be mine ; it is for your
own sake I ask you."
Anna listlessly bent her head towards the speaker,
" God's blessing be with you, father ! " she said, her voice
faltering. " Yes, I Avill be your — your beloved
daughter I "
•' Tliat is right," answered Collinius. and he imprinted a
fatherly kiss on her pale forehead. " On Sunday next the
banns Avill be proclaimed for the first, the second, and the
third time, and on the same day you and your mother
will come with me. To-morrow I shall come back
and tell her all. And now, good-night, my own
Anna." Left alone, the maiden stood motionless for
some time, and a tear, the last one, slowly trickled over
her cheek,—it came from a broken heart.
The Attempt. 373
CHAPTER   IV.
At an open window in Palace AVrangel, which served
as a royal dwelling Avhilc the building of the new castle
was going on, stood Sweden's young sovereign, King
Charles. His clear blue eyes were thoughtfully fixed
upon the slightly agitated Avaters of Lake Miilar and the
glorious view before him, when a page stepped in and
announced Count Piper.
" He is welcome," said Charles, hastily, throwing him¬
self into an arm-chair.
Piper entered, approaching slowly.
" Let me be free from that to-day," said the king, smil¬
ing, and pointing to a ])arcel of papers under the count's
arm; " there will be time to-mcn-row. To-day I intend
to hunt."
Piper bowed.
" The day after to-morrow I shall go to Kongsohr,"
Charles began again, " and I shall remain there a week.
You will go with me."
" Will your majesty grant me leave of absence ? Most
submissively 1 ask for it."
" Willingly.    Where are you going ? "
" Not  far  from  the   capital,   your   majesty.     I   have
promised to attend a marriage."
"Eh, eh!" said the king, nodding kindly; "and who
are the happy couple T'
" Pastor Collinius of Salem,—a man for whom I feel true
friendship and esteem," answered Piper, attentively
watching his master. " He is going to marry a young
girl—very beautiful, so they tell me—a poor organist's
daughter.    ' Fair Anna ' they call her."
Violently the blood was rushing into the king's face as
he sprang from his seat. " Anna?" he cried, indignantly,
stamping upon the floor; " you lie. Piper!"
The courtier looked displeased. " Your majesty is
joking," he said, after a moment's pause.
"Anna! Anna!" cried Charles anew, and he struck his
clenched fist against his forehead. " Is it possible she
could deceive me ''. "
"I do not understand, my illustrious master, how such
a small thing can excite you to such a degree, but I
assure you upon my honour that it is all true."
" Do you know how this marriage came about ? " said the
king with forced composure.    " Let us hear, let us hear !"
374 The Aftfimpf.
"Willingly, your majesty," answered Piper, " AY hat
I know is soon told. The marriage is to take place next
Sunday, and "
" Does he love her ? "
" Collinius is at the age when love is extinct, but to
judge from what I have heard from his own lips, he has
a true afiection for the girl."'
" And she—does she love him? "
" The old man has saved some money, and she is poor,
—why not ? "
The young king pressed his hand firmly to his head,
and stood for some time in thoughtful silence. He then
approached the window, and dreAv a lock of golden hair
from his breast. For a moment he regarded it with
melancholy looks, but his face soon darkened again, and
contemptuously he threw it to the winds.
" They are all alike !" he murmured in a hollow voice,
" fickle, false, and fliithless; love upon their lips, and
lying and deceit in their hearts I—farewell, Piper I" he
continued, turning towards the favourite. " Welcome
back to Kongsohr."
Piper gave the king another searching glance, bowed,
and hastened away.
" The game is ours," said he softly to himself " God
be praised that all is over. I did not do it willingly, but
—once again God be praised that my plan succeeded! "
The young king stood alone watching the lock of hair,
which was floating lightly, a plaything for the Avinds,
until suddenly it sunk down into the sparkling waters of
Lake Malar.
" All is over," whispered he sorrowfully.
CHAPTER   V.
A YEAR had passed away I Many snowflakes had
covered the earth, and many spring suns had risen in
splendour over them. Borne upon the wings of glory,
Charles' name had flashed through the world. But among
the laurels with Avhich he had encircled his head, many
painful thorns had crept in, and the ever-capricious
goddess of fortune, his faithful friend in the beginning of
his career, had now forsaken him. Retm-ned from 'J'urkey,
where he had taken refuge alter the battle of Pultava—■
Avliere the great Peter so gloriously aA-enged his enemy's
victory at Narva—he had hardly reached his home Avhen
he  plunged  into  new   wars.     He  Avas   now   besieging
TIte Attempt. 375
Fredrickshall,   dreaming   of   revenge  upon   a   faithless
neighbour and of renewed honour for himself.
It was the 30th of November 1718.
In an inner room of the house which he was occupying
during the siege, Charles stood before a table, which was
covered with maps and plans, and not far from him
stood General Schwerin.
"You mean to say, then," Charles said, angrily, "that
Megi-et will keep his promise, and that in eight days we
shall be masters of the fcirtress ? "
." I am quite certain of it.''
" In a few moments I shall ride down to inspect every¬
thing."
" Your Majesty's presence always excites the workmen
to redouble their zeal."
"Have you anything else to say?"
" According to your gracious command I have brought
with me the young man who distinguished liimself so
much at the takmg of Gyldenlove."
" Very well, let him come in. God be with you,
Schwerin."
The general bowed and departed, and, shortly after,
a fair and curly-haired youth was ushered into the apart¬
ment, and regarded the hero with shy and bashful looks
as he came up to him.
" You have behaved bravely, I hear," said the king;
" you were the first at the taking of the bulwark, were
you not?"
" Yes, your majesty."
" Only continue thus, and you will get on in time.
How old are you ? "
"Seventeen."
•'Your name?"
" Erick .Johansson, from the parish of Salem."
"Salem !" cried the king, and threw a piercing glance
upon the youth. " Do you know, then, Pastor Colli-
nius?"
" He is my adopted father."
"Is he still alive?"
" Yes. your majesty," answered the youth.
"And his wife, your adopted mother?"
" Yes, God be praised I I am the child of a poor pea¬
sant, your Majesty, and I owe them everything."
" Do you love her?"
" More than my life I    She is so good, so gentle, such
376 The Atlempf.
a true  angel.    Without her, I, a poor  motherless  and
fatherless child, should have perished."
'' But yet you have left her?"
"I was obliged,—the conscription required it,"
stammered he.
" Yes, 1 know; young and old, all had to join in
this unhappy war." The youth looked at the king in
astonishment; it seemed as though he could not believe
such words could be uttered by the war-loving hero.
'• You are wondering, maybe," said the king, with a
sad smile, " at what 1 said just now. Yes, yes; I know
that at home you all think I love war and hate peace; but
you err. Even I have become tired, even I long for peace.
But not before I have proved that it is not from weakness
that I yield. And better times may come I" And he looked
thoughtfully before him.
A moment after the king drew himself up to his full
height, and approaching the young man, " You are free
from military service," said he, hastily; " to-morrow you
may return home."
" Your Majesty!"
" Such is my will," continued Charles, earnestly.
" Honour your mother—love her," he repeated, with a
faltering voice; " and now itirewell."
The youth bowed and turned to go away, when the
king beckoned him back.
"Are your adopted parents poor?"
" Yes, your ]\Iajesty; war and bad harvests "
"Very Avell, take this," and Charles slipped a heavy
purse into the young man's hand. " Hasten homewards,
exchange the sword for the book; there is still time."
With tearful eyes Erick bent his knee bef ire the noble
donor; but he, with a short " I do not like that," pushed
him into the open air, seized his hat, threw himself upon
a horse which was waiting for him outside, and galloped
away from the headquarters.
CHAPTER VI.
It was evening, and darkness was already cov^ering the
landscape as with a veil. Only from the outworks of
the besieged fortress there shone a hideous light, which
was produced by a number of pitch-wreaths and the con¬
stant firing of artillery. In spite of this, however, the
work of the besiegers was progressing with undiminished
etrength.     During  the  whole  afternoon   the king  had
Tlie Attempt. ?>11
cheered his men by word and deed to persevere in their
endeavours; but a feeling of weariness and sadness had
suddenly taken possession of his soul. He drew his cloak
closer around him, and, leaning against the parapet,
was soon lost in deep thoughts. The days of his youth,
as it were, seemed to pass before his half-closed eyes. A
quiet smile stole over his lips, as he remembered his hrst,
his only love, and the happy days he then had spent.
He again beheld the organist's little house in Salem,
where he had so often been happy. Gently he laid his
hand upon his forehead, as if to fix there these sweet
images. And, lo ! they did not fly! Sweet and beautiful,
nay, even more beautiful than ever, he fancied he saw
Anna floating towards him. "I was not faithless!" she
seemed with mild reproaehfulness to whisper to him; and
these words found an echo in his breast. A feeling of joy
came OA^er his soul, and his heart beat with redoubled
strength. He wished to draAv her to him, when she
seemed to turn to him smilingly—and to whisper, "Come!"
Shivering with cold, Charles arose; but at that moment
a shot was fired. Charles turned pale and sank back.
He was dead.
The warrior slept his last sleep as he dreamed the rosy
dream of love.
CONCLUSIOX.
Several months after, a young man was walking quickly
along the road that leads from Botkyrka to Salem.
It was Erick Johansson, who was returning to his
beloved home.
Spring had not yet unfolded its golden wings, but the
snow was melted, and here and there a budding anemone
showed itself. The sun stood high in the clear heavens,
and the woods resounded with the joyous songs of the
birds. When the youth had reached the church, he stood
still for an instant, and, wiping away the perspiration
from his brow, he gazed upon the scene before him. The
light in his eyes showed clearly that it Avas well known and
dear to him. Accelerating his steps, he hastened on to¬
wards the pleasant-looking dwelling close by. He had
soon reached it. With a cautious hand he opened tho
door of his adopted mother's room, and stepped in.
Everything in it was as formerly; the pots with frag¬
rant mignonette Avere still standing on the AvindoAV-sill,
and the time-piece was  in its old place by the stove,
DECEMBER  1874. "   *-"
378 The Attempt.
ticking as regularly as ever.    But the youth looked in
vain for her whom he loved ; she was not there.
A cry of surprise sounded at this moment behind him ;
he turned round hastily, and fell joyfully into the out¬
stretched arms of his adopted father.
Age had blanched Collinius's hair, and the ploughshare
of sorrow had furrowed his brow, but the same expres¬
sion of peace still reigned as formerly upon his pious
countenance.
" AVelcome home, dear son," said the old man as he
folded the wanderer once more to his breast. " You look
at me so wonderingly," he began anew; " perhaps you
think me altered?"
" I have no other feelings but those of joy at meeting
again."
" I have been expecting you for a long time,—I almost
began to despair."
" A gun-wound which I received the same evening as
that upon which the king was shot, prevented my return¬
ing; but you must know about it already, for I wrote as
soon as I could hold the pen.    But where is my mother ? "
CoUinius was silent.
" You do not answer me. Why do you not take me to
her ? " And still the old man continued silent, and a tear
rolled doAvn his cheek.
" Speak, father !" cried Erick, anxiously; "speak, and
torture me no longer. Speak out; I have experienced
grief before;  do not fear  on that  score.    Is she  ill'? is
slie " At these words his voice failed him. " Is she dead?
Yes ; I see by your look it is so.    My God, my God !"
"She died in my arms, invoking Heaven's blessing upon
all," said the old man, with a broken voice.
"Dead, dead !" continued the youth sadly, " and I shall
never see her again, never press a farewell kiss upon her
lips, never thank her for all the kindness and affection she
bestowed upon the poor forsaken one. Dead I—she, so
good, so mild.    Ah ! it is dreadful."
" The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away." said
Collinius, folding his hands reverently and raising his
eyes towards heaven.
Overcome with grief, the young man bowed his head.
" When did she die ? " whispered he at last.
" The same day as King Charles," answered the old man
significantly; " the 30th of November."
HeLEXE MiJLLER.
The Attempt.
^t   ^t^Btt   of  nc   (£r(c's   gocljtcr.
" Oh I my love he is winsome and fair to see,
As he rides through the wide woodland dun;
Boasts the Border broad not a statelier knight.
Or a sword that hath more honour won;
But —false is my love as the wild winds that blow,
And cold is his heart as the feathery snow
That drifts fathoms deep in the hollows so low
Of the dark hills that shut out the sun.
He wooed me, my love, when the red leaves were dead,
And he wooed me when primroses smiled,
Till my heart was all his, and my lone life was filled
With a passionate dream, sweet and wild.
But the stem Earl's daughter she brooketh no wrong.
And deep though her love be, her vengeance is strong;
i^'or vengeance and hate to her proud race belong.
And her dead father lives iu his child!
My love kissed the fringe trembling dark o'er mine eyes.
And he praised the blue sheen of my hair;
But deep iu the dell lives a snow-blossom maid—
Ah! he knows not I saw him steal there !
He dreams not I heard him breathe low in her ear
The often-told tab that to mine was so dear ;
And little he thinks that this heart then beat near
With the hot throb of sudden despair.
He heard but the song of the brook as it rushed
O'er its green mossy bed to the sea,
And the whispering hum of the leaves overhead,—
Not the wail of my deep agony.
Oh! I love him^l love him, this false love of mine,
With a love that will last till the worlds' decline ;
But revenge is the birthright of our waning line,
And true to that line must I be!
My father's red dagger is cold and is keen I—
It gleams in the ghostly star-light!—
It shines in my dreams when the moon rideth high—
Oh ! the moon will ride high to-night!
And my love he will come at the wonted hour.
When the lone warder watcheth the darkling tower,
And my sweet mother prays in her saintly bower,
He will come with his smile so bright.
380 The Attempt.
He will come through the wood when the day is gone,
And the gloom lieth deep in the glen,
When the glow-worm gleams in the dank, rotting grass,
And the 'wild'ring lights flit o'er the fen;
He will come to the linden he knoweth so well,
Where the soft words were whispered that thrilled as they
fell—
Oh! the boughs, though they murmur no secrets can tell,
And there will I wait for him then I"
He sang as he crushed down the slow-dying leaves.
O'er the shadow-dimmed path that lay strown,
He laughed as the hollow Avind fitfully Availed
Round the tree where she Avaited alone.
With his false tongue attuned to a gay greeting fair
He stretched his strong arm swift to clasp her close there;
But a dagger flashed keen through the deep moonlit air,
And he fell Avith a shivering groan!
Oh ! the sun shineth gay on the woodland dun,
And the brook runneth on to the sea,
But when the stars rise, glides a maiden distraught
To the gaunt linden shudderiiigly,
LoAV moaning, "I loA'ed thee, oh dead love of mine!
But rcA^enge is the heritage dear to our line,
And close round my heart did its dread fibres tAvine,
So—thy blood stained the dark trysting-tree I"
Melexsa.
Ilcrpiit llesearchr.^ in |loman gistorg.
Part II.—The Constitution, the Armv, and the
Keligion of Ancient Rome.
In the constitution of early Rome, many things, at first
sight, strike us as paradoxical, Avhich on closer A^iew are
not so. Such is, for instance, the fatherly aspect assumed
by the king towards tlie state, along Avitli the arbitrary
poAver AA'hich he exercises at the same time. Such is the
absolute power Avhich a father possesses thro^^gh life OA^er
his son, as a son, in contradistinction to his complete
poAverlessness as a felloAv-burgess. A Roman matron, on
the death of her husband, was placed entirely under the
The Attempt. 381
control of her nearest male relatives.    Would  not the
pride and self-respect of a British matron have spurned
such  interference ?       But in those early days  of Home,
the state was in the ascendant, and even virtuous human
feelings were often checked as weeds, lest they should
interfere  with its   growth.     The king acted as judge,
general of the army, aud at the same time as father of
the state.    So minute in its condescension was the juris¬
diction of the king, that not even a conflagration could be
extinguished without his presence.    The inflmcy  of the
state is here show^n by that want of confidence which
prevents  minor  affairs   from  being   entrusted  to  minor
officials.    The supremacy of the state is shown by the
severity  with  which  crimes  against it were  punished,
w'hile offenders against private persons were treated with
comparative   mildness.     No  king was appointed unless
chosen by his predecessor, whether rex or interrex.    Acts
of extraordinary powei-, which only occurred rarely, were
generally discharged by the people ; while the daily duties
of legislation remained the exclusive province of majesty.
It would seem as if the Romans, from their love of exact¬
ness, would fain have kept the population of their city
always, at least nominally, the  same.    In  the early con¬
stitution,   the   people   were   divided   into   communities,
wardships (curias), clans (gentes), and households.    Ten
households formed a clan, ten elans, or a hundred house¬
holds, a wardship ; and ten wardships, or a hundred clans,
or a thousand households, formed the community.    'J'he
state was composed  of three such communities, so that
the nominal population w-as  3000 fiimilies.    Each hoi;se-
hold had to   furnish one foot-soldier to the army,   each
clan   a   horseman,   and   each    curia   a   senator.        The
original army thus consisted   of  3000   foot-soldiers and
300 horsemen, wdiile the Senate had 30 members.    The
reign of Tarquin effected changes in these matters.    By
raising many from plebeian to patrician rank, he increased
largely the number of possessors of land, and paved the
way for the Servian constitution.
By the enactment of Servius, the Quirinal Hill, which
had formerly been the site of an independent town, be¬
came incorporated with Home. The inhabitants of this
hill, instead of forming a new tribe, were distributed
among the three original tribes. They never ceased,
however, to be regarded as in some measure distinct from
the  Romans  proper.    Another change  was effected in
382 Tlie Attempt.
favour of the clients, who had long existed in a dependent
state, either separately in families or collectively as
households. From a state of dependence and slavery,
they were raised to a free condition, though unendowed
with burgess rights. Thus arose the class of the plebeians.
Highly favoured under the reigns of Tarquin and Servius,
the plebeians, as soon as the latter king had closed his
reign, became a prey to the jealousy and tyranny of the
patricians. Deprived of political power, of a share in the
public lands, and placed under severe laws with regard to
debt, they had just reason to complain. More than two
centuries had elapsed before they could regain any por¬
tion of the rights which were thus wrenched from them
by the patricians; and not until the Licinian laws were
passed, by which these grievances were redressed and
tribunes appointed, did they settle down into any degree
of peace or quietness. This constant claiming of redress
on the part of the plebeians has caused them to be com¬
pared by Niebuhr to the Irish Roman Catholics between
the years of 1792 and 1829. Perhaps, had a little more
freedom and indulgence been at first granted to each, the
grasping spirit might have been more kindly quelled, and
less of civil dissension might have ensued. The spirit of
the plebeians during their struggle is Avell expressed by
the young Icilius in JMacaulay's ballad of Vh-ginia,—
" Now by your children's cradles, now by your fathers' graves,
Be men to-day, Qukites, or be for ever slaves," etc.
Under the Servian constitution, however, the plebeians
continued to enjoy their neAvly-acquired advantages; and
perhaps the very want of political rights, which alone dis¬
tinguished them from the burgesses, produced, along with
the want of property, a corresponding release from anxiety
and forethought.
To the original Roman army, consisting of three legions,
with one thousand men in each, Servius added twelve cen¬
turies. These were composed of five summonings from
different classes of plebeians. These five classes, arranged
in ranks and equipped in armour according to their landed
property, have already been enumerated. The Roman
army, with the addition of these centuries, consisted now
of four legions, each numbering 4200 men; the whole
thus inimbered 16,800.
Every man between the ages of seventeen and sixty
was bound to serve.    Though this organisation was en-
The Attempt. 383
tirely of a military character, yet it is evident that it must
have been of great use in making the census, and also in
determining the share which each individual should con¬
tribute to the taxes. Only the cavalry remained always
in fighting condition. But of the character of the whole
army we may judge from the account given by Cicero.
" The Roman soldiers," he says, " carry witli them their
food for more than a fortnight, besides all that they re¬
quire to strengthen them; and witli regard to their arms,
they are not more incommoded by them than by their
own hands." Whatever the Romans might borrow from
Greece in other ways, the idea of their army was all their
own. And it was the Roman legion, with its unflinching
ranks, that was destined to awe the armies of Tarentum
and Epirus, thiis washing in blood the insulted robe of
Posthumius, and turning to weeping the scornful laughter
of the Epirotes. This was the legion which the seer
Capys saw in futurity, and thus described to Komulus
with the voice of a prophet:—
" Thine, Roman, is the pilum;
Roman, the sword is thine ;
The even trench, the bristling mound,
The legion's ordered line ;
And thine the wheels of triumph.
Which, with their laurelled train,
Move slowly up the shouting streets
To Jove's eternal fane."
Possessed of such a military organisation, backed by so
high a degree of internal comfort, it is no matter of siu-
prise that the Romans speedily carried their arms with
success against neighbouring towns. Many of the towns
on the north-east and north-west of the city were subdued
at an early period; the maritime town of Ostia was com¬
pelled to abandon all political power; and the town of
Alba, which had for years contested with Rome the sove¬
reignty of Latium, was also brought under the power of
the conquering city. The legend of the three Alban and
the three Roman brothers, at the battle which decided the
fate of Alba, is supposed to have been founded on the
existence of the three Roman tribes. In this period also
occurs the battle of the Lake Regillus, fought for the pos¬
session of Gabii, where "the great Twin Brethren" arrived
with timely relief, and ensured victory to Rome. The
treatment by Rome of these vanquished cities was marked
by a wise and generous policy. It differed as much from
her treatment of fallen ioes in after ycar.« as the behaviour
384 The Attempt.
of the ancient Jews towards conquered enemies differed
from that of the warhke forces around them. But it was
a wise policy on the part of Rome, for the conquered
towns were in the same province. If enslaved, they
would rebel, and probably cause civil war; if conciliated,
they would form able and useful allies. The foreign
citizens were permitted to come and reside in Rome,
though incapable of acquiring burgess rights there. This
greatly increased the number of strangers or metoeci re¬
sident at Rome. One great part of the foundation of
Rome's greatness abroad Avas her conciliatory conduct at
home; and the alliance which, as a single town, she
formed with a whole province, proved very favourable to
the maintenance and increase of her dominion.
To render the course of the external policy of Rome
thus even and successful, it was necessary that the in¬
ternal administration should be guided by a firm hand.
And we find that it is the case with the Romans, as with
many other nations in their beginnings, that their justice
is stern and inexorable. We look at their primitive
legislation, as far as through the lapse of time we can
view it, to obtain an index of the character and require¬
ments of the people whom it governed. It would be
unwnse to judge of these, or indeed of any laws made for
any people, by the absolute standard of moral right.
The experience of crime or the sternness of the magis¬
trate demands what may seem undue severity: the
extreme value placed upon property, with the com¬
paratively small value attached to human life, may
equalize the punishments for breaches of the law re¬
garding both. Thus from the early laws of the Romans
we are led to suppose that two leading principles among
the people were, a regard for the state and a regard for
property. Crimes against the state were held to be
public offences; the trials for them were conducted
in public : while oflf'ences against private individuals were
privately jjunished. With regard to human life, the law
was, as with the Jews, an eye for an eye; and the Romans,
like the Jews, transferred this in many cases from the
civil to the moral law, and acted accordingly. That the
good name of a man was highly esteemed, however, we
see from the punishment inflicted on the false witness.
Such an offender was hurled from the Tarpeian rock ;
while the incendiary and the harvest thief were re¬
spectively burned  and  hanged.    Well might  the  poet
llie Attemiyt. 385
Grahame have had his eye upon the judicial proceedings
of the Eoinans when he exclaimed,—
" Relentless justice I with fate-furrowed brow .'
Wherefore, to various crimes of various guilt,
One penalty, the most severe, allot ?
Let crimes less heinous, dooms less dreadful meet
Than loss of life ! So said the law divine.
That law beneficent, which mildly stretched
To men forgotten and forlorn the hand
Of restitution.'"
To strangers and debtors the face of the law was pe¬
culiarly stern. The property of the former might be
seized by any citizen ; and, under a system which allowed
the insolvent debtor to be treated like a thief, lie was liable
to be imprisoned at any time. It was this that roused
the indignant feelings which find vent in the words used
by Icilius in the same speech from Avhich we have already
quoted :—•
" Still let your haggard debtors bear all their fathers' bore ;
Still let your dens of torment be noisome as of yore."
Yet though stern in some instances, the Roman
legislature was beneficent in the main. Well might
Spain have blushed, when her deadly Inquisition was
in force, at the knowledge that in primitive Rome it was
forbidden to torture any free man. The laws Avere those
of a people tar advanced in agriculture and in trade, and
inspired with such exalted ideas of the civil dignity, that
they would sacrifice individual freedom, all tliat was most
valued by the citizen, rather than allow the state to
suffer.
The religious instinct with the Romans had at least
one element of the true in it. Tliey desired to be under
the constant protection of their deities. The state, each
pursuit, each individual, possessed a tutelary divinity.
Their religion was less grovelling than that of the Egyp¬
tians, less sublime than that of the Sabeans, less
imaginative than that of the Greeks ; yet it bore more
resemblance to the latter than to any other. Many of
the deities bore Greek names Latinised, and were
believed to perform the same offices in Rome that their
cognomens did in Greece. The polytheism of the Greeks
extended itself over all nature ; it gave the creations of
the fancy a name and an abode. The Romans, with their
excessive development of the practical faculty, suppressed
all  unnecessary   flights  of   the   imagination,   and  con-
DECEMBEB 1874. '5   U
380 The Attempt.
tented themselves with assigning to each individual a
number of spirits who were to preside over all his actions,
one being the presiding genius of one set of actions,
another of another. At the death of the individual,
their existence was supposed to cease. It is difficult to
believe that spirits capable of directing the conduct of a
human being were destroyed or annihilated, while their
charge was destined to be immortal. For that the Ko-
mans believed in the immortality of the soul needs not to
be called in question, as their Elysium and Infernum
bear witness to the fact. It is only with reference to
the Jews, in wliom the religious element was more fully
developed, that Voltaire and others have thought it worth
while to question this belief. To the more devout among
the Romans, their religion must have given mucli
occupation., Besides invoking, in their due season. Mars,
the God of War ; Janus, the God of Peace; Mercurius, the
God of Traffic ; Manes, the God of Frugality and Specu¬
lation, and others, with the Penates, Silvani, Lares, and
all the nameless and ephemeral deities of the hour, they
had also to consult the augurs, and, by a well-judged
statement of their circumstances, to induce those digni¬
taries to obtain, by their observations of the flight of
birds, a favourable prophecy with regard to the fate of
tlieir questioners. They would also be diligent in their
attendance at the temple of each divinity ; and besides
this multifarious worship, would contribute their quota
towards the maintenance of the fire on the hearth of
Vesta. This last was the most sacred, and the longest
kept up, among the religious ceremonies of the Romans.
It was a rite so identified with the safety and well-being
of the state, that it is one of the precious objects which
their wariors set themselves to guard with their arms:—
" Charge for the hearth of Vesta ! charge for the golden shield !"
We cannot better judge of the religion of the Romans
than by comparing it with another. For this purpose
let us take that of the Jews, Avhich Avas instituted in
still earlier times. The great and appalling contrast
between the monotheism of the one and the polytheism of
the other is too self-evident to require mention. The
great object sought by the Jews in their religion, Avas the
glory of obedience to the Deity. The Romans, in the
midst of all their offerings and religious labours, had it
CA-er at heart to promote their oAvn present and future
Tlie Attempt. 387
well-being. The Jews—though less imaginative in their
religion than the Greeks—had such a reverence and
firmness of confidence, as by their intensity, could not fail
to quicken the imagination. Their aim in honouring the
Deity Avas not, like that of the Romans, to delight them¬
selves in feasting, with mirth and music, but to honour
the Supreme Being by a suitable sacrifice. A\'lien we
look at the religion of the Romans, and see the monoto¬
nous repetition in its forms, the want of ideality in its
teaching, and the indulgence practised on its holidays,
we can but call it a religic^n of the hour, based on present
necessity, and on expediency with regard to the future.
Much as M. Mommsen deserves to be praised for his
ingenuity and learning, we cannot but rebel against his
statements with regard to early Italian art. It would
require the assertion of more than one man to destroy
our belief in the poetic faculty of the Italians. The
Italians devoid of poetry by nature I The Italians a
people destitute of the feelings Avhich prompt the fine
arts 1 Their painting, poetry, sculpture—all the produc¬
tion of cold philosophic abstraction! Experience and
feeling alike deny it. The belief in the high-souled
imaginativeness of the Italians is our inheritance, which
the pen and the chisel have bought and kept for us from
age to age; and we cannot give it up even at the bidding
of the most ♦clear-sighted man on earth. Niebuhr did
not deny the existence of a whole library of ballad-lore in
I-atium. He even proved the circumstances by which it
must have been destroyed if committed to Avriting.
M. Mommsen condescends to prove nothing on the
subject. He merely declares that the Romans had no
early poetry, as other nations had: that they honoured
no god of poetry; that what they had of the poetical
was derived by an impulse from Greece. We know
that they adopted many of the Greek divinities, and
of these the god of poetry was one. Apollo was the god
of poetry to the Roman as well as to the Greek, just as
Mars is the god of war, and as Jove is the supreme
divinity to both. It is to be feared, that in yielding
implicit confidence to M. Mommsen, we shall sharpen the
intellect at the expense of the heart. Niebuhr, and
Macaulay, who had faith in Niebuhr, are clear-sighted
enough for us. They left to Rome its legendary lore, or
at least a possibility that such had existed. If the dis¬
covery of some portion of this legendary lore, in some
388 The Attempt.
obscure nook, were a thing of which even a shade of
possibility might exist, the face of I\I. Mommsen, at the
moment when this interesting fact was being communi¬
cated to him, Avould form a striking study for a painter.
The Italians may have been wanting in due culture, in
true religious principle, but we cannot believe them to
have ever been devoid of imagination.
Carlyle has justly remarked that historians may be
divided as a class into artists and artisans. The artisan
works mechanically at the period of history which it is his
task to describe; the artist can view no era otherwise
than as it bears some relation to the whole: he sees how
time has brightened some parts, and cast others into the
shade; hoAV the harmony of all is dependent on the true
colouring of each portion, however minute ; how contrasts
exhibit each other, and add to the brilliancy of the efiect.
Xiebuhr and Mommsen are eminent historical artists, wlio
stand forth conspicuous amid the herd of artisans. The
outlines drawn by Niebuhr, though exact, are not so
sternly minute as those of Mommsen. Both are impas¬
sioned, the one with the love of liberty, the other with
the love of truth. I'ruth in history, as in painting, is
much, but it is not all. We can excuse occasional indis-
dinctness in a shady part of the drawing, provided the
Avhole appeals to our moral sense and feeling. Mommsen
brings everything to light; if he cannot' remove the
shade, he draws forth objects in relief against it. The
background of Roman history, filled formerly with
legends, all the more charming because doubtful and
indistinct, he covers with a grey cloud, upon which he
draws minutely the outlines of his theories with regard
to the population of Italy, the foundation of Rome, and
its constitution, civil and military. These theories bear
in some respects an exact resemblance to those of Niebuhr.
In other respects they differ from, and are even superior
to them. To M, Mommsen the praise is due, that his
eye, though all along fixed on truth, has been unclouded
by jealousy, or by the arrogant spirit of innovation.
Tliroughout his work there is no combating the views of
tliis or that historian, but merely a faithful and con¬
scientious statement of his own. To the men of the
present day he imparts a personal interest in the histories
of all peoples, by viewing these as separate cycles of
civilisation, gradually progressing from east to west.
Among the four civilised nations Avhom he mentions as
The Attempt. 389
havang dwelt around the shores of the Mediterranean,
the Romans held the fourth place in point of time; and
by marking what they inherited and what they trans¬
mitted, we are able to rank them duly, and to form a
faint estimate of what we owe to them. From the
Pandects of Justinian, which contain the result of the
perfection attained by the Roman law, much of the law
at present in force in Scotland has been copied with
exactness. But this and other instances are but rays in
the flood of light which civilised Rome shed over the
after-world. ^Vhen the curse came on man at first, the
ground brought forth weeds, and labour was required to
root them out. And since the ignorance and forgetfulness
of men have for ages been encouraging the weeds of
falsehood in their growth, the plant of truth has been
well-nigh choked, A few individuals, more patient than
the rest, have undertaken to extirpate the weeds, in
some places at least, and to cultivate truth, which appears
often but as a tender shoot beneath the mighty boughs
on the trees of falsehood and tradition; yet it may be
many years before that little shoot, being duly ministered
to by soil, air, and light, shall have expanded into a
mighty tree, able to nourish the nations with its fruit,
and to shelter them with its grateful shade.
Procla.
{^Conclusion.~)
^twxt Refects in (Bttucalion.
II.
It may be remembered that in my last paper,* I attempted
to draw the distinction between what I called the two
factors in our education—education as including the
acquisition of knowledge, and the culture of the faculties of
the mind. The various schemes of education, affecting
more or less both of these divisions, I do not now touch
upon ; and again, as on the former occasion, it is a defect
in education as concerned with the second of these two
factors, the culture of the faculties, with Avhich we have to
do: in other words, our education as affected by all the
influences of life—as carried on by the mere fact of living.
* Attempt, November 1S73.
390 The Attempt.
I then also spoke of my conception of the bearing exercised
by the influences of life on our education, as a means of
affording mental culture, and to this I shall not now return.
How am I to name the defect I wish to allude to i
There is no cut-and-dried term ready to be applied to it,
and for the obvious reason that the defect is rarely
recognised as being one at all. I can but grope in the
dark for a suitable term, perhaps by hinting at its origin.
It arises radically from the non-recognition of the impoi-t
of the life-conduct of each human existence ; of the magni¬
tude of the possibilities which lie before each individual
being. It is engendered by a want of self-consciousness ;
of a consciousness of self as, to use the momentous words of
Carlyle, "a centre of Infinity." Shall 1 take the liberty,
if not of coining a word, yet of using a combination of
two in a new and somewhat arbitrary significance? With
this apology, perhaps I shall not go far wrong if I style
the defect I speak of the defect of Self-Ohlivion. This
term is at any rate capable of the construction I wish to
put upon it. But it will require some explanation ; for, as
it stands, it has a ring of doubtful significance.
Let me premise, then, by indicating what 1 do not intend
to advocate, in styling Self-Oblivion a defect. I do not
wish to inculcate selfishness—a postponement of the
welfare and interests of others to those of the individual.
I do not wish to foster self-conceit—a belief in the superior
claims and qualities of the individual to those of others.
I do not wish to encourage self-consciousness — than
which no more fatal enemy to individual peace of mind,
unconstrained and unobtrusive demeanoiu", can exist. 1
do not wish to rear a race of what, in conventional
language, are expressively denominated i^rlgs—beings
whose very apjjearance shows their consciousness of self as
a centre, not of Infinity, but of their social circle or sur¬
roundings of the moment. Instead of affording the
slightest encouragement to such temperaments by
anything I now write, it is, on the contrary, my aim
to show that due recognition of the defect of Self-
Ohlivion, as I proceed now to define it, would materially
tend to diminish their present ranks.    But of this later.
First, then, let me repeat what formei-ly I tried to
show—that as regards the culture of the mental faculties
we are in the main passive. AVe are the recipients
of outward influences. From the moment of birth
we   are   exposed   to   the   action   of   external   circum-
The Attempt. 391
stances. The manner of our reception of these external
influences is acquired in youth ; rather, I should say, we
begin in youth to receive them, consciously or uncon¬
sciously—the degree of consciousness varying in varying
natures. But here lies the defect to which education
should furnish the elements of a remedy. Here lies the
defect of Self-Obllclon. The child receives no instruction
as to the attitude he is to assume towards these outward
bodiless existences called circumstances, meeting him on
all sides, affecting his most trivial actions, pressing on
him the necessity of being guided by them, or of resisting
their importunity. We find, therefore, as the natural
result, far more frequently than need be, that because
the child—the young, plastic, impressionable mind—has
received no hint of their significance in reference to his
own individual mental attitude, and of the duty or obliga¬
tion of recognising the same ; when mature age is reached,
he is found as unconscious as before. In short, I would
define the defect of Self-Oblivion to mean, the want of a
consciously assumed independent mental attitude towards
any (or rather every) given circumstance, and the con¬
sequent want of a consciously responsible exercise of
choice as to the course of action to be pursued.
My aim in this paper is intensely practical. It is not
the metaphysical—perhaps 1 should rather say scientific—
aspect of the question which I have in mind. It is its
influence on the life-conduct of every individual that I
now think of. The daily decisions, the daily duties of
life, are ail affected by the view Ave take of this
question. I cannot, however, refrain from saying, that
I believe it is chiefly, if not only, want of considera¬
tion, which gives birth to any variety of opinion in regard
to it.
No one questions the statement that, in a general way,
we are affected by circumstances. No one, on the other
hand, Avill dispute the fact that we ourselves are absolutely
independent of, and separate from, our surrounding in¬
fluences; and, in ordinary parlance, we are held to be free
agents, our actions influenced, but not absolutely generated
or constrained by outward influences, alias circumstances.
It is, however, one thing to accept these statements
thoughtlessly and unquestioningly, and quite another to
accept it as our duty to consider consciously first the
precise bearing which certain circumstances ought to be
permitted to exert  upon our actions; and secondly to
392 The Attempt.
act in conformity with the result of our deliberations.
I wish, then, to lay before you some reflections regard¬
ing our attitude in reference to outward influences or
circumstances, and in Avhat way a due recognition of the
true bearing of this attitude ought to affect our course
of action.
In  what attitude then  do   we  stand  towards   these
external facts  which  we   call  circumstances ?     Do  Ave
assume consciously any attitude at all'?     Do we recog¬
nise that they are facts differing from and independent
of us?    Do we  consciously recognise the fact of their
separateness; of our individuality, apart from and inde¬
pendent   of   them ?     Does   our   contact  with   outward
influences find us   conscious  of the fact that they  are
acting upon us. that we are being acted upon by them ?
That, if we follow their apparent guidance, one set of
facts  Anil  result?    That,  if we   defy  them, something
totally different will bo effected ?     Do we, in short, on
every occasion, consciously recognise that, in the common
phrase, we are free  agents f     That Ave tnai/ resign our¬
selves to the guidance of external circumstances, folloAA^-
ing  blindly where they lead,   like Avill-o'-the-wisp  over
the dark fields of the night, and finding, need I say hoAv
often, that the goal of our journeyings is indeed the city
of " WeissnichtAvo;" but that,  though we do thus, Ave
might have done otherwise.     Had Ave paused and reflected,
Ave might  have   descried a shining  Arcadia Avhere the
morning sun was rising to tinge the skirts of the dusky
robe, laid by night over the dark fields,—aa^c might have
recognised that our destiny lay trembling in the balance,—
and yet Ave Avould not by one thought aA^ert the " fateful
decree."     And do Ave recognise the fact that, if indeed
tliis last state of matters be the true one, the conseqvience
stands  that  we  are  bound  to   face it consciously, and
unshrinkingly to accept the responsibility it invoh^es ?
These then are the two opposing attitudes that may be
assumed towards external ilifluences. The one a verit¬
able abandonment of our identity, an apathetic laisser-
aller; the other a conscious recognition of our individuality
—a mental resolve as to Avhether Ave Avill or Avill not resign
ourselve to external guidance. It is of course evident
that the first of these attitudes is Avliat gives rise to the
defect of Self-Ohlivion.
Here I Avould further notice some A^arieties in the
mental attitudes Avhich Ave may assume toAvards any given.
The Attempt. 393
set of circumstances. Consciously to face the situation
may show it to be our duty to defy their allurements, and
choose a contrary path. But not less is room left for an
act of conscious choice, even should the course which our
conscience approves be both the easy and agreeable one.
And again : consideration of any set of circumstances
may show us that our path must not be one of action, but
of simple agreement or sufferance. Here, too, I would
argue, is conscious choice equally incumbent u})on us.
If we neglect its exercise, we fall into the defect of which
I write; for if we believe we are free agents, we have
no excuse to forget that we are equally responsible for
our actions, Avhether performed in defiance of circum¬
stances, or because the latter have afforded us a guid¬
ing clue. It is indeed specially in such cases as the last-
mentioned that we are apt to abnegate our prerogative
of conscious choice, and to run Avith the swift stream
of circumstance; in cases of difficulty and doubt, con¬
science acts as watchful alarmist to arouse our slumbering
sense of responsibility. This brings iis, in fine, to acknow¬
ledge that the ultimate test of all action is supplied by
a personal consciousness of our responsibility.
It Avill, then, be seen that the want of this sense of respon¬
sibility proceeds from the defect of Self-Oblivion, from
non-recognition of the utter abyss between the individual
and his circumstances.
There is no doubt that the degree in which this fact is
naturally recognised, varies in different temperaments.
We find some always waging miniature warfare Avith these
bodiless and yet very real antagonists, circumstances ; and
others, who are barely aAvare of their influence at all,
who are totally unconscious of hoAv fcAv and Iioav small a
proportion of their actions, perhaps, emanate from their
OAvn unaided Avill, For I belicA^e that those AA'ho least
recognise or admit that they are acted upon by cir¬
cumstances, are in reality the most subject to their
sway. It is natural that those Avho do not consciously
recognise their own separate individuality as opposed to
surrounding circumstances—the only means to escape
from the dominion of and subjection to cu-cumstances—
should be found in the ranks of those Avho yield to their
control Avithout a struggle. It is natural, either that
we should not realise that in yielding to the guidance
of   circumstances   we   are   abnegating the exercise of
DECEMEER 1574. O   lli
394 Tlie Attempt.
our own will,   or  that the recognition should spur us
on to assert that will.
Let me then repeat, that it is the duty of education to
lend her aid to counteract the defect I name Self-Oblivion.
Not many years pass over the child, whose mind is ready
and open to receive instruction, before he finds himself in
so far his own master, that in one case or another the
necessity of choice as to what he will do is laid upon him.
Left to himself, he does not, too often, realise this
freedom of choice; and unless some influence is exerted,
some hints afforded him, he contracts the habit of gliding
without reflection into the course of action the easiest, or
involving the least mental effort. Were but a hint
afforded him of the responsibility under which he lies to
choose, to assert his own personality, the foundation would
be laid of a life of independent action,—a consciousness of
moral responsibility would be acquired, of which a glance
only on the world around will reveal to us the too
frequent absence.
One restriction I would wish to lay on what I have
said. In the responsibility of choice which I have spoken
of, I do not intend in this place to insist on its necessity
in reference to decisions of a great and important moral
bearing. No one disputes our individual responsibility
in such matters. Such call importunately for a conscious
decision; and the voice of conscience will not be hushed.
It is in regard to the trivial everyday occurrences of life
that I would uphold the importance of a conscious
exercise of choice. The very weight that is attached to
our deliberations in questions of moment, degrades or
throws into the background the value of the minor
decisions of life. Yet the fact is tacitly and theoretic¬
ally admitted on all hands, that of these minor decisions
is composed the sum of every life.
To return for a moment to the objections that may be
excited by the name I have attached to the defect
spoken of,—Self-Oblivion. Selfishness, self-conceit, self-
consciousness, are all phases in which the individual is
exalted at the expense of the many. On the other hand,
to remedy the defect of Self-Oblivion, a more distinct
consciousness of self is required, that the individual
actor may separate himself from surrounding circum¬
stances. Is, then, this intensified recognition of individual
responsibility of a kind to minister to an undue con¬
ception  of the   importance  of the  individual ?     Is   a
The Attempt. 395
serious consideration of what our action must be in
certain circumstances likely to induce us deliberately to
choose a selfish course of action ? Are we to believe
that, in the majority of cases, the mental vision is so
obscured that self-conceit will be fostered rather than
suppressed by reflection and a serious attempt to choose
the right? Can we credit the supposition, that, by a
careful review of our situation, self-consciousness will be
engendered, and not rather overthrown by the consider¬
ations which must of necessity on such an occasion be
forced upon us ; considerations as to how our meditated
action will affect others—their wishes, their prosperity,—
and the objects and aims which it will further or hinder.
Will it not rather prove a sure means of awakening
us to the momentous interest of many questions to
which we may lend our aid ?
Tn fine, to these hypotheses I think the candid mind
cannot refuse consent. The responsibility of choice is
not one which can be consciously exercised without
giving birtli to many serious, nay, overwhelming
thoughts. It must raise in our minds many grave
questions of duty,—of the various results we have in our
power to bring about; of the magnitude of the ends which
our conduct may thus help to forward, by decisions based
on our appreciation of and adherence to what is good and
noble ; and of the terrible import of a conscious decision for
what is, I do not say base or evil, but merely inferior,
secondary, unworthy, ignoble :—
" Nay, falter not—'tis an assured good
To seek the noblest.    'Tis your only good
Now you have seen it; for that higher vision
Poisons all meaner choice for evermore."
Noli-me-Tangere.
<3t
%t |loi fst mort, mt \t ^oi."
The King is dead !    Long live the coming King!
AVith glad acclaims the echoing heavens ring.
Why should not we, with the rejoicing earth.
Hail with a song the New Year's happy birth ?
If the still rider on the pale, pale horse.
Has ta'en some dear ones in the year's short course.
J96 The Attempt.
Only whose memories are left behind,
And hollow voices on the wintry Aviud,—
To-day let no dim tear of sadness born
Mar the fresh beauty of the New Year's morn,
Bright with the hope that at its close will stand
A happy, sisterly, unbroken band.
Subject to gentle sway and tender rule.
With all the pleasures and no pains of school.
I sit half-envious, yet with loving jDride,
That others share the gifts to me denied,
And from their bountiful and varied lore
1 add fresh knowledge to my scanty store:—
Still let me sing, although my rhyme be rude,
A welcome to our little sisterhood!
A blessed, bright, and bountiful New Year
To each and all who monthly meet us here!
Successes sure all our "Attempts" attend
(And may our influence for good extend).
And from the mouldering ashes of their flame.
Spring. I'hoenix-like, and with a happier name,
To hush dissentient voices which lolll vex
Because some soul is found in our poor sex,
And so employ our long and leisure days
(With no desire for what the world calls praise);
With our debates—too gentle for such name—
They never stoop to feed an angry flame,
But, in the realms of letters, science, art.
Take now a friend's and now a foeman's part.
AVe'U trust the many names we know so well,
AYith countless others, may our pages swell.
To Alpine peaks let happy travellers climb.
And mount with ''E. ,]. C)." to heights sublime.
Or listen while she speaks of Music's poAver
In cialtured hall or peasant's lowly bower!
Still on our charmed ears full oft let flow
The clear and sweet-toned cadence of " Des Eaux."
Let " R," whose lips have touched poetic fire,
Still move our souls with her expressive lyre,
And " Jeaxie ]\Iorisox"s" most varied skill,
Weave verse or story at her " own sweet will."
Let "Procla," from the page of Teuton rhyme,
Call ghostly voices down the vales of time ;
While "Naomi" sweet Nature's praises sings.
And to our gaze "Melensa" vivid brings
Bright pictures of some Avild and woodland nook.
The Attempt. 397
Meandered o'er by many a winding brook :
" LuTEA Reseda" still soar on high
AVitli thoughtful flights of grave philosophy :
" Frucara," " Dido," " Elfie,"—all augment
With graphic prose,—our page,—or sentiment;
And other names too long to tell, I ween,
Add fresher beauty to the changing scene.
And thus 1 close the rough and halting lay
Of one who signs herself here—
Martyx Hay.
NOTICES.
Tete Prize offered for the best Poem appearing in the
August, September, or October number of The Attempt,
has been awarded to Jeanie Morison, for her poem
entitled Leonor de Lisneros.
The Editors have to announce to their Readers, that on
and after the 1st of January 1875, The Attempt, which
has hitherto been printed for private circulation only,
will be published by Messrs. Maclarex & Macxiven,
138 Princes Street, Edinburgh, under the name of The
Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Every article intended for publication must in future be
accompanied by the real name and address of the writer,
sent in confidence to the Editors, not for publication, but
as a guarantee of authenticity.
A Prize is offered for the best Prose Article appearing in
the February number of The Ladies Edinburgh Magazim.
All competitive articles must be sent to the Editors on
or before the 4th of January.
EOISBUROH :   PRINTED   BY  COLSTON   AND  SON.
