•* •
UL.u^\,
THE  ATTEMPT
A
LITERARY  MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE
EDINBUEGH   ESSAY   SOCIETY
1
VOLUME  IL                                                             1
1
"AUSPICIUM     MELIORIS     MVl."
FEINTED    FOR   THE   EDINBURGH   ESSAY    SOCIETY.
EEID & SON,  SHORE,  LEITH.
MDCCCLXVI.
D
CONTENTS.
Mrs Gaskell, by Incha  j^rflfl^ At,f\/:K
New Year's Eve, by Elsie Strivelyne
Something about Everything (Humour), by Elsie Strivelyiie
The Stormy Petrel, by Mas Alta   h.,.«, C«^^i^^^
The Colosseum, by M. E. M
Photography, by Agatha
Lonehill; A Tale of Christmas Night, by Norton Reeves
Double Acrostics (I. and II.), by F. B.
Something about Everything (On Beauty), by Elsie Strivelyne
Letters from Switzerland (No. I.), by M. L.
The Farewell of Prince Charles to Scotland, by Z.
On Accentuation, by des Eaux
Lonehill; A Tale of Christmas Night, by Norton Reeves
The Emigrant Primrose, by Meigeag Bheag
Pictures, by Mas Alta    ....
The Discovery of America, by Nellie
Answers to Double Acrostics, by F. B.
Thoughts on Shakespeare's Women, by des Eaux
Hapijiness, by Meigeag Bheag
The Babes in the Wood, by J. I. L.
Letters from Switzerland (No. II.), by M. L.
The Moon ; a Non-Scientific Paper, by Agatha
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K. H. D
Cotton Grass, by Lutea Reseda /^ ^yi^^'i^ja-iai-W-kWct*-. U. ^■
PAGE
1
6
8
10
13
15
17
24
25
28
31
34
37
40
42
44
48
40
51
55
56
61
63
69
11
CONTENTS
'/•
/
Ilisen from the Banks, liy Incognita
Virtutis, by Lutea Reseda
Thoughts on Shakespeare's Woinen (Juliet), by des Eaux
Letters from Switzerland (No. III.), by M. L.
The Seer's Vision, by J. I. L.        .
Beau Brumme], by Incoguita
The Last of the Goths, by Mas Alta
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K. H. D.
" Gracia capta ferum victorem cepit," by Dido,^^ i!vU^ fj ftH<- *ifc-&£*-i*'4 %i/uA^i^
Anecdote, by Cara .....
Thoughts on Shakespeare's Women (Lady Macbeth), by des Eaux,
May, by Elfie
Thoughts for the Storm, by Meigeag Bheag
Letters from Switzerland (No. IV".), by M. L,
Beau Brunimel, by Incognita
A First Book, by Elma   A.-%+'i'>**^—
The Border Keep, by J. I. L.
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. "Wildermuth), by K. H. D.
Thoughts on Shakespeare's Women (Hermione, Imogen, and Desdemona), by des Eaux
On Letter Writing, by Cliireuce
The Sad Heart, by J. I. L.
Ambition, by Alma . . . •   t    ^     • ,
Life and Death, by Elsie Strivelyne 11n-m4>X. li^i-L 'Vvt ^ t^AXJju tvv«.£«rve.vu4/'
The Knight of Toggenburg, (From the German of'Schiller), by Dido
Letters from Switzerland, (Conclusion), by M. L. .
The Endurance of Despotism, by Lutea Reseda
" I Always Speak my Mind," by an I'ntidy Young Lady
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K. H. D.
Thoughts on Shakespeare's "VVomen (Rosalind, Beatrice, and Portia), by des Eaux
A^ariations or Glosses, by Lutea Reseda
Mary Stuart, Part I.—The "Voyage, by Meigeag Bheag
Leisure and Indolence, by Elfie
Legendary Lays—The Wild Huntsman, by J. I. L.
lu Defence of "Viscount Dundee, by Dido '    . '    .
PAGE
71
72
73
76
80
8-3
87
89
94
96
97
101
104
106
111
115
117
118
121
125
128
129
134
137
139
144
150
151
153
157
160
164
168
169
CONTENTS
iii
PAGE
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildennuth), by K,
H.
D.
171
Enigma, by Clarence      ......
.
176
Thoughts on Shakespeare's Women (Queen Constance and Queen Katharine), by
des Eaux
177
On Judging Uncharitably, by Agatha           ....
181
Mary Stuart, Part II.—Lochleven, by Meigeag Bheag
184
Doing Evil that Good may Come, by Dido
188
Thoughts by the Eiver, by J. I. L.
191
Something about Eveiything (At Work), by Elsie Strivelyne
192
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K.
H.
D.
106
Kebus, and Answer to Enigma, by Clarence
200
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening ^From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K.
H.
D.
201
Mary Stuart, Part III.—Fotheringay, by Meigeag Bheag
205
On Quarrels and Reconciliations, by Dido
209
The Captive's Song (From the German of Goethe), by Dido
213
Something about Everything (Ireland), by Elsie Strivelyne
216
On Jealousy, by des Eaux              .....
219
A Highland Piaid, by Clarence      .                .               .               .               .
221
Answer to Rebus, by Clarence      .                 ....
224
A Round with the Postman, by Meigeag Bheag
225
The Salute of the Gladiators, by Mas Alta
231
Sleeping in : A Chapter of Misfortunes, by Dido
234
Half-hours in a Picture-GaUery, by Mas Alta              .          *   .
236
Ariadne, by J. I. L.        .
239
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K
H
D.
240
Thekla ; A Spirit-Voice (From the German of Schiller), by Dido
244
Journal of a Tour in Thelemarken, Norway, by Alma
245
Transposition Enigma, by Clarence                ....
248
Something about Everything (Of Certaia Poems), by Elsie Strivelyne
249
Journal of a Tour in Thelemarken, Norway, by Alma
253
LaMorte deClorinda (From the " Gemsalemme Liberata" of Torquato Tasso), by
Dido
257
Half-hours in a Picture-Gallery, by Mas Alta
259
A Day in Denbigh Castle, by Lutea Reseda
261
The Expulsion of the Moors from Granada, by J. I. L.
267
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K
.H
.D.
269
IV CONTENTS
PAGE
Answer to Transposition, Enigma, by Clarence . . . ; 272
An Old Lady's Musings over Old Letters, by EMe       .... 273
The Voice of Song, by J. L L. ..... 278
Journal of a Tour in Thelemarken, Norway, by Alma . , . 279
Jamaica—From the Founding of the Colony to the Emancipation of the Slaves,
by Euterpe . . ... . .282
Mrs Gnmdy, by Dido    *^4n t '-•"..'-■ '   '   - ■ .'*-^'t.+-i^-&- . . 286
The Voice of the River, by Meigeag Bheag . '. . . 289
Morning, Mid-day, and Evening (From the German of 0. Wildermuth), by K. H. D, 290
TTTT^.     ATTEMPT
ERRATA.
Page   35, line 21, for " reserve," read, " rescue."
Page   36, line 16, for " boiile," read " boule."
Page   84, line 24, for " Huzzars," read " Hussars."
Paj^e 124, line 26, for " sacrifice," read " sacrificer."
Page 124, line 36, for " bribe," read " tribe." ^^1  ^0*
minent
Page 147, line 23, for " lowest," read " hone.st. ,
° iselves.
Page 1.5S, line   a, for " Caucionero," reoii " Canciouero." comes
P.igf' 245, line   S, for " Drammlu," read " Drainmeu." ipation
in the
Dn's or
n their
place, and gratify a new generation.
Her life seems to have been rather a quiet one ; she was very domestic, and the
care and training of her daughters took up much of her time, but her friends had no
cause to complain of her neglect, for her kindness of heart and geniality of manner
have had ample testimony borne to them. That she took a warm interest in others is
evidenced in her own work on " The life of Charlotte Bronte," who appears tu have
looked to her for sympathy and affection, and to have felt completely at home in her
domestic circle. The way in which she writes about Mrs Gaskell's daughters shows
that they were the companions of their mother as well as her children, and ruled by
love, not by fear. One may generally judge of a mother by the behaviour of her
January 1866 A
IV CONTENTS
PAGE
Answer to Transposition, Enigma, by Clarence . . . ; 272
An Old Lady's Musings over Old Letters, by Ellie       .... 273
The Voice of Song, by J. L L. ..... 278
Journal of a Tour in Thelemarken, Norway, by Alma . , . 279
Jamaica—From the Founding of the Colouy to the Emancipation of the Slaves,
by Euterpe ...... 282
Mrs G
The V
Morui;
fJ\V
THE  ATTEMPT.
IS. 6a:sML
Mrs Gaskell's death has created a blank in the literary world, that will not
easily be filled up. Her talents were of a high order, and she possessed in an eminent
degree the power of creating interest in things of no particular moment in themselves.
She never requires to resort to the sensational style in her fictions, everything comes
within the limits of probability, and the reader feels more active human participation
in the joys and sorrows of the heroes and heroines of her works, than he does in the
highly wrought characters and situations of startling tales like Miss Braddon's or
Wilkie Collins'. Long after these are forgotten, those of Mrs Gaskell will retain their
place, and gratify a new generation.
Her life seems to have been rather a quiet one ; she was very domestic, and the
care and training of her daughters took up much of her time, but her friends had no
cause to complain of her neglect, for her kindness of heart and geniality of manner
have had ample testimony borne to them. That she took a warm interest in others is
evidenced in her own work on " The life of Charlotte Bronte," who appears to have
looked to her for sympathy and affection, and to have felt completely at home in her
domestic circle. The way in which she writes about Mrs Gaskell's daughters shows
that they were the companions of their mother as well as her children, and ruled by
love, not by fear. One may generally judge of a mother by the behaviour of her
Jamiary 1866 j^
THE ATTEMPT
children ; pleasant mannered, agreeable, obliging ones, speak of wise, judicious training,
which is the truest wisdom for the happiness of both. Over-indulgence in youth
causes many a heart-break in later years, and too many have been heard to say, " Oh
that my parents had ruled me better, and restrained me, then my evil passions would
have been checked, and I should not have been a source of misery to myself and
others." In the midst of an affectionate family Mrs Gaskell gently passed away, leaving
us none but cheerful memories of her, and a legacy of the fruits of her graceful mind.
We know as yet comparativelj-^ little of her life, but earnestly hope that the day is not
very distant when a biography worthy of its subject may be presented to the public.
A peculiarity of hers was that she required perfect quiet while engaged on any of her
works, and generally retired to the country for this purpose. This was probably the
result of the habits of her youth ; we are told that she passed many years of her life
in a small country town, the original of " Cranford;" and a mind accustomed to the
peace and quiet of such an existence Avould feel the want of it on these occasions. "We
may be grateful that the opportunity was afforded her, when we owe to it the pleasure
and instruction derived from such books as " Mary Barton," " Cranford," " Euth/'
" North and South," with others, and the excellent biography of " Charlotte Bronte,"
already referred to. We have every reason to believe that the beautiful story of
" Wives and Daughters," edited in the " Cornhill Magazine," is from her pen also.
" Mary Barton " was her first novel : she was well acquainted with the phases of
life as seen in a manufacturing town, and was able to depict them to the life. She
always inspires us with sympathy with the characters, we tremble with them in their
suspense, and rejoice in their joy. The one great event in this book is the trial for
murder, its causes and effects, and although a temporary halo is thrown over mere
commonplace people, we yet feel that they would probably have acted and spoken in
this manner under the pressure of the peculiar circumstances. The exertions of Mary
to obtain the acquittal of her lover, though great, and producing mental and bodily
prostration afterwards, were only natural where remorse had set in so keenly, as in her
case, and the mind almost unhinged by the violence of its emotions. Mrs Gaskell
rightly supposes that a great mental strain may support the sufferer up to the moment
when the danger ceases, and the faculties up to that time remain free for action; then,
when the necessity for restraint is at an end the long pent \\p feelings give way, and a
temporary (it may be final) clouding of the brain is the probable result, particularly in
the young and those unaccustomed to endure trials. Another point that strikes us as
evincing the authoress' knowledge of human nature is the coldness and " touch me
not" manner of the hero Jem Burton's former employers and associates, when he is
THE ATT LSI PT
discharged after the trial. He is proved innocent, but the stigma remains, and people
involuntarily draw their garments aside as he passes by. As the Germans say,
" Reputation is a mirror, a breath upon it and it is dimmed." Though the guilty man
had then and there come forward to make a full confession, and clear the falsely
accused, poor Jem might at any time in after life have been wounded by sucli
speeches as—" Oh ! Jem Burton, did you say 1 rather a curious character is he not 1
strange story about his youth ! " and so on. He wisely foresaw this, and took the
only plan that remained to him—emigration, making a name for himself in a new
world, and leaving old heart-burnings behind liini. Society is hard to cure of its pre¬
judices, and is seldom too lenient in its judgments.
" Cranford" is perfect in its way, a complete photograph of the life it depicts.
Many of its pages are delightful from their freshness and truth to nature ; one longs
to become acquainted with these dear old ladies, and to have a good gossip with them.
Their pride and desire to appear genteel is most amusing, especially as each knows the
poverty of the others, and how difficult it is to keep up an appearance. The order
of precedence is rigidly maintained, the widow of an honourable, the officer's widow,
and the rector's daughter being of course at the top of the tree. The first-named lady
is very selfish and very stupid, but the pleasure of her company is none the less
ardently desired, though she sleeps half the evening, and at her own house feasts
her dog before her guests. But then she is an honourable ! Dear old Miss Matty,
the rector's daughter, wins our hearts directly ; her reverence for the memory of her
strong-minded, clear-headed sister Deborah is most touching, for it often impels her to
act against her own inclinations, because " Deborah would have wished it." When
in any difficulty, or anxious to help others out of theirs, she always says with a
sigh, " If only Deborah were alive, my dear, she would have known how to act."
This much vaunted sister had however not been above the weakness of wishing for a
high per centage for her money, in consequence of which her poor confiding sister
finds herself one day penniless, the bank in which her all was placed having stopped
payment. Instead of complaining, her first thought is of the numerous sufferers by
this event, and the sense of having been a shareholder makes her determine to
realize every penny she can for their relief, while she gently subsides into a seller
of tea, not to mention the lollipops for the children. The lollipop trade is not
a profitable one, the little folk always having the best of the bargain, though she
is warned that sweetmeats are apt to do her favourites harm. The old ladies, her
friends, come out in a beautiful light on this occasion, clubbing together to make up a
little income for her out of their scanty means without her knowledge, and so honesi]y
THE ATTEMPT
glad of the opportunity of proving their regard. The alarm about robbers produces
an immense sensation in their qiiiet life, the passage of two or three suspicious looking
characters through the town resolves itself at last into " that murderous gang;" and
when the sole robbery that can be traced to its true source is that of the cat running away
with a leg of mutton, the ladies are a good deal disappointed, and for many a day refer
to " the night Miss Pole's house was attacked," this attack being a myth altogether.
They confess their private weaknesses to each other one evening of especial confidence,
and we cannot resist the temptation of making an extract of a portion of this conver¬
sation for the benefit of any reader who may not yet have read this delightful little
book, in the hope that it may lead to a perusal of the entire A'olume.
" I saw Miss Matty nerving herself up for a confession, and at last out it came :—She owned
that ever since she had been a girl she had dreaded being caught by her last leg just as she was
getting into bed, by some one concealed under it. She said when she was j'ounger and more active,
she used to take a flying leap from a distance, and so bring both her legs up into bed at once, but
that this had always annoyed Deborah, who piqued herself upon getting into bed gracefully, and she
had given it ujj in consequence. But now the old teri'or would often come over her, especially since
Miss Pole's house had been attacked (we had got quite to believe in the fact of the attack having
taken place), and yet it was very unpleasant to think of looking under a bed, and seeing a man con¬
cealed with a great fierce face staring out at you ; so she had bethought herself of something—per¬
haps I had noticed that she had told Martha to buy her a penny ball, such as the children play with
—and now she rolled this ball under the bed every night; if it came out on the other side well and
good ; if not, she always took care to have her hand on the bell rope, and meant to call out John
and Harry, just as if she expected menservants to answer her ring."
The return of Miss Matty's brother, the Aga Jenkins from India, but to her the
long-lost Peter, brings the story to an end, restoring her to comparative affluence, and
producing general harmony, the stranger having a happy knack of reconciling enemies,
without niucli apparent trouble. We give one other short extract showing the excite¬
ment caused by the idea of a wedding in their limited circle.—
" Marry," said Miss Matty once again, "well, I never thought of it. Two people that we know
going to be married.    It's coming very near ! "
" So near, that my heart stopped beating when I heard of it while you might have counted
twelve," said Miss Pole.
"One does not know whose turn may come next. Here, in Cranford, poor Lady Glenmire
might have thought herself safe," said Miss Matty with a gentle pity in her tones."
" B.ah !" said Miss Pole, with a toss of her head, "don't you remember poor dear Captain
Brown's song, 'Tibbie Fowler,' and the line —
' Set her on the Tintook tap,
The wind will blaw a man till her.'
That was because Tibby Fowler was rich, I think."
THE ATTEMPT 0
We are sorry to close the book, and bid adieu to the little coterie. A most refined
ladylike mind is visible in every page, making us feel certain that its authoress must
have been a delightful companion, genial, and a good discerner of the hearts of those
she lived amongst.
" North and South," presents a powerful view of a strike, and the fierce passions
excited at such a time. " Sylvia's Lovers." gives a graphic account of the whale
fishery trade, as it was conducted many years ago. We believe the scene is laid at
Whitby. The evils of the press-gang system are also forcibly represented, and our
hearts ache for the sorrow it brings on the simple inhabitants. We must plead guilty
to a weakness for a happy ending to a novel; the pictures of grief, anxiety, and hope
yielding to despair contained in this book were severe trials to our nerves, and haunted
us gloomily for weeks after. The " Life of Charlotte Bronte," we have mentioned before.
It must have been a satisfaction to Mrs. Gaskell to feel she had given some gleams of
happiness to this gifted, but ill-starred woman, for whom existence could have had so
few charms, whom death had deprived of those she held most dear, and whose highly
strung nerves were ill fitted to bear sickness and solitude, but whose genius blossomed
in this cold atmosphere like a rose in the desert. What more sad than her early death,
just when the sun was breaking through the clouds, and her friends rejoicing in her
new-born felicity. Well has her biographer done her part, though perhaps with an
over-indulgent pen.
" Be to ter faults a little blind,
And to her virtues very kind."
These two eminent women rest in their graves, " life's fitful fever o'er," having
laboured well in their day and generation.
And now we come to the last work of our authoress, one well fitted to be the
close of such a series, the beautiful story of " Wives and Daughters," rapidly ap¬
proaching a termination in the " Cornhill Magazine," simply depicting rural life, and
the doings of the Doctor's family, but in such a charming way that each fresh number
has been eagerly looked for, like the arrival of a dear friend. No truer woman, full
of noble feelings, modesty, rectitude, devotion, and unselfishness, ever existed in
reality or fiction than Molly Gibson, the Doctor's daughter. With all her natural
timidity, she is fearless when called on by others to exert herself; her sacrifices having
the eff"ect of casting a cloud on her name for a time, till the truth appears, and she
is reinstated in the public opinion. The Doctor, kind, thoughtful, anxious for a
quiet life, is harassed and annoyed by his second wife, whose want of tact, and
disr(!gard of the feelings of others, makes him  an uncomfortable home, whilst his
6 THE ATTEMPT
wife's daughter by her first marriage brings manifold troubles by her coquetry and
habits of concealment. The whole is worked up into a deeply interesting tale, and the
example of sudden death occurring in its pages is especially striking, when we recollect
the circumstances of Mrs Gaskell's own death. We must draw our remarks to a close.
"We have not entered much into the life of our authoress, for the simple reason
that little is as yet known about it, and probably her books will be the best vehicle for
conveying the most correct idea of her to our minds. The more we read, the more we
see clearly how she aimed at doing good, and raising the tone of our literature, and
our feeble tribute of admiration and respect is here freely offered, together with our
deepest sympathy with those who have lost an affectionate mother, and a friend truly
deserving of the name.
Incha.
^ffo Hoar's (&bt
Fill high the goblets, crown them with red wine,
Give them to friend, and child, and grey-haired sire;
Close up the circle, in the golden shine,
And crimson gloom, around the great Yule fire.
Hark to the storm ! The old year's heart is brave
And cheery, though this night he reigns his last,
Bold king ! he sends, ere sinking to his grave,
A parting shout of laughter down the blast.
Let us give genial answer from within,
Show that the breezy greeting is not lost;
Wake up the echoes with the merry din,
Of hoarse hurrahs, up to the rafters tossed.
THE ATTEMPT
Pledge these our toasts ; the first to all mankind,
Each year grown nearer to their final birth,
Their life in death, wherein both soul and mind
Shall see and know the truth, undimmed by earth.
Next to our country ; and her sons, who stand
Supreme on freedom's glorious muster-roll;
They live and die in harness, and the land
Mourns for their loss, who kept her honour whole.
Fill, fill yet higher to our trusty friends.
The hearts we love, the hands we clasp with truth j
Wlio palter not with faith for selfish ends;
Whose love in age is stedfast as in youth.
Stand closer yet around the flashing fire,
Let each face gleam beside the ruddy blaze ;
Then with joined hands, ere yet the year expire,
Drain one cup more to all our bygone days;
Our bygone hopes, caresses, dreams and fears.
Sweets joys, dark losses, mingled laugh and sigh,
Deep in these goblets hide the rushing tears.
Then with wet eyelids, watch the old year die.
Our blessing on him : by his midnight bier
A boy comes speeding, innocent and bold.
Eager to love us ; 'tis the young glad year :
One more wild cheer to greet both New and Old!
Elsie Steivelyne.
THE ATTEMPT
HUMOUR.
Have you ever watched a dancing bear, led out by his keeper, and made to exhibit
his acquirements before a select audience, composed of red-cheeked errand boys, floury
bakers, small girls carrying big babies, and perhaps a sprinkling of nursemaids of a
superior class 1 Do you know with how stupid an expression the poor beast walks
forward in his natural position; and then, when the drums and penny pipes begin to
play, and he receives a few admonitory pokes from bis keeper's stick, he raises him¬
self gradually, and with slow effort begins his stated gambols 1 If ever you have seen
this and not sympathized with Bruin, your hearts must be hard indeed. For my
part, a " fellow feeling makes me wondrous kind;" for I, the writer of this paper, am
in almost as unhappy a predicament. The editors and readers of " The Attempt"
alike concur in complaining of the too great seriousness of the Magazine—a complaint
with which I too agree; therefore, acting for the nonce as my keepers, they call upon
me to be funny for their benefit.
Now, I have it not in me to comply with this request—mine is eminently one of
those Scotch characters of which it is said, that while appreciating fun of some kinds
in others, they can by no means originate a humorous remark of their own ; if by any
chance they do succeed, the result of their efforts is as ponderous as the dance of our
friend the bear. Mine is rendered even a worse case, because, like my prototype, I
may not gambol in the manner natural to me; no doubt he could be active on all
fours, and I might be facetious, who knows, in a parody, but our keepers forbid, and
I can only pity the audience in either case.
To speak more gravely, nothing is more difficult than to be truly humorous. I
am inclined to think that it is a natural gift, which cannot be imitated by any who
are not to the manner born. Those, for instance, who have studied Tom Hood's
effusions, with their rich playfulness, and delicate sparkle, will feel at once, that if
they wish to write at all, they had best confine themselves to serious, or at least quiet,
topics, since few can steer clear, as he did, of the many shoals which beset the course
of the humorist. To be humorous without being vulgar or coarse, to be comical
withour being elaborate, to be amusing without being flippant, to point a joke withoiit
being either bitter or illnatured—these are difficulties appalling enough to an inexperi¬
enced author.
THE ATTEMPT 9
ITot long since, I was one of a luncheon party where the capacity of human
nature for amusement of all kinds was discussed at some length ; and as we lounged
over our grapes and wine many ideas were promulgated as to the oddity, from some
points of view, of laughter itself. "Why should that curious muscular movement take
place when anything strikes us as ridiculous 1 What is ridiculous ; and why should
some men take pleasure in irritating, so to speak, the sense of the absurd in others ]
These and many other questions we asked and did not answer, for we were skimming
on the surface of de^ps into which no one cared to plunge. " Life is a comedy to those
who think and a tragedy to those who feel," quoted one of the party ; •' and for my
part, I think whoever chooses to do the latter, must be a consummate fool. He'd be
wiser to enjoy his laugh, there is scope enough for it, heaven knows; and besides, to
perceive the folly of others gives one such a charming sense of exemption from their
mistakes." The speaker was young, as might be inferred, young enough not to appre¬
ciate youth, but his quasi bhxsS remarks met the rebuke they deserved. There was
one man at the table, with a grand weatherbeaten face, and rough iron grey hair, with
keen, far-seeing, blue eyes, and a quaint brusque manner, who turned upon him, and in
the short sentences, so well known to the world in his writings, silenced him effectually.
"Laughter's a grand thing, when it's genuine—-as all genuine things are ; but there's
nothing more awful in nature than the laughter of a man who has got no fun inside
him." From laughter to " Punch" was an easy transition of subject; and after specu¬
lating whether Tom Hood junior would equal his father in the pages of " Fun," our
chat ended with a final joke from one of our best talkers, who proposed that " Punch "
and " Fun " should join their staff of wits, and call the combined result " Funch."
It is a wonderful thing to listen to a man who has the gift of amusing others ;
who, without buffoonery, can " keep the table in a roar," though I fear me, in this part
of the world at least, our Yoricks are few and far between.
I once heard of a celebrated wit who called on a lady friend one afternoon, and
over a cup of tea confided to her with a sigh, that he had failed in his conversation on
the previous night. He reckoned his jokes as a sportsman would count his head of
game, but the effect was drearily oppressive. Fun must be spontaneous to be delight¬
ful, and no one enjoys a joke when he feels that the joker is scoring it as a hit or a
miss with painful care.
Many of the best things ever said are unrecorded, save in the memories of the
hearers ; no one chronicles them, and they go floating about the undercurrents of
tlie world of talk, making little speaking circles whenever they come to the surface,
till by constant wear the edge is taken off, and they sink for ever among the fossil
B
10 THE ATTEMPT
witticisms of bygone ages. One such story I have heard of Tliackeray. One Derby
Day he was returning by one of the last trains to London, and saw a little man
rushing wildly about the platform, exclaiming as he looked into each full carriage,
" Good gracious me ! I must be in London by half-past six, will no one give me a
place ]" None responded to the appeal, and as the train began to move, the victim
cried despairingly, " Has no one any charity ?" " !No sir," answered Thackeray,
thrusting his head out of the last carriage, " no charity it appears, but plenty of faith
and hope at your service."
And now this mention of Thackeray brings us to the touch of pathos that under¬
lies the merriest laughter. Thinking of the loss the world of literature has sustained ;
thinking of that genial spirit whose bright words no longer gladden our eyes, we have
not the heart for further attempts at fun.
Let us only say this, that laughter is a beautiful thing, and like all beauty, a thing
to be thankful for ; it is the sunlight of the voice, in which we do well to take
pleasure; the token of a gladness that wells up in the healthy human heart, and
breaks forth in free merriment as its natural expression. Associated as it is in our
minds, with aU that is pleasant and friendly, we can fully appreciate the feeling of the
poet who writes lovingly of
" The delight of happy laughter,
The delight of low replies."
Elsie Striveltne,
" Whither art wandering, fearless and free.
Over the surge of the glorious sea ]
Flashing, and heaving, and tossing its foam
High o'er the crags of the sea-gull's far home—
Dancing and rippling and laughing in glee—
Whither art bound— Oh thou child of the sea 1"
" I am bound for the Isles of the ]N"ortheTn Main,
Loffoden's shores I must see again ;
THE ATTEMPT 11
I must reach the ISIaelstrom's deadly tide,
I must hover above its eddy wide,
I must gaze in its gulf so dread and dark,
And see the wreck of the shattered barque
With lightning speed round the funnel whirled,
And then, like a stone, to its fate be hurled."
" But say, oh my bird—thou dost not delight
Only in darkness and fury and night—
Surely thou lovest the calm and the peace
Of the smiling sea, when the storm-winds cease ?
Say that thou lovest the ocean's breast
When its wrath is fled, and its surges rest 1"
" When the North Wind sleeps, and the Zephyrs blow,
Then over the Summer sea I go.
Winging my flight to that far-off land
Where the blue waves break on Tahiti's sand.
And roll o'er the hidden coral-reef,
And rock the boat of the island chief.
But I like it not—that calm soft clime—
Though there I may sojourn for a time—
For oh ! a petrel can never stay
Where the winds and the waters are ever at play."^
" What ! off once more to the raving storm 1
I pray thee, here rest thy weary form.
Thy wings, sure, must ache, and thine eye be dim,
Thy very brain with thy speed must swim."
" A petrel weary 1    A petrel's eye
Dim with gazing on sea and sky !
A petrel's brain with his speed grown duU !
As well may you ask of yon snowy gull,
Whether he tires of his rocky nest,
And would on a tree-top go seek his rest.
12 THE ATTEMPT
No ! the war of the elements love I to see,
The roll of the thunder is music to me ;
The lightning that gleams in the darkness so dread
I can watch without terror, play over my head;
And fearlessly skim the giant wave
That sweeps the mariner to his grave.
And quenches, amid its seething foam,
The light of many a far-off home.
Then talk not of land to the hird of the sea,
Speak not of rest to the careless and free;
Far dearer to me than the fairest shore
Are my own strong waves, and their ceaseless roar;
Far fairer are ocean's weeds and shells,
Than the sweetest flowers of your woodland dells.
Let the blue sky dandle its clouds of snow—
But give me the thunder-cloud looming low;
And tell, if you list, of the balmy night.
Lit by the stars with their golden light—
But, oh, for wild Winter's midnight drear—
The awful sounds and the sights of fear ;
The breakers' dash on the echoing strand—
The rush of the tide on the yielding sand—
Tlie ghostly gleam, 'mid the banks of cloud.
Of the glimmering moon in her misty shroud.
And the numberless terrors in which I delight,
I, the brave bird of the storm and the night.
Then strive not, my friend, my flight to stay,
O'er the rolling waters I hold my way,
1 hear the voice of the storm-king fell.
His path I must follow—farewell, farewell."
Mas Alta.
THE ATTEMPT 13
On their return from the destruction of Jerusalem, Titus and Vespasian founded
the Colosseum or Flavian Ampliitheatre, as a circus for the celebration of the venationes
or combats with wild beasts, and of the gladiatorial shows. An immense number of
slaves were brought to Rome to grace the imperial triumph, and it is said that fourteen
thousand of these unhappy wretches were employed in moving the huge blocks of
travertine, and rearing the majestic arches.
The building was dedicated by Titus in the year 80 a. d. (though not entirely
finished till the reign of Domitian), and in honour of the occasion no less than five
thousand wild beasts were slain. The festival lasted for a hundred days, and each day
fifty animals were killed. The Colosseum probably derives its name from its colossal
magnitude, and not, as some suppose, from a Colossus or huge statue of Nero which
stood near it. The outer walls are composed of travertine, and the interior is principally
of brickwork, faced with travertine. The arena was surrounded by a wall of about fifteen
feet high, as a protection against the wild beasts, and on the top of this wall was a
terrace termed the podium. Seats were here placed for the emperor, the principal
officers of the state, and the Vestal Virgins. Beyond, rose three tiers ; the first, with
marble seats richly cushioned, was for the senators and the equestrian order; the
second for the populus; and the third, with only wooden benches, for the pullati,
or common people. Above were galleries, from which women were allowed to
witness the conflicts, and it is calculated that in all there was accommodation for
upwards of eighty thousand spectators. An awning was extended over the whole in¬
terior to protect both combatants and spectators from the burning sun, and it is related
that sometimes a savage emperor, not content with the horrors of the circus, ordered
a part of this awning to be removed, thus leaving the spectators exposed to the intense
heat, and forbidding them to leave their places on pain of instant death.
The fondness of the Roman people for the gladiatorial combats seems almost in¬
credible, and it is asserted that no war Avas ever'so destructive to the human race as
were these barbarous games. They continued till the beginning of the fifth centurj^,
when a monk named Telemachus, who had travelled from the East on purpose to
protest against the cruelty of such scenes, rushed into the arena on the occasion of a
very splendid festival, and endeavoured to separate the combatants. The Prajtor
Alybius, who  presided, was passionately fond of the games, and enraged at the inter-
14 THE ATTEMPT
ruption, ordered Telemachus to be instantly put to death. He did not sacrifice his
life in vain, for the Emperor Honorius was so much struck by the justness of his
protest and by his courage, that he abolished the gladiatorial conflicts. The venationes
continued to be celebrated for more than a century, but were finally abolished by
Justinian.
The Colosseum had been twice ravaged by fire, and once struck by lightning, but
it had always been restored, and up to this date it appears to have been in a state of
perfect preservation. After the abolition of the games, however, there was not the
same object in keeping it in repair, and it was plundered and mutilated by barbarians.
It was probably entire, though despoiled of its ornaments and decorations till the
beginning of the eighth century, when it excited the awe and admiration of pilgrims
from the north, who expressed their feelings in words thus translated by Byron—
" Wliile stands the Colosseum, Rome shall stand !
Wlien falls the Colosseum, Rome shall fall!
And when Rome falls—the world ! "
In the eleventh century it was occupied by the Frangipani, and during the next
three hundred years was constantly the scene of conflicts—-sometimes being possessed
by the Frangipani, and sometimes by the Annibaldi—till it was conquered by the
Emperor Henry VIII., in 1312. A bull-fight was celebrated in the Colosseum in 1332 ;
the ladies of the noble Houses of Colonna and Arsini were amongst the spectators, and
many gallant youths engaged in the conflict. Eighteen were killed and nine wounded,
whilst only eleven buUs fell, so that the quadrupeds seem to have had the best of it.
By the middle of the fourteenth century the outer arches on the south side had
fallen, and the ravages of men were added to those of time—huge stones being carried
from the ruin to serve as building material. In the fifteenth century Passion Plays,
or Mysteries, were regularly represented at Easter in the Colosseum, but these were
prohibited by Paul III., probably for no better reason than that they interfered with
his supply of stone for building the Farnese Palace. JSTot only were the stones
plundered in this shameful manner, but the marble which decorated the interior was
rudely torn off and burnt into lime. It seems strange that so splendid a ruin should
have been so treated, and that the Romans should not have striven to preserve it as a
relic of the grandeur of their ancestors. Even Michael Angelo, Avho built the Farnese
Palace and the Campidoglio from the stones of the Colosseum, does not seem to have
protested against the barbarity of the proceeding.
In 1585 Sextus V. sought to put a stop to this wholesale plunder by establishing
a woollen manufactory in the interior, and blocking up several of the arches ; but after
THE ATTEMPT 15
spending large sums of money he was obliged to abandon the project as impracticable,
and it certainly was little short of desecration to employ so noble a building for such
a purpose. In 1671 permission was granted by the senate to celebrate bull-fights in
the Colosseum for six years, but (3arlo Tommassi protested so strongly against their
barbarity, that Clement X. prohibited them, and consecrated the Colosseum to the
memory of the Christian martyrs in the year of jubilee 1675. In 1714 Clement XI.
erected the altars of the Passion, and placed the paintings of Jerusalem and the Cruci¬
fixion over the southern entrance.
Benedict XIV. again consecrated the Colosseum, and made it a church in 1744.
He erected the cross in the centre of the arena, repaired the altars of Clement XI. and
cleared the place of robbers. Since then, being under the protection of the church, it
has been constantly repaired. Pius VII. buUt the wall supporting the north-west
angle, and it is said that the appearance of the stones was so threatening that criminals
under sentence of death were employed in the undertaking, with a promise of pardon
if they succeeded. Pius IX. built the buttress at the southern end, rebuilt some of
the arches, and repaired the interior.    Such is the history of the Colosseum.
M. E. M.
Although this paper bears the sufficiently familiar title of photography, it is not
my design to enlarge here on the many benefits of that wonderful art, but rather to give
utterance to feelings which must have arisen at one time or other in the minds of those
who have ever been subjected to the pain of sitting for their photographs—in these
dajs by far the greater part of the respectable community. And therefore having the
sympathy of almost every one, I think I may with propriety ask those who have
undergone the operation to agree with me when I indulge in a few grumbles over it.
Firstly, if you do not happen to have a " carte" fit to present to your friends, you
are constantly tormented to " get yourself taken;" and, obtaining no rest, some fine day
you step into a photographic saloon, fully prepared for the worst that can befall you.
Happy are you if you have not to sit idly waiting for the coming out of those there
before you, who, you are told, " are almost done," and who yet are no little time of
making their appearance.
16 THE ATTEMPT
Sooner or later, however, your turn comes, and you are ushered into a chamber
furnished with all the accessories of the art. There you put yourself in the photo¬
grapher's hands, and be well on your guard, for you are now at his mercy. How the
relentless man twists you about to suit his eye, artistic or inartistic, as the case may
be ! At last you are fixed, with your head supported by a so-called " rest," but to
which the title of " unrest " more properly belongs. With your head secured between
two iron prongs, and your eyes directed towards some definite object, you are told to
feel and look easy and natural, and assume a pleasant expression, a? if such results
were possible ! How can you look comfortable when you feel so marvellously uneasy,
and how put on a pleasant expression at a moment's notice, when your eyes are staring
fixedly, and you try in vain to look as you do at home when yon are not sitting, or
what is even worse, standing for your picture ? Tlien what kind of countenance are
you to assume 1 If you attempt to smile and look pleasant, your sweet smile is
delineated upon paper as a broad grin or a silly meaningless simper : if you look grave,
you are pretty sure to come out with such a scowl or sulky pout on j'our face, that you
feel that were you to meet such a one you would certainly stand aloof from him or her.
The photographer, kind soul, does not always allow such a forbidding countenance
to be transferred to paper, for he may drive away the gloom from your face by saying,
as a foreigner once did to a friend of mine, who was labouring under the not uncommon
delusion that she was looking very sweet, " JSTow miss, don't you go for to look so
soo-oor !"
In spite of the discomfort attending the operation, the victim seeras often disposed
to laugh under it, and hence arise the extraordinary fa(;es one sees of persons who
have been striving hard to refrain from breaking out into a merry laugh. In many
cases, however, I think they might ha^'e spared themselves the trouble, for one of the
pleasantest, and certainly one of the most natural photographs I have ever seen is
one of a lady and her child, who, thoroughly amused with the efforts of the photo¬
grapher to divert the little girl and her younger sister, are laughing in a perfectly
natural and unconstrained manner, thereby forming a striking contrast to the other child,
•who, too young to understand the meaning of what is going on, looks quite grave and
perplexed. In laughing, however, one should take care that one does not shock any
ideas of propriety, as was certaiidy done by a johotograph which I saw the other day of a
minister, wlio, attired in liis sober black gown and bands, stood up, book in hand, witli
a very unmistakeable grin on his countenance. Not that a clergyman is not at liberty,
when in his own home or in that of his friends, to laugh as much as any of his
congregation; but as we rarely see a Scotch lainister arrayed in his gown unless when in
THE ATTEMPT 1 '
the pulpit, one could not have a very favourable impression of the worthy man's
decorum when in church.
After the sun has done his duty and your fate is decided, the next proceeding is
to inspect the result of the sitting, and with that result the sitter himself or herself for
one, is seldom pleased. There is so much vanity inherent in the human breast, that
though your friends assure you that the likeness is admirable, you have difficulty in
believing that that plain-looking person represents you, who, according to your own
opinion, look decidedly well. To say the truth, however, photographs are rarely
flattering, not to speak of the absurd positions in which one is often placed. If you
are a modest retiring person, how provoking is it to see yourself standing as a forward
bouncing individual; if you have a wholesome horror of sentimentalism to be repre¬
sented as sitting or standing in the most sentimental posture; or if you detest affectation,
to see yourself adorned with all the graces of that too common vice.
Having almost exhausted this theme, at least the more shady side of it, I may as
well turn charitable and say that there are not a few photographs on which it is a
pleasure to gaze, so truthful and pleasant are they—which recall to our minds the
well-remembered and well-loved features of those, who it may be, are now in other and
far-distant lands, and for the sight of whom we have to thank that most wonderful and
too recently discovered art.
Agatha.
A  TALE  OF   CHRISTMAS   NIGHT.
LoNEHiLL House by no means belied its name. It stood alone on the only
elevation for some miles round, vnth. no other human habitation within sight, save
a few small cottages, chiefly occupied by the farm servants. And yet Lonehill was not,
■ strictly speaking, a farm, as the present occupant, Mr Melville, seemed to have no
further aim in his agricultural pursuits than to provide occupation for himself and
servants. He had come there some years before the date of our story, with a wife and
one daughter, apparently seeking rest from some overwhelming sorrow; but finding
none, he resolutely declined all the invitations which were sent by the neighbouring
c
iC> THE ATTEMPT
gentry, alleging as a reason that he and his wife were broken-hearted from the loss of
their only son under peculiar circumstances, and would consequently be no acquisition
to their society. However, as their daughter Isabella grew up, she became intimate
with a few families, and was a great favourite, as she was amiable and lively in dis¬
position, besides being a veiy beautiful little brunette. Dutiful and affectionate to her
parents, she tried to make them forget their sorrow by her loving attention and cheerful
companionship; but although for a tune they might appear less sorrowful, yet the
melancholy always returned—the shadow lingered still. Let it not, however, be
supposed they were selfish in their sorrow ; far from it, the mourner never hesitated to
send for Mr or Mrs Melville if he wanted sympathy or advice; nor was a stranger
ever sent unwarmed or unfed from their house, and many a benighted traveller could
testify to the kindness of his welcome.
There was one other inmate of Lonehill, of whom notice must be taken, and then
we shall proceed with our story. This was a widow lady who had lived near the
JVIelvilles before they came to Lonehill, whose only daughter, named Lucy, had been
drowned on her passage home from Australia. When Mr Melville prepared to seek a
new home, the idea of separation so overwhelmed poor Mrs Campbell, that he, with
true kindness, asked her to accompany them, and make her home at Lonehill.
It was en Christmas night that the following events took place, and a bitter night
it was, (hiving sleet and biting wind without, but within roaring fires that seemed to
langh at the cold outside, if only the inmates would have laughed too, with the great
blazing Yule logs; but on Christmas night the shadows fell deeper, and the sorrowing
parents sat silent and mournful. Isabel however kept a merrier Christmas, in
the great comfortable kitchen where the servants were enjoying themselves with
dancing and singing, and the rites usually performed under the mistletoe, after the
fashion of country lads and lasses of the good old time. Xor did Isabel go alone—
she was accompanied by a young man, Charles Gordon, whose noble bearing and
polished manners betokened his gentle birth and liberal education. He w^is the only
son of a wealthy and aristocratic gentleman whose principal estate marched with Lone¬
hill ; yet, although the master of almost unlimited means, Charles counted as his
greatest wealth the love of his gentle Isabel
A spirited country dance had just begun, when a loud summons at the hall door
was heard, and the servant soon came back to say that a party had been storm-stayed,
and sought refuge for the night for themselves and horses, which was of course at once
most willingly granted. On hearing this, Isabel, " on hospitable thought intent," went
to prepare sujiper and beds for the travellers, who Avere, she ascertained, a gentleman,
THE AITEMPT 19
who gave his name as !Mr Miinroe, his wife, fijur children, and servants. Having con¬
cluded her arrangements, she entered the sitting-room, whither she had already sent
Charles, in time to hear Mr Munroe's account of how they chanced to become the un¬
invited guests of Mr Melville. It was all owing, he said, to a quarrel which had arisen
at their last resting-place between the innkeeper and his wife. The man ordered one
thing, the woman another, and the servants would obey neither, till at last, after wait¬
ing above two hours for fresh horses, Mr Munroe went himself to the stables, and,
between coaxing and threatening, succeeded in obtaining what he wished—too late,
however, as it proved, to reach the next town, as the snow now lay so thick on the
ground as completely to conceal the road which beyond Lonehill had no walls.
" What a fearful curse," he continued, " is a hasty temper. How many lives have
been sacrificed to it, and how many more checkered and blasted by it."
As he spoke, Mr Melville became much agitated, perceiving which, Mr Munroe
also seemed suddenly overcome with emotion, as he asked with a scarce audible voice,
" Can it be, may I ask, is your name Melville, and did you once live on the Abbey
Hill in B ]"
" Yes," replied the old man, " I am he, how do you know me 1 I do not recollect
having seen you, nor do I know your name."
" That is quite likely, it is many years since I saw you last, I was at school wiili
your son, he was a great friend of mine—what has become of him 1"
Mr Melville pointed to his wife, who seemed in such agonizing grief at the
mention of her son, that Mr Munroe regretted having spoken of him so hastily, and
begged them to forgive his thoughtlessness, then with great tact and delicacy intro¬
duced by degrees, other subjects of conversation, and soon interested them all in
accounts of his travels. Later in the evening, Mr Melville, after speaking to his wife
in a low tone for a few moments, addressed Mr Munroe, and said, " It is now many
years since I unburdened myself to any one, but of late I have felt a strange craving
to do so, and where could I find a more suitable confidant than you,—a friend of my
poor Arthur. It may do good also, as my sad story may give you a still greater
horror of an ungovernable temper. Isabel, my love," he said, turning towards his
daughter, "you have never heard all the particulars of our blighted life, you will hear
them now, and all I ask is that you will try to remember, it is your parents you are to
judge and so don't think too harshly,—you also, Charles, will hear to night what is the
secret of our inconsolable grief, which has been the subject of speculation to our
hajjpier neighbours. In telling my story, I must go back thirty years, to the time of
our marriage.   I was then a more boy, just twenty, and my wife a girl of sixteen.   How
-'0 THE ATTEMPT
our friends permitted us to be united at such an age I know not, but certain it is we
were too young, as we had not learned to rule ourselves when we undertook the grave
duties of married life. Our first baby was a boy, whom we named Arthur, after my
father; he was a beautiful child, and such a talented spirited little fellow, that he was
universally admired. His companions, as you must know, Mr Munroe, loved him
passionately, his teachers spoke of him with rapture, and praised his docility and his
wonderful talents. When he was ten years old Isabel was born, we had had four
children between them, but they all died in infancy. When Arthur was fourteen he
matriculated into the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated in Arts, after four
years' study. Immediately after taking his degree, a rich cousin of my father's in
Liverpool, offered Arthur a lucrative situation in his counting-room, with the prospect
of becoming a partner. This offer, Arthur at once declared himself ready to accept,
much to our astonishment, as we had supposed his inclinations lay towards one of the
learned professions, rather than the merchant's desk. The reason we afterwards dis¬
covered was a romantic one, being in fact his desire to be near the daughter of our
dear friend here jVIrs Campbell, who, after her husband's death, had gone there to
reside. For some months all went on well, Arthur became as much beloved by all
whom he met in Liverpool, as he had been by his friends at school and college ; but
on the twelfth of December, how well I remember the dates, I received a letter from
my cousin, saying, he regretted to inform me, he feared my son had been defrauding
the Company, and that he had embezzled money to a considerable amount. This
charge I treated with indignant scorn, but one letter after another came to me, with
what appeared such conclusive proofs of his guilt, that at last they did their work by
poisoning my mind and that of my wife against our own son, but still we did not fully
believe him guilty, till we had a visit from Mr Usborne himself, when he appeared so
deeply to sympathize with us, and brought with him such dreadful proofs, that we no
longer doubted,—would to God we had doubted, as we ought. It was on Christmas
morning twelve years ago, that Mr Usborne called on us, and that afternoon he sent
our boy to us, having consented not to deliver him up to the law. I can see him
now, our noble boy, his face ashy pale, and his dark eyes flashing with honest indigna¬
tion, defiance, we thought it then, and his finely chiselled lips set with determination
to prove his innocence, and doubtless expecting consolation for the sorrow he had
endured in the sympathy and encouragement of his parents. In j^lace of that, to my
shame I speak it, in hasty anger I met him with reproaches as he was about to throw
himself in my arms ; he instantly started back with a look of thrilling anguish, and
was turning towards his mother,  when she said, ' Oh Arthur, to think my only son
THE ATTEMPT 21
should grow up to shame his parents as a common thief!' At these words, poor
Arthur's anguish burst out in a low wailing cry, as he turned hastily and left
the room,—Mr Munroe, I never saw my son again, that is twelve years to-night."
Here the old man's voice became choked by sobs, and indeed there was not a dry eye
in the room, all wept in sympathy.
" But you heard of him surely 1"
" Yes," continued the father, " 1 heard once from liim, two days after, the
post brought a letter dated from Glasgow, telling me he had sailed for America,
and having no money, he meant to work his passage out, and bidding me fare¬
well, assuring me of his innocence, but adding that it was impossible for him to
live at home if thought guilty. Enclosed were a few lines to his mother, in
writing which the poor fellow seemed to have almost broken down, as the paper
had been wet with tears; ' Dearest mother, farewell, God bless you,—oh mother
how could you doubt me,—had you believed me innocent, I would not have left
you,—your son once, now for ever lost to England and aU in it—Arthur !'—
that was the only letter we ever had from him, but we heard of him once again.
This," lifting a large pocket-knife, " was brought home to us. A traveller was
crossing the Rocky Mountains by an unfrequented route, when he saw this knife
lying with Arthur's full name and address on it, and beside it a few bleached human
bones, which were aU that remained of our son, exiled and murdered by his father's
hasty temper."
" "What a sad, strange fate!" said Mr Munroe after a pause of deep emotion,
" And his character, how of it ] was it afterwards cleared 1"
" Yes, thank God, my boy's name was untarnished, none knew of the charge
brought against him beyond our own family and his fellows in the office who all be¬
lieved him guiltless, except one poor lad, whom Arthur had mortally ofi'ended by
prospering better than he in aU he undertook. He alone declared he believed him
guilty, at the same time expressing the deepest sorrow at being compelled to do so,—
Sir, the whole charge was the invention of that poor sinful youth, who confessed
the whole scheme soon after in an anguish of remorse. The whole thing was so
cleverly done as to escape detection, he had embezzled the money himself, and after¬
wards secreted proofs among Arthur's clothes, simply for the love of revenge, as
he allowed he had no wish to possess the money. Imagine if you can the conflicting
feehngs of our hearts when we heard it, joy that our son should have passed
through the fire with his purity unsullied, and agonizing remorse for the injustice
of which we had been guilty.    If he could only have known before lie died that wo
22 THE ATTEMrT
knew him innocent, if we could only have heard him hreathe one word of forgiveness,
but God willed it otherwise, so we must bow in submission to his fatherly correction.''
" Thanks be to God that his name M'as righted," exclaimed Mr Munroe,
vehemently, " Oh, if he had known, how quickly he would have come home again, and
how much sorrow might have been spared. But doubtless all was for the best. I
remember too Miss Campbell, this lady's daughter, a very beautiful child—What
became of her 1 Did she remain in Liverpool, or does some history attach itself to her
also 1"
" Ay that there does, Mr Munroe," said Mrs Campbell, speaking for the first
time, " a strange sad story, and as you seem so much interested in poor Arthurs fate,
why should I withhold the history of my sorrow 1 I went, as Mr Melville said, to
reside in Liverpool, soon after the death of my husband who died of cholera, when it
scourged the country in 1848. I took with me my only daughter Lucy, who was then
only twelve years old. We had been there about a year when Arthur came to Mr
Usborne's, and for a few months he was constantly at our house, till about three weeks
before the charge of fraud was made against him, when we sailed for Australia, at the
urgent request of my brother who had settled there many years previously, so that I
did not hear of it at the time nor indeed till I returned to England. My brother gave
us a kind welcome, and we lived happily with him for two years, at the end of which
time he died, leaving no children, but a widow, who resolved to return to her friends
in England, so as we had no tie to keep us in Australia, we all prepared to come home
together. Shortly before the sailing of the vessel, I took a dangerous illness, on
recovering from which the doctor told me, the only chance for my life was a sea
voyage. Plearing this we rejoiced that we had secured our passage in tli<> next ship,
since delay would endanger my life, so you may judge of our dismay, when, two days
before we were to sail, Lucy showed symptoms of measles, so that to take her on board
was impossible. Her Aunt immediately said she would stay with her and come in the
next vessel, while she and the doctor both insisted I should proceed as at first intended.
Long I resisted, I could not leave my only child ill, I said, to take care of my own
health; but when they reasoned with me that my life was surely of more value to my
daughter than a week's nursing which might kill me, especially when she had such a
kind and efficient nurse in my sister-in-law, and Lucy's case was a mild one, I at last
yielded, and left them to follow. My voyage was an uneventful one, and we reached
Liverpool without having encountered one storm, an emblem, I hoped of the peaceful
future ; it only proved the calm preceding the tempest. After I had been about two
months in England, during which time T had been employed in furnisliing a small
THE ATTEMPT 23
house  close to Mr Melville's on the Abbey HiU in B , I began to look for the
arrival of Australian vessels, but no word came of my sister and daughter. Three
months and four passed, but still I looked in vain, when one morning 1 received a
letter from Australia. It was from a friend who had been very kind to us, and she
wrote saying that doubtless long ere I received her letter my daughter would be safe
with me at home, as she had sailed in the 'Mary Anne,' a month before she wrote.
Strange to say I felt no alarm, but thinking I must soon see the arrival of the ' Mary
Anne' announced, I went to Mr Melville to shew my letter. When I entered, I saw
Mr Melville hastily fold and pocket the newspaper, while they both had a startled
look.    This I remembered afterwards, but scarcely noticed at the time.
" ' They will soon be home now, they sailed in the " Mary Anne " before this letter
was written,' I exclaimed, holding it up, and then after reading it to them, I asked
when they thought I should start for Liverpool, as I must be there, I said when the
ship came in.
" ' We shall see, we shall see,' said Mr Melville, trying to smile, but something
in his manner made a chill creep over me, and my sense of hearing was quickened
I suppose by fear, for I heard distinctly Mr Melville whisper to his wife, ' Yes, Mary,
it is the same, you must tell her, God comfort her.'
" ' What is it she must tell me, what has happened, have you heard any bad
news 1' I asked fiercely.
" Mrs Melville took my hand and burst into tears; ' My dear Anne,' she said, 'I
only wished to remind you that it might be God's will that the " Mary Anne " should
never arrive.'
" ' Mary,' I said, speaking with a frightfully calm voice, I seemed turned to stone,
' you have not told me all—you have seen something in the the paper Mr Melville put
in his pocket as I came in ;' and turning to him I demanded the paper from him.
" ' Mary will tell you all,' he said, ' and I trust it may prove an unfounded alarm.'
" Mrs Melville then told me that great anxiety had been felt on account of the
non-appearance of the ' Mary Anno,' and now they feared the worst, as there was a
rei)ort that a bottle had been picked up on the coast of Portugal with a letter inside
directed to the Captain's mother. Mrs Melville tried to cheer me by saying it was only
a report, but I felt sure of its truth, and I saw she believed it too."
(To be concluded in next Number.)
24 THE ATTEMPT
JottbU ^cxostm.
" The sleeping and the dead,
Are but as pictures."
1. " Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death:
And so his knell is knolled."
2. " The river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth, wherof who drinks.
Forthwith his former state and being forgets."
3. " TNTiere Proserpine gathering flowers,
Herself a fairer flower by gloomy Dis
Was gather'd."
4. "I am dying, , dying ; only
I here importune death a while, until
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
I lay upon thy lips."
6. " Take again
From this my hand, as holding of the pope
Your sovereign greatness and authority."
11.
Conspirators.An Island.
1.
Two Points.
2.
A Mistake.
3.
4.6.
An Appellation.Unfriendly.Casual hints.
6.7.
An Emperor.Sea side dust.
i
F. B.
THE ATTEMPT 26
ON    BEAUTY.
" The DiTine fact of Beauty is the grand formative principle of the Universe."
We are accustomed in common parlance to speak of the creation of man as if it
were the commencement of all things, almost forgetting that there was a sentient,
active divinity for boundless ages before the fiat went forth, in obedience to which our
cosmos arose in all its early perfection. We forget in dreaming over the purity of
that morning of man's life, by how much it was preceded, how long were those mys¬
terious ages of whose countless years we get an overwhelming glimpse now and again
from water-worn fossil, or fire-riven rock. If we could see back into that Past, how
much would be unfolded before us of marvel, how much of strange elemental chaos
working gradually to order. We are reminded of the old tale of the Titans, whose
rough, wild dynasty gave way before the superior power and intellect of the younger
god, so that their places knew them no more, and they were fain to groan out their
despair in the caverns of Olympus; only no such contempt has faUeu on the first
mighty efforts of mother nature—they have done their work, they have filled their
allotted parts;
" The old order changeth, giving place to new,
And God fulfils himself in many ways,"
making the earth of to-day wondrously different from that of the earlier times, and yet
wondrously the same, bearing on her bosom now, races whose prototypes sleep far
below, locked in the once impressible volumes of the sandstone and coal. Through
all these changes there runs one constant element; one which it is no easier to define
now than in the days of the " Hippias," or the " Banquet," but to which we have
given the vague name of the Beautiful.
At first sight this name seems comprehensive enough, but let any one endeavour
to specify precisely what it indicates, and the meaning becomes as uncertain, as fleeting
as Beauty itself, or as those visions of the Beautiful to which the followers of Plato
professed to attain. This Magazine is scarcely the place for a disquisition on so com¬
plicated a subject; we must assume that our readers intuitively recognize the existence
of moral, mental, and physical beauty, and look upon each of these as a kind of
February IS'iS D
26 THE ATTEMPT
perfection—a facile ex])ression of God's power; and this idea, though doubtless most
uiiphilosophical, is sufificient for ordinary minds and purposes. Here then we may
glance back again to the bygone ages, and see running tlirough them the everlasting
principle of the Beautiful, carried out unerringly and unceasingly.
Over the crude rocks and scarcely formed crystals of one period; then over silver
seas and tangled fronds of gigantic ferns, among which strange creatures crushed the
lush herbage, and lifted broad heavy foreheads to the breeze ; through the long days
when the bright waters trickled and filtered down to new levels, and the untried earth
lay bare to the young glowing sun; everywhere, and in every step of the world's great
march, there is apparent the same harmonic music of beauty and fitness. And so it
wiU be through the coming as well as the bygone cycles of time. The sun-king's robe
is as gorgeous now as of old, the amethyst mists veil the mountain crests as richly,
and Hesperus looks down with as pale a loveliness out of the soft darkness of the
summer night.
In the works of man the elements of beauty are twofold—the beauty of the
material—gold, marble, or stone ; the beauty of design and workmanship, shown in the
ornament, the statue, the carved arch. Each of these affects the mind in a different
manner; to each we may apply the term beautiful, and each may be to us one among
the million sources from which a beneficent Creator intended us to receive delight. A
craving after this delight is implanted in every human soul; from the savage who
stains his weapons with bright colours, to the artist or poet who almost worships the
ideal which always eludes his grasp—we all have it, and may gratify it, for everywhere
in nature there is beauty, only marred by the imperfections which must exist on this
side the veil, or by man's influence, which, sad as it may sound, is in most instances
of the destroying kind.
To many this craving for what is beautiful appears as pertaining merely to sense,
but this is a false estimation of the feeling alike in its source and aim. It is one of
our " Intimations of Immortality," linked indissolubly with the love of all that is good
and perfect, and giving to all who feel it intensely the spontaneous conviction of some¬
thing existing beyond our present horizon. Keats leaning on heaped up flowers and
dreaming of the spheres ; Shakespeare wailing that sweet music made him sad;
Tennyson writing of the " awful rose of dawn"—none of these are conscious merely
of the pleasant sensations given to eye and ear; there is always a deeper tone in their
voices than passing pleasure brings, an echo of a nobler, a more enduring music. Ko
doubt there are those to whom a seeming appreciation of the beautiful is a deadly
snare.    Nero himself wore wreaths of sweet fresh flowers in the midst of his orgies,
THE ATTEMPT 27
but this is only a seeming, not a true appreciation. It is partial, maimed, referring
only to luxurious desires, and to nothing truly lovely and beautiful. To men like
Xero, though the rich grape and the gorgeous rose were in a certain sense beautiful,
the glowing harmonies of sunset and sunrise, the grandeur of tlie storm, the solemn
voices of the night, must have been things silent and incomprehensible.
Some assert that Beauty is dependent entirely on association, adducing as proof,
that what is beautiful to one man is not so to another; but we rather lean to the
opinion, that the " Science of Beauty is based on a great harmonic law which pervades
and governs the universe."
It is true, that to one a grey street, a worn doorstep may be dearer than a velvet
lawn or sculptured portal; that to another some plain-featured face may wear a more
loveable expression than the veriest queen of beauty could boast ; but it is easy in
these cases to distinguish between the power of association or memory, and the in¬
herent beauty of the object admired. The existence of the Beautiful of every kind and
degree is independent of man's mind : the " eternal and divine canons of loveliness
are immovably fixed"—" beauty has been appointed by the Deity to be one of the
elements by which the human soul is continually sustained ; it is therefore to be found
more or less in all natural objects; but, in order that we may not satiate ourselves with
it, and weary of it, it is rarely granted to us in its utmost degrees Absolute
ugliness is admitted as rarely as perfect beauty, but degrees of it, more or less distinct,
are associated with whatever has the nature of death and sin, just as beauty is asso¬
ciated with what has the nature of virtue and life."
We have said that to define the Beautiful or mark out the boundaries which
separate the moral, mental, or physical expression of it is work for the student or
scholar; but we also acknowledge that, apart from such distinctions, we may all
reverence its presence, coming, as it does, to alleviate and brighten the weariness of
our lives, and while we yield to its gentle influences, we may remember that if wisdom
and virtue are not essentially the same as beauty, yet,
" Beauty, Good, and Knowledge are three sisters
That doat upon each other, friends to naan,
Who never can be sundered without tears."
Elsie Strivelyne.
28 THE ATTEMPT
%ttttxB from ^toitgjrlan^.
NO.  I.
Zurich, Hotel Baur-au-Lac.
My dear Lucilla,
It was so truly kind of you to have a letter waiting for me
in the post-office here, that I must try to pay you back in some degree. Only excuse
me if I should fall asleep in the middle, for now that the Venetians are closed, and the
bougies lighted, I begin to be aware that we have had a most fatiguing, as well as a
most charming day.    We have just returned from a sail on this beautiful lake, first by
sunset, then by moonlight, in company with whom do you think 1    I mean to
keep you in suspense for a short time, to punish you for enjoining me so strenuously
to begin my account at the beginning of my travels. That, however, I can scarcely
do, but must just give you a few jottings of Germany before entering upon Switzer¬
land.
The spot which will live longest in my memory is, I think, that peaceful Heidel¬
berg, with its romantic old castle, its church and cloister, the resting-place of Olympia
Morata; the green slopes and cool waters beside it, and below, the quiet Neckar
valley, widening out in the sunshine. It must be by the law of contraries that the
students there are so fond of fighting, and that a gashed cheek or scaiTed forehead seems
necessary to the reputation of a gentleman.
I know you want me to tell you of the wonders of the Ehine. It is wonderful
and bewitching indeed, yet you must not imagine, as I used to do, that its scenery
surpasses every tiling we have at home. Indeed, if while we were in the Khine boat,
you were sailing through the Kyles of Bute, I am not sure that you had not the better
feast, as far as landscape is concerned.
But then, had your fancy power to connect at every turn, a tale of love and sorrow,
of enchantment, or of chivalry with some ruined tower ? Could you conjure up a
dragon on yon hiU, and a melodious syren on yon cliff? Could you see the waving
white arms of a watei-nix, where the bubbles curl and eddy; or the stony forms gf sev^en
cruel sisters, where the rocks jieer above the current ? Could you call up in fearful
vision, a whole nation of rats, terrible, irresistible—swarming over the broad stream,
to carry doom to the foul bishop of fair Bingen ?     It is those weird legends which
THE ATTEMPT 29
make the Eliine an enchanted river.    The poetry and the love of a whole nation hang
around it.
There must have been poets by these waters in the dim old times, long before Ger¬
many had found a voice with which to speak to the outer world. Perhaps some pensive
Uhland, or even an unknown Schiller in embryo, wandered here and poured out those
lays which still make music of the echoes of the Ehine, though the words have been
long since forgotten, and the memory of the minstrel has died away. It is strange to
look at those thick, gruffly-polite, smoke-tanned Germans that we meet, and to think
of the full, impetuous flood of song that has gushed from their countrymen, perhaps
even from such as they are.
How little the mere outside shell can tell us of the heart of a man, or a nation—
for your benefit, who pretend to deride German gutturals, I may add, of a language.
We have had little difficulty in making known our wants to the natives ; for though
we find speaking German a very different thing from reading it, yet so many people
know English on those frequented routes, that we are always sure to find some one to
understand us. Money, with its constant changes from franks to thalers, and from
thalers to guldens, has been the most troublesome part, and has sometimes caused droll
mistakes. One evening, Maitland, who considers himself rather au-fait in such matters,
took charge of the purse, but put us all out of countenance by offering the steward of
our boat a silver groschen, which being nominally silver, he supposed to be of respect¬
able value. The man's astonished look sent him to inquire whether he had overpaid
him, when he discovered that he had bestowed the generous sum of one penny
farthing !
I wish time would permit me to tell you about the towns we visited—Cologne
Avith its cathedral; Wiesbaden with its elegant Kursaal, the haunt, alas, of the most
unlovely human beings I ever saw ; Frankfort; Mayence ; Worms, where every tile
reminded us of the bold man who feared God, but turned back for neither man nor
devil. But I must pass them all over and come to this most beautiful of lands, on
whose threshold we are.
We entered it by Basle two days ago, but Basle, with its swift-rushing Ehine,
seemed scarcely Switzerland. My first sight of the Alps was yesterday, from that most
romantic point of view, the window of a railway carriage ! But that did not spoil
them. Far, far away over the green hill tops, they rested like fleecy clouds on the
hori2on, only so still, so unchangeable. We whirled away amidst crags and woods,
with tlie bold Aar foaming between, and the distant view was shut out. Several
times again we caught glimpses of snow-peaks in different aspects, until, as we came
30
THE ATTEMPT
near Zurich, the long, majestic ridge of the Glarus Alps remained permanently in
our sight. We command the whole view from the windows of our hotel, which is
close by the lake, except for the pretty bit of garden before it.
We spent this forenoon in seeing the town, and were specially interested in the
old library, with its relics. There we saw letters of Lady Jane Grey, of Cranmer, and
of Zwingli, also that reformer's Greek Bible, with notes in his own handwriting.
The afternoon we spent down on the terrace by the lake-side, all but poor
Miss Gilmour, who was obliged to lie down with a headache. We sat enjoying
the calm beauty of the scene, and amused ourselves by throwing crumbs to hundreds
of marvellously bold little fishes that darted through the clear water to seize them.
Other groups were rejoicing in the same dolce far niente at short distances from each
other. The nearest to us were a lady and gentleman whom we knew to be English by
the sound of their voices, but further we did not concern ourselves with them, till the
lady's white parasol slipped from her hand and drifted full-blown, among the fishes.
A polite little German sprang to the rescue at once, and, stretching himself at full-
length by the water's edge, succeeded in tipping the rim of the parasol, so that the
lady's husband could reach it, and was also successful in the apparently more difficult
matter of recovering his own balance, at the price, however, of his beloved cigar, which
went out hissing in the water. Now followed a torrent of thanks on one side, and
compliments on the other, in the midst of which the lady turned her head, and Bessy
was the first to recognise our old school companion, Laura Leslie, now Mrs Lea. We
have become fast friends again, already, for I think Laura is more charming and full
of sunshine than ever. We get on very well with Mr Lea; he is clever and sociable ;
uot /ia//good enough for her, you know, but that's of course.
We made arrangements for our evening sail, but first had tea together in the
gardens. By tea, I mean cafe-au-lait, with zwiebach, and delicious Swiss honey.
This rural way of making our repasts has been very common with us since we left
home. I shall not soon forget our pleasant breakfasts under the acacia trees at Wies¬
baden, nor even our dining under a verandah by the road-side at Mannheim. No one
thought it worth while to cast a look on us, so common are such doings in Germany.
There is so much time and ceremony spent at the table-d'hote, with its score of
courses and hundreds of guests, that one can afford to be free and easy for the rest of
the day.
We have just been startled by a most unwelcome apparition, namely, one of the
waiters, who came to bring up a missing piece of luggage. After knocking, he walked
straight into the room, and began to uncord the box, utterly unconscious of our astonish-
THE ATTEMPT 31
ment at this unlooked for intrusion. In another moment I had turned him out, how,
I hardly know, for he vanished with a most innocent, uncomprehending look in his
eyes, wondering, no doubt, what he could have done to inspire the English ladies with
such horror. We must keep locked doors in future, for one never knows what ex¬
ploits those foreigners may perform. Bessy's nerves have recovered their late shock,
and she is threatening to come and blow out my candle, if I will not come to bed. And
yet I have missed so much that I wished to tell you, that I can hardly stop. I must
just write to you again so much the sooner, perhaps from Lucerne, where we go next.
With love to all at home,
Believe me,
Yours affectionately,
M. L.
^1^ (f awfodi £if ^ritta OlD^arks to Srotlan^.
On lonely Moidart's barren shore there stands
A little group of anxious, toil-worn men,
With sad and downcast looks—the knitted brow,
The wasted cheek, tell a sad tale ; and when
They seek to gather from each other's eyes
Some ray of hope, they only find despair;
All had been risked—all lost—and these brave hearts
Seem to have nothing more to do or dare.
To have lost all was much, but there is worse
In store for them, for now has come the hour—
The bitter hour when they must lose him too—
The gallant prince, of all his race the flower.
No longer shall their eyes meet his, their hearts
Beat strong with hope, as from his bearing high
They draw fresh courage, and for his dear sake
Rush on the foe—to conquer or to die.
32 THE ATTEMPT
But, see—amidst the brave and faithful few
He stands ; o'ershadowed is his noble brow
With unshed tears, while pressing round him now
They seek to grasp his hand, and on it fall
From eyes unused to weeping, burning tears—
Tears wrung from their despair, which, falling, quench
All hope they cherished for his future years.
Few words had passed, for in that bitter hour
There needed none; time pressed, and from the bay
Was seen a signal—will he silent part
Without a word upon his lonely way i
Ah, no ! the exile speaks, although at first
His voice is scarcely heard, broken and low;
But its sad music sinks into their hearts—
Of all their griefs this is the bitterest woe.—
" My brave and faithful friends, how shall I say
Farewell 1 surely that heart shall never ache
With after grief, that is not broken now,
If the sad tale be true that hearts can break !
My own griefs 1 can bear, but not your tears,
Your ruined homes, the blood that you have shed,
And the dark future that awaits you all,
Those that you lov'd, but whom you mourn now dead.
Kind friends, ye linked your fates to one whose race
Is doomed, and, in his fall, each loving heart
Must perish too ; forgive the selfish prince
Who, when the hour draws nigh, he must depart,
Begins to feel his own unworthiness
Of the great sacrifice that he has cost;
Your fond fidelity I do not wrong,
For never yet was blood more freely lost,
But of my many mem'ries this perhaps
Is yet the bitterest in the heavy past.
Now the last drop has filled my brimming cup,
And with an aching heart I bid a last.
THE ATTEMPT- 33
A long farewell to thee my own loved land,
My father's heritage—my native shore,
1 dreamed to raise the fortunes of my house.
Thy people free, but I shall dream no more.
Scotland ! in thy inhospitable breast
I shall not ask a grave, but as a spell
I leave my name breathed on thy mountain air,
That in succeeding ages, when they tell
Of Charles Stuart, then it shall have power
To stir the hearts of gallant men, and fill
The gentle eyes of women with sad tears ;
And knowing his misfortunes, they will still
Forget his faults, which, ev'n remembered, shall
Be softened into virtues, as they say.
He who could win the love of such brave hearts,
Could not himself have been all evil—nay,
The cause for which such men vrith stedfast souls
And faith unwavering could dare to die.
Must have been righteous—men do not such deeds,
Whose cause is doubtful, or whose faith a lie."
He ceased abruptly—cast a hasty glance
Around him, then he turned his head away,
As if he dared not trust himself to look
On each remembered face, but hastily
Passed through the little circle, who, with heads
Uncovered now, in silence round him stand :
Last of his exiled race, he went alone—
And broken-hearted—to a foreign land. Z.
'6i THE ATTEMPT
§n ^tanimtxon.
As most misfortunes have a bright side somewhere if we will but look for it, so
most gifts and talents have a dark side which will show itself whether we seek it or
not. Thus the gift of a good ear, and an inestimable gift it is, gives many and many
a time pain to its possessor. Not only do the harsh grating sounds, from which most
ears recoil, wound it, but slight mispronunciations and words wrongly accentuated give
it a degree of pain as intense as that felt by the musician when a discord breaks upon
his ear.
It has been said that " there is a certain tune in every language to which the ear
of a native is set, and which often decides on the preferable pronunciation, though
entirely ignorant of the reasons for it," and this is certainly true to a great extent,
both as regards pronunciation and accentuation; yet there are innumerable words
which we as often hear wrongly accentuated as rightly.
It is well known, even to foreigners, that the English language cannot be well
learned by rule, nor the accentuation of a word be always determined by its derivation—
many of our syllables being long, where, in their original tongue, they are short, and
short where they are long. This being the case, it is universally allowed that we are
right in following the accentuation made use of by the most correct and polite of speakers
and writers. There are some words the proper accentuation of which remains still an
open question, the advocates of at least two modes of accenting the same word being
able to bring forward learned authorities to support their favourite mode. With these
we have at present little to do, our wish being merely to point out a few of the most
ordinary and, at the same time, extraordinary accentuations which greet us constantly
on e^'ery side.
As we are writing for a magazine, let us begin with that very word, and ask how
it is that the first syllable is given such undue preponderance, to the almost complete
annihilation of the last 1 As we write, the uncouth sound of magazine rings in our
ears as it has so often done before, and we fear will yet do many a time. The very
months of the year, old friends as they are, have not escaped unscathed—the bright
and sunny month of July having fared worst, for, short as the word is, it yet boasts,
poor thing, of two syllables—sufficient reason apparently for mistake; so the first has
ingulfed the second, and people announce their intention of leaving town in July, for
Ji/Iy is such a hot month.
THE ATTEMPT 3o
Tlien again, during the inclement months of winter, when every house has some
slight illness, we hear many laments from our friends that their dear is such an
invalid, and even while pitying the patients, we cannot but wish that tlieir friends
would describe them as being invalids.
Another word which is improperly accented by almost all the lower classes, and
also frequently by well educated persons, is that of committee ; the ee at the termina¬
tion of the word proves too attractive—it draws off all attention from tlie preceding
syllables, and committee is the result.
There are some striking examples of the perversity of human nature to be found
in the accentuation of words, as in the term lunatic asylum, which, by a strange in¬
version of the accent, becomes lunatic asylum. In the same way advertise becomes
advertise; and, oddly enough, advertisement becomes advertisement. We have occa¬
sionally heard the word temperament strangely accentuated on what is called the
antipenultimate syllable, and made into temperament; but we are induced to think
that this phenomenon is chiefly to be found in Ireland.
Not long ago a clever and well-educated man spoke to us of being much harassed
by business, which accentuation of the word, being new to us, struck us in particular;
but we now find that it is a recognised false accentuation of our countrymen, and has
found a place in a list of such words made by Mr Elphinston, and which we here
quote second-hand : it runs as follows —silence, bids, canvas, sentence, triumph, conifurt,
solace, constriie, ^serve, respite, govern, harass, 7'ansdck, cancel—we see that those words
have the same mistaken accent throughout.
In further illustration of this, we may mention a story told of Erskine, the
great Scotch lawyer, who, when conducting a case in an English court of law, made
frequent use in the course of his speech, of the term curator, which he pronounced
accenting the first syllable. The judge who presided, apologizing for the liberty which
he took, interrupted Mr Erskine, saying, that, following the analogy of the Latin
language, in England the word was pronounced curator, " My lord," said the ready
lawyer, "we in Scotland, following the analogy of the Latin language, call it curator;
but in deference to tlie judgment of so great an orator and so learned a senator as your
lordship, I shall be happy to call it curator."
There is also an amusing story told of John Clerk which brings out two of the odd
Scottish accentuations, or rather pronunciations of words. When the said John Clerk
went up to London on some business of the Water Company (for it is not only of late
years that that Company has been making a stir in the Edinburgh world), he was
making a long speech about the waiter and the loatter when the presiding judge (Lord
36 . THE ATTEMPT
Eldon) showed his English politeness by interrupting him, to ask whether in Scotland
they spelt water with two ts : " Na, my lord," said the shrewd Scotchman, " we dinna
spell watter wi' twa ts, but we spell maners wi' twa ns."
There is one word about the accentuation of which there has been some contro¬
versy—we mean the word inimical. It is not to be found in Johnson's dictionary;
but as Walker says this word must have been " omitted merely by mistake," the latter
writer gives a place in his dictionary to both modes of accentuation, viz. : inimical
and inimical. We and other upholders of the former accentuation support our view
by saying that, as it comes direct from the Latin arnicas, we prefer to retain the i long;
while, on the other hand, our opposers refuse to accept the Latin quantity in this
word and to reject it in others.
This is not a paper on the accentuation of proper names, but there are two which
arc so constantly given a false quantity, that we may be allowed here to mention them,
more particularly as the false accentuation of these words to many an accustomed ear
has the preferable sound. We mean first the ancient name of Aristohulus, which
being derived from the Greek word 1)onle, has always been accented by the best
scholars on the penultimate syllable, and not pronounced Aristobuhis, as we are too
apt to do. And secondly, the name Zebulon, in which the same sort of mistake is
often observable, many pronouncing it Z'''bulon.
As in speaking and reading English the Scotch are more inclined to accentuate
words wrongly, so in reading Latin they pay less attention to the proper quantities than do
English scholars ; many Latin students in England indeed would rather plead ignorance
of a word than give it a false quantity. If this were a little more the case with us in
Scotland—if in our own language we were to avoid all words the accentuation of which
we were not sure, we should soon be driven to study the subject, or to keep silence for
ever; and the latter expedient not being pleasant, we would adopt the former, and
learn to speak with " good emphasis," " good discretion," and scholarly accentuation.
DES Eaux.
THE ATTEMi'T 37
A  TALE  OF   CHRISTMAS   NIGHT.
" Soon afterwards the letter found in the bottle was published in the Times, and
copied into every local paper. . It was very short, written hundreds of miles from land,
the vessel threatening to go to pieces every moment; but the captain said he would not
commit his letter to the waves till he himself sank beneath them, so that his mother
might know, if his frail messenger ever reached her, that the last act of his life was for
her; and finally, he commended her to God, bidding her trust in Him for comfort;
also asking her for the sake of the relations of those perishing with him, to make
known his testimony to the state of mind of the suflerers. ' Say,' he said, ' that our
ship seems a little heaven, all, both crew and passengers, in the midst of the fury
of the elements, are so filled with the peace of God, that should the fiery chariots of
Elijah appear, I think I would not wonder much.'
" That letter was the only thing ever seen of the ' Mary Anne.' She had sunk in
mid ocean, and all on board were drowned. Long, long I rebelled against the chas¬
tening hand of the Almighty, but at length I was enabled to say, ' Thy will be done.'
I continued to live in the house I had taken on the Abbey Hill, till Mr and Mrs
Melville proposed coming here, when, seeing my grief at the thought of losing their
society, they most kindly asked me to make my home with them, which ofier I was
only too glad to accept.    Here I have lived ever since."
" Thank you very much Mrs Campbell," said Mr Munroe, " and now I think it
is due to you that I should give a short account of our lives, which have not been
uneventful either. Misfortune led me to abandon my native land, and for upwards of
two years I travelled over the wide world, trading with the different nations through
which I passed. At the end of that time I found myself at the Cape of Good Hope
a thriving merchant, God having prospered all my undertakings. There were at that
time so many storms at sea that many vessels lay in near the coast for shelter. Several
passengers came on shore from one ship, when the town was so remarkably full that
there was no accommodation to be procured for them, so, as I had a large house and lived
alone, I begged them to accept the use of it. Judge of my surprise when, on receiving
my guests, I recognized in one, now a very beautiful tall girl, the playmate of my child-
38
THE ATTEMPT
hood and my first love. Often had the thought of her cheered a sorrowful hour, and
dreams of meeting her again filled my mind and heart, but to have her there in my
very house and to lose her again, for the ship was to sail soon, was too horrible. Still
I did not feel at liberty to speak to her of love, as the circumstances connected with
my leaving England, and her parents' absence seemed to forbid it. It is true, she was
travelling with a relative, but I could not think her permission, if she would give it,
sufficient, and the young lady was little more than a child in years, though, in all else,
a woman. I trusted myself very little near her, as I felt that my manner betrayed the
passion that was consuming me, and I read in her truthful eyes too dear an answer to
my heart's longings, though I do not think she was herself aware that she loved me.
My self-command was sometimes severely tried, but I kept up a wonderful show of
composure, till one day a conversation I overheard put it utterly to flight, and over¬
came all my scruples. It was occasioned by the extreme reluctance of my beloved one
to go again to sea so soon. She was far from strong, and her nervous system seemed
utterly unstrung. She was sobbing violently, and begging the captain to wait a few
days longer on shore, that she might become stronger and more able to conquer her
terror.
" ' I heartily wish I could do what you ask, my dear young lady/ said the kind
captain, ' but it is impossible ; we must sail, if the weather continues calm, in three
days.    I am very sorry about it, but I see no help for it.'
" ' I think I can see a way out of the difficulty,' I said, entering at that moment;
' if this young lady and her aunt will speak with me in private,' saying which I led
the way into another room. I then explained to the aunt who I was, and pled my
long love, but I was so much agitated that I know not what I said. To my great joy
she at once gave her consent to my suit, and told me our union had been ardently
desired by both our parents, and then left us alone. The weather continued calm, so
they all sailed three days after, leaving behind one passenger—her who had that morn¬
ing become my wife. We sent letters and messages home to Britain, begging her
mother to come out to us, which she never did; we have since heard that she never
received those letters. We soon left Cape Town and went into the interior, where I
traded with the natives, and explored unknown lands ; and for eight years I nevc^r
visited the dwellings of white men, but lived with my wife and a small company of
friends who W(;re in partnership with mo, among the Africans, being enriched by them
in worldly goods, and having the inestimable privilege of conveying to many, for tlie
first time, the knowledge of the glorious Gospel of Christ. We traded with the towns
by jnoans of messengers, so that we remained somewhat ignorant of what was going on
<
THE ATTEMPT 39
in the world; but what surprised and distressed us most was that no letter ever came
from England, and we had no idea of where to address one : those we wrote were
returned from the dead letter office. During all those long years what would I have
done without the patient love of the best of wives 1 Madam," addressing Mrs
Campbell, " my wife's brow was never darkened by a frown, and often have I seen her
smile when in pain, if she thought I was dull and needed cheering. God has blessed
me with wealth, but He gave me the best of all treasures when Lucy Campbell
became my wife. Sir," he said, struggling with emotion, " your son did not die on
the Eocky Mountains, nor, Mrs Campbell, was your daughter drowned—1 and my
wife are Arthur Melville and Lucy Campbell."
Mrs Munroe, or rather Mrs Arthur Melville, had always sat in the shade to avoid
showing her face, but as she now sprang forward, Mrs Campbell recognized her long
lost child, and mother and daughter were clasped in each other's arms. Mr and Mrs
]\Ielville, however, could not believe that the man before them was their long mourned
son. His long beard and moustache had so completly changed the pale lad who had
left them many years ago, and his tall thin figure had altered into that of the strong
athlete; but he threw himself on his knees at his mother's side, saying, " Mother, you
will know me by that," at the same time pulling up his sleeve and showing a mark
he had received when a child.
" My son, my boy," she exclaimed, sinking into his arms as he rose to embrace
her.    Laying her gently on the sofa, he turned to receive his father's welcome.
The old man extended his hands, saying, " Can you ever forgive me, Arthur 1"
but his son stopped him with an earnest gesture, and threw his arms round him ; he
could not speak, the emotion he had been restraining all evening now burst its bonds,
and he sobbed aloud.
For some time the excitement of all was excessive, till suddenly there pealed forth
through the room the rich deep tones of an organ, and the solemn strains of that
glorious hymn of the redeemed, " Te Deum Laudamus." The grand words of praise
rolled out and filled every heart with a feeling of devotion, and soon young and old,
though with trembling voices, joined in singing the praises of Jehovah.
Norton Eeeves.
40 THE ATTEMl'T
%^t Emigrant grimro.'jf.
A NOBLE ship at anchor rode,
Within a land-lock'd bay,
Wliose waters hold Australia's isle
In bondage to their sway.
Bravely her keel had ploughed the deep,
Till by the destined shore
She stayed, and from her deck sent forth
The living freight she bore :
A varied band—some old and worn, ^
Some young, strong-limbed and gay, "j
On whom was now about to dawn
Young life's adventurous day.
Some with the placid sinless brow
Of hallow'd infancy.
And some whose bold and hardened gaze
Spoke guilt and infamy.
And on the shining wave-swept shore,
Stood by the vessel's side
A crowd, who long before had cross'd
The ocean's swelling tide;
Who now, with hearts where hope and fear
Were strangely mixed, had come
To welcome parent, child, or friend
To this new island home. ^
Sudden one stranger from the throng
Attracted every gaze.
41
THE ATTEMPT
And ev'ry heart pour'd blessings forth
Upon the weU-lov'd face.
And moist grew many a beamless eye,
Which tears had long forsook ;
And many a frame of giant mould
With strange emotion shook.
What dims that time-scarred cheek with tears t
Why heaves that giant frame ?
What is't hath power those hearts to melt.
Those rugged minds to tame 1
A primrose, rearing from green leaves
Its head of creamy gold;
Its roots still clinging to the soil ■
Which they had loved of old.
A primrose, cull'd by maiden's hand,
And borne across the sea.
To make this home seem somewhat like
That of her infancy.
And with the flower were wafted o'er
Across the sea of time,
Sweet memories of bygone days.
And of a distant clime.
And in fuU many an ear there rang
Sweet voices from the past.
Soft words, with power to thriU the heart,
More strong than trumpet blast.
Meigeag Bheag.*
* [The orthography of this nom de plum^ is changed to accord with the rules of Gaelic
grammar.—Ed.]
P
42 THE ATTEMPT
Perhaps there is no branch of the fine arts which is so generally popular and so
universally appreciated among all classes as that relating to pictorial representations.
Go where you will through the length and breadth of the land, in its most remote
corners as well as in its most refined and luxurious cities, you cannot fail to perceive
numberless signs of this love of pictures. In the stately mansions of the " upper ten
thousand" this taste manifests itself in delicate engravings, oil-paintings by the best
masters, and valuable water-colours and photographs. Descend to the labourer's
cottage, and you find the white-washed wall adorned with a coloured German print of
the same picture that, in all its pristine beauty, hangs in the nobleman's picture gallery,
with a large woodcut from the " Illustrated London News " on one side of it, and a
sheet almanac on the other; while on the chimney piece are some glass photographs of
father and mother, and brother Tom in his red coat and forage-cap, taken before he
went to the East, whence he never came back, poor feUow ! And his mother, with
tears in her eyes, shows you the glaring German print in its yellow frame, and tells
you how that was the last thing he ever brought home to her, and how she means to
keep it to her dying day —" Ah, ma'am ! he was so fond of pictures, that he was."
But to turn to more general facts. I think there is hardly any body who doesn't
like pictures at all, in some sort of stylo. Of course tastes differ greatly : one will tell
you he prefers landscapes to anything else ; while another cares for nothing so much
as historical pieces. A man's business, or mode of life too, have no little influence in
determining the bias of his artistic tastes. We can easily suppose that a horse-dealer
would gaze with much greater interest on Landseer's " Shoeing," or, " A Dialogue at
Waterloo," than he would on Lawrence's fine portraits of Benjamin West or Mrs
Siddons. He would be a poor architect who would be content to pass with a casual
glance the lofty Gothic cathedrals of David Roberts, and yet linger over a group of
roses in a crystal vase. We should not be surprised if we saw a bluff man-o'-war's man
pause before a sea piece of Turner's or Stanfield's, and hardly look at a cornfield of
Constable's ; and Lance would draw the attention of a Covent Garden fruit merchant
much sooner than the best of Mulready's glowing and life-like home scenes.
In common every-day life we are so used to seeing pictures about us, that the
absence of them at once strikes us as something remarkable. Have you never noticed,
on going into a large room handsomely furnished, but without pictures, that there is a
THE   ATTEMPT 43
certain air of desolation and discomfort in the place—a feeling of want somewhere ?
You look round, and at first can hardly tell how it is, till your eye glances at the bare
waUs, and you exclaim—" Ah ! I thought there was something missing ; there are no
pictures." Such a place, whatever it may be in other respects, at once seems to wear
a forbidden air, as if it cast off entirely any relationship with the social refinements of
life, eschewing everything but stiff, and stately, and uncomfortable grandeur meant
only to be looked at, but never to be used. But hang a few good engravings on the
naked walls, and wonderful is the difference that will be immediately effected : the
room will look ten times more homely, sociable, and complete than it could possibly
have done before.
We are all acquainted with that beautiful line—
" A thing of beauty is a joy for ever ! "
which, although greatly at variance with what we experience in every-day life, is cap¬
able of application to many things, and to none more than to pictures. The gorgeous
summer rose fades and dies in the full blush of its brilliant splendour, and we call it a
thing of the past. But its reproduction by the limner's art is not of so perishable a
nature, but remains to delight us and refresh our sight long after the fragrant petals
of the queen of flowers are mouldering under winter snows. And in the same manner
our eyes can wander over the green slopes and breezy woodlands of our native village,
and linger lovingly on each well-known spot, although at the same time all the hurry,
and dust, and din of a great city may be surging outside our windows. And need
anything be said of that feeling which many (let us fain hope not all) of us may have
experienced as keenly as ever Cowper did when he blessed the " art that can im¬
mortalize "—that art which drew from his overflowing heart that exquisite apostrophe
to his mother's picture. Do we not know what it is to look through blinding tears
upon the pictured face of some departed and dearly loved one, and bless with sorrow
and grief of heart that art which has preserved to us the lineaments we so fondly
remember-—now mouldering in the silent tomb ? Surely, surely, this needs no com¬
ment, but will commend itself to the heart of any one who may read these lines, the
sunlight of whose life is dimmed by the shadow of a grave.
Mas Alta.
44 THE ATTEMPT
In the continent of America nature evinces itself in the highest scale of grandeur
and sublimity. Its lofty mountains, some rugged and bare, others clothed with forests
of everlasting verdure, raise their snow-capped summits to the clouds; its romantic
valleys, its large rivers and foaming cataracts—all exhibit a savage grandeur almost
equalling the magnificence of the Alps.
The merit of having first discovered this vast continent is claimed by various
nations. It is true that Sebastian Cabot, an Englishman, landed at Labrador, but
fixed no permanent colony, and although Americus Vespuccius gave his name to the
country, yet the honour is due to Christopher Columbus, a Genoese. Brought up from
his very infancy to a sea-faring life, he had a passionate love for navigation and
enterprise, which, instead of being thwarted by his parents, was rather encouraged,
they doing aU in their power to give him an education fitted for the line of life he
had chosen. At the early age of fourteen he began his career on that element which
was destined to bring him to so much glory. Portugal being then the most enter¬
prising nation, Columbus settled in it as more congenial to his tastes, and there
married the daughter of Bartholomew Perestrello, an experienced navigator, and one
of Prince Henry's captains. From his father-in-law's stores Columbus got some
charts and journals which were of great use to him.
Columbus, naturally of a thoughtful turn of mind, had been watching and
pondering over the principles upon which the Portuguese prosecuted their discoveries,
and came to the conclusion that he might improve their plan. The great aim at tliat
time Avas to find out a passage by sea to the East Indies, as the spices of India were
much prized. The Portuguese thought that by steering their course due south, and
then turning cast, they might come upon India; but the distance was so great, and
their vessels were so imperfectly fitted out, that the design seemed impracticable.
Columbus, believing the world to be a sphere, naturally concluded that by sailing west
they would come upon the regions of the east.
Several circumstances happening at this time led him to believe that there were
countries farther west than they had yet explored : pieces of artificially carved wood
had been brought by a west wind and cast on the shores of the Madeira Isles ; and also
two human bodies, wliose features wore unlike those of the hitherto known world. All
these things made a deep impression on the mind of Columbus.   After having matured
THE ATTEMPT 45
his plan, he resolved to apply to the Genoese Republic for aid, generously determining
to let his native country have the honour of the expedition. Accordingly he laid his
scheme before them, soliciting aid in ships and men; but Columbus had lived so long
away from his country, that they were not acquainted with his character and abilities,
and having made no long voyages, did not understand his proposals ; so they rejected
his offer, and thought that he was labouring under a delusion. Nothing daunted by
this failure, he applied to John II. of Portugal, where he met with no better success,
as John's advisers, jealous of the superior talents of Columbus, started many objections
to his plan, and put off giving a final decision concerning it. In the meantime, they
secretly sent out a small fleet to try the plan of Columbus, who, hearing of it, was so
much disgusted with their deceit that he broke off his agreement with them. He
next applied to Spain, but met with the same success. His brother Bartholomew
went to England to lay the matter before Henry VII., but he was captured by pirates
and detained many years a prisoner.
After so much disappointment Columbus conceived the idea of going personally
to England ; but when just setting out, he was recalled by Isabella of Sj^ain, through
the influence of his friends, Santangel and Quintanilla, and Isabella, after some delay,
fitted out a small fleet, consisting of three vessels, and even generously offered to pledge
her jewels to raise the needed sum, but this was settled by Santangel who forwarded
the money.
All being now ready, he sailed from Palos amidst the shouts and well wishes of
a crowd of spectators, by whom he was respected and beloved. After quitting the
shores of Portugal he steered due west, touching at the Canary Isles, where there
was a short delay, owing to the wretched construction of his ships. Continuing his
voyage, he bravely launched out into unknown seas. Now the courage of the seamen
began to give way; they were alarmed at the boldness of the undertaking, fearing
they might never see land again. Columbus comforted them with glowing descrip¬
tions of the riches and glory that lay before them, and by his undaunted conduct
stirred them up to new eagerness. He carefully watched the flight of birds and the
appearance of every thing that was borne towards them by the restless billows, in the
hope of finding out tracks of land. After being three weeks at sea, the sailors again
began to be so filled with fear and despondency that they conspired to rid themselves
of Columbus and endeavour to find their way back to their own country. Columbus,
though quite aware of their design, preserved the same calm dignity of manner,
upbraided them with their want of courage, and, in a tone they dared not disobey,
sent them to their various posts.    On they went at the same steady pace, the appear-
46
TUE ATTEMPT
ances of approaching land becoming more and more certain. Two more days passed,
land seemed nearer—-two or three thmgs had been picked up which seemed the work
of man.
On the next night, when the vessels were quietly sailing in a tranquil sea the
joyful cry of "Land! Land!!" was heard. All were on the alert lest the report
might be false. But, no ! as the morning light slowly dawned upon them there was
stretched before their astonished eyes land, not the dreary waste of a desert island, but
the fruitful fields of an inhabited country. Suddenly a song of praise rose on the
stillness of the morning air from their bursting hearts. Tlie other vessels caught the
sound, and joined in heartfelt thanks to their God who had watched over and pro¬
tected them in the midst of so many dangers.
Hastily making some preparations for going on shore, they manned the boats, and
slowly rowed towards the land, which was covered with men gazing in silent astonish¬
ment on the invaders. They did not resemble any of the inhabitants of the world
then known to Columbus. Their complexion was copper, and their hair long, black and
lank, floated in uncombed tresses on their shoulders. There was nothing fierce or
warlike about them ; on the contrary, they were gentle and timid. When they first
saw the huge vessels riding fearlessly over the crested waves they were awed and
frightened; which feelings increased when they saw by whom they were manned, and
regarded them as beings not human, but divine. But when Columbus went amongst
them and kindly distributed some showy presents, their fear was turned into joy, and
they did what they could to give Columbus something in return. This was the Island
of San Salvador.
It would be useless to enter into the details of all the adventures during his
perilous voyages, of his discoveries, his dangers, and his reception when he returned to
Sj)ain laden with riches. It was not till his third voyage that he discovered the
continent of America. The discoverers were much struck with the appearance of the
Americans : they seemed listless and inactive, except in those parts of the country
where they subsisted by hunting. That circumstance may be accounted for in this
way, they were not used to the continual labour that civilized nations are accustomed
to ; in confirmation of which supposition, it has been noticed, that when they began
to work constantly they became more manly and robust.
The greatest conquest acliieved by the Spaniards was that of Mexico. Compared
with the wandering savage tribes around them, the inhabitants had attained to a high
degree of civilization. Instead of living in wretched huts, subject to no laws, and
knowing no occupations save those of hunting and war, we see them in well-built
THE ATTEMPT
47
cities, under the control of one sovereign, laws in some measure enforced, and even the
supremacy of religion known and obeyed. Thus the Spaniards were much surprised
to find a comparatively civilized country in the midst of one in the lowest state of
barbarism.
The Mexicans received the invaders with every respect due to superior beings,
believing them to be gods come down in the likeness of men.    But their eyes were
soon opened by the conduct of the Spaniards, and seeing that they were nothing more
than human, they became exasperated at the servile manner in which they had been
treated, and in their hatred and anger put some of them to death.    This fired the
indignation of their conquerors, who immediately retaliated by carrying Montezuma,
their king, prisoner.    The terrified Mexicans submitted to all the exorbitant demands
of the Spaniards without a murmur, and even surrendered the imperial treasures for
the ransom of their sovereign.   The conquerors forced Montezuma to acknowli^dgo him¬
self a vassal of the king of  Spain,  and tried also to make him renounce his false
religion;   but, though pliable to every other  demand, he withstood this.      Cortes
(who had succeeded Columbus in the command of the army) in the flush of his suc¬
cesses proceeded to break down the idols.   This, however, was more than the Mexicans
could bear, and rallying round their priests, they bravely defended their gods,  till
Cortes, seeing it imprudent to carry his plan further, desisted.   The Spaniards steadily
prosecuted their conquests ; not without opposition however, for Velasquez, governor
of Cuba (jealous of the growing power of Cortes) sent a fleet to besiege them at Mexico,
which was defeated by the intrepidity of Cortes and the courage of his soldiers.    On
the death of Montezuma, his brother Quetlavaca was raised to ilxb throne    His strong
mind and dauntless bravery revived the drooping spirits of the Mexicans, and hope
dawned upon them that they might one day be able to drive the conquerors from their
country.    Their hope was in a short time partly realized, for Quetlavaca succeeded in
driving Cortes from Mexico, and engaged himself in fortifying the city, in case of
another attack.
What he tried most to accomplish was to alienate the hearts of the Tlascalans
(whose confidence and help the SpaniarrLs had gained) from his enemies, and so
eloquent was his appeal to them that it required all the persuasive address of Cortes
to prevent a treasonable consequence ; but Quetlavaca was cut off in the flower of his
age and in the midst of his usefulness and triumph. He was succeeded by Guatemozin,
nephew and son-in-law of Montezuma, a young man very distinguished for his abilities
and courage. Guatemozin had made great preparations for defending his capital. The
extensive plain of Mexico was filled with armed men ready to respond to the call of
48 THE ATTEMPT
their leader. The lake was covered with canoes manned by the bravest and most
enterprising of his warriors, Cortes hastily built a few brigantines, but these being
imperfectly finished, and manned mostly by landsmen incapable of managing a vessel,
the prospect of victory seemed small indeed. Whilst the Mexicans could row their
small canoes and approach the enemy, the larger vessels, entirely at the mercy of the
wind, were becalmed. But fortunately a pretty smart breeze sprung up. Immediately
the Spaniards unfurled their sails and came down upon the frail barques of the
Mexicans, which were; totally broken by the attack, and many of the crews perished.
Long and bravely these poor people struggled against the innovations of the
Spaniards, but the last blow to their power was struck in the execution of Guatemozin
and all the princes of his blood. In the same year D'Almagro and Francisco Pizarro
landed in Peru, which had attained to even a higher pitch of grandeur than Mexico.
There the same scenes of rapine and bloodshed were enacted, till the people, overawed
and subdued, peacefully yielded their all to the discoverers. Though the Spaniards
deserve every credit for their perseverance and courage in prosecuting their conquests,
yet we cannot sympathize with their cruelty and inhumanity. The manner in which
they treated the vanquished people cannot but rouse the indignation of every manly
heart; but all was overruled by an ever-merciful God, and wrought together for the
praise and glory of His name.
I^ELLIE.
-«—fe-^»-^-<i^«S-o-
^mhjtxs to ^txastm.
I. II.
Sleep—Death. Fenians—Ireland.
1. Sewa.Td. 1. Foci.
2. Zeth«. 2. Error.
3. Enna. 3. Name.
4. Egypt. 4. /nimicaZ.
5. PandulpA. 5. Ana.
6. iVapoleow.
7. Sand. F. B.
THE ATTEMPT 49
It seems at first sight as though commentators, annotators, and " improvers " of
Shakespeare have said all that can be said, and perhaps rather more than they were
capable of saying well, about our Shakespeare ; yet we, though somewhat doubtful as
to our fitness for the task, have determined to bring once more before our readers some
of his most perfect characters. We shall not even attempt to speak of all his wonderful
varied, and truthful delineations of character, but shall confine our remarks chiefly to
those of his women.
It has often been said that Shakespeare's characters are real people, men and
women among whom we live, with whom we sympathize and of whom we are proud :
we do not think of them as characters which are brought before us for a few hours'
amusement or interest, and which vanish from our thoughts when we close the book ;
but they are ever with us from childhood to old age. That this is the case with all
ordinarily intelligent minds may be seen from our never asking each other if we have
" read Shakespeare 1" With what astonishment we would look on the man who told
us that he had never, or that perhaps he had once read Shakespeare's works. What
a feeling of contempt would rise in our minds for such a creature, which feeling how¬
ever would soon soften into pity as we thought of the dreadful ignorance of the man
thus wilfully depriving himself of the greatest and best literature that this world has
ever produced. But there is a wide difference between reading and knowing Shake¬
speare : we all read his works; but to know them is a higher thing—to have made his
characters our study is what some of us may not have done. Yet, Shakespeare is not
to be learnt as we learn an art or a language ; he must grow upon us with our growth,
ever becoming clearer and clearer to our understanding, and more dear to our hearts
as our thoughts and affections become more developed by age or some other cause.
Thus it is that our thoughts and opinions of his characters change much. As we
advance in life we see new beauties in our old favourites, or we appreciate more fully
those which before we considered as secondary to others. This change in our opinions
is more marked as regards Shakespeare's characters than those of any other author,
not only because they in themselves are superior to anything which ever entered into
the dreams of other men, but because they are those with which we have been
acquainted from our childhood. Many people, looking back to their nursery days may
remember having heard of " The Forty Thieves " and the " Witches of Macbeth " at
March 1866 q
50 THE ATTEMPT
about the same period, and having listened with equal attention to the story of
" Beauty and the Beast," and to that of " Eomeo and Juliet."
But as time goes on the fairy tales scarcely hold their first ground; the Forty
Thieves are the Forty Thieves stiU and nothing more, looked back upon merely with
the affectionate regard of old friends ; but the Shakespearian stories, instead of losing
that reality which children attach to all they hear, gain a still firmer place in our
thoughts—they cease to be merely stories, and become histories of human beings who,
if they have not actually lived in the circumstances in which the poet has placed them,
have certainly lived at some time, and would as certainly have acted in the circum¬
stances as the poet has made them to do.
In every state the characters are natural, however extraordinary their surroundings
may be, for as the great German appreciator of Shakespeare has remarked—" This
Prometheus not merely forms man, he opens the gates of the magical world of spirits,
calls up the midnight ghost, exhibits before us the witches with their unhallowed rites,
peoples the air with sportive faeries and sylphs; and these beings, though existing
only in the imagination, nevertheless possess such truth and consistency, that even
with such mis-shapen abortions as Caliban, he extorts the assenting conviction that
were there siich beings they would so conduct themseles." This could only be done
by a man capable of throwing himself out of himself, and into the characters, situa¬
tions, thoughts, and feelings of others. Had thoughts of self obtruded themselves on
the writer, tingiug the characters of others with his own prejudices and opinions, we
should never have had the human race portrayed in its diverse forms of nature.
Without this self-forgetfulness, few of his characters of men could have been written,
and very few, if any, of those of his women.
All readers of Shakespeare must be struck with astonishment that he, living in
an age when women were (with a few bright exceptions) far removed from nobility of
character and true refinement of mind, should have portrayed them in all the good¬
ness and purity of highest womanhood. Shakespeare did not fear that in making his
women good, he would make them stupid. In liis mind there was no confusion
between virtue and ignorance, between talent and vice ; so, while gracing his female
characters with many of the best qualities of the heart, he did not forget that they had
also heads. His characters of women are not unnaturally perfect; yet there is seldom
a very serious fault undermining those which are otherwise admirable, nor are there
petty faults marring a noble mind : in short, their faults are always in keeping with
the rest of their character. "We see his women before us with all their virtues and
imperfections, and yet we never wish that they had been other than they are.    In
THE ATTEMPT 51
their persons we have an almost endless study of character in all its varieties, each one
differing from another as they do in the world. We have the intellectual woman, the
impassioned, the ambitious, the gay, and the loving—each with her own individuality ;
and yet all interesting us so completely, that we can scarcely name the one which in
preference to all others we admire.
A few of those characters we hope to consider in future numbers of this Magazine ;
but our introduction, as is the wont of such things, has left us neither space nor time
at present for the serious consideration of the character of any one of Shakespeare's
women.
DES Eaux.
Among the many schools of philosophy which held their place in ancient Greece
were two whose tenets were directly opposed to each other. These were the Epicurean
and Stoic schools, founded respectively by Epicurus of Samos and Zeno of Cyprus.
The former school held happiness to be the highest good, and urged that virtue should
be pursued with the view of attaining this " summum bonum;" for not in the
pleasures of sense, but in the peace of mind, which is the inseparable attendant of
fulfilled duty and virtue, did Epicurus place his idea of happiness. Zeiio, on the other
hand, although he also urged the cultivation of virtue, set aside the attainment of
happiness as an incentive to this pursuit, maintaining that virtue should be cultivated
for its own sake vrithout any regard to recompense.
Of the two doctrines, no doubt, the latter appears the nobler, and that which
stands on the loftier principle; yet we have no hesitation in saying that Epicurus has
had more followers in aU ages and among all classes of men than Zeno. Nor is it in
its pristine purity of dogma that this school has attracted the greatest number of
adherents, but rather in the corrupted state into which it fell after the death of its
founder. There are very many who hold happiness to be the supreme good, but of
those, comparatively few, alas ! cultivate virtue as the sure means of attaining this end.
The universal, or almost universal search after happiness is indeed one of the
strongest ties which bind humanity. Few men are alike in every particular, but most
men are alike in this —they ai-e all seeking after the gem of happiness.    Nor is this
52 THE ATTEMPT
search by any means to be condemned, if the spirit and manner in which it is pursued
be right. The poet-king of Israel, speaking of the man who sets the fear of God
before his eyes, exclaims, " Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord, that walketh
in His ways. For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands ; happy shalt thou be, and
it shall be well with thee." And the commands laid upon the children of Israel to
obey the Lord and do His will, were generally enforced by a promise of blessings
which shoidd follow the performance of these duties. But in the fact of their universal
desire for happiness ceases the resemblance between man and man in this respect;
for in nothing do men differ more from their fellow-creatures than in their ideas of
this boon.
Some seek it in noble and elevating pursuits, others in vain and trifling pleasures,
and there are those, alas ! wlio so abuse this great gift of God as to seek for it only in
vice. "What pleasure can compare, in the mind of tlie man of science, with that of
piercing with his magical telescope far beyond the ken of the naked eye, and beholding
brilliant suns and revolving planets where the unaided vision sees but a dark un¬
broken canopy, or at most, a sombre arch studded with minute points of light; reading
on rugged rock or riverbed the record of a world that existed long ere God had crowned
His great work of creation with His grandest creature—Man ; or discovering facts, the
knowledge of which shall make the world wiser and happier for all future ages ] What
can fiU the heart of the true poet, or lofty-souled musician or painter with such ardent
joy as the power of giving utterance to the beautiful dreams that float through his
mind in words or melodies or pictured images that ravish the senses and enchain the
hearts of admiring thousands 1
But not to the learned, wise, and talented of the world alone are there granted
pure and elevating joys. Many a one, unendowed with the gifts of profound thought
and a scientific mind, has perused witli intense enjoyment the volumes in which men
to whom God has granted gifts denied to him, have placed within the reach of the
popular mind the fruit of their years of thought and labour : many a one has listened
with enraptured soul to words and melodies which he is utterly unable to call forth,
and others have gazed with charmed eyes on the works of art which they have no
power to produce.
It is strange how widely different, how directly opposed, often, are the ideas
connected with this word happiness in different minds. There are some to Avhom town-
life with its continual excitement and gaiety is the summuni bonum, whilst to others
this bustling gay life is positive pain.
But surely there are few, however attractive to them may be the busy stir of city
THE ATTEMPT 53
life, to whom the sights, and sounds, and odours of rural life bring no sensations of
pleasure. Who can ramble without a keen sense of enjoyment among the beauties of
the country ? Who can gaze on the many lovely landscapes in which the fair land of
our birth abounds—crystal lakes mirroring the calm heavens overhead, dotted here and
there with miniature islets, which seem but one mass of luxuriant foliage, and encircled
by rugged rocks tinted with the softest and richest hues—grassy slopes and golden
cornfields—rocky coasts and rippling bays; who can scent the rich fragrance of the
purple heath and white-blossomed lime-tree, and listen to the sweet joyous music of
" merle and mavis," of purling brook and summer breeze, of foaming cascade and
rippling wave, without feeling impelled to cry out in the words of a modern poet—
" The world is very lovely, 0 my God
I thank Thee that I live ! "
Strange, that to some base sordid souls these beautiful tokens of our Maker's love
should breathe no murmur of delight! Strange, that to some the chink of gold should
be more fascinating music than the sweetest voices of nature ; that to others the spark¬
ling wine-cup should have more beauty than the sheen of the fairest stream that ever
lied on its course, breaking merrily over its bed of shining pebbles !
But however lofty and noble may be the objects by attaining which the wise and
great hope to woo the genius of joy to their breasts, there is one man whose aspirations
soar above them all, who rears his temple of happiness on a higher and surer founda¬
tion than all others, and he, need we say, is the Christian.
The pleasures of the man of science are of no mean value, but there shall come a
day when the " heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned
up; " when sun, moon, and stars shall roll no more in their courses, and there shall
be " no more sea." Poet and painter have good cause to rejoice in their gifts, but if
all their happiness is contained in these, they must consent to lay it down with their
lives; but the joy of the Christian is no such evanescent thing—higher and higher it
shall rise as the years of his life ebb away, until at length it shall be perfected in
heaven. But the happiness which has its source in a mind at peace with God, although
above all other pleasures, does not necessarily stand aloof from all. No ! it enters into
all the employments and innocent amusements of life, elevating and enhancing them ;
so much purer and lovelier is the stream flowing from an unpolluted fountain than that
which emanates from a spring tainted and sullied by contact with foul weeds.
The poet Cowper has shown, in language at once beautiful and true, how much
more enjoyable are the beauties of nature to the man whoso heart is filled with the
54
THE ATTEMPT
love of God than to those who have no such wellspring of gladness within them.
Speaking of the " freeman whom the truth makes free," he says—
" He looks abroad into tlie varied field
Of nature, and, though poor, perhaps, compared
With those whose mansions glitter in his sight,
Calls the delightful scenery all his own.
His are the mountains, and the valleys his,
And the resplendent rivers ; his t' enjoy
With a propriety that none can feel,
But who, with filial confidence inspired.
Can lift to heaven an unpresumptous eye,
And smiling say—' My father made them all!'
Are they not his by a peculiar right.
And by an emphasis of interest his.
Whose eyes they fill with tears of holy joy.
Whose heart with praise, and whose exalted mind
With worthy thoughts of that unwearied love
That planned, and built, and still upholds a world
So clothed with beauty for rebellious man ?"
But the power of intensifying the ordinary pleasures of mankind is not the sole
or the highest attraction of the happiness which has its origin in heaven. No ! it is
one of the greatest proofs of its superiority over the joys of earth that afflictions under
which weak hearts are breaking and strong ones are bowed down with something akin
to despair, have no power to banish it from the bosom of its owner; nay, it is often
in what seem the darkest hours of a life-time that the heart of the true believer is
fullest of joy. And when life's short day draws to its close, and the shades of night
are at hand ; when the solemn hour has come when the trivial ami fleeting concerns
of life here are exchanged for the solemnities of the great hereafter, then it is that this
true happiness becomes most apparent, for who but the Christian can pass through the
dark valley shouting—" 0 death, where is thy sting] 0 grave, where is thy victory?"
Meigeaq Bheag.
THE ATTEMPT
Oft in happy days of childhood
I have heard the tale.
How, amid the forest straying.
With the crimson berries playing,
And the daisies pale,
Two fair children through the wildwood
Wandered up and down.
Chasing coloured butterflies
Underneath the smiling skies,
Weaving many a crown
Of the fairy scented flowers.
Culled amid the greenwood bowers.
Oft in pleasant days of childhood,
I have wept to hear
How, amid the forest drearj',
Those two children, lone and weary,
Hand in hand, with fear
Wandered trembling through the wUdwood,
Starting, if a leaf
Eustled 'neath the darkening skies,
And with sad and wistful eyes.
Watching for relief
Promised all in vain, till light
Faded slowly into night.
Oft, in those bright days of childhood.
By the wood-fire's blaze,
I have trembled to the story.
How, amid the forest hoary,
And the tangled maze
55
56   . THE ATTEMPT
My dear Ldcilla,
Of the drear and shadowy wUdwood,
Nestling side by side,
With the chill winds round them wailing,
And their little hearts fast failing.
Those two children died.
While the birds above them strewed
Autumn leaflets many-hued.
Bygone days of happy childhood,
Tales of fairy lore.
When in simple faith believing.
Little childish hearts mused, grieving
Those fair legends o'er,
By the hearth, or in the wildwood.
Listening with charmed ears
To each tender moving word.
Till the childish spirit stirred.
Melted into tears;
Still to me with tenderest thought.
Childhood's legends, ye are fraught!
—••£-»»«: i*»-
%ttkxs from SfoifeerknJr.
NO.  II.
■I
J. I. L.
Zuceme.
We have succeeded in getting ourselves made dry and com¬
fortable, after a complete drenching on the Eigi. We had a peep of sunrise there this
morning, lovely, but far too short; for an envious bank of cloud lay in wait to receive
the sun as soon as he had showed his golden rim.
We began to plod our way down the mountain, leisurely at first, till the increased
gloom warned us to make haste.   Most of us dismissed our horses after a while, finding
THE ATTEMPT 0 (
them rather a trial of patience. They must go very slowly indeed over paths that are
often more like ladders of uneven rock than anything else. Besides, the sensation of
plunging perpetually forward into unknown depths, and the constant efforts one must
make to counteract the inevitable force of gravitation, do not tend to produce ease either
of body or mind. I could feel pretty sure that my careful steed would not play me false,
but it seemed not so certain that I should not leave liim riderless at some extraordinary
jolt, and take the downward course alone, with more rapidity than safety. Trusting
to our own feet and our good alpenstocks, four out of our party of seven sprang down
the steep slopes by short cuts, avoiding the stony tracks, and hardly stopping till we
reached the landing-place. There we had to stand still to wait for the otliers, and to
recover breath, which we greatly needed.
The day had changed to a dismal twilight, and the whole tempest seemed piled
upon the opposite brow of Mount Pilatus, gathering blackness and strength every
moment. All around there reigned a breathless stillness and expectancy which we
hardly dared to break by a whisper. At last the lightning leapt from the darkness—
flash upon flash shot forth, printing the forms of the mountains on our eyes in lines
of fire, while the thunder roared and swelled from ridge to ridge : a moment hushed;
then caught up by echoes from the distant ranges, or drowned by some nearer and
more awful crash, till the very mountain above us seemed to shake. " The voice of
the Lord is upon the waters." " The God of glory thundereth." " The voice of the
Lord is powerful." " The voice of the Lord is full of majesty." I write those words
to you because they have kept sounding in my ears ever since. Thunder among the
mountains brings the power and majcisty of God very near to us.
The bank against which we stood, with its crown of tangled wood, formed but a
scanty protection from the sweeping torrent of rain; yet we were not so badly oS as
the Leas and Miss Gilmour, who appeared rushing down in a most piteous plight, just
as the first fury of the storm, to which tliey had been exposed, had expended itself.
There was nothing for it but to get into the steamboat in our dripping attire, and to
stand patiently on deck, being rained upon, till the wished-for shelter was gained.
Not a whisper of the storm is breathing now, but the silent, sad, enfolding mist
has wrapped up every sound and every sight witliin itself. The view from the windows
is a blank, so we must wait patiently till sunshine comes to restore it to us. It seems
that my conduct contradicts my words, for Bessy has caught me gazing outward, and
alleges that I have been doing nothing else for the last half-hour. She startled me out
of my reverie, by asking what I was looking at.
" At Mount Pilate," was my reply.
H
58 THE ATTIi.MI'T
" At nothing hut a Scotch mist that I can possibly discern," she rej\)ined.
Bessy will not believe me, when I say that sometimes I can distinguish the dim ridge
of the mountain, and that now and then the fog curls up and uncovers a dusky patch
of green, and a little glimpse of leaden water. This is not much to attract, but it
recalls so much. For is not that sullen water the Lake of Lucerne ? and are not those
dim slopes the roots of the everlasting mountains ? and are not their snowy crests
tliemselves beyond ? I can sit and picture them to myself as I saw them yesterday;
and through this dingy veil I can drink in all their wonder afresh. And then, too,
Zurich comes back upon me in its simpler beauty. I am glad it was at Zurich that I
first grew acquainted with the Alps. Its pleasant green hills, with their cultivated
slopes and friciidly human dwellings, arc not envious, nor apt to draw attention to
themselves. You feel their quiet harmony with the whole scene, but your thoughts
fly past them. Your eye does not wander—it rests—rests upon the broad breast of the
lake and the white silent watchers over its calmness. There is no bewilderment nor
excitement, but a grand unity of idea about that lake, which you must have felt to
understand.
But Lucerne, with its thousand, thousand glories—with its mountains, changing
everlastingly as you sail, unfolding again, towering, hanging one above another—with
its scarped peaks and precipices, its eternal snows, its green orchard hollows, its pine
woods, its meadow slopes—with its bays and promontories that open up a fresh
surprise at every winding—with all its softness and its sternness, its gloomy grandeur
and its winnmg grace. Lucerne—with the wonders of a hundred lakes in one, how
shall I describe even the shadow of it to you 1 Your last letter, with the joyous hope
you expressed of seeing Switzerland through my eyes, half amused, half saddened me.
Your wish is such an impossible one, that I wonder how it ever crossed your mind.
That I should be able to give you even a peep of the marvels that I see ! Why, Cilia,
do you not know that this is the true second sight—the dowry of poets alone 1 As for
me, I can only look, and feel intensely happy, and long vainly for you to be a sharer
in my delight.
How you would have enjoyed being with us the day we sailed up to Fluelen ! The
lake bends and changes so much, that you never can see the whole at once ; and though
here, at Lucerne, it is lovely enough, yet by far the wildest, as well as most interesting
part lies amidst the three cantons that gave birth to Swiss freedom. You would have
liked to see the chapel above the rocky lodge, where Tell leaped ashore, leaving the
tyrant's boat to drive in the storm. And then, a little withdrawn from the margin,
lies the heart of Switzerland—Schwitz, warmly nestled among its green woods and
THE ATTEMPT 59
pastures, yet just at the foot of those giant pinnacles of bare, jagged rock, called the
Mitres. Its little port, Brunnen, lies below, with figures of the three patriots, life size,
flourishing as the sign of its tavern. One can so well imagine the old hero, "Werner
Staufifacher, embarking there in the moonlight, and steering for the meeting-place
appointed on the wild shore opposite. For there lies the Eiitle full in view—that
sunny slip of meadow-laud, the only gentle spot among savage precipices and tangled
forests. But, apart from those associations, Schwitz is one of the loveliest spots on
earth. Two vistas open up before it—one, of stern old Pilatus, softened by distance,
the Rigi and the orchard-clothed banks of Lucerne ; the other, of the wild bay of Uri,
with the mountains stretching far away, rising in succession, endless as billows on a
stormy sea. A little onward, and those mountains had locked us in from all the world
beside. We were clasped in the very arms of the giants. We were winding under
the massy bulwarks and buttresses of those mighty strongholds built by God. It was
a scene of grandeur, such as I had never imagined before. And still before us, scenes
of wilder and gloomier majesty beckoned us to come on, if we dared, even to the misty
gorge of St Gothard itself.
We could not go there, as you know, but, after landing at Fluelen, we made our
way to Altorf, the scene of Tell's shot at the apple. Odd statues of himself and his
little boy decorate the market-place, and keep its story in remembrance. Not far off
there is a curious old tower, painted with scenes from the bold cross-bowman's life,
and garnished with appro])riate inscriptions. One of these struck us as being a quaint
adaptation of a bible text to national circumstances. It is taken from Gal. v. 13, and
runs thus—" Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty, ... by love serve one
another." Every village, every rock, has its memorial of Switzerland's heroic age.
Those days live still in the hearts of the people; yet our romantic notions of Swiss
mountaineers have been a good deal toned down. No William Tell has crossed our
path. The people too often look pinched with poverty, disfigured by disease, and
vacant in expression. The sudden change in the inhabitants that one sees in passing
from a Protestant to a Catholic state is most striking. At Zurich and Basle everything
betokened life, and enterprise, and intelligence; while on this lake, where one feels
the Switzer ought to be most thoroughly Swiss, there is langour, and ignorance, and
apathy. It is oidy where reformation, light, and liberty have penetrated, that the
people are truly free.
But I am forgetting to tell you of our ascent of the Rigi, which must by no means
be left out. We went up from Weggis, but did not keep together all the way. Mait-
land and Mr Lea went on first to make sure of beds for us on the top, while Laura
CO THE ATTEMPT
and I, choosing to walk, fell behind the rest. There was no fear of our getting lost,
for the zig-zag stony path was unniistakeable, and well frequented. There were
hundreds of travellers on the mountain that day, and we might have been disposed to
grumble at their numbers, had not solitude and quiet been easily found. We had
only to plunge into the thicket at our side, to be quite alone. There, throwing our¬
selves on the softest cushion of heather and blaeberries, and pushing aside the bending
branches over us, we could look down on the sleeping lake ; the clank of hoofs, aiid
ring of laughing voices only sounding dimly, as in a dream, to guide us back to the
track. Nothing could be more delicious than those stolen peeps. Each time that we
felt wo had fairly earned rest by steady climbing, we made a fresh retreat into the
shade to regale ourselves with the beauty beneath us, and also with the juicy pears
and apricots which peasant girls pressed upon us at every turn. And each time the
lake looked more blue and lovely. At first, the low sharp promontories, called " Noses,"
overlap each other, and close up the lake. Higher, you see them separate, a zig-zag
channel opens between them, and another reach of water is disclosed. The mountains
of Schwitz and Uri, under whose shadows we had lately sailed, rose before us in a
new aspect.
We could enjoy all this to the full, for Laura and I, not being mere csmpany
friends, as you know, did not think it necessary to torment each other by conversation,
when happiness consisted in silent looking. By and by we emerged from the orchard
to bleaker grounds, green only with pines and patches of pasture. My uncle was
waiting for us at the Kail-Bad, with the horses wliich Bessy and Miss Gilmour had
relinquished. On the jirinciple that change of labour is rest, the ride was most
acceptable.
We dismounted ere long, for the air was growing cliiUy. Our view too had
changed. It had lost its green richness and geniality, but was gaining in breadth and
grandeur every moment. The beautiful lake we had left was but one of countless
spangles, scattered at our feet, and the Uri peaks were overtopped by the great range
of the Bernese Alps. A peep through a telescope, when we had gained the summit,
showed us their glaciers and snow-fields, at first glistening dazzlingly white in the sun,
then flushed with rose as evening drew on. The sight made me long to leap over to
them at once. To our left, lay the bare seamed shoulder of the Eossberg, with its
track of desolation all down the valley for many miles; great blocks of rock and
ploiighed-up heaps of earth and ruins marking the place where cottages used to be.
It makes one shudder to think of that fearful scar on the smiling landscape. Behind
that mountain wo coiild see Morgarten.   In another direction lay Sempach—the heroic
THE ATTEMPT 61
Arnold's grave. Beyond the lovely lake of Zug lies another battle-field, that of Kappel,
where Zwingli fell. One cannot look at the present state of Switzerland, without
feeling deeply how much more enduring in its results, as well as more precious to a
people, is that liberty of conscience that was fought for there, than even the most
gloriously won and purest civil freedom. The sunset was no disappointment I can
assure you, and was worthy of a brighter morning than I told you of in the first part
of my letter.
Wliat is to be done 1 The bell has sounded for table (fhote, and I have left many
things untold. I must hasten down however to the magnificent dining-hall, delight¬
fully cool and bright as it is, with its fountain playing over white marble. Sometimes
it is very tiresome to spend so much precious time indoors j but to-day the prospect
would be cheering, if it did not interrupt this pleasant chat with you. It is perhaps
as well, however, that I have something to stop me, as I do not know how many
volumes of correspondence I might inflict upon you otherwise.
The sky is clearing, and we plan to visit the famous " Lion of Lucerne" this
afternoon, so I must bid you a hurried goodbye.
Your ever affectionate friend,
M. L.
[am,
A    NON-SCIENTIFIC    PAPER.
Last winter a popular speaker delivered a lecture on "Ill-used Men;" and
although he contended that a great deal of the ill treatment such people receive
is merely fanciful, or at least might be somewhat remedied by themselves, yet it is to
be feared that there are not a few persons and things that have not had justice done
to them ; and, rightly or wrongly, the idea has seized me, that the moon has often not
received fair play in the way she has been spoken of.
As the moon, unlike our earth, has no surrounding atmosphere, its inhabitants (if
there are any) cannot in their physical structure, at all resemble the occupants of our
globe, and hence in part I daresay, has arisen the idea of the " man in the moon " as
an extraordinary individual, a sort of convenient peg on which to hang all manner of
62
THE ATTEMPT
absurdities, and this ludicrous idea has become attached to the orb itself, so that the
monosyllabic word " moon " comes to have often a sound somewhat akin to the ridicu¬
lous.
Even the ludicrous associations of the moon, however, are less strong than those
sentimental ones which surround the orb of night as with a halo of sickly hue.
We hear one lover singing, "Meet rae by moonlight alone," and another, "The
young May moon is beaming, love," until when we hear of a moonlight walk we
picture to ourselves the sentimental loitering of some love-sick pair, who, not content
with walking in broad day-light, court the silence of the night, and lighted by the pale
effulgence of the moon, murmur soft whispers of eternal faithfulness; or, if less
happy, bid tender farewells with trembling lips and faltering voice.
Why, we protest, should such associations attend the moon 1 Surely its presence
is common enough to all parts of the earth 1 It shines with as much lustre into the
abodes of misery as into the dwellings of happiness ; it gleams with as much light on
the streets of a common place town, as on the most retired and poetically situated fields
and hill-sides. We do not require to be lovers to relish the pleasures of a walk by
moonlight, and our sense of enjoyment is not the less keen that we do not meet any
loved one " alone," nay, much more, for I question if the beauty of the scene could
ever gain more than a passing glance of admiration from those eyes and minds occupied
with far other subjects.
I am sure there is not one who has not admired the glories of a moonlight night,
watched the magical effect, the pale luminary exerts on height and hollow, field and
tree, the charming mystery it throws over all it shines upon, revealing all objects with
astonishing clearness, and yet witholding the colour which belongs to each; for the sun,
in lending his feebler sister a small part of his brilliance, reserves to himself the right
of bringing out the variety of hues which owed their existence first of all to him.
What purity is there in the pale sheen of the " queen of night," what a contrast
does it present in a city to the cheerful but somewhat vulgar glare of the street lamps
that flutter with the wind, while the moon in dignified majesty shines on unruffled by
the roughest gale, unless indeed its light is shaded, but not quenched, by the stormy
clouds that sweep across its surface.
And yet, in spite of all our admiration, I do not think it is possible for us to love
the moon. We may hail its appearance with delight, and regret that we cannot enjoy
its prt'scnce more frequently, but let us compare with our esteem for it, tlie feeling M-e
entertain for tlie sun, that glorious orb of light, and we must confess that we regard
the two with very dilferent sentiments.    How cold is tlie lustre of the moon ! how com-
THE ATTEMPT 63
fortless would its light be if even intensified to a great degree, were it to supply the
place of the sun ! its gleam on the water is beautful but cold and cheerless, and we
cannot help feeling that the pale moon in the severe dignity of its splendour looks down
with but little sympathy for us mortals, while the sun, great and majestic as he is,
loves us all and makes everything smile on which he smiles in the fulness of his large-
hearted benevolence.
Can we then not be thankful that it is the sun whose light we most enjoy, and
thankful also that he imparts some portion of his lustre to the moon, that she
may shine upon us with a beauty all her own when he is absent from that part of the
world in wliich we dwell 1
Agatha.
FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    O.   WILDERMUTH.
The German language is peculiarly rich in proverbs tending to inspire distrust of
early good fortune or happiness. Witness the following—Morning red, evening
cloudy : First success is worth nothing : He who laughs last, laughs longest: He who
first wears the silken raiment, will end with the woollen : Praise not the day until the
sun be set; and many more which might be added. The sentiments expressed in
these and other proverbs are so universally believed in, that all desire to overcome (as
soon as may be) some difficulty, or endure some disappointment, in order to insure, if I
may so say, carte blanche for future happiness.
And yet, how beautiful is a bright morning both in nature and in human life !
Happiness seems such a natural prerogative of youth that most reluctantly would one
wish to cloud its rosy dawn with anticipations of a sorrowful decline.
" Le ciel s' eclaircit au couchant" is a word of comfort we draw from our French
neighbours, but, according to my experience, it is much less for the evening than for
the mid-day of a life whose commencement had been all hope and brightness, that one
need fear. Evening has a poetry of its own ; the air is cooler, we are a little fatigued,
we think of laying ourselves to rest. But noon, the hot sultry noonday, the dry
prosaic working hour, it is to be dreaded.    Ask not doubtfully, when dawn breaks
64 THE ATTEMPT
forth in all its glory. How will evening find us ? rather inquire. What of the noonday ?
By it the golden-tinged clouds are scattered, all uncertain haziness dissi]iated by its
inexorable light, all our brightest day-dreams turned into cold realities. Happy is it
for those who, having cast aside the puerilities of childhood and the oft-times vain
imaginings of youth, strive after higher things, and at length attain to a peaceful and
hallowed eventide.
A happy, joyful childhood and youth had been graciously vouchsafed to the
children of Herr S. The influence of this cheerful home extended to many beyond
the immediate members, for hospitality was largely exercised, and much geniality
characterized the gatherings round the family board. Pleasant as these were, they
formed however by no means the sole attraction to the numerous guests. The hearty
kindliness with which all were welcomed; the unlimited freedom, enabling each to
follow his own inclinations; the never-failing good humour of the landlord, who, as
he sat in his arm-chair, spectacles in one hand and newspaper in the other, appeared
at times deep in thought, yet showing, every now and then by a few words, how alive
he was to the interests of those around him—young and old alike.
Herr S. was the only son of wealthy parents. In his youth he had studied the
law, but with little partiality for all its intricacies. On the death of his father he
succeeded to the family property of Blumenwelt, and to the almost equally hereditary
ofiice of magistrate to the surrounding district. In the efficient discharge of the duties
connected with the latter employment he availed himself more, 1 suspect, of the large
stock of good feeling and common sense with which nature had endowed him than of
the instructions he had received in his youth. His elder son, Charles, who was to
succeed him, was at this moment absent; the younger, Edward, was at home studying
theology; and in him the love and hopes of the father seemed to centre. Frau S.,
like most German ladies, was an excellent manager and housekeeper. She took so
much trouble to teach her own two daughters all the miuutias of domestic economy
that her friends urged her to allow one or two young girls likewise to benefit by these
instructions ; and greatly appreciated by the young people was the permission to spend
a short time at Blumenwelt. A good many left our friend's house having learnt
nothing mure than the proper way to clean vegetables and pare potatoes; the more ener¬
getic penetrated into the dairy and the kitchen ; and some few even rivalled Frcderika,
the elder daughter, in the manufacture of her far-famed cakes. All were thoroughly
happy; the house, gardens, and neiglibourhood were endeared to them, and the
remembrance of the busy lively household, with its many cheerful influences, was
frequently of more consequence than all the information there acquired.
THE ATTEMPT 6f)
But I think I hear my readers saying—" Is the story never to commence 1" It
certainly has had rather a long preface, so without one word more, I beg you will follow
me in this beautiful summer evening to the garden. There, under the shade of a
splendid lime tree, where the family were wont to take their evening meal, you will
find two young girls seated. The tree was in full flower, and its sweet scent per¬
fumed the air, every now and then a stray blossom falling into the large milk
dish, into which Matilda, the most recently arrived of the young pu})ils, was breaking
bread. Matilda was the daughter of an old friend of Frau S. She had just completed
her studies at a fashionable school, and was now to pay some attention to household
matters. Her companion, Minnie or Wilhelmina, the youngest child of the house, was
busy picking lettuce leaves ; their thoughts however wandered far from these prosaic
employments.    Doubtless the lovely evening exercised some influence on their minds.
" It would be very pleasant if one could occasionally get a peep into the future,"
said Minnie, and shook back the pretty brown ringlets that were shading her bright
joyous face : " I do wish I could meet with some real gipsy who would tell me every¬
thing."
" It would be quite unnecessary, in so far as I am concerned," answered Matilda,
a strong blooming blonde; " no one could tell me anything new,—I know exactly what
will become of me."
" Oh ! how can any girl know that 1" exclaimed Minnie.
" Perfectly well, when she knows what she wishes. I certainly do not know
whether I shall live long or die soon; wliether a war or pestilence may be expected,
or such things; but I do know that I shall never marry."
" You !" exclaimed ^Minnie incredulously.
" Yes, I myself," said Matilda with great determination. " I will show the world
that a husband is not absolutely necessary to make one happy and useful. I will prove
myself a pattern old maid. The only thing that greatly distresses me is, that I do not
possess a few thousand pounds."
" Oh ! is that all your desire ? " asked Frederika who, attired in cooking apron
and sleeves, had come to fetch the milk dish; " such wise wishes are echoed by others
I suspect."
" Not for the mere sake of possession," answered Matilda contemptuously ; " who
would lay stress upon that ] No ! only so far do I covet riches, that people might
know that I do not wish to marry; that there is one girl, at any rate, who knows her
worth; who is not a cipher, requiring numbers to be placed before her to give her
value."
G6 THE ATTEMPT
" But it would be pleasant to be able to share such wealth with a noble heart,"
gently murmured Minnie.
" With a noble heart, indeed ! " at whose feet you have placed your life, heart, and
worldly goods, and from whom j'ou must thenceforth beg every halfpenny which is
required for the household and the wants of the lord and master. JSTo ; so long as the
position of the wife is such an unworthy one, I shall not so far forget myself. If ever
I should marry, which, however, I do not intend, there must be no talk about money.
It must be kept in a particular place, and that place never allowed to be empty: I
shall attend to its not being squandered."
" Well, should you live long enough to find such a pattern husband," interrupted
Frederika, " let me advise you not to break the bread into his milk in such large
pieces as you are now doing."
" Do not be alarmed," said Matilda, tossing her head, " gentlemen do not take
sour milk ; ' it does not agree with them, much as they would like it; they are sorry
they have just had beer,' and so on. However, it is sufficiently good for the ladies.
The gentlemen would perhaps take a little ham, or a nicely cooked fowl, or some other
dainty, whilst the wife looks on and eats bread and milk. No, no, such degradation
is not to be submitted to."
" What I despise, that do I wish,"
sang, in an undertone, a rough voice somewhere in the background. The girls looked
up in great astonishment, but saw no one. A short time after, Herv S. passed on his
way home from the field, but he was not known to be a singer, nor had he what
people caU a musical face.
The conversation however was completely interrupted. Frederika carried off the
salad, and begged the others to follow with the milk dish, as something else had to be
added. Matilda and Minnie did not hasten much; the evening was so beautiful, and
they themselves so happy in the first ecstasies of the eternal friendship which had been
sworn the day before yesterday, that they would rather have avoided the kitchen and
its uncongenial duties.
" Only look at the splendid sunset, Frederika," said Minnie.
" I have no time to look at what can be seen any day," answered the former in
great haste, and continued on her way to the house.
The two girls watched her and smiled. " I do think she would be happier if she
could convert the moon into a kitchen lamp," said Matilda.
At this moment they heard voices, and, turning round, saw Edward with his two
I
THE   ATTEMPT 67
cousins. Otto and William (these had lost their parents in infancy, and had found a
second home at Blumenwelt), who had just returned from an expedition in the neigh¬
bourhood.
" Good evening," shouted Edward. " What, you are busy ; that's right: I hope
it is something good, for we are very hungry."
" Hungry," said Matilda ironically ; " is that the only idea you bring home after
such a magnificent walk in the woods 1 "
" I^^ow, now, not surely waxing satirical already," said Otto. " That empty basket
shows that the ladies have not been feasting on air and the sweet scent of flowers
alone. It is all William's fault we. are so hungry ; he has driven us round the woods
in search of some stray slieep, as he declared; but I believe the whole hunt was got
up to remind him of boyish days now gone by."
" We did not entirely forget you, ladies," said Edward, " and have drawn up a
programme for to-morrow's amusement. In the first place, we propose in the morning
a sail to the green isle, accompanied by music and singing; at mid-day, our family
meal; in the afternoon, coffee in the wood ; and in the evening, wind up with a dance.
Don't you think the arrangements promise well 1"
In the meantime the supper table was being prepared. To Matilda's great indig¬
nation, ham and salad were ofi'ered to the gentlemen, whilst the ladies partook ordy of
milk; nor was her wrath at all appeased by the fact that she, as the greatest stranger,
had been^ invited to share the good things : it was not on her own account, but for the
ill-treatment of her sex she was distressed.
The programme for the morrow was laid before the elders and duly approved,
Frau S. only stipulating that Emma, the clergyman's daughter, should be asked to
join the party. Frederika, however, who seemed to find difficulties on every side,
declared there was no vacant seat in the boat.
" That does not signify," said Edward ; " we can easily place a board across."
" And early to-morrow the macaroni for the soup should be steeped; it is three
days ago since Matilda said she wished to assist, and we can wait no longer, for the
day after to-morrow the sheriff has announced a visit."
" The servants will manage that," said Frau S., " and with their help I can
arrange everything else, so you do not require to stay at home, Frederika."
" I shall certainly not go in the boat, mamma; I know too well how much there
is yet to be done. And as to dancing, Edward, that is quite out of the question, for
the table must be covered and prepared in the dining-room for next day."
" Softly, Miss Difficulty, we can undertake all that ourselves afterwards."
68 THE ATTEMPT
" Oh, yes, I assure you, Frederika,'" said Minnie ; " we promise to rise very early
and have everything arranged, even to your satisfaction."
" Well, well, we shall see," said Frau S., whilst Frederika turned away, shaking
her head very ominously.
" How long does the sheriif intend to remain 1" asked Otto.
" Business will detain him at least three days," answered the father.
" Oh dear !  three days with such a sober-minded individual," sighed Edward.
" He is not so bad as that sigh would lead us to suppose," said the mother; " it is
no longer the old gentleman who comes, but his son, who is young and still a bachelor;
perhaps he is rather quiet."
" All he can do is to smoke," cried Minnie. " I should not wonder if he suited
Matilda's ideas of chivalry."
" ]!fonsense, child, how can j^ou talk so presumptuously 1 Stupid girls, like you,
coupling yourselves witli the sheriff indeed !"
" Like us !" muttered Matilda, and tossed her head.
" But how will our poetical 1^'orthstar and this official proser agree 1" asked Otto.
" Not at all, but we shall place the sheriff between papa and William, and leave
them to entertain him as to the best means of rescuing prisoners, governing hospitals,
etc.    Our star shall be given in charge to the girls."
" What star are j-^ou talking about 1" inquired Herr S. putting down the news¬
paper, and pushing up his spectacles.
" I forgot, uncle," said Otto apologetically, " to ask if you would permit my friend,
Arwed Xorthstar, to share your hospitality for a few days 1"
" Northstar; where does he come from 1"
" From Welsburg ; not very far off."
" Northstar; I never heard the name."
" Perhaps not," said Otto, in rather an embarassed manner; " his own name is
Haberstock, but his no7n de plume is Northstar, and ho prefers being called by it."
" Well, so far as I am concerned, I have no objection to your Herr Haberstock,
but I shall have nothing to say to the assumed name.    What is the fellow studying 1"
" Strictly speaking, he is in the financial department, but since he felt the in¬
spiration of the muse liis studies have been more general."
" It does not sound well; I never heard of a poetical financier. I strongly
suspect he will not do much good at anything," said the uncle, shaking his head;
" but we shall see." K. H. D.
(To be continued.)
THE ATTEMPT 69
Cotton ^rass.
In this age of many cares about what we shall eat and what we shall drink and
wherewithal we shall be clothed^ and in the present distress, through the difficulty
that many find of procuring any of these three desiderata, are we quite sure that we
fuUy exhaust the resources of our country and of our brains to supply them ? More
than once, ideas of things have flashed upon my unsophisticated brains, as containing
possibilities of benefit in some way to the country in general; but these have always
been settled with a wholesale " quietus "—" there are so many able and willing men
of genius stirring in this fatherland of ours that it would be only presumption in one
like me to open my lips "—and so they passed away. Yet, the more experience, age
gives me, I find more clearly that little things and simple are often passed by by the
great, and that a child's suggestion has often filled the life of a wise man with thought
and work. Having a wholesome dread of fancying myself original in this age when
every one seems a plagiarist from the mere fact that the great tide of public opinion
that swells through every mind should be locked and marked by him that first finds a
voice to express it, and the hermit comes forth with his new thought to find it has
grown stale with a world that knew it long ago, I would be very modest in the expres¬
sion of my present idea. It can do no harm. If philosophers have already weighed
it in the balance and found it wanting, by all means let them cast it aside as an arrogant
pretender ; if they have not, let them try if it is not possible to their great resources to
mould into staunch realities what is now offered them in the softest and downiest
manner possible.
The Cotton Grass—Eriophorum—is a well-known product of our rough heaths
and hill sides. In Sutherland especially, and the far north of Scotland (not rich in
iniligenous plants that may be used), it grows in such great abundance that we cannot
imagine the most careless observer passing it without feeling—" There is a possibility
of some kind here ; I wonder if machines could do nothing with all that white stuff."
Surely its very abundance and its spontaneity bring forward one powerful argument.
WhUe the price of cotton remains so exorbitant, surely something might be done to test
its capabilities. It is well worth the trial, for a failure involves no risk, and the success
would be unmitigated good. If this plant could be used as even a temporary sub¬
stitute for cotton, and if the cotton-grass hills of Scotland should rise up in the place
of the cotton-fiidds of America, so lately drenched iu  kindred gore and sick at heart
70
THE ATTEMPT
that they cannot give forth their wonted produce of soft white down, what an immense
advantage would it be.
It grows like other grasses, but the flowering stem produces from the spike soft
white tassels of silky floss cotton.    There are several species of it, as the Harestail
cotton-grass—Eriophorum   Vaginatum,   which  grows in  profusion   on English and
Scotch heaths.     Its  stem is   triangular   in the  upper  part, and  rounded towards
the root; and it bears  but one spike of cotton.     Then there is the Eriophorum
Graeile, with  a  drooping  cluster of  small spikes.     But  I  think  that  it  is the
common cotton-grass—Eriophorum Augustifolium, that adorns most plentifully our
hills, and of it particularly do I now speak.    I do not think that the number of its
tassels is regular, but they seem generally about five or six.   Very delicate and beautiful
do they look on the dark hill-sides; and so common have they ever been, as they are,
that in Ossian the " Cana grass," as it is there called, becomes a simile, and he com¬
pares the white arms of the fair maidens to the snow-white " Cana."    Its fibre is fine,
flexible, and unentangled.    Set against its advantages we find that its disadvantages
are, that it is short and weak.    Yet, are there not many contrivances ready to be
brought to bear on it ?    Chemical appliances to render it more dure; and mechanical,
to make it gather strength from union.    If there arc, then our Cana may yet be woven
into a native cloth, whose beauty and durability remain yet to be tested.    If the fibres
be found unable to repay the labour and expense of this preparation, is it not possible
to use them in the paper manufactory 1    Here it seems to me to be unexceptionable,
if no better destiny is left for it, for what are faults in cloth, are advantages in paper.
But if this also should be left undone, and these beautiful tassels cannot be sewed
together in their natural state into rugs, mats, or even boas, then surely they can bo
picked and teased, and used as feathers are.    They are sometimes used to stufl' pillows
by thrifty housewives that live near their habitats, but not nearly to such an extent
as one would expect from the poverty of the country and the abundance of the article
in question.
As it is, it falls and decays unused year by year. As it maij he, if any use can be
fixed upon it by those wlio have the power, and means, and will to W(3rk it, it might
be easily planted and reared amid the solitudes it loves, costing nothing, and yet im¬
proving under the tendance by producing fuller and stronger cocoons ; while children
could gather it and prepare it to be packed in bales to be sent to the manufactory, whence
it may come forth as grass-cloth or cotton-paper, or any other machine-wrought article
that the ingenuity of man can conceive, and the iron " creatures " of man produce.
LUTEA Eeseua.
THE ATTEMPT
71
%mn from i'^t ^aolis.
EiSEN from the ranks—upstarts—nobodies—parvenus ! How often, my readers,
do you and 1 hear these and such like terms of contempt applied to good, hard-working
folks who have, by their own praise-worthy industry, made themselves rich, and gained
a good position in life! All honour to the many, of " Nature's Nobility," that are to be
found in this class ! An old family, and a time-honoured name are very good things,
and by no means to be despised; but those who are so favoured have no right to look
down on any neighbour who has won for himself what the other was born to, and no
thanks to him. Of those who, from the very humblest stations, have, by great inven¬
tions and discoveries in useful arts and sciences, made themselves names which have
come down to posterity, and will do so, we may say, through all ages I am about to
enumerate a few for the benefit of the readers of " The Attempt," many of whom wiU,
no doubt, be quite surprised to find how many such are to be found in all the humblest
walks of life. To be polite for once, in a way, let me begin with our much-despised,
though needful friends, the barbers and tailors.
Eisen out of the barbers' shop, we have such men as Sir Eichard Arkwright, the
far-famed inventor of that useful little machine, with its homely name, the " Spinning
Jenny;" Tenterden, though he was only a paper lord ! and Turner, the world-renowned
landscape-painter. I have not found so many tailors uncrossing their limbs for great
exertions ; yet, we have even from their maligned race such men as Jackson, the painter,
and Admiral Hobson. Among day-labourers there are a few who have risen very high :
for instance, Brindley, the engineer; Cook, the navigator; and our own national
poet, Eobert Burns. Masons, and bricklayers have also contributed, as we find among
them names so well known as Ben Jonson, and Edwards, and Telford—great engineers,
and our late lamented citizen, Hugh Miller. If any of my readers would like a nice
book to read, allow me to advise them to peruse his " Schools and Schoolmasters."
Of the honoured trade of carpenters there have come such men as Inigo Jones,
architect; Harrison, chronometer maker; John Hunter, physiologist; Eomney and
Opie, painters; Professor Lee, orientalist; and John Gibson, sculptor. Then, among
our very useful friends, the weavers, there have been many great minds, showing us
that, amid all the continuous din of their work, they have found time to think. There are
of them, Simpson, the mathematician; Bacon, the sculptor; Wilson, the ornithologist;
Taimahill, the poet j and the great traveller and explorer of central Africa, Dr Livingston.
72
THE ATTEMPT
From among the wielders of the awl we have such men as Sir Cloudsley Shovel
Sturgeon, electrician ; Samuel Drew, essayist; Gifford, editor of the Quarterly Eeview;
Bloomfield, a poet; and William Carey, the great missionary. Of butchers there are,
at least, a few, such as our ancient friend, Cardinal Wolsey; our childhood's prime
favourite, De Foe ; Akenside, also, an author, though not so well known ; and Kirke
White, with whose poems most of my readers will doubtless be familiar.
How many more of our greatest geniuses have sprung from a similar obscure
origin, is an interesting study to all who are fond of biography. We shall not how¬
ever farther intrude on the biographers' province, but content ourselves with the
enumeration of those names we have already mentioned, who have so nobly and
deservedly " Eisen from the Kanks."
Incognita.
-»-*"&>0-o^-S-
0irttttis.
What thing thou hast to do—
Thoroughly do it!
What way thou hast to go—
Bravely go through it!
What grief thou hast to share-
Unflinchingly share it!
.    What cross thou hast to bear—
Silently bear it!
Seek for a meaning in all things below ;
Trust in a good that thou can'st not yet know !
Hope in a future, when all may be clear;
Hope—and tlirough sorrow yield never to fear !
Keep thy heart patient, and earnest, and pure—
Those hearts are the greatest that longest endure,
That longest endure, and most humbly can learn,
That burdens accept, and their message discern ;
That, childlike, believe in the Fatherly Love
WTiich, though cloud-closed to us, shines changeless above !
LuTEA Eeseda.
1
I
THE ATTEMPT 73
JULIET.
Strangely misconceived is the character of Shakespeare's Juliet by many persons
considering themselves as competent judges of the works of our great master. Capable,
though they be, of admiring the power and ambitious determination displayed in the
character of Lady Macbeth, the gentle purity in that of Desdemona, and the gay
humour in that of Beatrice, they fail miserably in appreciating the passionate woman¬
liness in that of the beautiful Juliet.
"We are sometimes apt, thoughtlessly, to glory in the boasted matter-of-factness of
our life of to-day, to treat all romance as a thing gone past, as something which gave
pleasure to our forefathers, but of which we have no need, and for which we have no
taste. But pause, be careful, think again before you consign romance to an untimely
grave, think of the human affections and passions which you there bury in the cold
hard ground, and then say if you could dare to live in this bleak desert-like world
bereft of romance. No, we have not yet lost our romance ; while there is sorrow and
suffering, love and hope in the world, romance will remain, colouring our lives and
imaginations with its glorious tints.
We may appear to be drawing no line between romance and love, but in the
history of Juliet they are so mingled that we can scarcely separate them, unless by
saying that the love was within herself, and the romance in her situation and circum¬
stances. Besides, the world makes but small distinction, if any, between them ; and
in affecting to despise romance, it implies contempt for love. Surely, the half-uttered
boast of want of romance will die on our lips, when we consider that with it goes our
perfect appreciation of, and sympathy with, the character of Juliet. Let romance once
leave us, and we may be dragged down lower and lower, till with some foolish men
and women, resembling more, monkeys than human beings (as some one has remarked
of blundering critics), we may denounce her as a " forward love-sick girl." Their
contracted minds can view her in no other light than in that of an English school¬
girl of the nineteenth century in her fourteenth year. They cannot transport their
ideas to the sunny shores of Italy, washed by the blue waters of the Adriatic, where
the sycamore spreads abroad its shady branches, and the nightingale nightly warbles
her soug on the pomegranate tree.    They cannot understand the warm Italian nature
April 1866. K
74 THE ATTEMPT
raaturinp; while yet young in years; and so, they term her forward! Then, again,
being incapable of strong affection (for strong affection bespeaks strength of character
and of mind), they term her love-sick ! Sick and sorrowful, truly, her thwarted hopes
might cause her to be, but to that state of milk and water langour which our modern
acceptation of the term lovesick suggests, it could never reduce her : with her trials
her strength increased, till death, in its most frightful form, seemed to her lovely as
compared with inconstancy.
Fierce quarrels had arisen between the families of the Capulets and the Montagues,
and hatred of each other had filled their hearts, when the young Montague first beheld
the beautiful daughter of the house of the Cajjulets. Immediately he feels the
shallowness of the affection which before he imagined himself possessed of, for the
unfavourable Eosaline, or rather, as has been weU explained, he feels that it is of an
ideal of his own that he has been hitherto enamoured, and that now, for the first time,
he sees before him the true embodiment of all his fond imaginings.
But with the character of Eomeo we have less to do than with that of Juliet.
Let us turn and see why her young mind opened so readily to the impression made by
the being who was to influence the remainder of her life, and to be the fated cause of
its shortness. Let us here remember how and in what company the early years of
Juliet had been spent. Equable even to monotony had probably been the firet part of
her life, with no single person near her capable of calling into play the fine loving
feelings of her nature. There she lived in the old mansion, with a father and mother
certainly, but with dispositions strangely unsympathetic and cold, with only sufficient
affection for her to wish to see her married to a man of rank and fortune. One other
companion she had, in her old nurse who, though fond and proud of her young lady,
was but an ignorant and common woman, with little wisdom, and that all of this
world. The noble mind of the young Italian girl must have craved for higher sjtu-
pathies and truer companionship ; yet, with such associates had Juliet lived from her
birth, with her feelings all thrown back upon herself, and her affections repressed, till
the well of love within her became very full, and ready to overflow on the first worthy
object, whose kindred nature should call it forth.
This play has been called a poem, and truly, though in itself a drama, the perfect
poetry throughout, leaves on our mind all the sweet and peaceful feelings of a poem,
notwithstanding the tragical magnificence of its latter scenes. A very different state
of feeling is produced by the perusal of this tragedy and that of " Othello." The
study of the latter seems to cloud the mind with misery, but, on looking back on the
former the tragic sensation fades away, leaving rather a feeling of the beautiful and the
THE ATTEMPT 75
poetical; for, as has been remarked, the " tragical part of the story, from the first
scene to the last, is held in subjection to the beautiful."
Pure and exquisite poetry breathes through the night scene in the garden where,
under the silver moon, vows of love are exchanged between the two young members of
the hostile families. Sweetly and simply docs Juliet acknowledge to Eomeo that but
for the accident which had betrayed her " true love's passion," she would have dwelt
more on form, and been more strange, and earnestly does she entreat him not to
impute his easy wooing to her " light love." Yet, ever in the midst of her joy, there
is a certain prophetic fear present with her, that the contract has been " too rash, too
unadvised, too sudden."
When we next see Juliet, she is waiting impatiently for the return of her nurse,
murmuring at her tardiness, and vainly exclaiming that—
" Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glide than the suu's beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hUls."
At last the nurse returns, but Juliet is not yet to hear her news ; her breath is spent
and her bones ache by reason of the "jaunt" she has had.    Her young mistress seeks
to entice an answer from her by every means in her power.    Finding that her first
natural indignation at the circumlocution of her nurse does not improve inatters, she
implores her " sweet, sweet, sweet nurse " to give her news of Eomeo.    In course of
time the rambling old nurse is brought to the point, and the now hapjiy Juliet is
ordered to visit Friar Laurence's cell, there to be made the wife of Eomeo.    But, alas
for short-lived joy !    A few hours only of happiness are vouchsafed to Juliet.    Once
again she is awaiting the return of her nurse from Eomeo, and once more does every
moment of suspense drag heavily past.    The nurse returns with the account of the
bloody engagement which that day has taken place, of the murder of Mercutio and the
death of Tybalt,   Mark how naturally the grief of Juliet is depicted.   For one instant,
and but for one, her anger and horror are aroused by the news that her kinsman,
Tybalt, has fallen by the hand of Eomeo ; and this was perhaps the bitterest moment
of her agony, when her heart hardened towards her husband.    But, at the first sound
of a reproach uttered against him by another, all her faith and reliance in him return,
and she knows that he is still the honourable true man she believed him to be.    Now
she mourns to think how she his " three hours' wife " could for an instant chide him.
The horizon of Juliet is now dark and gloomy—Eomeo exiled, and the threat of
a compulsory marriage with the county Paris reiterated by both father and mother.
With every feeling revolting from such a union, she lias none to turn to for comfort or
76 THE ATTEMPT
counsel save the good old friar, for her nurse, ready to serve Eomeo in the days of his
prosperity, is now eager in her advice to his young wife to marry another, and profuse
in her congratulations on the superiority of this second match.
Turning for advice to the holy friar—holy, though sometimes erring in judgment,
she drinks the liquor of wonderful power distUled from herbs growing around his cell.
Pictures of the harrowing and fearful sights she may witness when waking from her
" unnatural sleep " in the sepulchre, present themselves to her imagination; but love
overcomes all, and the potion is drunk. Her history is nearly finished; but one short
waking, and all is over here. All is over here—the love, sorrow, and separation of
those two young hearts have slipped into the past, and as has been well described " the
echo which the whole leaves behind in the mind resembles a single but endless sigh."
It cannot astonish us that this story, or rather legend, has been handed down by
tradition from generation to generation among the Veronese, and that they should love
and revere its hero and heroine. Eyron, in a letter to his friend Moore, makes the
following mention of the story :—" I have been over Verona. The amphitheatre is
wonderful—beats even Greece. Of the truth of Juliet's story they seem tenacious
to a degree, insisting on the fact, giving a date (1303), and showing a tomb. It is a
plain, open, and partly decayed sarcophagus, with withered leaves in it, in a wild and
desolate conventual garden, once a cemetery, now ruined to the very graves. The
situation struck me as very appropriate to the legend—being blighted as their love."
DES Eaux.
'■■" ••&:j»*ci3«> - - — .■■ — ■
%ttttx^ from Sbiteerlanir.
NO.  III.
My dear LuciiiLA,
Geneva.
" Mont Blanc is the monarch of mountains;
They crowned him long ago,
On a throne of rocks, with a robe of clouds,
And a diadem of suow."
We have been up to the roof of the house to pay our respects to his Majesty. He
does not assert his dignity in at all a proper manner, but retires in the distance behind
two other peaks, so that for a long time we could not make out which was the greatest.
The soft haze that makes everything so beautiful to-day, helped to confuse us, no doubt.
THE ATTEMPT 77
The lake is lovelier than ever, with the Ehone pouring out from it, its strong, full,
intensely blue current. The blue is not liquid and changeful, as in other rivers, but
deeply dyed, like the stain on a cathedral window—a colour that one often sees in art,
but hardly anywhere else in nature. Only a mile and a half farther down, all this
beauty is spoiled. It almost made me angry this morning, when we drove to the
confluence of the Elione with the Arve, to see the fierce onset of the impetuous
darkly-swoUen torrent, and the long gallant struggle of the noble river to repel the
invader overcome at last. And then the waters mingle and roll onward, robbed of all
their brightness.
We came from Berne last "Wednesday, partly by steam-boat and partly by rail.
It was a long journey and a hungry one, as it turned out. We had grown so accus¬
tomed to have refreshment pressed on us at all turns, both when we needed it and
when we did not, that we never thought of laying in provision for future necessity,
and did not find out our mistake till we were fairly en route in a train that would not
stop. Several delays were marked in our time-bills, no doubt, but then the trains here
have a fashion of being late, and of making up time at the stations, so that our stop¬
pages were only for an instant.
We expected to be allowed ten minutes at Lausanne, so Maitland and Bessy got
out to forage for us / but they had scarcely vanished from our sight, when the whistle
gave warning, and we were off. In a few moments they appeared rushing along in a
most piteous plight. I had better not make comments on their appearance however,
as Maitland assures us that ours was quite as laughably forlorn, as all heads were
thrust together out of the window ; some of us shrieking to the guard to stop, some,
he says, stretching out our hands to drag them in by force, others making ready to leap
out and share their fate. Our entreaties and lamentations must have been irresistible,
for the officials let off the steam, and we welcomed the wanderers in, not less heartily
because they came empty-handed. It would have been rather awkward if they had
been left behind, as, except the francs which they had left unchanged on the restaurant
table, they were utterly destitute of money.
It grew rapidly dark after leaving Lausanne, so that the soft mountain scene up
the lake was the last that lingered in our fancy, after a long and eventful day. There
was lightning among the Jura, but the thunder, if it was within hearing distance, was
quite drowned by the racket of our engine. I wonder what Byron would have thought
of that.
I am sorry we are to leave Geneva to-morrow. There is not very much to be
seen in this little city, but there is a great deal to be thought of, and I feel as if I
78 THE ATTEMPT
could go back to its haunts again and again, till I knew them well. Laura gave us a
specimen of her old talent for riddle-making the other day.—""Why is Geneva like
ISTapoleon Bonaparte 1" " Because it has a great mind in a small body," was the
answer. Perhaps it may turn out that the little city had the greater mind, and by
far the more enduring influence of the two.
But it is not what Geneva is now, and has been for several centuries, that chiefly
fascinates me. It is what she was in reformation times—the refuge of the exile, the
defender of truth that would have had a hard struggle for life witliout her. I love to
think of her as a little green-house, sheltering plants that might else have perished.
She took them in from France, from the valleys of Piedmont, from our own Scotland,
when the frost was too keen for them there, and when spring came again, she scattered
them far and wide, to bud and blossom, and cast their seed over all Europe. I think
we in Scotland especially, would be very ungrateful if we did not love Geneva. The
best memento of those times is the old cathedral of St Pierre, with its venerable
chair, the same from which Calvin, Farel, John Knox, and many others stood up to
preach.    The pulpit is modern, but the chair and canopy ai'e untouched.
Another favourite resort of ours is the cemetery. It is a very quiet resting-place,
with its long avenue of bending sycamores, very solemn, yet far more cheering in their
fresh green than our gloomy borders of yew. The graves are all set round with flowers
by loving hands, and the monuments bear, not so often a formal record of name and
age, as some simple word of affection, such as " Marie," or " Petite Ainiee," or " Adieu
ma mere cherie, an revoir." We often stop before a small square stone, marked " J. C."
It is uncertain whether this is Calvin's tomb or not, as the laws of the city long for¬
bade the erecting of monuments, or the preserving of graves. After all, it is men
whose life-work is transitory and soon forgotten, that need tombstones to keep their
name from dying out.
But now I know you are looking very cross, and turning to the next page to see
whether I have not a word to say about the Bernese Oberland, and all that we saw
before coming here. The scenes we have passed through, have been so varied and so
wonderful that I can hardly speak or even think of them connectively as yet. One
image chases another out of my mind, and I feel as baffled as your little Katie, with
her kaleidoscope, when she cried because the figures Avould not come back again the
same as before. I hope my kaleidoscoije will arrange itself wlien I get home ; in the
meantime, you must be content with any stray beads I can pick out for you.
The glaciers have been more of a surprise to me than anything else I have seen,
for nothing I had heard or read of tliom ever gave me any conception of their true
THE   ATTEMPT 79
character. Some stiff, awkwardly cut plan of a river of ice instead of water, I had in
my head, but not the faintest idea of the vast size, the ice-bergs, the ice-cataracts, the
fearful chasms cleft downwards, with the blue light gleaming far, far away in their
depths, and the ice-fed torrent gurgling below. Uncle Fred, who has been in Norway,
is the only one of us to whom such scenes are not new.
As we came up the valley to Griiidelwald, we thought ourselves quite close upon
the glacier, and had rather a hot discussion on the point with my uncle, who was
quite sure we must be at least a mile and a half distant. He told us that as we knew
nothing either of the illusive effects of ice, or of the vast height of the glacier, we
could not possibly estimate the distance. " Oh," replied Mr Lea, " the height is not
so difficult to guess ; 1 can see quite well that the glacier is at least twice as high as
myself." He was the first to smile at his own mistake when we came under its
great precipices, stumbling among the heaps of debris brought from the tops of the
mountains to their foot by its resistless power. The ice itself was all marled with
fragments of rock. It was perfectly pure however in a cavern about half-way up,
into which we mounted by a ladder, and glistened by torchlight in all sorts of brilliant
colours. We could not take any adventurous upland excursions, as our party consists
so much of ladies, which some of those very ladies regret exceedingly.
The next morning, when we visited the Staubbach, was one of the most glorious
summer days we have had, and the rainbow on the fall was in perfection. We were
never tired of watching the glancing shower of finest spray, springing so fearlessly from
its dizzy height, and were standing watching it from a little distance, when suddenly
the light capricious thing shifted its course, and fell like a bright mist all over us.
If the wilful little water sprite meant it for a trick, it was too gentle to do more than
cool and refresh us.
It must be a distinguished waterfall indeed that draws so much attention to itself
in such a spot, for the valley is Lauterbriinnen—nothing but fountains, and I daresaj'
we could see more cascades with a glance of the eye than we ever saw in our lives
before. There they leapt and tumbled over the rocks down into the White Lutschine,
that goes singing along down to the opening of the valley, where they are all swept
together into the Elack Liitschine, and carried furiously down the gorge. We followed
the water's course on our way back to Interlacken, which had been our starting-point,
with torrents above and torrents below our path, rushing and roaring incessantly. And
when we looked back, sometimes one peak of the high Alps, sometimes another
bounded the view. The loveliest is the Jungfrau, with her attendant, Silberhorn,
glittering, as if self-lighted, near the crest.    The very names of the other peaks—
80 THE ATTEMPT
such as the Finsteraarhom and the Schreckhorn, have a sound of terrible bleakness ;
while the Monk and the Giant are nearest neighbours to the Maiden. But the Jung-
frau well deserves her name—all softly rounded, and robed in the most stainless drifted
snow, she is a perfect image of unsullied purity. And yet, after all, her purity is only
such as men have too often dreamed of, and tried to attain to, happily in vain,—calm
and cold, and far, far away from human love and sympathy. I would rather take the
little Alpine gentian I pulled for you at Grindelwald, for my model, on which—
" The tired traveller
Gazing abroad,
Fixing his eyes on her,
Thinketh of God;
Thinketh how, 'mid life's cold snow,
Hearts to God given
Breathe out where'er they go
Summer and heaven."
If I have been making mistakes, you must excuse me, for Maitland has been
rattling at the door and distracting my weak faculties in a most unbrotherly way,
while I have been writing the last half-page. However, you must forgive him too,
for he has kindly come to teU me that if I want to make sure of a last walk in Geneva,
I must come now, and that we shall have a splendid sunset from the bridge. We are
to start for Chamouni early in the morning, and are not sure of returning this way.
So, in haste, I must remain,
Yours affectionately, M. L.
i
" Oh ! hoary headed man,
With the sad brow, the deep unquiet eye,
And pallid cheek and wan,
Seest thou not a mailed host passing by,
And banners waving o'er the trees afar 1
A king in all his pomp, goes forth to war."
THE ATTEMPT 81
" I see a sunny plain, glad streams that flow
Along its flowery banks, a silver tide ;
Is it the evening's crimson cloud, whose glow
Tints the pure wave ?  ah, no !   its fount is dj^ed
By the red life-drops from their crushed hearts shed,
The lion-hearted dead."
" On ocean's billo^vy crest,
■  On yonder fair hark gliding o'er its wave,
Why doth thy sad glance rest 1
As it bears proudly hopeful hearts and brave,
To sunny pastures, and rich vales that lie,
In purer light, beneath a brighter sky."
" It bears away from the green shores of earth.
Those who no more her breezy hills shall press,
No more shall wake her laughing homes with mirth,
Nor gaze upon her changeful loveliness,
Nor fold her mantle round their last long sleep
In the blue treacherous deep."
" Hearest thou not the joy
Of early childhood, on the still air borne?
Earth mingles no alloy
In the bright draught of life's first sunny mom,
In its clear skj'^ no warning cloud appears,
Its rosy dawn hath nought to do with tears."
" Alas ! a mournful wail is in mine ear,
As of a heart bereaved—a bitter cry ;
I see a tiny blossom folded on its bier,
And pale hushed lips, that may no more reply.
And silent feet, that to a home of clay
Have wandered from their play."
82 THE ATTEMPT
" No dim foreboding thrills
My soul; while gazing on the golden day,
Nought with a dark sense fills
Mine ear, with murmurs of the earth's decay ;
Oh, hoary dreamer ! bid those clouds depart.
With their deep gloom, from ofi" thy saddened heart."
" Oh, joyous-hearted youth ! it may not be :
In every whisper of the trembling leaf,
I hear an echo of the falling tree ;
In every festal strain, a plaint of grief;
In the wind's sigh and on the bright flowers' breath.
An under tone of death."
" Ah ! it were all too sad,
Through woodland haunts, into the sunny air,
"With happy voices glad
Of bird and stream, such prescient thought to bear.
Casting the shadow of its drooping wings,
Its dark forebodings, o'er all lovely things."
" Earth's loveliness is written in the dust.
Its touch is on her precious things and fair;
How may immortal spirits put their trust
In aught that dwells amid her changeful air ?
Stay not thy heart on earthly joy and love,
Seek them in homes above."
J. I. L.
THE ATTEMPT 83
A   SKETCH   IN   TWO   PAPERS.
From the earliest ages and in every country there have been found people, vain
and idle enough to be almost wholly taken up by the study of dress or personal
adornment of some kind. Such students have varied in degree, from the painted
savage to the finished beau of the reign of the Grand Monarque, when the study of the
art of dressing had reached a great height. The fair sex, of course, come in for the
greater share of blame on this head, but we shall see in the following sketch that we
can sometimes turn the tables on the " lords of creation."
The term " beau" was first applied to such a person as Hotspur describes as a
" man who shone so bright and smelt so sweet, and talked so like a waiting gentle¬
woman." Before the word " beau " came to be used for such, the terms " macaronis'"
and " bucks " were in vogue. In our days, in the above sense, none of these words are
applied; but I suppose that a " sweU " serves as a synonyme.
In our own country, the time of Cliarles II. produced a few very great beaux,
such as Hewitt, Fielding, and Wilson. The first of these was an Irish viscount, and
the original, it is said, of Sir Fopling Flutter, in the " Man of the Mode." Beau
Wilson, a man of low origin, was in the army in Flanders, but being dismissed,
he borrowed money to bring him home, and subequently rose high in the " beau
monde " by some unaccountable means. Some said that he robbed a Dutch mail of a
packet of diamonds, and others, that he possessed the power to change the baser
metals into gold. In whatever way he managed, he led the fashions in his day, and
after this glorious career was kUled in a duel! Fielding is renowned as the handsomest
of all the beaux; so much so, that the king called him the " handsome Fielding."
He lived on his wives' money, and was at one time tried for bigamy at the Old
Bailey. He was the " Orlando" of the " Tatler," and died of fever in 1712. Steele
describes Beau Edgeworth as "a very handsome, well-shaped youth, who frequents
the coffee-houses about Charing-Cross, and ties a very pretty ribbon with a cross of
jewels to his breast." Next to Beau Brummel in fame, comes Beau Nash, who has
been called " King of Bath." He supported himself entirely by gambling, and died
at the age of eighty-eight, aping to the last, the gaiety and hilarity of youth.
These are all the beaux of much fame before the days of our friend Brummel;
but although no man ever got this name who had anything in him superior to it (for,
as Eoscommon says, a beau is "a man of smaU understanding and much conceit").
84
THE ATTEMPT
there have, nevertheless, been found clever men rather more than duly taken up with
dress and personal ajjpearance. Byron had at least a touch of dandyism, as he himself
confesses. The Abbe Delille, priest and poet, and, albeit, the ugliest man of his
time, always had his hair powdered " couleur de rose." The Prince de Kaunitz wore
satin corsets, and had two valets to puff scented powder on him every morning whUe
he walked up and down his room. Eafaelle has been called a coxcomb ; and it^elson,
the author of "Fasts and Festivals," was a splendid dresser. Charles Fox was a beau
when young, and Ijords Carlisle and Essex wore red heeled shoes. Indeed, as muffs,
velvets, ruffles, gold lace, perfumed powder, etc., were in general use, there is nothing
wonderful in the fact that coxcombs were then rather common animals. Is the race
now extinct 1    We must hope at least that it is less numerous.
Beau Brummel, Byron tells us, was one of the three great men of the nineteenth
century. The following was the order in which he placed them : Brummel first,
Napoleon second, and himself third ! Brummel's origin, like that of many greater
men, was humble, the founder of the family being a Treasury porter. The father of
the subject of our sketch was, it is said, a confectioner, and his son, George, was born
7th June, 1778.
Of his education we hear nothing till 1790, when he was sent to Eton, where
thus early he was distinguished by the title of " buck," and so, in his case, the " child
was father to the man." The great care with which he avoided the streets on a wet
or muddy day, his white stock with its gold buckle, and the dignity of his strut,
formed fair and abundant subjects for the fun and jeers of his fellows. From Eton
Brummel passed without much honour to Oriel college, Oxford, on leaving which he
was gazetted as cornet in the Tenth Huears, commanded by the Prince of Wales,
afterwards George IV. The cornetcy was the gift of the Prince, who had taken a
particular fancy for our boy beau, then in his sixteenth yeai. Any peculiarity was
always sure to attract the attention' of the Prince, and Brummel, besides being very
handsome, was a bit of a genius in his way, being possessed of a little wit and a large
stock of assurance. When the Prince was married to the Princess Caroline, Brummel
was in attendance as " chevalier d' honneur."
That the beau was a great favourite with the fair sex, we are led to believe from
the following anecdote.—At a ball given by a member of the household, a very
celebrated beauty, for some reason or caprice, would dance with none of the assemblinl
pleading nobles. At last Cornet Brummel was announced, when she rose and offered
to dance with him, much to the chagrin of her previous numerous suitors. It is
further said, that in passing one of the discarded nobles, our beau asked who that ugly
THE ATTEMPT 85
man at the mantle-piece was ; to which the reply was—" My dear fellow, that is
the master of the house." This last was one of the many examples of Brummel's im¬
pudent assurance, for he had come uninvited.
With his regiment, he was the life and soul of the mess, but on duty fell very far
behind, and indeed only knew his own company by a man who was afflicted with a
very blue nose. On one occasion when this signpost, with some others of his com¬
pany was transferred to another, Brummel arrived late, as usual, and falling in behind
his friend of the nose, had to be put in his right place by the officer in command.
After the affront of the first moment, his usual assurance came to his aid, and he
laughed it off. Owing, however, I suppose, to the favour of the Prince, Brummel got
rapid promotion, for we hear of him as captain in 1796, only three years after he
entered.
In appearance Brummel was so handsome, that it is said he might have gained a
livelihood by being a life-sitter for an AjjoUo. His face was long, with a fair com¬
plexion, and whiskers inclined to sandy. He had not regular features, but possessed
a very high and well-developed forehead, the organ of self-esteem being very high ; for
inordinate self-esteem and a large share of impudent assurance, were among his worst
faults. We are not told so much of his virtues, but we may believe lie had at least a
few. He was very kind-hearted, most excellent company to those whom he favoured,
and whatever happened, was never put out, but always ready with an answer. One
day, in driving into the barrackyard with four horses, one of his comrades called out
to him—" Hallo, Brummel, when did you start four 1" " Only since my valet gave
me warning for making him "travel with a pair," was the ready reply.
On the occasion of a review of the troops by one high in command, the whole
regiment was in line, and the commander on the ground before Brummel (who had
then reached the rank of major) appeared in breathless ha-ste. Of course such neglect
of duty could not be overlooked, and the dignitary, in great wratli, began a severe
reproof which, nothing daunted, the major answered, by saying—" Excuse me, my
lord, but in my anxiety to explain this most unfortunate business, I forget to deliver
a message which the Duke of Eutland desired me to give you when I left lielvoir this
morning. It was to request the honour of your company at dinner this evening."
After this, the two parted amid showers of smiles, the general, feeling delighted witli
the honour done him, and Brummel, with his successful ruse. The moment the revicM'
was over, Brummel gallopped back to Belvoir as fast as he came, to apprise the Uuke
of the guest he might expect, as, with his usual impudence, the invitation was his own
giving to screen himself.
86 THE ATTEMPT
The arriral of an order for his regiment to go to Manchester was so little to
Brummel's liking, that early in the following day he went to the Prince to try to get
the order reversed. He said, " Your Eoyal Highness, I have heard that we are ordered
to Manchester! You must be aware how disagreeable this would be to me ; I really could
not go—think, your Eoyal Highness, Manchester ! Besides (notice his tact), you would
not be there. In fact I have with your permission determined to sell out." No doubt
he expected to be entreated to remain, or at least that different orders would be issued
for the regiment. In this however he was quite mistaken for the Prince just said, " Oh
by all means, Brummel, do as you please."
Thus before he was of age, he left the Tenth, at that time the most dashing
regiment in the army. The profession did not however lose much as the army was
never the place for a youth who seemed to give his entire time to personify elegant
idleness. A year after leaving the army. Beau Brummel came into his fortune amounting
to thirty thousand pounds, and at once set up a very fine establishment at Xo. 4,
Chesterfield Street, May Fair, where with the help of a man cook, he entertained many
congenial spirits, among whom the prince was not an unfrequcnt guest.
The prominent point in Brummel's character was, as has been noticed, his in¬
ordinate love and study of dress. He has been described as " an over dressed fiaical
puppy;" and is said to have worn a dove coloured coat and white satin nether garments,
witli an artificial scented clove carnation in his button hole. We are told that two
glovers were specially employed to make his gloves, the one being charged with tlie
thumbs alone. He had three hair-dressers employed on his precious head, and his
neck-tie was designed by the first portrait painter in London. He was the first to
introduce starched neck-ties, and about this article of dress must have been more tlian
ordinarily particular, as a friend going to his house one day, met his valet coming
downstairs with an arm full of the said articles, which, on being questioned, he de¬
scribed as " our failures." If one did not tie properly at the first trial it was cast
aside as useless, and sent back to the laundress. IS'otwithstanding all this, Brummel,
it is said, was not a "dandy," but only a "beau," in the true sense of the word, i. e.,
" handsome," " fine," and he himself used to remark that the greatest mortification that
a gentleman could endure, was to attract attention in the street by his appearance or
dress. How he further supported and adorned tlie character of beau, and occupied the
high place assigned to him by Byron as a " lion " of the nineteenth century, we hope
to sketch in a second paper.
Incognita.
THE ATTEMPT 87
^t last 0f i^t 6i3t|s.
The night had closed in, and the long day was done,
The battle was fought, and the victory won ;
By his camp-fire King Koderick in sadness sat down,
Despairing of keeping his tottering crown.
For Taric, the Moor, had invaded the land,
And ravaged the plains with his infidel band ;
The Christians were slaughtered, their strongholds were ta'en,
And the Moslem was bent upon conquering Spain,
And fierce were the combats, and heavy the toil.
While Eoderick was bravely defending the soil.
But every great effort all vainly seemed made.
For traitors deserted, and friends were betrayed,
The African's forces gained field after field.
And fate to the conqueror's touch seemed to yield.
Alas for King Eoderick ! Alas for the land
That must languish and pine 'neath a foreigner's hand !
Alas for the monarch, all covered with shame.
Who must fly for his life, without honour or fame ;
The throne of his fathers abandoned and lost,
And he on the tempest of misery tost !
Such thoughts were now coursing through Roderick's brain,
As he gazed on the battle-ground cumbered with slain ;
While on high the pale moon, from her dark cloak of night.
On the gore-reddened sward looked with sad face and white;
And the low moaning wind swept iji fitful gusts by.
As it fled to the olive-grove's branches to die,
And chaunted a requiem mournful and slow.
For the warriors brave, now in death lying low.
It struck in its passage an answering chord
In the breast of Spain's downcast and desolate lord;
And with his proud spirit in agony wrung.
This song was by Roderick despondingly sung :—
88 THE ATTEMPT
" Oh Taric, Oh Taric ! thou scourge of my race,
Wliom me from Toledo's fair dwellings would chase,
Why earnest thou over from Africa's strand
To tyrannize over my innocent land 1
Was broad Mauritania too small for thy sway ]
Were its people too few thy commands to obey 1
Oh, Ilercule's Pillars ! why did not the tide
'Tween thy two giant shafts roll more broad and more wide ?
Then might the usurper his progress have stayed.
And some province less distant his conquest have made.
" Oh Julian, Count Julian ! false traitor and base.
Why knew I thee ever, or e'er saw thy face 1
Thou treacherous serpent! thou double-faced foe !
How now can I friend from sworn enemy know 1
Oh falsehood ! how fair the disguise thou canst don,
How beauteous the mantle thou often put'st on !
How smooth the soft words, and how sweet the bland smile
How deadly the snare, and how fatal the wile !
Oh Julian, Count Julian, a curse on thee rest!
May heaven-bom peace never dwell in thy breast,
May the darts of remorse thy false soul ever tear,
And be thou the prey of the darkest despair !
May a blight rest on all that thou boldest as good,
May it eat up thy brain, may it canker thy blood !
May thy long years of guilt in an evil death end.
And, dying, leave thou neither mourner nor friend !
" Once more,^Oh Hispania, the sword shall be drawn
To retrieve the sad fate of the days that are gone.
Once more will my chiefs at my battle-cry meet.
And swear or to conquer, or die at my feet.
Once more on my banner, the Lion of Spain
Shall summon the Goth to the conflict again;
The red tide shall swell Guadalete's swift wave.
And the turf shall be soaked with the blood of the brave.
THE ATTEMPT 89
Then, Taric, the light of thy power shall wane,
And Roderick once more as a monarch shall reign.
The Lion and Castle* their fame shall regain,
And the Moor shall for ever be driven from Spain.
But I, till that day, must a wanderer be,
No home, save the camp and the saddle, for me.
Eevenge ! is my watchword, my sword my ally,
My object—to conquer the Moslem, or die !"
He ceased ; the last notes of his sorrowful lay
'Mid the roar of the wind died in whispers away ;
His mantle he wrapped round his shivering form,
That shook with the violence of passion's wild storm;
Then laid himself down by the dying watch-fire,
Whose light seemed in flickering flame to expire;
And as late the night grew, the darkness more deep,
His woes were forgotten and buried in sleep.
Mas Alta.
The next morning, the sun shone forth in all its splendour. Minna, who
thoroughly understood her household duties, although seldom much inclined to attend
to their discharge, had greatly exerted herself this morning. The breakfast things had
been cleared away ; some sandwiches prepared for lunch ; and assistance lent in some
of the wonderful efforts which were being made for the reception of the Herr Sheriff.
And now, duly equipped for the promised sail, our young friend repaired to the river
side. In passing through the garden, she met Frederika still in morning dress, with
cooking apron on—" Is not this a glorious day, Frederika 1"
" Yes, indeed ; what a pity it is not washing-day," responded the latter.
* The Spanish national arms.
M
90 THE ATTEMPT
" Are you not going with us, Frederika 1" asked cousin William, descrying the
two girls I'rom tlie o})en window of his room.
" Certainly not, when I know how much has to be done at home." In vain
did he urge her to change her determination—she resisted all persuasion, and he had
to hurry off without her. In the meantime, the young people, who had been joined
by Emma, a girl of fifteen, the daugliter of the neighbouring clergyman, had decorated
the little boat with flowers and evergreens, and were just ready to start, when an old
and trusty messenger appeared in great haste and evident trepidation. He was so
breathless, that some moments elapsed before he could gasp out—" The Herr Sheriff is
coming."
" How ! what! where 1" exclaimed Herr S.; and it was now his turn to be
alarmed.
" The letter must have been mistaken, for I assure you sir, he is even now on
the way."
" I see him coming, papa," cried Minna, " he has left the house, and is now in
the garden." Edward wished to push off the boat, and escape before the unwelcome
visitor joined them, but the girls would not listen to the proposal, to leave their mother
in the dUemma this unexpected arrival would place her in. The Sheriff now
apjiroaches, pipe in mouth; about thirty-five years of age, tall, indeed I may say
commanding looking, but rather portly for his years. Although Herr S. was not a
little annoyed at the premature arrival of his visitor, he could not now help himself,
so, after exchanging civilities with the gentleman, he frankly told him that the docu¬
ments he had come to inspect could not be finished before afternoon. That being the
case, he hoped he would find some amusement for a few hours; " perhaps," added he,
"you do not dislike boating." The young people had observed, much to their discom¬
fiture, that although he said nothing, their guest had been surveying with great
complacency both themselves and their small craft; they were consequently not
surprised to hear his reply—" I have never tried, but don't object to do so now. Is
the plank quite firmly fixed," inquired he in a doubtful tone; " and is it strong
enough ?"
" Your mind may be quite easy on that point," answered Edward; " but suppose
we fetch one of the thick oaken boards— eh, William 1" Off starts the obedient
William, and by the time the extra strong plank is adjusted, Fran S. has contributed
some additional delicacies to the provision basket, and carefully placed her beautiful
red shawl for the Herr Sheriff to sit upon, to the intense disgust of IMatilda. At last
all preparations finished, the boat is j)uslied off, Herr S. repairs to his oflict! there to
THE ATTEMPT t) 1
hurry on the despatches, whilst his good wife and careful daughter plunge themselves
into sundry culinary mysteries.
The soft morning air, the cheerful warbling of the birds, the brightness and beauty
of all around, soon exhilarated the spirits of our youthful party. Even Minna, who
had not left her mother and sister without some misgivings, speedily forgot the for¬
saken kitchen and pantry, as well as the presence of their formidable visitor. It was
something to be oblivious of the Herr Sheriff, for he sat immediately opposite to the
ladies, looking very comfortable, one might almost say pleased, and endeavouring to
prove that he was possessed of some amount of gallantry, by trying to blow the smoke
from his pipe to the other side of the boat. His politeness went still farther, for,
seeing how very crowded the ladies were, he pointed to the vacant space beside him¬
self, and said—" If you don't object, be seated." With repressed tittering the girls
literally pushed the shy Emma off the bench, nnd, blushing deeply, as if guilty of some
dreadful misdemeanour, she saw herself forced into the seat of honour.
Cousin William was ready with help wheresoever and whensoever it was wanted;
he was particularly attentive to Minna, but his care and assistance were received witli
much indifference. The only time she seemed duly to appreciate his aid, was when
his rich deep voice joined her own in the choruses of the numerous boat songs, glees,
etc., which one after the other enlivened the sail. When the musical repertory had
been fairly exhausted, a dreamy silence seemed to creep over all, and in the midst
of sweet visions and beauteous fancies, Minna was ruthlessly roused by IMatilda,
whispering—" Now this is really unbearable."
" What ?"
" I declare he has only spoken four words."
" Who ?"
" Your stupid Herr Sheriff, of course."
" Well, if it please him to be silent, why not ?"
" No, no, it is quite insufferable ; and he is by no means so old that he should
presume to neglect all the rules of good breeding. Might he not say one word to poor
Emma 1"
" Emma is quite happy with her own thoughts, I am sure," answered Minna; and
before she could add more, " Stop there," was shouted from the farthest off side of the
river. The young people turned round greatly astonished, and wondered who could
be calling to them.
" 'Tis he," exclaimed Otto and Edward.
" Who 1" inquired the Sheriff.
92 THE ATTEMPT
" Our friend Arwed Xorthstar, a young poet," replied Otto rather curtly, and
hastened to push the boat to the bank, regardless of the evident annoyance of their
guest, at the (to him) untoward interruption.
" But where in all the Avorld have you come from ? " eagerly demanded Otto, as
Northstar jumped into the boat.
" I reached Blumenwelt shortly after your party had left, but the ladies directed
nie how to overtake you, and here I am."
" Allow me to introduce my friend Arwed Northstar," began Otto, notwith¬
standing the angry looks of the Herr Sheriff—" my cousin Minna Eeinfeld, Miss Matilda
Berg, Miss Emma Miiller, Herr Sheriff" . . . (" Fiirst" supplemented the latter.)
" And now, my dear fellow, as T see you have brought your guitar, we expect you
to draw some sweet sounds from it for our benefit; the sail will not be much
longer, so do not fear your powers being overtaxed."
Arrived at their destination, the young folk speedily chose the most suitable place
for the pic-nic, and all, with the exception of the Sheriff, lent assistance in the removal
of the baskets, bottles, and other necessaries.
" Did you see how disagreeable he looked at Arwed's introduction ?" whispered
Matilda to Minna, " one would think he was the great Mogul! and I declare he has
taken possession of the most comfortable seat on yonder old trunk, without offering it
to any one !    Such boorishness I have never seen I "
Minna had other things to occupy her thoughts than the boorishness of Herr
Fiirst. Had she not seen for the first time to-day a real live poet! and one with fine
expressive dark eyes, black hair, and noble forehead, who had sat beside her, and
spoken so beautifully about the enchantment of such a morning, that he had almost
drawn tears from her eyes ! Arwed was the hero of the hour; the Sheriff was entirely
forgotten. Indeed, had it not been for William, who could not get a word from
cousin Minna to-day, I fear the guest would have had but a scant share of the delicacies
which Fran S. had added to the provision basket on his account.
So soon as the good things had been discussed, the young people agreed to stroll
about and gather wild flowers. Matilda and Minna went together. " Could you
believe it, the lazy creature has never moved, and did you see," exclaimed the excited
Matilda, " how he kept everything that was offered him, and never thought of us 1''
" Well, why should not he 1"
" You country girls are far too humble-minded, and set too little value on the
dignity of our sex ! "
" That is not concerned in the handing of a plate suiely ! "
THE ATTEMPT 93
" I beg your pardon, it is just an attention to these small matters, that raises or
gradually lowers our sex. I believe you would be ready, like Ottalie, in the story we
were reading the other day, to pick up whatever the lords of creation chose to let fall
at their feet."
" And why not, if it lay nearer to me than to them ? "   answered Minna.
" No, no, you esteem yourself too lightly, I only wish I could have such a Pasha
to guide.    I would give him a bit of my mind, and teach him to be gallant ! "
" Permit me to join you, ladies " interrupted Arwed ; " I think I can guide you
to where you will find the prettiest flowers." William, who ha4, hitherto, very good
naturedly carried on a one-sided conversation with the Sherilf, also approached, carry¬
ing a bunch of anemones, but when he saw Minna escorted by the young poet, he
modestly withdrew, not however, before a slight tinge of melancholy diffused itself
over his countenance."
" The Herr Sheriff wishes to go," shouted Edward in a stentorian voice, which
resounded through the island.
Minna started j " I had almost forgotten! . . . and the good mother and
Frederika toiling at home ! "
" Please do not let any dissonance disturb the harmony of this charming morning,
it would be a sin," said Arwed.
" But when one shirks a duty," timidly suggested Minna.
" Duty 1" cried Arwed, " It is our duty to make life happy ; thoroughly, truly,
and purely, to enjoy each hour; to nourish within us all real poetry, all that tends to
ennoble our natures. There are earth-worms enough and to spare, who crawl along the
ground; the eagle towers above the mountains; the butterfly flits among the flowers !"
And now the shore is reached, and the party once more seated in the boat. Matilda
did not miss the opportunity of abusing Herr Fiirst for hastening their departure, and
that, without once consulting the ladies. The little vessel sailed softly and gently
down with the stream; a few more songs were sung, then a general calm o'erspread
the company. The two cousins fell asleep, the Sheriff followed their example, and Emma
was again quite happy with her own thoughts. Edward had begged her bouquet, and
stuck it into his button-hole. Every now and then, as her pye caught the pretty
buds, she blushed, and wondered if she had done wrong in yielding them u]>, and if
she ought to tell her mother. William remained awake and guided the helm ; Minna
fancied she could trace a sad expression in his face, so she sought to avoid him, and
forbore looking in his direction.
Suddenly, Matilda, who had hitherto been sitting quite still, jumped up, and
94 THE ATTEMPT
seized Herr Fiirst by the arm, calling out " You are tumbling into the water ! " He
certainly had almost lost his balance, and one moment more, would have plunged him
into the river. He roused and readjusted himself on his seat, and although evidently
annoyed at the contretemps, lifted his hat to Matilda, and said in a tone, for which
the young ladies had not given him credit, " Extremely obliged." The astonishment
of all on board was still greater, when on landing, he, with the most studied politeness,
assisted Matilda out of the boat, and escorted her to Blumenwelt, where the worthy
Frau S. and Frederika, had a sumptuous repast awaiting them. K. H. D.
" (^xmvd raj^ta fmnxx bldoxm rcyit."
The question which naturally occurs to the mind of everyone, on reading the
above line is, which of the two victories mentioned there is the greater—the pliysical,
or the moral 1 the victory by force of arms, or by force of intellect ? In the present
Essay we intend to illustrate shortly our view of the subject. Let us first, then, con¬
sider the physical victory—the victory by force of arms.
From the time that men began to multi]ily upon the face of the earth, love of
conquest has always been one of their predominant passions. It springs from different
motives in different men : in one, it is caused by avarice and love of riches; in
another, by an overweening desire for power; in a third, by a laudable M'ish to extend
the progress of civilization ; a fourth devotes his life to battle, fojidly hoping that his
name will be famous through all times, and be handed down to posterity as that of the
greatest of conquerors; while the restless ambition and active mental organization of
a fifth, lead him to prey upon his fellow creatures, in order to find employment for his
superabundant enei'gies. The characters of conquerors differ as widely from each other
as do ther leading motives. One seems to owe all his success to the affection for him¬
self, and confidence in his powers with which he has inspired his men; mixing freely
with the common soldiery, sharing their toils and hardships, their jests and merriment,
in short, completely identifying himself with his troops, he makes himself popular and
even beloved. A striking example of this kind of general may be found in Alexander
the Great. Pn the other hand, there are some generals who hold themselves com¬
pletely aloof from their inferiors ; issue all their orders through a delegate; enforce
obedience by the strictest discipline ; and, wrapt in a proud consciousness of their own
superiority, inspire the vulgar mind with feelings of awe and wonder : such a man was
THE ATTEMPT 95
the Duke of Wellington, of whom Britain is justly so proud. But, in spite of these
differences of character and conduct, there are certain qualities which must be possessed
by all conquerors. A conqueror must have the judgment to plan his designs, the
authority to enforce them, and the courage to execute them. He must be patient and
persevering, daring and hopeful. He must never neglect a favourable opportunity;
and, on tlie other liiuid, he must guard himself against taking any rash or hasty
measures. When we consider all the qualities requisite to a great conqueror—when
we reflect how few men there are, in whom they can be found united—^when we take
into account all the dangers and difficulties of an invasion—the skill and judgment
which are required to plan its details, and the promptitude, courage, and prudence
necessary to carry them out, we shall comprehend and approve the honour and glory
which are the just reward of a skilful commander, though the conquered nation be
barbarous and uncivilized. But when we remember that in the line which is the sub¬
ject of this Essay, the conquered nation was Greece—Greece, the most learned and
polished of ancient kingdoms : Greece, the land of freedom—the birthplace of Lycur-
gus, of Socrates, of Homer, of Aristotle : Greece, before whose determined bands the
hosts of Persia had wavered and fled—whose annals were illustrated with the names
of Marathon and Thermopylae; we may well applaud the valiant army able to subdue
such a nation : we may indeed consider them capable of executing whatever enterprise
they might undertake ; and we are forced to confess that this was indeed a great and
glorious victory, for which it would be hard to find a parallel in ancient or modern
history.
We must now consider the second victory mentioned in the line ; that is the
moral victory—the victory by force of intellect. The progress of this conquest is
necessarily much slower than that of the other ; indeed, in most cases, it takes many
years to bring it to maturity. But, when it is once established, it stands on a far
firmer footing than any conquest brought about by war and bloodshed. A conquered
nation, however well they may be treated, cannot but look back with regret on the
days when they were free, and owned no foreign master ; while a nation once made
acquainted with the blessings of civilization, can only recall with a shudder the days
of their ignorance and barbarism. How different, too, is the progress of civilization,
from the advance of a conqueror! !N"o blazing cities, no trampled corn-fields, no
desolated homes, no blood-stained battle-fields mark its course; calmly and majesti¬
cally it advances, overcoming all obstacles, silencing all dissentient voices, till a nation
of savages becomes a learned and refined community. It has been said that knowledge
is power, and these are words which can be proved by our daily experience.   What an
96 THE ATTEMPT
infinite advantage is possessed by a member of a civilized community, though he may
only have acquired the simplest rudiments of learning, over the rude and untutored
barbarian ! As a land gradually emerges from the darkness of barbarism into the light
of civilization, what a change do we behold in it ! The inhabitants, who formerly
cared for nothing but war and the chase, diversified and relieved by rioting, gluttony,
and drunkenness, acquire a taste for nobler occupations, and purer pleasures. Forests
and morasses give place to fruitful corn-fields, and smiling vineyards; schools and
temples are erected, and the arts and sciences take root and flourish. When the
Eomans conquered Greece, they were indeed partially civilized ; but what a difference
was produced in Italy, when Grecian refinement was grafted upon the strong and
powerful, though as yet uncultivated Roman understanding ! The fine arts, trans¬
ported into Italy, found there a congenial soil, and ever since that time, Italy has been
famous through the world for its master-pieces in poetry, oratory, sculpture, painting,
and architecture. Much might be said on so fertile a subject, but the limits of this
Essay forbid our proceeding further. Dido.
A ready answer is often more powerful than the most persuasive eloquence. A
suppliant while searching for arguments which he imagines indisputable, and certain
to secure the wished for reply, should remember that he thereby allows numerous ob¬
jections to arise, and an answer to be framed very unlike the one he hopes for. I
remember a case in point. A celebrated Greek philosopher, was visited by a young
man who requested permission to be enrolled in his classes. The philosopher, without
speaking, took a cup and filled it with water to the brim. He thereby intended the
student to understand that the number of his pupils being complete, he was unable to
admit him. The young man's ready wit instantly supplied an answer. Still in
silence, he took a rose leaf, placed it on the water, and returned the cup to the pro¬
fessor. The latter was so pleased with the young man's ingenuity, that he granted
his request. Cara.
THE   ATTEMPT 97
LADY    MACBETH.
Our scene lies no longer on the warm, sunny shores of Italy, but on the moun¬
tains and blasted heaths of the Highlands of Scotland. ISTor is our heroine now a
young impassioned girl, whose history is loved by posterity, but a proud ambitious
woman, hated by many, and even partially defended by but a few—we mean the
grand-daughter (as history tells us) of Kenneth IV., the Lady Graoch, afterwards the
wife of that fell tyrant, Macbeth.
Let us preface the following remarks by an endeavour to fix in our minds some
idea of her outward appearance. Of it, history leaves no description, nor does it, in¬
deed, to any great extent, of her mind and character : for what we know or can guess
of all, we are indebted to Shakespeare. It is Shakespeare's Lady Macbeth that we
know and discuss; it is Shakespeare, who, from the bare historical account, has filled
up and embodied that which, without his aid, would have been to us little more than
an empty name.
Apparently, the only direct reference to Lady Macbeth which our poet can have
found in the chronicles of the great Scottish historian, HolKnshed, is comprised in the
following few lines :—" The words of the weird sisters also (of whom before ye have
heard) greatlie encouraged him hereunto, but especially his wife lay sore upon him to
attempt the thing, as she was verie ambitious, burning in unquenchable desire to bear
the name of a queen." The words were few, but they pointed to the agent that had
been at work in the " bloody business," and the darkness of doubt as to why such
horrors were perpetrated, being once penetrated by a ray of light, was for ever banished
by the clear view taken by the poet. The historian, dealing with facts and results, left
to the poet the analysis of the character, the reasons, and the intentions of the actors.
True, neither historian nor poet has left any description of her personal appearance
such as the novelist gives of his heroine. We are not told the colour of her eyes, the
length of her hair, her height, nor her complexion ; but her character is put before us
plainly and forcibly, and that outward form, which seems to us to be the most suited
to the inner thoughts and feelings as described in her words and actions, is the one
with which, in our mind, she nmst be endowed. The usual idea of the appearance of
our heroine, is that she was of high stature, large dimensions, and of somewhat over¬
powering presence ; that she had dignity and pride in her demeanour, combined with
May 1806. N
98 THE ATTEMPT
a gracious manner, particularly when playing the part of hostess, we are probably all
ready to allow. But this conception, or misconception, may partly arise from the
greater facility with which the mind fixes its ideas on that which is visible and tan¬
gible, than on that which it must create for itself from its own thought. We mean,
that when the world in general, or at least the Shakespearian world (which ought to be
the same thing), thinks even passingly of Lady Macbeth, there arises before its eyes a
vision of Mrs. Siddons, tall and majestic. Not so did Lady Macbeth appear to her
who so personated her. In her opinion she was a slight, soft-looking woman, deter¬
mined and bold, as is often the character of such small persons. She had a friend of
this description, who, in her mind, represented more correctly the outward appearance
of Lady Macbeth than she, with her dark eyes and lofty bearing, ever believed herself
to do. To this friend, and through this friend to Lady Macbeth, she used to apply
the description of Constance de Beverley in the trial scene, when standing facing her
judges in the gloomy death-like vault.
'' Her look composed, and steady eye,
Bespoke a matchless constancy ;
And there she stood so calm and pale.
That, but her breathing did not fail,
And motion slight of eye and head.
And of her bosom, warranted,
That neither sense nor pulse she lacks,
You might have thought a form of wax,
Wrought to the very life was there ;
So still she was, so pale, so fair.
*****
It was a fearful sight to see
Such high resolve and constancy,
In form so soft and fair."
Such then was the idea pictured of the outward appearance of Lady Macbeth by one
who had realized the character to an intensity surpassed by none. With such then let
us invest our heroine, and try whether we, too, may not feel and appreciate its fitness.
We do not wish here to attempt to clothe vice in beautiful colours, or in any way
to gloss over the sins of one whom Shakespeare has not spared ; but the poet, " who
utters all th^t is in men"—as one of the ablest and most truth-seeking of our clergy¬
men, but lately dead, has remarked,—has not lost sight of her human nature. He has
not even, as she, in her desperate prayer, dared to ask, " unsexed " her; for, ever and
anon throughout the play, the woman's nature " peeps through the blanket" of ambi¬
tion and cruelty in which she had wrapped, and all but smothered her better feelings.
THE ATTEMPT 99
Hollinshed, as shown in the passage above quoted, attributed the bloody deed,
which raised this guilty pair to their unquiet throne, in a great measure to the per¬
sonal ambition of Lady Mdcbeth to bear the name of queen. Now, we are inclined
to think that the prospect of her own aggrandisement was decidedly secondary to her
craving to see her husband crowned and recognized throughout the land as king. This
longing once making itself felt, reigns paramount in her breast; for it, all else is to be
sacrificed—truth, loyalty, even hospitality, that virtue which belongs to all climes and
degrees of civilization. All such impediments, with one fell sweep, are to be cleared
away. Hers is not a character to think, doubt, and defer; but to wish, wUl, and act.
She determines, and the deed is done.
Thus worked up to the one great act, cool and resolute she goes through with it.
Only once during the murder scene does a touch of humanity thrill through her veins,
as she stands by the bed of the brave old king, wrapt in sleep, with the daggers in her
hand, and relentless ambition in her heart. She sees an expression on the peaceful
countenance, which brings before her the face of her father ; a softer feeling wakes
within her for an instant; a quick thought of him, who might unseen be watching her,
stays her arm but not her purpose, for though withdrawing to the anteroom, the daggers
are laid where " He could not miss them," who, from that moment, commences the
career of guilt, which ends only with her madness and his despairing death.
The deed done, her calmness returns, the more easily, perhaps, because her nature
was not of an imaginative cast; for, as has been remarked, she hears no voice in the
stillness of midnight showering denunciations on their guilty heads, nor can she under¬
stand her husband's horror-stricken words : to her, " a httle water" clears them of all
that need cause them to tremble. "With what fearful hypocrisy does Lady Macbeth
bear her part, on the discovery by the household of the murder of King Duncan. The
gentle Macduff fears to tell her the news, so horrible in the repetition, that it,
" In a woman's ear,
Would murder as it fell."
Her cry for help has all the fear and misery in its echo of that of any ordinary woman,
and she suffers herself to be carried out of hearing of the discussion of the deed, the
perpetration of which she did not fear to look upon.
At length all seems prosperous, the third salutation of the weird sisters is ful¬
filled, and all Scotland hails Macbeth as king. Now, when all seems gained, a feeling
akin to sorrow assails the heart of Lady Macbeth; for a moment, outward greatness
pales, as compared with inward peace, and, with deep, strange pathos, she exclaims—
100 THE ATTEMPT
" Nought's had, all's spent,
When our desire is got without content,
'Tis safer to be that which we destroy.
Than by destruction live in doubtful joy."
But not to her husband does she betray a doubt of their happiness. She who, from
the commencement, "has poured her spirits into his ear," would not now inspire
him with discontent. Here comes out, in the strongest light, the difference between
Macbeth and his wife. At the beginning, we saw the former doubting and holding
back from the projected crime, scarcely able to resolve on raising his hand against the
meek and gracious king ; but once led on by a stronger mind to the perpetration of the
crime, remorse is lulled asleep. For " his own good aU causes must give way;" mur¬
der after murder is committed by his command on women and children alike as on
men. With Lady Macbeth the case was different; ready as she was to dare and to do
anything for the attainment of the one great aim of her life, that aim, once accom¬
plished, further cruelties are distasteful to her. Her nature, not entirely bereft of
womanly feeling, revolted from indiscriminate bloodshed. She had not contemplated
a continued course of wickedness at the commencement of her career, nor liad she cal¬
culated how many other cruelties would be necessary in order to cover the one great
sin, and to render secure her husband's seat on the throne. She, who had experienced
the tender love of a mother, could not look with indifference on the massacre of inno¬
cent httle ones ! though once, in the first strong intensity of her ambition, she had
declared herseK capable of sacrificing her own, " even while it was smiling on her
breast."
We are not told by the poet during how long a period the sceptre was swayed
over Scotland by the hand of Macbeth, but history causes us to believe that a con¬
siderably longer time elapsed between the coronation and death of the tyrant than can
be distinctly gathered from the play. This leads us the more readily to understand
the despair which at the last overwhelmed the mind of Lady Macbeth. As years rolled
on, the weight of sin became very heavy to bear, till, awakening to a sense of the awful
nature of her guilt, remorse fills her breast, remorse which, in a healthier mind, might
liave worked repentance, but in hers only wrought despair. Maddened by a haunting
remembrance of sin and an ever-present sense of misery, she sought peace in the tomb,
and forgetfulness in eternity, believing sadly that in that land—
" Lethe, the river of Oblivion, rolls
Her wat'ry labyrinth, whereof who drinks
Forthwith his former state and being forgets.
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasui-e and pain." des Eaux.
THE ATTEMPT 101
" Hail, bounteous May ! that dost inspire
Mirth and youth, and warm desire,
Woods and groves are of thy dressing,
Hill and dale doth boast thy blessing !
Thus we salute thee with our early song,
And welcome thee and wish thee long."
So says Milton; and in so saying, speaks the sentiments not only of the poet and
lover of nature, but of all with whom the agreeableness of the season is matter of any
interest,—as May has been immortalized in prose and poetry as the favourite month of
the year, when Nature, beginning to rejoice in her newly-acquired life, communi¬
cates something of her joyous spirit to all under her influence; commanding even more
universal and strong admiration from the occasional fits of April-like spleen, to which,
like a pouting beauty, aware of her power, she now and again treats her admirers.
Thus, the peculiar charm of May consists in her donning the petulance of April with the
first delicate instalments of the floral garments, which befit the handmaid of summer.
The first of the fresh green grass comes " creeping, creeping everywhere," covering the
maternal bosom of the earth with a soft, velvety verdure ; the trees put on their
fairy dress of green; the hedges are redolent of the delightful perfume of the white
hawthorn; and the orchards
" One boundless blush, one white empurpled shower
Of mingled blossoms."
In the meadows, now rich in the varied beauties of wild-flowers, may be gathered many
a sweet bouquet, made a thousand times more fragrant by the poet's breath upon their
precious petals. Let us bind a small garland in honour of May, of blossoms loved by
herself as well as her lovers.    Let us pluck daisies,
" Those pearled Arcturi of the earth,
The constellated flower that never sets ;"
" Those bowing adorers of the gale,
The cowslips wan, that hang the pensive head ;"
"brighter than the bright heaven, the speedwell blue," "the yellow crowfoot," "the
glowing violet," and we shall carry a wreath worthy of encircling the poetic brows
of May herself.
102 THE ATTEMPT
With the awakening of nature, the animal creation also rejoices, as the reveille of
summer is sounded by the voice of May. The cattle are turned out to pasture,
the lambs frisk about in the sunshine, the hives send forth their earlier swarms of
busy inhabitants, and the little glow-worm kindles her bright light to illumine the
gloaming of the now-lengthening evenings. But, with a yet more gratulatory sj)irit,
the feathered tribe keeps up a musical festival all day long, begun at " heaven's gate,
ere Phoebus 'gins arise," by the skylark—that favourite of Wordsworth, SheUey, and
the Ettrick Shepherd,—and wound up with the delightful music of Milton's pet, the
nightingale,—
" Sweet bird, that shunnest the noise of folly !
Most musical, most melancholy."
In sympathy with this general rejoicing of nature, festivals have been instituted
and kept on the first day of the return of May by all j^eople in all times, though differ¬
ing according to the several lights of different periods of history. The origin of English
May-festivals has been traced by some to the Floralia or Maiuma of the Eomans, and
by others, to the sports of the Swedes and Goths ; but according to Mary Howitt,
whose authority on such matters is by no means despicable, there is much more reason
for deriving them from the Phallic Festivals of India and Egypt, which were intro¬
duced to this country by our ancient priests, the Druids. However derived. May-day
was held as a festival as far back as the time of the Druids, by the burning of Belen's
fire in honour of Bel, alias Apollo, alias Orus, and its observation continued through
succeeding centuries ; Hone's every-day book, giving us an account (not less interest¬
ing from the quaint, old English in which it is written) how, when, " in the nioneth
of May, namely on May-day in the morning, every man, except impediment, would
walk into the sweete meadows and greeue woods, King Henry the Eighth, with Queen
Katherine his wife, and many lords and ladies, rode a-Maying from Greenwich to the
high ground of Shooter's Hill," where they were unexpectedly entertained by the clever
woodcraft of a band of archers, who must have been either a second edition of Eobin
Hood and his merry men, or figurers in a certain May-day festival derived from the
Moors, called the Morris dance, in which the actors blackened their faces to resemble
Moors, and represented such personages as Kobin Hood, Maid Marian, Scarlet Stokes-
ley. Little John, the Hobby Horse, Tom the Piper, and hosts of other characters, dif¬
fering according to the time when they were played.
From honest gatherers of olden chronicles, we learn that in London the May-pole
used to bo brought into the town with great ceremony, and the festival kept ■with all
sorts of pastimes, even the milk-maids and chimney-sweeps joining in the_ rejoicing ;
THE ATTEMPT 103
the former having borrowed silver plate from pawnbrokers, carrying it on their heads,
all gaily adorned with flowers, instead of milk-pails, and with music and dancing
parading before the doors of their customers, who seldom failed substantially to reward
their holiday-making.
From speaking with such regard of May-day customs in the olden time, my
readers may imagine that now will follow a most pathetic lament over the degeneracy
of our own days, when May-poles and their attendant sports are almost entirely obso¬
lete, and May allowed to come and go without a greeting such as she was wont to have.
But what is the use of mourning over what cannot be helped, however desirous we may
be of its restoration, especially when doing so would take away the charm of reading
the accounts of past May-day festivals, and fancying them part of the present time,
with the same feeling which imparts such great zest to the perusal of historical novels ?
Besides, though the ecstasy of her Avelcome is tempered by the bitter east winds, with
which (probably out of revenge for the comparative coldness of her welcome) May pro¬
verbially favours us, Edinburgh holds May one of the dearest of the months, and hails
her return accordingly. To be sure, the May-pole is not set up in Princes Street, nor
do the elite go a-Maying in Corstorphine Woods, but any who will, may gather dew
with the earliest on Arthur's Seat, and if not in truth a reviver of beauty, it will at least
be an earnest of the sweet May morning.
Though, by the unhappy union of one illustrious princess, deemed unlucky for the
solemnization of marriage. May is an auspicious month from the birthday of a more
fortunate sovereign, annually bringing round the glories of the Lord High Commis¬
sioner's "Walk, as grand a procession as any Lord Mayor's Show, and to many a happy
family the birthday pleasure of driving round that roadway honoured by the same
beloved lady's name. Though no more Bel fires are kindled on Scottish cairns, we
may encourage their well-known relics by responding to the well-known cry, " Please
to mind the bonfire;" and if on the first day of May no folk-mote meets to judge the
civic affairs of the nation, the congregation of Ecclesiastical Courts met in Edinburgh
this month are no less noteworthy. This is, indeed, the great and crowning glory of
the month of May in Edinburgh, supplying plenty of gaiety and good living for the
epicure in that line, and a rare intellectual treat in the discussions which may daily be
heard in the Courts of our Scottish Churches. In each of these may be heard charac¬
teristic debates. The General Assembly has its usual strict decorum broken by hard
discussions with regard to the organ question and other " innovations;" and the Free
Church is very satirical in its hits at its neighbour "over the way ;" but the grand
centre of  argument and opposition is Queen Street HaU, where the U.P.s do  not
104 THE ATTEMPT
scruple to give vent freely to their opinions. Every question started there has so
many violent supporters and opponents, that hours elapsg before any settlement is
arrived at, and the voice of the Moderator has no power to quell the troubled waters,
though frequent are the appeals to him, bawled out with a sonorous length, worthy of
Dominie Sampson's " Pro-di-gi-ous !"
Lest that alarming epithet should, with reason, be applied to the length of this
article, let me conclude with the parting admonition, never to own that May is not the
same sweet damsel that she used to be, but to rejoice in her presence as of old, for, in
the words of a poet,—
" May is come and May is flying,
Spring is liere and Spring is dying ;
Shout a welcome frank and flowing,^
Say farewell for she is going."
Elfie.
-^•&>-0-c^-^-
When the stars have fled from the darkened sky,
And the wild winds moan, and murmur, and sigh,
And the voice of the storm-king is heard hard by,
Bidding havoc reign around :
MTien athwart the heavens the dark clouds dash,
And through many a rift gleams the lightning flash,
And the thunder bends its pealing crash
To heighten the dismal sound.
And thou within, by the fireside bright,
Where all is cheerful, and warm, and light.
Art safe from the jaws of the ruthless night,
And can'st list to its wrath and smile;
THE ATTEMPT 105
When all thy loved ones are gathered around,
And to thee there comes but the distant sound
Of the storm, that many an echo hath found
In human hearts meanwhile,
O ! think of the poor without in the cold.
The helpless and young, the weary and old.
And deem not the voice of entreaty too bold,
Pleading hard for shelter and food.
Will thy pleasant home with its warmth and glee,
Seem any less sweet and bright to thee,
That thy heart hath melted at sorrow's plea,
And hath led thee on to good 1,
And when at the dark, dread midnight hour.
The weapons of heaven seemed charged with power
To waste and ravish and devour.
And wage a^deadly^strife ;
0 think of those who, in wild unrest,
Are toss'd on the ocean's seething breast.
That surges and writhes like a thing possess'd,
Toying madly with many a life;
Of the brave hearts all unused to fear.
Filled with thoughts too sad for speech or tear.
Of the forms that soon on a wat'ry bier.
May be cradled in deathly sleep.
And pray that there on the raging sea
The Lord their Keeper and Shield may be, .
That He these lone ones, no less than thee,
In His arms of love may keep,
o
106 THE ATTEMPT
So peaceful and sweet shall be thy rest,
So holy calm shall fill thy breast,
And while other hearts, with fears oppress'd,
Are heavy with unshed tears,
Thine, firmly staid on the loving care
Of the God who hears and answers prayer—
Whose fatherly presence is everywhere,—
Shall utter no note of fear.
Meigeag Bheag.
%ttitn ixDxa ^klktxhxih.
NO.   IV.
Chamouni.
"We reached Chamouni last night, my dear Lucilla, and have spent the greater
part of the day in this happy valley. I give you this piece of information, partly on
the authority of the guide-book, partly as founded on the statements of people who
ought to know : we ourselves have had no means of proving its truth. Indeed, if we
were to judge according to the evidence of our senses, it would be more easy to believe
ourselves in Amsterdam, or in the fiats of Lincolnshire, or anywhere else where moun¬
tains are unknown.
It is now four o'clock, and from morning till now, nothing has been visible but rain
and mist; not a trace of rock, or glacier, or valley, or even village, except the bit of muddy
road before us, along which a few miserable, drenched figures pass occasionally. Alto¬
gether, the day is the most sunless and cheerless that you can possibly conceive, and holds
out not the faintest ray of hope that it will ever relent. " Our sunshine is within" is an
excellent song by a home fireside on the dreariest winter day, but it has little comfort
in it for poor, shivering Alpine travellers. We can expect no warmth from those bare,
shining boards, or from those wide glass doors, intended to let us out upon a balcony,
commanding, we are told, one of the finest views in Europe, but now only encouraging
the wind and rain to pelt against them without mercy. The room feels and looks
empty with its light furniture, suited to the bright summer weather we are supposed
TUB ATTKMPT 1<J7
to be enjoying, and a bit of carpet, or curtain, or the sight of an English fire-place,
even though there were nothing in it, would be a great consolation.
None of us have been able to settle to do anything all day, though we have often
agreed very sagely that occupation would be the best cure for our discontent. Even
Miss Gilmour, with all her self-command, and quiet, methodical ways, has been almost
as idle as the rest of us. She sat down with her writing-desk the first thing after
breakfast, but it was too cold to sit stUl, and she had to get up to seek for shawls, and
to walk up and down the room, trying if she could get warm. The gentlemen took a
short walk, but reported that it was more disagreeable out of doors than in, and that
the attempt to see anything was hopeless. It struck me, at last, that it would be a
relief to grumble a little to you, wliich, you see, I am doing at full speed.
We have had occasional variety in watching what goes on at our hotel door,
which is nearly below us. There is one big, pompous American in particular, who
undoubtedly thinks that the whole creation was made for his especial benefit, and fails
very much in its duty when it does not subserve his desires. He is very angry at the
weather for being so persistently wet, and almost on equally bad terms with the waiters,
of whom he inquires every half-hour whether it will clear, and who can give him no
satisfactory answers. We hear by his loud voice that he is in the lobby, and then we
see him come out and look about him, and assure himself that it miist positively stop
raining in ten minutes more.
He breakfasted at the next table to ours, and we had a curious specimen of his
manners. When the waiter asked him what he would choose to have, he replied,
indignantly, " You have not surely forgotten the rump-steak I ordered last night?"
The garcon, quite in the dark as to his meaning, called the head-waiter—a very polite,
thorougldy obliging man. But, though he knew a good stock of English words, and
would have brought a "bif-teck" with the greatest pleasure had he known that was
required, he had unfortunately never heard the other term. The Imperator did not
choose to explain, but only vociferated about the disgrace it was to the establishment
that he should be subjected to this delay, after having taken the trouble to order his
breakfast the evening before. The object of his displeasure had no resource but in
silence and most respectful bows till the end of the harangue, when he left the
room to do the best he could, returning with cofiee and the lighter materials of break¬
fast. He was met by the same imperious demand, " Where's my rump-steak ?" A
low bow, and a half-polite, half-puzzled smile were all his reply, as, seeing he could
make no more of it, he turned to help in other quarters, leaving the old gentleman to
exercise the virtue of patience, if he possessed such a thing.    Presently the door
108 THE ATTEMPT
opened, and a covered dish appeared. Before, however, our poor hungry neighbour
had time to devour it with' his eyes, it was set down at our table. It was only our
omelette, not his rump-steak. This was quite too much to be borne, so, calling again
the hapless head-waiter, he delivered such a volley of musketry as might have been
expected to annihilate him utterly if it had not passed over his head. The discourse
was so rapid and so voluble, that the man was saved from understanding a word of it,
so he only stood, bowing at proper intervals, and looking up occasionally, with the
same quiet, puzzled smile, as if he would have said something if he had known what it
was all about. I don't know how the scene ended, for when we rose from table, no
rump-steak had appeared.
It is curious how many Americans we have met, with whom it seems to be
a point of honour never to alter their language, or to use the commonest foreign
expression. Of course, in the case I have told you of, it was insolence direct, but in
other cases it is simply a habit. We heard one talking of his expedition to the Sea-
of-ice, which set us thinking how many miles it might be to the North Pole.
I have stepped for a few minutes to watch a party of adventurers, who have
attempted the ascent of Mont Blanc, but have faUed for this time. They look toil-worn
and weather-beaten enough, as if they sorely needed snugger quarters than they found
last night, half-way up Mont Blanc on the Grands Millets. They mean to try again in
a week, to see if the snow has cleared away at all. Of course, I join all sensible people
in thinking it very wrong to hazard life so recklessly, yet something within me keeps
perversely sympathizing with them, and goes on singing,—
" And were I a laddie, I'd follow tliem too."
I wish I could give you some idea of yesterday's enjoyment in coming from Geneva,
up the valley of the Arve, with Mont Blanc always growing before us, higher and
grander. But I cannot tell you a little, unless I could teU you all. It is not only the
great mountains that are beyond the reach of description, but the wild river-bed, and
the pine trees, and the rocks, and the cascades, the wild-flowers, and tlie mossy nooks,
and the scrambling paths creeping among the trees ; all sorts of shady and all sorts of
sunny places fill up the measure of beauty, till it is almost too full. I could not help
feeling a kind of oppression, because I could not take it all in, in its fulness, but was
letting so much slip past me. I have sometimes had the same feeling even at home,
among the simplest things; and when it was first proposed that I should come to
Switzerland, I felt that it was not more loveliness I needed, but a more open eye, and
a largf'r, less pre-occupied heart, to feast on what I had got.   Yet, I am sure, that such
THE ATTEiMPT 109
glorious things as we had yesterday to look upon, do help greatly to give the clearer
eye and the wider heart. It has much joy in it, this feeling of being very small in the
midst of a great, beautiful world. It makes us feel more low and humble toward God,
when we come to know how little we can comprehend even of the outer circle of His
glory.
The diligence only comes as far as Salleuches, and it is there that the greatest
magnificence begins. We lingered so much, and sat down so often to look about us,
that we did not reach our journey's end till after dark, so it is partly our own fault
that we have not had a glimpse of Chamouni.
Half-past Ten p.m.
I cannot help adding a few lines though it is late. We have seen enough this
evening to make up for a dozen gloomy days. My letter was suddenly broken off by
the announcement that it did not actually rain, and that we might still have time to
see the source of the Arveron. So we set off, with very moderate expectations indeed,
towards the Glacier du Bois.
We have learned that this is the real name for the whole glacier of which the
Mer de Glace forms part. We walked along, by very muddy paths, almost striking
against the pine trees on each side, for we could never see more than a few yards
before us. We chatted with a bright, black-eyed little girl, the daughter of one of the
guides. She told us her name was Eosine. I think I shall not forget her, for it has
not been our lot to meet with many pretty things in human shape since we left home.
Some dreadfully withered faces we have seen in their picturesque costume, and with
the heirlooms of grandmothers and great-grandmothers twisted in their hair. Those
we met with on one of the lakes—I forget whether it was Thun or Bienne—were
more like Macbeth's witches than anything else you can think of. The disease called
goitre is the most frequent cause of this deformity. Savoy is said to be worse than
most parts of Switzerland, so this merry little specimen rather surprised us. I wanted
to hear something of her way of life, but the mention of her mother made her remem¬
ber that she would be expected home, and she was off like a deer.
Tlie path turned suddenly at length towards the torrent, whose roaring we had
heard all the way along, and we came upon it just where it foams out from under a
great arch of ice. It was very wonderful to see the waters rushing tumultuously out
to the light of day they had travelled so far to find.    They seemed rejoicing in their
110 THE ATTEMPT
liberty, but withal disposed to make rather a wild use of it. We stood and watched
them for a little, and then scrambled up the moraine—that is to say, the masses of
rubbish and stones that accumulate in different parts of glaciers. We came nearly
over the top of the cavern, and groped about, resolved that if our view was to be
limited, we would at least make the most of it. But, though a geologist might have
found much to think of here, we could not feel particularly interested. The mist was
still so thick that we could not see the Arveron below, and we could only guess from
the slope of the ground in which direction the glacier rose upward. So we began,
like children, to try how many different kinds of stones we could find, when some¬
body looked up with an exclamation that made us all do the same.
We held our breath in silence, it was so beautiful, so far beyond anything we
had ever pictured. Two white summits, pierced far up into the pure blue sky, sepa¬
rated from earth by miles of mist—one greater, and almost stainless white, the other
smaller, with flecks of black rock mingling M'ith its snow.
Have you ever seen a star look suddenly through a rift in the clouds, and felt a
conception of height, and immensity, and far, far distance thrill through you, that you
never felt when the whole arch was clustered with stars 1 It was something like this
that we felt as we stood—two points of space only present with us—the low, barren
spot of ground, where we groped in darkness ; the heaven, as it seemed, where those
spires of snow rested in light. One could not look at them and dream that they had
ever touched our earth, or needed its foundations to rest upon, or felt the breath of its
impurity go up.
Our guide tells us that the peaks are two of the Aiguilles, over the Col du G^ant,
and that we shall see them very well when we visit the Mer de Glace. I am sorry for
it; I would rather never see them but as they looked to-night. I have had a peep
into a new world, and I would rather not know that it is tethered to the old one. We
came home in darkness, this time genuine darkness, of night; but the fog was begin¬
ning to break. We got in, in time for the late table-d'hote, at which I think our appe¬
tites would have shocked you quiet people at home. There is moonlight now, and a fine
day is prophesied. If not, we shall not quarrel quite so quickly with the weather, for
we have found out that clouds and mists may give us a sight of brighter things than
we could ever have seen without them.
I hear of another letter going in your direction, so I shall enclose this instead of
keeping it till it is quite filled up, as I intended ; and you will, for once, be sur^arised
at the dutifulness of your correspondent and friend,
M. L.
THE ATTEMPT 111
A    SKETCH    IN    TWO    PAPERS.
So entirely did Beau Brunimel lead the fashion that his taste was absolutely pre¬
ferred to that of the Prince.   Young Lord going one day to his tailors for a new suit,
was shown only two sorts of stuff, one used by the Prince and the other by Brummel,
the one used by the latter being said to have a decided preference as " the thing."
Indeed, Brummel's taste in dress seems to have been his chief recommendation to the
'' first gentleman in Europe " who it is said would sit for hours watching the perform¬
ance of his friend's toilet and then insist on remaining to a quiet dinner at Chesterfield
Street. These two friends, intimate as they were at this time, soon after had a quarrel
which was never made up. After this circumstance, the Prince described his old
friend as a block that a tailor, might use to advantage to show off his goods. This
however might with more truth have been said of his royal master till the fell tyrant
corpulence, put his veto on elegance, at least, in the royal person.
Brummel laid great stress on good manners, and always corrected any breach of
them where he dared. On one occasion thus reproving a young friend for a glaring
breach—" Civility, my good fellow, may be said to cost nothing ; if it does not meet
with due return, it at least leaves you in the most creditable position." He had no
affectation, but a strong tinge of that graceful formality generally designated the " old
school." In fact, he was considered a most perfect and finished gentleman, though
what a gentleman means exactly has been much and often disputed. Por instance,
according to Lord Chesterfield, a gentleman must play on the violin, whilst another
authority pronounces that a gentleman should never be thirsty. Brummel, we are
told, was not only a gentleman, but a charming and amusing companion. He drew
well, and knew music a little, and was even guilty of composing " vers de societe,"
then much in vogue; besides possessing an album, in which was carefully and beauti¬
fully written a fine collection of poems and ton mots, by the great men of his day. The
" Quarterly Ecview " actually acknowledged that he had talent, and indeed he wrote a
poem called the " Butterfly's Puneral," a good imitation of our childhood's favourite,
the " Butterfly's Ball." He numbered among his intimate friends such men as Lord
John To^vnshend, and such women as the Duchess of Devonshire ; and Madame de Stael
considered it the greatest malheur in her A'isit to London, that she failed to please
him, the second that the prince did not call on her ; so that he must surely have
possessed more attractive qualities than mere elegance of dress and manners.    Society
112 THE ATTEMPT
in general considered him of such importance that no party was thought complete
without his presence, and the journals of the day, in their accounts of such things,
always placed the name of Beau Brummel first on the list.
Of the manner in which he conducted himself in society many stories are told,
illustrating that self-assurance which was such a prominent feature in his character.
Dining one day where the champagne was not superb, he thus addressed the servant—
" John, give me a little more of that cider." On one occasion his club friends asked
him why he had not dined with them the day before, to which he answered—" A
person of the name of li— asked me to notice him. Hence he prepared a dinner, to
which I asked A—, N"—, P—, and not a wish was ungratified, but R— had the
assurance to sit with us !" One time he asked to be allowed to drive home from some
fete in a friend's carriage, and being told that he might, he said, " Thank you exceed¬
ingly ; but how are you to go 1 surely you could not get up behind !" Of course of the
citj' or its denizens, Erummel pretended he knew nothing. One day a rich merchant
there asked him to dine, which he promised to do, saying, " If you wiU promise not to
tell." One day a visitor bothered Brummel very much with numerous questions about
a tour in the north of England which he had lately made ; when at last the inquirer
came to ask which lake he preferred, he said, addressing his valet—" Robinson, which
lake did I prefer 1" The prompt reply of the well-trained valet was, " Windermere,
Sir." " Oh, yes, so it was; " and so ended the questions. At an Ascot meeting
when standing talking to a certain lady, she asked him if he was not afraid to be
seen talking to so unfashionable a person. The beau replied—" Pray, don't mention
it; there is no one near us."
Though not a susceptible man, there were two occasions, at least, on which
Brummel did nearly " his quietus make with a gold ring." On the latter of these
affairs being broken off, a friend inquired the reason, when the beau said, " I discovered
that the Lady Mary actually ate cabbage ! "
As before mentioued, Brummel was once an intimate friend of the Prince of
Wales, who was always happy to see him at Carlton House. The rupture, it is said,
took place in consequence of Brummel, in fulfilment of a club bet, having said
" George, ring the bell," whereupon, it is added, his Royal Highness did as requested,
and ordered Mr Brummel's carriage. After the quarrel, when riding in the park with
a friend, Brummel met his Royal Highness with one of his friends. The Prince, to make
the cut more apparent, stopped and spoke to his friend, but took no notice of Brummel.
Never at a loss, the beau said quite aloud to his companion, as they passed on—" Who
is your fat friend ?"
THE   ATTEMPT
113
When in the good graces of the Prince, the beau did not much patronize clubs,
or gamble and drink in the style then so sadly comnlon. After the quarrel, however,
he appears to have abandoned himself very much to gaming, and at one time lost as
much as £26,000. He was successful in his play to a wish for a time, as is often the
way; but slowdy and surely his luck left him, till he was not only ruined, but, alas,
deep, deep in debt. So much so, indeed, that he was obliged to expatriate himself;
and the poor broken down man of fashion retired to the small continental town of
Caen, then a very common city of refuge. Brummel and Bonaparte, who had so long,
we may say, divided the attention of Europe, thus foil together.
In Caen, Brummel had two or three rooms at the back of a tradesman's house. The
ruling passion was not yet however quenched, for he remained in his exile a veritable
beau. His rooms were filled with the rarest articles of vertu Paris could yield. Tliis
taste he was enabled to indulge through the kindness of some of his true friends.
But through it all he was really, as he represented himself, a "broken bow" (beau).
George IV. at one time visited Calais, when Brummel sent him a snuff-box, which
he returned with £100 note enclosed, but would not see him. Brummel, was one
day accosted by a poor man who begged a halfpenny—" I've heard of the coin, never
had one, there's a shilling," replied the king of Calais, as the beau was now called.
In September 1830, when the Whigs were again in power, Brummel was appointed
consul at Caen for Lower oSTormandy. This apparently fortunate circumstance at first
led to trouble, as his creditors at once became so urgent, that he had to sell, not only
his articles of vertu, but even his furniture, to appease them. These must have been
of some considerable value, as he at one time gave 200 guineas for a tea sei"vice, and a
pair of vases sold for £300. It is evident from the following story that amid all his
reverses he had not forgotten his impudence. At dinner, in a friend's house one day,
he got a piece of fowl on his plate which, not pleasing him, he lifted with his napkin
and presented to his dog, saying, " Here, Alton, see if you can get your teeth through
it, for I caimot."    Brunimel was, even to the last, a most extravagant epicure.
After Brummel had been consul for some time, he wrote to the English government
to say that at Caen there was nothing for him to do, and so thought to save his country
some expense. He however expected that at the expiry of his consulship, he would
have been promoted to Havre or to Leghorn. The minister to whom he wrote, thanked
him, abolished the consulship, and with many fair promises, left our poor beau some¬
thing between a " moping idiot and a madman gay."
After this Brummel was reduced nearly to starvation, and was little more than a
fashionable pauper.    The following note serves to show his great poverty :—
p
1 14 THE ATTEMPT
"Dkar a.,
" Send me seventy-five francs to pay my washerwoman ; I can't get a shirt from her, and
she is really starving on my account. I have not money to pay my physician, or my letters to and
from England. yours,
G. B."
Soon after this, poor Brummel, while engaged in trying to get assistance out of
his difficulties from some of his old chums, had a sudden and severe shock of paralysis,
which he took for rheumatism. He was so ill that his friends did not attempt to
undeceive him. On his recovery, to the credit of a few of his friends be it said, he
received very handsome assistance. From this time poor Brummel's life was a most
melancholy one ; with no money, no real friends, and nothing to do. He who had
been reared in the lap of luxury, and accustomed to all the gaiety of the court of Eng¬
land, now dragged out his existence, with few or no resources, in a dull continental
town alone.    Such an end to such a life may well make my readers pause and think.
In 1834 Brummel had a second attack of paralysis. In May, 1835, things came
to a crisis with our poor friend, for he was arrested and actually put in prison, being
unable to pay his now large and increasing debts. He was in bed when the gendarmes
came, and was forced to get up and dress before them, and, for the first time, in a
hurry. Fancy the humiliation to the ci-devant leader of fashion to the court and
country of England. To show how strong the ruling passion still was, we are told
that writing from prison to a friend, and sealing with a wafer, he requested that it
should not be mentioned, lest he again frequented the world. After two months and
a half's incarceration, Brummel's friends paid his debts, and he was allowed to return
to his hotel once more. Visitors coming there, always asked to see the once celebrated
beau, and some requested to be placed opposite him at dinner.
At sixty-six Brummel had all the appearance and customs of a man of seventy-six.
From this time he was quite in his dotage, repeating over and over aU his old stories,
and actually wearing a black tie. In fact the quondam beau was now an entire sloven,
wearing a coat Avith holes in it, and dirty linen. He had now sold all he possessed,
even to his last pet snuff-box.
In 1831 he is described as not now a wit, but only half-witted. He used to
fancy himself in his own house, in May Fair, and held imaginary parties, to which
both dead and living celebrities were ushered in Irfy the man who had charge of him.
By 1838 he was a perfect imbecile, and as helpless as a child. He Avas at last put in
charge of the sisters of charity, at the hospital of " Bon Saveur," where he ended his
days in quietness and comfort, March 1840; and was buried in a land of strangers by
strange hands, Avith none to mourn him. Incognita.
THE ATTKMPT 1 1 0
Putting aside those authors who are forced to write for their bread—which always
seems to me the most miserable way of earning it, horribly suggestive of brain fevers,
and thoughts which will not come, and sitting up at night, with coffee, and wet linen
cloths to stimulate the brains, which have already given out as much as they had in
them,—putting aside these, it always seems to me that nobody should write but when
they have something they are burning to say, and really think they have earned a
right to say it.    I dare say we shouldn't have quite so many books as we have now if
everybody who hadn't something to say remained silent;  but then they would be
better books perhaps, or they might be, and one could always make the excuse, as
indeed one has to do now,—" that So-and-so has written him or herself out; but then,
poor things, I suppose they must write for bread."    I suppose it is oidy beginners
that have so much thought and care about it, but when they think they have really
something to say, it  is like  a  strange,  new  life,  a  little (Uterary) child  that be-    i
longs to them, and them only.    The carefully written and corrected roll of manu-    :
script assumes a sort of sacred aspect in their eyes.    It is liuished at last; every
thought therein so carefully expressed, so thoughtfully worded.    Perhaps it is to try
its fate first with some publisher.    How tenderly it is folded, stamped, and registered    ^
before it is committed to the post.    Our postal arrangements are generally considered    i
safe enough.   Thousands of letters and book parcels and samples travel from one corner
of the kingdom to the other, without any harm, every day, and are safely delivered at    I
their destination; but there is no end to the things which may'arise, to the pitfalls    j
and dangers lying around the path of the bag which contains the " something" some-    '
body has wanted to say, which is on its way to be made into a book.   Safely, however,    |
at last it reaches Paternoster Eow, that abiding place for almost all the publishers and
book shops, one would think, by the numberless times one sees the name on title pages.
Perhaps the anxious, waiting author learns that it has been safely received.   Then fol-    I
low weeks, it may be months, of weary " looking for the post:" for publishers are pro-    '
verbially slow and deliberate in their doings, and to them the   " precious child of
many hopes and fears,"—is just a manuscript, of no interest whatever, by an unknown
author.    At last, however, when hope deferred has long ago passed into deliberate not
thinking any more about It till it comes, the roll is returned ! with a cool note, or a
civil note, as the case may be, each bearing, however, the same purport, that "they,"
i.e., the publishers in question, had rather have nothing to do with it.
11 G THE ATTEMPT
Perhaps this little experience, which is a very dreary one to an enthusiastic or a
timid mind, may be repeated once, twice, or thrice before the author gives up pub¬
lishers, and makes up her mind to take the risk herself. It is all easy now; the
question was, and still is, only one of filthy lucre. Everybody is ready to do the
printing ; and the precious roll, of somewhat battered manuscript—for in appearance it
has not improved in those journeys to and from " The Eow"—is to become a Eook !
Not that the need of that much-valued quality of patience ceases yet; by no
means. Some time elapses before the first proof gladdens the eyes of the long-enduring
and ever-hoping author, who has thought, over and over again, that all the powers that
be were united to prevent her saying what she had to say. Then come the other
proofs, and the correcting, the tender pains which are taken that no misprint or mis¬
take of any kind should mar the beauty of this precious literary infant. Then come the
patterns for binding. Does anybody think it a matter of indifference to an author
that the (first) book should be well or ill bound ] Is it supposed to be enough that
the inside is good, and clearly printed ? Are most mothers altogether indifferent how
their little ones are dressed ? Do they take no pride in seeing that all about them is
pretty and in good taste ? And shall authors be Jess particular about their children ?
Not they ! The relative inerits of this stamp or that, of this style or the other, of red
edges or gilt, all are subjects of the gravest and most earnest consideration. Then
there is a speciinen copy on approval. The arrival of that is a moment which makes
up for all the weary indecision, the long waiting when one's fate hung in the balance,
the innumerable disappointments with the post; now, all that is over. The tiny
volume—the first generally is a tiny one— is actually in existence. It must be ; be¬
cause you have seen one ! Then a few more days, and your own parcel is sent you,
with an intimation that the rest have been sent to the appointed book agent.
It is done now; the hopes, the fears, the work, the impatient longings of the last
months, are all over. Your little book is ready ; and inasmuch as that little book is
what all should be, the product of an earnest heart and brain, written for a purpose,
because you thought something needed saying, and that you could say it; if it is, as it
is almost sure to be, something very precious and almost holy to you, something that
is yours, as nothing else is, your thought, your heart, your deepest self reproduced, to
do its work in the world, to help others on a right path, to cheer some through rough
ones, or to amuse others in a dull life; inasmuch as your book hopes to be and do any
or all of these, then that moment of pause between the final touch being given to
youi' work and its being sent forth into the world, ^yill be one of very grave and
serious moment to you.     If, as must sometimes happen, the work should be com-
THE ATTEMl'T
117
pleted on a Saturday, the Sunday that intervenes, before your tiny-winged messenger
goes forth on her mission, will be a Sunday full of grave and anxious thought.
You never perhaps spent one exactly like it before, probably you never may again, for
a new experience is ever more vivid than those which succeed it. To-day, your work
is yet your own, yours only. Whatever in it there may be of good, of truth, of value
to others, fighting like battles, needing like helps with yourself, has not been tested
yet. It is all yours. To-morrow, it will belong to the world, and go forth to do its
appointed work. Who would not wish to pause first, to ask a blessing on its career,
and wish it God speed ? Elma.
»   jJ-:=a<S»cCC"!8   '
%\t ^0ikr fUf^.
Eugged pile of old grey stone,
Reft of all thy ancient might.
Standing in the shadow thrown
By the gathering night;
Type of gloomy feudal ages.
From time's still unfolding pages
Long since passed away !
Tempest-riven, and stained, and rude,
Fitting theme for minstrel's rhyme,
Emblem of the warlike mood
Of that bygone time ;
Dwelling meet, for chief or rover,
Parting, when the day was over,
On his lawless way!
Battle chant, and wild lay, heard
Echoing through the midnight hall,
Hath the captive's spirit stirred
In thy dungeon's thrall.
While with jest, and stormy laughter.
Pealing from the glad board, after
Lengthened foray o'er.
Surely here did beauty's flower
Never shed its fragrance sweet,
For a ladye's dainty bower
Thou wert all unmeet;
Tiny feet and childish faces
iNever, with their thousand graces,
Flitted o'er thy floor.
Only love's untiring heart.
With its youth's sweet memories rife.
Could have bound its gentle part
To such restless life ;
Clinging, as the ivy clingeth.
When its green festoons it flingeth
Round some shrine o'erthrown.
Spell bound by the dreamj' night
Standeth rampart, arch, and tower,
Softened by the radiance bright
Of the moonlit hour.
Like the charm, that legend haunted,
Lighteth with its ray enchanted,
Ruder ages gone. J. I. L.
118 THE ATTKMPX
FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    O.    WILDERMUTH.
The repast, which had been the source of so much anxiety to Frederika, was over;
coffee had been served, as promised, under the lime trees, and the Herr Sheriff, after
enjoying a more comfortable nap on the drawing-room sofa than had been permitted on
the treacherous element, had repaired with his host to the office. The young people,
left to their own resources, sauntered forth into the woods, gathered flowers, and deco¬
rated themselves with garlands. Notwithstanding the many beauties around her,
Matilda was evidently not enjoying herself so thoroughly as might have been expected,
and the following observations would seem to prove that she had not been able to
forget the numerous injuries, real or fancied, which had that day been offered to the
dignity of her sex. " How could that Herr Sheriff eat so much dinner ! after such a
lunch too, and, as usual, helping himself first to the best of everything !"
" Oh Matilda, do not grudge the poor man his food ; he seemed to appreciate it."
"Then the fuss you make about him ! Dear me ! A Sheriff is not such a very
high dignitary. My father was Court physician, but we did not fancy ourselves supe¬
rior mortals on that account."
"I cannot understand," said Otto, " why you should be so hard upon the unfor¬
tunate Sheriff. He is a good man of business, and a most harmless member of society;
besides, you saved his life to-day ; and this afternoon, as you left the table, he was
heard to remark to my aunt, ' What a nice young lady she is.' This much from Herr
Furst is wonderful and quite unprecedented."
" I am sure I am very much obliged to him," answered Matilda, blushing ; "but
as far as eating goes, our poet Northstar did full justice to Frcderika's dinner."
" I did not observe him," replied Minna, much piqued. " I am not in the habit
of counting the number of pieces our guests put into their mouths."
" Well, well, Minna, we shan't begin our first quarrel on that account. See, here
comes your Star."
Whilst Minna and Arwed had been decorating themselves with ivy wreaths,
Frederika sat at the foot of a tree, knitting. Slie seldom raised her eyes, and it seemed
as if sl>e had set herself a task which must be finished before she could return home,
so intently was she working.    The good William kept near her.
THE ATTEMPT 119
" Do you not feel inclined to go a little way farther into the woods, Eikchen 1"
asked he.
" Oh, no, it is quite unnecessary ; we walked through the glen already, and I am
satisfied here."
" But we might perhaps find some lily of the valley farther on," urged he.
" The children bother one so with bouquets, that I should not know what to do
with more."
" Look how pretty!" exclaimed "William, as Minna and Arwed approached, crowned
with green garlands, and immediately followed by Edward and Emma, the latter blush¬
ing deeply under the shade of her broad hat; " we really must decorate ourselves,
Frederika."
" I shall have no wreaths on my head I can assure you, and have people taking
us for so many fools !"
The general entreaties, however, prevailed, and Frederika consented to a small
branch of ivy being fastened on her hat, protesting at the same time that quite enough
of the evening had been wasted, and that whatever the rest did, she must return home.
As they approached Blumenwelt, our young party was met by the peasant women
returning from their field labour, and the gay laughing couples attracted no small
attention. One little girl was heard to whisper, as Minna and Arwed passed, " Is it a
wedding, mother dear ?" Frederika instantly snatched the ivy from her hat, and was
beginning some long dissertation on propriety, when Otto seized her knitting, and
bearing it aloft on his stick, declared he would precede the company, and convince all
unbelievers that there was at least one notable person of the party !
There were a good many things to be attended to (or, at all events, Frederika
thought there were) before she could retire to her room. Minna offered to remain with
her; she was not the least sleepy; the night was so beautiful she would open the
window and look out in the bright moonlight. Matilda, the door of whose room had
been left open, softly approached, and laying her hand on Minna's shoulder,—" You
are not angry with me, Minna?" asked she.
"I! No; why should IV
" Because I teased your poetical Arwed."
" Xo ; but it (lid hurt me that," and the tears glistened in Minna's eyes.
" But child, child," said Matilda smiling and shaking her head, " you are surely
not so foolish as to wish to guide your future life by the light of a fitful rainbow ]"
"Who thinks of such a thing]" cried Minna, bursting into tears.    "I scarcely
know him, and I am sure I am quite indifferent to him."
120 THE ATTEMPT
" Quite, quite indifferent, Minna 1"
Before the latter could answer, the soft, sweet sounds of a guitar were heard float¬
ing along the night air, and the words of a favourite evening song were borne towards
them. The girls listened with breathless attention ; Minna's colour came and went in
a very tell-tale fashion, and a spectator would have felt inclined to doubt the fact of
her being quite indifferent to the young musician. Whilst the second verse was being
sung, a noise was heard proceeding from the lower flat, and in a minute or two, Herr
S. was seen to put out his head and call as loudly as possible, " This music is most
unseemly ; see that it is stopped at once " Suddenly the notes died away, and a
slight rustling announced the departure of Arwed—for of course it was he. Matilda
burst into a hearty fit of laughter at tlie thought of the very unpoetical interruption.
Minna looked round slowly,—" You must not laugh ; you will have to apologize to¬
morrow."
" I sue for pardon ! what do you mean 1"'
" It was intended for you," said Minna, rather confusedly.
" For me ! oh fie, Minna, when you know so well that I can lay no claim to
the honour."
" I do hope no one else has heard, . . . but papa ... oh dear, do you think Arwed
will be offended 1    Perhaps it was quite accidental his singing here," suggested Minna.
" Quite accidental, I have no doubt," answered Matilda, laughing ; " but now to
bed my child.    Sweet dreams !"
She had put out the light, and was just dropping off to sleep, when she was con¬
scious of a slight whispering—"Are you sure it was forme 1"; but before Matilda could
sufficiently collect her ideas and frame an answer, all was again still. And so finished
this not uneventful day.
How many trees do we see laden with blossom, the true worth of which Autumn
alone can tell!
K. H. D.
(To be continued.)
THE ATTEMPT 121
HERMIONE,   IMOGEN,   AND   DESDEMONA.
In this paper we purpose to bring before our readers three of the most beautiful
female characters conceived by Shakespeare^ viz., those of Hermione, Imogen, and
Desdemona. Not from any resemblance in their individual characters have we been
led to class those three women together, but rather from the natural comparison in
which they stand each to the other in our thoughts—a comparison arising from the
similarity of their surrounding circumstances. Their outward lives have several points
in common : all are of high birth, all are married to high-minded, honourable men,
and, lastly, to come to the one important link, binding their destinies in one common
chain of misery, all are the innocent victims of unfounded jealousy. Here the resem¬
blance ceases, for there are marked distinctions in the characters of the women them¬
selves, as also ill those of their husbands. Although the same test is applied to them
all, it only serves to bring out, in stronger colours, the dissimilarity of what we may
call, their inner lives. As some dire calamity falling upon a nation depresses and mad¬
dens some, while raising and purifying others, so does the scourge of jealousy, falling
with its blighting influence on these three young lives, nerve up one to strength and
patience, wound another sorely, though scarcely raising an angry feeling in her lieart
towards him who caused this anguish, while fairly overwhelming the third with a sense
of desolation and woe.
Let us bear in mind that their sufferings all proceed from one source—unfounded
suspicion. The character of Hermione commands our first attention. In it, and in
the circumstances of her life, there is a perfect unity. As each event is unfolded, her
noble nature shows itself well fitted to meet it; as the jealousy displayed in her case
is most unpardonable and unprovoked, arising in the heart of her husband merely from
his own morbid temperameut, aided by no half-muttered doubts of any double-faced
villain, so is the offence the more flagrant, and is destined to bring with it the punish¬
ment of long years of suffering and separation.
The most distinctive mark in the character of Hemiione is her dignity ; it is her
(juiet, self-possessed withdrawal from all by which it can in any way be compromised,
that excites in our minds for her that deep admiration, very different from the com-
jjassionating love with which we regard other charming though weaker characters.
The instant she perceives that a cloud has overshadowed her in the estimation of her
June 18G6. q
122 THE ATTEMPT
husband, she retires ; nor will she contend for that love which she knows to be her
due, but leaves all to a higher power, with perfect confidence in the issue. Her tears
do not flow, and the air resounds with no useless lamentation, but she quietly resolves to
" Be patient, till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable."
Very beautiful is her farewell to her husband,—
"Adieu, my lord ;
I never wished to see you sorry ; now
I trust I shall."
In writing of Hermione, we cannot forbear a loving remembrance of her impetuous,
high-minded friend Paulina, who, nothing daunted by the warnings of her husband
and other lords in attendance, rushes past them into the presence of the enraged
Leontes, boldly asserting the goodness of his queen, with the energetic words,—
" Good queen, my lord,
Good queen ;  I say good queen ;
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you."
No such champion, however, is needed by Hermione. With an eye of faith she turns
to Delphns, and with a voice of trust she exclaims, " Apollo, be my judge !"
Had Imogen or Desdemona been in the circumstances of Hermione, the opening
of the sealed-up oracle and the partial fulfilment of the same had ended the play,
sorrow expressed by Leontes for his sin had gained immediate pardon, and the joy of
the wife at her restoration to favour had covered all remembrance of the offence. Not
so Hermione. Suspicion and cruel accusation had been heaped upon her by one whom
she had loved with a boundless trust and reverence, bringing a clearer insight into his
character, and showing her that their reunion could not restore peace and confidence,
tin time, and " the divinity of suffering had worked that regenerating change in his
nature which would bring it again into harmony with hers." With pious trust, she
determines to await in retirement the fulfilment of the hope held out by the oracle,
that that which was lost shoidd one day be found, and as she beautifully expresses it,
has preserved lierself " to see the issue."
Eetween the characters of Hermione and Imogen there is a less decided difference
than between that of Hermione and Desdemona ; yet, the shades which divide them,
are delicately but clearly marked. Imogen seems to us to be an impersonation of un¬
selfish love ; it fills her whole being, and opens her heart to forgive all wrongs when
done to herself alone : this only could have power to restrain her anger when lachimo
THE ATTEMPT 123
first endeavours to poison her ear with those stories which cause her sadly to exclaim,
"My lord, I fear, lias forgot Britain."
It fails her, not even in the trying hour when told of the false suspicion entertained
by her husband. Distress, even to agony, fills her heart, but not at the thought of the
cruel death to which she is doomed ; that is of little moment to her now : dead to her
husband's love, she is dead in spirit already; and, holding out the sword to Pisanio,
she bids him strike at her heart, " the innocent mansion of her love," saying—
" 'Tis empty of all things but grief :
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it."
Pisanio, conscious of the spotless innocency of his mistress, feels all his manly nature
revolt from the barbarous deed, and refuses to obey her. Here we perceive a touch of
the high religious principle of her faith, mingled with the longing to obey her husband
even to self-destruction, as though by the act she might prove her love ; but no, she
solemnly declares—
" Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition so divine
That cravens my weak hand."
She calls on Pisanio once more to obey his lord's behest,—
" The lamb entreats the butcher."
We need not here trace out the story of the wanderings of Imogen on her sad
journey towards Milford Haven, but must just glance at her in the cave, surrounded
by her new friends. Where have we so perfect a picture of gentleness blended with
strength, or sweetness with valour, as here, in the demeanour of her two unknown
brothers, Guiderius and Arviragus ] It has been weU remarked that " it was in their
gentleness that Imogen found a support for her gentleness ; it was in their roughness
that the roughness of Cloten met its punishment." We see the two young boys bear¬
ing tenderly their sleeping sister to the tomb, strewing it with flowers, while wording
over it the grand old dirge,—
" Fear no more the heat o' the sun."
"These scenes," says Schlegel, " might give to the most deadened imagination a new
life of poetry."
While the gentle Imogen is passing through the varied vicissitudes of a wander¬
ing, unprotected life, the noble Posthumus is repenting him sorely of his revenge¬
ful cruelty. Very bitterly does he look at the bloody cloth, the token of Pisanio's
supposed obedience, and all angry thoughts of his lost lady melt into love.    In this
124 THE ATTEMPT
frame of mind, each supposing the other dead, do Imogen and Posthumus meet
once more. Few words are exchanged ; no explanations are necessary; love has re¬
vived their old confidence, and we feel that now it will endure for ever.
In reserving Desdemona for our last subject of discussion, we do not intend to
regard her with less interest than we do her noble sisters in misfortune, but merely to
point out a certain want of that strength and dignity which forms so essential a part
of their nature. She is in herself an embodiment of purity and innocence ; so meek
in the hands of her destroyer, she would have disarmed the revenge of one with cooler
blood running through his veins than that which coursed through those of the Moor.
We would not here attempt to point out poetical justice in the works of our great
author; but there does seem a peculiar fitness in the choice of the victim, who is to
sulfer to the last degree from the jealousy of her husband. True, she had given him
no cause for suspicion, yet there was one fatal error committed at the time of their
union, which now rises up, like a dark shadow, and bears witness to a weak point in
an otherwise beautiful character.
" She did deceive her father, marrying you,"
remarks the wary villain, lago. And then again, as if it were decreed that Desdemona
should herself weave a yarn in the web of jealousy, entangling her life, she fails in
strength ; not daring to admit the loss of the magic handkerchief, her hesitation, and
finally her terrified denial in answer to his wild demand, is garnered up against her.
She can scarcely conceive the nature of her husband's displeasure. Her loving heart
would have trusted in him for ever, and her mind refuses to grasp the idea of his sus¬
picion ; no anger fills her heart; with her last breath she woidd fain screen him from
the evil consequences of his deed. So dies an innocent, pure, and spotless victim.
And j^et we cannot turn \\'ith repugnance to him who quenched that light. He was a
sacrificei-not a murderer.    We can only speak of him as
" Of one that loved, not wisely, but too well;
Of one, not easily jealous, but being wi-ought,
Perplexed in the extreme."
No nobler eulogy can we find for him than that of one who had suffered from him
wrongfully, in a degree only second to that of his innocent wife, that " He was great
of lieart."    Great in his early bravery, great in the intensity of his love, great in his
sacrifice, great in his repentance and in his despairing acknowledgment that he had
thrown
" A pearl away
Eicher than all hisxribe." 17 „ .
DES JiAUX.
THE ATTEMPT 125
A GOOD letter, it is said, "ought to be the mirror of one's conversation ;" but if
the average style of conversation corresponds to the average style of letter-writing, the
pleasures of social intercourse must be a myth, and the exchange of jest and repartee a
mere rumour. There are few people who do not like to receive letters, but to many
the pleasure is overshadowed, by the (to them) unpleasant fact that a response is
looked for. Such selfishness soon recoils upon itself, because no correspondence can
be carried on all on one side. Ideas, like coins, must be circulated to be of any value,
and also, like money, must have something in exchange.
Next to the disappointment of receiving no letters, is the receiving those unworthy
of the name—letters, Avhich one struggles through once, but would not on any account
allow a second perusal. Take, for instance, the last half-dozen letters you received,
and see how many of them will bear a second reading. Doubtless, one does take an
interest in the weather of each day as it comes ; but to know that on a certain day, in
a certain place, perhaps some hundred miles distant from yourself, the sun shone or
remained perdu, rain fell or considerately remained where it was, may come under the
head of useful information, but is decidedly uninteresting. As the seasons do not
change, but, unlike the mortals to whose pleasures they minister, punctually keep their
appointments, it appears almost a waste of words, or rather of paper, to tell you that
hopes are entertained that winter being past, spring will soon appear. As a general
reveille sounds, and Nature, rousing herself from her winter's sleep, begins to apparel
herself pretty much about the same time everywhere, it is unnecessary to tell you that
buds are beginning to appear, and that other parts of Nature's toilet are in progress.
Certainly, the topic of weather ought to be confined to conversation. There it may fill
up an awkward pause, but in any correspondence worth having, it must appear a flaw.
In contrast to a meagre style of writing, which requires such aid, is the gushing
style, which overwhelms you with adjectives and adverbs heaped upon each other. A
letter of this kind must, when read, be accompanied by high action. The right arm
must be repeatedly raised, then thrown violently down ; the eyebrows must also be
brought into play ; and when two adjectives come together, preceded by a " such " or
a " so," the reader might even be allowed to walk up and down the room.
But if a meagre and a gushing style of writing are to be deplored, what must be
said of the consolatory 1    IIow one pities the poor patient, wliose wounds cannot be
126 THE ATTEMPT
allowed to heal, but must be probed and laid open afresh. The torture can scarcely
be mitigated by the knowledge that it is necessary. So to some sensitive minds the
slightest hint of its mental wound is not less painful than the doctor's knife. And
here, no feeling of necessity helps the sufferer to endure his martyrdom. It is on occa¬
sions like this that one feels inclined to cry, " Save me from my friends," even
though the allusions be softened and shrouded by texts, which one cannot but consider
ill-timed, however well-meant and appropriate.
As to the beginning of letters, pretty general rules have been laid down. The
danger of seeming to mean too much or too little, is averted by the knowledge that
you must address your dearest friend or greatest enemy in very nearly the same terms.
But if the ways of beginning a letter are circumscribed, the endings are as varied as
the writers. Some cry halt, abruptly, then dash into one of the common conclusions ;
others gracefully train the last sentence, that it may not only express its own idea, but
lead on to the next, which will tell you whether you are truly, or sincerely, or aifec-
tionately regarded by the writer. In reading Lady Mary Wortley Montague's Letters,
few of their admirable qualities strike the reader more than the various ways of con¬
cluding them. In these three volumes scarcely half-a-dozen of her letters end alike.
In this they differ from the generality of letters, of whose concluding sentences it may
be remarked, that scarcely half-a-dozen of them are different.
Others again, oblivious of the fact, that two sheets, or even one, filled with com¬
mon-place remarks is sufficient folly, wind up with a few polite falsehoods, in the way
of imaginary messages of regard and affection. The knowledge that one is remembered
by friends at a distance is no doubt a pleasant one, but the feeling of pleasure is cer¬
tainly not enhanced by the suspicion that the messages have no surer foundation than
the brain that imagined, and the paper that transmitted them.
As some persons pay more attention to the adornment of the body than the mind,
so some writers trouble themselves more about the material than the intellectual part
of their correspondence. The monogram, like some secret sign, must be intelligible
only to its owner and the initiated. The paper must be superfine, and is generally
found more redolent of scent than of ideas. Of the envelope it may be said, that, like
the waistcoat of the " first gentleman in Europe," under that is to be found " nothing."
Indeed, the only thing to be approved of in such an epistle, is its brevity, which
quality, if admirable in wit, is still more so in the absence of it. Some people seem to
consider it the greatest compliment they can pay you, to return a fac-simile of your
own letters. Like lawyers, who, on receiving a document, answer it by repeating the
substance of itself, they keep your letter, and religiously answer each question, which
THE ATTEMPT 127
questions, although asked in all good faith, have quite faded from your mind, and be¬
come part of the " things that were."
It is much to be regretted that letters are so often spoiled by bad writing. As a
just retribution, the point of many a would-be clever remark is lost, by the difficulty
in deciphering it. Had it been at once legible, the remark might have appeared
shrewd and spirited ; but, after vainly trying several times to discover the meaning,
when you at last find it, the spirit of it is gone, and the joke falls flat; and this for
want of a little care, which would have given the writer but slight trouble, and the
reader greater comfort and satisfaction. For mistakes in spelling, no excuse can be re¬
ceived ; and as a moment's hesitation may unnerve the most competent, it would be
well always to have a small dictionary at hand, the necessity of such aid being a mis¬
fortune, but a misspelt word a disgrace.
The facilities given to correspondence have added greatly to its wealth in point of
numbers, but to its poverty as regards sterling worth.    Think of writing nonsense at
ninepence a sheet!    On the contrary, in those less favoured times, every sentence was
well weighed, and advice, which was to last for some months, carefully considered.   A
resume of past events, in well-chosen words, occupied a small space, while those to
come were slightly hinted at.    In them, small notice of weather was taken ; but, in¬
deed, if there had been, it would have been excusable, there being then no telegraph
to put separated friends almost within speaking distance of each other.   How surprised
the writers of documents now yellow and faded would be, could they see the epistles
of their descendants.     Accustomed to the staid "Eespected Sir" and "Honoured
Madam,"  how astonished they would be at the familiarity of our modern address.
Obliged to select their words, what would they think of a word often appropriating an
entire line to itself 1    How shocked they would be at the waste of space ; but taking
up an envelope—to them also a novelty—and looking in one corner, the mystery would
explain itself.   In that wonderful " My day," which old people are so fond of alluding
to, no Sir Kowland Hill existed.    That beneficent genius was reserved for the descen¬
dants, who are supposed to have so much deteriorated from the old stock.   If the benefits
keep pace with the deterioration, what favoured people the succeeding generations will
be !   Probably they .will not have to pay for letters at all; and, indeed, some way may,
ere then, have been found, of transmitting thoughts without transcribing them.    How
they will pity our innocence, and think we allowed ourselves to be imposed upon when
we acknowledged the small, red likeness of her Majesty to be not less necessary than
familiar to us.
There is one remarkable coincidence to be noticed in many letters, and that is the
128 THE ATTEMPT
time chosen for inditing them. It is strange how often people fix upon the post-hour
to write in, and have to conclude abruptly in order " to catch it." The idea that mate¬
rial was awanting, and any excuse for stopping grasped at, cannot but suggest itself.
To any one who enjoyed correspondence, no such subterfuge could arise, because none
would be needed. The only want felt would be that of space, to contain all the
thoughts that crowd the mind of the experienced letter-writer.
Unlike poets, good correspondents are not generally born with that talent, but
acquire it by practice. On an art about which so much has been written, and of which
so many samples are to be had, few might not surpass the average, if not become pro¬
ficients. Indeed, care, observation, and above all, practice, may put every one in the
fair way, not to become the possessor of, but to be every one himself " the complete
letter writer." Clarence.
^•I;=>««=3**—
Faint, faint no more, nor fail.
Oh trembling heart, disquieted and sad ;
Press on through life's dim vale
Till perfect light shall make thy spirit glad ;
Bear on, bear on in patient hope thy cross—
Each heart, from earth's rich stores, must suffer loss.
To hearts, where entereth in
Untroubled peace, God givetli cares without;
Troubles and fears within
He sends to those, whom love doth hedge about;
Sad lessons penned in the heart's utmost page,
Hard steps and thorny, in life's pilgrimage.
So He shall guide thy feet
Into fair pastures, green, and fresh, and still,
Where living waters greet
The steps of those meek ones, who do His will;
Where pain, and grief, and tempest, and decay
Shadow no more the bright and perfect day. J. I. L.
THE ATTEMPT 12'J
Probably no man ever lived that did not cherish some aim, some goal at which
he wished to arrive. Most of us are born with a certain amount of hope and ambi¬
tion : in some these feelings are crushed out in their youth, or seem to be so ; but it
is surprising how a little encouragement will cause them to bud forth again, as plants
that have withered and dried up in nipping winter will revive and open up to the sun
of an early spring. Ambition is a passion, which, when it takes possession of a man,
becomes his master, and in its blind determination to attain its object, will reject the
voice of prudence, and even stifle the promptings of conscience. Amljition has hurried
many to a premature end, changed the mildest natures into the sourest, love into
hatred, sometimes ending by obscuring the light of reason itself. How many noble
names bear testimony to the results of over-weening ambition ! What was the fruit
of the struggles for pre-eminence of Wolsey, of Somerset the Protector, of J^apoleon ?
As their rise was splendid, so was their fall ignominious. Their deaths were friendless
and forlorn, forsaken even by those they had raised by their own elevation.
Like the beautiful apples that turned to ashes when tasted, the end attained is
often found not to be worthy the trouble employed in gaining it. We are never wholly
satisfied, we never sit down calmly and say, " Now I am at rest, I have all that heart
can desire, and am thoroughly happy." To be sure, rest is a thing never attained in
this life. The old man tottering on the brink of the grave gets troubled about things
as trivial as when he was a child, and frets and worries those about him as if such
matters were of vital importance. But, certainly, rest seems sweeter as we grow older,
and find our expectations disappointed, and we begin to think of a fairer, brighter
world than this, where " the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest."
But we do not wish to condemn ambition wholesale ; on the contrary, a man who
is entirely devoid of it, is not worthy of the name, and must have allowed indolence
and bad habits to gain the mastery. When the feeling is cherished in order that he
may worthily employ the talents bestowed on him, and strive to elevate the profession
or position in which he is placed, then indeed it is a noble passion, which no one need
feel ashamed to own. Keep it in check, and you will float securely on the waters ;
let it over-master you and overcome your discretion, and you may be lifted high on
the crest of a towering wave, only to fall back into the gulf below, shattered and use¬
less.    Most certainly, however, a dull supineness is as bad, if not worse ; for we have
R
130 THE ATTEMPT
each some duty in the world to perform, and will be held responsible for it. If we
have but one talent, it will be required at our hands, and must not be suffered to lie
hid away out of sight.
" Life is real, life is earnest;'" and we shall all find it to be so sooner or later, and
bitterly regret the golden opportunities Ave have lost. Longfellow never wrote a
finer poem than the " Psalm of Life," whose every word sinks home, stirring every
noble feeling in our hearts, with its remonstrating yet encouraging entreaty,—
" Be not like dumb driven cattle ;
Be a hero in the strife."
You hardly ever meet a boy, who has not some aspirations for the future, who does
not declare his intention of becoming a soldier, a sailor, or a member of one of the
learned professions, whilst amongst the lower classes you find an early predilection for
particidar trades and occupations. This is often accompanied by a complete ignorance
of the labour and exertion necessary to fit them for the desired eTid. We remember an
idle little boy, who, on being asked by his teacher what he expected would become of
him if he never learnt anything, replied, " Oh, when I'm a man, I mean to be Lord
Advocate !" He had his ambition, but forgot the gradual steps necessary to attain such
a position. Whilst the boy is developing into the man, his mind undergoes manj'
changes, and what maj' have constituted his highest ambition in early life, may become
distasteful as he grows older. Even in manhood such changes are not uncommon; the
profession first chosen being sometimes abandoned for another, the soldier leaving the
army for the church, and the youthful lawyer exchanging his pen for the sword.
The present day is certainly one of activity. We live in the age of railroads and
the electric telegraph, and cannot afford to let the grass grow under our feet. Genius
is speedily recognised, talent is encouraged, there is a wide field for ambition, and, cer¬
tainly, many candidates ready to enter the lists. How marvellous has been the rise of
some men of our own time ! From one honour to another they are elevated, and must
need discretion to keep back the growth of vanity and self-satisfaction in their Jiearts.
As we have said before, it is difficult to attain distinction and remain humble ; to rise
above your compeers, and not show your sense of your position ; in fact, to gain the
greatest of all victories, the victory over self! What a bitter lesson of this kind had
the unfortunate Wolsey to learn : he who had ruled a king, had to sue for a refuge to
die in, and ground for burial:—
"Oh! Father Abbot,
An old man broken with the cares of State,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye ;
Give liim a little earth for charity."
THK ATTKMPT lol
One cannot help being touched by his fall; and see how freely he acknowledges the
cause of it :—
" Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition,
By that siu fell the angels, how can man then,
The image of his Maker, hope to win by 't ?"
He had realized this by the saddest experience, which, after all, is the best teacher,
and the only one much listened to. His fate might have caused Anne Boleyn, whose
star rose as his fell, to tremble foi; her future. Dependant on the fickle favour of a
king, who eagerly welcomed the first breath of slander on those who had ceased to
please him, her path was strewn more thickly with thorns than roses.
More marvellous in his rise, more awful in his fall, is another of Shakespeare's
characters—Macbeth. From the first moment of success, he was seized with the mania
of ambition (for in his case it was nothing less), and immediately saw an ascending
scale of grandeur before him, of which he determined to reach the highest point.
Wedded to an unscrupulous woman, with ambition at least as strong as his own, and
courage and power to work out her ends, greatly superior to his, tlie deeds were done
that drove rest from his pillow, and conjured up the phantoms of his brain to torture
him with the wild, vain wish that he could bring back the dead to life. Truly, the
great enemy of mankind, whose slaves such men are, gives them hard wages, for he
forsakes them at the very moment they need help most, and the black truth stares
them in the face when the effects of their conduct are irrevocable. " Oh, for a moment
to recall the past," they cry, " to be clear of this weight of remorse." Macbeth appeals
thus to the physician who attended the dying queen :—
" Can'st thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from tlie memory a rooted sorrow.
Raze out the written troubles of the brain ?"
Vain hope! no draught was ever yet composed that could drown guilt, though it might
deaden the tortured nerves for a time ; no salve that could soothe the stings of a bur¬
dened conscience.
And, after all, the prizes of this world are not so valuable as to make it worth
while to barter honour and self-respect for them. Thf.n they lose their intrinsic
worth, and a man wonders how he has bestowed so much labour on what he
cares for so little when he has won it. It is not the thing itself that is so sweet, but
the efforts to win it; and if fraud and evil dealing have been at work, instead of honest
exertion and fairness, the fruits will yield no pleasure. Our happiness is in work, not
in gilded idleness ; and we are never so well and cheerful as when fully employed, fiUed
132 THE ATTEMPT
with a laudable ambition to get on, and to be a help in our day and generation. There
is a sweeter taste in the fruits we raise ourselves than in the choicest hothouse produc¬
tions obtained without our own toil and supervision ; and the labourer eating his
homely dinner under the rays of a broiling sun, enjoys his hard-earned repast more
than the jjampered epicure daUying over his tempting viands, who, no doubt, often
sighs for the power of relishing simpler fare.
The noblest ambition of all is that which seeks to serve its country and the cause
of right and truth, with complete disregard of self-interest. For an example of this
kind, we have the noble lesson taught us by Garibaldi, the hero and idol of Italy.
Perhaps no man ever excited more enthusiasm in aU ranks and all countries, or held a
more absolute sway over the hearts of the people who owed their liberties to him.
But when he had risen to a height, and attained successes that would have gained the
acquiescence of the populace in his adopting any proud title he chose to demand, and
when ambition would have stirred too strongly in most men's hearts to enable them to
refuse, he tlirew up all his greatness, satisfied with a patriot's true reward, liberty won
for his country, and retired to his solitary little island of Caprera, and to a life and fare
simple as a hermit could desire. He felt that he did more for his cause by adopting
that plan than any other, as such conduct could not be misconstrued, and posterity
will revere his name all the more for his self-abnegation.
Ancient Roman history furnishes us with an analogous instance of this kind, in
the person of Cincinnatus, one of the consuls. In consequence of a misunderstanding
with the Patricians, he had thrown up this dignity, and retired to a small farm beyond
the Tiber. Two years afterwards, Rome was alarmed by the report that one of her
consuls, with his army, had been cut off from hope of delivery in the narrow valley of
Mount Algidus. The Senate agreed that Cincinnatus was the only man that could
help them in their dilemma, so they raised him to the rank of Dictator, and sent a
deputation to acquaint him with his new position, and to convey him back to the city.
By a series of wise measures, he succeeded in surrounding the enemy and compelling
them to surrender. On his return to Rome, he was decreed a triumphal entry into
the city, and was presented with a golden crown. Declining all further honours and
rewards, and satisfied with having performed this service to his country, he retired
contented to his wife and his farm. But such cases are rare, for it is difficult indeed
for poor human nature to withstand the sweetness of fiattery.
Perhaps the inosl extraordinary instance on record, of the realized fruits of ambi¬
tion laid down and forsaken at once and entirely, is that of the Emperor of Germany,
Charles V.    Tlie greatest and most influential monarch of his time, able to sway alike
THE ATTEMPT 133
the decisions of camp and council, his favour sought and his anger feared by all the
nations of Europe, just as he was in the hey-day of prosperity, he suddenly, to the
world's astonishment, relinquished his crown for the monk's cowl, his throne for a
cloister, and became as one dead to all outward things, absorbed in exercises of devo¬
tion. Did he hope by his austerities to blot out the memory of the misery caused by
his cold-blooded calculating policy 1 It is difficult to imagine the motives that actu¬
ated his conduct, that stifled ambition in his breast, and caused the proudest of tyrants
to conform meekly to the severe discipline of his convent home. Probably he fancied
he was thereby winning a foremost place in heaven, as previously he had striven for
the same on earth.
Every one would wish to leave a name behind him, no one likes the idea of
being forgotten ; but it is surely far better to leave a reputation for good and noble
acts that never die, than for the mere success that has self for its object. The memory
of an evil life is stronger than that of the best and most virtuous ; and posterity is
harder in judging faults than prodigal in praising virtues :
" Men's evil manners live in brass ; their virtues
We write in water."
We have, however, a nobler ambition than the praise of men to aim at. There
are heroes who have missed fame ; patriots, whose praise no tablet has recorded ;
benefactors to the world and the cause of truth, who have gone down to their graves
" Unwept, uuhonoured, and unsung,"
who yet are more enviable than an Alexander or a Napoleon ! A single vei-se from
the Evening Hymn will be sufficient to show the ambition we speak of:—
" Teach me to live, that I may dread
The grave as little as my bed ;
Teach me to die, that so I may
Rise joyful at the judgment day."
Alma.
134 THE ATTEMl'T
Either of these subjects alone would fill a volume of essays, and yet we can
hardly write of one without touching upon the other. They are indissolubly allied as
are the parts of a chain, wherein each link depends equally upon the other, and each is
so well made, so finely moulded, that only the master-workman's hand can find method
to separate them.
There is but one other word in the language of man, of as great importance to
him as these two, love, which makes life and death alike beautiful, and is to each
as the refiner's fire to the gold, as the forging hammer to the steel.    Only death is
master of life, only love, so says the poet, is master of death; and yet, in another
and a truer sense, life and love go hand in hand, and death crouches behind them,
a hidden foe whom they shall one day conquer, a shadow that shall vanish utterly
before the perfect light of day.    And knowing this, we say with a proud consciousness
that
" Man is man and master of liis fate,"
able to face life and death alike undaunted, as one who knows that the latter is but
a blot, which mars for a moment the continuous existence which he may perfect if he
will; perfect by persistence of virtuous intention, by persistence of A'irtuous deed.
To dream of such perfection is easy, to attain it seems next to an impossibility;
but this same Azrael with the shadowy wings, is one of our surest guides in the difficult
task.    We all know how hard it is to keep our hearts watchful, while we sit by our
warm hearths, amid cheery faces and smiles so bright, that we would fain believe that
these at least, wiU
" Never grow old, nor change, nor pass away."
It is then, when we are letting life slip by us unheeded, that death comes to rouse us
from our apathy. Some of us will never forget the bitterness of the awakening, when
we opened the door and found that unbidden guest, with the calm, white face, standing
upon the threshold ; some of us will never forget how, when he left us, he bore with
him all the sunshine of our lives, and how then, and then only, we lifted ourselves up
out of our desolation, and prepared to learn our hard lesson, and follow up the steep
path that the feet of our beloved had made beautiful to us for evermore.
We may remark, as regards one class of lives, that it is in circumstances such as
these that some of the noblest poetic work has been written—work poetic in feeling
if not in form ; the harder the blow the brighter the fine steel flashes, and the poetic
THE ATTEMPT 135
soul never seems so fervid as when death has wounded it most deeply. Orpheus'
strains are never so sweet as when Eurydice has passed the dark portal; Beatrice is in
heaven, when the great Italian grows most sublime; few could read immoved the letters
in which JS^ovalis writes with a sacred grief of his lost wife ; and in all the grand work
of Goethe there is hardly anything so touching as the life and death of the holy
Mignon.
In one and all the realization of death seems to awake a fuller power, men of the
highest genius soaring beyond their ordinary limits, and lesser natures catching from
their great subject a spark of greater power. Pugliesi never poured forth his knightly
soul in such delicate verse, as when death took his lady hence ; for Adonais we lament
passionately; and in our own day our noblest modern English poem bears out the
argument still. " In Memoriam" is, for thought and rhythm, as subtle and sweet a piece
of music as ever was wrung from a soul in trouble, as ever comforted a mourning
heart: not only is it beautiful with a wild tender beauty, but it is full of fine reason¬
ing, well calculated to soothe the minds of those who find existence, from the cradle
to the grave, a matter for much bewildered speculation, much mental trouble.
We hear a good deal said now-a-days about the " problem of life," and doubtless
much of what we hear is part of a cant peculiar apparently to the nineteenth century ;
but grains of truth underlie much claptrap, and we cannot on the other hand agree with
those, good men and true though they be, who assert that life should never be a pro¬
blem to the Christian. Happy is it for them if they find their words true, if theirs
is the quiet unquestioning temperament, which accept all things, and, in all circum¬
stances, can "smile and be content;" but they should not be hard on the more im¬
petuous turbulent spirit that seeks conviction ere it can render obedience, and requires
a reason ere it can accord belief: to such as these, life is indeed a problem, both in
itself, and in the events Avliich make up the sum of the whole.
Some well-meaning people never realize how different will be the appearance and
influence of the same event, when experienced by diiferent characters, nor how almost
impossible it is for one nature to prognosticate as to the tendencies or inner sentiments
of another. We have known a child hardly emancipated from the nursery, debate the
question of free will, and tend towards a fatalism quite eastern in its intensity ; to
such a being the comi)lex circumstances of after years are likely to present somewhat
strange aspects. Then again, with wliat different feelings the young travellers prepare
to emerge, a little later, froui their hom(! shelter into the long road; one will step forth
with perfect fearlessness, seeing in the sunny days to come, the life-volume spread open,
with dewv flowers laid between the leaves, that the summer breezes turn over before his
136 THE ATTEMPT
eager eyes; another looks into the future with a veil of misty doubts and fears upon
his soul, and would fain leave the volume of destiny closed, in which he dreads to
read his coming fate. How far circumstances will control each of these, whether the
unsuspecting spirit wiU be mastered by them, while the more fearful will hold his own,
with the energy of one who plays a losing game despairingly, how far either or both
will find their visions realized, none can tell; these are among the thoughts respecting
which we truly say that each soul knoweth its own bitterness, these are among the
griefs with which, as well as with our deeper joys, a stranger intermeddleth not.
One thing chiefly is clear, even to the philosophic, much more to the Christian
mind, that this wonderful gift of life is to be regarded reverently, cherished heedfully,
perfected earnestly by each of us according to the measure of our knowledge. To
educated, thinking miuds, we say with Herbert, that
" All may have, who dare to choose,
A glorious life and grave."
Thej" have the needful training, their weapons are laid ready to their hands, nothing
need hinder them in their course ;—like Ulysses they may drink life to the lees, greatly
suffer and greatly enjoy, using their finely wrought faculties to the utmost.
But for the rest—for the millions in our cities whose existence is, through no fault
of theirs, an iinbroken round of crime—what shall we, what can we say 1 There, in
deed, is the problem of life, on which we can only look with a great pity; it is a sight
more pathetic than Jerusalem that would not repent, for on those sunny eastern slopes,
the voice of warning had been heard, but in our haunts of misery, sin seems a necessity,
for good is unknown. This is the great mystery, which we must leave to the divine
silences, for never, in this world, can it be explained; and thinking thus, we almost
regret that we ever took pen in hand, or sought to string togetlier rambling thoughts
which cannot apjDroach so unapproachable a subject as this that we have chosen. Let
us too be silent then, only saying to any reader, who will not altogether sconi our
sympathy, that though life is oft-times hard, and death terrible, we would do well to
learn the lesson, one of our great painters has striven to teach us—the lesson of life
171 death. He has drawn for xis a pilgrim knight kneeling before the great gate, to
which his weary feet have brought him at last; the gloom of night is gathering fast
behind him, and shutting out the road he has travelled for so long; his face is worn and
haggard, he has not always kept the straight path, though now, indeed the helmet he
has laid aside, shows the dints from many a hard contest with the foe who sought to
tempt him astray;   beside him  stands the great  angel, one  dark  hand upon his
THE ATTEMPT
137
shoulder, the other, already bright and living, opens the gate ; and as the flood of light
flows out past the white lilies, we see that death is truly, as the Rabbinical legend told,
the most lovely of all God's messengers. A dread skeleton to our eyes on this side the
grave, but in reality he is beautiful exceedingly : so beautiful, that did we see liim as
he is, we should scarce be willing to preserve the life, which we must care for, in order
that we may finally meet him aright.
Elsie Stbivelyne.
-«*£c»*«i^«i
%\t BiJifilt flf ^o^genburg.
FROM THE GERMAN OF SCHILLER.
" KxiGHT ! -a sister's feelings tender
Bind my heart to thee.
Other love I cannot render.
Ask it not from me.
I am calm in sorrow's season.
Calm I see thee go.
And I cannot guess the reason
Why thou weepest so."
Scorning death, and danger braving,
On the hero goes.
With his helmet-feathers waving
High amongst the foes.
All the Mussulmans, affrighted,
Tremble at his name ;
But his heart, in grief benighted.
Still remains the same.
Silently he heard, and blessed her.
Though his heart did bleed ;
Closely in his arms he pressed her;
Leapt upon his steed.
Then, to all his vassals sending.
Over moor and moss,
Towards the holy grave they 're wending,
On their breasts the Cross.
One long year, though sorrow shook him.
He his sword did wield ;
Then his strength of mind forsook him.
And he left the field ;
Sailed from Joppa, o'er the ocean,
O'er the trackless foam.
To the land of his devotion.
To his lady's home.
138
THE ATTEMPT
Half in hope, and half in wonder,
Knocks he at the gate,
And the answer comes like thunder.
Or the voice of fate !
" She is now the bride of heaven,
Midst the sisters meek.
Yesternight to God Avas given,
Whom you come to seek !"
Gazed upon the cloister shady,
Gazed in mute repose
Towards the window of his lady,
Till the window rose ;
Till his love, the window raising,
Showed her angel face,
Down the rocky valley gazing.
Full of tender grace.
Then he leaves, and leaves for ever.
His paternal hall,
Leaves his faithful steed, who never
More will hear his call.
From his castle, high and airy.
Comes he down unknown,
For a sackcloth mantle hairy,
Eound him he has thrown.
Then, consoled amidst his sorrow,
Sleeping he 'd recline,
Waiting for the coming morrow.
For the sun to shine.
And for years his place retaining,
Gazed in mute repose ;
!N"ever grieving nor complaining.
Till the window rose.
Near the convent of his lady
Did he build a hut.
Whence he saw the cloister shady.
In its lime trees shut.
There he waited from the morning,
Till the day was done ;
Patient hope his face adorning,
Lived he there alone.
Till his love, the window raising,
Showed her angel face,
Down the rocky valley gazing.
Full of tender grace.
Even death, his love amazing.
Could not change nor chill,
For a corpse they found liim, gazing
Toward the window still.
Dido.
THE   ATTEIWPT 139
%ttttt% from Sfoitztrlanb.
CONCLUSION.
Dijon.
My dear Lucilla,
You will be surprised to see, by our present address, that we
have left Switzerland behind us, and are on our way home.    Only two of us, however,
have changed our plans.    Uncle Fred found letters at St Maurice, which obliged him
to be in London on business by the end of this week.    It was thought best for me to
come with him, as the others intend crossing the Great St. Bernard into Italy, and
will probably stay there so much longer than I could have done, that I should only
have hampered them.
If I had known you were not at home, I would have written, or at least sent a
message, to let you know where we were, and then your letter would not have wan¬
dered so far before reaching me, which it did only last night. I had no idea that you
were paying visits in England, and did not even recollect that Miss Neville lived near
Hereford now. Will you give her my kind regards, though I am surprised to hear
that she remembers me so well. I was only half a year with her at school, and have
never heard from her since.
Some of the best days of our Swiss tour have been kept till the last. "We had a
glorious morning for the Mer-de-Glace ; mist and rain all gone, sunshine and the most
exhilarating mountain air surrounding us instead. The mere act of climbing was a
delight in such an atmosphere. Few of us would accept mules ; and, wonderful to
say, we even rejected the kind proposal of our guides, who pressed us to pull ourselves
up the steepest parts by help of the animals' tails ! And so we clambered up the
Montanvert, hardly knowing where we were being led, or how we were to reach the
Mer-de-Glace, tUl we came out from among the pines and stood upon its brink. The
valley lay three thousand feet below us. The bases of those mountains, round which
the giant arms of ice were clasped, were near ; but their summits, still so immeasurably
high and far away ! We were guided across the glacier by easy paths, avoiding, rather
than overcoming, difficulties. Two guides to each lady were quite sufficient, we
thought, and sometimes resented being taken by the elbows and hoisted over a crack
a few inches wide. Where the fissures were wider, broad planks were thrown over
them ; but few that lay in our way were too great to be passed by an easy step. But
of their depth, we could only form a guess from the intensity of that strange blue light
that fills them.
The great ice-river, where we crossed it, was a mile and a half broad ; deep and
] -10 THE ATTEMPT
smooth, and comparatively unbroken. Its rapids begin a little below, and then comes
ground on which no human feet have trodden. It plunges from the heights, almost
at one leap, down to its terminus, at the spot where we stood on that dark evening
when I Avrote to you last. We could not see this grand part of the glacier, except by
going over to the rocks on the other side, and taking a difficult path to lead us home¬
ward ; so, when we were about half-way across, we had a long debate as to what we
should do. We all maintained the steadiness of our heads, and decided to go onwards
to the Mauvais Pas.
The Mauvais Pas is a narrow footpath on the face of a high, and all but perpen¬
dicular cliff, to which we clung by means of a rope stretched along the whole way.
Some of our party liad to summon up all their courage to get past the worst places ;
but we all agree that the reward was far more than worth the effort. It was a fearful
pleasure to creep along the narrow ledge, with precipices above and below, and further
down, the still more awful precipices and chasms of the glacier. Its crevices grew
deeper and more yawning as we went on, while the ice between was tortured into every
possible form of grotesque obelisk and turret, or shivered into a thousand splinters,
growing thinner and sharper, and more perilous as it nears the cliff, over which it
breaks itself, and hangs, not falls, a tremendous cataract. Eut there is no possibility
of keeping close to the glacier all the way. We had to part company from it, and
wind about by easier, though still rocky ways, to the foot of the mountain.
We left Chamouni next day by the Pass of the Tete Noire, quite in the opposite
direction to that by wliich we had approached it; so that uncle Fred and I have made
a complete round, coming back to the Lake of Geneva by the Valley of tlie Ehone, as
we had left it by that of the Awe. It is a long day's journey from Chamouni to Mar-
tigny. We rested half-way, at a little inn, where we got delicious wild strawberries
and cream, besides something more substantial. After that, the scenery grows very
wild, and continues so till within a few miles of the end, when the road winds tran¬
quilly down to the valley among orchards and fragrant walnut trees.
We were half enlivened, half tornieuted by tlie company of a gentleman, who
claims some sort of old acquaintanceship with my uncle—j\Ir. flint by name. He is
an old, experienced traveller, who, having been nearly everywhere from the Himalayas
to the Rocky ilountains, knows how to apjjreciate scenery, and to put down every
item accurately at what it is worth. If we stopped at a wild turn of the Eau Noire,
he took occasion to point out how the scene would liave been picturesque if the water
had been clearer, and if the gorge had admitted more breadth of light as a contrast to
its deep shadows.    He had seen tlie sun set upon the Pyrenees ;—could any body
THE ATTEMPT 141
wonder that he did not care to watch its glow ui^on the Alps 1 He had been under
tropical skies, so the splendour of daylight was nothing to him. I am afraid he found
Chamouni a very stupid place, for two weighty reasons. In the first place, he has been
among the Andes. In the second place, he has found out that, " although the moun¬
tain range is allowed on all hands to be the finest in Europe, yet the summit of Mont
Blanc is too much hidden by far, and the bareness of the valley entirely destroys the
completeness of the effect." Everywhere he finds some flaw, but for which, " the
picture would be perfect," as he says. Poor, miserable man, if he could but see that
the pictures are perfect, or rather, if he could be content to see in them, not pictures at
all, but glorious works of God, far beyond the scope of his criticisms ! It may seem
an odd feeling to have, but really I did feel thankful that no man, least of all Mr.
Flint, had had a voice in the making of the world. One toucli of his finger would
have wrought such havoc. Maitland made bold to ask him why he had come to Swit¬
zerland at all. Instead of being offended, he replied very frankly, " Ah, well, you
know, one must go somewhere, and there's nothing to be seen in England."
But I have wasted enough of paper and ink on ]\Ir Flint. I see I shall not have
time to give you all the outs and ins of our doings, but I cannot leave out our last
evening upon Lake Leman. We had just left our Italy-bound friends at Bex, and
neitlier our parting from them, nor the swampy country to which we came, at the
embouchure of the Ehone into the lake, was calculated to raise our spirits. But once
on the water, there was enough to occupy our thoughts. There were the steep, lake-
washed battlements of Chillon, and there Bonnivard's small green islet.
" And then there was a little isle,
Which in my very face did smile,
The only one in view."
Thus we passed by the smiling hills of Montreux, " Le sejour le plus gentil du Monde,"
as an enthusiastic Frenchman assured us.   Then Clarens beautiful, though to me
unconsecrated by the name of that bad man whom Frenclimen adore. The sun began
to sink, as we left Vevay, and a flush crept upon the distant Dent da Midi. Presently,
the lake itself was all on Are, and oh, how the wizard colours changed and played. If
you have ever watched glowing steel in a furnace, you will have some idea of this
burning water. One moment it would be rosy, the next lit up with gold, then burn¬
ing with crimson, then green, then deep purple, then glowing amber; and tliis was our
farewell to Switzerland.
Next afternoon we were steaming through France, still side by side with the im¬
petuous Ehone.    Uncle has an objection to night-travel'ing, so we took our tickets fur
142 THE ATTEMPT
Dijon—to our cost. We arrived very late, to find all the hotels filled. From good
to indifferent, from indifferent to bad we drove, still in vain. At last we found
rest in this " Chapeau Eouge," contented, perforce, with two rooms at each end
of a crooked passage. I wished uncle good night, assuring him that I was not
in the least afraid, and not till I had locked myself in, did I begin to have a mis¬
giving that I had not spoken the truth. I shall not tell you whether an exactly oppo¬
site avowal would have been true or not; I shall only confess that I was not quite
comfortable, and had to examine every nook and cranny of my chamber before I could
be at peace. Bare boards, not polished this time, nor even over-clean ; a cracked mir¬
ror, and some extraordinary pictures of shepherdesses on the walls ; a bed, with yellow
gauze hangings; two or three wooden chairs, and one magnificent easy chair, with gilt
border and green velvet cover (if one could see it for dust)—these compose the furni¬
ture. There is one other relic of better days to keep the arm chair company, in a
wash-handstand, with a marble top, on which, to my horror, I found reposing the re¬
mains of a worn-out cigar. A small door still remained to be investigated. I had
just laid my hand on the key, when a sudden rush from within forced it open, and
made my heart almost stop beating. In another moment I saw, and felt too, that the
cause of alarm was only a shower of old hats, shoes, lime, and dust from the closet
inside.
It is in this same dismal room that I am sitting writing to yon now, but it looks
much better, as things always do, by daylight, especially with uncle Fred sitting in the
window, trying to mend the strap of his knapsack, and wishing my letter were ended.
We are rather proud of our single night's experience of the rough side of a
travellers life ; nevertheless, our only desire is to leave Dijon, and get on to Paris as
soon as possible. Whether we shall have any time there, depends entirely on letters
awaiting my uncle. Eut even if we miss seeing Paris, I shall never be sorry to land
in dear old England a day sooner. Above all things, I think it will be refreshing to
see Englishmen going about their work in their own calm way, without unnecessary
hubbub. And then, away to the north, to the land dearer still, where our best friends
are. I am not going to flatter you, by saying that Scotland will be desolate because one
friend has deserted it, though I know that would be the proper compliment to pay you.
By the way, 1 had quite forgotten, that in Miss Neville's opinion, at least, I am
spoiled for a Scotch woman, and can never be happy at home after this mischievous
peep at the continent. I am very sorry she is so disconsolate on my account. Do give
her some comfort about her old pupil. Tell her, for one thing, that I love her country
a great deal better than I did before, and that I should never think now of pulling
THE ATTEMPT 143
down England to exalt Scotland, and fighting all the old battles over again with her as
I used to do. No, no ; England and Scotland are tied up together in a knot that
should never more be sundered, even in thought. One feels this very strongly abroad.
Amid strangers, and the din of strange languages, it is impossible to think of the dear
island over the seas without loving it all, and having a home-feeling to every part of
it. But, for all that, you know which part 1 love best in my heart of hearts, and I
think Miss NeviUe must have taught you a bad lesson, before you could ask me, so
doubtingly, "If I am sure I shall enjoy our own mountains quite as much as ever V
Are you afraid that I am coming homo with a measuring pole, fifteen thousand feet
high, to stick its bare point far above Een Lomond, and prove it a mole-hill ? Dear
heather hills ! the bare thought is treachery to them.
I forget where I have read of a painter, who, when looking at the works of the
great masters, and when most conscious of their superiority, used still to exclaim with
joy, " And T, too, am a painter !" So I think our hills may exult, and say, " And we,
too, are mountains j" and every gushing waterfall, and every rock and river may sing,
" And we, too, are parts of a great world of beauty." And I shall love them all the
better, because I can associate them with their great prototypes among the Alps.
Two years ago, I might, perhaps, have been more easily spoilt than I am now. I
suppose most school girls pass through a stage of their lives at which they strikingly
resemble poor Mr. Elint. With parsing Milton, and picking Shakespeare to pieces ;
with the general awaking of their discriminating faculties, there comes a troublesome
habit of criticism. They see people and places only to compare them with each other,
refusing to admire anything that does not come up to their standard of perfection ; by
which means, perfection recedes further and further in the dim distance, and with it
all their simple childhood's enjoyments. Then they find out, with a start, that this
spirit of criticism is robbing them of their treasures, and turn him out of doors, to wait
till he is wanted. For we cannot deny that sometimes he may be indispensable to ns.
But in general, he is a conceited, thoroughly selfish fellow, bent on showing off his
superior discernment, though it should be at the risk of losing his eyes altogether. I
have very few dealings with him now, I assure you.
I think I have very good reasons, dear Cilia, to entreat you to keep this same mis¬
chievous elf at arm's length till you have folded up this long epistle of mine. It would
be a great favour if you would not even perceive that it is crossed all over. But the
fact is too obvious; so all I can du now is to refrain from crossing a third time, and to
add no more than the one sweet English word—good bye.
M. L.
144 THE ATTEMPT
W^t €nburaita of ^t^otbm,
•        ••**«
Free labour one cause of tlie form and endurance of government.
******
In despite of the sad forebodings of many prophets in our own days, there is not,
in our nation, any real sign of approaching dissolution, or even of serious disease, or
the decrepitude of an effete old age. Faulty wo are in the collective, as we are in the
unit; afflicted frequently with many of the troubles that flesh is heir to—headaches and
heartaches being interspersed—but lively, and, on the whole, strong and healthy, and
likely to remain so, through a long period of enlarging and deepening progressive
middle age. True it is, that no political power can last for ever—a thing created by
man for man, consequently has man's weakness and liability to sickness and death;
the seed being mortal, so must also the plant be which receives, at the same time
with the principle of life, the necessity of death. Like the SicUian physician of old--
who, commenting on Galen, affirmed that it was possible to make man immortal, and
undertook to bring up children to become so, if they were fit for the purpose—we
would ere long find such national hopes completely destroyed, through the supjjosition
and contingency foreshadowed in the little word " if." But, at the same time, we have
some hopes that the longer personal lives of ancient days may be resuscitated in a new
form—in the longer national lives of modern peoples; and can even see, dimly, a way
towards making them become so.
We may ask, as a leading question. How can the world have improved in these
later years ] and we know the ready answer, that lies prepared for us, in these words :
The progress of humanity through the arts and sciences, and what we call civilization.
But we forget that it can only be through civilization in certain conditions, and that
these conditions must necessarily be taken into account, if we wish to prove anything
therefrom. This we must very particularly do, if we would compare the character, the
pitch, and duration of monarchy by monarchy. How was it with these old nations —
powers as great, and as civilized (comparatively), as our own—Egypt, Greece, Assyi-ia,
Persia, Mexico, and Peru 1 A fact to be remembered, and to be noticed more particu¬
larly hereafter, in one of its effects is, that all these early monarchies lie in the warmer
regions of the earth, in one broad zone, hotter and more fertile than ours. Certainly
their climate had somewhat to do with their fate—the early ripe do not last longest,
the seedling annual rushes up more speedily than the oak.    They come before us, but
THE ATTEMPT 145
they do not endure after us—these elder children of the earth. If one were to seek to
discover as a physician would, by what poison they where destroyed, of what
disease they died, the name of that cause of death, would be found to be despotism.
Certain other concurring causes hastened this effect—and, hastened the iinbecUity of
their premature old age, that sunk from want of power to breathe in life—but despot¬
ism was the poison that permeated the system, to clog and choke the working of its
vital powers :—it was the great nightmare, that forbade healthy sleep, and troubled
with terrible delirious dreams ; the broad stone laid on the seedlings, that will live
thereunder but a little while, blanched and sickly ; the vampire-bat that drained many
a better vein to fill its own foul life ; a disease where the extremities become torpid
through want of the life blood, that goes to clog one swollen vein, and the repletion
at the heart causes destitution through the members. Doubtless from the upper side,
the principle will look fair and tempting enough, yet even to the despot himself, sure
I am, that it will prove but a bitter apple of Sodom, when he will have pierced its
blooming surface. Some have seen, and many have heard of the wondrous buildings
of Egypt, and others of these kingdoms, miracles of labour, that could almost have
inspired our prosaic age, with the fable of the Titans, had that been left to us undone ;
for no human labour in our days could have wrought the like, without its Titan slave,
steam power. But these huge buildings, of which each stone is a marvel, where
measurement grows dizzy, and calculation dim, seem to have been wrought without
such aid. And were these great works, of national benefit, harbours, breakwaters,
embankments for the river, or granaries for the nation 1 No—What else can we call
them, but mausoleums, gigantic as the hopes they buried ; tombstones " In Memoriam "
whose impress we can well translate. A despot is no philosopher, he knows no self
but one, and that he deifies. This is natural to all, as even we feel now-a-days, with
all our training, exoteric and esoteric, to love our neighbour as ourselves. But in those
days, there were no neighbours, no brothers ; there were only masters and slaves, and
the slaves held all things, at the mercy of the master. What to him were so many
lives, of so many units 1 Not his brothers, but mechanical " hands'" wherewith to do
his pleasure. To thinning ranks he would cry—"Send more;" to bewildered over¬
seers, having none to send, he would order—" Make more." That is, press them, tear
them from their homes, and all they hold dear on earth; blot out their sun from their
sky, their very humanity from their existence ; warp their being so that it may grow
all " hand," and become better to me than a machine of wood and iron ; that a
thousand of them may drain their lives to purchase strength, to raise one stone where
my whim desires it to lie.    There it lies still, and preaches its sermon.
T
146 THE ATTEMPT
One wonders now, how the thousand would thus submit, but we must calculate
humanity, according to the fixed ratio of its education. These men had been bom
slaves, and had been trained so—but how was it so 1 and, when was the time that this
began, as all things must begin 1
Let us imagine the inhabitants of the earth, to have been once all brothers.
Looking as far back as the confusion of tongues, we then hnd each small group, gather
round  a common language, and men becoming friends, simply because they could
speak to each other.   Whither shall we go from the face of all these 1 would doubtless
be the first question asked by many ; but answered by one, and he who answered most
speedily, and most boldly, would be followed first.    Following produces obedience;
dictation is easily learnt; minds seek their own level ; the strongest proves himself
the best ; the " Aristocrat" rules ; the one who can, becomes the king.    This best
gave his counsel, the place of abode would be chosen, ground parcelled out, the choice
fields being voted to himself; and a tribe arose, and was named.    Then he prepared
himself to decide on certain emergencies, which decisions became to him a new strength,
and formed a code of laws from precedents, which this " king " could mould.    Tiius
far, despotism might have grown up in any country, even in ours.    But here comes
the place of the consideration we have alluded to—the positions of these kingdoms, on
the earth's surface—the warmth of their climate.   While in sultry climes, men require
less food than we do, and, that less concentrated, at the same time nature presents
them more freely with an abundance.    They need lighter clothes, and less substantial
shelter than we do ; and what they need they find brought to their hand, by the
luxuriance of the vegetable world.    While a necessity for action makes men more
sinewy in mind, as well as in body, more provident, more skilful, more ingenious
towards new action, while the discovery of the means of satisfying one need, opens
new ideas, and new ways of working them out, until luxuries become necessities to
the worlving  man; the   opposite  conditions,  produce opposite effects.    The natural
lassitude produced by heat, fostered and indulged from childhood (since no spur of
want stung them up into action); the life, that having sufficient for the day, ended in
the day; the want of all intellectual sharpening, in times when books were a thing
unknown to the masses, prepared them very calmly to submit to the king, who saved
them so much trouble by thinking for them.    But meanwhile he, under whom obedience
had become a principle, died ; and his successor stepping into the same outward place
and power, would be almost certain to be of some lower stamp, without equal inward
sense, and strength, to form an equilibrium, so that the outward balance would fall
crus!;in"lv down (jverloaded on tlioso beneath.      With less matter for advice than he
Tltfc;   AXTKAUT 1)7
who had settled the state, now ready to hand ; with less wisdom to bring forth advice
when so needed, than he who had proved himself king in times of perplexity ; in every
way, with less of the " king " about him, and more of self, the smaller the nature that
seized the power, the more blindly tyrannical would it become. We can imagine how
succeeding nations would see succeeding kings arise, less and less worthy of the power,
but more aggressive therein ; understanding less what government means, and yielding
more to their own evil desires, while the bewildered people, stunned by this load of
overbalance of power, would sink far past the degree that marks wholesome obedience,
into unwholesome slavery, inherent and inculcated. K^aturally where little is necessary
to support life, an overproportion is expended on ornament, among high and low, and
the people become vain, as well as weak. The great ambition of kings became display,
for which wealth was required, and this wealth was only to be drained from the
people. These he forced hopelessly to labour, while the advantage or profits accrued to
himself, or his minions, who were the same as he, in so far as, that their power lay only
from him and through him, so long as they succeeded in pleasing him. And the very
wealth they thus provided, only went to forge new chains and bolts for their souls and
bodies. Poor ancient people ! What picture of desolation can be more complete ?
they had no hope—whence could it be born 1 They had no God in their world, or in
that above them. They worshipped, of necessity, for man must worship ; but they
worshipped they knew not what, and in return they received they knew not what.
According to the purity and strength of the standard, set up as the guide to all exel-
lence in the worshipped, must be the comparative elevation or degradation of the
lowest worshippers :—hypocrites are unaffected in any condition by the object of their
nominal worship.
Perhaps it may be advisable to carry out the contrast that we have begun among
ourselves, by glancing at the past and present of our own land, as being the country,
of all others perhaps, that had the fewest national advantages, and has done the most
with them ;—that is, she spent her one talent in upholding freedom. Here also, men
had doubtless a king in the beginning of their times, but that king could not do very
much for them. He could not lead them to rich pastureland, nor give them fertile
parcels of ground, that could bring forth almost spontaneously under a bright sky, the
choice fruits of the earth, so he could not find them lying idle, dreamy, and self-satis¬
fied by the banks of their rivers, through live-long days, and urge them or force them
to labour for Mm at his will. Xo—they had enough to do, to labour for themselves ;
they were obliged to take much thought what they should eat, and what they should
drink, and wherewithal they should be clothed.    The soil was too poor to yield any
l-iS THE ATTEMPT
increase, without much bodily labour ; the hills too bare, and the skies too inclement
to leave their cattle abroad without much tendance. The scantiness of provision and
clothing, and the great necessity thereof, would cause the people to be spread thinly
abroad on the face of the earth. As each man laboured, perhaps alone, in his stony
little field, one can imagine the deepening thoughts that would spring therefrom to
him, as he watched first the blade, and then the ear, then the full corn in the ear.
Every trouble past or coming would double the interest he had in, and the love he
had for, the piece of ground that cost him so much, until the germs of patriotism arose.
Through conquered difficulties are Ave not made strong ? Though God gave it to man
as a curse, that he should eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, yet did his fatherly
love grant a double blessing on the obedience that bowed down under this now-
irrevocable curse, and that honestly laboured with hands or head. So their fields
brought forth more than corn, their hill-tops more than cattle ; even the second bles¬
sing of labour, made by God to be the first. The poor soil did not repay abundantly
the sower; the rough hills could not be made level to a plough, and the spare grass
thereon could not feed many cattle ; long winters required ample and thoughful stores ;
and deep snows kept them from hope of help from friends; therefore they were forced
to be patient and persevering amid difficulties and disappointments; enduring amid
privation, and provident against destitution. No thought can dwell alone, it proves its
existence by giving birth to others ; so no man who is provident can be thoughtless of
the future ; no heart that is hardy can be slavish ! Consequently the men of this
land had " hope," and that means as many things as the heart of man can fancy, or
his desires create for himself. They dwelt amid bold natural features, and who can
denj"^ the power that tlie outward face of the earth has in impressing the inner human
mind. The rough hills—bold, rugged, and beautiful, indomitable in their strength,
through sunshine, and majestic storms, silent, heaven pointing, hero-browed—could
not but give example of strength unto their sons ; could not but raise solemn thoughts,
that the mind that had designed and created these, must have upreared them as
monuments and testimonies towards himself. And he that roamed or tended cattle on
their thousand peaks, amid their speaking silences, and many voiced lonelinesses, could
not but feel this presence of their Creator as a powerful spell; while at the same time
his very consciousness thereof, the solitude of the humanity of the one human life, he
called his own, amid these other objects of animate and inanimate nature, must have
created within him the feeling of the importance of himself to himself, and of lii.^
communion witli that other higher life, more than with these lower lives.
Doubtless, su])erstition arose with him, as well as it did with these other myria;!
THE ATTEMl'T 149
slaves of the warm south, but from far other causes; with him, through awe and
reverence—with them, through abject fear and perplexity; and the results were as
different as the causes. Earthquakes nor whirlwinds, nor the terrible wild animals of
the desert, approached our cottages to terrify our families; our dangers came not so
powerfully to bewilder and crush, but powerfully enough to rouse men to strain every
nerve to resist them. Wonderful are the results of that fine balance between these
seemingly common-place facts, and capable of being worked almost ad infinitum. So
they were prepared to receive and make their own, the good news that came to them
when they found that they too had " a God in the world." We are told that " the
truth shall make you free," and the truth made them free. Yet, in the fragmentary
state of our human nature, we can understand how they would take hold most keenly
of the truths that suited their tastes best; and the result would be only a partial
truth, and a partial freedom.
Better, however, a fragment of truth than all error; better a sturdy stunted gnarled
tree than the sickly vegetation or rather herbarium existence, by which wo would con¬
trast the two classes of men of which we have been speaking. The shoots from that
rougli stock may be brought up more straightly in a better soil, for the life it can give is
sound and healthy. But it is not wonderful that in their roughness and incompleteness,
they yielded but partial obedience to their kings, that their rebellious nobles
were constantly in turmoil; every one felt his manhood so strongly, that it became too
self-asserting, and the very contentions kept up the spirit of the wild, free natures
that had fostered it.
These ebullitions of youth will calm down; the nation will grow " men," having
both " hope and a God in the world," and holding in their hands his word, as the
great unchangeable charter of their nation's rights and liberties. They hold their lives
as the^r own possession, and no other's; consequently they do the best they can with
and for their own. How different from the cowed slaves of the old despotic nations !
What could they be, and what could they do 1 for being and doing react ever on each other
But a dim and imperfect sketch has this been of what it aimed at, but a sug¬
gestion of the suggestions it idealized ; but the bondage to limited space has hampered
throughout the freedom even of the unfledged idea; and hope must remain to us
of finding more suitable time and space to extend our investigations. Let us now,
however, close. All despotism is unhealthy and abnormal; all despotism works its
own ruin. But the most dangerous poisons, the most severe wounds, are some¬
times used as healing, in extremity, to a wounded life. All history so teaches us
—despots have been  sent by   God to   work   his   work,   and cure   a disease wliich
150 THE ATTEMPT
nought else could then effect. But we will not enlarge now on that point, re¬
maining thankful it is a thing unneeded and unknown now in our land. Up trained
to habits of thought, of fortitude, of manliness, our forefathers having become men,
formed for us a constitution under which their children might also attain unto the
like purpose of life, all faults or virtues secondary to the one great fact, that life,
earnest, manly life, be in them. One might almost have reasoned downwards from
past time, and have calculated that now we should have formed what we have, a limited
monarchy. Altogether a democracy, we should have been swayed hither and thither
with every wind of doctrine, more than is compatible either with good sense or stability;
a despotism of any continuance would cause an upheaval most volcanic and destructive
to the despot; for our nation, after its education, cannot bear trammels. But our one
fixed ruler steadies the state, as the keel and the ballast do the vessel; the men in
government raise the sail and hold the helm, as the sailors do; the people form the
proprietive company that choose the freight, and mark the ports, and pray God to
send his favouring winds and tides. Herein lies the difference between ancient
chronicles and modern history—the influence of the people. To this must all tend.
The despotisms still on the earth must abdicate, sooner or later, be modified or be
forcibly overturned; for thought is abroad.
LuTEA Eeseda.
BY AN UNTIDY YOUNG LADY.
I HAVE an aunt, a charming aunt, " Come here," said she, " and let me see.
Benevolent and kind ; Before I ' speak my mind.'"
One only fault I think she has—
She always " speaks her mind." I stood before her, calm and proud ;
I thought, " ISTo fault she '11 find."
" My dear," said she to me one day, She looked, she turned me round and round,
"Your hair's a fright behind, And then she " spoke her mind."
Your dress is torn—excuse me pray—
I always ' speak my mind.'" " My dear," she said, " you 're well enough,
To some things I '11 be blind,
" I 've brushed my hair and sewed my dress, I fear I 'd hurt your feelings much
Now, aunt, no fault you '11 find." Were I to ' speak my mind.'"
THE ATTEMPT 151
from   the   german   of   0.   wildermuth.
three tears later.
Dearest Minna,
You always maintained that I never knew what it was to be in a
state of embarrassment, but this is far from true, for here I am in the very greatest
perplexity as to how I am to communicate a piece of intelligence, which must not be
longer withheld. Yet I do not see why I should hesitate about it, for am I not at liberty
to do what I think right 1 Here it comes then, and you need not be so very much
astonished. Since yesterday I am the affianced bride of Herr Fiirst; yes, the Herr
Sheriff of three years ago. How it happened I cannot exactly tell—I really do not
know myself. You heard, I suppose, that he was sent here by Government some
time ago ; and it so chanced that he took apartments in the same house as my mother
and myself A few days after his arrival I met him in the hall, and was surprised to
find he recognized me. " Fraulein Berg, . . . once had the pleasure of seeing you . . ."
—a great deal from him, as you know. He called upon mamma the next day ; and as
he is much at home in the evening, he asked and received permission to join us occa¬
sionally at coffee. The first time he came he did not smoke, but he appeared so iU at
ease, that I was quite happy when, on his next visit, he produced his pipe, and asked
mamma—" If not disagreeable V It certainly was impolite not to make the same
inquiries of me ; but what could 1 dol I was glad to see him more comfortable ;
besides, I am told tobacco smoke is very good for my plants. But to make a long
story short : when I came home the other day, mamma told me that Herr Fiirst
had asked her permission to declare himself my suitor—(I wish I had heard him,
he must have exceeded the three words)—and would hope for an answer the
following day. I felt as if I had faUen from the clouds. My mother evidently
wished I should say yes, for he is clever, and well-informed too, although he
speaks so little ; but she left me to please myself. Well, at first I would have
nothing to do with him, then I would think about him, but remain undecided
for a long time : it would do him no harm to wait. At length I resolved to allow
him to come on the morrow, if only to set before him all my objections, his silence,
his want of gallantry, also my doubts as to the reality of his love for me.    The next
152 THE ATTEMPT
day he came before I expected him, and surprised me in the drawing-room. He looked
at me as if waiting for some explanation, but, as I remained silent, he asked—" Has
your mother not spoken T' I could not longer appear ignorant,'so told him I had heard
of the honour he had done me, but I did not think our dispositions were suited to each
other. " Exactly," interrupted he. That I feared it was not true love that had led him
to me. " What else would it be," asked he, " that makes me so awkward and . . . ."
That I was doubtful whether he sufficiently understood and appreciated the rights and
claims of my sex. I confess I got a little confused, for he stood there and answered
not a word. At last he got up and said slowly, " So it is no 1" I assure you, Minna,
he looked so miserable that I pitied him, and in my compassion said rather too quickly,
"Not exactly that." "Yes, then?" and offered me his hand. Don't despise me,
Minna, I gave him mine, and before I knew what I was about, we stood before my
mother betrothed ! I fear I spoil him a little, but you know reform must be gradual.
The pipe I am already quite accustomed to, and could not fancy liudwig without it.
We are speaking of an early date for our marriage, so prepare your bridesmaid's dress,
dear Minna.
I have not forgotten your sorrows, nor will I rest until Liidwig promises to find
some appointment suitable for your poor Arwed, and without requiring a very strict
examination. You cannot wonder that your father should be determined to have your
future prospects fixed upon a more solid foundation than the soarings of a Pegasus.
And now farewell.  Do not pity me too much^ I am wonderfully resigned to my fate, but
Ever believe me, your contented
Matilda.
One thing more. Please ask Frederika for one or two of her most approved
recipes for made-up dishes ; Ludwig sups with us every Sunday, and I should like to
give him some variety from our usual plain fare.
K. H. D.
(To be continued.)
THE ATTEMPT l^^
ROSALIND, BEATRICE, AND PORTIA.
As a storm among the mountains is grand and elevating to behold, and as, on the
calming of the tempest, the smUing plain beneath, with its sweet pasture-lands and
shady woods, is pleasant to look upon, so is it good for us to turn from the study of
the great and moving passions portrayed in some of the stronger characters of Shakes¬
peare, to that of the lighter and more sparkling of his female delineations. We would
not infer that the former class is stronger in goodness and virtue, but merely more
powerful, as being strengthened with a peculiar force rendered necessary to support
them in the stirring actions and fearful cu-cumstances of their lives.
The very mention of the name of Kosalind carries us, in imagination, to a rural
hfe in a forest scene, where human nature is blended into harmony with the peace and
beauty of its outward surroundings. Here the small community banished, or having
fled from the court, strives to forget the jealousy and tyranny that there hold sway,
and seeks for " the sweet uses " which may be distilled from that very adversity which
has darkened its worldly prospects.
Not as cousins, but as sisters, Eosalind and Celia had loved, and lived with each
other from their earliest infancy, brightening all around them by the light of their
happy, sunny dispositions ; nevertheless, a light cloud overshadows the life of the for¬
mer, which her friend would gladly chase away by her merry talk ; but replies Eosa¬
lind :—
" Unless you can teach me to forget a banished father, you must not learn me how to remem¬
ber any extraordinary pleasure."
However, the grief once shared, is lightened, and henceforth the two young girls deter¬
mine to be as happy as may beht them : together they are bent on enjoying or endur¬
ing whatever may be their fate, and to live as hitherto " like Juno's swans, inseparable."
When the Duke, with hot displeasure, shuts the doors of his stately palace against
his innocent niece, he suspects not that two figures in disguise are tracing the outward
path, flying to " liberty, and not to banishment." The spirited Eosalind being " more
than common tall," arrays herself in manly apparel, liiding all fears in the womanly
heart, which, in spite of doublet and hose, will occasionally beat a little more timitUy
than is quite in keeping with her office of protector to the gentle Aliena—Celia no
July 1866. U
154 THE ATTEMPT
longer. Very fresh and charming seems the life which now opens to them. Purchas¬
ing a little cot skirting the forest, " like fringe upon a petticoat," with its adjacent
pasture-land on which to feed their flocks, they give themselves to country pursuits,
and no more as princesses, but as shepherd and shepherdess they spend their days in
healthful industry.
It were as difficult to describe to the sightless man, the sparkling ripple on the
summer waves, as to enlarge upon, or to explain the peculiar charm in the character of
Eosalindj to one who had never perused the play, throughout which, it is her lively
spirit and ready answers that captivate the reader; but, as below the dancing wave
there is a stiU depth of water, so in the brief moments when disguise may be cast
aside, and the youthful page be once more the Eosalind of heretofore, we discover be¬
neath her vivacity a true weU of love, so " many fathoms deep " that " it cannot be
sounded."
As we approach the end of the play, the course of love in the forest becomes
tangled as the thickets, as though Cupid had shot his arrows at random ; but Eosa¬
lind, stepping into the breach, with a pretty mixture of jest and earnestness, dex¬
terously adjusts the misdirected shafts, and the scene closes amidst " rustic revelry."
Though of the same merry cast as that of Eosalind, verj' different in many respects
is the character of Beatrice. The wit which is sweet and winning in the former, be¬
comes quick and satirical in the more marked character of the latter. Where Beatrice
hates, she hates with vehement intensity, and where she loves, it is with a love " con¬
stant as the Northern star." It is very natural and right that all women should regard
our heroine with feelings of admiration and delight, for from her lips there never falls
a slighting word against her sex. As easy it would be to imagine the sun envious of a
taper's light, as to picture to ourselves Beatrice a prey to any petty jealousy. In her
conversations with Benedick, we have the perfection of comic humour; no sooner do
they meet than each longs to challenge the other to a war of wits ; as enemies certainly
they meet, fight, and separate, and yet, in their constant seeking of renewed inter¬
course, we can scarcely believe their mutual hatred to be deadly. With admirable
readiness does Beatrice turn every sharp remark uttered by Benedick against himself,
and he, being no dull fool (for with such a one would Beatrice have disdained to con¬
test), returns the shaft new sharpened; still, on the whole, we are left with the
satisfactory feeling that woman's wit has gained the victory, and that, in many a con¬
flict, " four of his five wits went halting off."
There is a certain largeness and independence in the thoughts, actions, and speecli
of Beatrice, which indicate a nature not tied down to little rules, but one apt to wander
THE ATTEMPT 155
I
from the beaten track, and to explore for itself regions of newer thought. It is just
such a character as this that would readily fall into a net spread by ordinary persons.
Unsuspecting and truthful, never would the faintest suspicion darken her mind of any
intended trick. Honest and fair in her judgment of herself, she feels no resentment,
but only grief at the pride and scorn for which she finds herself so much condemned
by her cousin and Ursula. Ever hot on one side or the other, all her hatred of Bene¬
dick now turns to love, for pity (often a strong ingredient in such characters) being
once aroused for her supposed victim, prompts her to cast aside a portion of her pride,
and to be a little more gentle in her speech. To this, perhaps, she vras the farther
moved by a dim fear, scarcely acknowledged to herself, that Signior Benedick might
follow the kind advice of her cousin to so "wrestle with affection" as finally to subdue
it. Beatrice, listening in the bower, is truly a very different being from Beatrice war¬
ring with Benedick, but Shakespeare, in painting the light and merry portion of the
human race, never loses sight of the high, pure, and honourable feelings which actuate
all his best feminine characters. Mere comic humour is not put before us as a substi¬
tute for virtue and nobility of mind, but as, in real life, it is often the apparently bright
and thoughtless who show themselves most worthy of regard in the hour of trial ; so,
in his delineation of Beatrice, we find that when the proper hour for seriousness arrives,
she alone is ready and eager in her concurrence with the holy friar in his faith in
the innocence of her friend and cousin. When others cry shame upon her, the clear
voice of Beatrice rings on our ears, exclaiming—
" Oh, on my soul, my cousin is belied ! "
Eager and decided in her wishes and advice, we find her now working up Benedick
to undertake the office of revenger of the cruel wrong done towards her cousin. First,
we see her explaining how much that man would deserve of her who should clear her
cousin ; then we hear her, with admirable tact, lamenting that she has no such friend
willing to bestir himself for her sake. Soon Benedick implores to know the means
whereby it can be accomplished, saying—
" Come, bid me do anything for thee."
See his startled look when his gentle lady imperatively orders him to
" Kill Claudio."
Indignant and angry that any one should demur about ending the life of one rendered
detestable by his scorn of her cousin, she will listen to no reason, but, with her cutting
156 THE ATTEMPT
sarcasm, derides all men, declaring that their " manhood is melted into courtesies," and
" their valour into compliment." Brought back to his allegiance by this, Benedick
undertakes that Claudio shall " render him a dear account." We know how this neces¬
sity is obviated by the blundering of the inimitably humorous watch which has dis¬
covered knavery where none other could, and who bring the viUany home to " plague
the inventor."
Few of us will feel any love for Claudio, after the dastardly manner in which he
publicly accused his innocent bride ; yet we must all turn with pleasure to the form
which, unmasked, shows again the gentle loving countenance of Hero.
The last scene is truly characteristic, in which neither Benedick nor Beatrice, will
quite allow that in consenting to their union, they are pleasing themselves. Each
wouhl willingly make it appear a sacrifice for the sake of the other. However, their
friends implore, and a kind consent is yielded.
In turning to Portia, we behold one of the most intellectual of Shakespeare's
heroines. Possesed of a highly refined mind and delicate taste, she failed not so to
cultivate the same, as to produce much good fruit. Wit and humour she has in no
small degree, as is evident in the scene whore she bids N^erissa overname the suitors,
who have come to hazard their fate on the mystic caskets, and by her description to
level at her affections. But there is higher power within her, which fiir outshines
these smaller gifts—a strength of character, a clearness of understanding, and a naturally
philosophic mind : these gifts combined with a gentle loving disposition, surely render
her one of tlie noblest creations of the poet's brain. With none of the love of ruling
which ever dominates in small minds, we see her freely and entirely giving herself and
her queenly possessions to him, whose discriminating love has not chosen " by the
view."
Passing on to the great, the universally admired, yet, in representation, sometimes
much abused trial scene, Ave find ourselves in Venice, in a court of justice. Before us
we see the Duke surrounded by his magnificoes, together with Antonio, Bassanio and
Shylock. A young doctor of laws has just been announced, and is pleadmg with the
Jew, urging him to show some mercy to the " royal merchant," crushed by thick
coming losses. Never did mortal being plead for mercy in so noble, and so high a
strain, in words so nearly divine in their poetic inspiration. And, it is this very speech
which our would-be great actors, gabble over in a conversational argumentative style,
as though it were spoken by the veriest country clerk, calling it forsooth the " forensic "
style ! We can only refer any of our readers infected with this poisonous taste, to the
very words as they stand writ by our great master.    If they do not militate against the
THE ATTEMPT 157
prosaic everyday style above mentioned, if the present fashion jars not on their ears as
the harshest discord, we can only wish them safely through the world, but assistance
they will have none from the cheering and purifying influence of music and poetry.
Successful in the law court, merry and witty in everyday life, loving and true at
all times, doing good and never repenting the deed, we leave our gentle heroine to
pursue her course, ever " dropping manna, in the way of starved people."
Eosalind, Beatrice, and Portia—a group of sparkling gems, each with her own
peculiar colouring, but aU shining with a lustre ca-st on them by the same sun, which
though set, has left his beams behind him to illuminate posterity.
DBS Eaux.
5l!)'anati0M ox 6la%5t%.
We have known much hard language, from various quarters, applied to the musical
composers of the present day, who produce wonderful " variations" or " fantasias" upon
well-known songs, the fantasias themselves havuig, from like minds, been sometimes
painfully abused. Once the idea was started, and illustrated by example, " If a poem
were taken to pieces, and recreated in such a variation, what a mess, what a confusion
would be made !" Certain it is, that we, who know the words of the old Scotch or
English airs, thus lengthened by the rack of a new conjunction of musical keys, or a
Procrustean number of pages, experience a peculiar sensation, when, as we strive to unite
them once more to their lawful mates, that occasionally shoot from the musical instru¬
ments, we helplessly find a coquettish hesitation, a mock flight, a tremor, an angry
reverberation, or a languishing sigh separating deliberately the syllables that should
form one expressive word.
The custom is astonishing, though not so entirely original as some people think,
neither altogether confined to musical periods.
In fact, poems have been used in that manner, and without producing a confusion
at aU disagreeable to the hearer. In Spanish literature, we find the poetic " gloss "
(glosa), a kind of poem scarcely known on this side of the Pyrenees. It is, as it Avere, a
poem upon a poem, a romance woven round a romance.    The fact that there were
158 THE ATTEMPT
poems and romances "written and known, and so well known as to be freely " glossed,"
even early in the fifteenth century, shows us somewhat regarding Spanish advance¬
ment in literature, as our musical fantasias prove the existence of our national music.
Had subjects not been known, and well known too, the process of twisting, torturing,
murdering, and embalming, would have lost all charm. In Spain, the " Caucionero
General" was a rich mine of such materials. The operator took therefrom his victim,
dissected it, and strung the pieces together again, intertwined with his own ideas, their
connection broken, but their order strictly kept up. The difference between these and
our musical variations arises chiefly from the various natures of the arts of music and
poetry. Considering the eclat that our harmonious paraphrasers have gained, it seems
more wonderful that these literal glosses should not have been known and admired out
of Spain and Portugal, than that they should have been such peculiar favourites in the
place of their birth. They went somewhat out of fashion even there for a time, but
were revived in the middle of the eighteenth century by Vicente Garcia de la Huerta.
It seems that the old romances w^ere first " glossed;" then mottoes, and afterwards
everything that was capable of being " glossed," or of taking on any degree of polish.
The very conversations of the Spanish lords and ladies (at least, any bright specimens)
have been found woven into rhythmic glosses.
Doubtless, as their world grew older, the Spaniards found their wonderful old
romances rather strong for them, or not highly seasoned enough for their refining taste,
so they were pleased to get them diluted with a little weakening and a little sweetening
influence. No matter how stale was the diluting agent, nor how brown the sugar, the
Spaniards, in their brave, self-satisfied style, accepted them both. The trash introduced
into them was sometimes ten times as weak as the original, though that is speaking
strongly enough. For instance, Don Manuel Faria y Sousa, the Marinist, glossed an
old couplet in praise of his mistress' eyes—a fertile subject in that land. One of his
expressions runs, that " their beauty, in which Love has inscribed the poet's fate, is
as large as his pain, and as black as his destiny;" farther on, he tells us how " ten
lucid arrows of crystal were darted at him from the eyes of his Albania, which produced
a rubious effect upon his pain, though the cause was crystalline." Another similar
poet says that another beauty's " hair, in waves of curling gold, floating on the wind,
could cause a thousand deaths, or fill a thousand lives." The grand sentiment of much
of the old Spanish poetry seemed to be the apotheosis of nonsense, which nobody be¬
lieved, and everybody pretended to believe ; which grew up as the weeds and thorns
do in a field of wheat, or in a garden-parterre, choking the useful and the beautiful,
which had been really sown, aud had really germinated in Spanish soil.    We will not
THE ATTEMPT 159
enter now on a discussion upon the merits or demerits of that poetry ; we may merely
mention that gold is none the less pure though the vein be small, or even though the
precious ore be mixed with an uncommon quantity of rubbish. Fire can fuse it and
separate it once more, pure as its nature is. The Spaniards had a flourishing national
literature at a time when many another proud nation was voiceless, and almost, we may
say, soulless. It grew fast and very fair, but the principle of vegetation was arrested,
and the tree is stunted. "We don't mean to give these old glosses, or their authors, or
even the romances that gave birth to them, the credit of this. No ! We merely spoke
of them in so far as they were variations not practised in our country, though we can¬
not conceal that we have a worse kind than the Spanish gloss or musical fantasia
among us. One thing these always did, and always do—dignify their fancies with the
name of their original or text, openly. But other variations we have in amazing profu¬
sion, with the title "original" prefixed. Shakespeare, Goethe, Tennyson, and all poems
from " The General Song-book" of the world; how have they not gone through the pro¬
cess of glossing, and being reproduced with more deleterious mixtures than diluting
water, or even coarse brown sugar ! Meanwhile, these unprincipled marauders have
often the conscience to compare their lines to those of the world's prophet-poets, and
pretend to find a similarity, a parity, most satisfying to themselves. " Wonderful,"
they say, "how great minds ever run in the same direction !" Wonderful, indeed, all
great minds do ; and that direction is purity in thought as well as in expression, in¬
tegrity in character as in composition, joining a fitting body to a reasonable soul—■
making a ijoem, and not a string of rhetorical extracts.
To endeavour to multiply the " variations" or " glosses" of the present day, would,
indeed, be in vain. Every parody, every imitation, every pretence is, in its own way,
a " variation," acknowledged or unacknowledged, and speaks volumes to the mind
of the variationist, as well as to the intrinsic, or, at least, marketable value of the item
" varied." They say " hypocrisy is the homage that vice pays to virtue :" it is, indeed,
but a diluted " variation " by the vicious man, raised from his own ideas being glossed
around the fragments, enabling him to see and to copy from the precious poem of a
perfect life, acknowledging thereby the worth thereof, his need thereof, and the value
that the universal soul of man ever has for the eternally beautiful, and good, and true.
LuTBA Eeseda.
160 THE ATTEMPT
Part I.
Tlie Voyage.
The hark is moor'd, the sails are spread.
The deep blue sky that gleams o'erhead
Lends shadovv'd azure to the wave
That seeks prow, stern, and keel to lave ;
Then upward leaps with thundering roar.
To dash in foam upon the shore ;
High on the deck a canoi:)y
Of crimsom wrought, and ivory.
Paints, with a radiant, ruddy glow,
A gilded couch that stands below,
"Whore sits a lady's form so fair,
A lovelier mortal gazed on ne'er ;
Her form so royal in its grace,
The queenly beauty of her face,
Her robes, with many a gem bedewed,
With rich embroidery thick bestrewed,
All speak her born of lofty line.
In court or palace form'd to shine ;
All at a glance her rank is seen,
A princess born—too soon a queen.
But see ! the heaving of that breast
Betrays a grief that cannot rest;
The wavy mass of auburn hair
Clings round a brow imprest "vvith care ;
Tears gem those soft, gazelle-like eyes
That far above the ocean rise,
To wood and streamlet, veil'd in haze
That stretch before their earnest gaze.
THE ATTEMPT 161
n.
The anchor heaves ; the ship set free,
2^0 longer mocks th' infuriate sea,
Firm rooted to the shore ;
But, as the timbers creak and strain.
The plashing billows of the main
Exulting leap before.
Now yielding to the wind's embrace,
The bark speeds on, with rapid pace ;
Each hour that sees her onward sail
Draws o'er the land a deeper veil,
Till e'en the lady's eager eye
Scarce its dim outline can descry.
Augmented flows the stream of grief,
Deep sighs are bursting for relief;
In vain her wondering maidens try
Tlie powerful aid of sympathy ;
Each soothing word that meets he'? ear
Seems but to raise another tear.
At length the burden of her woe
Finds vent in words that plaintive flow.
And, as land fades before her eyes,
'Tis thus the lovely lady sighs :
ta.
" Farewell! thou pleasant land of France,
For aye, sweet land, adieu !
League after league we bear along.
And thou art lost to view.
" Soon shall the rugged Scottish shores
Loom sternly in our sight;
Soon Scotia's leaden ships appear,
For thy horizon bright,
X
1G2 IHE ATTEMPT
" Alas ! sweet France, that we must part,
That I must leave so soon
The land where all was mirth and joy,
And life a summer noon.
" I care not that in Scottish homes
A regal crown I '11 wear;
Its weight Avill press upon my brow,
And goad me to despair.
" I care not that acclaiming hosts
Will me their sov'reign greet;
Nor that each courtier knee will bow
In homage at my feet.
" I know too well that golden crowns
Are oft with thorns entwined,
And that those lips that shout my praise
Hide many a hating mind.
" 0 could I see thee ! France, once more,
And be as I have been,
The greatest of my bosom's foes
Might then be Scotland's queen."
IV.
The ship, no more the water's sport,
Eides anchored in the destined port.
And, as the lady's foot once more
Steps lightly on her native shore,
Applauding thunder rends the air,
From countless numbers gathered there.
Here plumes and tartans nod and wave
O'er Celtic brow and bosom brave ;
THE ATTEMPT 163
There velvet, silk, and hodden gray
O'er Saxon breasts their hues display ;
While high o'erhead, in massy gold.
Floats Scotland's lion-banner old.
But some look on with sad, stern eye.
And shake their grizzled heads and sigh,
And in low whispers darkly tell
Of cross, and bead, and priestly spell
By their young monarch lov'd too well.
And pray that God their land would screen.
From judgment for their Eomish queen.
For from the land, late dark and dead.
The night of monkish lore has fled,
And the warm flush of dawning day
Sheds all around its welcome ray :
And well they love their new-born faith.
With love that clings through life and death.
And doubly hate the faith so blind,
That swayed before, their darken'd mind.
'Mid shouting hosts the royal train
Edina, Scotia's glory, gain ;
And now against the horizon blue
The craggy mountains rise to view,
'Xeath which for many an age has stood
The palace of the Holy Eood.
Meigeaq Bheag.
fTo be continued.)
164 THE ATTEMPT
The talented author of " Adam Bede," a book that is thoroughly English, is espe¬
cially English in eulogizing Leisure, that word that is dear to all English hearts, and
included in all English sympathies. The pressure of heavy cares in the earnest pureuit
of duty is too engrossing with the Scotchman to allow him to enjoy, particularly, any¬
thing so aimless as leisure ; and the Frenchman is too frivolous a creature to do other¬
wise than especially devote les moments perdus to the service of ennui, that god before
which, everything that is French, bows down with trebled obeisance; but honest,
jovial John Bull, never more honest and jovial than in his hours of relaxation, to whom
the unceasing gnawings of dull care, and such a word as ennui are alike unknown,
constitutes it his principal life-bu^siness to enjoy himself, and betakes him to the
achievement of his end with as enviable a relish as that with which he eats his own
roast beef and plum-pudding. Consult the authority of that thorough Englishman,
Mr Punch, on the point, and he will tell you that all Englishmen love leisure, and, in
illustration, show you in his wonderful mirror where everything English is duly re¬
flected, Paterfamilies revelling at his home fireside, and even his well-known parliamen¬
tary magnates, rusticating in such an undignified manner, as to be more concerned in
catching a trout or riding well up to hounds, than in any legislative business whatsoever.
But, though the Englishman is undoubtedly its most thorough appreciator, the
ambition of having nothing to do is too common to all, to exempt any from the love of
leisure. Who is not bewitched by golden-haired Leisure 1 that coaxing syren that, affect¬
ing to be unawed by the relentless character of stern old Father Time, plays with his
hoary locks, blows into his furrowed cheeks, and cares not for his threatening scythe ?
None, for she is an enchantress of too universal might, to let any escape the touch of
her fairy wand. As I write, lazy mind pictures rise up before me, pleasant in their
very laziness in illustration of this love of leisure—pictures such as that of a broad river,
slowly majestic in its course, with its sheeny green and darkly troublous blue glittering
and twinkling beneath the sunbeams, while, on its verdant bank, clothed with trees,
in the full luxuriance of summer beauty, reposes beside the lazy kine, ruminating in
peace, a recumbent figure, in an attitude sufficiently expressive of lazy contentment,
to indicate the fact that Damon, not even troubling liimself to " chew the cud of sweet
and bitter fancy," is dreamily reposing on a flowery couch, with a very vague notion
that he is doing so.
But the seaside is ever the most suggestive of the enjoyment of leisure, where the
THE ATTEMPT 165
buzz of the many tongues, the splash of the bathers, and the musical modulation of the
waves to every mood of mind, as well as the sight of the busy life going on among the
nursemaids and the children, invite indulgence in the most desultory, forgetful musings.
Of all the beautiful parts of this beautiful world, the sea shore is, to me, the most attrac¬
tive, conveying a sense of stupendous grandeur and infinitude, as well as a winning
witchery of poetic beauty unrivalled in any other department of creation, and giving
a key to trains of thought the most suggestive of the boundless power and love of its
all-wise Creator, such as breathe sublimity in the works of Milton. In this choicest
spot for enjoying the pleasures of contemplation could one most congenially loiter
away a life-time of leisure moments, gazing with wondering eyes on the wide expanse
of blue ocean, nowhere so immense as where it seems to melt into the horizon ; while
the noise of the never-ceasing action of the restless waves falls on the ear, affecting the
mind with a wondering curiosity to know the meaning of their magic music ; and the
imagination roves in endless mazes of uncertain and wandering thought, revelling in
delicious reveries, and building castles in the air of such colossal magnitude and
Arabian night splendour, as can only be realized in all their brilliant hues when re¬
garded in the sober grey light of reality. "Wrapped in such a perfection of dreamy
happiness, we can appreciate the fitness of Milton's desiring Melancholy bring with
her, " fijst and chiefest," the cherub Contemplation, for the right enjoyment of
"retired Leisure,
That in trim gardens takes his pleasure."
How inexpressibly true this is can only be felt by those who have experienced the
feelings attending a visit to the " trim gardens " of which the poet writes : gardens of
that prim and formal cut which abounds in close-shaven terraces and orderly arbours,
with the close clipped trees and hedges representing those grotesque and quaint figures
expressive of the Dutch style; while, over all, there is diffused an air of serenity,
which, along with the ancient aspect of the place, suggestive of the tread of mailed
warriors, and the soft footfall of a lady's foot, the sound of angry and defiant voices, oi"
the peal of silvery laughter, invites the companionship of the " cherub Contemplation."
Milton's phrase is also suggestive of a quieter, less imaginative, but especially
pleasant leisure, the possession of which affords us a snatch of pleasant thought, of quiet
reading, or any other agreeable div-rtissement, such as lends us a respite from the
pressing concerns with which relentless Time would ever load us,—a leisure, in fact, that
suggests in illustration, the picture of a fair face with a thoughtful expression, in an
elegant, yet comfortable drawing-room, crowded with attractive looking books and
1G6 THE ATTEMPT
periodicals on the prettiest little fanciful tables, fairy work-boxes and work-baskets,
besideiji embroideries and sewing silks, with other evidences of mild and easy occupa¬
tions. Again, I say, who is not in love with leisure, careless easy-going, delightful leisure 1
But, the enjoyment attainable on the possession of leisure is attended by the cor¬
responding danger arising from the too natural tendency to indolence, a habit of which
the personal and social effects are no less disagreeable in their nature than in their
increasing extent through indulgence. Laziness is surely one of the most personally,
as well as socially disagreeable of vices, for how can those be happy who like to exist
in a state of inactive lethargy, because they " can't be bothered " doing anything that
involves the slightest exertion ] The rough paths of the world would require to be
covered with velvet for the dainty feet of those selfish Sybarites, to induce them to
walk in them, and, strange to say, this is often done to some extent by people who
confound wilfully inactive with quietly unobtrusive natures, ascribing to amiability the
mild indifference, that does not think it worth while to be ill-natured because it is too
much trouble, and often excusing the non-display of talent because of its supposed
absence, while it is all there, if indolence would only stop smothering it and allow it
free egress. Of the many striking examples of the evils of indulgence in indolence,
we would only refer to those of the numberless, briefless barristers, and empty-headed
dandies, whose constitutional dawdle, and lazj^ affected mode of speech, sufficiently ex¬
press the lazy manner in which they smoke away a useless existence with the aid of
meerschaums and stupid novels, the most successful of brain soporifics ; and the num¬
ber of girls now-adays who idle their time away in reading sensational novels, that
most poisonous food for the mind which has the invariable effect of enervating the
energies so as to render active exertion highly disagreeable. This would require a
desperate cure, for " Who can minister to a mind diseased 1" Prevention has, how¬
ever, its work also to do, in the aid of which a few suggestions as safeguards against
the influences of indolence may here be found useful.
The first great preventive principle is never to be idle, as a wrong employment of
time is generally the consequence of its non-employment, (witness the well-known
testimony of childhood's friend—Dr AVatts), were we better convinced of which, or did
not so often forget it, every one of those small moments would seem of more value,
that go to fill up a whole, hereafter to witness either for against us. Side by side, and
for comparison with the numberless experiences, in ourselves and around us, that act
as impressive warnings against the evils of idleness, is the experience of the happi¬
ness that flows in upon tlie spirit from being constantly emi)loyed, and the beauty of
unremitting industry arising from the cheerful and invigorating influences that surround
THE ATTEMPT
1G7
it, especially noticeable in woman, whose virtues are ever .her graces,—witness King
Solomon's declaration, when, in enumerating the perfections of the " virtuous woman,
whose price is above rubies," he says, " She worketh willingly with her hands," and
again, " She eateth not the bread of idleness."
As to the somewhat vexed question of how time is best employed, upon which
very different opinions are held by different people, especially by those in whom pre¬
judices or predilictions are very strong, taste, conscientiously exercised, should decide.
It is very natural that survivors of last generation, in which the perfection of womanly
industry was thought to consist in such an assiduous attention to the use of the needle
as to produce wonders of sewing skill, should ridicule the comparative degeneracy
of these days of sewing-machines, and no less natural that the present generation
should pity the past for its slavish mode of employing time, and turn with a sense
of superiority to the pursuit of its less manual and more intellectual employment.
The intolerance of each should be condemned, however different in its nature, the
first arising from prejudice, and the second from pride, and producing various effects ;
with the first, it being often held waste of time to read a book twice, and, in one
solitary instance within my knowledge, even to read at all, while the second would
disdain to dedicate any time to useful or plain accomplishments in the engrossing pur¬
suit of those that are ornamental, sometimes even transcendental. At the same time,
however, the lesson of the change of taste and opinion with the progress of time, should
teach us that circumstances must determine the manner in which we employ our time.
As important helps, however, we should be careful in what channels we allow
reading and thought to flow. We have already referred to the evil influences of sensa¬
tional novels, the worst defect of which is their real unnaturalness, glossed over with a
plausible surface; but we need not deprive ourselves of the pleasure of the perusal
of the pages of Action, so long as we have the true works of Sir "Walter Scott or
Thackeray to fall back upon. These, with the deep or light works of the world's great
men, but, especially, the study of biography, fill the mind with a rich store of know¬
ledge, besides assisting in the no less necessary work of guiding the thoughts, which
must ever exercise a considerable influence on the outer life, the most needful element
in the accomplishment of which, is the power of concentration of thought.
Thus, we have referred to the inner and outer safeguards that must be exercised
against indolence, but, without a ruling aim, they are comparatively useless. We can¬
not hope to exercise them successfully, unless we live with a distinct purpose to point
their use in the direction of one goal. The decision of the channel into which the
energies are to be turned is not an easy one, but, bringing all our mental powers to
108
THE ATTEMPT
the task, will even enable us to overcome the difficulty of the word " choose," especially
when the necessity for decision is present to our minds in the lights thrown upon it in
the late inaugural address of that King Solomon of the present day, Thomas Carlyle.
With the mighty consideration influencing us, that our decision is that of a life¬
time, let us make it, so as to multiply our talent to the highest degree in our power,
the words of that solemn warning addressed to the poet in answer to his question,
" What is Time ]" ringing in our ears—
'Time is the warp of life," he said, " 0 tell
The young, the fair, the gay, to weave it well."
Elfie.
-<■ s»;r«>«^<c:-c£ «
%tQm1im^ Sags,
THE   WILD   HUNTSMAN.
The shades of midnight rest
On tower and tree,
On the stream's breast
The stars look silently ;
Upon the dewy air
A wild note rings,
From mossy lair
The couched deer startled springs ;
With crested front, leaps forth,
Swift as the wind,
Wierd ghostly mirth
Pursuing close behind.
Through forest glooms they come,
With sounding horn,
Tn rose wreathed home
The peasant prays for morn.
Night's purple shadows move,
Unveiling earth,
And from above
Streams the glad sunshine forth.
Yet, when the soft moonbeams
On each couch lie,
In lonely dreams
They hear the chase sweep by.
And by the happj"- hearth,
When fades the light,
And silver mirth
Makes glad the deepening night,
When gentle tongues unfold
Their mystic lore,
Still will be told
That night's dark legend o'er.    J. I. L.
THE ATTEMPT 10 9
With the exceptions of Mary, Queen of Scots, and Oliver Cromwell, there is
scarcely a character in all modern history that has been the subject of more violent con¬
troversy than that of Viscount Dundee ; and, in our opinion, not one that has under¬
gone more harsh and unmerited condemnation. Every hero has his faults, and Dundee
was certainly no exception to the rule; but let us beware, lest, in condemning him, we
place ourselves in the category of those who,
"If they find
Some spot or blemish in a name of note-
Not grieving that their greatest are so small—
Inflate themselves with some insane delight,
And judge all Nature from her feet of clay."
Many people consider ViscoTmt Dundee as a blood-thirsty persecutor of the Church, the
scourge of his country, and the enemy of all that was orderly, peaceable, or pious ; but,
surely, we should pause to reflect ere we consign to such opprobrium the memory of
one whose unflinching courage and stainless loyalty must bo admitted even by his
bitterest foes,
John Grahame of Claverhouse, Viscount Dundee, was the eldest son of Sir
William and Lady Jean Grahame of Claverhouse. He was educated at the University
of St Andrews, and subsequently enlisted as a volunteer in the French service, from
which he passed into that of William of Orange. During his whole career abroad, he
was distinguished for great intrepidity, and gained, as we are told by a historian of the
period, " the love and esteem of all his equals, as well as of those who had the advan¬
tage of liira in dignity and estate." He returned to Scotland in 1677, when he was
appointed commander of an independent troop of horse, at the head of which he con¬
ducted a successful campaign against the Covenanters. In 1G82 he was appointed
Sheriff of Wigtown, and for his services in that capacity, he was, two years later, sworn
a privy councillor. In 1688, Claverhouse, who remained faithful to King James when
the unhappy monarch's own children had forsaken him, was created Viscount Dundee
and Lord Grahame of Claverhouse. In the May of 1689, he appeared in the High¬
lands at the head of an army of King James's adherents, and hastened to give battle to
the Whigs, who were advancing, under General Mackay, through Athol. The armies
met in the Pass of Killiecrankie ; Mackay was utterly defeated ; but, in the very houi
Y
1 70 THE AXXEJli'T
of triumph, Dundee received a mortal wound. He died, like Xelson and Wolfe, in the
arms of victory ;—
" And leaviiic; in b.ittle no blot on his name,
Look'd proudly to heav'n from the death-bed of fame ! "
Claverhouse selected, early in his career, a glorious example for imitation in his
heroic ancestor, the great Marquis of Montrose ; and, although neither his natural gifts
nor the circumstances in which he was placed were such as to enable him to equal his
illustrious kinsman, in whom the most romantic courage and brilliant generalship were
united to the most exalted principles and cultivated intellect, still, throughout his
whole life, Claverhouse gave ample proof that he was a worthy descendant even of the
heroic iloutrose.
Professor Aytoun has defended the memory of Dundee in language worthy the
champion of such a cause ; and, surely, no one who has read his noble poem, " The
Burial ]\Iarch of Dundee," can help wondering at the stupid malignity of those who
have sought to brand with infamy the name of the hero of Ivilliecrankie. The part of
Dundee's life which lies most open to censure, is the period between 1677 and 1684,
while he was acting, first, as the captain of an independent company, and afterwards as
the Sheriff of Wigtown. His treatment of the Covenanters during that period was,
doubtless, very severe, sometimes, perhaps, unnecessarily so ; but he is fully exonerated
by the circumstances and the spirit of the times. The cause of the Covenanters was,
in the abstract, a good and holy one, and their courageous endurance deserves the
highest praise; but in their ranks were to be found numberless fanatics, and not a few
downright reprobates. They were, it is true, rebels for conscience' sake, but they were
rebels none the less for that; and, at the time Claverhouse returned to Scotland, they
were a numerous and powerful armed force. What should we have thought of our
hero, if, holding as he did the king's commission, both in a military and a civil capa¬
city, he had remained in sloth and inactivity, while the country was troubled on every
side by the lawless deeds of the armed fanatics, and the nation disgraced, in the second
year of his sheriflfdom, by the brutal assassination of Archbishop Sharpe ? W^as not it
conduct more worthy of a Scotchman, a patriot, and a Grahame, to set vigorously to
work to extirpate a sect which, misled by the conduct of many of its adherents, he be¬
lieved to be composed of dangerous and obstinate rebels ? and can we wonder that his
vengeance often failed to discriminate between the innocent and the guilty 1 Besides,
half the stories circulated among the peasantry regarding the cruelty of Clavcrhouse,
are unLrue, and the remainder are generally grossly exaggerated; as in the case of John
THE   ATTEMPT
171
Brown of PriesthiU, whom Claverhouse is said to have murdered in cold blood, with
his own pistol, although a letter written by him to the Duke of Queensberry distinctly
denies that Brown fell by his hand, and proves that the Covenanter had his life offered
him, on conditions which were accepted by his nephew on the same occasion. Let
Dundee's own words be his defence : " Terror is true mercy, if it puts an end to, or pre¬
vents Avar." But let us leave the darker portion of our hero's life, to gaze for a moment
upon its glorious closing scene. Oh ! surely all narrow-minded criticisms, all petty
prejudices, must melt like snow before the noon-day sun, as we think of that unshaken
loyalty to the exUed monarch, of that last grand charge at Killiecrankie, of that solemn
scene in the church of Blair-in-Athol, where the hero was laid to his rest by his mourn¬
ing and devoted followers. All honour, then, to Viscount Dundee ! While Scottish
history exists, the Temple of Fame shall ring with the martial echo of his footsteps.
" 0 thou lion-hearted ■warrior !
Reck not of the after time ;
Honour may be^deemed dishonour,
Loyalty be called a crime.
Sleep in peace with kindred ashes
Of the noble and the true,
Hands that never failed their country,
Hearts that baseness never knew.
Sleep ! and till the latest trumpet
Wakes the dead from land and sea,
Scotland shall not boast a braver
Chieftain, than our own Dundee."
Dido.
FROM THE GERMAN OF O. WILDERMUTH. ,
SEVEN   YEARS   LATER.
Minna to Matilda.
.   .   .    All is settled : and at last I may invite you, if not as bridesmaid, as dig¬
nified matron and ever sympathizing friend, to be present at my Avedding.    The day
fixed upon is the 12th of June—^just eight years since the bright, joyous time Avhen
172
THE ATTEMPT
we first met. How long these weary years have seemed ! I can hardly yet realize
that all my fears and heart-burnings are so soon to be exchanged for hope and joy.
What glorious days were these in the wood, in the garden, and under the lime trees,
where our hearts' thoughts were first revealed to each other ! Perfect bliss seemed to
be within our grasp, until my father discovered us, and demanded Arwed's right to
speak to me as he had done, when he could show no guarantee for my future happi¬
ness. Then came the long, sad times—the bitter struggle between love and duty. It
is a wretched feeling to nurse a love unsanctioned by a parent's blessing, to know that
you are the cause of the first words of discord, in a hitherto peaceful home. My father
unceasingly declared that if Arwed were worthy of me, if there were any good in him,
his love to me should make him exert himself. Then I was seized with the horrible
doubt, the dreadful suspicion that his love was not so sincere as mine ; I watched his
every look and gesture. Oh 1 I cannot bear to dwell on this. Arwed must deal gently
and tenderly with me to repay me for all I have endured for him. Two years ago,
when my dear mother was dying, I resolved to give him up ; but my good mother
would not accept my sacrifice. " You must not, in the agitation of the moment, forego
the desire of your whole life," said she : " no ; ask Arwed to be father and mother to
you, my child, and promise me to be happy with him, and I shall bless you both from
this deathbed, and from the skies beyond."    Can one promise to be happy 1
But why vex myself now, when all is arranged 1 The emoluments accruing from
the appointment which Arwed has succeeded in getting (thanks to the kindness of
your husband) are certainly not great, but they will suffice for our wants in the mean¬
time ; and when Arwed finishes the epic poem, upon which he is now engaged, it is
sure to bring him into notice, it is so beautiful.
We have taken a delightful cottage in a pretty little garden. I am only afraid of
its being rather too expensive ; but our home must be everything to us : and, you
know, a poet ought to be in the midst of beauty and harmony. Wo intend, imme¬
diately after our marriage, to take a short trip into Switzerland, to have a few weeks
thorough enjoyment before Arwed is obliged to settle down at the hateful desk. We
have to thank my good cousin William for having obtained my father's tardy consent.
He is a worthy fellow, for had he hinted one word of his own attachment to me—of
which I have had many proofs, and which I suspect my father divined—there would
have been an end to all hope for Arwed. But the good feUow actually declared he
had never thought of me ; on the contrary, he wished to speak to him about Frederika.
The latter is as much interested in William as she can be in any person or thing un¬
connected with her beloved Kitchen.    She has wearied me dreadfully the last few
THE ATTEMPT 173
years, and is trying now to make amends by excessive interest in my dowry, trousseau,
etc. I trust you will not refuse my invitation, that is, if that strict husband of yours
will permit. I do not venture to ask him. Our wedding will not be one of the
greatest events of the year, and for nothing else, I know, would he request a couple of
days' leave.
Do come, my dear Matilda, and bring back with you the remembrance of the
happy, hopeful days of long ago. Do not think from my saying this, that I am not
happy now. Indeed I am ; but should I not live to see your dear Lina grow up, tell
her, as the last words of her godmother, " She must never persist in extorting permis-
mission to obtain (were it even her heart's fondest desire) what her parents are unwill¬
ing to grant."    Farewell.    For the last time I sign myself, my dear Matilda,
Your affectionate,
Minna Reinfeld.
A    LITTLE    LATER.
Frederika to Edward.
Dear Edward,
Although we expect to see you so soon at Minna's wedding, still my
father thinks you ought to be informed that a few days ago my cousin William, who is
now pastor of Wallburg, and I, were engaged. I rejoice that such a worthy man has
fallen to my lot, and our father evidently shares in this feeling. Our near connection
to each other made me hesitate a little, but then William's mother was only half-sister
to my father.
The want of water at Wallburg was a serious objection ; but William says he be¬
lieves the heritors will defray the expense of sinking a well in the court-yard. We are
in no hurry for the marriage ; indeed I scarcely know how we are to be ready for
Minna's. Everything is left to me. Minna is perfectly useless. I tremble to think
what sort of a housewife she will make. I must conclude. William desires hearty
greetings to his new brother.    We all send love.
Your sister,
Frederika.
P.S.—I think it would be well if you brought a fillet of veal, also a saddle of
mutton with you. It has just occurred to me that the widowed Frau Miillerin might
take charge of my father's household when I leave.
174 THE ATTEMPT
MID-DAY.
My kind readers must now suppose that eight years have passed since the preced¬
ing letters were written. With their permission, we shall see how well, or ill, our
young friends have conducted themselves. Let us begin by taking a peep into the
manse at Wallburg, where William is preparing to start on a short excursion. His
good honest face is little changed since the time of the merry sail to the " green isle ;"
it had always a thoughtful expression, perhaps it may be a little more so now. William
is duly equipi3ed for his journey, and is pacing up and down the dining-room with ill-
concealed impatience ; at length he calls out: " But, my dear, is the coffee never to be
ready 1    I wish so much to take advantage of the cool morning air."
Frau Frederika hereupon appears in a clean, but, by no means, becoming morning
dress—" Well, you must just wait," says she, in rather a snappish tone. " This comes
of trusting to other people. I told that stupid Eosa to boil up the grounds of the
coffee last night:  she has not done it, so I must see to that before I make more."
" But, for this once, could you not have taken fresh water and a little more coffee V
" You do not understand these things; order and regularity must be kept up.
Goodness knows, there is coffee enough consumed in this house during the year, par¬
ticularly since the washerwoman now demands an afternoon meal; perhaps you would
wish me to make it without any chicory as well as with pure water?"
William quietly struggled with his impatience, and changed the subject. " 'My
dear, I think we ought to ask Minna to spend a few weeks with us, I do not know in
what state I may find her, but she is evidently very delicate, and a sojourn in the
country might be of service to her."
" Such nonsense, I could not do with her at all."
" She is your only sister, Frederika," said William, in a bolder tone, " and during
the last eight years, we have seen her only once ; surely, when change of air might be
renewal of health and strength to her, room could bo found for her."
" Well, well, you need not speak so loudly, she can come if she likes. During
your absence, I shall get the house cleaned, the large washing over, and our supply of
candles made. I do hope, however, she will bring no children with her, for they are
sure to be spoilt brats, and will ride upon my best sofas."
" I think we may venture to ask them," said William, smiling; " such an excel¬
lent manager as you, Frederika, will always find ways and means."
" Yes, that is true," answered the latter ; " I had experience enough in my mother's
lifetime, when our house was never empty. It might have been the hotel for the
whole surrounding country."
THE ATTEMPT 175
" ilany happy days were spent at Blumenwelt, my dear ; God's blessing is sure to
rest on an hospitable house."
" It may be so, but had it not been for my father's useless hospitality, this impru¬
dent marriage of ]Minna's would never have taken place."
This fact being unanswerable, William thought he would run up and take a look at
the children, hoping coifee would be ready on his return. The two little ones were
asleep. His eldest daughter, called after her grandmother, Dorothea, was up, and sprang
into his arms. " Oh! Papa, I was so afraid you had gone away without saying good-bye."
" lio, my darling, I would not have done that," said he, kissing her tenderly.
" Make haste and put on your things, I think you might escort me a little bit on the way."
Whilst his little girl was dressing, William looked round the nursery, and seeing
everything in such good order,—the beds so clean, the clothes so neatly folded, the
drawers so tidy, he could not but confess, " She is a good wife to me after all;" and as
his eyes met those of his child, he said to himself, "but your mind must not be so
warped !"
" What are you doing out of bed at this hour V exclaimed her mother, when she
saw her. " It is very absurd; I cannot possibly plait your hair just now. Why did
you not remain upstairs V
" Xever mind for this once," pleaded William. " Come with me and the children,
the walk will do you good."
" Me walk at this hour ! what are you dreaming of? I have so much to do that
I scarcely know where to begin. Dolly must not go either ; the wet grass will ruin
her frock."
With great difficulty, William carried his point, in so far as the children were
concerned, and after many admonitions from Frederika on no account to leave anything
behind him, to spend no more money than absolutely necessary, and, finally, to bring
no guests without due warning, he was allowed to take his departure.
The children danced and skipped with delight, and could, with difficulty, be per¬
suaded to turn back when the limit of their walk was reached. Little Dolly was a
very warm-hearted affectionate child; and it was not until her father had reasoned
gently with her upon the necessity of not tiring her younger brother, that she con¬
sented to allow papa to go on without her.
When William turned round, after a few minutes, he saw her wiping the dust off
Charlie's pinafore, and evidently comforting him after some mishap.
" She has her mother's carefulness, and a warm gentle heart besides," said the pleased
father.    " Frederika is a good wife to me," repeated he to himself, " a faithful mother.
176 THE ATTEMPT
an industrious housewife. That she is so much taken up with everyday duties as never
to enjoy a blissful rest, never to dwell, even for one short hour, upon the glories and
beauties of this lovely earth that is her misfortune, she is to be pitied and loved
more tenderly for it. And who knows," added he, " what influence the children may
have upon her. How often has a mother learnt, for her children's sake, what she had
been blind to all her life before ! She is delighted already, although she will not con¬
fess to it, to hear how prettily, and with what intelligent expression Dolly repeats the
hymns she has learnt for me. Yes, yes, we may live to see many changes." With
thoughts like these, which made his life appear brighter, and his home happier, William
journeyed on. " It is true," added he, continuing his soliloquy, " I ought not to have
withheld from her the two louis dHor I got from the stranger at the castle; she thinks
more of money than I do, and was rather astonished that the dress for little Mary was
all the remuneration I received. The gold would have been put into the cash box long
ago, but when I give her a fine new velvet bonnet, imported direct from the capital,
and far smarter than the one belonging to the minister of Seelborg's wife, she will
scold, I dare say, but will secretly rejoice that her goodman thought of her in such a
way."
And, now, having brought our friend within sight of his first resting-stage, we
shall leave him for a short time with his father-in-law.
K. H. D.
(To be continued.)
I am a word of eight letters, and am the object of Irish belief and love.
My 7, 2, 3, 5, 4 is a source of attraction.
My 5, 3, 7, 8 is an instrument of torture.
My 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 is "the sea pirate."
My 6, 3, 8 is the king of the forest.
My 2, 3, 5, 8 is an exclamation.
My 7, 5, 6, 3, 8 is what grumblers do.
Clarence.
THE ATTEMPT 17/
QUEEN CONSTANCE AND QUEEN KATHARINE.
Before drawing to a close our remarks upon the characters of Shakspeare's women,
we must turn our thoughts, for a short time, towards two of his most admirable,
historical characters. Having already spoken of Lady Macbeth, we shall now only
touch upon two later queens, both injured and forsaken by their natural friends and
protectors—we mean Queen Constance and Queen Katharine. The former, a widow,
friendless and forsaken, moves us to pity by her sad condition; to love, by the depth
of her tender, motherly affection; and to admiration, by the weight of her grief, whicli
could find no resting-place but " the huge firm earth," on wliich, throwing herself, she
exclaims, sadly, proudly,
" Here I and sorrow sit;
Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it."
We see her first before the walls of Anglers, accompanying the king of France, with
her son, the young prince Arthur, brought to give greeting to the Duke of Austria, as
to one who has come to spread his colours in defence of the trampled rights of the
noble boy. We hear her j^roffering " his mother's thanks—a widow's thanks," to
those who have espoused the good cause of righting the orj)haii and defending the
weak, till the time when that young orphan may raise his own right arm " to make a
more requital" to their love. But very soon the hapless Constance finds the emptiness
of regal vows, the shallowness of royal hearts, which too often break faith, oaths, and
promises, when self-interest demands such ruptures.
Amidst the pride and majesty of Queen Constance, there is often a touch of pathos,
reminding us of her sad and powerless estate. Thus, when roused to indignation by the
news of the alliance formed between France and England, whereby two heads of great
nations (though one a usurping head,) join to defraud the young prince of his birth¬
right, she first, in anger, throws contempt upon the message brought by Salisbury,
then, more gently, upbraids him for deceiving one who is
" Sick and capable of fears ;
Oppressed with wrongs, and therefore full of fears ;
A widow, husbaudless, subject to fears ;
A woman, naturally bom to fears."
Here we may warn our readers against perusing Shakespeare's historical plays out of
annotated editions of his great works, lest their eye, dimmed by the pathos of such
August 19,r>fi. Z
178
THE ATTEMPT
passages, may, on glancing at the foot-notes, be rudely offended hy such remarks as
" This was not a fact," or " That is an anachronism." "What signifies it to us in
doubtful matters of fact, whether Shakespeare or his learned annotators are the more
correct ? It is Shakespeare whom we are studying, or rather his works, for, as has
been frequently remarked, no writer has kept himself so completely out of sight in his
writings as has our poet. It is not history, as meaning a list of dates and events, for
which we seek in Shakespeare, but it is for the greatest of all histories—that of the
human mind in its workings and influences. This, however, is somewhat of a digres¬
sion. It seems to us that Constance mistakes her maternal love, when, seeing her boy
before her, good, amiable, manly, and beautiful, she thinks that the heart within her,
which is beating high with love for him, would be calmer over his misfortune, more
indifferent to himself, were his outward form less lovely. She was deceived, her love
and her ambition had been for him as great and as overpowering, though " nature and
fortune " had not joined to make him great.
The " perjured kings" had miscalculated, when, in the pursuing of their own
selfish ends, they had thought to satisfy a wronged woman by any half measures.
Constance, though tender, had a womanly spirit, not one ready to sink uncomplain¬
ingly under the oppressor's arms, but able to raise her voice, undaunted by numbers,
against the kings; then, turning to Austria, she exclaims—
" You are forsworn, foreworn ;
Thou, little valiant, great in villany !
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side ! "
Very far removed from madness is her feeling speech, of which the loss of Arthur
forms the impassioned strain ; no merciful cloud has obscured her reason, every addi¬
tion in her misery is appreciated keenly.    " JSTo," she says,
" I am not mad ; too well, too well I feel
The ditferent plague of each calamity."
In the depth of her agony, a comforting thought enters softly into her soul, such as
could not find place there when in the height of her anger; turning her sad counten¬
ance towards Pandulph, she says, with momentary relief—
" And, father cardinal, I have heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in Heaven :
If that he true, I shall see my hoy again."
But such thoughts cannot yet suffice her, thoughts of her boy, pining in a distant
prison, flow in upon her mind, drowning all other brighter visions. Those who have
known grief, know how tliero is a certain comfort in dwelling on every particle that
THE ATTEMPT 179
makes up the overwhelming mass of sorrow ; how, from the very bitterness of agony,
a sweetness may arise. "With unanswerable force and mournful truth does she reply
to him who tries to make less of her sorrow—
" He talks to me that never had a son."
Just such an exclamation is this as that which escapes from another heart-broken
sufferer, bereaved of wife and children, who, when spoken to of comfort and revenge
by one not sorrow-stricken, says, in the same sad, half reproachful tone—
" Ha has no children."
Strange it is that any one can so misunderstand the gentle Macduff, as to regard these
words as the expression of an injured man thirsting for a bloody revenge.
For almost every phase of human feeling, there is something applicable in our
poet. "What mourner has not entered, and is not now entering into, Constance's love
for grief 1 "Who has not felt with her that " grief fills the room iip " of the absent one,
recalling his looks, and repeating his words, till ready with her to exclaim, " then have
I reason to be fond of grief." But a few words are required to tell how death has
hushed the mournful wail, and calmed the restless grief of the noble Constance. News
are brought to the king that
" The Lady Constance, in a frenzy, died."
Thus ends the life of a loving, proud, and injured woman. Had it been her for¬
tune to live in peace and happiness, the deep waters of her nature had not been dis¬
turbed, and, like thousands of other women, she had glided through life loved and
honoured, but, dying, had left no wide-spread name.
"Whatever may be our pity for the later wives of King Henry VIII., and our in¬
dignation at their treatment, for none is our admiration so excited, or our sympathies
so aroused, as for his first and noblest victim. With her Spanish descent, Katharine
of Arragon had inherited all the pride of her nation, in addition to the natural indigna¬
tion of a woman wronged by her husband, and he a king, able to bring all power to
bear on his capricious will. Historians seeking to vindicate the memory of Henry,
write of how public prosperity demanded the divorce of Queen Katharine, and of how
his conscience was reproving him for the marriage, throwing into the shade his fic]<le
selfish disfjosition. Did his duty to the public also require that Anne Boleyn should
suffer for sins of which she was innocent 1 No ; we cannot admit any excuse for him
who cast aside this noble, virtuous woman, the high minded Katharine, his " true and
humble wife."
Proud and tenacious in exacting respect from all around her, without losing her
180 THE ATTEMPT
dignity she could kneel to the king, urging her suit on hehalf of their oppressed and
heavily taxed subjects. A stranger to the land, without one counsellor on whom to
lean, she enters the court to plead her own cause. Very temperate, true, and dignified
is her vindication of herself; to the king not one word of anger escapes her lips, he
whom she had so fondly loved, could not now be by her accused. But one there is
present whom she deems her deadly enemy; to him we see her turn, as, drawing her¬
self proudly up, and casting upon him the full light of her countenance, she says, in
clear though impassioned tones—
" Lord cardinal.
To you I speak."
Her fine generous disposition is brought out most happily in the charitable patience
•with which she listens to the praises of this very cardinal, whom she considers as
having been the prime mover in the work of her misery, when sounded after his
" weary bones " Avere laid to rest, by the gentle Griffith. AU anger against him fades
from her thoughts, as, with true womanly forgiveness, she softly murmurs
'' Peace be witli him."
Love and dignity together rule her life ; whether seated as a queen in state, or dwell¬
ing in retirement at Kimbolton, never does her grief or indignation cause her to utter
words unbecoming a woman and a queen ; her anger being at no time spiteful, never
leads her on to mean retorts or petty accusations. Her last speech contains a blessing
on the king, and a charge to her attendants that, after death, her body may be em¬
balmed,
" Althougli unqneened, yet like
A queen, and daughter to a king."
Thus, then, have we striven to note down some of the many thoughts which
naturally occur to the mind concerning Shakespeare's women. Thoughts whicli not
only arise on the perusing of his works, but which almost unconsciously form them¬
selves when the written page may not for months have been glanced at. So thoroughly
are the minds of Eritish men and women imbued witli the thoughts, feelings, and re¬
flections of their great poet, that these have become, in a manner, their own, or rather
have purified and ennobled their inner nature till " their spirits " become " finely
touched " and " to fine issues." Truly and heartily thankful must all women be, that
what is best, and grandest, and truest in their nature, has been recognised by him who
saw into the human heart witli that eye which " glanced from heaven to eartli, from
earth to heaven."
Though many beautiful creations yet remain unnoticed, we think it best to defer
THE   ATTEMPT 181
any further remarks, at least for a time, and will now draw our series to a conclusion
by quoting the noble epitaph on Shakespeare by that great poet, second only to him¬
self.
" What needs my Shakespeare for his honoured bones,
The labour of an age is piled stones ?
Or that his hallowed reliques should be hid
Under a star-y pointing pyramid ?
Dear son of memory, gi'eat heir of fame,
What need'st thou such weak witness of thy name ?
Thou, in our wonder and astonishment,
Hast built thyself a live-long monument.
For whilst to th' shame of slow endeavouring art
Thy easy numbers flow, and that each heart
Hath from the leaves of thy unvalued book
Those Delphic lines with deeji impression took,
Then thou our fancy of itself bereaving,
Dost make us marble with too much conceiving ;
And so sepulchred in such pomp dost lie,
That kings, for such a tomb, would wish to die.''
DBS EaUX.
-•—S5-&>«^«^-*—»-
0n Judging ititr^aritablg.
One of the most remarkable and unfortunate faculties which man possesses, is the
ease Avith which he, in reading or hearing the most pithy moral and religious axioms,
can see all their beauty and appreciate all their force, and yet never once think of laying
their lessons to heart, or of studying to shape the course of his conduct, in any measure,
by their directions. It is, we fear, in exercising this most dangerous faculty, that the
greater number of men and women have read the following precept, wliich surely
might be received with some measure of regard, as it is in the Holy Scriptures that
we find it written : " Judge not, that ye be not judged." It would be hard, nay, I
believe impossible, to find one who had never, at any time, been guUty of the injustice
of judging unfairly of the motives or actions of some among his acquaintances, the
wider circle of public or well-known characters, or the individuals who, at diti'erent
times, have figured in the page of history.
This unfortunate propensity to judge our neighbours uncharitably, arises, in a
great degree, from the habit we have of not regarding them with impartial and unpre-
182 THE ATTEMPT
judiced eyes. That is to say, we are either disposed to judge every one by ourselves,
attributing to them our own dispositions, or the tendencies which we, from our peculiar
up-bringing or our surrounding circumstances, have to various methods of thought or
action; or else we neglect to place ourselves in the positions of others, forget to con¬
sider how we should feel and act were we in their place—having the same dispositions
as they have, and exposed to the same influences, or it may be temptations, as beset
them. If we all took pains to steer clear of either of these shoals, should we as often
find ourselves indulging in such harsh condemnation of our friends or those with whom
wc may casually come in contact, or hear, with a pang, the cutting remarks made by
others about those who are dearly loved by us, and whose many and amiable cj[ualities
are so well known to us, though perhaps not so discernible by the careless observer 1
It is always difficult, sometimes weU-nigh impossible, to judge of one's disposition
and feelings by one's actions, as all know who have at any time been made uncomfort¬
ably acquainted with the opinions of others respecting them. How unfair, for example,
is it for those who are naturally of a frank and open disposition to accuse shy, quiet
persons of being stiff and proud, little thinking that those accused often try hard to
overcome the disadvantages of their nature, to be frank and afflible to strangers, and all
the while feel so painfully how often they fail in spite of all their endeavours. !N"ot
less worthy of blame are those who, naturally reserved and quiet in manner, deem
those forward and giddy who talk and laugh gaily with persons with whom they have
but little acquaintance, forgetting that these are merely obeying the instincts of their
nature as surely as they who are either silent or sparing of their remarks. There is,
doubtless, such a thing as forwardness^ but persons of reserved and shrinking natures
are not always the best judges of the stage at which lively frankness ends, and impro¬
priety begins. Even when, looking with as charitable an eye as possible we cannot
help detecting faults in our neighbours' actions, we shoiild beware of judging harshly,
for how can we know under what disadvantages those lie whose errors we so readily
blame 1 It is easy for us to condemn the anxious head of a family for his over-anxiety,
his irritability and discontent; but if we knew all, our censure might well be turned
into pity for the burdened spirit that feels the weight that presses on it, only too
keenly. Could we know how many cares oppress him, cares which the natural despon¬
dency of his disposition serves to increase, we should wonder less at ebullitions of temper
wliioli he occasionally displays ; could we watcli liim struggling against his infirmity,
praying for help to overcome it, we should no longer blame him for yielding, as it seems
to us, to the fits of gloom and discontent which we cannot but deplore. And here
we see a great source of our unfair judging of our neighbours—our ignorance of the
THE ATTEMPT 183
circumstances in which they are placed. No just judge pronounces judgment without
knowing all the merits of the case of which he is the arbiter, and there are so many
details in the characters and positions of others which we can never know, that for
that reason we should ever be slow in taking the office of judge upon ourselves.
It is not only with respect to the trifling infirmities of our friends that it beseems
us to exercise charity, but into the wide atmosphere of crime we must carry it, and re¬
member that the disadvantages under which the wretched inhabitants of our courts
and alleys labour, are so great, and their evil surroundings so many, that it would be
notliing short of a miracle which could keep tliem free from the contaminating influences
of sin. It is easy to toss the head and curl the lip in self-approving scorn, but were
we to reflect how often even we, with all the Christian and moral influences brought
to bear upon us, go more or less astray, we cannot with justice harshly judge those who,
neither by precept nor example, have ever been led into the way of duty. I think it
is not possible for us to look on the pinched, bad faces of the young " city Arabs,"
whose sole lessons have been in vice, and not feel that if we were placed in their posi¬
tion, we should equal them in wickedness ; that if we were starving with cold and
hunger, as these miserable little creatures so often are, we should not scruple to lay our
hands on the property of others, and, like the ancient Spartans, only consider that we
had committed a crime when our theft should be discovered. The grand truth should
never be lost sight of, that while we may, and indeed must, hate sin, we must ever look
with eyes of tender compassion on its wretched victims, whoso misfortune, rather than
crime, it is, that wickedness is their daily pursuit.
There is another reason, which every one must feel, why we should at all times be
slow in judging our neighbours, I mean the proiieness to evil which exists in our own
hearts, and the thought of which, while humbling, might make us pause before wo
hastily condemn the faults of others. The beams may not always be in our own
eyes, and the motes in those of our brother, but there is always such a tendency to
magnify the errors of our neighbours and diminish our own, that we can never be sure
that the balance by which we weigh them is properly adjusted, and, being ignorant, we
must guard as well as we may, against the great evil of injustice.
This subject is not nearly exhausted, but lest the reader should, without "judging
uncharitably," attribute to the writer the weakness of not knowing when to stop, this
paper must be brought to a close; but it is surely not too much to hope that some one
who peruses this may lay the matter somewhat to heart, and hesitate before pronoun¬
cing judgment on the ever shifting crowd with which he daily comes in contact.
Agatha.
184
THE ATTEMPT
Ijtar^ Stuart
PART II.
Lochleven,
Behold ! once more before our eyes
We see that lovely form arise,
Once more each lineament of grace
Confronts us in that noble face ;
Not, as of yore, in queenly state,
With fawning courtiers at her feet,
But mured within a gray old keep.
Round which the waters, in their sleep,
Seem moaning words of dark despair
To the poor heart imprisoned there ;
For, in the lonely Kirk of Field,
A tale of blood, in mystery sealed,
Has waked distrust in many a breast,
And many a heart with fear opprest,
And foul suspicion wide is spread.
That lays upon the regal head
Of her, the wretched victim's wife.
The fearful load of Darnley's life,
And hints that she, revenge to feed,
Has smiled approval on the deed.
Fierce foes have risen in the land.
And some have dared, with ruthless hand.
To seize her from her rightful throne.
And bear her, friendless and alone.
To this small spot of barren ground.
With waters blue engirdled round.
THE ATTEiHT
II.
But, to full many a jealous mind,
'Tis not enough that here confined,
The queen her throne awhile has left,
Of all but empty name bereft;
That name they too must tear away,
And so it faUs, that, on a day
"When Mary sits deep wrapt in thought,
Mourning the griefs her crown has brought,
The sounds of heavy feet approach.
And two unbidden guests encroach
Upon the royal solitude,
And harshly rouse the musing mood.
The one, a hoary man and old,
O'er whom the tide of years has roU'd,
Looks on his queen with mild, sad eye.
As though he feels the hour too nigh
"When she a traitor's deatli must die :
The other, wild of mien and fierce,
"With eyes so keen they seem to pierce
To the sad soul of her they scan.
Enters, an iron-hearted man,
"With clash of steel and martial tread,
And helmet gleaming on his head ;
And draws from out his steel-clad breast
A parchment roll, with words imprest,
"Which wring his victim's heart with pain,
And dye her cheek with crimson stain ;
And, in a voice of stern command.
He bids her, with her own right hand,
The cruel paper quickly sign.
That queenly name and crown resign.
III.
Proud gleams her eye with anger now.
Indignant crimson stains her brow;
2 a
185
186 THE ATTEMPT
Resistance trembles on her tongue,
But Lindsay's eyes breathe forth command;
And her fair fi'agile arm is wrung
By the steel grasp of Lindsay's hand.
Till blushes to his cheek are brought
By the harsh deed himseK hath wrought.
Wliite grows the lady's brow with pain.
Scarce can her lips a cry restrain ;
But the proud Stuart blood boUs high.
And with calm face, though kindling eye.
That none may mark her agony,
She takes the paper from the lord.
Attentive scans its every word—
Subscribes her name the deed is o'er,
And Scotland calls her queen no more.
IV.
Ten weary months the sun has rolled
His course around the castle old;
Ten moons, with calm and pearly hue.
Have kissed the waters cold and blue j
Ten weary months the captive queen
Immured within those walls has been ;
To her an aimless, changeless life,
(To those without—too full of strife ;)
But freedom now is near at hand,
And, soon upon her native land,
No more a captive "will she stand;
¥ov one within this house of foes
Feels pity for the lady's woes ;
One bows beneath her beauty's claim,
And AVilliam Douglas is his name.
'Tis midnight; cold, and calm, and bright,
A spring-tide moon sends forth her light,
With arrowy silver paints the walls
On which her radiance quivering falls.
THE ATTEMPT 187
A boat at anchor half reveals,
Which hanging brushwood half conceals ;
And plays the dimpled waters o'er.
That murmur round the island shore.
But sudden to the water side,
A group of silent figures glide ;
A gentle lady, fair in sooth,
A waiting-maid, and stripling youth.
Noiseless and swift the lad/s tread,
And quick the motion of her head.
And sharp the glance of that dark eye,
As though she fears discovery nigh.
And now in eager, trembling haste,
Within the boat her foot is placed ;
In silent speed the oars are plied,
And swift the lake's clear course divide.
No mortal eye is on them now,
The stars that gem the heaven's dark brow,
The waters gurgling 'neath their feet,
No tell-tale whispers can repeat;
And yet the lady's heart beats high,
And nervous fear is in her eye ;
Though calm her outward mien appears,
No symptom showing of her fears.
But now the lake's expanse is cross'd,
The prison-isle in distance lost.
And the small bark is moor'd once more
In shelter of the wooded shore.
The moon's uncertain rays reveal
Helm, lance and sword of burnished steel.
For noble hearts are there to see
Their queen restored to liberty;
And as the skiif draws near the strand,
And once again on Scottish land
188 THB ATTEMPT
Does Mary all unfettered stand,
Low fervent murmurs of delight
Arouse the softly slumbering night,
A hundred swords flash forth their light,
And man by man the nobles swear
That while in life their swords they bear,
Their queen her lawful crown shall wear.
(To he continued.)
Meigkag Bheag.
§0m5 ^iril ^^'A ^00ir mag ^Qvat
Although the principle "not to do evil that good may come," is universally
known and generally accepted, there are few of us who have not found ourselves
placed in circumstances where strict adherence to the path of duty seems to entail such
disastrous consequences, while a small deviation from it holds out such unquestionable
advantages, that we hesitate, consider, and, I fear, in nine cases out of ten, decide in
favour of the latter course. Sins of the tongue are those into which we are peculiarly
prone to fall, from such considerations as are mentioned above. How often, from a
wish to prevent dissension or estrangement, to palliate the faults of our friends, or to
bring about some object, in itself excellent and desirable, are we tempted to mis¬
represent, magnifiy, or diminish facts which seem too plain, too harsh, too disagreeable
to be strictly attended to ! and how many, actuated by generous and unselfish motives,
have slipped into the pit of falsehood, sinking deeper and deeper at every step, until
extrication becomes almost impossible !
Scattered through the pages of history and fiction, we find many illustrious names
stained with some crime, committed in the hope and belief that thereby " good might
come." One of the first that occurs to nie is that of Brutus, who, firmly impressed
with the belief that the death of Caesar was necessary for the good of Eome, plunged
his dagger into the breast of his friend and benefactor; and the name of Brutus,
associated though it be with patriotism, courage, and magnanimity, has nevertheless
come down to us as that of a traitor and an assassin from this cause alone,—he " did
evil that good might come." Turning to modern history, we find an example of the
errors into which men may be betrayed from praiseworthy motives, in the conduct of
Henry of Navarre.    On the awful morning of St Bartholomew's Day ho was brought
»
THE ATTEMPT 189
before King Charles, who offered him two alternatives—death, or the mass. What a
crowd of considerations must have presented themselves to his mind, at that terrible
moment! If he remained steadfast in the Protestant faith, instant death was inevitable ;
if he abjured his principles, life and the favour of the monarch were assured to him ;
but far higher and nobler motives than these guided Henry's conduct. If he perished,
the Protestant cause in France was irretrievably lost; if, on the contrary, he should
disguise his principles until the tempest of persecution should abate, he might assist,
in a thousand ways, his unfortunate co-religionists ; he might in time soften the heart
of Charles, mitigate the severity of the religious laws, or, in case of the worst, might be
ever ready to mature and direct plots for obtaining the civil and religious liberty of the
struggling Huguenots. The advantages of the one course seemed, indeed, to outweigh
the principles of truth and constancy which pointed to the other. Henry abjured his
religion, and obtained more than his most sanguine hopes could have promised him ;
but alas ! at what a price ! rectitude and consistency were lost, and moral courage
misdirected : his conduct furnished a subject for the scoffs and sneers of the Catholic
faction, and was quoted as a precedent by every faint-hearted, weak-minded Huguenot,
whose courage failed him in the hour of trial, and who endeavoured to quiet his con¬
science with the thought that he, like his leader, might " do evil that good might come."
In the " Gerusalemme Liberata," of Torquato Tasso, we find a remarkable in¬
stance of this kind of error. The Pagan king of Jerusalem obtained possession of an
image of the virgin, in order to perform with it some incantation, intended to obstruct
the progress of the Crusaders' army. The image disappeared mysteriously from the
Saracenic mosque; and the Pagan monarch, finding it impossible to discover the author
of the theft, condemned the whole Christian population of Jerusalem to the ex¬
tremities of fire and sword. A Christian maiden named Sophronia, upon liearing the
barbarous mandate of the king, determined to sacrifice herself for her people; and,
although entirely innocent of the theft, she proceeded to the palace, and solemnly
declared that she, and she alone, had stolen and concealed the image. She persisted
in this story, and, having obtained a promise that the lives of her fellow Christians
should be safe, she was led to the stake, from which she was, however, rescued by the
timely arrival of the female warrior, Clorinda. What pure and exalted feelings, what
unshaken fortitude, what Christian love must have animated the breast of her who
could thus, of her own free will, give herself up to a death of lingering agony, while in
the very pride of youth and beauty, and bound to the world by numberless ties, both
of duty and inclination! "Surely," many a one will exclaim, "the character of
Sophronia is worthy not only of admiration, but of imitation ! it must be impossible to
190 THE ATTEMPT
find a flaw in a mind so noble and exalted !" Alas ! no. Upon the name of Sophronia
rests the stain of falsehood—undeniable, deliberate, reiterated falsehood. Her sin is
all the more dangerous from the attractive colours in which it is arrayed, and many
people who would suspect motives in our two previous examples, and thus be preserved
from similar errors, might be dazzled by the magnanimity of Sophronia, and be them¬
selves led away, by their admiration for her character, into " doing evil that good may
come."
Let us consider, in conclusion, an example of a different kind—one who nobly
resisted temptation, and remained firm to her principles of right in an hour of bitter
trial; and such an example do we find depicted by Sir Walter Scott, in that character,
surely the most beautiful and touching in all modern fiction—Jeanie Deans. The
story of which she is the heroine, is too well known to require any explanation here,
I feel sure that its details must be fresh in the minds of every reader. It is well-nigh
impossible to conceive a situation more painful, or more trying, tlian that of Jeanie
Deans at her sister's trial. Think of the contending emotions which struggled in her
heart, as she took her place in the witness box! She beheld her aged and venerable
father, bowed to the ground by the weight of shame and sorrow ; her beloved Efiie,
whose childhood she had watched with all a mother's anxious care, and all a sister's
sympathizing fondness, in imminent danger of a shameful death, and but ill-prepared
for the awful prospect. She knew that a single word from her lips would secure her
sister's life and liberty, and yet she was able to resist that sister's heart-rending ap¬
peal ;—" Oh, Jeanie, Jeanie, save me, save me !" How deeply rooted was the love of
truth, how firm and well-grounded the religious principles which supported Jeanie in
those agonizing moments, when, with her sister's despairing cry still ringing in her
ears, she returned a mournful, but steady negative to the reiterated questions of the
compassionate counsel! Her faithful love for Effie, carried her fearlessly through all
the toil, danger, and difiiculty of her pedestrian journey to court—it would have led her
to the end of the world, to procure her sister's pardon—but, it could not blind her to
the enormity of falsehood, it could not mislead her pious and well-regulated mind into
" doing evil that good may come."
It is ill studying a character like that of Jeanie Deans, that we understand the
full reality and beauty of the eternal principles of virtue and truth. Viewed in their
pure and radiant light, the meshes of sophistry and error disappear, and our hearts, as
well as our understandings, shrink with horror from a wicked action, or a deliberate
falsehood, however praiseworthy the motives, however forcible the circumstances,
wliich tempt us to forsake the path of duty.    Let us, then, incessantly set before us
THE ATTEMPT 191
the thing which is right, and not that which is expedient, as the end and aim of our
endeavours, and adopt for the rule of our lives the old French motto.
Fais ce que dots, advienne que pourra.
Dido.
Strew them upon the river,
Wreaths, culled from woodland bowers,
Thy young mirth trilling ever
From lips that pale the flowers.
Like joys of thine own childhood.
Which years may ne'er restore.
Those blossoms of the wildwood.
The wave gives back no more.
Launch thy bark on the river.
Youth's precious freight, and rare ;
Its silken pennons quiver
In Hope's light fragrant air.
Yet, while the sunshine golden,
Lights up the sapphire sky.
Bethink thee, of each olden
Heart-wreck, of lives gone by.
Stand by the brimming river.
Oh ! weary age, and say,—
While hoar leaves pale and shiver
To the last sigh of day—
How time of all hath reft thee,
And, as its false gifts died,
Heaven's stars alone were left thee,
Soft shadowed in the tide. J. I. L.
192 THE ATTEMPT
AT WORK.
" That which is not perfect had better not be."
I HAD heard these words of the great Goethe quoted sadly, as one would a sen¬
tence of condemnation, by a man whose genius none can doubt, and bitterly, mockingly
they recurred to me, as I laboured at the work on which I would fain spend my life.
I put them aside, but they came back, and seemed to write themselves before my eyes,
and blot out all else from my sight. They were the thought of a man of Titanic
intellect, they were endorsed to me by a worker whose work is known, and who was
I, that I should raise my own conviction against theirs 1 And yet, that conviction
grew stronger and more consoling when I had faced my spectre fairly, when I had
confessed to myself that my work, imperfect as it is, is, to me work still, and no play.
And so I stopped and looked my dread in the face as I have said, and, behold, the
bitter words vanished away, and, in their place, I saw a servant with a toil-worn
countenance and stained robe, bearing to his master the produce of his labour : poor
and insignificant he looked, and the work he bore in his hand was small and contemp¬
tible, but he had done what he could, though his power was little he had used it to the
utmost, so he came humbly to the gate of his master's house, trusting in nothing of
his own, and, as I watched him, his face brightened, I heard a voice like music saying,
" faithful over a few tilings," and thus the tired labourer passed in to receive his
reward.
Thinking, then, of this, I began to search for the cause of the dissatisfaction that
fills almost every artist soul—I use the word artist widely, of creative natures, apart
from any consideration of the mode of expression sought. From the author of this
apothegm the sentiment is natural: subtlest of philosophers, deepest of thinkers,
there was little geniality, and less Christianity about Goethe ; he was a grand pagan,
but, living as he did in a later and Christian age, he wanted the simpleness and fresh¬
ness which made early paganism beautiful. With the most marvellous power of de¬
lineating passion, with the keenest insight into thought and feeling, the man himself
Avas cold, self-contained, egotistical. He dissects with the delicate skill of an experienced
surgeon, he does not describe with the irresistible warmth of a sympathetic poet;
there is more tender glow in a few paragraphs of Quiutus Fixlcin, than in pages of
THE ATTEMPT l'J3
Goethe's magnificent eloquence. So, too, with his thought respecting the perfection
of work ; it is cold, merciless, liglited by no feeling for the wasted effort of millions
whose lives would be a ruin and a despair were his fiat true. From him we expect no
softer speech, but there are others, men to whom Christianity is no mere form, who
have fervent, generous souls, and yet to whom the sense of imperfection is a daily
snare; with these we can sympathize, for theirs is a "noble discontent" springing
from various motives.
First comes what Adelaide Proctor so deftly describes in her poem entitled
" Unexpressed : "—
"Dwells within the soul of every artist,
More than all his effort can express ;
And he knows the best remains unuttered,
Sighing at what we, call his success."
Then there is the sharp contrast between the ideal world so present to the artist mind,
and the real with its jarring difficulties; then the inevitable disappointment felt by
him, who, appealing to the higher nature of man, finds, for one who can respond to
him aright, hundreds whose blunted faculties misconstrue his most earnest thoughts :
all this, reacting on the over sensitive mind of a man of genius will, make Goethe's
words seem for the nonce most harshly true. Then followa the delight in a wis¬
dom which is not truly wise, a certain cynical faithlessness which makes failure
appear inevitable and irreparable, and adopts the Eastern Kismet, without the eastern
faith in Allah that renders fate endurable : no wonder that work in these moods
becomes a miserable grinding duty, instead of a joyous expenditure of strength and
intellect.
We have spoken hitherto of men, the acknowledged workers of the world, but
our remarks apply in a different kind and degree to women. Not many of us are
privileged to enter the ranks of those whose work is of the creative description : not
many of us can write, or paint, or study science, and we fear some of those who do so
would fare better in more beaten tracks ; but, to the few who attempt such work in a
right spirit, we would say a word. Let them labour truly; not with the coquettish
dabbling in deep things that characterizes a school-girl, but earnestly, humbly, self-
forgettingly, as those who, with limited powers rendered yet smaller by scant education,
(we speak of such education as fits a man for mental toil) are still anxious to follow
afar off in the track of wiser and stronger natures than their own. If a woman has
one spark of the divine afflatus in her, and approaches her subject in this temper, she,
at least, and probably her little world also, will be the better of her endeavours ; but,
2   B
lyJ: THE ATTBMFT
if neither of these conditions he fulfilled, then let her dance, sew, cook, do anything
that will save her from " rushing in where angels fear to tread."
Apropos of sewing, needlework is the kind of work supposed to be especially womanly,
hut, excellent though it is when needful, I begin to suspect it is at the bottom of half the
gossip we hear. I know a woman not devoid of brains, who leads, owing to her husband's
profession, a somewhat lonely life, and who confesses that she sews all day and likes it;
need I add that that woman lias every report and tale of the vicinity at her tongue's
end ? She cannot help it; for hours she sits at an occupation which leaves the brain
active, and, as she does not read, her mind can but spend itself on the last on dit of
her neighbour's tea-party. Surely women, unless they have very extensive household
cares, should try to avoid such a fate ; surely an hour, nay, half an hour might be
spared to intellectual reading, so that the doings of Brown and Jones should not be the
sole food offered to that rapacious consumer, the female brain, I merely offer this as
a suggestion, knowing that many a sober matron will cry shame on one who ventures
to think that " white seam " and the gossip for which our sex is so miserably famous,
are somewhat closely allied.
IMr Euskin has again been attempting to point out work for women to do, and, in
some cases, has succeeded admirably, but one passage of his last work quoted in the
Scotsman, reminds us forcibly of the wise adage, that, " If wishes were horses, beggars
would ride." It is true Mr Ruskin is not a man to be judged from extracts, but no
context can alter the meaning of some of the remarks to which we allude. " If women
willed it," he says, " there would be no war upon the earth;" that is, if women, every¬
where, would drape themselves and their houses in mourning when the first shot
crashes through the air, if they would make the homes of all civilized men hateful to
them as a punishment for tlieir contentiousness, no doubt mankind would be so
immensely bored, that they might be won over to keep the peace. But ilr Euskiii
unfortunately forgets two very sim^jle facts, which render his arguments, like tliose of
many another woll-meauing philanthropist, utterly useless, because utterly impractic¬
able. Fii'st, no known motive has ever produced, or ever can produce, under the present
dispensation, the perfect unanimity of even one nation, still less can we hope for it
among the women of many dift'erent races; only differences of opinion could save the
world from stagnation. Secondly, supposing, for argument's sake, that women had
agreed to carry out Mr Euskin's theory, does it not seem likely that the husbands and
fathers, wlio are to be coerced thereby, would find summary means of putting a stop to
so abnormal a state of things ? If woman's influence is to wear the stone away, it
must he with the gentle unobtrusive wearing of the slow dropping water.
THE ATTEMrT 195
Another false step the lecturer makes : he _asserts that the bravery we teach our
sons to admire, is but "a firebrand's tossing," one of those pictorial expressions so
common in his mouth, and so temptingly beautiful, if not followed too far ; this one,
we venture to think, is entirely a mistake.    There are various kinds of courage, and a
certain fierce animal daring common in- most vigorous, physical organizations, is the
least admirable among them; but this is not the quality that women usually worship.
There was more than this in the courage which made Leonidas and his Spartans wait
calmly in the Pass for an inevitable death; there is more than this in the cool self-
denying manliness that gives birth to many an heroic deed, none the less grand that
few men may ever hear of it.   Doubtless, Mr Euskin would reiterate that all these are
alike useless, that Sparta is dead, and Persia no longer awes the world; but, though
no change of geographical boundary, no visible political result ensue, is the moral effect
that remains, to count for nothing in the balance 1    Has not many a boyish heart, at
an age when books are a horror, felt some quickened sympatliy as the deeds of the
grand old Greek came before him ? has not many a man been stirred to nobler life by
the consciousness that in his veins runs the blood of some paladin of bygone days ]
We have studied Mr Euskin pretty thoroughly, and have seldom known him slip into
so strangely false and unchivalric a tone as he here adopts.    Xo one would willingly
doubt that, when the need for them is over, wars will cease upon the earth ; no one
can fail to wish that such a calm might come ; but, while the world remains as it is,
while every pursuit of life is more or less a battle, we may rest assured that our inborn
recognition of the greatness of true bravery, is one of those natural instincts not to be
lightly set aside, and, however deeply we may feel that our womanly work is chiefly to
be, in all ways, promoters of peace, we must also maintain that she would be a weak-
hearted woman, one, by her very nature incapable of strong influence of any kind, who
would repress or ignore true courage, or who would weigh her own chances of sorrow
and pain against the cause of truth and duty.
Elsie Sthivelyne.
196 THE ATTEMPT
P^ornhig, ^ib-bag, anb ^btnixiQ.
FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    O.    WILDERMUTH.
Blumenwelt was no longer the happy cheerful home it used to be. The fine old
liouse, with its wide portals and stately rooms, had been swept away from its ancient
site; the seat under the lime trees had disappeared, and with it the pretty flower-
garden, and shady walk leading to the river. Charles had completely broken up the
old place, and built in its stead an extensive breAvery, with dwelling house attached,
nothing now was heard but the din of hammers, and the loud voices of the work
people; the old gentleman had succeeded in preserving the lime trees from destruc¬
tion, but the seat was gone, and its place occupied by casks, barrels and all sorts of
necessary utensils.    The only spot left untouched by the mthless reformer, was the
small kitchen-garden, and here William found Herr S .    He is much changed and
looks worn out and exhausted, but his face lit up with a smile of hearty welcome, as
his favourite son-in-law approached. " It does me good to see you my dear friend !
your face recalls the happy past, and brings back to me more vividly the remembrance
of my beloved wife,"
" How are you my father 1"
" Xot weU, I am old and useless ; my only wish now is to join Jier "
" But surely you do not complain of your children 1"
" Certainly not; they respect and care for me, but I am no longer of any use to
them, William, and that is the thing. My daughter-in-law never for a moment makes
Charles feel that her meney built that extensive structure ; but the foreign language
and customs weigh heavily upon me. The friends that come into the house are busi¬
ness friends, the table is spread for business guests, and on Sunday instead of seeing
old and valued faces around me, the young people go out and leave me alone, but I
must not complain, I am old and useless."
" We have here no abiding place," answered William, gently, " but look for a
better."
" There you are right my son, and that is a point on wliich I have yet much to
learn.    How is "Frederika t why did she not accompany you 1''
" She is always so busy, she had no time " . . . .
" No time to see her old father during eight long years," interrupted the latter !
THE ATTEMPT 197
" Where did the girl get her excessive worldliness. Her mother was a first-rate man¬
ager, but she always found time to devote to others, and to enjoy herself. I am afraid
we thought too highly of Frederika's early fondness for household management. I know
I praised it much, for Minna again was inclined to take things too easUy."
" Poor Minna, how is she 1" inquired William.
" Do not ask me, I only hear from them when they are in difficulties, which, un¬
happily, is too frequently. There is, I fear, little love and less peace in that dwelling,
my poor wife was right in her estimate of Arwed, but it is too late now to repent. The
thought of Edward and Emma is the truest comfort I have ; the lighthearted fellow
has indeed been fortunate in securing such an amiable loving wife. Although not
blessed with over much of this world's goods, they have true contentment, and the
sunshine of happiness ever beams upon them."
At this point they were joined by Charles, and accompanied him to the house.
The rooms were richly and luxuriously furnished, but they resembled too much the
" company room," of AVilliam's own IManse for him to feel quite at ease.
The next morning our friend the Pastor continued his journey.    Herr S 
accompanied him a short distance. " And where is your next halting place to be t"
asked the latter.
" I intend paying a flying visit to Councillor Fiirst's Avife in the first instance, and
then continue on to see Minna."
" May God bless you my son, a sight of you will do her good."
"William found Matilda established in a prettily situated, elegantly furnished villa
on the outskirts of the town. He was warmly welcomed by his old friend, and intro¬
duced by her with all a mother's pride to her eldest daughter Lina; the other children
had not returned from schooL " And how are you dear William 1 and Eikclien 1 is
she busy and restless as ever 1"
" That she is," answered he cheerfully ; " she is a busy little housewife, and we
have three beautiful children." (There are some people, that we would not for the
world, should imagine that any shadow rested on our household.)
" Lina, get a glass of wine for our visitor."
" The red wine, mamma ?" asked the child, doubtfully.
" Ko, no, that must be kept for papa ; desire another bottle to be brought. But
Lina, dear," calling after her, "see that everything is ready for papa's luncheon before
you go. The Herr Pastor will excuse you. People in business, you know," said
she apologetically, " like punctuality, and my husband always expects everything to
be ready for him at four o'clock."
198 THE ATTEMPT
After refreshing himself, William was enjoying a chat with Matilda, when the door
bell rang—" Quick Linchen, see that your father is not kept waiting, and put aside
your knitting, he does not like such work you know."
Before everything was duly in order Herr Fiirst entered. There was little change
upon him since the days of the picnic; rather more portly perhaps, and more fully
impressed with the amount of deference due to his increased importance as Councillor.
He received his old acquantance with apparent indifference ; much as if they had seen
each other only a few days before. One or two questions were asked and answered
on either side ; then began the attack upon the roast beef and red wine. The latter
must certainly have had some soothing influence, for the manner of the Herr Councillor
gradually became more cordial, and greatly to the astonishment of Matilda and Lina
(who exchanged significant glances at the unwonted generosity), lie begged "William
would join him in a glass of the famous red wine.
Luncheon over, Herr Fiirst began to manifest sundry signs of impatience; ho
walked up and down several times, and at last left the room.
"You will not take offence I hope," said Matilda, "but my husband always
goes to his club for an hour or so in the evening. I am sure he would remain and
keep you company if" ... .
" Do not think of such a thing, I am an old friend and claim to be treated accord¬
ingly ; besides," added William, " I must be off and find out Minna."
" No indeed, you must not think of leaving us to-night; poor Minna has removed
far from this, and I much doubt if she be prepared to welcome visitors. We have
a charming spare room, and I know Herr Piirst will be very happy if you will
occupy it."
William accepted the invitation, and was going on to speak about Minna, when a
most commanding voice was heard calling " Wife " ! Matilda hastened away to fetch
hat, coat, and stick for the goodman, who duly appeared in a few minutes and took his
leave.
The evening passed very pleasantly, perhaps all the more so that Herr Fiirst was
absent.
" I need scarcely ask if you have any acquaintances near you," said William, after
the young folks had left them, " surrounded as you are by so many beautiful villas,
whose occupants doubtless form a pleasant society."
" Well yes but I go little out.    Fiirst likes to find mo at home when he
returns from court, and even when business obliges him to be absent, he prefers my
remainiu" at home."
THE   ATTEMPT 199
" Are you still fond of reading ?"
"Just as fond as ever, but my husband is no great reader, and prefers seeing me
working or arranging household matters." She observed William's ill-concealed smile,
and blushing a little, continued, " I know very well what you are laughing at, you are
thinking of old days and old opinions. The times are certainly changed, and I can
scarcely say how ; but Fiirst is such a worthy man, so good a father, and such an
excellent business person, that for these considerations, and for peace' sake, I may well
give in to his peculiarities."
" But why," said William, still laughing, "apologize for being, as in duty bound,
an obedient wife 1 It may be true, you spoil him a little, but that is an amiable weak¬
ness on your side."
" And you do not really think, that I lower myself by so doing ]" asked she
anxiously,
" Certainly not, I have never found self-denial derogatory—but one thing, dear
Matilda let me say (a minister must give a sermon you know)."
" And that is ? "
" Is your submission always quite true and sincere 1 Do you not sometimes fur
love of peace only appeal' to comply 'I"
Matilda looked conscious. " But really," began she hesitatingly, " there are cases
in which men could not judge rightly, and the exercise of woman's tact is surely not
deceit."
William shook his head, " I have never believed in innocent deceit; it may be
that through such harmless tact, certain relations may remain undisturbed, but surely
it were nobler to be clear and explicit in small as well as great matters." Matilda let
the conversation drop, but evidently what had been said, made some impression.
The next morning Matilda was up early, and William overheard her say to Lina,
" Send the children with the cash-box to your father, for I have not a penny left."
" But mamma, wliy did you not ask him yourself, before he left the room 1"
" You know how annoyed he always is when I ask for money, I cannot do it."
" But tell him, mamma, what has been done with it; he will see there could be
none left."
" You know quite well that papa never looks over an account, but only grumbles
at the sum total,    Be quick and send Alfred, he will not be angry with him."
" AVell mamma, if ever I marry, you must give me a great bagful of gold, so
that I need not ask my husband for any. If you do not I shall certainly never
marry."
200 TUB ATTEMPT
" Silly child," said the mother, laughing, " I do not mean that papa is unkind for
all that."
" 0 tempora" thought William, and smiled.
How the episode regarding the money had ended we do not learn, but when the
Herr Councillor appeared at breakfast, he was in the best of humours, and most friendly
to William, after whose departure he remarked, " A very sensible man; have no objec¬
tions to him, minister though he be."
William meanwhile was hastening on to the prettily situated village, where Arwed
and his family had established themselves.    This was his first visit to the home of liis
old love, for Frederika had always thrust innumerable difficulties in the way of his
making it out before.    As he approached the cottage, and walked through the little
garden whose grass-covered plots betokened tlie absence of carefid hands, William
thought of other days when things were so different, and a certain shade of sadness
came over him. K. 11. D.
(To be continued.)
Itbits.
1. The cup-bearer of Jove.
2. The iiainu of a range of mountains in Russia.
3. Au archbishop of Canterbury in the reign of Charles I.
4. A Carthagenian princess who committed suicide.
5. The town where the peace of Westphalia was signed.
6. The patroness of Columbus.
7. A water nymph.
8. The muse of erotic poetry.
The initials give what every one would willingly possess, and the finals where it is
supposed to be found. Clarence.
^nslvcr fa ^itifjmu.
Shamroch.
1. Charm. 4.  Oak.
2. Hack. 5.  Hark.
3. Shark. 6.  Croak.
Clarence.
THE ATTEMPT
201
FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    0.    WILDERMUTH.
The state of the room into which our friend the pastor entered was not calculated
to dispel his gloom; cheerful enough in itself, with the open window looking upon the
green fields, the sun shining brightly, and the birds singing, yet, despite all, there was
a decayed, neglected look about everything. The furniture, which had once been hand¬
some, was covered with a dirty chintz, whose gay roses had long since faded; the cur¬
tains were in many places held together by pins ; a poor dried up plant, was suspended
from the window in a dusty basket; the fire-place was encircled by a screen, on which
some things were drying : nowhere could William find a spot for his eye to rest upon
with any degree of pleasure.
A side door opened, and a woman, in very untidy morning dress, entered and stood
before him, in great astonishment.   It was Minna—" God bless you dear Minna!" . . .
" It is you, William, and I such a figure," said she, the colour rising to her cheeks,
" but the children take up so much of my time And you have come to see us.
God bless you."
There was something depressing in her tone and manner ; William felt this, and
strove to be cheerful.    " Where are the cliildren 1" asked he.
" Where the bigger Ones may be, I know not," answered Minna, " but here is my
youngest," bringing a pretty little girl out of the next room, whose dirty face and
neglected dress, did not give much evidence of a great deal of time having been ex¬
pended upon her.
" And so you live here now, Minna 1 it is a very pretty country you have chosen."
" Well, I live here; Arwed, as you know has something to do in the library in
town, and remains there to amuse himself after his work is done."
" I saw a short time ago, that his Epic was soon to be published," said William,
uncertain which chord he ought to strike.
" He gets a friend to announce it from time to time, but Heaven knows^ if it ever
will be finished; idlers are never at a loss for excuses," answered Minna, as she left
the room to dress herself.
Whilst Minna was absent, the two elder children came into the room to beg for
some bread.
September 1866. 2 0
^02 THE ATTEMPT
" Is it not time you were in the school-room my boy 1" asked William, of his
seven-year-old god-child.
" Yes, indeed, Willie " ! exclaimed his sister ; " there is ten o'clock striking."
" And what do you intend to be, my little man, when you grow up ?"
"A cobbler I should think," replied Minna, who had overheard William's
question as she came into the room again, " for he will learn nothing, and all he can
do is to wear out shoes."
" No, no ! " screamed the youngster, " I shall be a poet."
" Rather apprentice yourself to a tinker," said the mother with unmistakable
bitterness.
" Kikchen would not come with you I suppose," said Minna, after the little ones
had been sent off to school. " Should she make up her mind to visit us at any time,
she must give me due warning, so that everything may be made clean and bright, else
she would faint in my small house."
" Not improbable," thought Wdliam. " Yes, yes," he said aloud, " Frederika is the
same careful Martha as of old. I often wonder what she can find to rub and scour,
when everything seems so beautiful."
" Ah ! to keep things so neat and nice, there must be time, space, and, above all,
a contented mind," sighed Minna.
" Perhaps the reverse also," returned William, " a certain harmony of outward
things, is necessary for the maintenance of inward satisfaction." Minna coloured and
made no reply.
William spoke of their father, of Matilda, and the happy change in her ideas of
woman's rights and dignity.
"Tt was not difficult for her to give in," interrupted Minna. "Her husband is a
good man, and although she has spoilt him in many things, they are but small matters,
and on the whole she has every reason to be satisfied with her lot."
William was again silent, and found considerable difficidty in carrying on the
conversation ; there was evidently a cloud hanging over them, which must drift
away before one or other could feel quite at ease. Minna was the first to break
silence.
" William," said she, " it seems it is to you, you from whom of aU others I most
wished to conceal my misery, that I must confess I am an unhappy wife and mother."
What more she would have said, was lost in an impassioned burst of grief. " Do not
tell me," continued she vehemently after a moment's pause, when WiUiam was going
to speak, " do not say it is my own fault, you will drive me distracted, if you do.
THE ATTEMPT
203
How have I been deceived ! I believed in a star, whose rays would shine brightly on
every-day life and duty, making every sacrifice light, every pain a pleasure, but what
has it proved ? an uncertain flicker, that barely saves one from falling into the marsh.
What have I not given up for him 1 my youth, my father's happy home, and look at
the return he has made me. Say nothing to excuse him," continued she again, as
"William was preparing to speak ; " you do not know all, how I liave loved him, worked
for him, and been ready to share his lot whatever that might be. The emoluments of
his situation, were all we had to look to for the necessaries of existence. Could he
not have endured the small amount of drudgery for my sake, without, day after day,
complaining of the burdensome yoke, that cramped and crushed his spirit. To refresh
himself, all sorts of recreations were necessary, concerts, theatres, and small excursions
into the country; at first I shared those pleasures, but as the supplies diminished I
had to sit at home, whilst his mind sought to be invigorated The fruits of
this extravagance are yet to be gathered. Latterly he has even denied me the harm¬
less recreation of reading, and made so many ridiculous claims on me, that I am con¬
verted into a perfect drudge, and yet he comes, if possible, seldomer than ever to his
own home " 
" And have you done all that lay in your power, dear Minna, to make his home
dear to him 1"
" Well, I would have tried more," replied Minna, colouring, " had he behaved as
he should have done. I could not always have the temper of an angel, when he oidy
came home to vex and scold me; and what pleasure or treat can one have to keep
things nice, when they are never looked at or cared for 1 Instead of helping me in
my constant toiling, he only returned to grumble, and taunt me, miserable that I
am ! "    Here Minna burst into tears, and hid her face in her hands.
" But Minna dear," began William, " you say Arwed has deceived you. Was the
deception not on your own side 1 He gave himself to you as he was; a sensible,
practical man, he never appeared to any of us. Did you love him for his own sake,
or only for his youth, his handsome figure, and the measure of talent, which you and
many others held to be greater than it really is 1 Have you led the way in self
sacrifice ? Have you consoled and soothed him,'^as only a loving wife can, when his
wayward spirit was broken and worn out with prosaic toil 1 Have you made priva¬
tions easier for him to bear by enduring them clieerfully yourself? Have you done all
that was possible to make his humble dwelling worthy of the almost sacred name of
home 1 . . . Believe me, Minna, it is a sorry reckoning to think only of one's mis¬
fortunes, forgetting the faults of which these misfortunes are the natural consequence."
204 THE ATTEMPT
Minna must have felt herself condemned ; she did not raise her head for some
minutes, and then said, " You exact much, dear William, and reverse the order of
things, by making the weaker support the stronger. Surely the husband should be
the stay and comfort of the wife."
" Where love is strongest, there too will the greatest power of endurance be found ;
and surely " added William, " it is not expecting too much, to look for the highest
degree of love, the most unwearying devotion from the wife."
Minna shook her head despondingly. " Perhaps you are right, but so far as we
are concerned, it is too late; we need expect nothing from Arwed, he believes in
nothing,—he is no Christian."
" And do you believe ? " asked William, slowly and significantly.
" I, oh ! what should I have done in this miserable world, had I not clung to the
hope of a more blessed one to come 1 Arwed's fine sounding words and meaningless
sentimentalities, availed nothing in the days of trouble and sorrow, but I sought refuge
in my mother's God, I read my Bible with my children, I listened to the words of peace
in the house of God ....    Arwed vouchsafed only a smile of compassion "...
" You believe," again repeated William, slowly and searchingly, " and what have
you done to win for your faith the respect and love of your husband. Did you show
him the blessedness of a faith which could enable you to be patient in suffering, submis¬
sive under reproach, joyful in privation, faithful in small things, and above all which
bestowed upon its possessor that soft gentle spirit, peculiarly pleasing in God's sight.
Beloved Minna, when Arwed sees in you the exercise of such a faith, such a mind, and
throws it from him, then, and then only, may we give up hope of him."
Minna remained long silent, and apparently sunk in deep grief At length raising
her head, " Oh ! William," said she, " I knew not until now the inestimable worth
that, in my childish wantonness, I cast from me ! oh ! that it might have been other¬
wise ! "
William gazed sorrowfully upon the young, sad face, that had once been as his
morning-star, and had so soon lost its beauty; then, taking both her hands in his, said,
with all the depth of a brother's love, " Minna, all things work together for the good of
those whom God loveth ; this path may prove to you the very way Heavenwards ; your
marriage was consecrated by God ; your husband's soul will be required at your hands if
you have neglected aught of a wife's duty. You are still young, you are richly gifted,
a long life is before you; it may not be a very prosperous, but a sanctified, peaceful one,
it may certainly be. It is not for us to indulge in useless disquisitions as to how we
find ourselves in this path or in that, but to labour with all diligence to make our own
THE ATTEMPT 205
truly an upward path. And this we can do with God's assistance. We are both
richly blessed, dear Minna, with loving little ones ; will you permit the poison of un-
charitableness and faintheartedness, to be instilled into their susceptible hearts 1 Still
so young, my sister, and with such high and worthy aims to live for, and already
despair ! Have you forgotten the promise made to your mother to live and be happy ?"
" You mock me, William, how can one pledge for happiness here below 1"
" Let us try once more, Minna, each in our own respective ways," rejoined William,
cheerfully, "and when we meet again, we can compare notes, and see who has advanced
farthest."
K. II. D.
(To be continued.)
arg Stuart.
PART III.
Fotheringay.
I.
No more do Scotland's rugged hills
Enwrapped with taintless snows,—
Her mountain tarns and dashing rills
Whose banks the moorfowl knows.
To Mary's yearning gaze arise.
But English scenery feeds her eyes ;
In vain for liberty she sighs,
In this the land of foes.
Alas ! how unavailing now.
Her faithful lords' impassioned vow,
Till death, to guard her cause !
206
THK ATTEMl'X
A deadlier foe's worst wratli she feels,
A jealous queen her bosom steels,
To trample mercy's laws.
From town to town, a captive bound.
She has been borne o'er English ground ;
And now old Fotheringay's proud halls
Around her clasp their gloomy walls.
II.
The setting sun—the last that e'er
Will gild that brow so seam'd by care.
Shoots through the casement downward beams.
Adorns the room with golden streams.
Lends painted forms a life-like glow,
Lights roof above, and floor below.
Behold the lady seated there ;
Grief upon grief has blanched the hair
That in her youth was wont to spread
A veil of beauty o'er her head ;
Her classic-moulded form and face
Have somewhat lost their former grace,
But regal still in form and mien,
None can forget she is a queen.
Who, in that proud, erected head,
Those eyes unwet, that fearless tread.
Would know a victim doomed to die,
Ere gentle night again draws nigh 1
For England's queen has flung away
The reins that sought her wrath to sway.
And now her sister-monarch's blood
Alone can quell her passion's flood,
III.
But though thus calm does Mary wait
The advent of her fearful fate,
Yet there are those whose bitter grief
THE ATTEMPT 207
Can know no limit nor relief.
Deep heave her maidens' breasts with sighs.
Fast from their lips pour anguished cries ;
And Mary, she for whom they mourn,
For whom this weight of grief is borne,
She gently checks their sorrow's flow,
She stems the torrent of their woe.
With soothing words she dries their tears,
As though the cause of grief were theirs.
So gently creeping o'er them all,
Does their last night of union fall.
And with a sweet unbroken rest
Are Mary's latest slumbers blest.
IV.
Cold, gloomy, dull, the morning breaks,
And Mary from her slumber wakes
With a dull sense of fate most dread,
That hangs o'er her devoted head ;
But soon the truth, the solemn whole,
Wells inward to her listening soul:
In haste she quits her couch to pray,
And, in devotion, pass away
The moments of her life's last day.
The moon is still in early prime,
Eut eight short hours have rung their chime.
As Mary, from her prison-room,
Comes forth to meet her awful doom.
Before the castle's massy gates
A curious crowd her coming waits ;
Her mourning maidens stand apart
With tear-stained face and aching heart.
Yet sUent all their signs of woe,
In speechless tears that overflow.
And now the throng, with wonder dumb.
Beholds the victim onward come ;
208 THE ATTEMPT
Her cheeks grown thin with years of care,
The sickly hue of bondage wear ;
Untimely threads of silver, crown
That head once clothed with wealth of brown ;
But calm her brow, serene her eye,
A Stuart can, unflinching, die.
With smile of love, and words of cheer,
She turns to soothe a follower near.
Whose heartfelt sorrow now finds vent
In words of loud and deep lament.
" Grieve not, good MelviUe," thus she speaks,
" That ere another morning breaks.
My soul, let loose by violent hands,
Shall flutter free from earthly bands ;
Bear witness, true to Scotland's laws.
My cherished faith, my country's cause,
I die, and therefore die in peace :
This day procures my soul's release
From all the sorrows that, from birth,
Have clung around me on this earth."
And now once more the deed is read,
That dooms to death that regal head ;
Calmly indifferent, she hears
What fills aU eyes but hers with tears,
Calmly before the block she kneels,
Unmoved, the weapon's edge she feels.
Until, at length, the deed is o'er.
And Mary Stuart lives no more.
Meigeag Bheaq.
TUE ATTEMPT 209
The other day I was reading an old song, written hundreds of years ago, every
verse of which ended with the line—
" The falling-out of faithful friends, renewing is of love."
At first, the words pleased me, and I thought them true as well as pretty; but, upon
reading the poem a second time, I began to doubt this, and, at last, I became convinced
that the sentiment they expressed was false, and, perhaps, even dangerous.
But, before giving my reasons for this opinion, I must acknowledge that, although
the line appears to me to be untrue as it stands, that is, untrue as applied to faithful
friends, yet I think that with formal acquaintances, with people who treat each other
with civility, and even with kindness, but who have for each other no deep feeling, no
affectionate interest, there is nothing more likely to produce a real and hearty friend¬
ship than a downright quarrel. This may sound paradoxical; but I speak from ex¬
perience, for I can, at this moment, remember the names of three or four friends—
friends whom noiv I would not, for the world, lose or offend, but with whom, I feel
convinced, I should have remained to the end of my life on terms of cool civility, had
we not been fortunate enough to quarrel violently and unexpectedly—for the quarrel
must be unexpected, or, at least, unpremeditated. It would be a dangerous experiment
to prepare the materials for a dispute, in the expectation of seeing Friendship arise,
purified and strengthened, from the ashes. There is a strong argument against the
efficacy of quarrels, even under such circumstances as I have just alluded to, namely,
that people who have no warm feeling of interest or affection for each other, are very
unlikely, if they quarrel, to take the trouble of bringing about a genuine reconciliation.
But people, between whom there subsisted very little cordiality, so long as their
mutual intercourse preserved the character of polite and placid indifference, very often
begin to take a new interest in each other, if the monotonous tranquillity of their
acquaintanceship is ruffled by a dispute, and the bond which has been formed between
them by habit, circumstances, or convenience, is temporarily broken through. After the
heat of the quarrel is over, each begins to remember, in the character of the other, numerous
good qualities which have hitherto remained almost unnoticed, and to recall many
little acts of kindness and courtesy little thought of at the time they were performed.
'210 . THE ATTEMPT
but which gain importance from the consideration that, for the time, at least, all these
things are at an end. Besides, in the great majority of quarrels, the ca^us belli is a
matter of such very small importance, that the disputants, when their angry excite¬
ment abates, and they have time for cool reflection, feel heartily ashamed of themselves
as they think of the trifle that occasioned the dispute ; and when this is the case,
they must either be of a very unforgiving disposition, or else have wounded each
other's feelings by inexcusable bitterness or malevolence, while the quarrel lasted, if
they do not manage, in one way or another, to make peace with each other. This
done, the probabilities, as I have already said, are aU on the side of their becoming
better friends than they ever were in their lives before.
But a quarrel between " faithful friends " is a very different thing. In the first
place, it must be a serious and important subject which can cause a quarrel between
faithful friends. I do not speak of estrangement—of that slow, gradual decay of con¬
fidence and afi"ection, which may extend over a period of years, and often has its origin
in the veriest trifle—in the
" Little rift within the lute,
Which, by-and-by, ■nill make the music mute,
Aud ever widening, slowly silence all."
Or, as another poet has expressed it, in
" A something, light as air—a look,
A word unkind, or wrongly taken,"
which, he tells us, can shake " love, that tempests never shook." Trifles such as these
may be the beginning of the end, the first of a long series of doubts, suspicions, and
grievances, beneath whose chill and deadly influence, love, and confidence, and friend¬
ship gradually droop and die.
But it is not an estrangement such as this that is meant in the line which
suggested this essay; it is a " falling-out," a violent and passionate dispute, iuto
which two individuals, deserving the name of " faithful friends," could never allow
themselves to fall, unless for some weighty and important cause. Unless one of
the parties be unusually irritable and passionate, the subject of such a quarrel must
be one upon which they think seriously, and feel deeply; and when this is the case,
when both are impressed with the importance of the disputed point, and each is
firmly convinced that his own view of the matter is the correct one, and that all con¬
cessions would be not only undignified, but wrong, is it possible that a " falling-out "
upon that subject can ever be to them a " renewing of love V    They may become re-
r\ THE ATTEMPT 211
conciled, and everything may go on apparently as smoothly as before, but, in the majority
of cases, the quarrel, though buried, will be buried alive ; it will constantly be recalled
to their minds by the slightest approach to the disputed subject, and unless one of the
friends be fortunate enough to bring the other round to his way of thinking, it is likely to
burst forth a second time with greater violence than ever. I do not deny that the
closest friendship may exist between people who think quite differently on very im¬
portant subjects ; but when such differences exist, be careful how you approach them !
The safest way is to leave them alone altogether ; but sometimes this is impossible,
and sometimes it is wrong. If we are forced by circumstances, or obliged by a con¬
scientious sense of duty to enter upon the dangerous ground, let us do so carefully,
tenderly, dispassionately. It is at aU times difficult to preserve even the appearance
of calmness, when we meet with opposition on a subject on which we think strongly
and feel warmly—and opposition is doubly bitter when it comes from one whom we
love ; but, nevertheless, as we value our friend, let us beware of the smallest approach
to a quarrel! because, in the first place, it is not by angry disputation that we will
ever convince any one of the justice of our cause ; and, in the second place, in spite of
the old song, it seems to me that there is nothing more melancholy, or more dangerous,
than the " falling-out of faithful friends."
Besides, although it is a difficult matter to produce a violent and serious quarrel
between faithful friends, yet, if the quarrel once takes place, it is often no less
difficult to effect a reconciliation. One reason for this is, that two or three bitter or
angry words, coming from one whom we love and respect, impress our memories
more strongly, wound our feelings more deeply, than a thousand such expressions
from any one to whom we are indifferent. The sarcastic expression, the harsh
accusation which have escaped the lips of our friends in the heat of passion, remain
deeply fixed and rankling in our hearts; they rise every hour to our recollection,
and every hour they appear more bitter and more unjust; and if we allow our¬
selves to brood in this manner over our real or imaginary wrongs, our hearts will very
soon harden into an almost impenetrable barrier against all friendly advances from the
other side. On the other hand, if we are conscious of having been ourselves to blame,
the feeling of shame, which, in the case of a quarrel with an indifferent acquaintance,
would only prompt us to a speedy acknowledgment of our fault, acts upon us quite
differently if the person we have injured or offended be a "faithful friend." The sense
of our own error is so deep and painful, the remembrance of our own violent words or
unfriendly actions is so distressing and humiliating, that we often absolutely dare not
ask for that forgiveness which we would give the world to obtain, and which would.
212 THE ATTEMPT
in all probability, be readily granted, could we only resolve speedily upon making the
necessary advances ; but should we hesitate long, the silence of shame and contrition
is very apt to be imputed to sullen obstinacy, and thus a wall of wounded pride, re¬
serve, aiid misunderstanding, rises up between us and our former friend. Ah, surely
the old poet forgot the many difficulties which stand in the way of a reconciliation,
when he Avrote that " the faUing-out of faithful friends, renewing is of love !"
Prevention is, at all times, better than cure, but it is not always easy or possible
to prevent a quarrel; and when two friends are so unfortunate as to become involved
in one, they should remember that the surest means of obtaining a hearty reconcilia¬
tion, is to set about it as quickly as possible, never waiting till the " slow foot of Time"
will have obliterated resentment from their minds, for, though this will sooner or later
come to pass, it may come, alas ! too late for reconciliation. With regard to injuries
received, the best way to forgive them, is to forget them. The recollection of them
gives us no pleasure, on the contrary, a great deal of pain; why, then, should we
cherish it 1 Again, if we ourselves have been the offending party, we should not stand
hesitating, and doubting, and wondering if our friend ever can, or ever will forgive
us ; we should go at once and ask him. "A fault confessed is half redressed ;" and
a frank and penitent acknowledgment that we have been to blame, will generally, if
only made soon enough, set everything right again, and though it may not be a " renew¬
ing of love," will at least preserve the old love pure and uninjured.
All novels agree in informing us that lovers' quarrels are not only matters of
course, but, positively, delightful; and we are even told that a courtship without
quarrels is devoid of its greatest charm. With regard to this branch of the subject, I
am, at present, unable to oifer an opinion; but I nevertheless would humbly venture
to say that it seems to me that even lovers must be so far lOve other people as to
find it dangerous playing with edged tools ; and that when I think of the very un-
amiable things that are said and done by common mortals during the heat of a dispute,
I cannot help having strong doubts as to whether lovers' quarrels are quite so delight¬
ful as they are represented to be, for, though Love is blind, I never heard that he was
either deaf or dumb !
Dido.
THE ATTEMPT
FEOM THE GERMAN OF GOETHE.
The Knight.
I know a flow'ret wondrous fair,
Ah, would that it were mine j
Fain would I seek it far and near.
But prison'd here I pine,
My grief is great, for woe is me,
In former days when I was free,
The flower was ever near.
I sit and strain my weary sight,
At castle window high,
But from the turret's rugged height,
No blossom I descry;
0 ! he who brings that flower to me.
Be he of high or low degree,
Shal rest my dearest friend.
The Rose.
1 hear thy song ! Beneath thy cell
My blossoms cluster bright,
'Tis I, the Eose, thou lov'st so well.
Thou noble captive Knight;
High minds for worthy objects glow.
And queen of all the flowers that grow,
I reign within thy heart.
The Knight.
All honour to thy crimson leaves,
Enwrapped in mossy green,
A wreath of them the maiden weaves.
More bright than jewels' sheen ;
Thou mak'st the fairest face more fair,
But thou art not the flow'ret rare.
That reigns within my heart.
213
214 THE ATTEMPT
The Lily.
Though honored is the rose, and high
Her hopes ambitious rise,
More would thy gentle lady's eye
The snow-white lily, prize,
And if thy heart be warm and true,
And stainless like my petals hae.
Thou too \vilt love me best.
The Knight.
My thoughts are chaste, my heart is pure.
And free from deadly crime.
Yet captive here in cell obscure.
Alone I pass my time ;
Although an emblem true thou art
Of many a maiden pure in heart,
I love another more.
The Pink.
It must be I, the Pink, who here
Adorn thy jailer's bower.
He tends me close and holds me dear,
A rare and precious flower;
My petals cluster close and bright,
In thousand hues of dark and light,
And scent the air around.
The Knight.
Thy beauty none can e'er deny,
The gardener's boast and pride,
Now open to the sunny sky.
Now fenced on ev'ry side,
But that which cheers the captive Knight
Is not thy gaudy splendour's light,
It is a modest flower.
THE ATTBMPT 215
The Violet.
Concealed I lie and downward bent,
And loath am I to speak.
But since thy words for me seem meant,
My silence I will break ;
Am I the flower, thou noble Knight ?
Alas ! thy prison's rocky height
My breath cannot ascend.
The Knight.
T hold the lowly violet dear.
Its modest worth I know ;
But ev'n its fragrance cannot cheer
My days of weary woe.
But hearken, and I '11 tell my mind—
On these rough rocks, I cannot find
My precious little flower.
But down by yonder streamlet's wave
Earth's truest maid doth roam ;
Ah ! many a bitter sigh she '11 heave
Ere I come rescued home.
A flow'ret blue, in shady spot,
She plucks, and sighs, " Eorget-me-not!"
I hear her in my cell.
Through faithful love, two hearts may be.
Though distant, ever near ;
The very thought gives life to me,
In prison dark and drear.
When half heart-broken at my lot,
I cry aloud, " Forget-me-not I"
And hope returns again.
Dido.
216 THE ATTEMPT
S^mftjin^ aboMt ^bfrgt^ing.
IRELAND.
It ought to be easy to say something about the place we live in, but it is, in reality,
as difficult as many other things that ought to be easy, but are not so. Because we
live in the Green Isle, our friends across the channel seem to think that we must be
able to furnish them with endless tales of Irish wit, and we feel much as though they
had set us down to string beads together, and given us no thread to do it with.
Though eyes and ears may both be on the alert, it is hard to put scattered observations
readably on paper; hardest of all to string witticisms wittily. Be this our apology to
our readers if the beads are somewhat loosely hung, and but glass beads at best.
First, then, of our local habitation itself. To eyes accustomed to the varied and
picturesque outlines of Modern Athens, Dublin is the most monotonous and hideous
of towns. After wandering through the principal streets, we are fain to confess that the
net result of our walk is flat, stale, and, especially if we have been the victims of a
shopping expedition, frightfully unprofitable. There are a few, a very few good
" points de vue " in the town, but, as a whole, it is disappointing. We used to think
John Bull bore away the palm for the utter ugliness of his public monuments, but
Paddy surpasses him in his daring disregard of good taste ; in one of the chief
thoroughfares stands what is intended to be the most national of his memorials—one
which should almost correspond to our unfinished, but beautiful columns on the Calton—
a monument to O'Connel. We had heard of this erection, and proceeded to look at it
with some interest; imagine our feelings when we found one or two rough stones, and
above them a huge signboard, on which is painted the cherished name ! There is a
wonderful pathos about the whole construction, one might even moralize over it, were
not the ludicrous side of the thing too obvious. Considering tliat we are still in the
British Isles, it is curious how unhomelike and novel everything appears ; climate,
manners, accent, all remind us that we are far from " our ain countrie," and it is not
mere national prejudice which makes us add that the change is not for the better.
With all their Celtic vivacity, impetuosity, and untruth, with a more than Celtic
dirtiness, and a goodnature entirely their own, the Irish are a strange people, and not
altogether pleasing. We soon cease to be surprised at the difficulty of governing them
quietly, for, to keep quicksilver motionless in one's hand would be about as easy ; and
THE ATTEMPT 217
the career of their favourite hero is a fitting type of their general character, beginning
with much expenditure of energy and high-flown idea, the ending whereof is in a cab¬
bage garden : no wonder, with such a national temperament, that there are Fenians in
the land. Of that most bombastic movement Ave hear little, except the sentences
passed on newly tried disciples of the great cause, but the hydra is far from being
killed, and many a man is, at heart, a Fenian, who dares not say so in the face of the
vigorous measures taken by the government. Severe strictures are being made here on
the foolish tenderheartedness of the home authorities, who have commuted to penal
servitude for life, the sentence of death passed most justly by court-martial on the occasion
of one of the most atrocious instances of Fenianism among the soldiers. Sepoys were
ruthlessly blown from the guns for doing very little more than this man had planned to
do ; and few will deny, that while there is a shadow of excuse for the Hindoo, who hates
the yoke of a foreigner, there is none for the soldier who plots treason and murder in
the army of his native country. Any one who wishes to see a sort of apotheosis of
Fenianism, should visit the Mountjoy Prison, during the exercising hour. There,
within a strong iron railing, and watched by sentries, stalk the unfortunate victims of
the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act : they solace their confinement by great attention
to their personal appearance, but neither dress nor swagger can carry off the ludicrous-
ness of their situation. There walk Yankees who once held commissions, but to whom
we scarcely feel inclined to apply the received expression of " officers and gentlemen."
Chief among them is a gigantic brigadier, who, having begun his prison career with
some impertinence to the guardsman in charge, expiated his sins forthwith, in the soli¬
tary cells, and now maintains a sullen but undignified silence. Every prisoner, as he
enters, is photographed, so there is no hope of his physiognomy passing from the
knowledge of his gaolers. And here let us add a word of praise, in passing, for the
adjoining female convict prison, beautiful in its careful order and cleanliness ; it even
suggests the thought that, in every respect, save liberty, our criminals fare infinitely
better than their more virtuous brethren of the same class. We almost wonder if liberty
counterbalances all other disadvantages.
The power of repartee with which this nation is gifted, is quite singular ; we find
it everywhere alike, from the ladies to the beggars, and their sayings would fill
volumes. We tell a Dublin belle, that no Irishwoman ever shuts a door, and her piquant
little face lights up saucily as she retorts, that the Irish were always famous for keeping
open house. We groan audibly for a policeman, when tormented past bearing by a
beggar, and with an insinuating smile he answers that, " Och shure, yer honour, there's
two of them down the lane, and I '11 fetch 'em for a shillin';"' while another, a woman
2  E
■1 [ 8 THE ATTEMPT
this time, wishes a hard-hearted gentleman " three bad wives " as a judgment on him
for his stinginess. Some of the Highland soldiers, too, are almost as amusing as the
natives, though from a different cause : their English is somewhat scanty, and the
results are curious ; one sentry, in repeating an order which referred, in the original,
to parcels, stated stolidly, that he was "put there to tak chairge o' ony persons that
might be thrown ower the wa'."
We must not omit to notice the one great beauty of Dublin, the Phoenix Park,
with its acres of turf dear to a rider's soul, its long shady glades and lovely groves of
hawthorn; it is, indeed, a delightful resort after the stifling air of town, and artists
and pedestrians may alike spend many a pleasant hour within its gates. There are
pretty bits of country, too, about the city, numberless sea-coast villages, and further
inland, little country places where the Dublin ieau monde assembles to drink unlimited
tea, with the usual accompaniments of croquet, scandal, and flirtation.
!N^owhero are the peculiarities of Irish character more amusingly displayed
than in tlie " Letters to the Editor " which crowd the columns of all the local papers;
what may be called parliamentary language of the most vigorous kind, incoherent
suggestions on every imaginable subject, and wild complaints of a hundred difi'erent
sorts, are all to be found there, and in all of them grammar is thrown aside as a
trammel unworthy of the writers. One enthusiastic person, who is above the use
of so plain a word as preservation, says, the duty of a certain board is " the conserva¬
tory of the harbour," and this is a very slight specimen of native style. ISTot long since
appeared an advertisement, " Lost or strayed a brown coat, reward £5," whereupon we
inquired of a cabman how a coat could stray of itself, and were met with the ready
" Shure sir, I don't know, but I 'U go and find out."
Tlie hair of an Edinburgh cab-owner would stand on end did he see the vehicles
in which we drive here, and, still more, the men who drive them. The Jarvies, as
they are called, are the dirtiest, raggedest, and most amusing of beings, every one con¬
verses with them, and only Erskine Mcol could do justice to their general appearance.
One of them, on hearing us complain of the narrowness of his cab, assured us the next
he had made should be a great deal bigger, and afterwards volunteered to take us to
catch a train, " wid his horse going along like a steam ingine." Once, too, having
taken a car from a country station to a friend's house, and finding no one at home, we
remarked that our carman was returning almost at a foot's pace.
" Do you generally gallop your horse, Jarvie 1" we asked innocently.
" Och, and don't I know you can't be in a hurry, for there isn't a train thin that
yo can catch,"
THE ATTEMPT 219
" And suppose we're going somewhere else ]"
" Och, an' I beg yer pardon, I never thought o' that. An' where is it ye '11 be
going ?" quoth he, with an abundant display of energy. Can you picture a respectable
and respected cabman in Auld Eeekie indulging in such freaks!
But this article grows as rambling as though we too were infected with Irishisms,
and, ere that catastrophe occur, let us pause, only praying once more for indulgence
from those who scan our piece of patchwork.
Elsie Strivelyne.
'■••^0<c:>«'
"'Tis a green-eyed monster."
Of all the rank weeds which embitter the sweetness of the social circle, that
which exercises the most deadly influence, because of the secret manner in which it
infuses its poison, is jealousy. Nor do we now refer to such great historical cases
where blood has been spilt and rivals cast into dungeons, there to linger till the dark
grave throws open its portals to receive their wearied bodies,—cases which might well
leave their impress on the reader's mind, and freeze up his blood. AVith such we
have no immediate connection. In our every-day life, we need scarcely fear the tempta¬
tion to such deeds. Did crimes so dark present themselves to our minds, we should
shrink back afi'righted; but a little examination of ourselves, a short time given to the
analysis of our own feelings, wiU prove to us that the tempter is at no great distance
from us, though disguising his hideous form in some more plausible attire. This done,
we shall, perhaps, cry out a little less harshly against those who, being greatly tempted,
greatly fell.
What meant that feeling, as though a pin had pricked you, this morning, when
you heard that your friend next door had been asked to publish that last essay of his
which he read before the learned members of the Anthropological Society 1 Why did
you answer, somewhat testily, that you had " nothing to do with it," when it was sup¬
posed that you would call in to congratulate him t    What was that secret, fleeting
220 THE ATTEMPT
sensation, scarcely formed into a feeling, which came over you when you saw the name
of that rich, overbearing parvenu in the list of bankrupts yesterday. True, the next
moment yon were revolving in your mind, plans for the relief of his family, but that
first, diabolical something, that blot on your heart, was it not a passing touch from the
brush of that great dauber, jealousy 1
How enviable are those sunny, sweet-tempered creatures, who, by the very make
of their beings, seem above all petty feelings; who, graced with love and humility,
enlist at once the affection and esteem of all around them. Yet, let us imagine such
an one thrown, by circumstances, from all her loved friends into a harsh and envious
atmosphere, where her good intentions are doubted, her spirits broken, her love repelled,
and we may see a change. From the ordeal, she may come forth strengthened and
wiser, but the quiet manner and saddened brow tell of sins not only found in others,
but of petty, secret faults lurking in the depths of her own heart, little suspected in
happier days. If people are jealous of us, and ever detracting from our good parts, we,
in turn, though hating the sin, feel it springing up within us, dwarfing those noble,
generous impulses which sympathy might have ripened into enduring principles.
Jealousy is a genus with many species. Indeed, the casual observer might fail to
recognize the family likeness which runs through the many phases in which this same
sin presents itself to our notice. Thus, there is the innate jealousy, approaching, with
its morbid fancies, almost to madness, enveloping the unfortunate patient in a yellowish-
green veil, through wliicli he views the Avorld, and what wonder if, from his distorted
stand-point, mole-hills appear as mountains 1 Then there is the quick, hot jealousy
which flashes fiercely for an instant, and " straight is cool again," such as that which
plunged the spear of the great Alexander into the bosom of his friend Clitus. But
the one jealousy, or rather the one form of the sin, which meets with most leniency
from, nay, is even sympathized and indulged in knowingly by many of us, is that
which is aroused for those we really love. There is a strange misconception in our
minds regarding this feeling, an ignorant confounding of it with love, causing us to
plead, as excuse for its presence, the depth of our affection. But we are wrong, en¬
tirely wrong. Our love arises from the better part of our nature, whereas the jealousy
which has entwined itself around it, is the offspring of narrow-minded selfishness. If
jealousy is stinging and embittering our happiness, making us tenacious and exacting
towards our friends, we must look, not only to our hearts, but to our heads, we must
cultivate our understanding powers and our reasoning faculties, for we may rest pretty
certain that, at present, our minds would have " room and room enough " within the
limits of a nutshell.
THE ATTEMPT 221
One of the greatest proofs of true unselfish friendship is the absence of all jealousy
between the friends, but it has often been remarked that intimate and professed " bosom
friends," though speaking of eacli other in ecstatic terms, declaring that life would be
worthless deprived of the company of their angelic " So and so," are strangely averse to
this same angel gaining any little distinction. You strive hard for some small honour,
insignificant in itself, but for the attainment of which you have put forth your best
energies, then: in the hour of triumph, when strangers are admiring and praising you,
you turn for sympathy to your loving friend, but you are suddenly chilled by the in¬
difference with which you are received; had you been less successful, your reception
had been warm as ever, endearing terms had greeted your ear, and pity been
lavished on your misfortune—^just a little too much of it for some tastes—but then
pity is much more easily bestowed than sympathy.
How much Christian love is evinced in a case such as of some college friendship
formed in the studious shades of a great university, when, on quitting its ancient pre¬
cincts, the one friend is presented to a quiet country living, where, in his retired use¬
fulness, he hears, with joy, of the success of his friend, who is gaining, step by step, to
eminence, with joy, pure and deep, unalloyed by any subtle sting of jealousy.
So petty and so absurd are some of the cases in which are seen and felt the effects
of jealousy, that a bitter, almost misanthropical feeling arises at times in the minds of
most people, as they reflect on the smallness of mankind. Happy are those whose own
hearts and homes, at least, are free from the stifling atmosphere of mean, back-biting,
envious jealousy.
DES EaUX.
-Sa.5»-o«i;-cs '
Evert one knows that a pic-nic is seldom accomplished without rain, and that,
before the event comes off, many an anxious look is cast towards the weatherglass, and,
if its prognostications are favourable, all—but those who see clouds and shadows where
there are none—congratulate each other, and, if obliged to acknowledge that the " glass is
falling," still take refuge in the comforting adage, that " things go by contraries." Well,
having determined to visit Loch Ard, and feeling convinced that our enjoyment of the
beautiful scenery would be greater, if the feeling were shared by some friends, we at
once arranged the preliminaries for a pic-nic.    We invited the three Miss Browns and
222 THE ATTEMPT
their cousin, five Miss Joneses and two brothers, the two Messrs Eohinson, each
accompanied by a sister, and when the six Miss Smiths kindly promised to accompany
us, we thought our party complete. For some days before the eventful one, the topic
of weather was the one uppermost in our minds and conversation ; and the position in
front of the barometer was generally to be found occupied by the tall Mr Jones, or the
small Mr Brown. When the day arrived, the weather, as if in return for the atten¬
tion it had received, was unexceptionable. Eleven o'clock saw the party muster, and
after some polite discussion as to who should mount the box and who should go inside,
and the judicious use of some diplomacy as to the distribution of the six Miss Smiths,
the three waggonettes were filled—and started.
Every one knows, or ought to know as soon as possible, the beautiful drive between
Callauder and Loch Ard; how, leaving the village behind, we, by a wild moorland
road, descend upon the romantic Lake of Menteith. Driving along the edge of the
loch, we have a good view of the small island where Queen Mary, when a child, lived
for some time with her four Marys. Many traditions are here connected with her, and
the remains are still seen of what Dr John Brown calls the " Child Queen's Child
Garden." The boxwood surrounding it has grown to the height of fourteen feet during
the three hundred years which have elapsed since the little queen, perhaps tended it
with her own hands. Four miles further on we como to the picturesque " Clachan of
Aberfoil," the scene of Bailie Nicol Jarvie's exploits.
We enlivened the way by singing glees, and the tall Mr Jones, who had brought
his cornet with him, performed a solo, which was principally marked by an utter dis¬
regard of time, great physical exertion, and as having no apparent air whatever.
Several of our party told amusing anecdotes, and a doctor who Avas with us was
very loquacious, particularly on the subject of diphtheria. It was quite astonishing the
hair-breadth escapes he related to us of some of his patients, who, but for his timely
assistance, would have fallen victims to that fell disease. Indeed, when one young
lady, as we were returning home, complained of fatigue, he advised her being laid along
the floor of the carriage, " as on a similar occasion had he not been present and taken
precautionary measures, the excessive over-exertion might have induced the disease,
and, in fact, but for these precautionary measures, he would not have been answerable
for the consequences."
Now and then we passed families of gipsies, and the children generally convoyed
us some distance in the hope of money being thrown to them. They, doubtless,
found the exertion well repaid, as an English clergyman, who was with us, produced a
seemingly unlimited supply of threepennies and fourpennies with which he was provided.
THE ATTEMPT 223
Two miles from Aberfoil wc arrived at our destination, and drove up the loch as
far as Ledeard. Here we determined that the important transaction of the day,
namely, the consumption of the various good things contained in the hampers, should
take place. Whatever variety there may be in pic-nics—whether they take place on
some wooded isle, in an open boat, on the summit of a hill, or under its shelter, whether
with the sun or umbrellas overhead—this part of the day's performance is always pretty
much the same. I may, therefore, leave it to the imagination and recollection of my
readers. It was afterwards proposed, that while the carriages were being got ready,
some of us should go in search of ferns. This we did, escorted by the tall Mr Jones
and the small Mr Brown. We had wandered some distance, and, in our search, had
become quite scattered. T was sauntering along, with a Eob Eoy tartan shawl thrown
over my shoulder, when I was disagreeably startled by a low growl. Imagine my situa¬
tion ! Here I was, separated from my companions, and the only Hving creature near
me, an angry-looking Highland bull. One has always heard that when a person is
drowning, the events of his past life seem to pass before him. And in like manner,
immediately, not past events, but all that I had read or heard of bulls, seemed to recur
to me,    I found myself constantly repeating—
" Whose tough bull hide.
Had death so often dashed aside."
I am not sure that I did not more than once repeat that improving little poem, which
is intended to impress upon the youthful mind, the signs of the zodiac. I mentally
recounted the important part he performed in the obsequies of " Poor Cock Eobiii,"
but still the burden of my rhyme was,
" Whose tough bull hide,
Had death so often dashed aside."
I thought of the different narrow escapes I had heard of. How Punch delineates an
old woman as boldly protecting herself with a large umbrella. I cast an anxious
glance towards my own, but it did not inspire me with much confidence, I remem¬
bered hearing of a man, when attacked, lying down, and waving his feet in the air in
so unusual a manner, that the before furious animal, with a look of astonishment,
turned and walked away. But if I could not trust to the swiftness of my feet when on
the ground, I felt that, if unnaturally elevated, my confidence in them would be sadly
misplaced.    And all this time, while I was repeating,
" Whose tough bull hide,
Had death so often dashed aside,"
224 THE ATTEMPT
my antagonist did not advance, but seemed to be communing with himself as to the
probable return for the expenditure of trouble if he should attack me.    Indeed, I
must acknowledge it was only by his roving eye, his ominous growl, and the nervous
movement of his nostrils, which, as Sir Walter Scott hath it, seemed " to snuff the
tainted air," that one could construe his intentions to be, as I certainly thought them,
far from amicable.    My friends shewed me wherein their strength consisted, for I may
say. Brown, Jones, and Eobinson,   " they raced and they ran," the tall Mr Jones
leading, and the small Mr Brown bringing up the rear.    I dare not venture to dispute
their courage or wisdom, of course they thought the wisest thing to do was to seek
assistance, and, perhaps, they had heard approaching wheels, for, in a few minutes, one
of the carriages appeared, and in it were seated my late companions, the tall Mr Jones
and the small Mr Brown vociferating loudly.    To scramble over the wall, leap a small
ditch, and movmt into the waggonette, by the united assistance of the tall Mr Jones
and the small Mr Brown, was the work of a moment.    But the previous minute was,
indeed, a dreadful one.    Eeader ! sympathizing reader ! can I " pile up the agony "
further than by telling you, that this dreadful minute was one of the sixty that follows
the chime of the midnight hour, that it therefore occurred in the dark,—where I leave
you.
Clarence.
^m^tx to '§tbm.
Gold Mine—Eldorado,
1. (?anymed«.
2. Oma.1.
3. Land.
4. JDido.
5. il/iinster.
6. Isabella.
7. N&i&d.
8. ^rato.
Clarence.
THE ATTEMPT 225
Although many a great and good man has adorned the world by his talents or
virtues, and has, by the exercise of his brilliant powers of intellect, or by long, weary
years of patient labour, rendered life still more pleasant to those to whom it was already
full of sweetness, and, nobler task by far ! more endurable to the poor and wretched,
I doubt if to any man belongs a greater degree of importance in society, or if any one
is more necessary to the community than that humble, and by no means heroic in¬
dividual—the Postman.
And yet few men perform the duties of their office, I believe, with more apparent
philosophy and humdrum sedateness. There may have lived postmen to whose minds
the thought was ever present, as they plodded along on the routine of duty, " In this
mysterious bundle of paper, which I bear in my hand, are contained, perhaps, secrets
which, when revealed, shall make the world cry aloud with wonder, tidings which
shall change the entire current of a life, which shall plunge a hitherto happy family
in the deepest affliction, or raise a hitherto wretched ono to comfort and joy. What
a responsible office is mine !" There may have lived such postmen, but, certainly, a
scrutiny of the calm, often stolid faces which peep from beneath the official cap, would
not lead us to conclude that this was often the case.
It may be that, at the outset of his official career, a warm-hearted young postman
may feel a pang of regret, and a degree of self-reproach, as he hands in at a door a
missive whose broad, black border, and sombre seal betray the mournful nature of its
intelligence; but years of service cannot but blunt this tender feeling, and soon he
will learn to quit, with equal unconcern, the home over which he has just cast a cloud,
dark as night, and where, did he but linger to listen, he might hear the bitter wailing
of grief that will not be comforted because loved ones are not, and the dwelling to
which he bears an envelope whose gay, silver adornments proclaim it to contain tidings
of what many consider as the most interesting and joyful event of a lifetime.
And how can we blame him, should this be so, when we reflect how little im¬
pression is made on ourselves by any grief which does not immediately concern us 1
With what little emotion do we scan, in the newspaper, the daily obituary, or
hear of the death of some ono with whom wo have had little or no intercourse ! Our
inward life is unchanged, and we cannot realize the sorrow which every such event
brings to those whom it nearly concerns : we cannot taste the bitter anguish of the
bereaved hearts, nor feel the sad blank in the desolate homes. Ah ! it is Ix^tter so !
October 1806. o ^
22G THE ATTEMPT
for did all the griefs we hear recorded touch us as our own, what heart would not be
crushed by the weight of woe ]
Eut, surely, some of the grey mist, which is hanging about in the atmosphere this
morning, has settled down on my spirit, for I have wandered from my subject, and
fallen into a strain of most melancholy moralizing.
Quitting now these rambling remarks on postmen in general, let us fix our
attention, for a short time, on one member of the profession in particular, and accom¬
pany, in imagination, old Eobbie, the worthy "postie" of the little village of Dun-
rowan, on his morning rounds. No consequential-looking official this, with smart
uniform to proclaim him bound " on Her ilajesty's Service," but a homely old man,
with an honest, weather-beaten face, and a rough suit of homespun garments, which
seem to have grown old with their owner, and to have stood the tug and wear of
years as well as he, his only insignia of office being the stout leather bag slang over his
shoulder. Ey his side trudges his never-failing companion, "Eess," a shaggy, grizzled
" collie," which, being a gentleman dog with a lady's name, is, and has been for many
a day, a standing joke in the yillage, and has given rise to many a roguish insinuation
of a lady-love of former days, after whom Eobbie, in an enthusiasm of affection, had
named his faithful dog. To all these jokes Eobbie and Eess listen with imperturbable
good-humour, the former replying by a sly look, which may either signify a great deal
or nothing, and the latter by such a sage wag of the tail and wink of the eyes at the
mention of his own name, that his master declares, " Eess kens a' the story off by
heart noo, an' is jist wonderin' hoo folk can speak sic daft-like havers,"
So much for Eobbie and his dog.
!N"ow, let us follow the worthy pair into the neatly-thatched cottage, gay and
fragrant with climbing convolvulus and jessamine, which, to the dignity of village
grocery establishment, adds the much superior one of village post-office. A kindly
greeting having passed between Eobbie and the buxom, smiling post-inistress, and the
letters having been all " sorted," we issue from the snug little nest, a Faradise of neat¬
ness and order, and proceed on our rounds. "VVe shall not stop at every house visited
by our old friend, as the delay would, in many cases, be unrepaid by any scene of in¬
terest ; but wherever such can be obtamed, we shall pause, and, possessed of a power
unknown to our companion, we shall accompany the letter within doors, and read, un¬
seen, the secret it reveals.
First, then, come with me to this substantial, two-storeyed house, whose spotless
cleanness of exterior prepares us for the intelligence that its sole inmates are three
maiden ladies, noted in the village for their worship of order in all its branches.
THE ATTEMPT 227
Eohbie's loud appeal at the shining brass knocker brings to the door a comely but
somewhat depressed-looking damsel, apparently not far in her teens, who, as she
receives the letters, eagerly glances at the address of each. Suddenly, catching sight
of a large blue envelope, with an elaborate address, beginning at the top of the left
corner, and sliding gradually down to the bottom of the right, her eye brightens, a
smile dimples her rosy cheek, and it is easy to see that her young heart is stirred with
joy. Eushing into the parlour with a precipitation which astonishes her staid mistresses,
she deposits two letters on the table, and then hurries downstairs to peruse her own
precious epistle. Wliat matters it to her that the writing is cramped and blotted, and
hard to read ? Does it not appear all the dearer from that very circumstance ? For
does she not know what trouble and thought it has cost the dear mother from whom
it comes, and how motherly love has overcome many difficulties for the accomplish¬
ment of a task, to her, arduous and much-disliked 1 What a feast these tender words
of affection and wise parental counsel are to the lonely girl, who, having been only a
few weeks in this, her first " place," under the supervision of ladies who, though kind
in the main, bestow on their handmaiden little of that sympathy which renders life
pleasant, has been yielding to sadness and despair ! Ah! Eobbie, little do you know
what a bright spot your visit has left in, at least, one heart this morning !
The next halt in our morning walk is made at a large, old family mansion-house,
pleasantly situated in the midst of a considerable extent of pleasure-ground, and half
hidden by several hne lime-trees, which spread their protecting branches about it, and
shed a sweet fragrance around. As Eobbie's well-known peal at the bell is heard, the
ponderous iron gate is hastily swung open, and out run a troop of sunny-haired,
smiling children, each clamorous for the honour of being the recipient of the letters.
With a smile full of kindness, Eobbie places the precious budget in the soft, fat
hands of the youngest child, and the baby-face looks round in triumph. Instantly all
the children crowd around, casting anxious glances towards the letters. What a shout
arises as a large and evidently well-filled envelope is whisked out of the arms of the
astonished little one, and held aloft by a rosy-cheeked urchin !
In less time than seems possible, the whole band is at the house again, joy painted
in each face, and sounding in every childish voice. Wild with glee, they dash into a
large and pleasant sitting-room, where sits a lady, in whose sweet face we read, at a
glance, the relation she bears to the little ones, and the precious epistle is at once de¬
posited in mamma's lap. With less tumultuous, but not less fervent expressions of
delight, the lady looks at the envelope, and smiles and tears are blended on her face as
she catches sight of the round, boyish characters, so familiar and so dear.    No wonder
^'28 THE ATTEMPT
there is great joy in that home to-day ! Have not tidings from the dear sailor son
and brother been longed for and expected, till hope, in one heart, at least, was almost
turning to despair 1 Many a happy hour is spent in reading, re-reading and discussing
Willie's letter, and it is with a thankful heart that the mother lays her head on her
pillow, blessing the Heavenly Father who has watched over her boy, and brought him
in safety on this his first voyage.
But not to every home does Eobbie come as a harbinger of joy. Kind old
man ! could you linger in this wayside cottage which you have just quitted with a
pleasant " Good news, I hope, mistress," your tender heart would ache to hear the wail
of sorrow which follows the perusal of the letter you have left. The father of this
household has been roaming through the country, seeking for work, of which a long
illness had dej^rived him, and now, after an absence of weeks, there comes a brief note,
in a strange hand, telling how he lies, weak and helpless, in the hospital of a distant
town, and has requested the doctor to inform his wife of his condition. Ah ! poor
woman ! what a mournful heart is hers as she thinks of her husband lying sick, it
may be dying, in a strange place, and with none but strange faces around him, and
then looks on the sickly faces of her children, pining for want of the bread which she
has not to give them, all of whom, even those who are too young to understand the
import of the sad letter, wear a look of dejection most touching to behold in the face
of childhood.
ISTow, let us direct our steps to this small, but somewhat gaunt-looking dwelling,
the window of which, filled with those numerous knick-knacks one so often sees in
village shops, would be sufficient, even did we not catch sight of the printed board, to
inform us that Martha Moore, its sole occupant, is a " dealer in small wares." The
letter which Eobbie presents at the door is received by the identical Martha, a middle-
aged woman, tall, bony, and hard-featured, who takes it without a word, and with an
expression of countenance which would lead one to suppose the sight of the wortliy
postman's kindly, beaming face distasteful to her. But follow Martha into her little,
cheerless room, watch her opening and reading her letter, and soon you will see the
hard look of discontent pass from her face, and a softer if more melancholy one take
its place. See! those thin lips quiver, and down those withered cheeks roll tears,
slowly at first, then thick and fast, until at last the letter is thrown aside, the grey
head is laid on the table, and sob after sob breaks from the stern-faced womaii, the
deep, agonizing sobs of one to whom such a display of emotion is little known. Much
wonder would this scone excite were it witnessed by any of the inhabitants of Dun-
rowan, to whom Miss Moore is scarcely known by any other name than that of
THE ATTEMPT 229
" crabbed Matty."     How would the village children stare to see tears on the cheeks
of the woman before whose grim looks and sharp voice they have so often trembled !
Few, if any, know the story of that lonely, reserved woman's life ; few would be¬
lieve that there has been a time when that withered face was fresh and fair, when that
heart, which seems closed against all kindly feelings, was open to the impression of the
tenderest affection. Yet so it has been. Many long years ago, a suitor had come, at¬
tracted by reports of the orphan girl's wealth, and, hiding his selfish ends beneath fond
words and a fair semblance of true love, had wiled away young Martha's unwary affec¬
tions, and then, on the eve of their marriage, discovering that the tale of wealth he
had heard was false, had cruelly deserted her for another. His heart, incapable of any
higher feeling than that of self-interest, quickly forgot the little love it had felt for the
poor girl; but Martha was not one to whom love was an emotion easily assumed and
as easily thrown aside: her affections were somewhat slow to awaken, but, once aroused,
they clung around their object with a tenacity which scarcely anything could shake,
which nothing could entirely remove.
The news of her false lover's marriage stretched her on a bed of sickness, from
which she rose sadly changed. Her fair, young face seemed to have grown ten years
older, and, what was far worse, her amiable and confiding disposition gave place to one
of distrust and discontent. But, at the bottom of her chilled heart, there stiU lay,
although she herself, perhaps, scarcely knew it, the smouldering embers of her old
affection, an emotion which wanted but a sufficient impulse to burst again into a flame.
That impulse has been applied by the letter which has drawn us into this history of
the past, for in it she reads, in the well-remembered handwriting, how her perfidious
suitor, having brought himself, by a life of folly and extravagance, at once to the brink
of the grave and to the most abject poverty, lies in a miserable attic in one of the great
cities of the empire, a blind daughter the sole companion of his misfortunes. As she
reads his touching tale, couched in the humblest and most penitent language, and his
request that she would care, not for unworthy him, but for his helpless child, so soon
to be left an orphan, ilartha cannot but weep, pity, and forgive.
Xext morning the whole village is startled by the announcement that Matty
Moore has gone, no one knows whither, or for how long, and no less is the amazement
Avhen, after many weeks, she returns, bringing with her a fair, sightless girl, concerning
whom little can be learned, as all inquiries are repelled by the silent Martha, in a man¬
ner firm as before, though more gentle. And now the sorrow, which had seemed to
bring only misery and hardness, begins to bear precious fruit, for not only to her
young charge does the old woman display an affection which the fondest mother could
230 THE ATTEMPT
scarce exceed, but the fountains of her heart seem unlocked, and flow out in kindlier
feelings to all around her.
Another picture, and we have done.
See that pale, slight woman advancing towards us with slow, weary steps, and a
most touching expression of countenance. Her face, M'orn and furrowed, rather, as it
seems, by the impress of grief than age,—her mild, blue eyes, wearing beneath their
apparent serenity a depth of anguish, and the sweet, placid mouth, round which circle
lines which untroubled age could never have carved—all these tokens tell us the tale
of a life purified in the furnace of afiliction. And they tell us truly. Of the happy
household once dwelling in her home, she alone is left; the husband, whose love had
shone like a sunbeam on her short married life, snatched from her, in a moment, by a
sudden and fearful death, and of her five stalwart sons, two lying far away, with the
blue waves moaning their requiem, one filling a dishonoured grave, one smitten down,
in the flower of his youth, by the fell hand of consumption, and the other, his mother's
idol—ah ! where 1 Years have passed since that dreary night when he fled fi-om his
home, leaving his mother no message of love, no word to throw light on the dark
mystery of his disappearance. Day after day has that fond parent waited, and wept,
and prayed for her prodigal boy; day after day, with hope, at first, but now with
scarce a shadow of expectation, has she come to meet Eobbie on his rounds, and ask,
in a low, desponding voice ever the same question—"Any letters to-day?" Kind-
hearted Kobbie makes a feint of rummaging among his packet of papers and letters,
and then, looking up with dimmed eyes, says, in a voice which is struggling hard to
be cheerful, " E"one to-day, Mrs Murray," laying great stress on the " to-day," as if
there was a chance of one coming on the morrow.
" Oh," says the kind old postman, as he watches the slight form turn away, with
steps growing each day more slow and dejected, " I wad rather do onything than meet
that puir woman come seeking for the letter she will never, never get frae her scape¬
grace laddie!"
And so poor Mrs Murray's weary life wears away; she, poor woman, hiding a
broken heart beneath a calm exterior, and turning her own grief into a blessing for
others, for, although in the house of mirth her presence is unknown, wherever sorrow
lays its hand, there she comes, bringmg her sweet, calm face, and woixls of solace to
comfort and reassure the mourners. And this ministry of love, and the blessed hope
of laying down her weary head among the dear ones who sleep in the quiet church¬
yard, and meeting them again in the world beyond, are all she has to make her sad
life endurable. Meigeag Bheag.
THE ATTEMPT 231
'^^t ^Mt 0f t^t 6Iai»iators,
Fair the morning sun is shining
Over great imperial Eome—
Over capitol and column.
Temple, palace, arch, and dome;
O'er the flashing, sparlding river,
Eippling onwards to the sea ;
Over orchard, field, and garden.
Golden corn-land, breezy lea.
Street, and square, and mart are glowing
In the flood of sunshine bright;
Tiber's thousand gleaming wavelets
Glitter back the liquid light ;
Little birds are sweetly trilling
Summer songs so glad and gay ;
All is fresh, and blithe, and joyous.
Meet for Eome's great festal day.
Yes ! to-day the mighty forum.
Sees a grand and glorious sight,
Por the Emp'ror comes to witness
The great gladiators' fight;
Brings his senators and warriors
All, to meet his people here,
Graces, with his noble presence,
This great show of all the year.
Ah ! how many a heart is beating
"Wild with expectation high.
And how much of anxious longing
Brightens many an eager eye.
And alas ! what weight of sorrow
Crushes many a breaking heart—
Forces many a bitter tear-drop
From the weeping eye to start!
232 THE ATTEMPT
The soft hreezes that are fluttering
Eome's proud eagles to the sky,
Laden are with anguished groanings—
Woman's deep and wailing cry.
The young child's low, plaintive murmur,
The sad mother's heart-wrung sigh—
For the loved ones in Eome's forum.
Who this day must fight and die.
Little recks imperial Cffisar—
From his window leaning forth,
Gazing on the thronging masses—
Of those far homes in the north,
By the Danube's rolling waters.
By the Rhine's fast rushing flood.
Whence the stay and joy hath vanished.
Where the light is quenched in blood ;
Little recks he of the sorrow.
The long days of gloom and grief,
When no hopeful bright to-morrow
Brings a gleam of glad relief.
Thinks he only—he is Emperor,
He, that shouting people's chief;
Hark ! a sound is in the distance
As of many trampling feet,
Shouts, and cheers, and clamouring voices
Coming onwards up the street.
And a flush of pride and gladness
Eises to the royal brow,
As he stoops his head to listen—
" Surely they are coming now !"
Ha ! that way ! yes, noiv they 're coming.
That small band of warriors brave—
Those, whom neither fame nor glory
Pays for valour—but a grave !
Hark ! what tones are rising clearly
']\Iid the clamour ?—list the strain,—
THE ATTEMPT
233
" Emperor ! hail! thou art saluted
By a band of dying men."
On they march—a noble phalanx,
Called barbarians though they be,
"With the soul of gallant bravery
Written on them, fair and free.
Some, with firm and dauntless purpose
Graven on the stedfast brow;
Some, yes, some—with craven shrinking
Stamped upon them, even now;
Tall and ruddy, stern and hardy.
Eagle-eyed, and strong of limb—
Ah! that death should hush those voices,
And those flashing eyes should dim,
And that all should fall and perish,
But to please a tyrant's wliim !
Seeks each up-turned eye the tower
Whence the Emperor gazes down.
Robed in his imperial purple,
Wearing his imperial crown :
And the murmur swells yet louder,
Eises high their shout again—
" Cffisar, hail! thou art saluted
By a band of dying men !"
On they pass towards the forum,
Leave the palace walls behind.
And once more their mournful chorus
Floats upon the morning wind.
And the echoes of their trampling
Die in the far streets away,
As they pass, to crown with blood-shed
Cruel Rome's great festal-day. Mas Alta.
Note.—As the gladiators passed the emperor's palace, on their way to the fomm, where they
were to fight, they saluted the emperor in these words :—
" Ave, Ceesar, imperator !
Morituri te saluant."
2  O
234 THE ATTEMPT
A   CHAPTER  OP   MISFORTUNES.
Did any of my readers ever do such a thing as "sleep in" in the morning 1 I
feel satisfied that the great majority of them must reply in the affirmative, and, also,
that they will confess it is one of these misdeeds which generally bring their own
punishment along with them.
You are awakened from a comfortable sleep, and, very likely, from a delightful
dream, by the sound of the prayer-bell; with a cry of mingled horror and amazement,
you dash out of bed, and thereupon discover that the strings of your night-cap are
hard and fast in a knot. I may remark, en passmit, that it is a curious and interesting
fact, that on whatever morning you may happen to " sleep in," on that morning will
the strings of your night-cap be certain to involve themselves in the most extraordinary
complication of entanglements, and force you, after a few frantic but unavailing
struggles, to get rid of the difficulty through the medium of a pair of scissors. This
done, your toilet proceeds in a spasmodic and most unsatisfactory manner; every
separate article of clothing seems to have entered into a league against you; every
button is loose, every string has a knot upon it; you put on your stockings inside out,
and a fear of detection compels you to rectify the mistake ; your shoes have vanished,
but are at last discovered, one in the farthest corner of the room, the other in the
fender. Arrived at that important part of your toilet commonly known as " doing
your hair," fresh troubles await you; for your hair has assumed the appearance and
consistency of a door mat, and obstinately refuses to be " done." In vain you pull
and strain with such energy that the comb flies out of your hand; no efforts you can
make will reduce the tangled mass to even the most superficial smoothness. 0, how
you wish you were a man, and had nothing to do with your hair but brush it! A
moment's consolation is obtained from the reflection that, under these circumstances,
you would probably have to shave! but the sense of your own miserable condition
returns upon you as you renew your frenzied struggle for " a division." After pro¬
tracted agony, you manage, after a fashion, to twist up your unruly tresses ; the struc¬
ture is not secure ; you feel that it will soon come down, for scarcely a hair-pin is in
its proper place ; but the thought of repeating the process is too horrible ; you feel
that you are shockingly untidy; but delay has made you desperate, and you mutter
THE ATTEMPT 235
defiantly that " you don't care." You proceed to fasten the skirt of your dress ; but
your misfortunes are not yet over, the hook comes off in your hand, and stopping to
sew it on, is, at present, out of the question. You supply its place with a pin, and, in
doing so, prick your fingers. Eeady at last ! no, not yet ! where, in the wide world,
is your apron ? surely you laid it in the wardrobe last night 1 it's not there now; in
the drawer 1 not a trace of it! on the table 1 no ; under the table 1 yes ! Down you
go to seize it, and, rising with a jerk, your head comes violently in contact with the
table; the shock knocks off the pomatum-pot, which falls in pieces on the floor.
Another morning, sucli an accident would have filled you with dismay ; to-day, you
don't even wait to pick up the pieces, but fly downstairs, and enter the breakfast-
room.
Breakfast, of course, is nearly over, and the several members of your family
are at leisure to observe your entrance, and to greet you with various pleasing and
characteristic little remarks. Papa sarcastically inquires " if you are up for all day 1"
IMamma " fears your tea is rather cold;" your brothers, utterly forgetful of similar
lapses in their own conduct, of no very distant date, grin maliciously, inquire if you
feel refreshed, and " hope you won't be the worse of this ;" your little sister glances
at you with an air of conscious superiority, and kindly informs you that your collar is
crooked. You sit down to breakfast, and find that your tea in rather cold; so is your
egg ; the boys have eaten all the rolls, and the loaf is as hard as a stone. Somebody
asks you a question ; you turn your head quickly to reply; the sudden movement
proves too much for the over-tasked and ill-adjusted hair-pins and flop ! down comes
all your hair over your shoulders. You spring up and make for the door, but, ere you
reach it, the pin with which you had fastened your skirt gives way with a loud crack,
and a shout of fiendish derision from the family party makes you aware that a fearful
hiatus is apparent between your jacket and your skirt. At last you effect an escape,
and make your way upstairs, a sadder and a wiser girl, to mend your dress and plait
your hair, mentally resolved that, rather than " sleep in" another morning, you will sit
up all night! Dido.
'23G THE ATTEMPT
Nowhere, perhaps, can a more pleasant half-hour be spent, by an intelligent and
observant lover of art, than in a gallery of really good pictures. There is often far
more to be learned from an attentive study of a few sterling works of art, than a mere
increase of knowledge of some particular school of jDainting, or management of light
and shade, or contrast of colour. Very often a good lesson may be gained from some
truthful delineation of human nature, some able illustration of our " household words,"
some powerful and stirring rendering of a great principle of thought or action. "Which
of us, as we have looked at Delaroclie's exquisite " Martyre Chretienne," has not felt a
fervid glow of thankful gratitude to God for the blessed foundation of that faith which,
through His strength, can be, and has been, througli all past ages, and ever sliall be—
"faithful unto death?" Which of us, who has seen the "Light of the World," has
not felt the earnest searching gaze of those deep, gentle, sorrowful eyes, going down
into our very souls, and reading there the secret of all that has kept the Divine Watcher
before our doors, alas, so long 1 But I need not multiply instances. All of us can
think of something a propos to the subject, and call to mind many square feet of can¬
vas which give as vivid and powerful utterance to noble thoughts, and bright, honest
truths as many a sermon, with its well-turned paragraphs, happy illustrations, and apt
sayings.
But my object not being to make invidious, perhaps impertinent comparisons, or
to run down sermons, by any means, I had better say what I really want to say, and
what the heading of this paper leads you to expect. I wrote " Half-hours in a Picture-
Gallery" because I mean to confine my observations to one place, at least for the
present, and to say a few words about what may be seen there, in half-an-hour now
and then.
Living for some few years past in the vicinity of South Kensington, and being
a student in the Art School there, I have thoroughly made the acquaintance of
tliat most delightful of all museums—the South Kensington. Above all, I ha-\'e
formed a very warm attachment to its beautifid picture-galleries, with their rich
and varied store of art; and hundreds of times have I conned over the modern
triumphs of the brusli, as they may be seen in their full perfection in the
ISTational Gallery. Possibly some of my Edinburgh friends may not have had
the opportunity of studying  these  pictures   at all;   let  mo only say,  there is   a
THE ATTEMPT 237
great treat in store for them; and perhaps those who have investigated the Sheep¬
shanks and Vernon collections may not be displeased to recognize in these humble
notices the names of some old friends, recalling to mind, hours spent at South Kensing¬
ton, I am sure very happily and profitably.
Specimens of the works of most of our well-known modern British painters are
here in full force—many of them world-renowned pictures, copies of which are num¬
bered by thousands over the land. Mulready's brilliant colouring and delicate work;
Leslie's quiet humour and tender grace ; Constable's bold dashes and startling effects ;
Turner's golden mists and gorgeous skies; Landseer's living, moving, breathing crea¬
tions—all are here, as you could hardly see them elsewhere—and much more besides.
I think if we spend our half-hours systematically, and take up the works of one artist
after another, we shall achieve more than by wandering aimlessly up and down, our
eye cauglit only by what comes first, instead of having a settled plan of action. So, if
you please, as we have taken up a good deal of our time already, we will give a glance
at a few of the most prominent of Mulready's paintings that we see about us.
The gifted Irishman is indeed well represented. Just look at " Choosing the
"Wedding Gown,"—could anything be better 1 Mark the thoughtfid look of the young
bride-elect's face, as she examines the pattern and texture of the gay fabric that the
old shop-keeper is so strongly recommending,—depend upon it, she is calculating well
the amount of wear to be got out of that dress, in its future career of very best Sunday
and holiday attire. How she has pulled about one roll after another, before she can
decide which stuff to choose; while her lover meanwhile stands by quietly, as if he
were quite content she should have all her own way about it, with perfect trust in
her prudence and economy ! The accessories, too, are very happily brought in; the
little spaniel asleep on the floor, his long silky ears sweeping the ground; the errand-
boy, with his basket and bottle, and the trim old woman (our old shop-keeper's good
spouse, we presume)—all are life-like. The picture, though a small one, appeared in
the International Exhibition Picture-GaUery, and I believe, attracted a good deal of
attention.
" The Butt; Shooting a Cherry," is a capital truthful picture, and most carefully
painted too ; a scene that inevitably brings a smile to your face, so well is every part
of it rendered. The butcher's-boy has laid down his basket by the roadside, in willing
response to his friend's call, "I say. Bill, come here and let's have a shy;" and so
there he stands, leaning half forward, with his mouth as wide open as it can be, ready
to receive the cherry, just about to fly from Jack's fingers. He looks a little nervous
about it, though, as if he thought that possibly the shot might stick in his throat, and
238 THE ATTEMPT
choke him; perhaps, too, he feels somewhat shy of the buxom girl Avho is laughing so
heartily at what she may think his awkward manner, as she kneels there with her
bonnet pushed back on her shoulders, her hands spread out on her knees, her
sleeves turned up above her elbows, and the broad laugh rippling all over her merry
brown face, as she watches eagerly the result of the shot. The marksman, too,—he
looks in earnest about the success of his " shy," as he sits on a clothes-basket turned
upside down, poising the cherry carefully between his finger and thumb for a good aim,
much as if it were a marble ; his eye carefully estimating the distance and elevation of
his target! That he means to lodge his shot safely in its destination, you may clearly
see. The old black and tan dog in the corner, stands by his master as if he were quite
as much concerned as any of the party; and that great pile of ruddy cherries, glisten¬
ing in the sun, half-covered by one or two broad cabbage-leaves, looks especially
tempting ! We feel as if we should very much like a handful, especially if our bright-
eyed damsel is to serve them to us. A quiet pleasant vein of humour runs through
the scene; and the execution of it is beautiful. Each particular cherry looks as if
you might pick it up, and put it into your own mouth ; you feel tempted to stroke the
old dog's glossy coat; and it would seem the most natural thing in the world for the
cherry to fly right across the picture into Bill's mouth, as you stand and look at it;
so well does every part of this capital composition stand out from the canvass.
I might enlarge this already lengthy paper by mention of numberless other works
of this great master—of " Crossing the Ford," a young girl being borne across a brook
seated on the shoulders of two sturdy lads ; of " The Last In," an idle school-boy, who
slinks into school an hour behind time, and is received by his angry master with a low
bow of mock courtesy, as he sarcastically welcomes the distinguished visitor; of the
"Fight Interrupted;" "The Young Brother;" and very many otliers. But I think
our time is quite up; perhaps you are tired of this; I am; so we will accommodate
each other, and not look at anything else to-day. It is very pleasant to look at pic¬
tures for a short time, but nothing is more fatiguing than spending too long in their
society. What then must it be to be obliged to look at them through imaginary spec¬
tacles, which are always an encumbrance unless they are rose-coloured 1 Perhaps, if
you please, we may have a little chat another day about some of Laudseer's and Turner's
famous paintings, or Eastlake's Italian scenes, or Ward's historical productions; but
in the meantime this consideration impels me to demand the lent spectacles, and say.
Good-bye.
Mas Alta.
THE ATTEMPT 239
FoHSAKEN Ariadne, by the blue
And lonely sea, watching disconsolate
A far-off barque, with white hands outstretched sate.
And did the while, with piteous plaints, pursue
Its lessening sail,—" Eeturn, oh love, return !"
At first in passionate entreaty borne
Over the wave, tiU from the far blue line
Its light wing parted, leaving her to pine
By the deep restless ocean, all forlorn.
Then on her faint lips paused their mournful prayer,
Even as a reed's sigh dies upon the air.
Like suppliant beside a shrine o'erthrown.
With all its wreaths, and gifts, and odours shed
At her amazed feet, she sate alone,
The white spray falling on her graceful head,
And her warm tears, a swift and silent rain,
Dropping apace, into the sighing main,
Tni the rich moonlight charmed its billowy might.
And slept on temple, chff, and lone watch-tower.
Then her sad heart unto the orb of night
Poured forth its grief, as a day-folded flower
Expands its fair leaves to the dews of night.
Pale, lo^ang watcher by the sounding shore.
Sending her deep soul out unto the bourne
Whence that love-freighted vessel shall return
To her lorn life no more !
J. I. L.
240 THE ATTEMPT
FROM    THE    GERMAN    OF    O.    WILDERMUTH.
Meanwhile the dinner-hour was approaching, and, as Minna's household arrange¬
ments stood greatly in want of supervision, she left her little daughter, Antoinette, to
entertain Williani, while she repaired to the kitchen. In a short time they were
joined by Arwed, who was evidently much astonished at the presence of a guest,
to whom he gave anything but a cordial welcome. There were few, however, who
could resist the never-failing good-humour of our Pastor, and the two old acquaintances
were soon chatting merrUy about bygone days. Arwed was no longer the strong,
vigorous N'orthstar we once knew ; his fine stately figure was bent, his cheeks sunken,
and his eyes lit up by an unnatural brilliancy which quite alarmed William.
After a long delay, dinner was announced, but some time elapsed before things
seemed to go smoothly; during* the first few minutes, Minna had to leave the table
half-a-dozen times, to supply spoons, pepper, and sundry other wants. Arwed, mean¬
while, was sitting, as if upon hot coals, his nervous irritability giving itself vent in
many harsh terms, which did not contribute to the general enjoyment of the feast.
Minna, who was now duly alive to her own deficiencies, bore all the disagreeable taunts
and ill-natured whisperings so quietly, that Arwed was thoroughly disarmed, and re¬
garded her with silent astonishment. As soon as the meal was finished, the two
gentlemen proposed a walk, but Minna, anxious that William should see her house in
proper order before he left, declined accompanying them, and lost no time in making
the best use of their absence.
William felt sure that Arwed's heart was full, and that he too would soon confide
his griefs to him. He was right. Before he had gone many steps, ^N'orthstar began
to lament his frustrated hopes, his miscarried plans; he was a martyr to severity, a
sacrifice to the heartlessness of his generation. " And how different, perhaps, might
everything have been, had my home been other than it is !" continued he. "Un¬
hampered by the presence of domestic discomfort and the worries of everyday life, my
soul might have risen to higher things. How differently did I once dream was the
amiability of woman ! I loved to fancy my wife a living Muse, the light of my
dull hours, the friendly fairy who would rid my path of all the pebbles that
tripped my weary feet. But what has she proved 1 A weak, selfish being, whose
every small sacrifice I have been made to feel twenty times, who, when overwhelmed
THE ATTEMPT 241
with care and misfortune, instead of comforting me and urging me on to greater exer¬
tions, folded her hands in listless despair ; a wife, incapable of household manage¬
ment, and requiring the smallest details to be taken under my own care ; a mother
who neglects her children for an interesting novel, and whose much praised piety con¬
sists in going to church when she can get ready in time. Oh ! for the dreams of
■ my youth 1"
William was sorely puzzled as to how he ought to reply to Arwed ; his more re¬
cent acquaintance did not entitle him to speak out so boldly as he had done to Minna,
neither did he expect that any sermonizing from him woidd be very well received. He
therefore contented himself with recalling to him the happy days spent at Blumenwelt,
the love and tenderness which he had called forth from Minna, the never-failing con¬
stancy with which she had clung to him in spite of much opposition, and the sympathy
and affection which, in his turn, he was bound to show to the spoiled child of the
family, who had renounced, for his sake, the tried sunshine and happiness of the
paternal home.
" Have you been true," continued William, " to your duties in this respect 1
Have you loved and sheltered as you ought, the wife whom you so solemnly promised
to protect and cherish 1 And as to the drudgery of your prosaic calling, is it not said
that the muse not unfrequently refuses to be courted or cajoled, but comes when
unbidden, so, that perhaps, had you worked heartily and earnestly to make home-
comfortable and happy, the true spirit of poetry would have visited you unbidden."
" I suspect you are right," responded Arwed, more quietly than William had ex¬
pected. " Mine has been an aimless, mis-spent life ; I often think, when 1 am kept
awake by this wearisome cough, how much better it would have been had I bound
myself apprentice to some trade, and cast my poems behind me. Had I but money !
money which I used to despise; and how bitterly has the accursed demon revenged
itself!"
William once more recurred to pleasanter subjects, spoke of what was passing in
the political world, the news of the day, and, by the time they reached the cottage,
Arwed's natural cheerfulness had, in a great measure, returned. Duiing their absence,
Minna and the servant had been very busily employed cleaning out and redecorating
the once pretty little arbour in the garden, and here coffee 'was prepared, and every¬
thing looked so inviting that Arwed was delighted. The neatness and cheerfulness of
these arrangements recalled the spring time of their wedded life; the hearts of both
were touched, and, thanks to William, the germs of better things had been sown
broad-cast, and would produce fruit in the future.
2   H
242 THE ATTEMPT
It was now evening, and William must return to town in order to take advantage
of tlie first conveyance in the morning to reach the home of Edward and Emma. Be¬
fore leaving, he whispered to Minna, " Take every care of Arwed, show him all the love
and faithfulness you can, we know not how long he may be spared to us."
Minna looked at her cousin with the greatest astonishment, and from him turned
to Arwed, who was just entering the room. Never before had she remarked the sunken
eye and wasted frame, so gradually had the change come on ! How long was it since
she had watched him with the sharp-seeing eye of love ! William saw that he had
driven an arrow into her heart, but he could not have spared the pain. Sorrowfully,
and yet hopefully, he took leave of her.
" The best always comes last," so says a Suabian proverb. It does not invariably
hold good, but, certainly, in our friend's case, it proved correct.
The manse of Bergzimner, which was the last halting place on his journey, was
the one which left the most pleasing impression. It seemed as if William had followed
the advice often given to children: " First eat your bread, then the cake, and you will
fancy it has all been cake." A prettily situated manse Bergzimner certainly was not,
and the furnishings were more than simple, yet there were flowers and sunshine in
abundance, and the busy, happy little mistress of the house, who blushed as frequently
as she did sixteen years ago, was a host of sunshine in herself.
It was an old and yet an ever new love, which Edward, four years before, when
employment and means were at length given him, had offered to Emma.
In her heart, his picture had been enshrined ever since the day of the famous pic¬
nic, but it was such a still, gentle love, that she barely acknowledged it even to herself
It was not so with Edward ; to him the shy timid Emma had only been an object re¬
quiring Ids protection, and if he thought of her appearance at all, it was that she might,
perhaps, grow up into a pretty looking woman. He had travelled far since then, and
his susceptible heart had been nearly taken captive, more than once, by the cliarms of
fair and dark beauties, but, somehow, the remembrance of the gentle girl in her modest
maidenhood, like a closed rose-bud full of promise, returned in his dreams and dispelled
other illusions.
After the death of her father, Emma went to reside with relatives who lived a long
way off, and Edward seldom thought of her. When, however, the church and manse
of Bergzimner were presented to him, he felt a wife was necessary to complete his happi¬
ness, and from among all the daughters of the land, his choice again fell upon Emma.
He sought and found her, no longer the blushing girl in her teens, but gentle, amiable
as of old ; the flower had opened and amply fulfilled the promise of the bud.    The
THE ATTEMPT
243
hand of Time had not pressed heavily upon her, and could you see her now, without
her three fine children, you would fancy her yet a girl; hers is the freshness of a pure
heart, and the sweetness of a self-sacrificing spirit.
There never were such beautiful children (at least, so thought their parents) as
the sturdy Martin and little Julia; the former, only three years of age, already said
such wonderfully clever things, that his sayings and doings were subjects of conversa¬
tion long after he had gone to bed ! And as for Emma, what might they not expect
from her; the nurse declared she had seen her laugh already, and she only a fortnight
old; she knew her mother's voice, and distinguished colours. Such precocity might
well prove the augury of future greatness !
Emma had a great deal to do, she was constantly apologizing for working aboitt so
much, and feared she could not yet be a very good manager, as she always found some¬
thing requiring her attention, but she herself and all her surroundings looked so neat,
happy, and cheerful, that no one could think she had found any difiiculties in the way.
William basked in the sunshine of this delightful family circle, rejoiced with Edward
on the many blessings Providence had bestowed upon him, and, after a couple of days,
set out for his own home, resolved that it too should be a happy one.
" I will be happy, my house shall be a cheerful one, and my children shall learn
to love and cherish all home feelings. No care or faithfulness shall be wanting, on
my part, to rear and shelter the sweet flowers which, if left unheeded, might be
choked up with the Martha-like cares of my Frederika."
The young hearts responded to his love and cheerfulness, and grew up such as
every father would desire to see.
K. H. D.
(To be continued.)
244 THE ATTEMPT
FROM  THE   GERMAN  OF  SCHILLER.
Dids't thou ask me where I am departed,
As my fleeting shadow by thee moved 1
Know'st thou not I perished broken-hearted 1
Know'st thou not that I have lived and loved 1
Dost thou seek the nightingales, who, singing.
Charmed thine ear with sweet melodious tones t
When the year was young and flowers were springing.
When their love was o'er, their life was done.
Have I found my lost one, hast thou wondered 1
Then believe we are united here.
Where whom God hath joined are never sundered,
Where no grief can come to cause a tear.
If thou love like us, some coming morrow
Thou mays't join us on the blissful shore ;
Here my father, free from sin and sorrow.
Lives where murder ne'er can reach him more.
And he feels 'twas no false hope he treasured,
When he fixed his gaze upon the sky;
As we mete, to us it shall be measured—
To believers, Heav'n is ever nigh.
Every trustful feeling cherished yonder.
Here shall find its hopes fulfilled in truth;
Venture thou through dreamland's realms to wander—
Wisdom lies beneath the sports of youth.
Dido.
THE ATTEMPT 245
Jouraal of a %am in I^|flmarlm, llorfoag.
24:th July.—I, in company with two other ladies, left Christiania in a comfortable
carriage, and drove along a very beautiful country to Drammlu, a place of some import¬
ance, which had been partly consumed by fire a few days before we visited it. It presented
the most melancholy sight I ever saw. For a mile and a half, this town was a scene of
desolation, a sort of city of the dead, for, from the end by which we entered, till near the
landing-place where we embarked, the houses lay a heap of ruins, or only portions of
the blackened walls remained. Some of the public buildings were still, in part, stand¬
ing, though completely gutted. The church, the bank, the theatre, the telegraph
office, etc., were destroyed. There had been two fires ; the first one, which began in a
smithy, near a hay-loft, burned twelve houses, and then stopped. The next day a
cracked chimney caught fire, and soon the room, and then the house was in a blaze.
There was some delay in getting the fire-engines, and, when they came, it was seen
that many houses could not be saved, so that all the force of the engines was directed on
the market-place, for which spot the fire was rapidly making. However, having come
so far, it leaped over, and began to burn houses farther on, returning afterwards and
destroying what it had spared. There never was a sadder scene, the glass and broken
crockery lying about in heaps, and scarcely a person to be seen in the midst of all this
wreck. Many had saved nothing, and the total loss was immense. A number of tents
on the outskirts of the town, showed the refuge the poor people were obliged to take
to. They have lost the equivalent of £700,000, a serious loss for Norway. Six
thousand persons were turned out of house, and this, when winter comes, will probably
lead to much wretchedness.
After leaving this sad scene, we set ofi" in one of the small steamboats that
ply on these fiords, for Lilleby, a sweet place belonging to an uncle of K.'s.
Here we had a beautiful view of a fine chain of mountains about thirty miles
distant, on which a glorious setting sun was shining, lighting them up with its deep
rays. All the plain between is about the most fertile in Norway. Here we were
very kindly entertained, and remained over night. I beard a very curious story at
this place. A relation of K.'s had lost some children in scarlet fever, and his wife,
being dreadfully distressed, put all their clothes away in a little chest of drawers, and
never looked at them again. She had more children, and, in course of time, they
married, and had children of their own, and one day, thirty years after, these children
found this chest, and asked their grandmother if they might have it.    She gave them
246 THE ATTEJIPT
leave, and they turned all the things out.    At once they caught scarlet fever, and
were very ill, although they recovered.    A curious fact for the doctors.
25th.—Drove through the valley of Eker to the town of Kongsburg. Some
parts of the road are very fine, especially as you approach the place itself. \Ye were
most kindly received by K.'s uncle and aunt, the former being the inspector of the
silver mines. They reside in a large, handsome house, which is always set apart for
the directors. The town lies in a secluded valley, and is very prettily situated, with a
broad river dividing it, where salmon are speared by men stationed on the banks to
watch them leap. We went after dinner to see the beautiful Fabric Foss or Waterfall,
a sort of Niagara, on a small scale, very wide, and rushing over rocks in a cloud of
foam. The prismatic colours of the rainbow shone through the mist or " reek" in
the most lovely manner, while the fine hills beyond, and the green banks, made up a
splendid landscape.
2Gth.—We went with the director to see the silver mines. After a steep drive of
more than three English miles, through the mountains, we reached our destination.
On arriving at the opening into the mines, we were provided with black cloth caps,
shaped like a baker's, and obliged to wrap our long waterproofs well about us,
and kilt our dresses, to prevent their touching the ground and sides, where the water,
oozing through the copperous rocks, dyes everything of a reddish brown. Very odd
spectacles T. and I must have looked, as we disappeared into the mountain, a species of
goblins of the hill, or troUds, for fairy lore is rife about this district, and nothing is too
wonderful to be believed. Preceded and followed by men with lamps, we walked along a
narrow passage for more than a mile into the mountain, at last reaching an opening or
cave where men were standing about, and we could see clearly. Here was the iron chain
which raised and lowered the large bucket for the blocks detached by the miners.
From where we stood, the mountain rose 700 feet above us, and continued for 700
feet below, where the mining was going on. It was a strange sight to see this large
cave, lighted up, in a ghostly manner, by the lamps, which shone on the faces of the
miners, making them look quite unearthly. Any one, with a superstitious tendency,
might well have felt a thrill as he became aware of many strangely luminous eyes
staring at him out of the crevices of the rock, the dim light only revealing the weird
faces, whilst their bodies remained in obscurity. We saw one or two old mines, now
exhausted, and peered down into one still in use, but were assured that we would see
little to repay the difficulty of the descent. A bucket full of stones was raised for us,
but did not produce anything remarkable. After retracing our steps through the moun¬
tain, we visited the machinery rooms for crushing the blocks, and the sheds where
THE ATTEMPT 247
they washed and examined them, and saw some fine specimens found that day. We
also saw a tub full of pieces, some very beautiful, the veins of silver twining and
twisting through the ore or quartz, iii most curious and lovely forms, sometimes re¬
sembling the branches of a tree or the fibres of a leaf We drove back by the Labro
Foss, an extremely romantic one, and, I believe, considered the finest in that part of
the country.
27th.—Went to the mint, and saw the different processes for coining the silver.
We saw some large machinery, which seemed of a complex order, but we were assured
that it was a great improvement on what had been in use formerly. Also, we saw the
process of refining the ore, and very beautiful it was to watch the stream of molten
silver flowing along the channel made for it, glowing with fervent heat.
After an early dinner, we took leave of the kind director and his wife, and set off
in a comfortable little carriage for Bolkesjb. When we arrived in Theleraarken, we
found the peasants wearing a particular costume. It varies in the dilierent parishes,
but the Hitterdal dress is, perhaps, the most characteristic. The dress for the women
is composed of a short petticoat of coarse cloth (the more of these they wear, the richer
they are considered), a tight fitting boddice over the linen shirt, these being fastened
with silver buttons, and ornamented with brooches; a loose jacket over this, sometimes
embroidered ; very wide black stockings, embroidered with coloured worsted ; and a
hood or handkerchief tied on the head. Dress for the men : knickerbockers of dark
cloth, called Avadmaal, and white stockings ; a short greyish white jacket of the same
material, embroidered round the neck and lapels with flowers in black velvet and
coloured silks, silver buttons and brooches not so showy as those of the women. The
females, especially, have a very picturesque appearance, and the abundance of silver
ornaments they wear, gives them a well-to-do aspect, which often belies the true state
of matters. The houses differed as much as the people from any I had been accustomed
to see, the doors and side beams being, in many cases, carved and coloured.
We drove through a fine country, but rather a rough one, where none but the
strong, sure-footed little Norwegian horses can venture safely. Up and down the
steep hills they went, no drag to assist them in keeping back the weight of the
carriage and its contents ; no fences along the roads to prevent an overset or the con¬
sequences of a sudden fright. The steep descents are fearful sometimes, for you cannot
help feeling that a false stop would probably cost you your life. "But one comes to
have entire faith in these little creatures, so sure-footed and careful are they. Our
driver, Ole, was a merry fellow, with plenty to say, and with a cheerful view of all
things.    The sight of his bright, laughing face would have been sufficient to have put
248 THE ATTEMPT
Mrs Grundy in a good-humour.    The scenery, as you approach Bolkesjo, is grand : the
mountains rise one behind another in magnificent forms and beautiful colouring, with
lakes in the foreground, and little promontories, covered with trees, stretching out into
ihem, reflected in the clear waters.    The great, dark forests all around add much to
the charm of the whole.   "We saw what is called the " Knees of Gausta," the famous
mountain, but mist rendered the summit invisible.
Ole   Bolkesjo,  the   proprietor  of this  place, answered to our idea of a small
Highland laird, and is a very interesting person indeed.    He has a most benevolent,
mild countenance, and this is the index to his character.    He likes peace and quiet,
and only entertains guests for their own comfort, charging a very small sum.    There
were three of us, and the charge for supper, beds, and breakfast, was only about three
shillings.    On Sundays he desires to be left alone, and wishes his servants to have a
day of rest.    His house is very curious ; the large room, on the ground floor, that serves
for kitchen and sitting-room, has presses all round it, curiously painted and illustrated
with religious sayings.    A row of  copper kettles denoted the number of thousand
dollars of which he was possessed, one for each thousand.    The house door was low,
and carved and coloured, and even the rough huts for milk and butter boasted of carved
side-pillars and doors, which gave them a most peculiar aspect.    The mountains are,
in some parts, coloured of a deep red, which, when the setting sun shines on them, has
the most exquisite effect. Alma.
(To he continued.)
The initiah form the name of an ambitious, unscrupulous, French prelate, prouder
of his bad poetry and worse plays, than of his great abilities as a statesman.
1. Ahalpre The greatest of painters.
2. Inacostloc A term applicable to the Scotch reformers.
3. iV<;c?/«.MZ(;r5a...A royal general, surnamed " the butcher."
4. Rdearhew A Saxon outlaw lately brought prominently before the public.
6. Begert The first Saxon king of all England.
6. VonisetUng....k celebrated African explorer.
7. Wisphic  The birthplace of the greatest of English cardinals.
9. Aliijev A beautiful Saxon queen who was very cruelly treated.
10.  Inarua The muse of astronomy.
Clarence.
THE ATTE.MPT 249
OF CERTAIN POEMS.
It is with great pleasure that we see on our table another volume of poems from
the pre-Raphaelite pen of Christina liossetti, illustrated by two drawings from the
still more pre-Eaphaelitc pencil of her brother. We can say of both the frontispiece
and the contents of the second volume, that they are sweeter and less elaborately
quaint than the first. Wonderfully expressive as are the creatures' faces in the illus¬
tration to " Goblin Market," the eye rests with far more pleasure on the graceful forms
and t«nder countenances of the maidens who chaunt the requiem for the Princess;
and the " Prince's Progress" itself, is infinitely above the former poem in subject,
metre, and finish. The last six pages are especially lovely in their description of the
subdued, patient jiassion of the woman's heart, and the unconscious cruelty and vain
remorse of the unstable man.
More narration and less individual plaint there is in this volume, though this,
too, is melancholy, as is the way with woman-poets. Their chief strength is in depict¬
ing sorrow, whether of a general kind, or of that which affects themselves only, as in
" Under the Eose," which is well and fluently written. It is comparatively easy to
treat grief poetically, but it needs a stronger hand and more developed talent to make
joy readable in rhyme. What we have termed the author's pre-Eaphaelitism is some¬
times, we venture to think, excessive. Much as we admire her Avonderful power of
description and observation of detail, when restrained within due bounds, our idea of
Eve's mighty grief is diminished by the abrupt transition from her contemplation of
her murdered son and ruined husband, to the " mouse Avith wheaten stalk ;" while
there is an unavoidable sense of the ridiculous in the image of the " huge camel" who
" knelt in deprecation," and the grave cattle, who " wagged their heads in rumi¬
nation,"—a process, by the way, which seems to play upon the word ; for though we
could imagine the slow wagging of the head which would accompany somewhat hope¬
less rumination in the sense of thought, we never saw such a movement among cows
who ruminated over the cud. It is a pity that this fault should be allowed by a writer
who might see more truly what is appropriate to her subject. In " A Year's Wind¬
falls," every verso is an admirable picture ; " A Farm-Walk " is redolent of spring and
cream ; and many of the minor poems deserve a careful perusal.
November 1866. 2 I
250 THE ATTEMPT
A yet greater stride has been made by Mr Robert Buchanan in his new volume,
entitled " London Poems." Indeed, placed side by side with " Undertones," we can
scarcely believe the two works to be by the same hand. Somewhat feebly classical
in the former book, he is vigorous and life-like in his latest eifort. He attempts no
flights of fancy, but takes common incidents of daily occurrence, and by his keen
sympathy, and dramatic power, sets them before us in the very colours of Nature her¬
self. Few women could read these poems unmoved, for more especially do they
chronicle their sorrows and nobleness, though the volume is not without its touch of
frank, manly character in the " Scaith o' Bartle." " Jane Lewson " appeals strongly
to all her sisters, even to those whose outward life is marred by no such stain as hers ;
for very few among them but must have known, in a greater or less degree, the bit¬
terness of lonely, unaided struggles after right, of wild prayers, to which no answer
conies for many a day, of stinging tears choked resolutely down beneath the calm sur¬
face. To Jane the answer came, indeed, in this world ; but, as is often the case, the
final gleam of happiness was too bright for the poor dazzled eyes, and they closed
wearily almost ere they had been filled with light.
Where every poem is full of pathos, it is impossible to select, but certainly none
surpasses the simply told tale of " ISTell." There is no varnish of fine speech—no
attempt to hide the little abruptnesses of the untaught woman; and she sits there
before us, heartrending in her agony of sorrow, beautiful in her intense affection,
which sees unfalteringly that " It was the drink, not ISTed," that did the deed for which
he, who was always so good and gentle, died. Very touching too, is her half-remorse¬
ful, half-wondering recollection, that for one miserable moment she was afraid to be
alone in tlie darkening room with him, for his hands Avere red with blood, but tlie
next instant her love reasserts itself, and the stained hands are covered with kisses
that might almost make a murderer pure. Mr Buchanan has done well a task that
very few men can accomplish—he has read women's hearts rightly, and they, at least,
of his readers, can echo the outburst of his own quick feeling when he confesses, that
" My eyes are dim witli tlie singing
That is all in the world to mo."
Almost to succeed is sometimes worse than entirely to fail ; and, perhaps, had
Mr Swinburne not been almost great in " Atalanta in Calydon," all critics would not
now pronounce him to have fallen so irretrievably from what is right and beautiful.
A man who has achieved a thoroughly great success, is great enough to be humble ; he
sees far into the illimitable space above and beyond his highest efforts, measuring their
THK ATTEMPT 251
relative value rightly—a lesser man, with more bounded vision, can please himself by
reckoning his nearness to those above him, and in so doing, loses slowly, and, it may
be, entirely, the simplicity, purity, and uprightness needed to make the true poet. A
noble failure were far better fate than this, both for the world and the man himself.
A poem in prose, though not without its gems of verse, is " Arne," the newly-
translated Norwegian tale by Bjornstjerne Bjornson. Little traits here and there re¬
mind us of Hans Andersen's happiest touches. Very sweet is the picture of the
tender-hearted mother and her impetuous son ; very delicate the sketch of the son's
bride, whose peasant parents fear she is too much of a lady, though she dresses and
speaks like them, and can do her household work. It is not these things make or
mar the lady, but they " fear she has got too many thoughts." There is a healthiness
about Northern literature very refreshing after the morbid sensationalism of modern
novels ; and to take up a page of an old saga, or even of " Arne," after some three
volumes, in which battle, murder, or sudden death succeed each other with appalling
rapidity, is like turning from a heated theatre to a fresh sea-breeze, which invigorates
as well as cools.
It has often struck us as matter for regret, that among the many volumes con¬
stantly published, there is, as far as we know, no really good selection of Scotch poetry,
including, for example, such gems as the subjoined verses by William Dunbar. Such
a selection would give to the public many choice bits now known only to students,
and, especially, would place them within reach of lady readers, who cannot search them
out from among the more than questionable effusions of earlier times. Dunbar, who
lived in the fifteenth century, was a man of education, having studied at St Andrews
and Oxford. He was intended for the church, but became court poet, a calling more
suited to his capacities. Possessed of much power and humour, his volume is unfor¬
tunately such as no woman could peruse, and, in common with others, we should have
remained unacquainted with this glad-hearted little poem, but for the kindness of a
friend, who copied it out, and somewhat modernised the orthography. Opinions diifei
as to the moaning of the line—
" Eemeuant all tliou bruiks but witli bailis,"
some rendering hailis by sorrow, as in old English, some holding it to be the same af
our word bail, Avhich would give the idea that all the remainder we must enjoy with
the prospect of answering for it, as if on bail. "Eagment," the only other doubtful
word, is cither " scroll," which is the common explanation, or, in this sentence, a bill,
for which reckoning will be exacted.    If the readers of " The Attempt" have not ahead}'
252 THE ATTEMPT
seen these verses, we think they will not fail to admire their frank geniality. The
most melancholy mind must feel tempted, on perusing them, to try and live " michtily"
awhile, with all sails set, after the manner of the poet, who seems to have studied
Ecclesiastes not a little.
NO TREASURE AVAILS WITHOUT GLADNESS.
" Bo merry, man, and tak not sair in mind
The waveri ng of this wretehit warld of sorrow ;
To God be humble, and to thy friend be kind,
And with thy nichtbom's gladly lend and borrow ;
His chance to-nicht, it may bo thine to-morrow ;
Be blytlio in heart for ony aveuture.
For oft with wise men it has beau said aforrow *
Without glaiducss avaDis no tresure.
'' Mak thee gude cheer of it that God thee sends,
For warld's wrak but welfare nocht availis ;
Nae gude is thine, save only that thou spends,
Remouant all thou bruiks but with bailis ;
Seek to solace when sadness thee assailis ;
In dolour lang thy life may not indure,
Wherefore of comfort set up all thy sailis ;
Without glaidness availis no tresure.
" Follow on pity, flee trouble and debate,
With famous folkis aye hald thy company ;
Be charitable and humble in thine estate,
For warldly honour lastis but a cry ;
For trouble in erd t tak no melancholy ;
Be rich in patience, gif thou in gudis be puir ;
Who lives merry he lives michtily ;
Without glaidness availis no tresure.
" Thou sees thir wretches set with sorrow and care
To gather gudis in all their lives' space ;
But when their bags are full their selves are bare,
And of their riches Lut the keeping has,
While others come to sjjend it that has grace,
Whilk of thy winning no labour had, nor care,
Tak thou example and spend with merriuess.
Without glaidness availis no tresure,
* Aforrow, of old time, fonnerly. + Erd, earth.
THE ATTEMPT
' Thougli all the wark that ever had living wicht
Were only thine, no more thy part does fall,
But meat, drink, clais, and of the lave a sicht;
Yet to the Judge thou sail give compt of all;
Ane reckoning richt comes of ane ragment small;
Be just and joyous, and do to none injure.
And truth sail mak thee strong as ony wall;
Without glaidness availis no tresure,
Elsie Striveltne.
253
■••Ec»»«=:^»»—
Jountal of a tjom in %'^tlmnlmt Brrrfoaj.
28th July.—Got up early to see the sun rise, but, beautiful as it was, I admired the
evening effect more. After breakfast, we took leave of Ole Bolkesjo, and drove off
with our other Ole to Tinoset, stopping on the road to dine at the Prasstegaard of
Prjesten A. The road through the forest to his house is very wild, so that one would not
be in the least astonished at seeing a bear or wolf pop out at any moment. In the winter
they are by no means uncommon, and, at Bolkesjo, we were told, that at that time
they come round the doors at night, and the wolves can be seen down on the lake in
the moonlight evenings in packs ; but they do not seem to come up to one's ideas of
such animals, as they do not attack unless in numbers, and even then, I believe, only
when very hungry.
The clergymen have great hardships to contend with. Often they have to preach
on alternate Sundays at some place where there is no house, only a sort of shed, where
they must cook their own food, and make their own beds. In the winter they often
experience great difficulty in going over the hills to these churches. Prsesten A. told
us, that on one occasion he set off at two o'clock in the morning, and did not reach
his destination till eight o'clock in the evening, and when he got there the key of the
hut could not be found, so that he had to wait in his drenched clothes till it was dis¬
covered, and he could get dry ones. Life in Norway can be about the hardest possible.
At Tinoset wo went on board a steamer, which took us down the Lake of Tinsjo,
which is really grand. The mountains have fine bold forms, and the rocks descend
perpendicularly into the water.    This lake is subject to sudden storms, and wears very
254
THE ATTEMPT
different aspects. Wherever the rocks give place to hiUs and verdure, one sees a little
groujj of houses, looking so sad and solitary. 'No wonder the people have a melancholy
cast of mind, for a winter in such places would be enough to make one lose one's
senses, to say nothing of the difficulty of getting enough to keep soul and body to¬
gether. So great is the misery amongst them, that emigration is rapidly thinning
these districts ; and this year, I believe, 30,000 have left their country, while it is ex¬
pected that 20,000 will leave next year.
At last we came to the inn at Mel, and, on arri-sdng there, found that there were
no rooms to be had, the people even fighting for a place on the floor. We were
iu a bad way, for K. had a severe headache, and, but for T., I don't know what we
should have done. Her energy, however, made all right. She went off to try and
arrange matters for us, and, in the meantime, a group of peasant women gathered
round us, compassionating our forlorn condition, and declaring wo ought not to be
turned away so late at night. To my relief, T. soon returned, having procured a boat,
and in this very leaky afEtiir we embarked. There was a strange combination of the
sublime and the ridiculous in our position. While one of us lay sick and ill at one end
of the boat, the boatman implored her to take care and sit lightly, as ho had a stock of
spirits in bottles under the seat, which were in a precarious situation. The other he
earnestly requested to sit quiet, as her quick, impatient movements rendered an overset
highly probable. As a set off to this, can my readers imagine anything more romantic
than a long row at midnight on this beautiful lake, with a glorious moon lighting
up a grand prospect, and the dark shadows of the mountains giving a mysterious
solemnity to the whole scene ?
At length we reached Haakenes, which consists of a few huts, and into one of
these we went, where no one seemed disposed to attend to us.    Fortunately,  two
well-born Norwegians had arrived before us, Mr and Mrs L., who kindly arranged
matters, so that we got a very small room, with something in the shape of a bed, and
an apology for a sofa.    Everything was of the rudest kind, and some of tlie shifts
we were put to were very amusing.    A large sheet served for towels for the company,
and we had to dispense with such a luxury on our beds, our own plaids and shawis
sufficing us for coverings.    We could get nothing to eat but eggs  and  fladbrotl.
Fortunately, however, we had white bread and tea with us, and to supply the want of
milk we broke some of our eggs into the tea, which made a good substitute.    We slept
pretty well, in spite of the numerous occupants of the bed, who were uncommonly
lively.    Poor JVlrs L. was fearfully bitten, and regretted that she had not followed out
her first intention of sleeping on the table.
THE ATTEMPT 255
2Qth.—Up early, and all rowed back to Mel, where we breakfasted, and then
started in two kja;rres for Dale. These conveyances have a seat for two, and a board
behind where the driver can stand. They have no springs, and no cushions, and it is
a matter of extreme difficulty to get out and in. The reins are made of coarse ropes,
and supply the place of a whip in case of necessity. The horses are strong and sure¬
footed, the road is very bad, and the jolting on the rough path anything but pleasant.
The drive is splendid, and very grand when we come in sight of the great mountain
of Gausta. It is nearly 6000 feet high, and towers above the other tremendous
mountains like a giant. Large tracts of snow glisten on the summit and sides. At
different points of the road it presents strangely varying aspects—the top sometimes
looking like a long serrated plateau, whilst, farther on, it stands up sharp against the
sky, with a peak like a sugar loaf. At Dale, the landlord, called Ole Dale, a very
affected man, assured us that we could not be accommodated there ; but when K. men¬
tioned her father's name (he had formerly often visited these jjarts in a medical
capacity, and was a great favourite amongst the people), he held up his hands in
astonishment, and instantly took us off to his own house, giving up two rooms to us,
where we were very comfortable. This being arranged, we set off for the Ejuken Foss,
the great waterfall, to which celebrated place, several other people were going. We had
to drive about two Norwegian, or fourteen English miles, in the little kjajrres before
mentioned. A marvellous road we had to go—up and down hill, over every impedi¬
ment, stones, rocky ground, and jagged points of every description, the way so narrow
that it would have been almost impossible for one vehicle to have got past another,
with a totally unguarded precipice beneath us, at the foot of which flows the Maan-elv,
quite green, as it comes rolling along from the Ejuken. Our horses went at a tremendous
pace, never slackening it at sight of the hiUs; but bumping along at the imminent risk
of throwing us out. The scenery is perfectly splendid the whole way ; the mountains
tower above the narrow road on all sides in the grandest forms ; large rocks and stones
have fallen at intervals into the valley beneath, sometimes crushing the houses that
happen unfortunately to be placed there.
At last we reached the station, where we had to get out and walk to the fall.
From this, we proceeded along a narrow path, gradually rising higher and higher,
with a succession of the finest views, until we reached our destination. We
seemed to be hemmed in on all sides by these tremendous hills, on which rested
great masses of light and shade, while, far, far beneath us, the winding river dashed
on, and we caught bright glimpses of it through the trees. What a feeling of
insignificance came over us in the midst of these wonders of creation!    It seemed as
256 THE ATTEMPT
if a world of beauty was opened up before us, such as the imagination had not dreamt
of. The fall itself is magnificent; it dashes down between great black rocks to a
depth of between 800 and 900 feet, whilst the deptli of water is lost in tlie clouds of
spray that rise to the very heavens. It is one of the finest scenes the world can hold,
and " beggars description." A precipitous path lies along the mountain on the
right hand, and we tried to walk on it for a short distance, but it is apt to turn the
head giddy, and we soon gave it up. This path is called Mari-stieu, being the scene
of the well known story of the unfortunate girl, whose lover, coming along this path to
meet her, lost his balance on seeing her beneath him, and fell over into the depths
below. As a natural result she lost her senses. Here we remained about an hour,
feasting our eyes on the beautiful landscape, and then returned, having written our
names in the book kept for the purpose at a little house near the fall, where we also
bought some peasant's silver buttons. The drive back was very amusing, as I was
alone with my charioteer, who put various questions to me, some of a very personal
nature, as, for instance, how old I was 1 where I came from 1 and if I had many rela¬
tions 1 lie seemed much interested in a little eye-glass I wore, taking it up and
looking at it, and being much astonished that he could not see through it, until I
informed him that it was only for near-sighted people.
We reached Dale about six o'clock, where we found a good dinner of ham and
potatoes awaiting us, to which we did full justice. Ole Dale would make us drink a
bottle of home-made champagne, while he held forth in a very rhodomontade style,
expressive of his happiness at having us under his roof. Late in the evening we
saw some ladies and gentlemen coming down the hUl from Gausta, which they had
ascended early in the morniug ; very tired tlioy were, but proud of the feat, and loud
in their admiration of the glorious view from the top. Before retiring for the niglit
we had begged a little hot Avater from our host, in order to have something warm to
refresh us after our day's fatigues. As we were sitting round the table, T. produced
a sealed packet, which, she said, had been given her just before leaving home, and
which was not to be opened till we reached Dale. Our expectations being highly
raised, the outside cover was torn open, and over the inner paper were written the
following words :—"When the three friends are enjoying the social glass in the even¬
ing at Dale, we think the enclosed will give it an additional zest." This was signed
by several of our friends. Upon opening it, what should we find but a couple of
cigars and short pipes, the latter ready filled for us ! Of course, our amusement was
great, and the point of the joke fully appreciated. Alma.
(1^0 be continued.)
THE ATTEMl'T 257
FROM   THE   "GERUSALEMME   LIRERATa"  OP  TORQCATO   TASSO.
(Tancred, a valiant Crusader, had fallen deeply in love with a beautiful Saracen named Clor¬
inda. She was possessed of dauntless courage, and on one occasion headed a party of Saracens who
made a sally from Jerusalem upon the Crusaders' camp. Clorinda, dressed in complete armour,
was not recognized by Tancred, who, challenging her to single combat, in the belief that she was a
Saracen warrior, slew her after a desperate struggle.    Her death is described in the verses.)
But now at last behold the fatal hour—
The hour that is to end Clorinda's life ;
And Tancred drives his sword, with hatred's power,
Through her fair breast—unmeant ibr such a strife.
Well has the blade its fearful duty done—
A warm red river fills the broidered vest.
She feels her death is near—her strength is gone—
Her foot has failed her, languid and oppressed.
The knight pursues his conquest, and the maid
He threatens, strikes, and forces to the ground;
But, as she fell, some broken words she said,
And forced her falt'ring voice once more to sound.
God's Holy Spirit taught her what to say;
Faith, hope, and love by Him to her were shown ;
Though God in life had suffered her to stray.
In death he brought her, humbled, to his throne.
" "Friend, thou hast conquered ; I forgive thee all,
Forgive me also—not my mangled frame—
Forgive my soul—on it may mercy fall!
And oh, baptize me in thy Saviour's name !"
Her languid voice, just sinking into rest,
Sounded at once so mournful and so meek,
That all the anger died from out his breast,
And unaccustomed tears bedewed his cheek.
2k
258 THE ATTEMPT
Not distant far, there flowed a little rill,
Down from the mountain rushing clear and bright;
Quickly he ran, his helmet there to fill,
Then sad returned to work the holy rite.
His hand was trembling as she loosed the band,
And bared the brow that was as yet unknown;
He saw—he knew her ! and his nerveless hand
Fell; and both head and heart seemed turned to stone.
But gath'ring aU his courage for the strife.
His deep remorse he struggled to restrain;
And turned to give, with water, lasting life
To her his misdirected sword had slain.
And, as the holy words he firmly saith,
She smiles with joy, and all her suff'rings cease;
She seems, rejoicing in the hour of death.
To say, " Heav'n opens; I depart in peace.
A deadly hue o'erspreads the snow-white face,
As if with lilies violets had been mixed ;
Heaven seems in pity to behold the place,
Heaven, upon which her dymg eyes are fixed.
Her bare cold hand she raises toward the knight,
Gives him the pledge of peace in silence deep ;
Her languid eyes she closes to the light—
Her soul departs—her body seems to sleep.
But when he sees her gentle soul is fled.
His strength and courage waver and depart;
And floods of poignant sorrow, for the dead,
O'erwhelm his tortured brain and aching heart.
His grief benumbs his blood and chills his frame,
Death clouds his features, and his senses fail;
The living and the dead appear the same,
Both bloody, speechless, motionless, and pale. Dido.
THE ATTEMPT 259
f alf-^ours in a ^irttirt-^alUrg,
" Leslie is on his throne in the Sheepshanks Collection," says the catalogue, in
a burst of admiration, while descanting on the beauties of this great artist ; and, in¬
deed. South Kensington is especially rich in his works. More than one half-hour
may well be spent lingering over these delightful pictures ; they are some of the most
beautiful to be seen in our gallery, and well will they repay any amount of time and
attention that may be bestowed upon them.
One thing cannot fail to strike even a casual observer, and that is, that Leslie
must have been an ardent admirer and careful reader of the works of the great master,
Shakespeare. The greater part of his pictures (I mean those now particularly under
our consideration) are illustrative of some scene from one of Shakespeare's plays, on
which a more true and valuable commentary, so to speak, coidd hardly be found than
these faithfid and beautiful renderings of the mighty thoughts and life-like characters
of England's greatest name. Witness " The Merry Wives of Windsor," " Florizel and
Perdita," " Taming the Shrew," " Queen Katherine," and numerous others. Such
pictures, once seen, and carefully studied, become henceforth inseparably connected
in one's mind with the words that gave rise to them—we seem now to know person¬
ally the dramatis personw of whom we have only previously had our own vague
conceptions.
Take, for instance, " Florizel and Perdita," which is the pearl of the whole col¬
lection of Leslie's works at South Kensington. What exquisite loveliness ! what
manly beauty ! what a depth of love is shown here ! They seem to grow upon you
more and more the longer you look at it; and there seems some fresh beauty to be
discovered whenever you return to it again. The scene described is that in " Winter's
Tale," beginning " Here's flowers for you," where Perdita is choosing various emblem¬
atical blossoms from the bunch in her hand, and giving them to the yet unrecognized
prince. There are five figures only represented—Mopsa, Florizel, Perdita, and the
prince's father and his counsellor. The beauty of the two young lovers is heightened
still more by the power of contrast. What a marvellous difl'erence is there between
the plain, clumsy homeliness of the girl Mopsa, and the modest, graceful loveliness of
the fair maiden beside her; and how well do the grey hair and wrinkled faces of the
king and his courtier contrast with the waving locks and bright youthful features of
260 THE ATTEMPT
the prince in disguise. The expression on riorizel's countenance is marvellously given.
It overflows with the most intense and devouring love, as he gazes most intently on
the maiden who owns his heart. The disturbed and mistrustful looks of the two
elders of the party seem to portend disturbance in a short time ; and yet, who could
steel his heart against the beauty, and grace, and sweetness before him 1
" Queen Katherine and Patience" is a scene that might almost bring tears into
your eyes—the poor forsaken, disowned, but still faithful wife, in loneliness and sorrow,
listening to the lute of her bower-maiden—thinking of dead happiness, of days when
her life was all music, and the voice of the lute was heard in joyful mirth, and her
heart echoed its tones, because for very gladness she could not but sing. The jewels
glittering upon her bosom no longer dance to the melody of her ringing laugh, but
rise and fall in mournful measure to the sighs of a breaking heart. Her pleasant days
are past—her love is buried in the grave of neglect and harshness from her life's lord
—and nothing is now left her but to suffer and to die.
To turn to a merrier subject.—Here is a scene of mirth and festivity, represent¬
ing the chief characters in the " Merry Wives of Windsor." How thoroughly jolly
does old Falstaff look—(that adjective most surely applies to him in its fullest sense).
He has doubtless been enjoying the contents of the bottle near him, and that has
helped to give an additional shine to his round rubicund face, and a brighter twinkle
to his mirthful eyes. But the generous wine seems to have had quite a different effedt
upon poor Slender. He looks more simple than ever—more helpless and listless.
There he is to the life ! There, too, are the " Merry Wives" themselves, bewitchingly
pretty, and " sweet Anne Page," characteristically demure, as she sits with her hands
folded quietly on lier lap, happy enough, no doubt, that Master Fenton is at the same
table with her. Pistol and Bardolph, rough and riotous, are evidently none the better
or c[uieter for all they have imbibed ; but as it is a time of general hapjDiness, why,
let every one enjoy himself as best he can.
We need not speak of the painting of this scene ; it is most excellent. The bread
and cheese look intensely real—the water in the glasses seems qidveriug as you look at
it. Stand a little way off from the picture, and it seems as if you were looking at a
real assemblage, instead of merely a delineation on canvas. The artist has evidently
div.ie well and nobly in this picture. Putting his heart into his work, he has caught
the meaning, the inspiration, of the vast mind that created the originals.
Mas Alta,
THE ATTEMPT 261
^ gag in i^uMg]^ Castle.
In the month of July I left the Scottish Clyde, as a branch of my ancestors did,
one thousand years ago, to do the Vale of Clwyd in N'orth Wales. I wonder, if after
all their struggles surmounted in going there, and in remaining there, against all Saxon
might from Dee to Conway, they looked on the scene with the same feelings as I did
after my conquered difficulties. For I was disappointed, I must confess. Neither
they nor I could look on it with the loving proprietive eye of a native, as their ally.
King Anarawd, did in tliese days, and as my friends did in mine, when they described
it to us. Did not they and I come from the wilder and more picturesque Strath-
Clyde, and could we not both draw comparisons ] Yet I acknowledge we are foolish
in our expectations and desires. We fashion out in idea things that we long to see ;
and when we do come to see them really in their own form and fashion, we are dis¬
appointed—we are unsatisfied—and more than we have any right to be, for it is often
the difference, rather than the inferiority, of the real to the ideal that displeases us.
If our minds did possess the power of picturing truly things unseen, why need we
travel ] Do we not prove ourselves in error by acknowledging that the principal
benefit of travelling is the removal of our preconceived, and hence narrow and self-
bounded notions of i^eople and things—a widening of the mind 1
Up to the said month of July I had heard the Vale of Clwyd much spoken of as
beautiful, and had imagined that these roving connections of my ancestors must have
f(jund a strong similarity between the two vales tliat induced them to name their
southern residence after the northern. I forgot for the time the charm that some find
in the very 7iame of home, which, it was most likely, they would carry with them as
the most portable of all their possessions. Besides, the face of nature is much changed
by cultivation and a thousand years ; so that the soft hills, the broad, rich cultivated
valleys, chequered by fertile fields of every shade and hue, with their clumps of oaks
and lines of poplars, might have seemed very different in those old times, when the
unbroken forest stretched from the Dee to Snowdon, and Denbigh was still the " abode
of the wild beast."
My fancy had altogether been derived from my notion of the " Clwyd" being an
enlarged and improved edition of the " Clyde" in its various steps ; the brook, like
Tennyson's, leaping from the hills; the broadening pebbly channel, the haunt of the
fisher and the fished; the deepening, tree-crowned bank, that trains the river, as a
262 THE ATTEMPT
mighty wrestler, to gather its strength for its mighty leaps ; these rock-crested, tower-
watched linns, where the snowy spray flies up to kiss the sunbeam, and is changed
into a thousand quivering rainbows; the rapids, the crags, set with caves, forests, and
romance of many days; the older and deeper river, with serene wide course and un-
wrinkled forehead, doing and suffering all that falls to the prime of active life—be¬
coming to many cities a highway whereon the nations of the earth may ride—
merging, not losing, itself in the sea, with no effete old age of muddy flats and sandy
shallows, but beautiful to the last, aye, and more beautiful.
My pleasant railway companions had soon found out that I was a stranger ; for,
like a Galilean, my speech betrayed me, and they had pointed out to me the beauty of
the hills on the east, and the various points of interest nearer us. The square red
castle of Ehuddlan, famed residence of the first Edward, the high-set Jesuit college,
and the higher and barer folly of Winn—a mansion so wind-bestormed, treeless,
neighbourless, highwayless, that it will never be able to change its name by marriage-
deed or estate-gift. They recommended me particularly to study the beautiful ruins of
Denbigh Castle that crowned the town of the same name; and, as my will agreed
with their advice, I set out early for that purpose the next morning, as the night was
far spent before I arrived at the hospitable mansion of my kind friends.
The town is built on the steep slope of the hill in a way that every creature ex¬
cept a beast of burden must think picturesque. The main street lies straight up from
the railway, and a stranger's eye could not but pick out the variety of the houses, built
of brick plastered white, with the great wooden beams black painted, chequering or
interlacing the white gable ends and pretty projecting dove-cot windows—many fronts
left in their natural red line, and some chequered by red and white bricks being built
in alternately—an effect most strange to Scottish eyes. On the right were many good
houses, with small garden plots in front, but all of them built of plastered brick. One
of them had a dense hedge-row of small beech trees, cut flat, balcony-like, in front of
the second row of windows, while on the ground floor were arches cut through it
before every door and window. Quaint, at least; a remnant of a custom almost
forgotten.
At the top of this hill I found myself in a broad flat street, M'hich serves for the
principal promenade, market-place, and shop-site of Denbigh. Long low verandahs in
front of many of the shops, with the projecting Flemish gable windows of the house
above, give it a foreign appearance, but I did not stay long to examine it. A still
steeper and higher hill behind the town, called Bull Lane, I had to climb before I
reached the castle.    Partly to gain breath, I went into the old church of St Hilary,
THE ATTEMPT
263
which stands a little below it. There was little to see within ; and a woman, who
was cleaning it, said that she knew very little about it, except that it was very old-
older even than "Whitchurch, down in the valley, where Syr John y Bodian was buried.
" And who was he ?'' asked I, as yet unaccustomed to the peculiar pronunciation
of vernacular Welsh words.
" He was a strong giant with four thumbs, and he killed the great beast that used
to devour the people of Denbigh ; so that, when he died and was buried there, they
put up a statue in honour of him, and his lady, and all their children, with the great
beast lying dead at their feet."
" Does not the name Denbigh mean 'home of the wild beast V"
" Yes, sure—Dinbych."
"I suppose the castle must bo still older?"
" Yes, sure ! they say it was old in Llewellyn's time."
" Can you tell me anything about it ?"
" No, sure ; but you can read plenty in the books they sell up at the castle."
" Should I go straight onwards?"
" Yes, indeed ; that is the north gate, or grand entrance. But, perhaps, you
would like to look at the altar cloth. I have heard people say it is very fine, and I
know it is very old indeed."
It was a piece of very old tapestry, " A.D. 1553 " being wrought at every corner.
The design was often repeated throughout, rays like the sun surrounding the letters
I. H,S, Nothing else in the church told its date, and nothing but the guide-book re¬
minded me that here mass was said and sung for the souls of De Lacy and Percy.
Fortified by a very hasty cramming at this volume of contracted information, I
was able to look on with an eye of enlightened interest, while I ascended the rough
common that sloped upward to the castle gate, and there I stood and paused. The
sight of such a gate always impresses me very much. One cannot but think of the
brave hearts that have passed out to war, or waited to Avatch, and the heart-sick cap¬
tives that have passed inwards, never to come forth ; with all the spectacles of woe or
gaiety that must have been enacted here during the ages of man that have passed and
been forgotten,
" Since first the hardy Briton chose,
Caledfryiir's crown to build his wooden keep ;
To bid defiance to his country's foes,
And guard his birtliright on the rock-bound steep."
Passing these dim times, one's mind can rest on the struggles of the Welsh-
264 THE ATTEMPT
beloved Llewellyn and his younger and unsteady brother, David, both crushed by the
overwhelming power of the first Edward, who waited yonder at Ehuddlan Castle to
rejoice in their fall, and to give the castle to his baby son, then born at Caernarvon
Castle, the second Edward, but first English Prince of Wales, also unfortunate, a.d. 1283.
The Castle of Denbigh, given to Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, proved again but a
fatal gift, when in the Goblin Well, he lost his only surviving son, and all de Lacy's
plans of improvement and profit came to an end, as, heirless, he cared for no inlierit-
ance.    Sad, also, was the fortune of Thomas Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster and Lord
of Denbigh, accused of aiding in the destruction of the king's favourite, Gaveston, and of
siding with the Scots—attacked, defeated, beheaded, and thereafter canonized, a.i>. 1322.
Not more joy-bringing when presented by Edward the Second to his unfortunate
favourite Hugh De Spencer, or allowed by his queen to her evil minion, Eoger IMor-
timer, Earl of March.    Sad, again, when it gave itself to Owen Glendower, the last
descendant of the far-away Welsh kings, with whom leagued a Douglas and a Percy,
whose hopes and life were crushed at Shrewsburj''; and thereafter came no spring to
the winter of Wales, and its last shadow of a prince.    It was owned for a time by
Elizabeth's favourite, Leicester, who undertook the building of the " great unfinished
church," to supplant St Asaph's, and bring the bishop's throne to Denbigh, hoping
that it might be a propitiation for his sins, as well as a mausoleum to his power and
ambition.    But heaven blessed not his work nor him ; the labours of the day were
undone in the night by spiritual hands, and the materials transported to other places.
It was vain to fight against God, so the walls were left, as we still see them, unroofed.
Through many hands did Denbigh pass, until it attained to its present peaceable con¬
dition of faded and tottering old ago.    The Parliamentary forces, even, planted many
a wrinkle in its forehead, when they assaulted it from behind the still remaining
mounds at Whitchurch—the whole of the kingdom over which the fated Charles at
that time held sway being this one castle of Denbigh.    Ancient building and unfor¬
tunate possession as it was, no one can say who first built it, or first ruled it.
It was said originally to have had eight towers. The north tower, or, as I read
in an old writing. Badness Tower, contained the grand entrance, at which I now stood;
the tower to my right, round which the houses were closely built, I knew must be the
north-western, or Burgess Tower, and both of these had a portcullis and narrow moat,
remains of which are still distinctly visible.
Beneath the crested archway of the north tower I then passed, and paid the two¬
pence requested by the girl Avho keeps the very small refreshment-room, as the uSual
THE ATT£.MPT 2G5
fee for admission. I asked her if she knew who had been the founder of the castle,
and some such questions, none of wliich she could answer, but thought that her father
might be able to do so, as he had read the guide-books. Eut the father in question
was not to be found, so I wandered, silently and alone, up a flight of steps that led to
the ruined wall. There I found seats erected at tlie best points for a view, and on one
of them I sat down, thinking —" Is this the extent of the interest of the Welsh in
their own country ? Has Edward's cruel plan been successful 1 By the crushing out
of a natural bard-tradition, the first step in history and literature, has he destroyed the
second step—a written historical literature, and minds grown up to read it ?" I could
not but think of Gray's lines —
" Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
Tliat hushed the stormy main !
Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy hed !
Mountains, ye mourn in vaiu
Modred, whose magic song
Made huge Plinlinmion bow his cloud-top'd head."
Poor, ill-used Wales ! its verj' music and poetry quenched from its past, lest its mar¬
tial fire be kept alive—the very memory forbidden the present!
I wandered along the wall to the north-eastern tower, to wliich I could find no
entrance. I could not but admire the care taken of the ruins at present; every dan¬
gerous place is railed in ; every fine point set off to advantage, and provided with a
seat; any broken step repaired that a stranger might wish to ascend, and yet the ruin
itself, left a ruin, rough, roofless, and romantic. I had been well informed at homo
of the praiseworthy exertions of the town committee which had wrought all tliis, and
of the glory of the National Eistedfodd, held last here in 1860, presided over by
Sir Watkins Williams Wynn, of Wynnstay, who belongs to tlio new dynasty in the
hearts of the people of Wales. But this town connnittee has done more, and has used
for the town the entire area in the interior of the castle. Where tlie "great hall"
had extended, a gymnasium for the public displays its swings, pulleys, see-saws, and
machines of other ends and other constructions than those that of yore would have
graced the spot. Croquet-hoops pierce what had once been the floor of the green¬
room ; and the green of the castle, in which stood a small chapel, is transformed into
a bowling-green and a flower garden. Such was the view inward from this broad wall
that met the north-eastern tower. Outward, the scene was very beautiful—the soft
vale of Clwyd, onwards to the ver^^ sea, Avhere the cone-shaped hill behind Rhyl ter¬
minates the range. I thought of the days of old, and of tlie people therein, who had
looked with other eyes from this same spot on that same scene, and had come and gone
2 L
^66 THE ATTEMPT
ovanescently, leaving the earthliest part of their shell (this castled house) to be entered
as evanescently by some such hermit-crab as I, who had no protecting sheU of mine own.
As I clambered along, and grasped a projecting stone, I traced the white living
outlines of a fossil Productus, and noticed, for the first time, that the castle was built
of shelly mountain limestone—a fine effective stone in a picture, but not the strongest
possible to endure the tear and wear of the elements—made very friable by fire. Yet
it is easily seen, that it is the stone of the vale of Clwyd by the outlhie of the land, as
well as by the numerous lime-quarries and lime-kilns around. A quaint idea, truly !
Memories of two i)ast worlds speaking to a ihird and newer one through the historic
and pre-historic ages ! I wonder what the builders thought of these strange sermons
in stone, when as yet the poetic volume of geology was all unopened, and untran¬
slated into utilitarian prose ?
Having rehearsed to myself all the information I had gathered about this castle
of Denbigh, to have it ready for application, I went downstairs, and rambled through
every corner of the north tower, but had no facts to fit into the tales I dreamed of it.
A small modern room, built against it, and named " Cloak-room for Ladies," I entered
unasked and unchecked, and found there a visitor's book, in Avliich I did not inscribe
my name. Wliy should I strive to render myself immortal in this pitiful way 1
Rather did I quietly write down the name of Denbigh Castle, with its titles of dig¬
nity and beauty, in the '•' visitor's book " kept in the locked chamber of my memory,
where no name is ever erased. Well worth writing there, is it ! On the table near
me lay some relics found in the excavations about the castle—old coins, iron instru¬
ments, boxes, a human skull.    To whom did it belong ^
Fair views and new had I from the site of the west, or Exchequer gate—the Trea¬
sure Tower of old. I fancied I distinguished the block-house, still called Llewellyn's
Barn, and traced the road called by his name. Turning away from this view, that sug¬
gested tlie painful tale of woe of Llewellyn to my memory, I went southward. From
the walk between the Bishop's or south-Avest tower, and tlie Bed tower, I saw the
remains of tlie moat. Farther south arose tlie fine new lunatic asylum, deemed such
an ornament to the neighbourhood and to North Wales, ily inspection of the cu¬
riosities of the famous Goblin Tower had, however, to be postponed, till I paid a visit
witli my friends to the family at the castle, as being within their grounds, it is re¬
served from the curious gaze of visitors unpossessed of a friendly passport. The details
of my visit, though interesting, would, however, be too lengthy to be entered on in this
paper, which has swelled to a considerable length, in describing my first visit to Den¬
bigh Castle. Ll'tea Eescda.
THt; ATTEMPT
%}^z €^pfei0tt 0f t^t '^aoxn fxoxa (5xmm'bTx.
With heavy step and slow,
With falchion laid in rest,
With white plume drooping low,
And bowed each knightly crest,
A mailed band passed on, and took
From the hill peak a farewell look.
On flower-enamelled plain.
On fount, and silver stream,
On tower, and arch, and fane.
Bright with the sunset's gleam,
Amid the citron groves that rose,
Girt by far mountains white with snows ;
A lingering gaze they bent,
Eyes dim with unshed tears,
Back to their fountains sent
By manhood's prouder years ;
And sadly rose a monarch's moan
O'er fallen crown, and power o'erthrown :—
" Strangers shall wander 'mid thy orange bowers.
Where, Kke fair gems in their soft shadows set.
Rise dome and minaret;
While thy true sons mourn amid alien flowers,
For the lost splendours, which their sick hearts yet,
Fair home, may not forget.
" jSTo more to rest by thy pure marble fountains.
Beneath the broad leaves of the sheltering vines
That round their coolness twine ;
267
268 THE ATTEMPT
For the free winds of thy encircling mountains,
When each white peak in sunset glory shines.
For evermore to pine.
" Thy ancient pride hath fallen ; a stranger's hand
Shall sway the sceptre 'mid thy colonnades;
And lute, and serenade,
And old familiar legends, loveliest land !
And song and sigh, have vanished from thy shades,
"Where love and beauty strayed :
" Thy glory hath departed, low in dust
Thy crown is laid, thy sceptre overthrown,
And I, thy hapless son,
From my fair kingdom, and my sire's throne thrust.
To M'ander, ever pining for mine own—
Despoiled and alone !"
From snowy battlement.
Even as the monarch spoke,
A shout of triumph sent.
Upon the stillness broke ;
And clash of cymbals woke the air.
And royal banners floated there.
Like a death knell.
The note of victory
And the glad music's swell
Met that impassioned sigh ;
And with a long sad gaze, for aye.
From that fair land they passed away.
J. I. L.
THE ATTEMPT
269
FROM    THK    GERMAN    OF    O.    WILDERMUTH.
It has long been a disputed question with teachers and professors, whether
learning ought to be pursued at once in a serious, earnest manner, or arrived at by any
of the numerous so-called royal roads to knowledge. It seems to me, that a lesson on
this point might well be taken from the " school of life." Seldom, if ever, are difficult
exercises at once set before us ; almost invariably, greater trials are reserved for greater
experience. For those, however, who will not master the first easy steps, the lessons
that follow, of necessity become doubly difficult, and so they proved to our friend,
Minna. It was only lately she fully realized that in this busy life of ours there must
be no trifling; and although she roused herself, and earnestly resolved to devote her¬
self with greater energy to her duties, she found how true it is that the habits indulged
in for many years are not to be overcome by the hasty determination of a few days.
Had the warning words of Pastor William not been constantly sounding in her ears,
I fear, after one or two attempts at better things, she would have returned to the old
ways ; but the thought, " Perhaps it may be for the last time," which connected itself
with all she did for her husband, kept her right, and in moments of weakness enabled
her to seek for strength from the true and only Source of life and good.
Her first endeavour was to make home attractive. She could not but acknow¬
ledge that her love of the beautiful still existed—that she knew how things ought to
be j but, alas ! how was it she had never succeeded in keeping them right 1 She
could not conceal from herself her uniform carelessness and neglect in household
matters, nor was she less reproached by the consciousness of much misspent time in
the frequent perusal of amusing literature—poems, romances, etc.—with which she
indulged herself. From henceforth, she gave up all subscriptions to libraries, divided
her day into regular times for the discharge of the respective duties of a mother and a
matron, and, on the whole, there was considerable progress. Arwed's increasing ill¬
ness did not, however, tend to soften his disposition, and, unfortunately, it often
happened, that when Minna had tried to arrange everything for the best, he would
come home dissatisfied, and angry with all around him. On these days, poor Minna's
courage was sorely tried, and bitter tears often rolled down her cheeks. She blamed
herself, her husband, everybody, and longed for the sweet counsel and cheerful help
270 THE ATTEMPT
to which, she trusted, a straightforward avowal of her former faults to Arwed would
entitle her.
Alas ! the days of hearty confidence and endearing intercourse had taken them¬
selves wings with the first years of their wedded life, and an auspicious moment was
not now so easily found as formerly. Happily, Arwed's birth-day was close at hand.
IMinna had never failed to remember it by preparing some piece of work, useful or
otherwise, for presentation on that day, but latterly, the gifts were coldly received,
and sundry murmurings about waste of time and money were all the thanks vouch¬
safed. This year she determined to give him a surprise of another kind, the execution
of which was the more readily accomplished, as, for some days previous, Arwed was
obliged to be absent on business.
His study had long been the greatest source of discord. He had been very
particular as to the furnishings and arrangements of this room, and objected much to
any litter being carried there by INlinna or the children. During the first few years
tliis little study was the prettiest, most cheerful room in the house. A short time
spent there with papa was looked forward to with great pleasure ; but when the num¬
ber of children increased, and when troublesome elsewhere, were shut up here and
amused themselves throwing about his finely bound books, making houses with his
portfolios, and tearing up his manuscripts, Arwed could stand it no longer, and forsook
his once pretty room, remaining but as little at home as possible. Month after month
passed, and still the crying evil remained; but now Minna resolved to restore this
room to its former beauty. She sacrificed a costly pair of ear-rings, one of the few
pieces of jewellery she possessed, to procure bright new curtains and carpet. She
decorated the walls with wreaths of ivy, here and there placing some vases of fresh
flowers which little Antonia had gathered for papa.
Arwed returned late the evening before his birth-day in better spirits than usual;
the little change and excitement had done him good. The following morning Minna
was up before him,—an unusual occurrence; breakfast was laid out with more can;
and comfort than ordinary in the freshly swept and aired sitting-room. He called for
his wife and children ; they answered him pleasantly from upstairs. He opened the
door. Through the bright windows and fresh curtains the sun shone brilliantly ; the
shadows of the large trees in the garden played upon the newly-papered walls ; lightly-
woven garlands of flowers festooned the windows. He felt as if the spring-time of
youth had returned, and his dreams might yet be fulfilled.
The children, dressed in their best, were ready to receive him, "William, the eldest,
repeating a few verses in honour of the day.    Behind them stood his wife, the loved
THE ATTEMPT
271
one of his youth, no complaint on her lip, no reproach in her eye, only a gleam of tlie
old love and the tenderest solicitude. Oh ! what wonderful efficacy is there in the air
of one's o^vn home when a breath from above passes through it. Such small means
are sufficient to heal deep and Avell-nigh never-to-be-forgotten wounds !
As Arwed looked on all around him, his heart suiote him. He felt how ill ho
had fulfilled liis duties as head of his house—how little he had attended to his
children—how badly he had behaved to her whose shield and stay he should have
been, and, mingled with the words of tenderest endearment to Minna, were bitter self-
reproaches. It is hard, indeed, to be humble, penitent, and impartial, when met by
egotism and self-love, but how diffi'rent when sympathy and affection embrace you !
Minna, too, found words of repentance. She laid all her weaknesses, all her good
resolutions before him, and begged him to bear with her in her troubles, to soothe her
in the many petly annoyances of every-day life. For the llrst tiuie, he spoke to her of
a Strength greater than his, and a never-failing Support, that would succour her when
he was gone.
Arwed now set himself in aU earnestness to better his position. He made known
his circumstances to the head-librarian, and by his advice undertook to give lessons in
German literature to several families in the town and neighbourhood. In this he was
so successful, that in the course of a few weeks every spare hour was occupied, and he
felt happier than he had been for many years.
Minna's task was a more difficult one. It was not one decisive struggle that
sufficed in her case, but a series of hourly, daily endeavours to overcome old and rooted
habits, to give up long-indulged luxuries, and to exercise self-denial in little things
known only to herself. For a good economical housewife it is no difficult matter to
keep a well-arranged house in order, but ]\Iinna found it by no means easy on limited
means to rejjlace what had been lost through carelessness. She had now, however,
the long-wished for, long-denied word of comfort and cheer from Arwed, who, knowing
from experience the many petty trials sh^ must have to endure, was ever ready with
kiud words and looks.
Months passed on, and there were visible improvements in the cottage. Arwed's
salary had been increased, and his lessons were so well paid for, that he resolved to
remove into town, and thus save the long daily walk, for which he was scarcely
able, ilinna, to whom all things seemed bright as of yore, lioped, nay believed, that
Cousin AVilliam's fears for Arwed had been groundless ; and as for two whole years
their happiness had been complete, she fondly thought a long Life might yet be
vouchsafed.
272 THE ATTEMPT
But it was not to be. About two and a half years after the long-to-be-remembered
birth-day anniversary, the weary cough returned, and pains in the chest became more
violent. Minna was unremitting in her care of the invalid. Ho was not at all
alarmed for himself, but trusted the return of spring would restore him, or, at any rate,
a trip to the Baths and the grape cure would be sure to set him up. Xot so Minna ;
she felt he was not long to be spared to her. She looked upon each day he lived as a
special gift from above, and sought to make it as rich in love and faithfulness as she
could.    Into the future she dared not look.
Arwed was soon unfitted for business, nor could he continue his lessons, ami dark
days were in store for Minna. The time which hail elapsed since Arwed had been
enabled to do something for the support of his family, had been too short for him to
provide against a day of sickness, and during his protracted illness Minna truly showed
that the newly-awakened strength was, by God's grace, equal to the greatest privations
and hardships. In the midst of all her trials she was conscious of a peace which no
purely earthly happiness could yield—a foretaste of the joys promised where sorrows
and partings are no more ! K. H. D.
(To be conclvded in next number. J
^nstcrcr to S^nins^gositiffit—iHifsnt^.
1.—iJaphael.
2.—/conoclast.
3.—Cumberland
4.—i/ereward.
5.—Egbert.
6. —iiviugstone.
7. —/pswich.
S.—Elgiva,.
9.—Crania.
Clakence.
THE ATTEMPT 273
A  DKEAM OF THE FUTURE.
" Tlie pictures drawn in our minds are laid in fading colours, and if not sometimes refreshed,
often vanish and disappear."—Locke.
It has been to me the ruling regret of my old age, that I have never kept a diary,
reflective of the ever-varying images impressed on the mirror of my mind, as well as
descriptive of the outward changes through which I have passed in the course of my
life-journey. The greatest writers and thinkers have ever felt the usefulness of the
practice of transcribing the thouglits, feelings, and actions of one period of their lives
for comparison with others, in doing which, they bequeath a precious legacy of the
fruits of their notable experiences to their friends and admirers. What could we
know of the inner life of that magician, whose witching spell unlocked the secrets of
the human heart to our view in the riveting pages of his poetry and fiction, during
the melancholy period of hard labour which followed the decadence of his fortunes,
Avere the interesting tracings of his private pen not preserved to us ; or what adequate
judgment would we form of the real character and feelings of Lord Byron,- were they
not to some extent laid bare in the pages of his diary, where the strange melamje of
tliought and feeling produced by his magnificent genius, his acute sensibilities, his
unfortunate early training, and his star-crossed fate ever afterwards, is so strikingly
and curtly portrayed 1
As.it is in these evidences of thought and feeling that we get beyond the author,
and come near the man, so is it in the essentially truthful pages of a diary that we
escape being muffled in the gaudy frippery of a deceptive fancy, and behold tlie nakeil
reality of our past life in the light in which we gazed at it as it flitted by us. kS(j I
\vould love to gaze at my happy youth, now that the light of my days is mellowed by
the dimmed radiance of autumnal skies ; for, as Shenstone so |}eautifully expr.-sses
the feeling, it is
" Pleasing when youth is long expired, to trace
The forms our pencil or our pen design'd;
Such were our youthful air, and shape, and face,
Such the soft image of the youthful mind."
Alas ! for "the youthful air, and shape, and face," nowhere distinguisliable in the siib-
Dccembar 1806. "  ■:
274 THE ATTEMPT
dued mien of the aged form looming in yonder mirror—the once blooming com¬
plexion replaced by the faded aspect of the ^\^.'inkled brow and withered cheek—and
these stiif grey curls, the only remnants of the sunny locks that memory pictures !
What a true companion-picture to that painted by the master artist, Thackeray, of the
decay of youth and beauty, in Beatrix Esmond, that beautiful, vain girl, and ugly,
worldly old woman!
The wreck of the most brilliant of natural charms is aye the same, but what of
the fairer and more lasting adornments of j'outh ? How fares it with the jewels
enclosed when the casket has become time-worn and dusty 1 Beauty may fade, but
not worth. Imagination, no longer soaring successfully above the down-dragging in¬
fluences of reality, may have vanished beyond the ken ; the lively glow of enthusiasm
may bo for ever extinguished, and the fire of genius incapable of rekindling; but the
clear certainty of truth assures that the affections are more exalted and purified, and
the heart more tender and charitable than ever, through endurance. !Now, though
destitute of much of the soft play of fancy that characterised me in my younger days,
I yearn with a keener affection over the retrospect of my gay spring-time, and the
tendrils of my heart entwine themselves with a loving, clinging embrace round the
memories of long-buried friendships and rivalries, when, as I am now about to do, I
unfold and read the old letters, where they are photographed with indelible accuracy.
I feel a sweet odour of the tender confidence that pervaded the distance between
myself and my correspondents wafted out upon the room as I open the doors of my
ever-precious cabinet—the sanctum sanctorum of my dearest memories and most
cherished mementoes, the casket of my choicest treasures. The ghosts of departed
realities that haunt this grave-yard, sacred to love and friendship, seem to assume a
j)alpable form, and clothe themselves in all their living beauty and grace, as I loose
the string that, tied half-a-century ago, binds together the little packet that is all that
is preserved to mo of my school-girl life. Ah me ! the yellow, Avithered appearance
of the paper contrasts strangely to the radiant girlishness of the tone of writing, and
the fast-fading ink but mocks the oft repeated and vehement protestations of perpetual
friendship thereon sworn. There is the angular, awkward-looking hand of my first
companion, Marianne Dennison, her mode of expression as inelegant, and her compo¬
sition as carelessly crude, as her movements were ungraceful, and her manner un¬
polished, side by side with the promisingly-fastidious caligraphy of my poetical bosom-
friend, Julia Elton, whose M'inning grace of manner and insinuating softness of address,
corresponded admirably to her pettish actions and pretty face. Poor Marianne's
gawky look, so honestly unconscious, and, therefore, so irresistibly funny, used to fur-
THE ATTEMPT 275
nish great amusement to the shrewish wit of Madam Julietta's ready tongue, but the
poor girl was not the less a friend of mine that she had not sacrificed to the graces.
Her day waned, however, when I got beyond the finical niceties to be learned at a
lady's school; and illustrative of the time when, at the age of thirteen, I had attained
to the dignity of a private class young lady, there are the cramped-looking lines traced
by the somewhat scratchy pen of my dear school-mate, Jane Seaton, the most of them
written during illnesses of my own, to bewail my consequent separation from her
society, and tell me the name of the dux, or a new essay. A few quaint-looking little
scraps of the same description from dear, old-fashioned little Goody Two Shoes, whose
primitive appearance used irresistibly to divert my thoughts in the direction of Noah's
ark, her antediluvian connection imparting a tinge of absurdity to the extreme develop¬
ment of her amiable qualities in her intense devotion to the promotion in the class
of her elder sister, whose habitual pout belied her amiability. One or two country
letters, wearing the large, bold appearance of the hand of that most matter-of-fact of all
girls, Kate Brown, every one of them containing a plain statement of facts—one, for
instance, detailing how she and her sister fell into a burn when wading rather deep,
and the distraction of a country congregation when a dog appeared in church, quietly
walked up the pulpit stairs, put his paws on the desk, and affectionately licked the
precentor's cheek. Dear, honest, open, true-hearted Kate ! I feel tempted to quote the
first line of Burns' famed " Address to a Haggis " when I thiiik of her.
But there is the bundle of letters from kinsfolk, which it is every one's lot to
receive. In that thick pile are the loving, motherly outlines of inward affection ; the
plain, truthful delineations, stamped with the universally acknowledged genius
wliich might render any one proud to call them a father's ; the minute em¬
bodiment of my orderly sister's character, and the quaint, little careless scraps that
remind me of my good-natured brother ; the widely-written letters, in all their ob¬
scurity of phraseology and " haste for the post" of our dear, kind-hearted maiden
Aunt Effie, which we used to teaze her by saying might have been stereotyped, for all
the variety of meaning that was ever visible in the whole series ; the bold, comfort¬
able-looking tourimre of Aunt Martha's dumpy hand ; the petit, finical, fine characters
peculiar to Aunt Annie ; the school-boy scrawl of Cousin Bobbie; and the sharp,
wilfully needle-pointed letters of his mischievous sister.
Then cometh the graceful troop of maiden friends, whose society and letters were
wont to form the delight of my own early maidenhood. My sweet friend, the White
Eose, who only shed on me a gentler fragrance when I railed on her at leaving the parent
stem for the dingier shelter of a tiger-lily; my auhurn-haired friend, Bessie, with her
276
TUE ATTEMPT
choking love of fun, thorough acquaintance with the mysteries of housewifery, utter
disregard of intellectual accomplishments, and thorougli contempt for all proprieties ;
my majestic friend, Juuo, with her noble mien and princely gait, her thoughtful grey eye
beaming with a clearer lustre in the utterance of those liberal sentiments of hers which
prevented the narrowing of her estimate of mankind in her humorous sense of their
absurdities ; my satiricallij-poetical friend, Eowena, with her ethereal look and curving
smile ; my talkative friend, Isabella, great in her discoursing attitudes and emphatic man¬
ner of delivering her opinions; my musical friend, Minnie, beautiful in her intentness of
listening to her favourite airs ; my intellectual friend, Lucilla, with her enthusiastic
temperament, and ardent love of literature, her respectable acquaintance with the best
authors, and characteristic ignorance of how to hold a needle, or wield tlie housewifely
authority; and my merry friend, Helen, her letters ever bearing the impress of her
laugliing mood, expressed with a prolixity which procured lier the sobriquet of Eound-
about-jVelly.
Last, dearest, and best of all, that fair hand recalls to my mind the fair face of
the writer, fairer tlian all beside, in that it was but " tlie ambassadress of a most fair
iniud"—a mind whose varied attainments were in turn fittingly represented in the
diversified power of facial expression which constituted a beauty, not of that descrip¬
tion which charms the eye of every beholder, but speaks to the heart through the
enlightening of the mind. Wearing, as she often did, something of that lofty expres¬
sion which characterised tlie high-minded Minna Troil, and
" "VVitli a stole of cypress lawn
Over lier decent slioulders drawn,"
she looked the very embodiment of Milton's sublime conception of Melancholy, while,
in her gay moods, the delicious music of her laughter, and the satirical, yet playful,
wit of her sprightly sallies, bringing in their train,
" Sport that wrinkled Care derides,
And Laughter lidding botli liis sides,
were not less suggestive of
'' The goddess fair and free,
In heaven yclept Euphrosyne.''
As I think of lier love, the most precious gift of my youth, and the most fondly
(;herished memory of my oLi age, methinks I see her, as I often saw her, with grace in
her mien and nobility marking her action, regarding me with that inexpressibly tender
ox])rcssioti looking out of her pensively-shaded eyes, which imparted to her smile the
THE ATTEMPT
277
most winning softness of expression that I ever saw adorn a face. Appropriately to
lier tall figure, mobile in its outlines as a sylph's, and her motions naturally elegant as
a grace's, her handsomely shaped head, and the darkness of her complexion, mingling
with the rich colour in her cheek, we used laughingly to call her " The Senora," and
playfully salute her with a Spanish reverence. Ah ! Carhtta mia hella ! the remem¬
brance of happy hours dedicated to our most sweet friendship, awakens yet a glow in
my old heart, as a letter, a touch of your hand or your cheek were wont to make it
throb—poor prisoner !—in the old days.
That the tender engrossments of female friendship do not prevent the possibility of
a noble relationship of the same nature subsisting between the different sexes, may Lo
witnessed in these next letters, some of which are perhaps the best written in my whole re¬
pository—few coiild be more interesting. They contain sketchy and lengthy repliques
and criticisms on what was passing in the literary, musical, and political world, with
frequent allusions to personal relationships, especially in disputed points, of which,
being fond of argument, I had always many with my male friends. The humours and
dispositions of these correspondents are all different; one being too eminently kind
and gentlemanly to say sharp things with the smallest chance of their wounding the
feelings, yet never at a loss for a pithy rejoinder when himself sharply accused;
another, producing the fruits of a thoroughly educated mind and refined taste,
enwrapped in the most tempting of coverings ; a third, draining the resources of a
noble and elevated nature to evolve the poetry to be found in all outward things ; and
a fourth ransacking his fertile brain for the most amusing rhymes, wherewith to prove
that he was " born under a rhyming planet," and could (jestingly) " woo in festival
terms;" but all sustaining tlieir regard on a thorougldy Platonic footing, so as to in¬
spire no sentiment of dis(piiet as I read their long-preserved effusions of grace and
pleasantry.
But there is a handwriting that makes me tremble. On the frail tenure of these
inky tracings, and what I fancied they betokened, I staked my happiness and lost.
(July those who have experienced the painfulness of the first awakening from a trust¬
ing sense in the goodness of the world, to a miserable consciousness of its wickedness,
can know the nature of the process that transformed me from the gay and happy girl
I once was, to the old desolate creature I now am. But I cannot further pursue
memories which bring in their train such a rush of painful recollections.
Speak no longer, therefore, 0 Voices of the past! but remain silent within the
sacred portals of memory. Cl<jse ye wormeaten doors upon your treasures ! Drop,
faded curtain, and leave the old woman again in her solitude ! Elfie.
278 THE ATTEMPT
Song for the bridal train !
Pour the glad numbers forth ;
Yet something of a sadder strain
Be mingled with its mirth.
From the true love of years
The heart goes forth alone ;
Be a hidden depth of holy tears
In each rejoicing tone.
Song for the early dead !
Dirge-like, and sadly slow ;
The requiem o'er the young life fled
With the summer's sunny glow.
And where the paptive sighs.
Let the wild bird's liquid strain.
From flow'ry meads and golden skies.
Be in its low refrain.
Song for the Christmas hearth !
Let carols, loud and sweet.
Flow, where with tale and silvery mirth.
The laughing children meet.
When garlands wreath the hall,
And white frost chills the night.
And happy hearts keep festival
Around the home-fire's light. J. I. L.
THE ATTEMPT
279
Journal 0f a %om m ^J^^Imarkttt, llortoag'.
SOtJi July.—We rose at eight, and were sorry to find a rainj' morning, but on
waiting for an hour or so after breakfast, the sky cleared, and we set off again in our
kjicrre on our return to Mel. I think we all had a strong feeling of regret at the idea
that we were saying farewell to that scene of beauty, I had, most certainly, knowing
that visits to Norway are not every-day occurrences, and that it was very unlikely I
should ever see Ejukan again. Shortly before Gausta became hidden from our view,
I made the driver stop for a little, whilst I endeavoured to get an outline of its magni¬
ficent form in my sketch-book. At last it vanished completely, and we turned away
resignedly, with our faces towards Mel, and before we reached it the sun broke out
brightly, giving us courage for the long day's journey we had before us.
There was no steamer that day to convey us back to Tinoset, so we determined to per¬
form the voyage in a small boat, trusting to the continuance of the fine weather. "We soon
found two strong fellows willing to row us down the lake, so our boat was filled with
large branches of leaves, and our shawls spread over them. Here we reclined most
comfortably, and for a short time all went weU. But soon we saw dark clouds come
rolling up to meet us, and we were evidently in for a storm, which is by no means an
uncommon event on Lake Tinsjo, coming and going alike unexpectedly. I must con¬
fess to having been rather frightened ; for, to be out on this stormy lake, in a deluge
of rain, in a small boat, was not an inviting prospect. So we bethought us of rowing
to the side, where we saw a little group of houses, carrying all our things under shelter
also. We entered a hut, which was tenantless, and where the door stood open.
There was one rather large room, which we entered, and a smaller one adjoining.
When the boatmen, or " romans," as one of my friends called thein (translating from
the Norse), had brought up everything out of the boat, they came and sat down by
us, taking out their pipes, and smoking with the greatest composure. They had no
idea that this might be considered rude ; it was just the custom, the law of equality
being held here to a great extent. The house was miserably dirty and wretched, and
we were afraid to go near the rough boards, used as beds, for fear of the consequences.
In a tea-cup, on a shelf, we found some of the silver brooches so common in these
parts, and there was nothing but our honesty to prevent our walking off with them.
Also, we discovered an old-fashioned silver watch, of immense size, and London work¬
manship.    After remaining here about an hour, the storm spent itself, the sun broke
280 THE ATTEMPT
through the clouds, and we returned to the boat.    After this there was no more rain;
we had an exquisite day; and our five or six hours' row was most delightful.
This fine lake, with its grand rocks and distant snow-peaks, glittered in the sun
like a queen among her courtiers, and we, reclined on our leafy couch, with the most
delicious feeling of " dolce far niente " imaginable. True, as the hours went on, we
got rather hungry, and having only some bread and butter, did not make a very satis¬
fying repast. Our " romans " produced black bread and cheese, and on our asking
some question about this latter article, one of them cut a great wedge off, and held it
out to us on the point of his knife. We were obliged to say we had eaten enough,
but thanked him kindly for his good intentions. One of these men was very good-
looking, with well marked, fine features, dark blue eyes, and firm, resolute mouth—
rather an uncommon looking character altogether. T. was charmed with him, and
dubbed him a prince in disguise ! We got the other man to sing some of his
national airs to us, but they were more distinguished for length than beauty. We
tried some duets, which sounded well on the water, and the boatmen seemed quite
pleased with this little extemporaneous concert.
At last we reached Tinoset, and found a couple of kja?rres in waiting to convey
us to Venersborg in Hitterdal. The L.'s had kindly offered to procure these for us,
having passed that way in the morning. We had a long drive before iis, and wrapped
ourselves up well, as the cold air is more felt in passing through the forests than out
in the open country. We passed through a succession of these dense forests, till it
got dark, and at last we stopped at a hut to rest and feed the horses, sadly in want of
such restoi'atives for ourselves. Feeling very tired and sleciiy, I was in a sort of doze,
when I heard my energetic companion, T., ask our boy-driver his name. " Ole," was
the answer, which had the effect of sending me into a fit of laughter, as almost all the
men whose names we had heard in Thelemarken Avero called Ole, and one Avondered if
it did not create confusion. This lad was a great curiosity, being most comically
dressed—arms and legs partly bare, hair and face wild and Indian looking, with a
strange cap on his head. He wore the dress of the country, the short jacket em¬
broidered round the neck and at the foot, also having metal buttons. He persisted in
running along beside the carriage, instead of getting up behind, as avc wished, so when
we came to Venersborg, he Avanted to charge ever so much more for having shown his
agility in this Avay, Avhich plea, however, avc Avere blind to, as it had done us no good.
We found very comfortable quarters at Madame Thomason's, and sorely did we need
the supper soon invitingly spread before us, for it was noAV midnight, and Ave had had
nothing to eat except the before-mentioned rolls since nine in the morning.
THK ATTEMPT • 281
The scenery in Hitterdal is very inferior to what we had been passing through,
and this part of the country is chiefly remarkable for a curious old church, which we
M'ent to see on the following morning.
3\gt.—A fine warm day, so we started immediately after breakfast for the Hitter¬
dal church, built in the so-called Stave-Kirke style, of which there is only one other
specimen remaining. It is entirely composed of wood, put together in the mo.-st ex¬
traordinary combination of pepper-boxes and odd projections, each surmounted with
little crosses, the whole resembling a building of cards that could easily be taken down.
The inside has been renovated, which is a great pity, as the style is quite altered.
The carving round the inside doors is beautiful and curious, and besides a fine scroll¬
work, it has a sort of dragon pattern running through it. The church is 600 or 700
years old, and the outside looks as if it could last as long again. There was a class of
boys and girls assembled when we went in, preparing for confirmation—a most im¬
portant event in Norway. Any one not contirmed has a difficulty in obtaining
employment, so it may well be an anxious time for the young people. We saw a re¬
markable chair behind the altar, preserved from the time befjre Christianity was
introdu(;ed, in the period of the ancient sagas. There were cuttings of queer old war¬
riors getting out of strange old boats, in strange old dresses ; and so antique and
curious was it, that 1 am sure, if our antiquarians could see it, they would be willing
to give a good sum for it. I don't think many English have been there, at least, 1
saw very few names in the visitors' book. There were cloisters round the church long
ago, but only a small portion remains to be seen. At the time when the " black
death," or plague, raged in Norway, this part became wholly depopulated, and the
very existence of the church was forgotten. One day, lo;,g afterwards, a hunter hap¬
pened to pass that way, and shooting at a venture, he was startled by hearing a strange
metallic sound in the direction of his shot, boon he reached the church, and dis¬
covered a bell tower near it. The bell had been struck, which accounted for the
unusual noise. He entered the church, and there found a huge bear, which had taken
up its abode under the altar, and which he immediately shot. The skin was long
[ireserved in the church, but there was no vestige of it left when I was there, previous
visitors having carried off portions as relics till all was gone.
At mid-day we embarked on board a very comfortable steamer, and sailed down
the Hitterdal Vand, through lovely scenery, till we entered the Nordsjo Lake. As
long as we had a glimpse of the snow hills, we strained our eyes to see them, and very
lovely they looked, fading away in the most beautiful combinations of colour and
form.    The shores of Nordsjo are very picturesque.   Fine hdls, well wooded, with little
^82 THE ATTEMPT
villages every now and then at the water's edge, and sweet little islands, all lighted up
by a glorious setting sun, was a feast of beauty. We passed one very interesting place.
In the centre of a rather rugged rock there was a large opening, the entrance to a cave,
where once lived a hermit, a Eoman Catholic, to whom the neighbouring inhabitants
repaired to listen to his exhortations. He lived a strange lonely life, and his death
was only known by missing the light wliich had been always seen at night, like a star
on the mountain. We passed through a succession of locks, recently constructed,
shortly before arriving at Skjen, a large thriving town, where we entered civilized
society once more, and as we left Thelemarken behind us here, I think I cannot
do better than take leave of my readers also, hoping they have been able to enter a
little into the pleasures, charms, and difficulties of " A Tour in Thelemarken."
Alma.
FROM THE FOUNDING OF THE COLONY TO THE EMANCIPATION OF THE SLAVES.
We hear and read much in commemoration of men who have besieged cities,
subdued provinces, and overthrown empires, but, " in the eye of reason and truth,"
says Bancroft, " a colony is a better offering than a victory." It was in the stirring
days of the good Quecni Bess that England first devoted herself to plantation, and the
success with which her efforts have been crowned, show that the English deserve the
eul'igiums they have received, of being peculiarly adapted to this work. Former occu¬
pations and old notions fell speedily into decline, as their ears tingled with the news
of the discovery of another and fairer world, and their hearts swelled with emotion at
the new field of speculation and enterprise thus laid open to them. Feudalism had
been overthrown, and agriculture was declining, manufactures had scarcely begun to
occupy the people ; and thus there were many who could not get work at all, and the
exaggerated accounts of tlie paradise of earth made the thirst for gold and the romance
of a " westward, ho !" irresistible to all classes. The sceptics might laugh at the em¬
bellished aooounts that were daily reaching them, of some newly-discovered mine of
THE ATTEMPT 283
gold, but the multitude lent a confiding ear to the fairy stories of the savages going
about decked with chains of pearls and dust of gold, and the trees that bare gems fur
fruit, and even men of learning and travel were beguiled by them.
A thirst for gold was unquestionably the principal motive of many of those who
went on voyages of discovery, but there were many who had a far nobler and truer
design in leaving their fatherland for the M^onderful new world. The new light of the
Reformers had shined into many a heart, and dispelled the " utter darkness ;" and
they, for the glory of their newly-found Saviour, and the promotion of His kingdom
among the heathen, counted not their lives dear unto themselves ; but having tasted
of His goodness, they longed to let others know it too. They were met by many
hardshi])s and disasters—famines, pestilences, raging elements, treacherous savages, and
jealous rivals ; but their faith was strong, and they did not trust in vain.
Jamaica, the first and ehief of our West Indian possessions, which has lately
occupied so much public interest, was discovered by Columbus, in 1656, on his second
voyage. When he first saw it, he was enchanted with its beauty and fertility. It
seemed to have a considerable population, and the pretty little vilages scattered ovei-
the country gave it a very cheerful asj^ect. When his vessels were seen, the savages
surrounded him in their canoes with a warlike cry, but they were soon pacified for
a time by small gifts. However, when the ships were anchored, and they were land¬
ing in the small boats, a band of warriors thronged the beach, and it was with great
difficulty they were put to flight by arrows from the cross-bows of the invaders, who
M'ere also assisted by a fierce dog. The natives then sued for peace, which was
granted, and though it was of short duration, the Indians were not the first to break
it. When the admiral, on his fourth and last voyage, was driven by a storm to their
coasts, he and his crew were received with the greatest cordiality, and ministered
to in a very kindly way by the natives. His stay on the island was much embittered
by the mutiny of his crew, and the refusal of the governor of Hispaniola to give him
relief. Indeed, the conduct of the mutineers was so cruel, that it nearly proved fata!
to themselves and the better disposed Spaniards, as the natives stopped the food with
which they had been providing them, and open war threatened to break out. Colum¬
bus, as may be supposed, was in great disnjay; and it was only by having recourse to
stratagem that he saved himself and his men. Knowing that on a certain day there
wouU be an eclipse of the moon, he assembled the chiefs together, and told them that
for their shameful conduct the Great Spirit would that very night blot out the moon
from theJ:ieavens, and it would only be the beginning of many disasters that would
befall them if they did not change.    As the admiral predicted, the eclipse took place,
284 THE ATTEMPT
and the poor deluded beiugs, thinking it really some frightful judgment, willingly
gave them all the provisions they required. A further supply arrived from Spain
shortly after, and Columbus left the island.
As long as Spain li(dd dominion in those parts, Jamaica continued in a state of
oppression and misery, and became the scene of many atrocities, which were only miti¬
gated during the short and amiable reign of D'Escpiimel. As might be expected, the
inhabitants fled, and within fifty years the original population had disappeared. The
coasts were much infested by " the monarchs of the main." who hoisted the English,
French, and Spanish colours as it suited them, and seemed to have an unbounded
license of the seas, and being also repeatedly assailed by the French fillibusters, the
colony declined very rapidly. The island was seized by the English during the pro¬
tectorate of Oliver Cromwell, who tried to form a new colony by inducing some of his
troops to settle there with their families-—a scheme which was at first attended with
but little success, as the settlers were constantly assailed by a band of blacks and
Spaniards, called Maroons, or hog-hunters. But it did make progress in spile of these
drawbacks, and in 1664 it was considered mature enough to have a legislative assem¬
bly. In the reign of CharJes li. the English were at war with Spain, and in order t(.)
spare the treasury they did not scvuple to employ the buccaneers against the Spaniards;
and, indeed, these ruffians obtained so much favour at court, that Sir Henry Morgan,
one of the most notorious, was appointed lieutenant-governor of Jamaica. The popu¬
lation speedily increased, and by the end of the seventeenth century, was nearly
tAventy times as large as when the island belonged to Spain.
The blacks now quite outnumbered the white people, and although the condition
of the slaves was improved with the times, yet they were an ill-used and suffering
race, and those scenes so beautifully and pathetically described by Jtlrs Stowe, were of
daily occurrence, when children were torn from their mother's arms, and husbands
separated from their weeping wives, to be dragged about in chains, tortured for the
slightest offence, and slaughtered at the stake if they dared even to attempt to obtain
that inestimable blessing—freedom. The settlers were kept in a constant state of
dread by the Maroons, who,
" Su;ldon as liglituing, darted on tlieir foe,
Seen like tlie flash, remembered like tlio blow,"
till, after a long and miserable contest, they came to some sort of understanding, and the
negro insurrections also greatly disturbed them. ^
But these were not the only calamities that befell this unfortunate colonj', for
THE ATTEMPT 285
Port Eoyale, the chief rendezvous of the buccaneers, was engulphed by a fearful earth¬
quake in 1692. Nature seemed in her usual serene state, the sky was blue and
tranquil, and the sun was playing liglitly on the gently rippling water, when all at once
the heavens were darkened M'ith lurid streaks of red and purple, and a dull, grumbling
sound reverberated through the earth, and echoed in the distant hills—the sea, before
so calm, began to swell upon the land in roaring surges—then the earth opened her
mouth and swallowed a great number of the inhabitants in her yawning gap, while
some were swept away by the waves, and a few found safety in some elevated pieces
of ground and in the ships, which now sailed over the streets of the so lately happy
city. Soon after this, Kingston became the principal city, for the inhabitants fled
from a town on which the hand of doom seemed placed. For, soon after the earth¬
quake. Port Royale was rebuilt, but a pestilence, caused by the corpses of those killed
in the earthquake, quickly thinned their numbers, and soon after the town was re¬
built, it was nearly consumed by fire, and the French taking advantage of their weak
state, made them still more miserable by many wanton assaults.
The emancipation of the slaves is the most notable event in the history of our
West Indian possessions. In Jamaica, at the time I have been speaking of, the slave
trade was carried on at a most extensive rate, slaves being introduced into the island,
about the year 1776, at the rate of 18,000 yearly, and after the trade was suppressed
in 1817, there were 34,000 on the island, and the nature of the white settlers natur¬
ally became very hard and overbearing. As was to be expected, the planters received
with stout opposition the proposal by the English Parliament to set the slaves free.
Eut the English having felt, through the successful efforts of Clarkson, Wilberforce,
and others, Avhat freedom was, were anxious that it should circulate through every
vein of all their emj)ire,
" That where Britain's power is felt,
Mankind might feel her mercy too,"
and the noble Parliament did not shrink from paying the sum of £20,000,000 sterling
to the " West Indian interest " for the freedom of the slaves. As was the natural re¬
sult of the long period of degradation through which they had passed, the slaves did
not at first appreciate the blessing of voluntary industry, but as long as they had
enough to eat, spent their time in a very indolent and slothful manner. They had to
serve six years before they could obtain absolute liberty, and numbers of them cele¬
brated the hour of their emancipation by a solemn thanksgiving.
Euterpe.
286 THE ATTEMPT
Who does not know Mrs Grundy'? "Which of us has not trembled at her name,
and submissively obeyed her dictates ? Who can conscientiously deny that he is sub¬
ject, in a greater or lesser degree, to the tyrannical government of this awful and
mysterious female 1 Her sway is absolute, universal, and supreme. Despotic rulers,
beneath whose yoke whole nations groan, yield a humble and implicit obedience to
the decrees of Mrs Grundy. They are surrounded by the pomp and circumstance of
regal splendour; their persons are protected by guards, their dominions are defended
by armies; magistrates, inquisitors, and spies are incessantly employed in bringing
their enemies to justice, and in endeavouring to procure obedience to their laws ; and
yet, Mrs Grundy, single-handed and unprotected, without throne, crown, or sceptre,
without magistrates, armies, or guards, without even a recognized code of laws, or a
clearly-defined identity, exacts universal homage, and receives universal and complete
submission.
This, too, is all the more extraordinary, if we remember the fact that Mrs Grundy
is anything but a beloved sovereign. Indeed, few people would hesitate to speak of
her in terms of unqualified dislike, and those few generally hate her in their hearts,
although a fear of her awful presence may restrain them from speaking their minds.
Yes, whatever may be the secret of Mrs Grundy's power, it is certainly not the affec¬
tion of her subjects; for I doubt if the most tyrannical of despots was ever so cor¬
dially detested as slie. And this should not surprise us, if we consider the character
of this mighty potentate, in so far as we can penetrate through the veil of mystery,
which shrouds her from profane and curious eyes.
There can be no doubt that Mrs Grundy is a terrible mischief-maker. Who
invents scandalous stories, disseminates malicious insinuations, exaggerates petty
foibles, and detracts from the merits of the great and good ? Mrs Grundy ! Who
spoils the pleasure of half the croquet-parties, pic-nics, and balls that take place 1
Mrs Grundy ! Who betrays people into foolish display and unnecessary expense,
and then derides their attempts to imitate those richer than themselves 1 Mrs
Grundy ! Or, to come from great things to small, who forces us to wear apparel often
both uncomfortable and unbecoming ] Who insists upon our adopting bonnets in
which we look ridiculous, and dresses whose inordinate length renders us odious to
o
THE ATTEMPT 287
ourselves and our feUow-creatures 1 Who prescribes for us styles of coiffure which
from our hearts we detest, and has of late years even presumed to dictate the colour
of our hair ] IVIrs Grundy ! And we submit to this sort of thing ! and we glory in
submitting to it!! and we pretend to like it!! ! Well, perhaps it is the best way.
Resistance to the fiat of Mrs Grundy is worse than useless, and it is always well to
give in with a good grace. Accustomed to the yoke from our infancy, the idea of
shaking it off appears too wild to be entertained for a single moment; nay, as I have
already said, we glory in our servitude, and I am sure, that not one in ten young
ladies who may read this paper would be able to contemplate, with any degree of
tranquillity, the consequences of being seen walking in Princes Street without a pair
of gloves on. Indeed, I tremble as I write the words ; for I feel confident that many
of my acquaintances, should they discover me to be the author of this paper, would
regard me as little better than " an outer barbarian " for suggesting the possibility of
an impropriety so glaring, and I hasten to assure them that I did but mention it as a
proof of our complete subjection to Mrs Grundy, for my terror for that mysterious
individual is far too strong to permit me ever to do more than imagine so flagrant a
breach of her laws.
These last remarks refer exclusively to ladies, and principally to young ladies;
but the empire of ilrs Grundy is very far from being restricted to this class, or to any
class of the community. Her authority extends to both sexes, to all ages, all ranks,
all nations under the sun. Even in the matter of dress, the lords of creation are
quite as much the victims of her tyranny as we are ourselves, however they may ridicule
our subordination in this respect; and I could give a hundred instances in proof of this
assertion, were I not restrained by the fear of becoming personal— no! let me be honest
—by the fear of Mrs Grundy; for I feel that I should incur the deep displeasure of that
implacable being were I to reveal here the many and anxious discussions I have heard
concerning tlie proper shape of shirt-collar, the correct style of breast-pin, the fashion¬
able cut of overcoat, and the thousand other points referred by gentlemen to the dread
power they affect to despise, but lack courage to resist. Yes, disguise our allegiance
under what form we will—call our tyrant by what name we please, her existence and
our submission are deplorable, but indubitable facts. We may talk about " the eyes
of the world," about " keeping up appearances," about a regard for " the proprieties,"
or a respect for " public opinion," but all these forms of expression mean the same
thing, and are merely different modes of acknowledging the authority of Mrs Grundy.
To my mind's eye, Mrs Grundy always presents herself in a definite and embodied
form, which I shall endeavour to describe.    Should the portrait bear no resemblance
288 THE ATTEMPT
to the Mrs Grundy who may have been conjured up by any imaginative readers, I can
only remind them that a great poet has said—
" Varium et mutabile semper femina,"
and Mrs Grundy, both from a mental and from a physical point of view, is no excep¬
tion to the rule, for she may truly be called "uncertain, coy, and hard to please;"
while, with regard to her outward appearance, I question if any two people are
haunted by precisely the same Mrs Gruudy, so that no one need wonder if my descrip¬
tion should fail to agree with their previous idea of this wondrous woman. Mrs
Grundy, then, ever appears before my terrified mental vision as a lady of uncertain
age, with a tall, bony, and ungraceful figure. Her nose is long, sharp, and red ; her
eyes are of a greenish grey; her lips are thin, and her mouth closes like a trap. Her
hair is sandy, and arranged in small curls on each side of her forehead ; her expression
is severe ; her shawl is folded with painful precision, and she invariably carries a
reticule. Should you meet a person answering to this description, take care, as you
value your peace of mind, how you conduct yourself so long as her awful eye is
upon you !
1 have only one thing more to say about Mrs Grundy, and that is, that although
I maintain that all mortals are more or less subject to her, there are various degrees of
servitude ; and while some people are only her subjects, others are her servants, and
others her slaves : and when I think of the miseries endured by this last class of un¬
fortunates, their very existence appears to me astonishing, for its every hour is
embittered by the relentless oppression of Mrs Grundy. She is their first thought in
the morning, and their last at night. Walking, talking, reading, writing, dressing, eat¬
ing, her image is ever present to their minds. They decline to give their opinion
upon the most trivial, as well as upon the most important points, until they hear the
verdict of ]\Irs Grundy, when they hasten to declare that their ideas on the subject
precisely coincide with hers. They dare neither laugh nor cry, sit nor stand, without
the example, or, at least, the permission of their tyrant. I have seen two of these
miserable individuals sit beside each other for hours at a ceremonious dinner-party,
both longing to relieve the tedium by a little conversation, but both shrinking with
liorror from the notion of saying a single syllable to each other until the ceremony of
an introduction had taken place !
But, oh ! what am I doing 1 Defying the most stringent laws of the tyrant I
have professed to revere ! ridiculing her faithful worshippers! showing contempt for
her time-honoured rites and ceremonies, and giving ample cause for suspicion that
THE ATTEMPT
289
they have been neglected by me ! How shall I defend myself 1 how escape the
vengeance of Mrs Grundy 1 At this moment I see her before me in the character of
Avenger. I behold the tall bony figure—I know the malignant glitter of the grey-
green eye—I hc^ar her awful voice denounce my contempt of her authority—and
overcome with terror, I drop my pen ! Dido.
%^t 0oia of i^t iiiJ^r.
What say'st thou, mighty river,
Tliat from the mountain crest
Dost flow along for ever.
Without one sigh for rest ]
As o'er moss'd stones thou leapest,
With noisy mirth along ;
And where thy path is steepest.
The loudest is thy song :
Till, through green pastures stealing
More calm thy waters glide,
Their'sheen at length concealing
In ocean's bosom wide.
Beneath thy song of pleasure,
Deep tones of wisdom hide.
What keep'st thou in tliy treasure,
Man's onward course to guide 1
" I tell him great things ever
Prom small beginnings rise,
And he who scorns them, never
Wili win the hero's prize.
" And as with song of gladness
O'er roughest paths I leap,
Where most in fear and sadness
Could only sigh and weep,
" I bid him never weary
In treading duty's ways ;
And though the path be dreary,
Still lift the psalm of praise.
" And thougli there l)e before him
Dark rocks he fain would shun.
With manful heart press o'er them.
Till life's hard course be run.
" And when, my rough path ended,
Through field and mead I glide.
And where my steps have wended.
There richer hues abide,
" Go, bid thy life shed blessing
On all around," I cry ;
" So thou, all hearts possessing,
Eeloved shalt live and die."
IVrEtGEAG  BhEAG.
290 THE ATTEMPT
from   the   german   of   o.   wildermuth.
Evening,
Time passed on, gently and swiftly, as it does with most of us, sometimes, no
doubt, touching us more lightly than at others, but always speeding on—how quickly.
The weight of life would overpower us were we to go on from moment to moment,
from step to stop, without occasionally halting at some well-defined point and survey¬
ing the slopes and steeps we have left behind. The calm retrospect of the most
rugged path is beneficial, in so far as we feel we have struggled on with a firm deter¬
mination to be faithful in all things, and that we have in some degree accomplished
this. It is such a point which we have now reached in the lives of those whose cares
and hopes, joys and sorrows, have been occupying us so long. With them it proves
to bo a merry family festival, held where once stood the old official residence.
Horr S. had long since been laid in his last resting-place. Charles"wife, too,
had been called away, and the childless widower had entreated Minna to return to
what had been her old home, and take charge of his household. It was not without
much hesitation that Minna yielded to the persuasions of her brother. She scarcely
felt herself equal to the superintendence of such extensive premises (the farm and the
brewery were still carried on, and most successfully), nor coidd she leave the quiet and
retirement of her own small cottage without much regret; but she had learnt to sac¬
rifice her own feelings to those of others, and with somewhat of an anxious heart,
found herself installed at Elumenwelt. Charles was not now the enthusiastic man of
business we once knew; he lingered longer at the breakfast-table than formerly,
often returned home early in the afternoon, and entered with great pleasure into any
scheme of amusement proposed by his nepliews and nieces, to whom he was as fondly
iiLtachcd as if they had been his own children. He longed for greater quiet and rest.
To procure this, he resolved to place his eldest nejihew, Minna's son, William, at the
iiead of affairs, and this resoluti(ni was formally declared at tlui iamily gathering, met
to celebrate the betrothal of William with the youngest daughter of Aunt Frcderika.
It is while grouped together at this festive board that we purpose taking a rapid
glance at our former friends ; but we must observe, in passing, that a secoml bridal
THE ATTEMPT 291
couple graced the table, in the persons of Minna's daughter, Antonia, and the son of
Counsellor Fiirst. The young people had tastefully decorated the ball with flowers,
evergreens, and flags; a band of musicians welcomed the joyful party who, amidst
much laughter and merriment, seated themselves at two long tables. In the place of
honour, with all the dignity becoming his position, sat Herr Fiirst, now an old man,
yet preserving his important appearance, which was not a little enhanced by the two
handsome orders decorating his breast. He looked brighter, happier than in by-gone
days, and we hear his wife, Matilda, telling her neighbour. Uncle Charles, that he now
lives so much for his family and grandchildren, that it is only since he retired from the
service of his country that she has discovered the social and most endearing side of his
character.
To the right of Herr Fiirst, and much flattered by the honour, sat Frederika,
decked out in a somewhat ancient style of head-dress, one which had been given her
bj' her husband on the occasion of the confirmation of their youngest child, and which
no persuasion on the part of her daughters could induce her to relinquish : " It is still
so good, and once cost so much." She surveyed with much complacency the young
couple before her, and confided to Otto, Avho sat next her, that she never could have
expected the son of Arwed Northstar to become such a sensible, practical man as
"William had proved himself. " But, I must allow, Minna has done much, very much,
for her family, both before and sir.ce her husband's death ; and her children are every¬
thing that a mother could desire. Antonia will make a capital little wife. I am sure,
the counsellor will never have occasion to repent having given his sanction to tliat
marriage,"
Edward and Emma were placed next to each other. The bright, happy little
woman might well have passed for the eldest sister of her children. She blushed over
and over again wlien Herr Fiirst reminded her of how nearly her shyness had preci¬
pitated her into the water the day he first had the honour of making her acquaintance.
Minna and William were seated together. The eyes of the former rested calmly,
yet lovingly, on the faces of her old friends and companions, and upon those of the
young folks whose future lay before them. She bad early lost the freshness of youth,
and her sunken features bore little trace of her former charms ; but there was a look
of peace and resignation which her early days had never witnessed. Confidentially,
as brother and sister, did Minna and William recall the remembrances of the past ; h('r
happy girlhood, and the days of error and weary solitude that followed. " (Jod bless
you, William, for that visit of sixteen years ago, and for all your words of advici;. On
that day first daw'ued the short sunshine of my married life.    You did not flatter my
292 THE ATTEMPT
poor Arwed as others did, who, aftenvards, ridiculed the poet, but you awoke in him
what was noble and good. Oh ! that these days of love and peace, in which we toiled
with and for each other, had been longer !    It was all too late !"
" IS'ot too late, Minna ; you took up life's warfare with the courage of a true
knight. Arwed blessed you with his latest breath, and you have won for your children
a happy, busy life."
" It is true, thank God ;" smiling through her tears. " Who could have thought
to see me installed here, the rich and happy mother that I am ? And with you, too,
all has gone well; our Rikchen becomes quite poetical in the contemplation of her
children's good fortune. My Antonia has certainly inherited some of the managing
spirit of her aunt, she will be a notable housewife, as well as a cheerful, loving com¬
panion."
The noise coming from the direction of the table, set apart for the young people,
now became so uproarious, that longer reminiscences could not be indulged in. It
would be Avearisome to introduce my readers to all the branches of the different flimilies,
even Uncle Edward, when trying to arrange them genealogically, signally failed ; for
as all the old names were represented by several editions of new faces, the confusion
was great, and such droll mistakes occurred between old and young, that at last one's
own identity became doubtful, and the shouts of laughter drowned all attempts at ex¬
planations.
At length Uncle Charles called to order, and made a speech, which was very good
of its kind, but the point of which the young people did not seem fully to appreciate,
for it was with some difficulty that Uncle William restrained them, more than once,
from unceremoniously cutting him short. As the first toast of the evening, a bumper
of champagne was fillod to " The memory of the old house." After having been duly
responded to, Herr Fiirst called for " one cheer more" for the pic-nic to the Green
Isle ! Toast followed upon toast, cheer upon cheer, until the uj^roar became so great,
that some of the elders began seriously to think of leaving the hall. Moreover, as the
old proverb says, " After a storm comes a calm," so, in this case, the lull soon came,
and Unc*le William seized upon the occasion to offer a few words of cordial sympathy
to the old, and earnest exhortation to the young people. The latter he besouglit to
prepare thcmseb^es, honestly and seriously, for the great campaign of life which was
opening before them, warned them of the many trials they were certain to encounter,
and reminded them from whence came the true and never-failing strength, which
alone could uphold them in every difficulty. K. II. D.
THE END.
• • ^
