M5jttnXfr!r>~'*£nnriK
National Library of Scotland
*6000653374*
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
By
the same Author
HANNO, or the future of exploration
POLYCHROMATA a story cycle
STAINED RADIANCE a novel
THE THIRTEENTH
DISCIPLE
BEING PORTRAIT AND SAGA OF MALCOM
MAUDSLAY IN HIS ADVENTURE THROUGH
THE DARK CORRIDOR
BY
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited, 34 Paternoster Row, E.C. 4
Printed in Great Britain at
The Mayflower Press^ Plymouth. William Brendon & Son, Ltd,
TO
MY DAUGHTER
RHEA SYLVIA
It was the anarchists of Rome and the East who originally
brought about the victory of Christ. And still to-day, as
then, they are the true fighting forces, the sole resources of
the Christian hosts.
Anatole France
We are all things that make and pass, striving upon a hidden
mission, out to the open sea.
H. G. Wells
CONTENTS
BOOK I. ANTE-NATAL
CHAPTER
I. Suicide and the Horizon .
II. Fourteen Thousand Miles .
III. The Walls of the World .
IV. The Moon in Ajalon .
V. Salisbury Plain ....
VI. The Defile of the Beast .
13
26
57
93
JI4
*45
BOOK II. BIRTH-PANGS
I. An Explorer from Mars
II. The Woman of Maglemose
III. The Riddle of the Glyphs
IV. The New Satanists
V. The Verge of Adventure
L’Envoi 
163
181
208
240
266
287
/
A FORENOTE ON ORIGINS
IN compiling this book the present writer has had
free access to the list of manuscripts noted below.
This was granted him through the courtesy and friend¬
ship of Malcom Maudslay’s heirs, who have decided to
hold over publication of the full and unexpurgated texts
for another twenty-five years.
(i) The Autobiography, nearly 250,000 words in
length, begun in 1926 and abandoned in late 1929.
(ii) The Diary, with entries from mid-November,
1929, to the 14th of December—an impossible date—
jgso-
(iii) A typescript of one hundred and seventy quarto
pages, without a title, but evidently portion of an auto¬
biographical novel.
(iv) The lengthy statement of Ramon Pech, the
Yucatecan guide, taken down and forwarded by Mr.
Robert Morland, C.B.E., British Consul at Soconusco
City.
Various interviews, conversations, and—for it is
illuminating—the privately printed book of verse, The
Darkness behind the Stars, have also been drawn on for
material.
The passages enclosed in double quotation-marks
(“. . .”) are taken chiefly from the Autobiography, but
large portions of the manuscript novel have been altered
from the first to the third person and transferred, en bloc,
and without other acknowledgment than this, to Chapters
Four and Five of Book I.
Names have been Actionized in accordance with an
established convention, and the fictions chosen at random.
No reference is therefore intended to any living person
whose actual name may chance to coincide with that of a
character in this book.
London, 1931
J. Leslie Mitchell
BOOK I
ANTE-NATAL
Through the great desert beasts
Howl at our backs by night.
A Marching Song
CHAPTER ONE
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON
Subchapter i
ONE of his earliest memories was of how, at the age
of five, he set out to commit suicide.
It was an afternoon in late autumn, and as he climbed
the hill towards Stane Muir by the rutted farm road
he could hear the whirr of the reaping machines and the
wailing of the peewits. Behind him was Leekan Valley ;
fringed to the north with mountains, purple-blue in
heather, granite-speared sentinels in misty serration.
The bulking of the moor above him and the bright,
quiescent sunshine vexed him a little, but his small rump
still smarted with the chastisement inflicted upon its naked
surface, and his determination to drown himself in the old
well at the top of the road was fixed and unwavering.
He must have been about two and a half feet high at the
time, his black hair rather long—his father cut it at in¬
tervals by the simple procedure of inverting an empty
brose-bowl on his son’s head and then trimming round
the edges with a great scissors—and his small face, intent
and sober, a little grimed with tears and the adherence
of remnants of the oatcakes which he had been dis¬
covered stealing. He looked back into the hollow where
the farmhouse lay and consigned all its inhabitants to
hell—aloud, and singing the word sobbingly, as he had
heard the Irish hired lad do when sacked for nameless
crimes. Then he stopped for a moment to gaze at a por¬
tentous hare which came loping over the bank at the side
of the road. But the beast looked at him unfriendlily, in
the fashion of hares, and he edged away to the other side
of the track, and held on, his short, defiant person gar¬
mented in thick jacket and breeches, woollen stockings
and boots with heavy soles. He had started out without
his fine new cap in his haste to drown himself.
13
14 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
By the time he came to the old well and pushed
through the broken railings which surrounded it, the
walking had so tired him that he lay down on the flat
coping-stones to rest himself. He lay very flat on his
stomach, and, having recovered his breath, prepared to
drown himself. The coping-stone tilted under him, un¬
certainly, as he crept towards the well-head, and the hole
yawned blackly, but with a certain dust-drizzle of sun¬
shine which caught his attention. The tilt of the stone
grew greater and then, with a sudden jerk, flung him
flat on his face, so that he bruised his chin and cried a
little. Disheartened, he lay for a while watching the
play of changing colours through the tear-drops clinging
to his eyelashes.
Then he raised his head and suddenly became aware
of the long wall of the autumn day, a quivering, bubble
wall, resting on the hill-brow just above his head.
It was his first conscious awareness of the wonder of
the horizon. He lay and stared at it and forgot his in¬
tention of drowning himself. Instead, a great resolution
came upon him. He would creep up through Stane
Muir and touch the Thing, perhaps throw a stone against
it and see if it would crack. . . .
If you have any imagination at all you will see him
crossing the road from the old well-head and crawling
stealthily under the muir fence in the beginning of that
pursuit which was to be his life passion. Broom and gorse
flowered yellow up to the brow of the hill in great clumps,
but a cattle-track wound amidst the bushes, and as he
panted upwards with short, fat, eager legs he stooped
and picked up a large and companionable-looking stone
with which to batter in the Walls of the World. . . .
Late that afternoon his brother Robert came upon
him, after much searching, several miles across the
Grampians, dead weary and minus a boot left behind in
an unchancy, swampy place. But the stone was still
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON 15
clasped to his chest and the conviction firm in his heart
that beyond the next scaur, the next stretch of gorse,
an incredible adventure awaited him.
Subchapter ii
Leekan Valley is in Aberdeenshire, a cleft in the
Grampians mountain-block, lying roughly parallel with
the North Sea. The winter howling of that three-miles
distant sea must have been among the first sounds heard
by Malcom. Though a valley, Leekan is at a high
elevation, except at the point where a glacier has torn
down its eastern wall in anxiety to provide a site for a
fishing village. Neither Lowland nor Highland, it is a
place without history, though the national hero of
Scotland, Sir William Wallace (“whose reputed penchant
for burning English castles seems only slightly less
monotonous than Queen Elizabeth’s craze for sleeping
in them ”), is supposed to have hidden in a yew-tree
near the present manse during the early days of the
rebellion against the southern aliens.
But if it lacks recorded drama of historic times, it
is rich with the evidences of pre-history. Men as remote
in time as the Magdalenians (such the staggering claim
of the Reverend Ian Stevenson) have passed through
Leekan, or halted there whole generations, hunting the
unkindly fauna of the Scottish Quarternary. Later came
Maglemoseans, wandering in dim tribes across the
swampy plains of the Dogger Bank, later still the
wielders of the epipakeoliths, then the men of the
polished axes who reared in such profusion the Devil
Stanes of Leekan and were doubtlessly amalgamated or
exterminated by the later smelters of bronze. But of the
last people there is no evidence, unless, despite the
Reverend Ian, the miniature Stonehenge of Leekan is
Bronze Age work.
Malcom was born into this ancient library of the hills
16 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
at the farm of Chapel o’ Seddel on Christmas Eve, 1898.
He arrived a little before midnight, and inauspiciously,
for a great snowstorm had come over the Grampians
about five o’clock that afternoon and the doctor had to
be fetched from Leekan village on horseback, ploughing
through great drifts. The times and place were primitive
enough in obstetrics—probably the Maglemoseans
managed things quite as well—and some happenings of
crude surgery took place, which greatly upset the house¬
hold in the matter of hot water and clean towels. How¬
ever, Mrs. Maudslay passed through the business safely
and in a week, according to the oral traditions of Leekan,
was out of doors again, feeding chickens and being
intent on the matter of a litter of pigs which had failed
to flourish in the cold. Malcom himself displayed
symptoms of retiring precipitately, and was hastily
christened in consequence. There was never any doubt
as to what his names would be, for his father s was John
and his maternal grandfather’s (including the unfamiliar
orthography) Malcom. The Reverend Ian Stevenson,
stout and genial and absent-minded, dripped water on
his forehead and christened him by the names of John
Malcom. The new Maudslay screamed atheistically.
“ Probably I considered an infantile distrust of priests
quite warranted—perhaps had caught a glimpse through
the time-spirals of some Leekan witch-doctor with a
flint knife performing unkindly operations on the body
of a weakling child. Hell lies about us in our infancy.
“ I was the youngest of four brothers and two sisters,
though my father and mother had been married a bare
nine years. Things were so in Leekan and maybe are so
still. It was the natural lot of women to be perpetually
bowed in the ungracious discomforts of pregnancy hhey
seemed to take this lot calmly, but I do not believe
that any woman other than a half-wit has ever desired
a large family. Child-bearing : it was a drearily exciting
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON 17
inevitability. ... If only half the epitaphed ideal wives
and mothers who predeceased their husbands in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries had kept diaries of
their inmost thoughts—what a history we might then
possess of solemn marital lust guised under the protective
name of fatherhood ! Especially among the clergy. If only
we knew the private opinions of the wife of that inane
prig and poetaster, John Donne !—She bore twelve
children in sixteen years, that pale, ghostly, eighteenth-
century wife, and died in child-bed. The Sunday
following her death Donne preached a sermon on the
text ‘ Behold in me a man afflicted.’ ”
This is a fair specimen of Malcom. John Donne,
roused from his lair, is pursued with whoop and halloo
for many a mile before we return to Leekan and learn
that Malcom, by some chance, was the last Maudslay of
his generation. That his father and mother discussed
the matter and decided there would be no more children
he finds inconceivable (“ ! ”). They would have con¬
sidered such conduct loathsomely indecent. They
never, he is convinced, discussed sex at all—unless it
was in the matter of bull-calves and how many cockerels
should be killed and sold to Seddel House. In bed
matters a wife did her duty and, like Brer Rabbit, said
nuffin.
Robert, Thomas, and Peter were his brothers, in order
of seniority and merit. Younger than these were his
sisters, Lilian and Jessie. He grew up in the midst of
a lamentable yet not unhappy squabble. Yet all, except
Robert (of Jessie and Peter we never hear again), remained
dim and faery figures in his memory : except Robert,
who left it ineradicably scarred with a horrific picture
—1916 and the attack on Thiepval and the head of
Robert thrust gasping from the port-hole of a lurching,
blundering tank. Malcom lay in a shell-hole and their
eyes met, and Robert cried something, weeping, sweat
18 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
and blood disfiguring his face. Then the tank swayed
forward into a writhing cobra-nest of barbed wire, cleared
that, and plunged and plunged into smoke and sulphur
till the inferno swallowed it. . . .
Grave Robert with the brindled hair and snappy
temper ! He tended much to Malcom’s childhood—
including administration of the slapping which almost
resulted in a suicide—developed a pride in him, and
resented remarks about his puniness and pigmentation.
The other Maudslays were red-haired, highly coloured
children : they took after their father. But Malcom
was like his mother, an Argyllshire woman—small and
sallow, with hair so black that Leekan Valley was vaguely
shocked. Black-haired children were in some fashion
disreputable.
John Maudslay, a saving ploughman of Leekan stock,
had farmed Chapel o’ Seddel for seven years prior to
Malcom’s arrival. He had a nineteen-years’ lease and a
constant, canny feud with the laird, Mutch of Seddel
House, a bloated, kindly individual who owned half the
Valley, drank three-quarters of its whisky, and, in intervals
of sobriety, paid rounds of visits to his tenants—prin¬
cipally, one gathers, for the pure love of picking quarrels
with them. Except in romantic novels of claymores and
stag-hunting and bonnie brier bushes, the Scottish
tenant farmer keeps his immortal soul intact by markedly
not raising his hat to the northern equivalent of squire :
knowledgable farmers who knew their law and had
fallen out with Mutch had been known to chase him off
their rentings with shot-guns. John Maudslay had
never gone as far as that, and Laird Mutch in the farm-
kitchen of Seddel, drinking butter-milk and conversing
edgedly with his father was a frequent play set for the
observation of the bashful Malcom. The farmer of
Chapel o’ Seddel was unbearded on week-ends, but
throughout the week burgeoned an ever more bristly
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON 19
chin and throat; he was a tall man, with dingy reddish
moustaches. “ Rather like the picture-book vikings,
my father, and oddly owlish. As probably were the
vikings. I have never elsewhere encountered exactly
that species of owlishness.” He would nod at Mutch,
gravely, his moustaches dripping buttermilk, his eyes—
grey, indeterminate eyes—slightly protuberant, like those
of an elderly lobster, and remark, ‘ Aye. Ye’re richt.’
Then nod again, after an interval, with his eyes glassily
solemn. ‘ Aye. Richt.’ Then wipe his moustaches with
the back of his hand. ‘ Aye. Ye’re richt there.’
He had a conversational weightiness which Mutch,
who was inclined to an alcoholic sprightliness, must have
found almost as damping as Malcom did in later years.
He was of all things practical. Once Malcom, then
about twelve years of age, induced him, in a moment of
relaxation, to go out on a winter’s night and look up at
the stars through a small telescope acquired from the
Reverend Ian Stevenson. He peered up through the
lenses, fumbled clumsily with the gauges, then shook
his head. It hurt his eyes. Probably he had never
before looked up at the bright splendour of the frost-
rimed star-fields. ‘ Aye. Aye. But what’s the use o
it, laddie ? Ye’ll no get on in the world through lookin
at stars. Come awa in.’
From that moment Malcom hated him—single-
mindedly, ruthlessly, as only an intelligent boy can hate.
But in later years, looking back at that incident, somehow
it was his father who seemed pitiful, heart-breakingly
pathetic, and himself, crude and young and cruel, who
was hateful.
Subchapter Hi
Sometime in the Epipalaeolithic, nine or ten thousand
years ago, there was a colony of Azilians on the Argyll¬
shire coast of Scotland—lost and degenerate descendants
20
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
of the Old Stone heroes, with clumsy microliths and
weapons of horn and bone, and a view of a wilder Atlantic
from the savage coasts where the cave bear still prowled.
Malcom discovered them—in books—at the age of
twelve or thirteen, and wove a fantastic belief in them as
short, dark, silent men, his own ancestors through his
mother, who was an Argyllshire woman. That still,
watchful gravity of hers impressed itself very vividly
indeed on his mind, struck him as something pre-
Neolithic, pre-Keltic, heritage of the days when perhaps
stray mammoths might still be seen from the mouth of
a cave and the crook-boned men made war against the
New Stone invaders. . . . The Reverend Ian’s books
and telescope, the ‘ standing stones on the vacant, wine-
red moor ’ (R.L.S. remained one of Malcom’s heroes
for life on the strength of that magic phrase alone),
Leekan’s winter splendour of stars and his mother’s
dark, impenetrable silence had even thus early moulded
all the poetry of his being into the channels archaeological
and astronomical which it kept throughout his life.
Yet he never loved his mother, except at odd moments,
when she came to his aid in matters of milk and unbutton¬
ing, when he was very young and overcome with weariness
and her hands were kind. But such occasions were few
enough. Her hands were too roughened and too busy to
be kind for long. Behind that immemorial gravity of
hers it was difficult to know how she looked on her
children : but hardly at all as intimately her children,
he came to think. She had no passionate loves and no
passionate dislikes. It was impossible to believe that
even in the early days she had ever regarded John
Maudslay with other than a silent acquiescence.
Yet you must not think of her as bowed and apathetic
She was quick and patient and dark. She worked
unceasingly, from five o’clock in the morning, when the
alarum clock in the kitchen had roused John Maudslay
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON
21
and herself, until half-past nine at night when, as
regularly as though the alarum clock had also regulated
the moment, they went to bed. They slept in a large,
wooden four-poster, John Maudslay next to the wall.
Malcom would watch him, upon occasion, going to bed.
He disrobed to his undergarments, but retained them.
They were thick, woollen undergarments of an uncon¬
vincing grey. Then he v/ould stride largely into bed,
groan, pull the blankets over his head, groan and shuffle.
Then he would snort deeply, lying on his back and staring
at the ceiling. He usually fell asleep in that attitude.
Chapel o’ Seddel was a farm of seventy-five acres.
John Maudslay kept one hired man, who slept in a
garret under the eaves. This hired man got up in the
morning at the same time as his employer, and descended
to the kitchen. Then, if it wras winter, they unhooked
from the roof-beams, from a medley of swathed hams
which had graced the Seddel pigs throughout the previous
summer, three great lanterns which burned paraffin,
smokily, in cracked, five-wandowed cages. With these
in their hands they’d unlatch the kitchen-door, sway in
a booming gust of wind coming through the passes from
east Aberdeenshire, and then plod across the cattle-
urinated courtyard to the stable or byre. Then would
come the tending to horses and cattle, crushing of
oilcake, mashing of turnips, carrying of water and treacle
and straw. Meantime Mrs. Maudslay would issue from
the dairy and also cross the courtyard, with such clank
of milk-pails as would rouse Malcom and his brothers in
the great upstairs bed where there were sometimes such
anarchistic outbreaks over undue shares of blanket.
There were usually three milch-cows at Chapel o’ Seddel ;
Malcom’s mother had a small, three-legged stool which
she would plant amongst the soiled straw ; then she
would plant her head firmly against the ribs of Meg or
Kate or Nancy, and begin milking. She milked with an
22
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
extraordinary rapidity : it was fascinating to watch her
milk while the cows stood patient, cud-chewing and
borborygmatic.
At half-past seven the children were breakfasted.
By then John Maudslay and the hired man had been out
in the fields for over an hour, and the slow, Northern
morning was spreading wanly from the eastern seaboard
of the Valley, and the bitterns calling and calling, and
thin pencil-points of smoke rising from all the scattered
steadings of Leekan. Chapel o’ Seddel lay on the western
side of the glen ; right athwart it, a glitter of far slate
roofs on the ledge of the foothills that climbed to the
sea-cliffs, were the school and schoolhouse. Three miles
to the north was the manse, a mile beyond it Seddel
House, and, at the tip of this crescent, Leekan Village,
straggling back from its railway station. South-east, in
the glacier-scaur riven through to the sea-shore, was
Pitgowrie, the fishing hamlet, hardly of the Valley at
all, drenched perpetually with a dreadful odour induced
by the practice of kippering butties. . . . Over three
hundred years before, the galleon Santa Catarina,
struggling incautiously northwards from the disaster of
the Armada, had come within smell of Pitgowrie and
had sunk like a stone, with all hands.
By eight o’clock the Seddel children were ready to
set out for school. They were generally wrapped up so
warmly that, short-legged, it was difficult to proceed at
any pace other than a shambling trot. They would set
out one by one, released with a final efficient pat and
injunction. Across the Valley to Leekan school was a
distance of three miles by the footpaths and probably
nearer five when one took the main road. Malcom
covered this distance, day in, day out, from the age of
five to the age of fifteen ; except for occasional illnesses.
At a conservative estimate he walked fourteen thousand
miles in pursuit of an elementary education.
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON 23
But behind, in Chapel o’ Seddel, the day’s work was
well advanced before the children had arrived at school,
and at eleven o’clock John Maudslay and the hired man
were unyoking the horses and coming back across the
laired fields to the steadings. Then came more feeding
of cattle. Then the three peasants themselves fed. Then
by one o’clock the men were again gone to the fields, and
Mrs. Maudslay was feeding poultry or pigs or making
butter or jam or sewing clothes or—one and a dozen
other occupations enslaving her dark silence. . . .
A grey, grey life. Dull and grey in its routine, Spring,
Summer, Autumn, Winter, that life the Neolithic men
brought from the south, supplanting Azilian hunger and
hunting and light-hearted shiftlessness with servitude to
seasons and soil and the tending of cattle. A beastly life.
With memory of it and reading those Catholic writers
who, for some obscure reason, champion the peasant and
his state as the ideal state, Malcom is moved autobio¬
graphically to a sardonic mirth. . . . He is unprintably
sceptical as to Mr. Chesterton or his chelas ever having
grubbed a livelihood from hungry acres of red clay, or
regarding the land and its inhabitants with any other
vision than an obese Victorian astigmatism. . . . Some¬
times, unkindly, he would vision Mr. Chesterton sentenced
to pass three years at Chapel o’ Seddel as hired man ;
picture of a large, distinguished presence staggering
across the slimy floors of Chapel o’ Seddel byre behind
a barrow-load of reeking manure often cheered his
dourer moments.
Subchapter iv
And yet 
There were memories of those early days in Leekan
of which he never wearied : memories of Spring mornings
—never such mornings in the world as those, when the
air was better than Benedictine and the red earth turned
24 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
beneath the drive of the coulter and the horses’ breath
drifted in a little cloud and the peewits cried and cried ;
purple autumnal nightfalls, with the darkness creeping
from the hills on the dim, far steadings and the fir-trees
etched in ink against the looming of Stane Muir ; Leekan
mantled in snow under scudding clouds, with the baa
of lost sheep in the mountain-scaurs ; the sound of
summer rain on the roof; long tracks of kye through
broom that lead to a beckoning, conquerable horizon.
Subchapter v
At midnight on New Year’s Eve, 1900, a great bonfire
was lighted at the summit of Stane Muir. This was by
permission of John Maudslay, but a result of the en¬
thusiasm and organizing abilities of the Reverend Ian
Stevenson, who had prevailed on Leekan to believe
that the century ended then, and not a year previously,
as some folk had thought. Great cartloads of whins
and broom-roots, twigs and logs, had been hauled to
the little plateau above the Devil Stanes. Leekan turned
up in its hundreds and its Sunday best, with large
mufflers to keep in the warmth and scores of bottles of
whisky to put it there. Gallons of paraffin were emptied
on the pile, and when midnight arrived by the Reverend
Ian s watch, when Mutch of Seddel House—considerably
at variance with the laws o gfravitation and hilariously
guided forward with his torch—had fired the reeking
foundations, a stray, misguided Highlander with a pair
of bagpipes burst into the skirling clamour of The Cock
o the North.
The sound roused Malcom and his brothers in the
muekle bed at Chapel o’ Seddel. They crept out on the
cold floor and hopped and shivered by the window, two-
year-o d Malcom disregarded till he had plucked Robert’s
shirt-tails to attendance.
‘ Want to see ! Want to see ! ’
SUICIDE AND THE HORIZON 25
He himself remembered little of this ; Robert was to
tell him of it later. He was elevated in friendly arms and
bounced and danced ecstatically at the sight which greeted
his eyes.
They were burning out the nineteenth century. The
flames fled skyward in crazy architecture, built themselves
into pillars golden and smoke-shot and red-streaked,
then melted into a great roaring lowe against a revealed
horizon. The wailing of the pipes pierced now and then
down through the sound of the blaze to the ears of the
shivering watchers in Chapel o’ Seddel.
They were burning out the nineteenth century:
Victorian England, Victorian Europe, cant a religion,
smugness a creed, gods in whiskers and morals in stays.
. . . That fire went up with the crackling of crinolines
and bustles, brothels and bethels. It screamed with
the agony of murdered children in Midland factories,
soughed and glimmered in a wind of such pious belching
as no other century had ever seen. It flamed on a
gaseous literature and an idiot art, sank and seethed and
roared again with the fuel of gutter dreams and palace
spites. Christianity and nationalism, socialism and
individualism—they flared and broke and showered the
dark hillsides with glowing embers. . . .
And from amidst the ring of the Devil Stanes great
shadows arose, faceless and formless, and went swiftly
out of the light, over the mountains and into the world.
CHAPTER TWO
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES
Subchapter i
LEEKAN SCHOOL, as IVe said, lay three miles
j across the Valley from Chapel o’ Seddel. From the
Maudslay farm the road ran straight for about a quarter
of a mile and then took to crooked courses from which it
never recovered. You passed by a loch, reedy and curlew-
haunted and brown with stagnant water ; about half-way
was the ancient stone quarry from which the cromlechs
of Stane Muir had been dug by the Neolithic herdsmen ;
climbing the other side of the Valley the path wound past
the fields of a fat and choleric man with very red hair
and a nose sympathetically tinted. His name was
James Greig and he farmed Redleafe. His swedes were
very good to eat : much better than Chapel o’ Seddel’s.
Or so the Maudslays thought when they stole them;
which they often did. It was a delight to reach through
a wire fence and steal a Redleafe swede and be conscious
that all the time a stout and wrathful figure probably lay
concealed in a ditch further on, ready to vent vengeance.
He would leap out and brandish a graip or other
implement; his nose would flame danger.
‘ Damn you ! ’ he’d cry. ‘ Damn you for ill-gettit
weans ! ’ Then he’d cuff them with a grittily-caloused
hand. ‘Takthat.’
They’d take it and slink past till distance lent them
courage again. Then they would turn round and howl
insults at him. ‘ Pot-Belly ! Auld Pot-Bellied Jimmie ! ’
Thomas was especially ^good at this : long and lean and
rakish, he’d elevate his fingers to his nose. ‘ Auld
pudden-heid ! ’ Then experience a spasm of terror.
‘ Rin ! here comes the auld devil ! ’
Sometimes, for he was foolish and choleric, the auld
devil would pursue them again, and they’d run like hares.
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 27
Being the smallest, Malcom would lag behind and make
vocal his fear. Then Robert would turn back and swear
at him and grab his hand. ‘ Dash it ! Come on ! ’
In ultimate safety beyond Greig’s furthest pursuit
they would turn and gesticulate their unquenched
aversion. Malcom would join with the rest, putting small,
sweating hands to his mouth and shouting in a thin
treble. ‘ Po-Belly ! ’ he’d cry. ‘ Puir auld Po-Belly ! ’
Only as they trotted on again would uneasy thoughts
assail them. How were they to pass Redleafe coming home
in the evening ! Sure as death he’d be waiting for them.
‘ And just for a swede, too,’ Thomas would exclaim
in sorrowful amazement, forgetting his feats of finger-
elevation. ‘ The auld B. should be locked up.’
There was a curious code of etiquette among Leekan
children. It wasna decent to use the grosser swear¬
words before a junior like Malcom. So the swear-word
was reduced to a bursting initial, regretfully, and Malcom,
panting, would murmur, agreeably, ‘ Aye, he’s an auld B.’
Past the lands of the unfortunate James Greig^who
was probably neither a Bulgarian heretic nor acquainted
with homosexual diversions, they’d be well up the other
side of the Valley, and, looking back, could see Chapel o’
Seddel below its Stane Muir, brown and dour, its biggings
set against a straggling background of firs. But they
seldom looked back. By then they’d have about two
minutes to spare and would do the last lap at racing
speed.
Leekan Parish School had three teachers—a man and
two women. They called the man the Dominie ; there
are many such curious words in the Scots dialects, pathetic
reminders of the once-national worship of scholastic
attainment. The Leekan cobbler was the Sutor ; and
of course a plate was an Ashet.
There were two play-grounds, bare asphalt stretches
in front of the school. One was for girls, one for boys,
28
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
and transgression by the latter into the former’s territory
was punished by the authorities with quite amazing
ferocity. Delimitation of his playground as a boy was
Malcom’s first introduction to those sex tabus brought
north by the Neolithic men six thousand years before,
and still sprouting, like so many foul fungi.
At nine o’clock each morning the Dominie would
stand at the head of the wall dividing the two playgrounds,
and toll a hand-bell, irritably. He was an uncle of Mutch
of Seddel House, a tall old man, and to Malcom at the
age of six or seven looked much more like the uncle of
God Himself. Then the children would snake-wind
into the school, the doors—long sliding panels—separating
the three rooms would be flung open, and a great gust
of chattering would arise. Then the Dominie himself
would appear, shepherding in such strays as the Maudslays,
and take his stand in front of the blackboard in the middle
room. From this position he could command the school.
A deep silence would fall. The Dominie would close
his eyes and raise his clenched right fist. The children
would stare at it fascinatedly. Upon its upper surface
a disturbance would be observable. This was the
thumb gradually rising to the perpendicular. As soon as
it attained that position, the whole school burst into the
Lord’s Prayer.
This rite of the Dominie’s Malcom describes in detail,
with much irreverent speculating as to its origin. Then’
abandoning the daily routine of Leekan School just as it
promises interest, he launches into a destructive criticism
of the education provided in those three rooms. Half¬
way through the diatribe he halts abruptly, with thought
that such^ criticism is generally done by the tribe he
detests— professional politicians, pressmen pimps of
the Sunday newspapers” and the like regrettable
pustules upon the face of civilization. One gathers an
idea of stuff austerely, if not always uninterestingly,
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 29
taught. There was practically no religious teaching.
History was circumscribed enough, but the dates en¬
livened with figures like Malcolm Canmore (a fruitful
source of gawkish puns), and Mary Queen of Scots,
whose blood was lapped by a dog. Arithmetic was
taught on a straight-forward plan, geography was no
dull subject, and, being Scots, they found English
fascinating enough. They were told to open their
mouths, to roll the letter ‘ r,’ and to avoid the elision
of aitches, otherwise they might be mistaken for English¬
men—poor, cowardly, excitable people whom Scotsmen
had chased across the border again and again.
But that was the pitiful all, apart from decorative
subjects. ‘ Natural History 5 consisted in snippets about
the wombat, the eider duck, and the unseemly habits of
the duck-billed platypus. ‘ Science ’ did not exist.
Drawing was a smudging of paper with unrecognizable
objects ; first in popularity as model was the Dominie’s
hat. No music was taught. There were massed singing
lessons in which no attempt was made to train voices.
The children merely stood up amidst the benches and
sang, and enjoyed themselves considerably.
They suffered from neither elementary Latin nor
still more elementary Greek. Later in life Malcom
taught himself to read Latin with a fair ease in order that,
at Haeckel’s urging, he might meet the over-praised
Lucretius. From the latter he wandered away into the
sterile mazes of Roman letters, emerging with the quite
unwarranted theory that most of the Latin authors had
suffered from chronic constipation. . . . Inexplicably, he
detested Rome and the Romans.
“ Of all unsavoury peoples that race of bloody-minded
barbarians which over-ran Italy and the Mediterranean
basin seems to me the worst ; of all dull and platitudinous
fools endowed with a vote in the republic of letters I
have still to meet a drearier than Virgil. ...”
30
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Subchapter ii
Outside school, in the morning play-time and the lunch-
hour, whatever supervision the children had been under
ceased to exist. They burst forth into the playgrounds,
whooped and ran and stirred the dust, played nameless
games, played football, sneaked through the hedges to
sleep in the fields, stoned the Dominie’s cat, chased his
hens, perched on the school boundary-wall and insulted
passing carters, quarrelled, fought, became reconciled,
organized slides, mass-torturings and pitched battles
with lumps of turf, stole tomatoes from the Dominie’s
garden, smoked cigarettes and brown paper cigars and
were sick.
They played the devil generally, Malcom records with
appreciation.
Most of the pupils (but they called themselves scholars)
came from some distance and brought sandwiches for
lunch (but they called it dinner). One’s social status
was graded according to the contents of one’s food-
parcel. Poor children and the children of ploughmen
brought pieces of bread and jam and were consequently
pariahs ; sons of small farmers, like the Maudslays of
Chapel o’ Seddel, brought oatcakes and butter and
home-made cheese and soda-scones ; they bowed in
abasement and went to eat in sheltered nooks when the
children of the factor, the postmaster, and the forester
unrolled ham sandwiches, buns, and cream biscuits.
But, apart from feeding-times, there was little snobbery
at Leekan School. Or rather, the snobbery in the boys’
playground was inverted. It was lassie-like and namby-
pamby and quite damnable generally to have a very
clean neck or collar or boots very shiny ; also, it was bad
policy, for then the more ragged boys, the Mundens and
the Edwards, threw stones and dirt at you. Much
depended on the head boy of the moment. This office
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 31
had no official recognition, but was very real in its
powers. It was an informal tyranny (in the Greek
sense) exercised by the strongest boy in the school.
His was the organizing of the more potent hooliganisms
and campaignings. He might even head a movement
against dirty beasts, and clean necks would flourish ;
more frequently he and his hoplitai—embryo he-men—
scorned the softer and preferred the more unscrubbed
virtues, smoking pieces of cane, talking filth, and tor¬
menting the lassies : the main functions of he-men
throughout the ages.
Surreptitious juvenile sniggering over genital organs
and the production of babies was, as elsewhere, Leekan’s
idea of sex-education. Malcom sets out his puzzlings,
his curiosities and his self-abasements in bitter detail.
He was nine years of age when they began to worry him,
but twenty-seven or twenty-eight when he came to them
in his Autobiography, and his very definite opinions and
prejudices obscure the facts considerably. After an
unnecessary jibe at Dr. Marie Stopes’ penchant for
invoking the Deity as a watch-dog to ward off the smut-
hounds, and a summing up of her scheme of sex-
education as “ admirable training for Platonic pornogra-
phers ” he goes on to tell of the only time he ever asked
his mother’s advice in the matter.
He had arrived home from school and posed her with
a quite simple question, anxious to combat a theory of
young Jock Edwards’. Her sallow face had flushed and
her usual composure deserted her.
‘ You are a dirrty little beast.’
That was all, in her slurred Argyllshire English.
Malcom had stared at her, hot-eyed, and blushed and
stammered involvedly, aware of a disgusting faux pas.
His abnormal sensitiveness festered over that repulsion.
It left a permanent scar on his confidence and faith
and “ if I ever possessed the beginnings of an CEdipus
32 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
complex, like Mark Twain’s celebrated beetle on the
red-hot shovel, it displayed a wild surprise and then
shrivelled up.”
Subchapter in
In spite of Malcom’s hurried christening in the far-off
days when it had seemed that his stay in Leekan was
likely to be short, there was at Chapel o’ Seddel no
‘ real ’ religion, just as there was no art, literature, fun,
high vision, hideous despair, or shocking blasphemy.
In Leekan, as in almost every other parish of Scotland,
the Established Church and the very kindred Free
Churches had killed popular religion through extreme
simplification of rite and the democratic election of
priests. Few gods survive the ballot-box or the bullyings
of a John Knox.
Malcom’s childhood Jehovah was a dim and emasculated
old man, no more frightening or inspiring than the weak
and languid Christ of the Sunday School texts. They
were both outside reality. The old phrases, the old hopes
and the old terrors had become meaningless. No one
believed in them, just as no one repudiated them.
Malcom, his brothers and sisters, were sent to Sunday
School; occasionally the Maudslays went to church, to
be like their neighbours. But they never applied the
references in the hymns, the prayers and the sermons
to themselves, says Malcom. They would merely feel
vaguely uncomfortable. They felt ashamed in their
secular lives to hear words and phrases associated with
religious observances. Malcom, at the age of five or six,
had his backside smacked by his mother for uttering
during play some innocent sing-song nonsense about
Jesus Christ. He was smacked, not as a blasphemer,
but just as if he had neglected some personal sanitary
precaution. ‘ The only occasions on which my father
would invoke the Founder of Christianity with any
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 33
passion were when he hit his thumb with a hammer or a
horse stepped on his toes.”
The Reverend Ian Stevenson, the Church of Scotland
minister who had dedicated Malcom, an unwilling
sacrifice, to a god who was already as little terrifying
as the forgotten totems of Stane Muir, was a large,
corpulent man, an enthusiastic anthropologist, an
archaeologist of some note (his monograph On Pictish
Burials still rouses amazingly unwarranted passions),
member of innumerable learned societies, and one of
the poorest preachers who ever graced a Reformed
pulpit.
He was ‘ Auld Ian ’ to Leekan, and was mildly liked,
especially at funerals, for death and burial interested
him and on such occasions he ceased to be vague. It was
only in the approach to his god, or his ordinary parochial
duties, that he moved behind a dim, genial cloud of
absent-mindedness. Leekan did not lack its semi¬
agnostics, crude doubters who would spit on their
hands and lean across the plough-shafts and pose the
Reverend Ian with intimate physiological questions on
the Virgin Birth, Jonah in the whale’s stomach, and
such-like mythic problems of parturition and digestion.
They never succeeded in angering him. He would light
his pipe, lean against the other side of the plough, and
launch out on a discourse on primitive symbolism from
which the doubter would generally emerge with the
dazed sensations of one who had been temporarily
upended and immersed in a lake of pea-soup. During
his twenty years in Leekan, the minister had dug up about
a quarter of the Valley in pursuit of the prehistoric.
Farmers would arrive at the boundaries of distant fields
and stand cursing under-breath at sight of immense
earth-mounds uprising in the middle of a promising acre
of young corn.
He had books on all subjects. He was the most
c
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
34
widely read person Malcom was ever to meet. Three
rooms at Leekan Manse scarcely sufficed to house and
stack the volumes he had accumulated, and his house¬
keeper, a soured woman by the name of Sarah Jameson,
spent her days waging an unending war against the
intrusion of still more skulls, eoliths, microliths,
macroliths, celts, and in flicking a ruthless duster amidst
piled calculations of cranial depth, periodic ooze, and
what not. Leekan gossips hinted that the Reverend Ian
frequently ‘ slept with ’ his housekeeper, which struck
Malcom as an exceedingly foolish thing to do when one
had a big, fine bed of one’s own.
It was not until the summer of that year when his
own interest in the puzzling matter of mammalian
reproduction had begun to flower that the minister came
intimately into his ken—the occasion an afternoon in
June and Malcom in search of stray ewes. He was
re-crossing the Stane Muir from the hills when, in the
middle of the circle of Neolithic stones, he came upon the
Reverend Ian, his coat off, a spade in his hand, and
much perspiration dripping from his face. He was
digging vigorously in a very unpromising patch of
heath. Malcom stopped and gaped at him respectfully.
The minister wiped his forehead, considered the boy,
and smiled vaguely.
‘ Ah> you’re an Edwards boy, aren’t you ? ’
Malcom was a trifle indignant, being much more
clever and better-looking than any of the Edwards boys,
especially the detestable Jock. (An early school-group
photograph bears out the contention that his appearance
was at least not lacking in interest. Amidst the gauche,
healthy wonder of the group he stands, slight and dark,
his nose even then with the tip .slightly askew, dark green
eyes still and grave in appraisal of the photographer.
Probably he presented just such appearance standing
and repudiating the Reverend Ian’s suggestion.)
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 35
‘ Na, sir. Tm Malcom Maudslay.’
‘ Oh yes. Can you dig ? ’
‘ Tm fine at diggin,’ said Malcom, simply.
The minister relinquished the spade , sat down, and
lighted his pipe. ‘Then try your hand at this patch.’
Malcom did. It was a tough patch. Perspiring
sympathetically, he cut through the thick roots and
then, as he had seen his father do, cut the sods in neat
oblongs, and delved them out. All the while his mind
seethed with wonder. He paused to interrogate the
Reverend Ian.
‘ Are ye diggin a garden, sir ? ’
The Reverend Ian shook his head. ‘ No. I’m looking
for the kirk-pulpit of another minister who used to
hold services up here in Leekan. Up here on this hill,
Malcom, in the days when the Pharaohs ruled in
Egypt.’
‘ I ken aboot Pharaoh,’ said Malcom, helpfully. ‘ He
was drooned in the Red Sea. But that was lang syne.’
He felt that he must have mis-heard. ‘ An—an there
were savages up here then, sir ? ’
‘ Long before then, and not savages. Very like you
and me. Come here and I’ll show you the calculations
I’m digging on now.’ He brought several sheaves of
scrap-paper out of his pocket. ‘ Let me see—no—here
it is—no. Where is it now ? ’
Malcom went down on all fours beside him while they
searched among the papers. Then the situation was
explained. If the minister was correct the centre of this
miniature Stonehenge had once been occupied by an
altar, oriented to face the single standing cromlech to
their right—the guest-house of the sun every mid-summer
morning, in the days of the New Stone men ; while that
pillar to their left was the point behind which the sun
sank on the ancient day of feast and sacrifice. Not
that the sun would come through the wee house accurately
36 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
now, or sink just exactly behind the pillar. Fraction by
fraction of an inch each century cromlech and pillar
had lost accuracy. ‘ For five or six thousand years have
gone by since the priest stood where we stand and
watched the sun rise over Stane Muir brae or sink
behind the Dominie’s school.’
The boy had listened with an eager if fragmentary
understanding. Five or six thousand years. . . . He
looked away from the kneeling and measuring minister,
out over the Leekan Valley, hazed in sunset, haunted
unendingly by the peewits. Five or six thousand
years. . . .
And then, as he struggled with the elementary
arithmetical equipment of his school class, suddenly,
mysteriously, as he tells, he caught such shuddering
glimpse of that pit of no-history as was to haunt him
with its dim, hazed slopes and voices as unendingly as
Leekan itself was haunted—a glimpse that in memory
terrified and then fascinated, that for long years remained
to him inexplicable, until he read the time-spiral specula¬
tions of Reimann and Einstein. . . .
The sun sank rapidly. And suddenly Malcom felt
afraid. He glanced scaredly at the minister. A voiceless
scream struggled up into his throat. The minister
had vanished. In his place a naked man squatted against
the sunset lowe, his gnarled arms outstretched to the
pillar, his body dipping and swaying in frenzied rhythm.
Himself—naked, kneeling, in his hands a bloody
trencher. . . .
And, as they waited there, priest and shivering acolyte
in an immemorial rite, the pillar blackened against the
western sky and darkness came wailing down the valley
of the New Stone men.
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES
37
Subchapter iv
But that glimpse of local limbo dimmed in a new
discovery—books and the beauty of words.
How he read ! He devoured all the poor few volumes
at Chapel o’ Seddel—they consisted of a Bible, a Basket
of Flowers, a tattered Burns, A Catalogue of Sheep Dips,
and a Life of Our Saviour. The latter was heavily
illustrated, with Christ “ dressed by Clarkson and
always clasping in his arms a peculiarly repulsive lamb,
evidently far gone in the staggers.” He would wonder
what had been done when the lamb misbehaved itself,
in the disconcerting fashion of lambs. ...
He scoured neighbouring farm-houses, borrqwing
books. At last he summoned up courage to make
application to borrow from the Dominie’s private cases.
Crowningly, the Reverend Ian, with whom he had
become a favourite, made him free of the manse library.
Books and books and yet more books. Marryat,
Ballantyne, Henty, Stevenson. Grown-up books. Scott
and Dickens, Fielding, Smollett, Thackeray. Flaubert
in a horrible translation. (Oh, Salammbo! Matho !
Spendius ! Hamilcar !) The early Wells, Haggard, and
Jack London, Hardy (queerly, he liked Hardy), Kipling
(whom he could not abide), a stray volume of R. H.
Benson’s which left an unfortunate and ineradicable
conviction that Roman Catholics were of necessity bores,
and brainless bores to boot. . . .
But fiction palled quickly. By the time he was thirteen
years of age he was reading the Origin of Species
and enjoying it. This was afterwards to strike him as
the most inexplicable of all his early loves, for the
Origi?i, re-read, is dry stuff, dry and heavy, mental
dyspepsia in tabloid.” But at thirteen it was wonder.
He read and understood and pondered and agreed ;
he procured other Darwin books and voyaged the
38 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
unplumbed seas with the Beagle of heroic memory ;
he secured books by Huxley and Haeckel and rejoiced
with them at the discomfiture of the Deity. (“ That
gaseous vertebrate ! ”) He read Herbert Spencer. (“ My
God, I read Herbert Spencer ! ”)
Innumerable others. He read Matthew Arnold. He
read the Bible—“ as literature.” He tried a translation
of the Quran and gave it up, without forfeiting a life¬
long liking for Mohammed. He read translated sagas
of Morris and Magnusson and Greek stuff in translation.
He became a champion of the Norsemen as the discoverers
of America. He passed to the early Arthur Keith in
anthropology, Avebury in archaeology, Herschel and
Proctor and Ball in astronomy. ... He read and read
till for days the outside world faded into a shadow-play
of phantasmata, till his mother worried lest his brain
should soften this was no joke, but a grave apprehen-
sion ! till John Maudslay, belching in the kitchen
firelight and the aftermath of a heavy supper, would
prophesy for his youngest son a dour future of poverty
and ^unemployment as result of such wastrel ploys. . .
(“ Poor father ! Plad he vision of myself and May
Laymore that sleeting night in the wilds of Whetstone ? ”)
Subchapter v
He went out of doors the evening he finished reading
that book of Ball’s, and stared at the Milky Way streaming
across the heavens. It was an early Spring evening.
u e ?attle moveci and clanked, cud-chewing, in the mush
bedding of the byre. The smell of ploughed fields was
m the air. Across Leekan Valley, clear and distinct from
some p oughman s bothy, came a hoarse singing presently
extinguished in guffaws. Overhead, watchfd by the
Chapel o Seddel boy that amazing thing at which none
stood astounded but himself.
Flat, like an enormous biscuit perhaps, Ball had said ;
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 39
whirling in space, with the solar system, like a spinning
of dust-motes, somewhere midway : The Galaxy. . . .
A fragment of poetry—a lovely fragment—was
remembered by the staring boy :
The gemmy bridle glittered free,
Like to some branch of stars we see
Hung in the golden Galaxy,
The bridle-bells rang merrily 
And then, conjured up in some misty fusion of images,
he saw, across the star-floored Galaxy, the riding of an
immense horseman, helmed and armoured, the shatterer
of the horizon, the conqueror of the skies, pressing
forward amid the dust of suns and the moan of nebulae
to the Rim of the Galaxy, out on some tremendous
Adventure in the wilds of space. . . .
The laughter across the valley rose deafeningly, like
the baying of a beast. The vision vanished. Malcom
stared, shook himself, and turned indoors.
Subchapter vi
This curious self-education of his—in character
neither nineteenth nor twentieth, but eighteenth century :
a bland disregard of that feeble creed that youth should
occupy itself with being youthful—was carried on without
aim or objective. “ The future occasionally rose and
stared in my youthful face. I would stare it back, angrily,
and then cut it dead.” It and its problems seemed
irrelevant nuisances except in school holidays of Spring
or Autumn when his father and brothers would impress
on him his peculiar uselessness as a farm-labourer. He
was a consummate failure as a farm-labourer, for his
thoughts would not merely wander from the job in hand
—manuring, hoeing, seeding, threshing—they would
leap from it across half the world to pithecanthropi and
Greek marbles and Rome and Hannibal and Pyrrhus
40 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
and Genghis Khan and Abyssal Plains and Easter Island
and Red Eric and Winland : they plunged and glittered
and soared again on every subject except the red clay
fields of Chapel o’ Seddel. . . .
‘ Od, ye lazy brute ! ’ John Maudslay would bawl,
plunging along an adjacent Spring-time drill, showers
of rich, reeking cattle-dung flying from his graip, Thomas
and Peter in hot and competitive pursuit, Malcom with
his finicking implement shatteringly recalled from an
excavation at Zimbabwe. . . .
‘ By God ! ’ he would find himself swearing, in hot¬
eared rearward regard of his kinsmen’s pliant buttocks,
‘ I’ll show you yet. . . .’
He did, immediately following a particularly unbearable
Spring planting. ‘ Feeder classes,’ to be entered through
competitive examinations, and with scholarships donated
to outstanding competitors, were being established in the
county elementary schools. The intention was that
those classes, after preparatory work of eighteen months
or so, should feed into Dundon college such pupils as
might win a second scholarship. Malcom came home
school one evening and startled his family.
‘ I’ve won a bursary,’ he said.
‘ What ? ’ said Chapel o’ Seddel.
He was thirteen years and two months of age. He
had passed the examination overwhelmingly in all
subjects, with, in history, a ‘ free subject ’ essay which
covered over forty foolscap pages. His bursary of
twenty-five pounds was contingent upon his immediate
entrance into Leekan School’s newly-formed ‘ feeder
class.’
na’’ sa^ John Maudslay, ‘ we canna spare ye.
Ye hae to tak Peter’s place when he leaves hame and
gangs to Redleafe. We canna spare ye. Na.’
But this was not the last of the matter. Leekan’s
intelligentsia massed its battalions on Malcom’s side.
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES
41
The Reverend Ian appeared on the scene, for once
affirmative, un-vague. Malcom must be allowed to take
the bursary ; he was a born scholar and should be trained
for the Church of Scotland ministry. While Chapel o’
Seddel was shaking its head cannily over sic daft-like
ideas, Dominie Riddoch crossed Leekan Valley, strongly
supported the contention that Malcom was a born
scholar, and made it clear that he should be trained as
a schoolmaster.
John Maudslay stroked his foolish viking moustaches
and looked at his wife, sitting dark and calm and efficient,
hands in her lap, thin lips neatly folded. She listened
variously to the Reverend Ian and to Dominie Riddoch.
Then came to a decision.
‘ If the laddie has anything in him,’ she said, in her
slurred (“ Azilian ”) English, ‘ we will not hold him
back.’
Subchapter vii
So he entered the Leekan ‘ feeder class ’ and was
put to studying for a further scholarship at Dundon.
He fell to learning French and German and algebra
and Shakspere and other things of a like import. There
were two others in the class. Both were girls. The
three of them sat apart from the rest of the pupils in the
Dominie’s room, at two small benches, and, after having
bloodied Jock Edwards’ nose in a great playground
fight which was attended by the whole school and cheered
like an arena-combat in ancient Rome, Malcom, provedly
classifiable under no circumstances of time or fate as
lassielike, deliberately set about training himself on an
un-Leekan-like model inspired by his books. . . .
That dark-faced, fantastic boy was to provoke both
the wistful laughter and the equally wistful derision of
the autobiographer who succeeded to his body. But
the self-reformer saw nothing humorous in the business.
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
42
He procured a spare exercise-book, ruled it neatly with
black and red lines, took it up to the circle in Stane Muir,
and spent an unsmiling afternoon among the menhirs,
drawing up his programme.
He must learn to walk properly, as Domina Riddoch
did (the average walk in Leekan was an urgent galumph).
. . . Bathe daily—or as often as his mother and Chapel
o’ Seddel kitchen would allow. . . . Always use a
handkerchief (Jock Edwards did serviceable work with
the sleeve of his jacket). . . . Stop blushing when spoken
to. . . . Speak English, never Scots. . . . Keep your
mouth closed (all Leekan suffered from adenoids). . . .
Learn to eat properly (like the Reverend Ian did that time
he gave you dinner). . . . Get up every morning at
four o’clock and put in an extra hour’s reading. . . .
Those were only a few of the points he was to remember
in later years as having jotted down in the columns of the
exercise-book. Unlike the protagonists of other historic
points, he set about putting them into operation at once.
Hidden in Stane Muir, he practised his clumsy legs
in walking straightly, his neck in keeping his head erect,
not arcing from the spine like the neck of a Neanderthaler.
He kept up the practice every spare moment school, his
books, and the farm would allow him and acquired an
easy carriage which even the drill-sergeants of Salisbury
Plain failed to destroy. He deliberately faced the
blushful and uneasy—giggling girls in Leekan shops
were his chief enemies—and in a couple of months
could probably have carried out W. L. George’s test
of buying baby ribbon in a multiple shop without any
other appearance than indifference. (“ Everything is
possible to youth, and, thanks to that blessed prig who
was once myself, I can walk into a women’s lavatory—
as I once did in an absent-minded moment in West¬
minster, thereby probably establishing a record for
males and make my apologies to a startled feminine
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 43
twitter and walk out unable to summon a single red
corpuscle from its normal duties.”) He jerked himself
back to nose-breathing—agon}'- for the untrained—every
time he found himself with lips ajar, and in a short time
found it possible to dispense with a handkerchief, that
happy breeding-bed of bacteria, altogether.
Chapel o’ Seddel, after goggle-eyed, dark and composed,
or guffawing starings, gradually became accustomed to a
member of the household ‘ tryin to mak oot he was a
gentleman ’ by eating without lip-smackings or gulpings,
by washing himself, all over, in the kitchen, naked and
composed and unashamed. (“ Nakedness was as shameful
a thing in Leekan as it is among the unclean Anglo-
Saxons everywhere.”) The Valley, as Malcom speedily
found out, now looked on him as ‘ prood an conceited—
did ye see the cratur raise his hat when he met the
minister ?—Thinks he’s gentry.’
The Reverend Ian put it differently, remarking with a
sigh after talking to a polite and unembarrassed book-
borrower, ‘ You’re growing up terribly, Malcom.’
Of the two girls in the new ‘ feeder class ’ Jean Stanley,
the forester’s daughter, was the elder. If Malcom was
“ Azilian ” she was flaming Nord. Her hair was corn-
yellow, her eyebrows almost white. She had eyes a
china blue in tint, with unusually large pupils, and was
the possessor of a lumpish, large-built body budding
into the questionings and cravings appropriate to her
age. She had very unreliable garters and a habit, when
immersed in the uneasy equations of algebra or the
obtusely irregular verbs of France, of twiddling her legs
and disclosing very white knees—to the intriguement of
the loutish Jock Edwards of Class VI. Malcom, on the
other hand, considered her knees merely indecent.
(“ Those shapely things—a girl’s knees ! ”)
Years afterwards he was to recognize that among the
older pupils of Leekan, Jean and Jock Edwards and
44 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
rest, it was himself who had been sexually under¬
developed and they who had been normal. At thirteen he
regarded the practical issue of sex—he knew all about
it from his readings in physiology—as a filthy business
of the order of bodily evacuation, but fortunately not such
a widespread necessity. It need never concern him.
“ All this a result achieved by my mother and Jock
Edwards in incongruous alliance. I had then no idea
that all civilization is but a by-product of sex, that my
book-passions, my early socialist dreamings, my self¬
trainings in Stane Muir, were the results of early sexual
repression.”
The other girl of his class, newly arrived in Leekan,
was in all things the opposite of Jean. A year younger,
her skin was a gypsy olive, her hair black—much blacker
than Malcom’s, that black which in the sun is almost
blue. She had a small, thin face and straight thin nose,
with eyebrows shockingly thick for one of her age. But
then she was altogether shocking, being a foreigner.
She was the Dominie’s niece, and, ludicrously, her
Christian name was a variant of his official designation.
Domina Riddoch. Her mother had been French, and
since the age of three, when her father, an analytical
chemist in London, had died very horribly while
experimenting with certain toxic acids, she had lived at
Avignon. She had come to Leekan for a little preliminary
training before going on to the Dundon College and
London University—she was quite definite in her
intentions and ambitions ; she was to be a chemist, like
her father. She shocked Leekan. It was reported that
she bathed daily and walked about the School-house
stark naked in hot weather, in spite of the startled protests
of the Dominie. She had a passion for bathing—again
in the nude—in Leekan River. She ate sweets in church,
not decently and under-breath, but with loud, enjoying
cracklings. In the girls’ playground she mentioned
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES
45
gigglesomely awful things with the same calmness as
she mentioned her dinner. She was never going to
marry and have babies because ‘ women—dhey say it
is dhe very devil.’ She had considerable trouble with
the hard English ‘ th,’ laying too much stress on the ‘ t ’
constituent. Leekan shook its head over her as an awfu,
foreign cratur, no decent.
To the eyes of Malcom this vivid brown thing, alive to
the finger-tips, was merely a nuisance—in the absences
of the Dominie from the school-room perpetually brawling
and playing the devil, getting up on her desk and dancing
on it, for example.
But her residence in Avignon had given her unfair
advantage in matters linguistic. Malcom threading a
careful way through a French passage would elicit a
giggle, presently crescendoing into an unashamed laugh,
regardless of the Dominie’s presence. The school-room
would hush to her breathless justification.
‘ But I cannot help it. Dhey are so funny. “ Longkel
dee Missyou Perreeshong ” dhe Maudslay boy said.’
The Dominie would have no family favouritisms. His
shrivelled face aureoled by its long, white hair would
harden. ‘ Stand up, Domina Riddoch.’
She would leap to her feet, eyebrows thunderous, and
extend a thin, brown hand to the tingling strokes of the
strap. Then sit down, face uncovered, and burst into
dry, tearless sobbing while Jean Stanley, china-blue
eyes a little frightened, would stand up and stumble on
through Le Voyage de Monsieur Perrichon.
Over the development of the affair between Jock
Edwards and Jean she presided with the frank curiosity
she might have devoted to the wrigglings of two interest¬
ing worms, and, intimately physiological, would question
the discreetly-whispering Jean.
‘ And you permit him. . . . ? You like him to ?
But he is such a dirty peasant boy ! ’
46 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
It was the Spring of 1912, seed-time, and weather of
such stifling warmth that the school was allowed an extra
half-hour at lunch-time. Jean would wander away from
her playground unostentatiously, into the nearby broom
thickets, and Jock Edwards, grinning, would slouch in
pursuit. The Dominie’s niece would lie hidden in the
bushes, and, by prearrangement with Jean, watch the
whole scene with insatiable zoological zest.
But one afternoon the observer burst out of the
thicket, white-faced, raced to the school, and roused the
unwilling Malcom from his book on the Dominie’s lawn.
‘ Oh, come quickly ! Dhe Edwards boy and Jean—
he will kill her ! ’
Malcom pushing into the thicket came on Jock and
his inamorata mutually entangled, Jean’s face red to
bursting. The matter had passed beyond mere horse¬
play, and Malcom, considerably disgusted, planted a
satisfying kick on Jock’s broad and sonsy buttocks.
Thereat the combatants fell apart. Jock grinned sheep¬
ishly, stuck his hands in his trousers pockets, whistled a
trifle uncertainly, and swaggered out of the thicket with a
notable rearward shrinking. Jean, under the unsym¬
pathetic eye of the relief force, burst into the cacophonous
dismay of a scared barnyard fowl.
‘ He—he tried to, Dommie, he tried to ’
‘ Aye, and didn’t you make him try to ? ’ demanded
Malcom, with a brutal lack of tact. The Dominie’s niece,
mopping Jean’s stained face, turned on him, snapping.
‘ I hate you, Malcom Maudslay ! Go away, or I will
say dhat it was you dhat tried to do it. I will report you
to dhe Dominie for assault.’
Malcom stared, and then suddenly boiled over, being
in a bad temper anyway at having been parted from his
book. He seized Domina by the neck, banged her head
against that of the moist Jean, strewed the pair of them
into the broom, and strode out of the thicket. How the
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 47
Jock and Jean intrigue fared thereafter he neither knew
nor cared.
“ I look back on the memory and feel sick with disgust.
But not of Jock Edwards. Rather of myself. The
beastliness of our upbringing ! The base shames and
tabus of civilization that befoul the clean desires of the
healthy human animal ! . . .”
But one must balk and retire behind those hesitation
dots which, whether in print or in startled feminine
cacophony, always so infuriated Malcom.
Subchapter viii
When he was fourteen his Leekan world suddenly
staggered and swayed a little, and then acquired new
colours and voices.
firstly, he and Jean and the Dominie’s niece made a
journey through the mountains to Dundon, to sit for the
entrance examination to the college there. They sat it
out amid cultured and trimly-clad city folk (Dundon had a
population of over three thousand) and felt like bumpkins.
At least, Jean and Malcom did. The Dominie’s niece
looked no more foreign in Dundon than she did in Leekan.
She sat in front and to the right of Malcom, her beetle¬
wing hair in two long plaits down her back. Paper¬
puzzling, he scowled at her shoulder-blades. Once
she turned and smiled at him from under her sombre
brows—a friendly smile, an unexpectedly friendly smile,
changed, lightning-like, to a grimace as he stared un-
comprehendingly. Heavy-hearted, he completed his
papers, sure that he had done badly.
When the results were announced three weeks later
Malcom Maudslay and Domina Riddoch headed the list
and divided the honours. They were both awarded
adequate scholarships—bursaries they were called—
and Malcom’s career at college was assured. He climbed
up to the ancient circle in Stane Muir, the scene of the
48 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
half-remembered vision of his childhood, and lay and
dreamt amongst the bracken, under the arcing Walls of
the World which he had once pursued with much faith
and a battering-stone 
He turned on his side and stared at the horizon.
The Wall of the World. ...
He had three weeks to wait before he could begin at
Dundon. The hay crop was heavy and clovery that year,
and consequently late in the cutting. This fact glad¬
dened Malcom. He volunteered to burn whins on the
moor and escaped from Chapel o’ Seddel farmhouse
each morning with a small supply of matches and a
great satchel full of books, forgetting through sun-lighted
hours Dundon and bursaries and dinner-time and the
world and its walls as he marched with Prescott’s con-
quistadores against the Tlascalans and Montezuma and
the knightly Guatamozin. No Leekan sunshine raised
the sweat under his collar : he was riding high-hearted
across the stricken field of Otumba, the Aztecs squelching
underfoot in bloody heaps as they clove a way to the
standard of the caciques and the images of the obscene
gods. . . .
And then his mother died.
It happened on a Sunday. She was feeding the chickens
in the yard at the time. Robert, pipe-smoking, home for
the day from the farm where he was fee’d, stood beside
her. Mrs. Maudslay chirked to the chickens, bending
towards them in her dark, efficient manner. Then she
put her hand to her side and gave a little sigh and
crumpled up at Robert’s feet.
Laid on the kitchen bed, she recovered a little and asked
for Malcom. Thomas searched the Stane Muir for almost
half an hour before the book-reader was found and
brought to look on the still, white-faced stranger who
seemed, at this the end, to have some very urgent
message to impart to him. John Maudslay sat beside
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES
49
the bed, holding her hand, but she disregarded him,
peering at Malcom, her lips, with a little spume on them,
twitching ineffectively. Then he saw his father’s foolish
head buried in the blankets beside unmoving fingers,
and understood. He backed away. The door and the
sunlight were near at hand.' He ran.
In the fir-wood below Stane Muir he sat down, shiver¬
ing. Under his arm was still clasped Prescott’s History of
the Conquest of Mexico, and the desire to continue read¬
ing it was strong upon him. He opened the book,
turned back the dog-eared page, and in a moment that
awful thing at Chapel o’ Seddel was lost and forgot in the
roar of Otumba. Then, appallingly, inexplicably, he
found himself lying face-downwards in the ferns, weep¬
ing and weeping as though his heart would break.
‘ Oie, oie, luilones ! ’ wailed the Aztec flight.
Subchapter ix
His mother was buried in Leekan churchyard on a
day of sunlight and scudding white clouds. Malcom
helped to lower the coffin into the grave, and was in¬
trigued at the silkiness of the cords. . . . Ten years
later, when he saw that grave, dog-roses drooped over a
long smother of grass and weeds, and he stood and
mixed up some vague quatrains in his mind, wondering
if the rose-petals came from the same womb as himself.
John Maudslay’s sister was brought from North
Aberdeenshire to keep house at Chapel o’ Seddel. She
was small and rosy-cheeked and cheerful and forty
years of age. She had quick, bright eyes, with a cold
glint somewhere in them. By then the home-staying
Maudslays had thinned out, through feeing to neigh¬
bouring farmers, to Thomas, Lilian, and Malcom. The
first two Aunt Ellen approved of. For Malcom her
dislike was manifest from the first. He returned it in
due measure ; he began to return it with zest, if only
D
5o THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
that he might forget his wayward, unreasonable (for he
had never loved her) grief for his mother. Chapel o’
Seddel was soon brisk with open feud. She stormed
at the untidy heaps of books she found in every room.
If Malcom left his scraps of poetry or uncompleted essays
lying unguarded they were sure to be swept up and
burned, impatiently, as ‘ dirrt.’ She could not bear to see
him sitting idle—reading or dreaming as his fashion was—
‘ while yer father’s oot there, workin like a slave.’ She
sneered at the cleanliness and fastidiousness in bodily
matters which his books had taught him : he prepared
himself a bath, twice every week, in the kitchen (‘ hae ye
no shame, standin aboot there naked ? ’), he cleaned
his finger-nails and teeth—‘ as though ye were gentry,
and yer father only a poor workin’ man.’ And so forth.
In return he contradicted her every statement on
general affairs, of which she was slightly less cognisant
than an Easter Islander, mimicked her squeaky Northern
speech, penetrated beneath that veneer of cheerfulness
and good humour with which she fronted the rest of
the world. She was an insatiable gossip : all the doings
of Leekan Valley were speedily hers to discuss. She
knew all about the girls who had stayed out late in the
fields, the girls who were hurriedly sent away for all too
obvious reasons ; she knew which family lived beyond
its means and would break at the end of the term ;
she’d heard things about the Reverend Ian and his house¬
keeper—the latter hadn’t slept in her own bed for a
fortnight, michty be here ; she knew about Jock Edwards
stealing a bicycle lamp and the police seeing his father
about it; she knew—ad nauseam. Prim in most matters,
she had yet acquired a peculiarly rakish phrase with which
she would close an account of something scandalous—
It’s a hell of a case ! ’ And this she would pronounce
‘ hellavacase.’
To a boy at once brutal and fastidious, it seemed that
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 51
she raked in filth with a poisonous liking for stench.
But in after-years, when Aunt Etyen had passed from
Leekan and its scandalous days and nights—no doubt
to that particular hell where all folk live discreetly and
unscandalously, where no juicy stories ever circulate,
where all girls marry their lovers before they bed with
them—he could take a clearer view. The little woman
was a romantic—a romantic starved of legitimate ro¬
mance. Books were beyond her, art was not even a
name, music was mouth-organs and melodeons. Only
the ethically unsavoury was left to provide her with
colour and excitement and the light that never was.
Subchapter x
Through his own last years in Leekan that light would
fall, blindingly, unexpectedly, startlingly, like sudden
swordfalls of sunshine in forest-clearings.
His father’s foolish face, tired and sagging to weariness
in the upspringing flame-glow of a lighted lamp—
once, at such glimpse, he stared at his father appalled,
heartwrung. He had never known he was as tired as
that. . . .
Pitgowrie Road on a Saturday night and two drunken
ploughmen fighting with bare fists, in the quietude of
the evening, the blood pouring from their faces, their
heavy feet stamping, their shadows, gigantic, elongated,
swaying far across the western fields. He had passed
them by, barely looking at them, yet with the crack of
each blow seeming to pound on his own heart. . . .
An old tramp in the pouring rain, his swollen feet
bulging from tattered boots, his dull, hopeless eyes
lighting up hardly at all at sight of a boy, white-faced,
sick at heart with pity, bringing him a pile of provisions
raided from Aunt Ellen’s larder. . . .
A booming sleet-storm from the Grampians driving
before it a herd of lost and frightened deer. In the
52 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
beating of the wind-gusts he had watched the sight
from his bedroom window one November morning,
and felt for the beasts no pity at all but only a wild
exultation in the pitilessness of the storm. . . .
A stifling forenoon in early Autumn, the footpath by
Leekan River, and Domina Riddoch standing nude,
poised above the river, smiling down at her naked self,
her body like a single vivid brush-stroke of pearl and rose
against the green background of wild beech. She had
started at the sound of his approach and he had faltered
in his stride. Then, miraculously, they had smiled at
each other, friendlily, and he had gone by in silence,
with that glimpse of the morning beauty of a girl his
forever. . . .
And somewhere, beyond the archway of the horizon,
synthesis and explanation of these things—pity and
cruelty and the heartache of wonder—awaiting him :
these, and the fantastic acceptance of fantastic challenge
that rose in him unbidden each night the stars lit their
torches over Leekan.
Subchapter xi
Daily the three Leekan pupils—Malcom, Jean, and
the Dominie’s niece—made the railway journey through
the mountains to Dundon. College life was in full
swing. They caught the eight o’clock train in the morn¬
ing, returning to Leekan at half-past six in the evening.
Often they were the only passengers on the train, but
even when this happened Malcom seldom travelled in
the same carriage as the girls. Being polite and abstaining
from his book bored him. At Leekan Station, coming
back, Jean would set out to tramp her three miles in one
direction, while Domina and Malcom walked a mile or
so in company and then parted to climb opposite sides
of the valley. On this walk Malcom did not stop reading
his book, unless darkness compelled him. He had grown
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 53
so expert in the lie of the land that he could walk reading
for mile on mile, along the banks of ditches, up steep
inclines, over the rickety foot-bridge of Leekan River.
Generally he was only vaguely conscious of the girl’s
existence. She would walk behind him silent and full of
thought, finding great entertainment in his last-moment
avoidance of this and that boulder and projecting root.
Deep in Captain Scott’s Polar expeditions he would
stride largely ahead, often unheeding or unaware of her
pert good-night as he turned leftwards through the late
Autumn evenings of 1913.
Winter brought a curtailment of Malcom’s reading
ploys, and a slight increase of friendliness between him
and Domina as they groped together along unchancy
footpaths and over the rotting foot-bridge in the evening
murk. Then came the snowing night when the Dominie’s
niece, who had gone to college unaccompanied—neither
Jean nor Malcom had braved the day’s storm—failed to
return.
At nine o’clock the Dominie himself, legging’d and
much be-belted in a shepherd’s plaid, knocked at the
kitchen door of Chapel o’ Seddel, thinking his straying
niece might have taken refuge there. Snow was falling,
whirling thickly about him and the tiny circle of efful¬
gence from the lantern he carried. Malcom pulled on
his boots and went out to join in the search. They
tramped the by-paths down to the spot where the home¬
coming Chapel o’ Seddel and Schoolhouse bursars
usually parted, and from there they set to searching the
fields, pausing every now and then to shout. The snow
whirled faster and faster upon them and a half-gale arose.
Malcom ceased to call the Dominie ‘ sir,’ and helped to
drag him out of gulfing snow-wreaths, and was himself
so dragged. They lost the paths again and again, and
regained them, and came to the foot-bridge. Ihree
rungs in the middle were missing. Below, the water
54 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
raced dark and evil. And at that sight the Dominie swore
aloud, cursing the night and the barbarous valley so that
Malcom was startled and then amused and then startled
again at the thought of that dark pertness torn gasping
away into the darkness of the water. . . .
‘ We’ll turn back, John,’ cried the Dominie, ‘ up the
schoolhouse track. The lassie must have taken shelter
somewhere.’
‘ Mebbe,’ Malcom shouted sulkily, considerably put out
even then at the reminder that his official name was John.
So they turned back. But the snowstorm was so
dense that not a light was to be seen in all the valley.
They might have been walking a deserted world. They
lost the bypath again and struggled amidst entangling
fences neither climbable nor escapable. Then they
floundered across a stretch of ground which squelched
soggily underfoot. By that the boy knew where they
were.
‘ This is Dreaichie’s moss,’ he called out. ‘ Dreaichie’s
cotter-house is at the end of it.’
They stopped and shielded their faces and presently
saw a glimmer through the snowfall. Somehow, stumb¬
ling, recovering, slipping on caked boot-soles, they made
that glimmer and searched for a door which seemed to
be non-existent. Then the Dominie knocked thunder¬
ously, footsteps sounded, and Mrs. Craigan’s sonsy face
projected from the dim passage of her butt and ben.
Od, the Dominie ! Come awa in. Yer lassie’s here.’
In they went, stamping the snow from their feet.
A door opened to the cheerful glow of the kitchen,
discovering a large fire and Domina seated in front of it
m her shift, head down-bent and drying her hair with a
towel. The rest of her intimate garments, arranged on
chairs, steamed cloudily.
My man he s awa looking for sheep noo—found her
near the brig.’
FOURTEEN THOUSAND MILES 55
‘ Hello, uncle, my dear ! Did you think I was
drowned ? Oh—! ’ Sound of hasty rearranging while
Malcom inspected the dresser-sideboard. Then a
laugh :
‘ It’s all right now, Malcom. I’ve got dhem on.’
‘ Ye’re an awfu kimmer,’ said Mrs. Craigan, flushing
a scandalized red. ‘ Ye’ll hae a cup o tea, Dominie ? ’
‘ This is very good of you, Mrs. Craigan.’
‘ Havers. Sit doon. Sit doon, young Seddeh’
Malcom sat down, politely avoiding scrutiny of the
unembarrassed Domina’s detailed toilet. By the time the
search-party had drunk its tea, the refugee was fully clad
again. The snowstorm whoomed outside and now and
then a monster gust shook the unstable kitchen-door.
The Dominie re-belted his shepherd’s plaid.
‘ We must set out again, Mrs. Craigan. It may get
worse later on, and the road is fairly plain with my
lantern.’
‘ A weel, Dominie. But will ye be a’right ? Mebbe
ye’d better tak young Seddel wi ye. My man’ll step ower
to the Chapel an tell them where he’s gane.’
So it was settled. The three wrapped themselves up
and stepped out into the breath-catching storming of the
night. The Dominie, battered by several hours’ search¬
ing, was weak and shaky ; his niece seemed to flutter
like a leaf at each gust that caught them. They kept a
path between hedges and so for a time were sheltered,
but presently, as they began to climb the Leekan brae,
the storm tore at their faces and garments as with the
teeth of mad dogs. The lantern light went out. The
boy and girl had been struggling along on either side
of the Dominie, but now Malcom took the middle
position.
‘ Haud on to me,’ he cried, abandoning his book-
acquired accentuations, ‘ I ken the road.’
And he did, for the hill to the Schoolhouse fronted
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
56
Chapel o’ Seddel across the valley, and often he’d marked
the long, terraced brae which shelved upwards towards
the mile-distant school-buildings : it had been the work
of ancient men, that terrace, perhaps burgeoning green
in corn and barley five thousand years before. They
reached it. The Dominie held to Malcom firmly and
stumbled heavily. Domina was on Malcom’s right. He
put her hand into his pocket for greater warmth, and
heard her shout something unintelligible, probably
thanks which the wind shattered on her lips. Then he
became aware that she was doing what he himself wanted
to do. She was singing—singing Up in the Mornin.
He joined in. They swayed upwards through a lull,
singing and daft and young, dragging the dazed Dominie
with them. Then the wind came racing and snarling
over the Aberdeenshire mountains again, and they rested
in the lee of a drift, and the Dominie’s niece said, ‘ Oh
hell, it wasn’t much use drying my knickers. . . .’
Blushing, Malcom dragged the others to their feet; and
they faced the storm for a last effort.
All that night it snowed. Trains came as far as Dundon
and then stopped. Sheep were smothered on the moors.
By morning the drifts covered the roofs of low-lying
shielings. Then it set in to freeze.
But while the worst of the great snowstorm raged
Malcom lay happit and safe and fast asleep in the guest¬
room of the school-house, wrapped in a voluminous
night-gown of the Dominie’s. The howling of the wind
awoke him once and he listened to the whoom and pause
and blatter, then turned over and went to sleep again,
resolving to eschew both M.A. and B.Sc. and become an
explorer ultimately perishing remotely and romantically
in the dark places of the earth. . . . And long afterwards
news of his end would be brought to the Dominie’s niece,
and she would weep, remembering him.
CHAPTER THREE
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD
Subchapter i
“ TN the momentous summer of 1914 I was sixteen
JL years of age, five feet five inches in height, one
hundred and ten pounds in weight, small-boned, dolicho¬
cephalic, with coarse black electric hair. I greatly enjoyed
brushing my hair because of the sparkling of the ‘ elec¬
tricity.’ I had, I remember, a smooth dark face with
grey-green eyes ; in fact, but that the smoothness is gone,
I probably looked very much as I do at the present
moment. Among hairless, bald-cheeked contemporaries
I found myself under the disgusting necessity of shaving
from my face twice a week the by-products of sexual
maturity.”
His mind had matured as rapidly as his body, and “ at
its by-products my teachers in the Dundon College could
only stutter and take refuge behind the blessed word
‘ precocity.’ ”
He had perhaps a better concept of world-history
(“ real world history, I believed it, though saturated with
the Fraser-Avebury outlook ”) than anyone in Dundon :
they gawked contemptuously at anything outside Europe
and Asia Minor. In the dim kingdoms of eoliths, palse-
oliths, neoliths he could doubtlessly have routed pro¬
fessors, not singly, but in battalions. Unfortunately,
pre-history was not a ‘ subject.’ Dundon concentrated on
dates—exact dates. You might know very well that
Aegospotami preceded the Battle of Mondynes ; you
might even be able to explain what those battles were
about, and to offer reasoned criticisms of both Konon
and Duncan ; but in the Dundon College, if you did not
know the exact dates you were damned. Malcom was
damned.
Dundon, an owlishly patriotic institution—no human
57
58 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
being has such acute resemblances to a boiled owl as the
patriotic Scotsman—dealt largely in Scottish history, and
Scottish history, within historical times, bored Malcom
profoundly He could not conceive a more unattractive
set of kings than the Scots from Bruce to James VI. They
seemed to him heavy, bunchy men, with uneasy minds
and bad digestions ; he discovered from one of the less
orthodox history-books that the much-admired Red Fox
had acquired his sobriquet not through choleric appearance
or handsome sunburn but a congenital tendency to erupt
into pimples. ... He insisted on informing Dundon of
his discovery.
In English classes though he could write a better essay
or short story than the average pupil, he held a low place
because of his inability to dissect Shakspere and kindred
bores into their constituent squeaks, and label each squeak
accurately. De-squeaked, he found them nuisances.
All the business of grammatical parsing and analysis
remained for him an abiding mystery—a singularly unin¬
viting mystery. “ I am still uncertain as to the difference
between a simile and a metaphor. I have written a book
of verse that has given a little pleasure to various odd
people, but the relation of an iambic pentameter to an
anapest—if there is a relation—remains hid from me.
On the other hand, the relation between grammarians
and the decay-bacteria in a corpse have always been per¬
fectly clear. ... In Dundon they tested your apprecia¬
tion of Tennyson’s Ulysses by your ability to explain
whether the dark, broad seas gloomed of themselves or
were gloomed over by the approaching dusk hinted at six
lines previously. As my mind refused to picture Ulysses
himself holding up his embarkation the while he worked
out this matter, I refused to work it out myself.”
In laboratory work, he could produce quite satisfying
smells and discolorations, but “ in language-masters I
seemed to produce almost exactly the same results.”
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 59
In French he had discovered Anatole France in the original
and a host of rules with which the Master’s acquaintance
appeared to be as limited as his own. Indiscreetly, he
preferred M. France to the rules of that writer’s mother-
tongue, and revelled in the bitter wit and tragedy of
Les Dieux ont soz/instead of hunting subjunctives in the
malarial jungle of Le Chat Maigre. Falling in with an
accidental text-book on Spanish, he found a perverse
pleasure in devoting to it hours which should have gone
to French or German. . . .
He could never look back on Dundon but that he saw
it as a temple-stronghold of that gross and colossal
stupidity—the English tradition of education, the cowardly
de-lousing, castrating, and segregating of knowledge into
underground pig-pens, each tended by a discreetly
inoculated overseer. Knowledge (he abandons the pigs)—
“ in Dundon its jewel-lights scintillated from a dozen
untidy heaps piled pell-mell at the ends of a dozen un¬
aerated tunnels. Down those one was supposed to
crawl, uttering mumbo-jumbo incantations, knocking
one’s head against the roof, urged on to sprightliness by
hidden tin-tacks strewn in the darkness. And when at
length you neared a pile, with its guardian-priest dancing
a reverential fandango round it, you saw that the jewels,
far from being rude excavations, were made of the very
finest paste. ...”
Malcom must have made a singularly exasperating
pupil, sceptical, enquiring, un-gaping, un-boylike. He
was twice solemnly reprimanded for ‘ disloyalty ’ in
‘ free subject ’ essays—a tradition of Dundon English
classes. The promoted Orkney fisher-louts and Kin¬
cardineshire ploughmen who made up the teaching
staff detested him.
He had class acquaintances, but no particular friends.
A complete absence of pocket-money prevented him join¬
ing in college sports, even had he wanted to. After the
6o THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
great snowstorm he saw little of either Jean Stanley or
Domina Riddoch : they had found lodgings in Dundon
itself, and Malcom alone made the daily journey up from
Leekan, sometimes returning at night in a train with no
other passenger than his joyously book-reading self. His
place sank steadily in every class; college quarterly reports
caused John Maudslay to goggle uncomprehendingly.
But Malcom, as indifferent to the opinions of his teachers
as he was forgetful of the prowling carnivores of the
examinations, squatted under the Walls of the World,
immersed in dreams of their conquest.
For, led to them through a strange love for the limpid,
childish verse of William Morris, he had discovered the
socialists and their gigantic, amorphous literature. Here
were people who, like himself, had shuddered in sick
horror at sight of the dehumanized and wandering
crucified ; people who also had known the challenge of
the winters’ stars and seen solution of all the earth’s
bitter cruelties in a gigantic expedition against the
World’s Walls . . . though they seemed vaguely in
dispute over plan of campaign. He discovered with them
a splendid, romantic hope which coloured his days and
nights ; he had no vision of his sardonic self fifteen years
in the future.
“ William Morris led me into the jungle and without
apparent qualms abandoned me to a voracious fauna.
They poured from the forest-paths of Dundon Free
Library and the Reverend Ian’s bookshelves. Best of
them I remember Lafargue (‘ The Right to be Lazy ’ was
great stuff), Dan de Leon, Hyndman (a patriarchal Jew
with a mission of economic circumcision), Blatchford
(booming treacly and a little self-conscious over his ser¬
geant’s stripes), Kark Liebknecht (still one of my heroes :
one of the world’s great heroes), Shaw, the incom¬
prehensible Marx, and, haloed in mystic clouds of fantasy
and ferocity, Mr. H. G. Wells. Mr. Wells it was who,
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD
61
scattering feline Shavian and amphibian Blatchfordian,
finally ran me to earth near the drinking pools, sprinkled
me liberally with a scientific Epsoms salts, and devoured
me at a gulp. ... At odd moments I still suffer from the
bleaching effects of my intra-Wellsian immersion.”
Subchapter na
He was just finishing New Worlds for Old when the
War broke out and —event far more portentous—Sammy
Dreep came to Dundon as the Rector of its college.
Subchapter iib
He was long to remember that very bright autumn day
when, in the accepted phrase and like a poison-laden
pustule, War broke out. It was holiday time and he
cycled down to Leekan village and bought a newspaper
and brought back to Chapel o’ Seddel the news that War
had been declared on Germany. On the way home he
met his brother Robert, by then foreman at the neigh¬
bouring farm of Hillside, driving a box-cart. Malcom
dismounted and showed him the news.
‘ Daft B’s,’ said Robert, with no shadow of Thiepval
blackening the bright moor road where his horse had
halted, panting under the heavy load of artificial manure,
its breath rising in a gusty steam. Malcom, in deference
to the Communist Manifesto of 1846, attempted to mask
his excitement with belated socialistic reflections.
‘ Germany is after our markets,’ he said.
‘ What! the Leekan cattle-mart ? ’ demanded Robert,
and chirked to his horse, and drove on. Malcom, grinning,
stared after him down the bright valley.
“ My shame at the warlike thrills the news had brought
me was needless. All over Europe at that very moment the
socialist leaders of my books were ululating hosannas
round the bright artillery tompions of the militarists.
All, except Karl Liebknecht. ... In England a few dis-
62 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
appointed politicians declaimed and continued to declaim
a few nonsensical anti-war platitudes, but the majority of
the Labourists, aitchless and obliging, and ceasing to
stress the pit in capitalist, flung themselves into war-
work and salaried positions with an hysteric abandon.
And the literati ! We’ve forgotten, you and I in the
years between, who manned the publicity sections of the
war departments and poured out that nauseating stream
of propaganda filth—we’ve forgotten, till a stray para¬
graph identifies some clamouring pacifist of the third
decade. . . . Somehow, this shameful memory clouds
across that other, dimming the bright Leekan road and
the face of my brother Robert.”
Subchapter iic,
Mr. Irvine Tring Bell, M.A., arrived at Dundon in
late September to take the place of the enlisting Rector.
Some Glaswegian wit had further christened him
Sammy Dreep—a name which preceded his arrival by
at least a week.
It was a singularly appropriate name. He was a tall,
thin man with a shuffling gait and a constant and apparently
incurable sniff. He had a narrow head and a face sugges¬
tive of a sheep in the possession of an unsatisfactory liver.
Aware of his unfortunate appearance he went on a con¬
stant sniffling crusade against imagined disrespect.
Taking over classes in Senior English, he discovered it in
Malcom’s ‘ free essays.’ Malcom, who had taken no part
in the class-tormenting of the unfortunate Rector,
found himself quite meaninglessly singled out for
Rectorial persecution.
It was the kind of thing his unflustered, unboylike
coolness of demeanour had hitherto kept at bay in all the
class-rooms of the Dundon College. But his lack of clod¬
hopper shuffling and awkwardness merely aggravated
Sammy Dreep the more. Malcom, once roused, joined
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 63
battle quickly enough, exchanging sneer for sneer,
spoiling the Rector’s best rhetorical passages from the
classics with the uplifted brows of sardonic doubt, very
much at advantage in the possession of cool hands and
cheeks and a devilishly assumed innocency. It grew to
be a familiar entertainment in class 3B, this baiting and
counter-baiting. The Rector’s eyes would constantly
turn on Malcom, and his colour mount. The blood would
spread across his thin parchment face like ink spilt on
stained linen.
Now, Maudslay, if you’ll be so kind as to give us
your opinions on ’ whatever was the subject of the
lesson hour. He would neigh out such clumsy sarcasms,
and Malcom, upheld by the devil, would sit and smile at
him. The climax came one afternoon with a reading of
Henry V. Sammy Dreep was expatiating on the oration
Once more into the breach ’ when his eyes encountered
Malcom’s and he stopped.
‘ But our friend Maudslay is bored. No doubt he will
stand up and give us something better.’
Malcom thought for a moment and in that moment was
on his feet.
Certainly, sir.’ His heart was beating high in his chest
but the first ring of his own voice in the silenced room
steadied him.
We mix from many lands.
We march from very far,
In hearts and lips and hands
Our staffs and weapons are,
The light we walk in darkens
Sun and moon and star. ’
It must have made an amusing tableau. He recited
as many of the lovely verses—three of them—as he could
remember, bowed politely, and sat down. The unfor¬
tunate Sammy Dreep sniffled, the mottled glow high in his
lace •
64 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ Ah, Swinburne. The perverts’poet. A revolutionist,
are you, Maudslay ? ’
‘ A socialist, sir.’
* Oh. Well, your friends, who murdered my brother
a week ago ’ (his brother had been an officer in the
Gordon Highlanders) ‘ are coming nearer every day.
Perhaps you would like to study German exclusively
in future ? ’
The only socialist periodical procurable in Dundon
was Justice (afterwards, in the year-books, to urge its
pathetic claim to fame—‘ though Socialist, was pro-Ally
during the War ’) and through its influence Malcom
imagined himself a National Socialist, as patriotic as
anybody. Suddenly he found his carefully-trained
temper boiling through the flood-gates of his control.
All his disgust and contempt for Dundon, its gaping
ignorances and shoddy erudition, exploded shockingly.
‘ You damned sniffling fool, if you don’t know the
difference between a socialist and a pro-German
Sammy Dreep was on his feet, neighing. ‘ Leave the
Room ! ’
Malcom picked up his books, stood up, strode to the
door, whistling, opened the door very carefully and left it
negligently ajar behind him. As he went down the cor¬
ridor he heard the Rector’s voice calling ‘ Maudslay ! ’
but he paid no heed. He walked out of the college gates
and never again entered them.
Subchapter Hi
Thereafter he passed two weeks in a carefully-gar¬
risoned hell. He did not return to college, and Sammy
Dreep’s Rectoria‘1 letter duly arrived. Reading it, John
Maudslay blinked his foolish eyes. ‘ Michty be here !
Sic a disgrace ! ’ Then looked across the dinner table at
Auntie Ellen. ‘ It’ll be the speak o the parish.’
Malcom forestalled her. ‘ It’s a hellavacase,’ he said,
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 65
tilting his chair back and digging his hands deep in his
trousers pockets. She flushed and shrilled at him while
Thomas fumbled uncomfortably at his plate, and Lilian,
spoon-poising, stared open-mouthed. But both regarded
Malcom as an unnecessarily-pampered member of the
family and neither had any great sympathy for him.
‘ They’ll laugh at ye noo, richt enough,’ said Auntie
Ellen, addressing her brother,—‘ a coorse brute that
insultit his teacher and stuck up for the Germans.’
‘ Och, I canna eat,’ said John Maudslay. He pushed
away his plate, foolishly dramatic. Then, addressing
Malcom directly, ‘ Foo did ye do it, laddie ? Could ye
no think o the disgrace to yer fouk ? ’
Malcom was to remember sitting and looking at him
with a contemptuous dislike. He was foolish, broken,
cowardly. His poor eyes had a glassily unintelligent
gleam. Good God, would he never stop whining ?
“ Poor father ! Even while I hated I remember the
twinge of sympathy and compassion I had for him. I
was the Maudslay whom he’d never understood, the boy
who was to do great things, become a schoolmaster or
even a minister. He’d grown to accept my inability to
be agreeable, my inability to listen to him, my inability
to do farm-work as things linked with my ability to achieve
scholastic distinction. And I’d failed and disgraced him.”
John Maudslay had a feeble, patriarchal spurt of anger.
‘ Ye’ll get oot o this as soon as ye can get a fee. D’ye
hear ? I’ll no hae ye bidin at hame, livin aft' yer fouk,
nae use to onybody. Ye can get a fee.’
‘ You can go to hell,’ said Malcom, and rose up and
left the kitchen. Most of that day he spent in the room
which he had come to claim as his own—the same room
from which he’d watched the nineteenth century in con¬
flagration. No one disturbed him, no one called him to
meals. But he hardly noticed, being busied putting into
execution the plans he had elaborated on his last train-
66 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
journey down from Dundon. In the evening he went to
Leekan village and posted the letters he had written.
For twelve days his ostracism continued. Spite his
self-taught Spartanisms the silences of Chapel o’ Seddel
drove him almost frantic. He spent most of the time out
of doors, up amid the Druid stones of the moor, lying flat
on the heather with a primer of Pitman’s shorthand in
front of him. Below, he could see the last of the harvest
being carted home and built in great stacks in the farm¬
yard. His father was an expert builder of stacks : he was
recognized as an expert all over the Valley. In intervals
of memorizing phonograms and watching those stacks
Malcom would turn to his favourite dreaming of the
vanished New Stone men of Leekan, wondering if any
of them had ever sat here above the Valley and longed to
escape from it with such passionate desire as himself. . . .
On Sunday he went to Leekan kirk. The Reverend
Ian had gone to England on a month’s vacation and to
preside over the annual meeting of the Hanno Society,
as Malcom learnt long afterwards. In his place a young
man of bulbous throat and glinting spectacles won Mal¬
com’s appreciation because of the speed at which he spoke.
It was exactly the right speed and the youngest Maudslay
covered the blank pages of two Bibles and a hymn-book
with a shorthand report of the sermon. Coming out of
the kirk—no other Maudslay had attended it—he found
that he had become an object of interest to the Valley.
Greig of Redleafe accosted him.
‘ Ye’ll be lookin for a fee noo, young Maudslay ? ’
Malcom became aware of a circle of Greig’s cronies,
in their Sunday blacks, their red, weather-lined faces
creased to hopeful smirks. Suddenly his coolness deserted
him, he ceased to think of a cutting retort. This peasant
malignancy routed even his English.
‘ Na,’ he said, a little breathlessly, and walked away.
And then, because he was only a laddie, and wouldn’t
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 67
be able to do much even though he did overhear, a voice
remarked ‘ Ill-gettit young B.’
He made for home in a boyish passion of anger which
he knew was boyish and foolish, which caused him to
clench his hands and sob through his teeth. In the gusty
jeering of clowns he had seen his own soul stand naked for
a moment, shivering and lonely and frighteningly young.
Subchapter iv
But on Monday the postman brought him two letters.
One was from Glasgow, one from Edinburgh, both from
editors of daily newspapers. Edinburgh offered him
employment as a cub reporter at a salary of thirty-five
shillings a week. Glasgow outbid this offer by half
a sovereign. He did not give Edinburgh a second thought.
He had written five letters altogether, to various news¬
papers, and had been certain that some would reply.
His youthful optimism was justified. War-time thinning
of staffs had already begun.
“ I remember my letters were extraordinarily well
written : I was respectfully humorous ; I enthused over
a reporter’s calling, yet not gapingly or too amateur¬
ishly ; I set forth my abilities in languages and short¬
hand without too much ostentation ; and I made no
mention of the fact that I was a socialist and had been
accused of pro-German tendencies. Some of the ingred¬
ients may be out of date, but I offer the recipe to any
journalistic aspirant who may care to use it.”
Two days later, with six pounds borrowed from Robert
in his pocket, he left Leekan Valley and did not see it
again till after the passing of ten crowded years, nor ever
again see either his father or Aunt Ellen.
Subchapter v
He landed in Glasgow—that strange, deplorable city
which has neither sweetness nor pride, the vomit of a
68 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
cataleptic commercialism—in the midst of a character¬
istically Glaswegian downpour of rain : rain compounded
of soot and other ingredients in steadily lessening pro¬
portions. After damp searchings to and fro throughout
a moist and uncertain afternoon he at length found
lodgings in Franklin Street, on one of the Glasgow hills.
His room was in a house at the highest point of the arc
and at night he could look across half Glasgow and see
the belch and glare of all Clydeside. The landlady
stressed this advantage, though not unduly, tastes differ¬
ing in such matters. She was a motherly woman, fat
and good-natured, with small and beautiful eyes and a
face pitted with smallpox. She became markedly res¬
pectful when told her lodger was a journalist. Then she
showed him up to his room, climbing in a fat and
contented vanguard waddle the innumerable stairs, and
Malcom admired it diffidently, unaware that within two
years it was to be the scene of his second attempt at
suicide.
It was a large house, that house in Franklin Street,
which bedded and breakfasted Malcom. For many a
day its inhabitants puzzled him at odd and idle moments.
It appeared to be let out in flatlets, but the male tenantry
changed with bewildering rapidity. Fat men, decrepit
men, young men, gaudy men passed and repassed on the
evening stairs. All of them were agreeably jovial,
however, and would wink at Malcom or raise friendly
eyebrows. He had been there nearly a year before he
realized the house was a kind of brothel, and the male
tenants mostly clients. Only himself and one other were
bona fide lodgers, their rooms let for purposes of camou¬
flage. But they were exceedingly cheap rooms, very
clean and neat. Neither that first night when, strayed
‘ Azilian ’ boy that he was, he sat and watched Clyde¬
side’s lights, nor afterwards was his custom solicited by
the torpid young Circes of Franklin Street. He came,
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 69
indeed, to nodding acquaintance with one or two of
them, cigaretted mezzo-blondes whose names he never
learnt.
He was only sixteen years of age, though he looked
eighteen at least. As he undressed in the unfamiliar
room he and his reflection took stock of each other,
solemnly, in the looking-glass. Then he saw his reflec¬
tion smile and after a little smiled himself, in response,
and turned out the light. . . .
Next morning, his stomach full of bawdy-house bacon
and eggs, the new Homburg firmly planted on his head,
he rode down to Sauchiehall Street on one of those Glas¬
gow trams that whoop round corners at speeds that
are hair-raising. The overnight rain had cleared away,
and Glasgow was stirring to life under the light-shot
smoke-screen which is her daylight. Sitting in the
tram, he was aware that his country boots were grotesquely
thick and heavy, and that wing-tip collars had apparently
gone out of fashion. (Later, he was to cultivate that wing-
tip collar as a reportorial idiosyncrasy.)
The offices of the Daily Tribune were in one of the
innumerable lanes debouching from Sauchiehall Street.
They occupied a three-storied building. On the ground-
floor the accountant section laboured under the direction
of Mr. Cleuk, a man with a white moustache and a
singularly self-libellous nose ornamented near the left
nostril with a hirsute Cromwellian wart. The second
floor housed the editor, the sub-editors, and others of a
like kidney. Under the roof was the reporters’ room,
long and bare, with tables dotted here and there, and a
space enclosed in glass walls : the sanctum of the chief
reporter. The photographer, who was also the artist,
occupied a cubby-hole in a passage leading towards the
rear of the building, where the printing machines thudded.
Though its new reporter was unaware of the fact, the
Daily Tribune was on its last legs. Swayingly, it kept
70 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
those legs till the Armistice, and then fell like a second
Mars. It was a Conservative sheet, a kind of ineffective
Scots Morning Post. Northcliffism had hardly touched
it ; it still exhibited pages guiltless of all but the essential
cross-headings ; it had no woman’s page ; its leaders
were long and Latin-strewed ; it printed on an extra¬
ordinarily coarse paper—even for war-time. Though a
supporter of Church and State, it was edited—had been
edited for twenty years—by a crude peasant Highlander,
one John MacFarlane, who was in politics a Gladstonian
Liberal and in religion a member of the Free Church
of Scotland.
Malcom’s portrait of MacFarlane might be a lapse into
all-too-frequent caricature but for its evident sincerity.
“ He was a man with a mind so narrow, said the reporters,
that some day he would fall over it and cut his throat.
He was obsessed by belief in an insane Gaelic-Judaic
God, a Keltic Moloch who had withdrawn his patronage
from the Jews and bestown it on such Scotsmen as the
irreverent dubbed Wee Frees. This God was not only
a jealous God : He was a prying sneak-thief, a Peeping
Tom and a queasy stomach. He could not abide the
use of the word Sunday, this God, and through his
chosen instrument in journalism, and that instrument
John MacFarlane, He held an incongruous Sabbath in
print. Drink and tobacco and the beautiful and intimate
things of women’s bodies were loathed by this God ;
but gatherings of horny-handed and insanitary islesmen
and highlanders who prayed for the damnation of all
that was clean and vivid and joyous in life ‘ bucked him
no end,’ to quote the jargon of the reporters’ room. Men
have never bowed in worship before a grotesquer deity
than dominated MacFarlane ; beside Him, Kinich Ahau
and Itzamna were benevolent gods.”
How MacFarlane managed to reconcile with his faith
much that he was forced to print Malcom never knew ;
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 71
but he did reconcile it. Nor was he any conscious
hypocrite. He believed utterly in himself and his own
righteousness ; he was unflinchingly honest and just ;
excepting his own God he hated all tyrants ; except
the basenesses of his own creed he hated all cruelties and
shams. Behind the steel-rimmed spectacles riding awedly
the bridge of his high, thin nose, he regarded the world
with a vision liker to that of a Hebrew prophet than pro¬
bably anyone else alive in the world.
Behind those spectacles he regarded Malcom’s col¬
lected politeness frowningly at their very first interview.
Then he dictated a passage as a shorthand test, found the
transcription satisfactory, delivered a short lecture on
the high responsibilities of the journalistic calling, and
finally dismissed Malcom with an invitation to tea on the
following Sabbath—if Mr. Rollo, the chief reporter,
could spare him.
The new reporter climbed up the grimy, uncarpeted
stairs to introduce himself to Mr. Rollo, who sat in his
glass case at that early hour with the air of an incompletely-
resurrected museum mummy. He grinned at Malcom,
wearily unmirthful.
‘ B’God, a loikes em yong myself, but how old are
you ? ’
‘ Sixteen.’
The chief reporter thrust a ledger towards him for the
filling-in of his address. ‘ Um. I suppose you’ll want
Sunday afternoon free, like all new arrivals ? ’
‘ God forbid,’ said Malcom, thus winning his way to
the heart of the chief reporter, who reverenced neither
God, MacFarlane, nor the Glasgow Tribune.
Sub chapter vi
So he began life as a reporter and learnt the meaning
of copy and stick and caps and quotes and many things
that are here altogether unquotable. He found his way
72 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
to the machine-room and watched the machines hounding
forth thousands of Tribunes to the outside world ; he
introduced himself to Mr. Cleuk, and heard his funny
story about a woman in a bath-room ; he learnt to avoid
the editor on the stairs, and to hail all policemen in a
jovial manner ; he bought a slouch hat and a fountain-
pen, and had large inner pockets made in his jacket.
“ I was to fall out of journalism as an over-heavy
brick falls through a rotting ceiling. It is a trade to which
I have no intention of returning : I have long ceased to
find interest in garbage. Even in those early days I
remember a passive disbelief that such life could ever
be permanently mine. . . . But it was a lucky chance,
nevertheless, which saved me from drudgery at the age
of sixteen and sent me out with fountain-pen and note¬
book, and probably such multitude of irreverent curiosities
as was never before let loose on the streets of Glasgow.”
The Tribune imposed certain routine duties on each
reporter. Most junior of those was the daily round of the
quays and harbours and shipyards, and to this Malcom
was assigned. For the first two days a reporter who was
joining the Army took him round and introduced him.
Thereafter he was free of miles of offices and warehouses
and garnered acquaintance with nodding anonymity in
the gross. He grew to know the types and makes of
ships, to speculate which boat had newly come from Rio
or New York, which was settling under the derricks
with steel cargo for the Mediterranean. He heard innum¬
erable stories of fights at sea with unauthentic German
raiders. He was passing a quay one morning when a
soldier in khaki and full harness jumped into the water
and tried to drown himself. He drank his first and last
pint of beer in a harbour tavern, discovered an extra¬
ordinarily sensitive stomach, went out of doors to a
sheltered spot, and was quietly sick. He hunted copy
up the gangways of Levantine traders and Belfast cargo-
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 73
boats. New factual hosts in myriads assaulted his
senses. He was out on his adventure against the World’s
Walls.
As always, he inspired either instantaneous affection
or instant dislike. Captain Romley of No. 12 Harbour
Office appears to have liked him, and one would like to
know more of the captain. But Malcom leaves him a
figure hardly tinted and but slightly limned. Romley’s
inner office was a sanctum to which only a few of the
harbour-frequenters were admitted; Malcom, news¬
hunting, was accidentally admitted on his first visit,
stormed at, and bidden to stay. . . .
There, in company with a Norwegian shipping agent,
Herr Jorgensen, blond and grey-garmented, wearing
short brown boots and a short brown beard, a retired
foreman of the shipyards who believed in Schopenhauer
and was minus an arm, superannuated whaler captains
and others of like ilk, he would sit many an hour on
Captain Romley’s desk, swinging his legs and listening
to the stories : mostly lies, and very good, solemn and
satisfying, so that Malcom remembering them in after¬
years would sometimes weep for mirth. . . . There
seems to have been singularly little of the bawdiness
Malcom was afterwards to associate with the squatting-
place laughters of the convivial male. . . .
Meantime, he wrote and wrote. His first efforts were
religiously rejected. He buried himself in the office
files, acquiring the technique of the paragraph, the art
of writing journalese—Glaswegian journalese, pomposity
and impudence carefully blended. He eschewed the
splitting of that infinitive which the English verb does
not possess, producing in consequence those unfortunate,
latinist-blessed sentences amid which the adverbs mouth
and mow like persecuted epileptics. “ My style, I’m
conscious, has never recovered from those Glasgow days.
It remains always a little uncertain, a little florid and
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
74
uneasy. Even throughout this plain record of things
felt, seen, and believed I hear resound an occasional
reportorial sickening thud.”
But he began to find his paragraphs, sadly mangled by
the sub-editors, sprouting in remote columns of the
Tribune. Journalistically, he was launched.
Within a month Leekan and the schoolboy imper¬
tinences of the Dundon college seemed remote indeed
in the memory of the dark young man who would return
to his room in Franklin Street at one or two in the morn¬
ing and yawningly undress while across the dusky miles
of roofs the furnaces flamed and whoomed as Glasgow
hammered out the ships for that desperate necessity
already foreseen.
Subchapter vii
Late one afternoon in November he strolled into
Captain Romley’s office and found the harbour-master
alone. It was a newsless day, and, after the usual ex¬
change of war-time rumours and surmises, Malcom
was about to leave when the Captain asked him to take
a note over to Herr Jorgensen’s place. The new reporter
had not been there before, but the shipping agent might
have publishable scandal or gossip of a neutral tinge.
Malcom took the envelope and walked over the swinging
bridge to the indicated quay through a crispness of air
successfully defying the Glasgow smoke. In the middle
of the bridge he stopped to light a cigarette and look down
the shining lanes of water going eastward into a mirage
of funnel-stacks and haze. He found Herr Jorgensen’s
office on the second floor of a small, prim building,
knocked, went in, and discovered Rita Johnson.
She had been sitting on the office rug, in front of the
fire, regarding the flames pensively (“ I know so well
she must have been regarding them pensively ! ”), and
her face was flushed and her skirts in disorder at the
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 75
abruptness of his entry. She became professionally
attentive.
‘ Yes ? ’
‘ A note for Herr Jorgensen.’
‘ Oh. He’s out; but he may be back any minute. Like
to wait ? ’ She moved a chair towards the fire.
‘ Please,’ he said, though he had no particular reason
for waiting. He sat down and looked at her. She
fiddled with her typewriter, turned towards the fire,
and turned away again. Then their eyes met and they
both laughed. They seemed to share some amazing,
secret jest.
‘ I know who you are, I think. You’re Mr. Maudslay,
the Tribune's new reporter, aren’t you ? ’
He nodded, producing an unnecessary card. She
frowned at it, but pleasedly.
‘ And I haven’t one to give you.’ Then her eyes
sparkled. ‘ But I will in a minute.’ She reached for a
monstrous sheet of cardboard and inserted it in her
typewriter. He sat and stared at her dancing fingers. . . .
He could never describe Rita adequately. She was in
the longish skirts of 1914, but wore a pretty white blouse
which showed her neck and throat down to an intriguing
secrecy : a veiled wonder, indeed, of breasts like Sapphic
apples and a body like a canto from Swinburne. She had
fair brows and blue eyes—such blue as is the sea’s in
Summer, sometimes greyish and smoky, sometimes
deep and dark. Try as he might in after years he could
never remember the colour of her hair. Perhaps it was
some tawny shade. She had a little twist to her mouth,
so that she smiled with a crookedness that surprised and
fascinated. Her finger-nails curved to fine points, like
Chinese finger-nails.
These the faint limnings for likeness of that Rita
whom he was to know to the uttermost secrets of body and
soul. She was a year older than he was. She was English,
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
76
and came from Cheshire—“ Chester, I think.” He never
knew if her father or mother was alive. She shared a
small flat with another girl, Edith Standish. She had a
purity of thought and act and demeanour so real and yet
so intangible, so divorced from life and morals, that
he was to remember her as a child might remember a
fairy—a jest of the atoms, a chance of the tides, miracu¬
lously garbed in mortality. She had a fairy wonder in
things, a fairy coolness and kindliness. Even that
passion she was to burgeon was somehow to seem un¬
human, a lost chord from the pipes of Elfland. . . .
However much else of import he was to forget, always,
and with an amazing clarity, he could recall the firelight
dancing in that room and Rita’s pointed finger-nails
flashing above the typewriter keys. Then she whipped
the card out of the roller and turned to him with mischief
in her eyes. Doing so, her elbow knocked against the
table and the card fluttered to the floor. She got off her
chair and knelt and reached after it : she knelt like a boy,
and the firelight pirouetted a fairy dance on the hair that
was perhaps some tawny colour. He stood up with some
idea of assisting, and she rose into his arms.
She rose up into them, literally, flushed and warm,
and suddenly closed her eyes and sneezed, minutely, like
a child. She did not struggle and he never knew how she
came to be there. The wonder of it was like the sound
of blown bugles. Then he saw her eyes kindle and kindle
with a kind of urgent fear, and in that moment he kissed
her.
Her lips resisted him for a moment, then opened, softly,
terribly, unbelievably, as though it was the Spring he
kissed and was kissed by in return. So, for a moment,
then she had wrenched herself away, breathless, her eyes
shining with laughter. She held out the typed cardboard.
My card, she said, with the little lights flickering like
flame-blown tapers in her eyes. . . .
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD
77
Subchapter viii
He went home to Franklin Street earlier than usual
that night. But Lucretius had lost savour. He dropped
his book and went to his favourite position at the window
and clasped his knees and stared across Glasgow. He
ose and turned out the light. And then, as he tells,
as he stood there dreaming the vague, clean, cloudy lusts
of youth, a sound in the street below caught his attention.
It was a beggar, an old man, singing in a dull, cracked
voice, his face uplifted under the dreary gasjet of a street
lamp. . . .
Malcom stared down at him, shivering, the girl of
Herr Jorgensen’s office forgotten. All his life the people
of the abyss, the cheated of the sunlight, were so to
haunt his happiest moments and dreamings : these, the
eternally crucified, who are not of Demos, who challenge
in mindless hopelessness every scheme of reform or
revolution. . . .
The old man heard a window wrenched up, and stopped
his singing, then bent and groped at his feet as a handful
of a dreamer’s scanty change rained about him in the
dimness.
Subchapter ix
Chance was to abet his revulsion from memory of the
incident in Herr Jorgensen’s office. Next morning,
consulting the ledger on the chief reporter’s desk, he
found himself taken off quay-patrol and put on police-
courts, hospitals, fires. He sat in grimy chambers with
juniors of other Glasgow papers from ten in the morning
till sometimes late in the afternoon', watching case after
case come up, and yawning, and stealing out into draughty
corridors to smoke surreptitious cigarettes. Police-
court procedure and minor crime and punishment palled
on him rapidly, except when sentence of the lash was
78 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
passed on some youthful offender. Then he would sit
with finger-nails dug in his palms and torture in his heart.
Such sentences roused him to a passion of hate and pity :
they so roused him all his life. He would sit and watch
some Glasgow Bailie, some chemist or baker, “ a thing
with a mean little bleached soul stung to a sadistic glow,”
pass sentence on shivering boys who probably, many a
time, suffered the consequences far less in actuality
than the white-faced junior on the reporters’ bench did
in imagination.
Three others occupied the reporters’ bench with
Malcom. One Morris, a billiard-player, a cheerful and
warty young man, had the reputation of a better acquain¬
tance with the street-walkers of Glasgow than any man
alive. Girls on a charge of ‘ soliciting,’ entering the
court-room—some desperate and forlorn, some upheld
by a poor, tawdry defiance—would glance round the
unfriendly place and suddenly brighten at sight of
Morris. Sometimes they would smile at him, sometimes
bow. Malcom was to remember one hailing him, ‘ ’Lo,
boy ! ’ and the shocked faces the Bailie and clerk turned
towards the reporters’ bench. ‘ Blast her,’ said Morris,
and stared at the ceiling.
In the afternoons Malcom went the round of the hos¬
pitals, looking for interesting accidents. Once he came
on a large and satisfying fire, complete with firemen,
brass helmets, miles of hose, and a hysterical crowd watch¬
ing two work-girls being rescued from an upper storey.
The whole procedure of the rescue struck him as
profoundly funny and unnecessary, seeing the girls had
merely to walk across a flat roof to a neighbouring
building in order to attain safety. Morris went back to
his paper and wrote half a column of sob-stuff. To the
Tribune's representative there appeared to be other
possibilities in the happening. He wrote a malicious
account which found a place among the war-news on the
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 79
front page of next morning’s issue, and led to innumer¬
able telephone-calls and protests. MacFarlane, while
reprimanding Malcom and the sub-editors for the
flippancy of the account, chose to approve generally,
and defied the fire brigade authorities.
Once, at eleven o’clock at night, he heard from a
constable coming off duty of a particularly grimy murder
in the Gorbals, which is Glasgow’s Soho and Stepney in
one. He risked hiring a taxi and made it wait for him
outside the odoriferous warren of courts leading to the
house. A police-sergeant admitted him, doubtfully,
and he heard the story and looked at the victim—a
woman lying on a heap of sacking, her throat cut from
ear to ear by a jagged razor—and hurried back to the
Tribune offices and, abruptly and disastrously, was sick
* on the floor of the reporters’ room. . . .
It was his first and last scoop. He passed from
general to specialized work. Fie was climbing. Great
gaps were appearing in the ranks of the Tribune's staff.
Two reporters had joined the Army. Two suddenly
deserted and went elsewhere to fill vacancies at higher
salaries than the Tribune's directors could abide. The
paper catered largely for agricultural interests, and one
of the deserters was the assistant of Grayman, the over¬
worked and irritable agricultural editor. Grayman
demanded Malcom as replacement ; previously he’d
talked the matter over with Malcom, and the latter had
agreed willingly enough.
So, surprisingly, did MacFarlane. With his salary
raised to three pounds a week, Malcom transferred his
professional interests to railway journeys and marts
and fairs and cattle-shows all over Scotland. Once,
at a sale in Aberdeen, he encountered a Leekan acquain¬
tance in the bulky shape of Greig of Redleafe—a
Greig who addressed him as Mr. Maudslay, for he
wanted the Tribune to make mention of his prize Short-
So THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
horn. Once he crossed to Belfast, that lesser and
baser Glasgow. Once—the night of his seventeenth
birthday—he journeyed south to Reading for the great
stock sale of the 27th December. He began to learn more
of prize stock and agricultural method than the average
farmer ever learns. He became accustomed to being
drawn aside confidentially and pressed to accept ten-
shilling notes in return for the much-prized mention.
He grew bored of life in hotels and in handing over long
telegrams in post-offices with the magic word Press.
It was early 1915. But the War touched him hardly
at all—the dark, rather silent agricultural junior who had
still to make a single friend in Glasgow, whose reserves
in smoke-room story-telling, whose blank uninterest in
cards and billiards in frowsy northern hotels possibly
won him no great popularity in his profession. “ Billiards
is a passion of the Fourth Estate.” But Grayman
confessed him a success. “ And I was a success. You see,
I had no reportorial traditions of hedging, tabu, or kow¬
tow. What I wanted to know I asked—a thing so unusual
with a reporter that I was often mistaken for a young
gentleman of leisure with agricultural interests.”
And then he met Rita again.
Subchapter x
It was four o’clock in the afternoon of a day in mid-
January. Snow was falling outside Glasgow Central
Station. Malcom had just returned from a long, cold
journey up to a horse-show in Oban. Fie stamped out
on the pavement and stopped to beat his frozen hands
together, thereby obstructing the passing of a girl.
Then he became aware that the obstructed persisted in
suffering obstruction.
‘ ’Ve you forgotten me ? ’ she said.
Her throat was swathed in a fur, and her left hand, a
small, gloved hand, was at her throat, patting the fur.
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD
81
Her cheeks were pink in the coldness, her nose was
white as only a fairy’s could be in such weather. He
looked at her solemnly.
‘ There are two more tapers in your eyes.’
She laughed, the lashes drooping over the smoky-grey
eyes ingenuously. ‘ It’s the weather. Saves me carrying
a Primus stove, you know.’ She regarded him with lighted
curiosity. ‘ You’ve got a moustache.’
The War had brought about an amazing out-cropping
and in-trimming of moustaches. At the moment the
football moustache prevailed—so-called because there
was supposed to be a maximum of eleven hairs on either
side : usually a generous estimate. This was the growth
which Malcom had achieved. He records that he felt no
shyness at all, only gladness. He put his arm through
Rita’s.
‘ Come and have tea with me.’
‘ Love to.’ She was as simple as himself. ‘ There’s a
nice place near the Picture Galleries.’
They sat in that nice place near a heartsome fire and Rita
poured tea with a solemn ceremony. They talked a little
and looked at each other much, without embarrassment,
in happy appraisal.
“ I have never seen in literature, that poor cracked
mirror of life, reflections of such characters as ourselves.
Are all seventeen-year-old boys and girls of these post¬
war years as our cretinaceous fictionists depict them ?—
Either awkward, insanitary beings, under parental control,
addicted to games and sweets and lumpish calf-loves
entirely sexless, or else moribund perverts immersed in
pleasures Lesbian and Gomorrahn under the able tutelage
of clerical schoolmasters ? Are there no frank young
people who want to talk together and kiss together and
sleep together, and is my ineradicable conviction that
sixteen is the ideal mating age merely an amoral obsession ?
“ I doubt it, though I’ve little means of putting the
82
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
question to test, here in this room above the River,
surrounded by my Maya codices, divorced from all
acquaintance with the very young, unless it be the intru¬
sive Steven. . . . If it be true all my philosophy of change
and envisagement of the European War’s main function
in history goes glimmering. If it be true Rita and I were
spiritual parents of the spiritually stillborn. For we did
not play at being grown-up : we presumed we were
grown up, however falsely we presumed it, and the fact
that after that meeting I looked back on the memory of it
with an obscene shame and disgust does not alter a jot
my conviction of our representative normality. . . .
“ We sat and talked and admired each other and allowed
our tea to get cold and ordered more and talked again.
Perhaps I did most of the talking.”
It must have been a fairly typical Maudslayan talk. . . .
He lighted her cigarette and they went out into the
snow—snow which changed into a rattling downpour of
hail before they gained the pavement. Rita laughed and
caught his hand and together they raced up broad steps
into shelter. Malcom shook the hail-stones from his
Homburg and looked about him. They were in the
Picture Galleries.
‘ Like pictures ? ’
She shook her head, a fairy Philistine. ‘ Not very
much. They’re tiring. I’ve seen them all before.’
He turned round and looked at the hail - storm
through the glass-panelled door. Then reconsidered
the entrance-hall.
‘ Some statues under the light over there. Let’s look
at them.’
They walked over and stood below the pedestals.
Above them towered not portrait statues, but plaster-casts
of nude antiques an Aphrodite, the usual discus-thrower,
a headless Nike Pteros and some others. The Leekan
barbarian had never seen their like ; he drew a deep breath.
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 83
Behind the statues rose a painted wall donated as fitting
background by some Glaswegian sesthete.
Malcom walked round the Aphrodite in frowning
wonder. Then had a sudden thought and looked from
the statue to his companion.
She flushed, sweetly, more tapers kindling in her eyes.
She nodded.
‘ Yes, very like her. So my tailor says.*
Subchapter xi
But from the mind-picture of Rita standing so he shiv¬
ered away next morning, and for many a morning there¬
after, in much the same spirit as he closed his ears to the
genial smut of the reporters’ room. With a sick distaste
he would turn from it, all unaware that the key to his
irrational shame was the memory of a thin-lipped peasant
woman accusing her questioning nine-year-old son of
‘ dirtiness.’ He saw as little of the wondering Rita as he
politely could. . . .
Moreover, and his work apart, other things clamoured
for his attention. After extensive research among the war-
shattered fragments of the British Socialist Party he had
joined a seceding wing, the Left Communist Group of
Glasgow. That was in January. In mid-February, such
the power of his youthful enthusiasm and sincerity, he
found himself elected the Group ‘ co-secretary.’ The
other secretary was the white-bearded Anton Meierkhold,
then a Professor of Russian Literature and now an exile
in Siberia from the Sovyets. The Group was aggres¬
sively anti-war and anti-constitutional, and Malcom,
crusader against both the challenge of the stars and that
savage cruelty which sent old men to beg their bread in
the streets, went to the logical extreme of his knighthood.
He was far from the ‘ National Socialist ’ patriotism of
Dundon.
The Group soon made it plain that as a journalist he
84 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
held a strategic position in the Army of the Revolution,
and it says much for his conviction that the world of real
news is never even skimmed by the press that for over
ten months he betrayed Tribune secrets with set and delib¬
erate intention, helped to engineer the great shipyard
strike of that year, and was politically and objectionably
active without being once suspected by either his own or
any other Glasgow daily. He assisted Meierkhold in the
editing of the Group journal, a libellous and obscene and
exceedingly active and bitter weekly which was twice
suppressed and its plant smashed in police raids. “ A
raiding policeman was my first glimpse of how vigorously
the machine-hating serf still flourishes.”
Caught in one of those raids Malcom, with the incalcul¬
able luck of the fanatic, was suspected of nothing more
than reportorial acumen on behalf of the Tribune. . . .
“ It is all very remote. Like most decent young people
I hated cruelty and pain and poverty, loathed these things
and believed they could be made to pass from the earth.
Socialism could do it, and to help in the task I was pre¬
pared, very logically, to inflict pain and cruelty on myself
and on the whole human race, just as a surgeon inflicts
pain by cauterization. And afterwards, afterwards, on
a decent earth, there was to be a tremendous planning
of a tremendous Something. . . .
“ That was in 1915, you must remember. Socialism
was still a thing for which young men were prepared to
die. I myself had still to meet and hate in his undraped
savagery the contemptible, pitiful Demos, had still to
watch from this Chelsea room the collapse of the entire
socialist philosophy and the monstrous outburst of
putrescent heresies upon its decaying corpse. I’d still
to witness the shameful flunkeyism of a Labour Govern¬
ment in office, its clownish leaders grotesque in court
dress and kowtow at the shrines of a fungoid tradition
and a moribund commercialism the while the Cheated of
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 85
the Sunlight starved in their hovels ; I’d still to hear that
commercialism’s leaders, those microcephalous morons
whose visionless incompetence has made chaos of the
economic world, hymned and hailed by the Wellsians
as the promised Messiahs ; I’d still to learn of the murder
of a Liebknecht by an Ebert or to read of a dreary old
man’s rejoicings over the blood-spattered bludgeons, of
Fascism ; I’d still to realize that that misty Something
which I and Metaxa and Domina call the Adventure is
entirely beyond the imagination of the orthodox socialist,
—that neither the Adventure nor salvage of the Abyss
lies with either the socialists or any orthodox politico-
religiosity.” ii-
The Group chairman was an engineer from the ship¬
yards, an orthodox Marxian who believed that Marxians
should breed like rabbits and encourage the rest of the
proletariat to do the same. Thus, in congestion, over¬
crowding and unemployment conditions would become
so terrible that revolt would be inevitable. Then the
capitalist system would be overthrown and the workers
take control and the capitalists with their whores and
harlots set to working in mines and puddle-pools.
He had a large, damp wife who breeded vigorously and
whom he frequently beat. This was his vision and this
was his life.
The Group treasurer was an evicted schoolmaster, an
enthusiastic and ambitious and robust young conscientious
objector. He had not repudiated his Christianity : he
was a sincere and earnest and muscular young Christian,
impervious to all arguments on behalf of the materialist
conception of history, for he would prove that God had
always been on the side of the working man, that Isaiah
was an early Engels, Christ a practical revolutionist, St.
Paul a more enthusiastic socialist than Proudhon. But
their teachings had been corrupted. . . . His muscu¬
larity and sincerity developing a dignified embonpoint, he
86 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
was afterwards to rat to the Labour Party, the comforts
of an Under-Secretaryship, and a belief in the inevitability
of gradualness.
Meierkhold was a sentimentalist, a gentle soul as much
out of place in the Left Communist Group of Glasgow
as he was later to prove in the blood and iron government
of Stalin. He suffered agonies from the War. Each
recorded battle, each list of casualties made him wince
as from a personal hurt. ‘ Akh God, this carnage ! 5 he
would say, and cover his face with his hands and then in
self-defence grope back into dreams with his beloved
Kropotkin, to picturing a future earth of grain and flowers,
a paradise of the leisured craftsman and the happy
peasant, without sin or blood. . . .
These three were representative socialists. Probably,
indeed, they were the flower of the Group, and to Malcom,
oddly romantic realist that he was, they were presently
to seem as sincere and selfish and utterly silly as
three Neolithic shamans plotting the perpetuity of
desirable Neolithicisms in the Druid’s Circle of Stane
Muir.
Subchapter xii
And then the Spring came.
Late in March Grayson, the agricultural editor, was
seduced from his allegiance to the Tribune and went to
Edinburgh to take over the editorship of a farmers’
weekly. Thereon MacFarlane sent for Malcom, lectured
him dourly, and ended up by offering him Grayson’s
post at a salary of £6 a week. This was a rise of three
pounds and even Malcom was a little staggered, though he
seems to have had no doubt of his ability to carry out the
work. Neither, apparently, had MacFarlane, though the
times and circumstances must have been exceptional
enough when they allowed of a boy of seventeen becoming
agt icultural editor of a daily newspaper. It was arranged
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 87
that local correspondents should largely carry out the
duties he had performed as Grayson’s assistant.
But the Spring came up even to Franklin Street, and
Malcom began to remember Rita again. He had not
seen her for over a month. Once since their meeting at
the Picture Galleries he had taken her to a theatre on
a press ticket, once to a dance where she had introduced
him to her friend, Edith Standish, and then herself
vanished and failed to re-appear, to the relief of his
inhibited next-morning self. But now there were nights
in bed when he turned, sleepless and sleepless because of
that wind which came down from the northern lochs to
Franklin Street and shook the window-curtains, when the
ancient shames of Leekan Valley were no protection,
when the foulest of the reporters’-room stories sang
through his mind like epics and he craved for Rita with an
unclean cruelty of craving altogether inexplicable by any
extension of the materialist conception of history. . ; .
“ From such strange cess-pools, no simple animal desire
rooted in clean earth, I suppose all our loves have flowered
since the ancient primitive promiscuity withered away
before the restraints and tabus of civilization.”
In his first free evening—a Saturday evening—he
called round at the little flat shared by Rita and Edith.
But he was not to see her even then. He found Edith
alone, and packing. ‘ I’m leaving here to-morrow,’ she
said.
‘ Sunday ? What for ? ’
‘ Going into training as a nurse. Rita’s at Chester for
the week-end—somebody ill. Hold that trunk open, like
a dear.’
He held it open, though probably not at all like a dear,
bade Edith good-bye, and came away. It was a very still
Spring evening over-watched by a sickle moon. He came
through a Glasgow park littered with amorous couples, the
men mostly in khaki, the women’s bodies as gigghngly
88
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
garbed as their voices. Near a man-deserted hedge he
stood and listened to the sleepy cheeping of a bird, and
was oddly comforted thereby. But there were still the
long hours of darkness to come.
He could not sleep. He lay and strained to hear in the
night silence—distant, furtive laughter and soft rustlings,
sounds which had never troubled him before the coming
of that Spring. He stuffed his fingers in his ears to keep
them out, hating as he glimpsed him—the slavering beast
which rose and gloated and lusted in the jungle-under¬
growths of his soul.
Why not go out into the corridor and knock at a door
and get one of the house-prostitutes ? asked the beast,
with grinning brows.
And a voice answered him very truly out of the gulf
of the years. ‘ Because I’m not a dirty beast.’
On the Monday and Tuesday he was away in Perth,
but on the Wednesday'returned early in the afternoon,
went to the Tribune, wrote up his copy, had early tea,
and set out for Herr Jorgensen’s office. April rain pelted
him in the streets, and for a while he sheltered in a door¬
way watching the lightning flashing over the moored
shipping in the harbours.
He found Rita locking the office door, and when he
saw her suffered such shock as brought back the knight
and banished the beast into unthinkable thickets. Her
face was pale and weary, though she smiled her crooked
smile at him and put a small, froggy hand in his. She
looked the tiredest person he had seen for weeks, and very
young.
He said so, holding her hand in that curious, unadoles¬
cent friendliness her actual presence always inspired.
Tired ? I came back only yesterday, and . . . some¬
body dead who was good to me.’ She bit her lips and
looked away from him, then smiled again with that sweet
kindness that was as much part of her as her crooked
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 89
mouth, that hatred of troubling others with her vexations.
‘ And Fm old. Oh, I’ll be old as ever to-morrow ! ’
‘ To-morrow ? ’
‘ Fm eighteen to-morrow. Edith and I were going to
hold a party—you were to be invited. But that’s quashed
with her going to London.’
It was his opportunity, albeit it was now the knight
who planned. ‘I’ve a complete free day to-morrow.
Come to a matinee with me. Bernard Shaw’s Pygmalion
is on. We can have tea afterwards at some place and you
can go home to bed early again.’ She came just neatly
a little below him in height. He looked down into the
smoky depths of her eyes and wandered a little. ‘ All
the lights have gone out, all except one.’
‘ I kept you just one. . . . Love to see Shaw and have
tea : Fm shaw I will. . . .’
She stood on the steps above him at parting, and ruffled
his hair, tiredly, with fairy fingers, when he took off his
hat.
‘ ’Morrow afternoon.’ Then yawned with the sleep
which had been denied her. ‘ So’y. So sleepy.’ She
knuckled her eyes and smiled drowsily. ‘ ’Night.’
He awoke next morning into a Spring dawn still and
fervid, with Glasgow smokeless and the sunlight upon her
streets. He dressed and went out. At one o’clock he
came back and put on the new suit of flannels he had
bought. He had also bought new shoes : the first good
shoes he had ever possessed. Then he filled his case with
cigarettes, frowned at his nose in the mirror, called a
taxi and went round to Rita’s flat. She came out at the
sound of the taxi, a Rita he had never seen before, in a
wisp of green dress and brown shoes and stockings and an
odd little hat, shaped like a jockey’s cap, which made
her look like an earnest boy. At the neck of the green
dress was pinned one of the roses he had sent that
morning.
90
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ But all this must cost such a lot. Sure you can
afford it ? ’
‘ Easily.’ He sat in the taxi beside her and told her
of his £6 a week, and then said something else of which
he had thought overnight, and, saying it, realized he was
being ridiculous. For some reason memory of the Aphro¬
dite of the Picture Galleries flashed across his mind. It
was like trying to tempt her from her pedestal with the
offer of a bun. ‘ I could afford to marry now.’
She leant back opposite him, and closed her eyes and
then opened them again to uncover a multitude of hurry-
ing lights below the grey veils. ‘ Oh, Malcom ! Sounds
awfully old—even for eighteen. Dull and old and awful.’
She considered him happily. ‘ Look a dear boy, ex¬
cept ’ She leant forward and patted his tie into
satisfactory shape. ‘ Better.’
It was the first Shaw play he had ever seen. They
sat and looked at it, and Rita, kind thing, gurgled oblig¬
ingly over the Shavian ‘ bloody.’ In a surprisingly short
time they found themselves out in the afternoon air again.
She shook her head over another expensive taxi, and they
walked through radiant streets to Ranald’s Restaurant.
High on the American roof-garden Malcom led Rita to
a table and found her a wicker chair and piled it high with
cushions. She lay back in it and looked at Glasgow and
at him, and was suddenly grave and wistful under the
peak of her jockey hat.
£ I love being fussed over. How did you know ? ’
‘ You’re very fussable,’ he said. Then was startled.
‘ What’s wrong ? ’
There were tears in her eyes. She smiled through
them, adorable, a fairy remembering mortality. ‘ Nothing.
Being silly. Only—Oh ! I wish. . . . What was it
Joshua said when he wanted the sun to stay in the
sky ? ’
He sought back through Leekan days of the Bible ‘ as
THE WALLS OF THE WORLD 91
literature ’ and found it. ‘ “ Sun, stand thou still upon
Gibeon ; and thou, Moon, in the Valley of Ajalon” ’
‘ You have a beautiful voice. Did you know ? Oh,
look ! There’s the sunset already.’
They sat at tea and watched the sun set over Clydeside,
with Rita’s curve of cheek and peak of hat a silhouette
growing duskier and duskier to the eyes of Malcom against
that remotely threatening sky. They sat there with glow¬
ing cigarette-tips when the darkness had come down and
the lights of Glasgow were all around them. Then
Malcom surprised Rita in a dim yawn, and took her
away.
Outside her hall door she stopped a moment and was
silent and shadowy. Then slipped her hand in his.
‘ Come up and I’ll make you some coffee.’
In the darkness of the second landing he stood and
fumbled with her key, and she laughed a little, and her
hand came over his, and the door opened. They were
in the little flat. The door closed softly behind them.
He searched for the electric switch, and, searching,
met her fingers again. She did not move.
‘ Rita,’ he whispered ; and then ‘ Rita.’
He found his fingers taken from the switch. Suddenly
she laughed, clearly, joyously, making ridiculous that
whisper of his.
‘ Oh Malcom dear ! ... so much? ’
He held her for a moment in his arms, kissing her.
He found himself alone.
Subchapter xiii
And so, in a little while, she came to him.
Subchaper xiv
Sometime, very early in the morning, he awoke.
Beside him slept the stranger who was his. One shoulder
was bared, but as he adjusted the quilt he found it warm
92 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
and dimpled. He pulled back the quilt again and kissed
her there, and lay listening for a little to her even breathing.
Then he became aware that the room was flooded with
a silver glow. He reached out his hand to the window and
drew aside the curtain.
Over the Valley of Ajalon stood the Moon
CHAPTER FOUR
THE MOON IN AJALON
Subchapter i
THEY would sit and look at each other in a shameless,
delighted possessiveness. It was to Malcom as
though he had never known hunger or thirst before, or
(he—the student of physiology !) the sensitiveness of his
finger-tips, the miracle of blood, the texture of human
skin. There was neither shrinking nor cruelty in all
the play and interplay of desire between those two young
lovers. Physically, they were as perfectly matched as,
mentally, they were utterly dissimilar.
For even at the quivering edge of keen delight they were
both conscious how alien each to the other was. Malcom,
like all true sagamen, had fallen in love with a fairy.
Their minds were of different texture, their interests so
wide apart that they were not even incompatible. They
remained strangers—kindly strangers, courteous strangers,
strangers adoring each other with utter passion. And they
never developed the least intimacy. . . .
He would come upon her, pensive and pyjamaed,
squatting on the rug in front of the bedroom fire, hands
clasped behind her head. He would kneel beside her and
kiss that dimpled place on her shoulder. She’d smile,
still pensively, and lean against him.
‘ Thinking of ? ’ She’d turn her darkened eyes upon
him, and he’d see himself, unthinkably remote, in their
depths. ‘ Oh. Just things.’
They were things outside his sympathy or comprehen¬
sion. As irreligious as himself in the sense that she never
bothered about the sex-codes of ancient Levantines,
deified or sanctified—or perhaps thought of them only
as remote snarlings of impotent age—she had yet a pas¬
sionate love of ‘ Church things ’ : organ-music, incense,
the triumphal chanting of the risen sacrifice, all the
93
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
94
sensuous beauty created by eunuchization of the ancient
cannibal rituals. “The Hound of Heaven was probably
her favourite poem ; she liked my abhorred John Donne,
loved the mistier Keats. She had read a little, but deeply,
and along bypaths of literature which seemed to me to
end in meaningless swamps of verbiage. . . . And all
this—her music, her reading, her intellectual appraise¬
ments and envisagements of Life—she stood a little apart
from, sweet and kindly, as though her fingers merely
played with those things the while she listened for the
far, keening horns of another universe sweep by along
the Walls of the World. ...”
So he would attempt, long afterwards, a stumbling
poet, to net in words the memory of her elusive quality.
She evoked in him a passion that was not all passion :
sometimes it was an aching humility to try and under¬
stand those gossamer delights of her mind, a tenderness
numb and numbing because it was oddly foreboding.
He was young enough and deeply enough in love to
believe in the possibility of ultimate, perfect understand¬
ing. And in response he would find her, faery-puzzling,
attempting to comprehend those boring and irrelevant
things to which he evidently attached so much importance
—politics, history, socialism.
Sometimes, remote behind those smoky veils in her
eyes, he would catch a look of puzzlement or swiftly-
suppressed resolve : she was shutting the door on things
bubbling over with interest, but incomprehensible to him.
But those were only occasional ghostly suspicions and
depressions. They were happy in a golden happiness,
wistful, solemn, absurd. Unconscious the achievement^
she created for IVfalcom wonder in a thousand common¬
place things having no direct connection with the fact
that she slept in his arms : A book left open by her was an
amazing discovery ; her clothes, piled on a chair—they
gave you a little shock when you touched them—it was
THE MOON IN AJALON 95
astounding to know that they had been intimately worn
by her ; the place where she had sat in a chair—it was a
nest he could not bear to sit in himself, when he noticed
it; a piece of morning toast with a neat semicircle bitten
in it, abandoned on a plate (she would discover the clock
and office-time with an ever-recurring dismay, and swallow
hasty coffee, and kiss him, and fly, door-banging, long-
striding like a boy, in pursuit of an early bus)—he could
never prevail on himself to dispose of such scraps. She
found this out and teased him, but there were scores of
such absurd obsessions undiscovered by her, unknown
to himself till his conscious mind would give a sudden
jolt of surprise at his own conduct. . . .
They played the oddest pranks in that Summer
Glasgow. Rita taught him dancing, and, long hours
after midnight in some hall or restaurant, they would
come out into a darkness softer than velvet and make a
mutual discovery : Too early to go home. So they would
tramp the streets to Clydebank, into the red-smeared
glow of the great shipyards, and peer into roaring furnaces
and the blue whirr of pounding machinery ; or wander
the quays and count the ship-lights in the harbours ;
or gain admittance to Herr Jorgensen’s deserted office and
brew and drink amazingly bad tea for no particular reason
but the fun of it; once, down at those same quays, they
were challenged by a sentry who displayed towards Rita
a hoarse familiarity until Malcom threatened to punch
his head, whereat he retired behind Cockney luridity
and a bayonet ; once they heard screams and came upon
a man lying in a stream of blood which gushed from his
neck ; they fled.
One Saturday afternoon they went out in the pelting
rain, mounted to the top of a bus, and rode far to the
confines of Glasgow, drenched and exultant in the tidal
breaking of the rain upon their faces. The driver
ultimately turned his bus round and brought them back,
96 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
two solitary passengers who refused to ride inside and
whom he probably considered either lunatics or spies :
Glasgow was spy-crazed at the moment.
And once, returning from a picnic in a remote village,
they missed the last train and bus and tram, and tramped
and tramped for hours, and sat on occasional doorsteps,
comforting each other. It was the period of the month
when Rita suffered for her incarnation as a mortal woman ;
in the last stages that walk must have been sheer agony
to her. But she kept up a pretence of gaiety, which was
more than Malcom did. His blisters had reduced him
to a sulphurous silence. And then, still two miles or
more from home, they came to a fortunate coffee-stall,
and a stall-keeper who gave them both coffee and Rita
a chair and mild remonstrances. Long years afterwards
her lover would still see her, sitting in that chair, her
small face very pale in the glare of the stall naphtha burner,
her small body twisting uneasily. The last few hundred
yards were an incredible adventure. Malcom sank into
an armchair and sprawled exhausted ; and recovered
to find Rita attempting to unlace his shoes. It roused
him to the only anger he ever felt against her.
‘ Don’t be a fool,’ he said, and pushed her away,
roughly. She sank back, not looking at him, with her
small face averted, and he was overwhelmingly conscious
of a cad sitting in his chair. He knelt on the floor
beside her, shoeless and ridiculous.
‘ Oh, Rita. I’m sorry. Let me ’ He began to
fumble with the straps of her shoes, raised his head,
caught her look, and suddenly they forgot their tiredness,
swamped under in wave on wave of hysteric laughter.
They laughed and laughed, clinging to each other.
Rita gurgled over hastily-grabbed morning shoes for
days afterwards ; Malcom, seated and bored behind the
judges at some distant agricultural show, would find
himself grinning at his shoes, fatuously.
THE MOON IN AJALON 97
Queerly, she—who was nothing of a social rebel, had
no new theories of conduct—shrank from the thought
of marrying her lover. Malcom had proposed it once,
certain of wringing an astounded, affronted consent
from his nominal guardian in Chapel o’ Seddel. Rita,
in her vest, slim as a boy, stretching finger-tips to
ceiling and to toes in evening exercise, stopped and flung
back her hair from her face, standing half-poised, like a
threatened bird.
‘ But why ? ’ All the tapers had gone out.
He considered. There was a score of arguments.
And he did not believe in one of them. He shook his
head.
‘ You’re the immoralest of fairies. ... I don’t know.’
She touched her pink toes, limberly, and flashed
upwards again, all the tapers re-lit.
‘ Neither do I.’
Subchapter ii
Malcom had no intimate friends in Glasgow. His
colleagues of the Left Communist Group were the
merest acquaintances, as were the people of the Tribune.
Since the departure of Edith Standish, Rita was equally
happily placed. Nevertheless, he induced her to rent
a new flat—an unfurnished ground-floor flat in a building
which he could enter and leave without observation
from any other tenant.
They furnished this flat sketchily and hilariously;
Malcom had a bearded Morris on the mantel-shelf and
a bookcase filled with books on archaeology and history—
not one on agricultural journalism. Rita enjoyed herself
in the purchase and plastering of outrageous wall-papers.
They bought wicker chairs and black cushions and spent
nearly a whole week-end on their knees, polishing the
floors of the bedroom and living-room, for they could
not afford carpets. The floors of the miniature bathroom
G
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
98
and kitchen they covered with an unsatisfactory linoleum
which gave off a permanent, turpiney stench. The
coal-cellar was under the stairs leading to the first-floor
flat, a trap of a place falling away into the crumbling
foundations of the house. The coal emptied into it, unless
this was done with care, would jettison away under the
floorwork of the flat, and be unprocurable except through
sketchy jabbings with a long-handled broom.
‘ This damn place is dangerous,’ Malcom would
fume, a soiled troglodyte in the depths with a coal-bucket.
‘ If one fell down here in the dark it would mean
suffocation on top of a broken leg.’
Rita, candle-poising, would peer down, like a fairy
inspecting hell. ‘ If one fell down there one would be
daft.’ Then gurgle. ‘ You do want a bath, darling.’
They shared the expenses of the flat in strict ratio
to their salaries. Rita still stayed on at Herr Jorgensen’s
and altered her every-day life hardly at all. Malcom
kept on his room in Franklin Street. He went there
infrequently, to collect Chapel o’ Seddel letters ; some¬
times he slept there when he returned after midnight
from journeyings outside Glasgow : the bawdy-house
understood he spent most of his life outside Glasgow.
Once or twice political refugees of the Group or kindred
associations ‘ on the run ’ used his room ; he loaned
it for one night to a gloomy and austere Sinn Feiner, who,
to judge by the evidences left behind, had none of
Malcom’s fastidiousness in the matter of bed-women.
The Group’s co-secretary was developing fastidious¬
ness in other matters. He attended fewer and fewer of
the Executive meetings, excusing himself on the plea of
business. To Meierkhold only did he confess himself.
‘ No, of course, it’s not business, Professor. It’s
just—oh, I don’t know.’
‘ It is just,’ said the old Russian, ‘ that you are not
a socialist.’ He shook his head and leant back tiredly
THE MOON IN AJALON 99
in his chair. ‘ And perhaps there is no more socialism
left. We have followed something wrongly, and our
dream is smirched, though I am too old to change now.
. . . Perhaps this trickery, this strike-making 5
Malcom had a pang of wonder if this new political
self of his was merely a result of Rita. ‘ No, it’s not that.
All things are allowable, any means is—if the socialism
we aim for is what I used to believe it. . . . But is it ?
Once, years ago, when I was a boy ’
His white-bearded co-secretary nodded. ‘ Yes, when
you were a boy ? ’
‘ I was about five. I went up over our moor at home
one day, and saw the horizon. I thought it the Wall of
the World : I thought if I could get near enough I’d
be able to break through to something tremendously
exciting behind. I chased it all that afternoon with a
stone. . . . Later, I read Ball and the astronomers and
made a tremendous discovery : that thing beyond the
horizon was the Galaxy, the universe we focus, and we’d
go out and conquer it yet.’ He fumbled for words.
There was something else, some abyssal, haunting, for¬
gotten thing on which he had built his vision. He found
his ideas tongueless fceti. ‘ Socialism—I thought it
was a planning for that, somehow.’
‘ Akh God, it is the Satanists, not the socialists, to
whom you belong. And even among them ’ The
Professor looked at him wonderingly, kindly. ‘ Per ardua
ad astra. Young men shall see visions. . . . This sky-
storming : it is poetry, dream of a struggle more remote
from human purpose than any dream.’
‘ It is a dream worth following.’
Meierkhold nodded. ‘ As you will follow it—if you
remember—alone. . . . And there are beasts that wait
for lonely men.’
100
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Subchapter Hi
The summer of 1915 passed over Glasgow in
days of glassy heat. War news ebbed and flowed in
waves of pessimism and hysteric hope. Recruiting
slumped. The patriotic Glaswegian female took to
parading the streets and decorating with white feathers
the unpatriotic, ununiformed male. Malcom evaded
their attentions with a cool agility, and Rita-wards
hurrying from a sale in Perth, was distant witness of
the famous incident which so shattered the morale of
the campaign : the leader of a bevy of summer-frocked
feather-bearers suddenly snatched off her feet by a
disgusted Highlander, her scantily draped person bared
for chastisement, and loud, public and careful smacking
administered by a trench-grimed hand, to the delight of
a traffic-blocked Sauchiehall Street. . . .
That night Malcom took Rita to one of the infrequent
Left Group dances, where she was a puzzled favourite
and danced with partners who discoursed industrial
unionism and passive resistance to one who had slightly
less interest in revolutionary ethic than a cat has in the
differential calculus. ‘ Queer people,’ said Rita, meeting
Malcom, ‘ all except Professor Meier-something.’ The
Professor had discoursed on Orthodox Church music
with a refreshing intelligibility.
But towards the end of that dance she fainted and had
to be taken home in a taxi, a Rita whispering apologies
and leaning against him, the tiredest of fairies. He
undressed her and put her to bed and marvelled at a
sudden shyness, almost terror, peeping from the smoky-
grey eyes. It was gone in a moment, but he thought it
fear of himself. A little chilled, he told her he would sleep
in the living-room. He put out the light and kissed her
good night and went through to the sofa with a blanket.
But he could not sleep. He had never felt more
THE MOON IN AJALON ioi
wakeful. He prowled the darkness for a little, softly,
found matches, and sat in a chair at the window, smoking.
And then, suddenly, as from the bottom of a well, he saw
the stars again.
He had not seen them for months. He had been too
busy living—living with Rita. He dropped his cigarette,
staring at those old friends, old enemies of Leekan days.
The august, inhospitable Night,
Glittering, magnificently unperturbed. . . .
Right athwart his vision hung the Great Bear, fanged,
the undying beast which guards the skies. He kindled
to that ancient challenge. By God, however had he
forgot them ?
He dropped his head in his hands, shutting out the
starlight. He listened for a sound from the bedroom.
Nothing. He sat and thought.
Study ? Nothing for months. Socialism ? Lost
somehow : nothing to do with the Great Bear and his
challenge. . . . He found himself unable to think clearly
and with any coherence. He fought his own mind with
a kind of desperation—a mind erupting innumerable
irrelevances, spraying into reminiscence of ecstasy and
delight, uncontrollable, flabby. Christ ! As though his
head was full of yeast !
And all this was because of Rita.
Not only his mind, but his body clamoured against him.
He fought them off—he, the essential Malcom Maudslay,
smothered for months. Of course it was true. But what
was it he had lost, who was this essential Malcom
Maudslay ? ... He groped down lightless corridors of
thought. Nothing to help him there, no reason, no clue.
Then he raised his head from his hands and saw his
hands bathed in starlight. He looked at the sky and
drew a deep breath, and knezv with a mystic certainty.
There was the clue. . . .
102
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He must break with Rita.
There was a long, dazed silence in his mind after he
had told himself this. He heard the clock on the mantel¬
shelf ticking loudly. Morning was coming, wheeling up
through the ensaffroned east. He felt a horrible lone¬
liness. Then he saw that the stars were paling. The
Great Bear faded from a violent challenge that made his
blood leap into a dream and a whimsy. . . . What had
he been drowsing about ? Break with Rita ?
He heard her breathing then, in that pallor of the
morning. His resolvings, meaningless, faded and went
out with the Pole Star. He moved his numb feet, rubbed
them to warmth. . . . Rita ? God, what had he been
dreaming about ?
He began to think of her in a passion of contrition,
—her sweetness, her kindliness, her faery gaiety. Close
at hand, all of it. Real as that amazing dimple in her
shoulder, where there was always a little shadow
lurking. . . .
What a fool he had been—those damned stars ! He
crouched rigid in the dawnlight while a hundred singers
in his heart, a poet in every cell of his body, began to
tell him of all the gifts that Rita had given him—the
simple, splendid things : all the delights of touch and
consummation and physical exaltation, all the gracious
loveliness of lust. Passion and purity, chryselephantine,
splendid, unwritten and unportrayed, she had given
him. . . .
It lightened. Day. But he still sat dreaming. By
God ! Some day he would write a novel, the world’s
first real love-story. ‘ I thee with my body worship.’
. . . What a book, what a book one could make of it, with
the essence of every love-story—the sex act—stripped
of shame and reticence ! With neither the wordy pawings
of the pornographer, the scared brutalities of the realist,
the romantic’s firelight and curtains 
THE MOON IN AJALON
103
Subchapter Interpolation
I am transcribing that novel of Malcom’s now, and,
looking back over its pages, I see that I am neither the
realist nor the romantic—both so despised. I am the
pornographer. I have called in moonlight and bare
shoulders. I have not described the naked Rita, un¬
expected and unbelievable, in his arms that first time.
... I recourse to chapter-endings and hesitation dots.
For I at least, however little Malcom, am a child of my
age—as much so, perhaps, as the snuffling elderly smut-
hounds of the literary press, and all prudent considerations
apart. To us of the early half of the twentieth century
the detailed sex-act is still impossible in all literature
but the pseudo-scientific. We are, all of us, still too
young and nasty-minded. The sniggerings cf the
Victorian mental water-closets are still unescapable.
Behind shields of phrase and phantasy, ludicrous and
pitiful as Nahuatl virgins dreading fertilization, we hide
our faces from the sun.
Subchapter iv
He attended a meeting of the Group Executive one
Saturday afternoon in late October, fell out with the
chairman, and was accused of ‘ reformism.’ The ship¬
wright thumped the table in a manner oddly reminiscent
of Sammy Dreep, and Malcom, enragingly, sat and
smiled at him. But he felt almost sick, and with a
desperate desire to get out into the fresh air. God, it
was for this—this social spite and meaningless chatter
of strikes and tactics which still left men hungry and
misery an unapproached reality—for this he had thought
any weapon justifiable, any means honourable. . . .
He found his thoughts, in a manner all too common,
jerking away from the situation, refusing to face it.
Outside, Meierkhold drew him aside and protested
I04 THE THIRTEENTH disciple
against him paying the fares of two delegates to a London
conference—one of the innumerable abortive pifistac
conferences. ( Akh God, you are a young man and it
is much money. We take all your money.’
4 I have plenty left, Professor.’
The old Russian smiled his tired smile. ‘ A capitalist,
akh God ! ’ Then peered into Malcom’s face and muttered
to himself. ‘ It is well. It is well. I am a fool.’
Malcom left him and took a bus to Rita’s flat. It was
windy weather. The sky flickered like a film with scudding
clouds. He had not seen Rita for three days, and found
her, wrapped in her overcoat, in front of a glowing fire.
4 Thought you’d come to-day.’ Her arms round his
neck, she yet turned aside her face from his. ‘ Don’t kiss
me, please. I’ve a cold and my lips are all cracked—’
she laughed and pushed him away—‘ like my head.’
4 Eh ? ’
She stood up and hugged him, then laughed again.
Against him he felt her quiver like a violin-string. ‘ Oh,
nothing. I’m all on edge to-day. Let’s go for a walk
out into the country, where there’s grass and trees.
Coming ? ’ She leant back in his arms, face upturned,
while he went through the usual ritual of counting the
tapers in her eyes.
4 There’s one more than usual,’ he discovered. Then,
after a surprised interlude, held her away and teased her,
a little breathless himself. 4 I thought your lips were
too cracked for kissing ? ’
They rode out to the country by tram and bus, beyond
the confines of Glasgow, and walked through fields with
fading grass and shivering hedges. Brown leaves scuttered
through the air, limped from tussock to tussock. Under¬
foot they squelched in heaps. Behind the flying clouds
was an angry lowe of sky, and the wind whistled through
the tree-boughs. Malcom was conscious of a numbing
astonishment.
THE MOON IN AJALON 105
‘ I never noticed Summer was past, he said.
Rita laughed. She caught his hands. She began to
sing, holding his hands, looking into his eyes, her face
wrung in an absurd caricature of emotion.
‘ The swallows are making them ready to fly,
Wheeling out on a windy sky :
Good-bye, summer, good-bye,
Good-bye ’
He laughed with her at the lugubrious Tosti. The
gale coming down the Clyde boomed gustily. And then
he saw a horrible thing. Rita was weeping. No pretence.
She had dropped his hands. Weeping and still singing.
He stared dumbfounded, not knowing this play, and at his
look the desperation in her eyes changed to mere misery.
‘ Oh, Malcom ! Summer’s past. Remember that
night and the moon in Ajalon ? Remember ? . .^ . All
the swallows gone, and I’m going to have a baby.
He said nothing. He could not say anything. An
icy finger reached through his skull, wrenched something
loose in his brain, and withdrew. He fumbled for his
cigarette-case. He could not find his pocket.
‘ I’m going to have a baby, Malcom. .
He nodded. It was too much for his finicky stomach.
He felt sick.
Subchapter v
She was going to have a baby. She had known it
since that night in August when she had fainted at the
Group dance. It would soon begin to show.
They were back in the flat again, the world locked
out with the autumn wind. His arms were round her.
She knelt at his feet in the firelight. Sometimes she
was seized with a fit of shivering and his arms would
tighten, and she would raise a terror-quivering face
and laugh at herself. . . .
io6 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ And you’re glad—really glad ? Then I’ll be. Oh,
Malcom, if I weren’t such a coward ! ’
He had never seen such courage. ‘ God, you’re
the best and bravest thing ever,’ he said, indistinctly,
and at that her hands came up to touch his face.
‘ Why, Malcom, dear, you’ve been ’ She raised
herself, slim as a boy still, and bent over him, and
spoke without any quaver now, but solemnly, with an
accent of relieved discovery. ‘ Do you know, my lips
are much better now ? . . .’
He heard the Glasgow clock-towers strike twelve,
strike one, strike two, strike three as he lay in the darkness.
His left arm was under Rita’s neck. It had grown
cramped, but he did not move it in case she also should
wake. She was close against him, lying straight from
shoulder to ankle, as her custom was. He could feel
her breast-nipples against his chest, making soft indenta¬
tions. Once she moved and seemed to choke : she sobbed
for a moment in her sleep. Her hand came out and found
his thigh. She grew quiet again.
. Three o’clock. His brain was an arena of sand. Round
it kept limping, wearily, a dusty pedestrian of a thought :
But however did it happen ? ’
They had talked together and puzzled over this before
going to bed. The useless question plagued him,
pretending an importance it did not possess. It had
happened. That was enough.
The question limped up. ‘ But how ? ’
From the first—excepting that first night of all—
Rita had used the crude contraceptives of her time :
inventions of that strange idiot genius, Science, who
has so little leisure for these things, being in a slavering
haste to dispose of surplus populations with better and
better eleven-inch guns. She had used these clumsy
tumblements in the utmost faith, and Malcom had gone
in light-hearted certainty of her safety. Not until long
THE MOON IN AJALON 107
afterwards was he to realize how pathetic and misplaced
was their confidence. In that night when he lay listening
to the clanging Glasgow hours, his mind kept denying
the possibility of the happening, over and over again.
And then he records a very vile thought which came to
him while he lay by the sleeping Rita. Perhaps he was
not the father of her baby at all. ...
The base thing whispered, mowed, and then tied
at his fury. Oh Christ, you swine. For a moment he
seethed with loathing for himself, and, though he did
not move, Rita’s arm came up and went round his neck.
Still sleeping, she kissed him. At that unconscious
absolution he bit his lips till blood, warm and saline,
trickled in between his teeth. He drew Rita closer, closed
his eyes in determination to sleep, and instantly began
to think again.
‘ Now we’ll get married.’
They would get married—nail their lives to the same
board because of this intruder in Rita s body. They,
who otherwise would never have married. They had not
a thought in common. They were lovers, and lovers
only : that had grown an unacknowledged certainty
with them. He looked down a horrifying vista of
prison-walled years, saw, with sudden clearness, how
in the ordinary course of events they would ultimately
have parted. ... A little bitter regret, tears, and many
good memories. Kindly strangers always. . . . That
night of stars—it had been the beginning of the end of
their time as lovers but for the fact that it had also been
the beginning of Rita’s secret, terrifying knowledge.
Rita a mother. . . .
Thousands of Ritas there must be. He had never
realized it before. Women for whom motherhood was
the equivalent of human sacrifice, marriage a bestial trap ;
women spiritually and physically tortured by rack and
hoist in the name of an insane convention. . . .
io8 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He wrenched back his reluctant attention to a
horrifying picture : Rita grown thin and drab and careful,
awaiting his uncertain returns, Rita with an undesired
and unimaginable baby, Rita with all her romantic
mysticism foregone in order that she might . . . wear
a ring and act the part of a licensed bed-woman 
God ! What a long time it was till morning.
Subchapter vi
They decided they would be married in the first week
of December. Meantime the great Reading Stock Sale,
earlier that year, drew near, and on the 15th of November,
Malcom set out by night-train for England. He went in
a sleet-storm and returned in a fall of snow, seven days
later. Outside the Central Station where, eleven months
before, he had met Rita for the second time, he ran
against Mr. Rollo, the Tribune's chief reporter, muffled,
hairless, sardonic.
‘ B’God, our Agricultural Correspondent, straight
from the byres.’ He grinned at Malcom incuriously
and glanced at the station clock. ‘ Had a good time
among the pigs ? ’Scuse me : got to scoot. Taking the
missus to a show. Boy home from France. Oh ’
‘Eh? ’
‘ MacFarlane wants to see you soon’s you’re back.
Better write up your copy first, though. Jehovah can
wait : the Tribune can’t. ’Night.’
He ran. Malcom took a taxi to the office, climbed to
the reporters’ room, and found it deserted, as was usual at
that time in the evening. He sat down at his desk,
brought out his notes, and wrote from six o’clock until
nearly seven. He was just finishing as MacFarlane, tall
and bowed and heavy-footed, came in.
Mr. Maudslay ? I gave instructions you were to
come to me as soon as you came back.’
‘ Thought I’d do my copy first.’
THE MOON IN AJALON 109
‘ Have you finished it ? ’
‘ Yes.’
‘ Take it to the sub-editors, then come direct to my
room.’
When he had gone Malcom poked the fire carefully,
picked up his copy, lighted a cigarette, and went down
the stairs. In the glass panel of the sub-editors’ door
he saw his face, composed and cool. He glanced at his
wrists and found them perfectly steady. He was glad
of that. He was conscious of nothing more than a certain
headachy alertness.
Then he went in to MacFarlane.
The Tribune's editor sat at his desk. Impaled on a
wire file in front of him was a sheaf of papers. He peered
at Malcom over his steel-rimmed glasses. Sitting so, his
shoulders hunched in his black coat, he looked like a
condor.
‘ Sit down.’
Malcom sat down. With a little tightening about his
heart he had recognized the papers.
MacFarlane coughed. Malcom waited, politely, alertly,
a little sick.
He knew what was about to happen. He had been
very simple indeed, when he started on his career as a
Communist bandit, not to foresee the possibility of a
counter-check. . . .
Subchapter viz.
He must have missed a preamble of several minutes’
duration. He had been thinking of Rita.
‘. . . from checking your expenses’ accounts, I find
you have forged bills for more than j£6o. You have not
even forged them. You have been a small and contempt¬
ible thief, altering original figures with an ink-eraser and
substituting others. Your father in Aberdeenshire has
a reputation for honesty, but . . . laddie, you’ve disgraced
no
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
the woman who bore you. If you ever have children
of your own, if you ever learn honesty and speak to
them honestly, Tm sorry for you. It’ll be fine for you
to say “ Your father was once a contemptible thief
who betrayed his trust and stole money from his
employers ” ’
The editor stopped and glanced across the table.
Probably Malcom’s face was very white. MacFarlane
had a twinge of pity.
‘ You may smoke if you like.’
Malcom was never to forget the kindliness of that.
He nodded. ‘ Thank you.’ He lit a cigarette, and then,
the gaze through the steel-rimmed glasses still upon him,
raised his head.
MacFarlane was leaning towards him almost appeal¬
ingly.
‘ What did ye do it for ? Laddie, you’re the best of
my staff, you’ve no look of a thief, you’ve ruined a
brilliant career. What did ye want with this sixty
pounds ? ’
(Sixty pounds ? Had it come to all that ? Delegates’
fares, printers’ bills for the Left Group weekly, bail for
a ‘ victim ’ who had promptly vanished to Ireland,
financing the Group chairman in a threatened libel
action—God, the Group chairman !)
‘ I can’t tell you—sir.’
MacFarlane dropped his eyes and sank back into his
seat and the wing-like shoulders of his coat. Looking
at him, Malcom was conscious, even at that moment, of
such feeling of pity as his father had once evoked under
almost similar circumstances. . . .’ Poor ranting an¬
achronism ! . . .
He found himself on his feet, listening to his
sentence.
‘ Don’t come back to the office, but don’t attempt to
leave Glasgow. I’ve got your address in Franklin Street,
Ill
THE MOON IN AJALON
When I’ve seen the directors I’ll let you know what action
they intend to take. For the sake of your father ’
Subchapter vib
He was out in the snow. He was in Sauchiehall Street.
He was being accosted by a young woman whom he had
never seen before—an obtrusive young woman, one of a
giggling group. He heard himself impatiently answering
a snivellingly accusing Glaswegian whine of queries.
He was conscious of the young woman’s steps receding,
of receding gigglings. He was glancing at the thing
stuck in the lapel of his coat.
It was a white feather.
Subchapter vii
He hung up his coat and hat in the dark passage and
opened the living-room door.
‘ Rita.’
She was not there, but a fire burned cheerfully in the
grate. Her miniature comb lay on the mantelshelf.
He crossed to the fireplace. He combed his hair. The
firelight splashed bright arabesques on the walls, on the
cushioned chairs. Something white lay in one of the
chairs. He picked it up and held it towards the light of
the fire. It was a baby’s half-knit vest. He laid it down
and groped for the switch of the electric light, then stood
looking round the bright room. A book lay face-down-
wards on the table. He picked that up too, and looked
at the title. It was one of his own books, Morris’s
Signs of Change. A coal fell out of the grate, startling him.
‘ Rita,’ he called again.
She must have gone out. But a scissors and a ball of
wool lay near the unfinished vest. He went into the
bedroom and looked at the wardrobe. Her coats were all
there, very neatly hung. One of her dresses shimmered.
He touched it and it swayed, emitting a faint perfume.
112
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
On the double-pillowed bed lay a suit of his pyjamas.
On the dressing-table an upended powder-puff stood
to peer in the mirror.
‘ Rita ! ’
He went into the kitchen. A kettle hummed on a
low flame of the gas-stove. He picked it up. It was
almost empty. The kitchen clock ticked absorbedly.
‘ Rita ! ’ Then he stopped, startled at the sobbing
sound in his own throat. He peered round the kitchen.
Hiding somewhere. A gust of irritation came on him,
but he stood very still. Presently he would hear her
breathing.
What was that ?
Sift. . . . Sift. . . . Sift ... a whisper. Then he
saw through the window the ghostly whorling of the snow.
He was listening to the flakes stroking the glass. He
turned and blundered against the kitchen door and felt
for the passage switch. His fingers on it, he began a
sobbing argument with himself.
‘ You blasted fool. Don’t look round. You fool.
You mustn't look round'
He looked round.
The door of the coal-cellar hung slightly ajar.
Subchapter viii
He never knew how she had died. Perhaps she had
slipped on the linoleum outside the cellar entrance and
fallen down. Probably she had landed on her feet, a
little breathless, a little shaken, hearing the door above
swing to in the draught. It would then have been too
dark for her to see. She must have felt round the walls,
twisting her small body in an effort to reach the upper
floor with her fingers. Perhaps she may even, reaching
on tip-toe, have touched the opening. And then, alone
in that darkness and suffocation, something happened.
Something within her snapped like a parting thread and
THE MOON IN AJALON 113
her mouth was suddenly filled with blood. She must
have fallen then and rolled a little, and perhaps died very
quickly. . . .
He had lifted her up out of the cellar and carried her
into the bedroom before he was aware that he had done
so, while his mind still protested the insanity of looking
at that cellar door. Also, he must have done other things,
his thoughts static, his brain petrified at a dreadful
moment lost far back in the evening. He must have
washed the stains from her face and hands, and the
blood from her lips. He must have undressed her and
placed her in the bed. He must have combed her hair
and closed her eyes. He must have folded her clothes
and hung them on the chair by the bedside. All those
things he must have done, because about midnight he
awoke to find them done and himself shivering because
of the perspiration soaking through from his back and
loins into his underclothing.
He felt cold and unemotional. He sat down in the
living-room to think, and found his decision already made,
without thinking. He rose up and began to search the
fiat, burning all papers and letters having his name on
them. None of his books was marked and he had few
clothes in the place. As he went to and fro in the bed¬
room the shrouded figure under the sheet vexed him a
little : he found himself sobbing once and turning
towards it. . . . But he pulled himself up savagely and
completed the business in hand. . . . There’d be no
sadistic coroner to beslaver her memory with his queries
and views. The charwoman would find her in the morn¬
ing. There would be no trace of himself, and it would
have every appearance of natural death.
It was time that he went. Now he saw something
that he had done mistakenly. She should not have the
sheet over her face. He folded it back.
H
CHAPTER FIVE
SALISBURY PLAIN
Subchapter i
IN spite of his definite purpose he must have wan¬
dered Glasgow for hours during that snowing night.
Towards five o’clock in the morning he found himself
again in Sauchiehall Street, staring vaguely at the offices
of the Tribune. An hour later, his clothes soaked by the
fine sleet which had set in, he came to the house in Frank¬
lin Street, climbed to his room, locked the door, and sat
down in a chair. Thereafter came another long blank.
He either fainted or fell asleep immediately, for it was
four o’clock in the afternoon before he came to himself,
cramped and cold, with a white sun shining across the
snow-covered roofs.
He rose and made some tea and woke up again to
find the tea cold and untasted and the night coming
down. Frost set in that night. It grew colder and
colder. He sat in the darkness, huddled in his clothes,
dozing and awakening and falling again into a shivering
doze.
But somewhere near midnight he aroused himself to
his original intent. The house had stilled of its scufflings
and creakings. He lighted one of the two gas-brackets
which stood on either side of the mantelshelf and drew
the curtains across the window. He opened his writing-
desk and brought out great stacks of the Left Group
weekly. Then, with a penknife as tool, he set about
stopping up every crack and opening which allowed in¬
gress of air to the room. In a little he had plugged
paper all round the door and window-frames. He
closed the damper of the fireplace, stuffed it with wads of
paper, sealed it across with sheets of paper. By the time
he stopped he was again drenched with sweat and
already the air in the room seemed to have grown stuffy.
114
SALISBURY PLAIN 115
Then he undressed carefully, put on his pyjamas,
switched out the light, waited two minutes by the lumin¬
ous dial of his watch, and then turned both gas-taps
full on. For a little he stood by them, listening to the
hiss of the escaping gas, then lay down in bed and
closed his eyes and fell asleep without another thought.
Subchapter ii
He awoke in a stifling darkness. The blood beat
through his head—/Mm, thlim, thlim. With an effort
he raised his left arm and saw the face of his wrist-watch
through aching eyes. It was four o’clock.
He got out of bed and staggered and coughed as his
head impinged on a deeper stratum of gas. His throat
and the roof of his mouth felt coated with a disgusting
slime. He clung to the bedrail and shivered and vomited.
In the wall glimmered two pallid rectangles and at sight
of them a frantic desire assailed him. Stumbling against
unseen furniture, he reached one of the windows, un¬
hasped it, and flung it open. A wave of winter air, cold
and pringling, as though stalactited with frost, poured
into the room. Far on the western horizon wavered the
unceasing fires of the foundries.
He sat in the window-seat holding his aching head
till the throbbing died down a little. Momentarily it
grew lighter. The furnace-fires paled and behind him,
flinging a ghostly radiance into the western sky, the morn¬
ing was coming. He stared at it, he says, as though it
had been the first morning of the world. Then, attacked
by a fit of sneezing, he lowered the window a little,
groped for and found his pocket electric torch, and
inspected the gas-brackets.
No gas was emerging. The supply had run out:
probably it had run out half an hour after he turned on
the taps.
He sat down on the bed, helpless in hysteric laughter.
n6 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He had bungled dying as he had bungled living. . .
Then the fit of laughter passed. Still mentally numbed,
but with a curious wonder upon him, he held up his
fingers and looked at them and moved them. He took
off his pyjamas and stood naked, passing his hands over
his body, feeling the cold silk of skin and the faint pringle
of hair with a detached amazement. God, he was alive.
He was still alive.
Naked, shivering, weeping, he crept to the window
and watched the impossible morning coming again. . . .
A rumour of hideous happenings awoke remote in his
memory, startling a multitude of fears to shout of one
pressing desire: he must get away, he must leave
Glasgow.
Already there was a stir in the house. He sluiced
himself with ice-cold water from the bedroom ewer,
towelled himself to warmth and dryness, then dressed.
He flung the windows wide open, withdrew the paddings
from fireplace and doorway, and lighted a fire which
gloomed dangerously through the room for a moment.
This fire he set to feeding with clothes and books and
papers. In an hour there was left to him only the suit
he wore, his overcoat, hat, and shoes, about three
pounds ten shillings in notes and silver, and his birth
certificate. He had even smashed his empty suitcases
and burned them.
Then he sat down at the writing-desk and with an
ink-eraser and water-diluted ink to match the pale
fluid used by the Leekan Registrar, altered the date of his
birth from the 24th December, 1898, to the 24th Decem¬
ber, 1897.
Two hours later he walked out of Glasgow and his
life there like one awakening and passing out of a dream.
For some reason he found himself avoiding the railway
stations. He went as far south as the tram-lines would
take him and then set out to walk. He tramped the
SALISBURY PLAIN n?
slush-felted roads throughout the remainder of the day¬
light, leaving Glasgow far behind, and never, except in
memory, were any associations with that life to impinge
on him again.
“ I have never known what happened in Rita’s flat
when they found her there, nor what coroner’s enquiries,
if any, were made. I have always been very fuzzy over
the powers and potentialities of coroners.
“ Nor do I know if Meierkhold or others of the Left
Group ever attempted to seek me out, nor what decision
MacFarlane and the directors of the Tribune came to
in my case. I never heard of them again.
“ I do not know to this day whether I am a still-
unpunished criminal in the matter of Rita : is my un¬
successful attempt at suicide still punishable ? I think
that the chances are I would have been arrested for
murder—and probably convicted—had I gone to the
nearest police station with my news of finding Rita s
body in the coal-cellar. If such a thing were to happen
to me again I should probably behave exactly as I did
then. In such circumstances I am like the average
intelligent man in these years of civilization’s debacle
though unlike him in that I confess to it : I would no
more trust myself to the mercy and understanding of the
rat-brained clowns who staff our police-forces than I
would smear myself with cub-smell and submit to the
investigations of a tiger.
“In my attempt at suicide I was in a pathological
condition probably common enough to most young
suicides—dazed, and yet seeing with a lunatic clearness
not only the immediate tragedy and cruelty of the moment
but the untheological insanity of the universe. I turned
on the gas-taps on a Malcom Maudslay too sane to live.
Even now I cannot see but that under certain conditions
self-killing may be the only logical course left to one.
“ I have been sufficient of the herd-beast to accuse
n8 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
that eighteen-year-old self of mine of callous cowardice.
But that has been done without reflection—as is meet
for a herd-beast—and in any case it is to accuse a self
which had temporarily ceased to exist. Rita’s death had
beaten from his horse, maimed, mutilated, and mentally
paralysed the pathetic young prig who had imagined
himself to be Malcom Maudslay. The thing that fled
southwards out of Glasgow was the scared human reality
—an alien, dazed Azilian in flight from the incompre¬
hensible treacheries and tragedies of a Neolithic squat-
ting-place.”
Subchapter Hi
Late that afternoon he came to Coatbridge and mad.;
for the railway station. Three days later, on the 28th of
November, 1915, he walked into a recruiting office in
Carlisle, enlisted in the Norsex Regiment, and was sent
to Salisbury Plain.
Subchapter iv
His medical enlistment papers, seen by him long after¬
wards, described him as ‘ mentally torpid.’
In those first weeks at Bulford he lived and moved
under a shadowy treaty made with himself. He did not
think. He rose and dressed himself and took his rifle
and tramped the parade-grounds and sweated at fatigues,
tie sat in windy huts and ate from a tin with a greasy
spoon. He spent his evenings polishing his equipment
or lying back in a chair at the Y.M.C.A. ‘ hostel.’ He
read great quantities of novels ; he read multitudes of
magazines and cheap periodicals from cover to cover ;
he read as one takes a narcotic. He must have appeared
an abnormally stupid and biddable recruit.
Often, in the Glasgow days, he had decided that in
the event of the coming of conscription he would refuse
to serve—refuse to serve in the Army in any capacity.
SALISBURY PLAIN 119
That decision never haunted him at Bulford. It belonged
to a life and philosophy so fantastically unreal that they
never troubled him except at night.
But his nights were horrible. He dreamt horribly,
though in mornings he would remember little more than
a nebulous horror. . . . His hut-companions were less
reticent than his memory. They told him he moaned in
his sleep. He soon found himself the subject of numerous
crude jokes. In a fortnight he was the butt of the barrack-
room. Humorists opined that he had deserted a girl who
was going to have a baby. . . . He found himself listen¬
ing with a strange, aching inability to think or feel.
“ Probably I required the attentions of an alienist.
Instead, I received those of Sergeant Morgan.”
Sergeant Morgan, in charge of the hut, a Welshman,
an Old Army soldier, a malingerer and snarling half-wit
in the Old Army tradition, found Malcom a god-send.
In addition to numerous other duties in the hut the new
recruit found himself detailed to clean the Sergeant’s
side-arms and equipment, to make up his bed and fold
his blankets, to fetch and carry generally. The rest of
the hut applauded.
‘ Where iss that puggled bastard ? ’ Sergeant Morgan
would shout, poking his stained face through the en-
drapement of blankets which formed his ‘ bunk 5 in the
least draughty corner of the hut. ‘ Here now—clean
thosse bloody boots—juldi ! ’
Sergeant Morgan had been in India—a country ex¬
clusively peopled by bastards not only puggled but
black, and only to be stirred to activity by the liberal
application of boots and shouted juldi’s—with the Old
Army. . . . Malcom would find himself clumping down
between the boards and trestles to pick up the boots.
A card-playing group would thrust out a foot as he went
back towards his own bed. He would trip and stumble
in a dark silence. . . .
120
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Morgan’s assistant tormentor was Wilsom, a butcher
from Poplar, an officer’s servant and a reputed boxer.
He was the typical private soldier in outward observances
to civilians and his superiors—cheerful, aitchless, obliging,
with a cow-lick of hair over his forehead and a ready
‘ Yussir.’ In the barrack-room he abandoned this role
like a garment that chafed, and displayed himself as an
atavistic little pervert who found a strange, mouth-
drooling pleasure in blood and suffering. He would
examine the various cuts and bruises acquired by the hut
in wet-canteen melees with a gloating enthusiasm. The
man in the bed next to Malcom developed huge boils
in his neck ; Wilsom insisted on hearing details of the
extirpation of the pus. . . .
He baited Malcom with zest and without provocation.
The new recruit would discover portions of his equip¬
ment slung far up across the rafters of the hut, or his
trestles flung out of the window, or his blankets filled
with cinders. The hut would watch him make each dis¬
covery and would roar its simple appreciation.
“ Until, inexplicably messianic, the coming of an
evening in early January. It is like remembering having
wandered in a tormented mist and then stepping out,
sharply and suddenly, into frost and the ring of the sea.
I found myself running and panting across the waste of
mud between the canteen and the barrack-hut with a
single idea etched in fire inside my skull; I must settle
up with Wilsom.”
The hut was crowded, busied with bianco and metal-
polish. Wilsom, at the far end, was bending over the
straps of his pack. At sound of Malcom’s entrance he
glanced up, grinned, and relaxed for a little cheerful
baiting.
‘ Elio, chaps, ere’s the puggle-wallah 1 ’ Malcom
walked towards him. ‘ Christ, fergotten where is bleedin
bed is ! ’
SALISBURY PLAIN 121
Next moment Malcom hit him.
The flimsy timber framework of the hut shook as
Wilsom crashed against the wall, lost his feet, and slithered
to the floor. Before he could rise, Malcom was on him.
Twice he found himself pulping the obscene little face
with blows which numbed his arm. Then he was
tearing open the greasy Army shirt to get at the Cockney s
throat. ... ,
The hut-inmates yelled and flung themselves at the
struggling two on the floor. Malcom found his left hand
trodden on. He loosed it, caught an ankle, and brought
the treader thunderously on top of a nearby bed. A man
clawed at his tunic, and then, as Malcom kicked him
intimately, doubled up with a groan. Malcom scrambled
to his knees, his feet, and suddenly found himself engaging
half a dozen opponents at the same time. A neck snapped
as though dislocated in the only scientific blow he suc¬
ceeded in getting home. ... A moment later he
tripped and was on the floor again, held down by half a
dozen of the scared and panting Norsex Regiment.
‘ Ere, Christ, cut it aht ! ’
‘ Nah then ! ’
The reply of their captive must have surprised them.
He ceased to struggle. He spoke unexcitedly.
4 You bastards, if you don’t let me up now—when I
do get up I’ll take you on one by one, and ’ he was
lurid and physiological in the terms of their own vocabu¬
lary. They released him. He got to his feet, brushed
himself, and walked to his bed in the midst of a dead
silence, leaving the half-strangled Wilsom to gurgle
and retch under unsympathetic ministrations.
That night, for the first time since his arrival in Bul-
ford, he slept dreamlessly. Next morning Sergeant
Morgan, hastening out to mess, glanced at him curiously,
and made no mention of the fact, as he usually did, that
Maudslay would have to bloody well hurry up. The man
122 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
in the next bed—he of the boils—pushed over his tin of
metal-polish helpfully.
‘ Christ, chum, seen Wilsom’s dial this morning ?
He’ll think he’s at home in the old butcher’s shop. . . .
Coin on leave to-morrow ? ’
‘ No. Why should I ? ’
‘ Well, Christmas, y’know.’
Christmas. It was Christmas Eve. Pie was eighteen
years of age.
Subchapter v
So, absurdly resurrected from the dark pits of his
imagination in an outburst of animal fury against his
tormentors of the barrack-hut, he found himself again.
No new self, but his old self came back—robbed of
illusions he had believed divine certitudes, swifter,
starker, harder than of yore, but essentially still the dream¬
ing boy of Stane Muir. He began to think again—in¬
tensely, vividly, as though the tools of his brain had been
reground and polished by an unnoticed craftsman.
He would halt on his January sentry-beats at night and
discover his stars again, would forget time and place,
Bulford,. his uniform, his rifle, everything, in fantastic
explorations of the Galaxy. Lying in bed after Lights
Out he re-discovered another delight of boyhood—the
making of purposeless mental pictures to the drumming
music of the rain on the hut-roof : tramps on lonely
roads, trudging derelicts of the squelching darkness ;
destroyers at sea ; the crumbling night of the mud-
lavaed trenches in France. . . .
And he. discovered something entirely new: the
endless variety of sexless sensation of which his body was
capable, hunger and cold and tiredness and belly-
satiety , pleasure of rest and glow of sinew-straining toil—
he had never before known any of those things to their
utmost extremes. He found he could draw ecstasy,
SALISBURY PLAIN 123
lingeringly, from a re-lighted cigarette-end, could lie a
last moment in bed while reveille shrilled down the morn¬
ing and know that last moment the quintessence of
enjoyment.
There were other new things. As though his ears
had been suddenly unsealed of deafness, he discovered
the barrack-room—a barrack-room which left him
severely alone, a barrack-room with a sergeant who had
impressed into his service as batman no other than the
unfortunate Wilsom himself.
Every war-book he was ever to read was to take retuge
behind a shamed and feeble humour in describing the
barrack-room and its argot. It was an argot that plumbed
the depths of obscenity for adjectives yet fetched from
out those dripping depths only a few poor squirming
inanities. It was an argot curiously sexual. One had
the idea of an unclean beast, head on shoulder, regarding
its own body and genital organs with a slavering amaze¬
ment. . . . With this diseased vocabulary went a lewd
curiosity in all matters sexual, in sex-perversion, in
sodomy, in incest, in rape.
He bought a pipe and coloured it and sat on his bed
and listened and found himself being educated. In
Glasgow days he had merely been the lone Old Stone Age
wanderer, astray and unresting with dream-blinded eyes ;
the people of the Left Group, his only intimates, had
been only political intimates ; he had known practically
nothing of their social lives ; he had never belonged to
any club or association of men for purposes of recreation ;
he began to realize that he knew nothing of men.
“ I had believed the common man simple and just
and oppressed. I had believed that were the ‘ capitalists ’
torn from his shoulders he would build the World Repub¬
lic—a fair and glorious state where all would live vividly
and read William Morris, where all would be interested
in stars and sunspots and Azilians, where in time there
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
124
would be neither disease nor death nor scandal nor futility.
... I would lie on my trestles and grin at the remem¬
brance while I coloured my pipe. Common Man as
Man Dominant—a world of unending barrack-rooms,
on unending Friday nights, thronged with the unending
insanitary, deafened with shouts and yawps and comic
songs, belching with laughter over the comicality of the
sexual processes. . . .
“ I think I can date the birth of a sense of humour
from the evening I spent in outlining that democratic
Utopia.”
Subchapter vi
He had the cowardly flesh of most men whose active
life has been mental only. To reflect calmly on the fact
that now, his normal self again, he might any moment
be called upon to reassert himself in the barrack-hut was
to be conscious that he would probably prove as as-
toundingly white-livered as Sergeant Morgan and his
associates had originally rated him. He faced the fact
with characteristic lack of emotion. Essential courage
had nothing to do with the matter. It was merely that
his body had not been trained in either public houses or
public schools to withstand ‘ punishment.’
The obvious remedy was patronage of the camp gym¬
nasium in his spare hours. A bribed and mollified Wilsom
undertook to teach him ‘ self-defence,’ and for half an
hour every evening, until he learned the necessary tricks,
Malcom allowed himself to be smitten to and fro over the
ring. This was hardly training in the accepted sense of
the word, and it was obvious that Wilsom was taking
advantage of a heaven-sent opportunity.
‘ Nah—old thet ! ’ he would pant, and Malcom, spitting
blood, would reel against the ropes. The loafing gym¬
nasium staff, surrounding the ring for this entertainment,
would guffaw or grunt in sympathy with the report of
SALISBURY PLAIN
125
the blow. “ Those grunts begot the strangest arguments
in my brain the while I would face up to Wilsom again.
I began to see boxing and such-like athletics for what they
were in the lives of spectators—sadism at second hand.
Excreted from the socialist stomach, I began to see the
War itself as no struggle of capitalist states eager for fresh
markets, but an international outburst of sadism. And
why not ? Blood-lust was our heritage. It was not two
hundred thousand years since the ancestral Eoanthropus
of the Sussex river-beds had tortured a prisoner in some
dark rock-shelter and licked the blood from living wounds.”
But this horrible theory, carried to the barrack-square
and the rifle ranges, broke down. That he should march
and wheel in formations useless since the abandonment of
open warfare, that he should be painfully and painstak¬
ingly taught the correct angle of salute and the proper
fashion in which to address a regimental quartermaster-
sergeant—this was obviously no planning of beast-like
cruelty : it was the fuddled maunderings of simian
dotage. . . . Hardly even that. It was not vertebrate
conduct at all. It was like finding himself member of an
insane and impossible ant-hill on which the ants, threat¬
ened by the descent of a gigantic and exterminating boot,
paraded to and fro on their hind-legs, their antennae held
in complicated positions, or solemnly and portentously
waving those useful members at one another. . . .
“ You who escaped that cosmic jest can have no idea
of the feeble tenacity and ferocity of the military mind.
Tenacious and ferocious it was, but feebly so, uncertainly
so. Faced with a war of chemists and physicists, its
borborygmatic distresses and mental rump-scratchings
would have moved the Javan ape-man to sympathetic
tears. ... It still saw no necessity for a man to be
respectworthy before he was respected by regulation. It
was unable to believe that all rankers were not of necessity
aitchless and not by nature sots. It had never been
126 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
planned for the consideration of sociological and scientific
intricacies ; its ultimate, prideful achievement was the
co-ordination of parade-ground baboon-snarlings.
“ But, feeble though it was, I came to realize how feeble
was the individual to resist its dotardism. With the very
fewest of exceptions, such as Metaxa and myself, the
civilian enlistments assimilated tradition and method
without question and almost without demur. The
grumblings and occasional riotings were against chance
happenings and injustices. The system no one indicted :
they submitted to it or took refuge from it in humorous
guyings.
“ . . . church and religion, its bond-slaves of the
Sunday parades, were too farcical in their bondage not
to suffer worst from the humorist in the ranks. I shall
always remember a crowded Presbyterian church in
Salisbury, a helpless mottle-faced minister, the tune of
‘ Oh God, our help in ages past ’ being played on the
organ, and a hundred or so mixed details uplifting their
voices in the satisfying parody of some anonymous
genius :
“ ‘ There was a man who had two sons,
And these two sons were brothers ;
John Andrew was the name of one,
And Andrew John the other's.
‘ Now these two sons, they bought a horse
And it was long and thin :
They took it to the river's edge
And chucked the bastard in.
‘ Now these two sons they had a wife
And she was double-jointed ’
“ And so forth. I found the adventures of the great
Twin Brethren highly diverting. . . .
“ But the system offered greater consolations than a
SALISBURY PLAIN 127
certain licence to guy. It offered—in place of hard think¬
ing and stiff, undiscriminating examinations—‘ honours.’
It gave out ribbons and chevrons and warrants and com¬
missions and un-hoped-for authorities. It gave to the
bright collier the opportunity, with a corporal’s stripes
on his arms, to bully objectionable people who had clean
skins and straight limbs. It gave to the bulbous-throated
bank-clerk, the Fleet Street hack and the chinless Harrow
boy a cross-belt, a khaki collar and tie, an opportunity to
refer to my batman.’ (Unbelievable pride, the owner¬
ship of a batman !) Promise of promotion was a perma¬
nent urge to the energetic in the ranks—not in order
that they might become more efficient soldiers but as
means to escaping the festering no-life of the barrack-hut,
to attaining a clean bed and wearable uniform and escaping
fatigues and medical inspections.”
Those medical inspections ! They would parade by
companies outside the medical officer’s hut, and lower
their nether garments, and take off their tunics and shirts,
and stand in shivering, jesting rows the while the medical
officer, an unbelievably old and comic medical officer
with bleary eyes and a disbelief in anesthetics, inspected
them. And those medical inspections were not medical
inspections in any comprehensive sense ; they were
merely inspected to discover if they had developed
syphilis or scabies or lice or the like. . .
Subchapter vii
If I write of things vile, it is because vileness has
many incarnations. There may come another war and
we be called again to train and suffer insanely, to crawl
and creep in syphilitic ditches, to stagger through the
hell ot a dawn barrage, to hear a drunken and fuddled
commander give orders equivalent to massacre. Dirty
htLle men may again peer at and punch our naked bodies
and beshme our naked souls. We may again be asked
i28 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
to crowd in the festering moral-reek of the barrack-room,
may again be asked to applaud the militaristic ape flound¬
ering and snarling in a waste of rotting corpses.
Subchapter viii
And then, in late February of 1916, Sergeant-Major
John Metaxa, drunkard, vagabond, scholar, explorer,
whom Malcom was to love more than any man he ever
met, who was to be his principal interest and influence
through two long years, came to the battalion. He came
to it unexpectedly, from the shattered remnant of his
unit in France, and was specially assigned to the task ot
drilling the Norsex enlistments in methods ol wartare
more modern than those approved by Cromwel . He
began his work in the depot by demanding a special ottice
and clerk of his own. . ,
The office was found him within an hour of his arrival,
and on the next parade Malcom was told to fall out and
report to him. It was a grey Spring afternoon, as he was
long to remember, a Russian rather than an English afte -
noon, as he made his way amid the welter of hutmen s
to a door which displayed the freshly-chalked inscription
‘ Sergeant-Major (Training Staff).’ . , , ^
He entered and stood at attention. Metaxa looked up
from his table and they stared at each other. . . •
The love of a man for a man has small place m Englisn
literature. Men in our books do not lov^ . 1 e
each other, they are fond of each other, are pals and pards
and chums and what not, in the queer, ricketic jargon ot
the second and third decades. Our books find a pleasure,
a bumptiously embarrassed pleasure, in the inability o
Englishmen to love. The word is tabu—perhaps because
of classical homosexual associations. But witnout any
doubt those two loved each other at first glance. Malcom
had no feeling of meeting a stranger and they twinkled to
a mutual smile as he clicked his heels.
SALISBURY PLAIN 129
‘ Sergeant-Major Metaxa ? I’m your new clerk.’
‘ Good God. Sit down. What’s your age ? ’
‘ Nineteen, sir.’
‘ When did you make that up ? ’
‘ Three days before I enlisted, sir.’
‘ Thought so. Never mind the “sir.” Sit down.’ He
yawned, being wearied with travelling, and began to search
among the papers on his desk. ‘ Here, want a cigarette ? ’
Subchapter ix
He was thirty-nine years of age, slightly over middle
height and slightly under middle girth, with fair brown
hair and the whitest skin Malcom ever saw. tie had a
low, broad forehead, misty blue eyes, a finely chiselled
nose, and the mouth and chin of a girl. His voice would
sometimes rise into music and sonorousness, sometimes
degenerate into the oddest sing-song. On the parade-
ground he had a startling siren-whoop of penetration that
made addressed and unaddressed alike start with a nervous
guilt. He had a habit, even on the most rigidly official
occasions, of stroking his nose, meditatively, as though
he considered it an extraordinarily good nose.
He was the bastard son of an American irrigation official
and a Cairene Greek. He had been an architect—a
Prix de Rome who had helped to design the mud sky¬
scrapers of Palais de Koubbah—and had deserted his
profession at the age of thirty-three in consequence of
some unnamed and apparently unnameable catastrophe.
Kinghorn was going south to the exploration of Ross-
land. His ship passed through the Suez. At Port Said
it was boarded by Metaxa, demanding employment.
The dazed and genial Kinghorn, after some protests
that there were not even Eskimos in the Antarctic for
whom Metaxa could design igloos, accepted the Gras co-
American as a supernumerary. At the termination of the
Kinghorn Expedition, Metaxa had gone to Papua with
1
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
130
the Portmaine Investigation Mission as geologist. Thence-
after he had passed a year in Kamchatka, six months in
the Gobi, and four months in struggling through the
mountains of Indo-China, in company with Knut Hamm-
sen, to the safety of a French river-post. In July of 1914
he had been a fugitive amidst the Wahhabi villages of
the Great Dahna, the last survivor of the ill-fated
Meyrin-Beard Expedition. . . . He was a naturalized
Englishman.
Eighteen months had seen the transformation of the
explorer-geologist into an extraordinarily brilliant and
bad sergeant-major. Training in gunnery, in bombing,
in bayonet-fighting he entered into with zest—‘ the zest
of a lunatic at large cheered on by his doctors and nurses.’
He was not only a valuable training expert who had
refused a commission, but, in the spirit of an antiquarian
investigating the scratchings of the sub-human, had made
himself completely at home in King's Regulations and the
Manual of Military Law, mean, sordid, ill-tempered, and
ill-written volumes consantly being swamped under
with sheaves of clownish ‘ amendments.’ Metaxa re¬
mained unswamped, threading the bog-paths of this
printed drivel like a skilled fenman.
He had a devilish facility in treating his superior
officers with an astounded deference which reduced the
young and overbearing to hot-eared flusterment and the
elderly and cautious to an invariable formula : ‘ \ou’ll
know what to do in the matter, sergeant-major.’ His
treatment of the men varied with his mood. He hated
Regulars—especially Regular N.C.O.’S. At the instiga¬
tion of Malcom he proceeded to make the life of Sergeant
Morgan such a burden as even a black bastard of India
might have groaned under. Quite equally he disliked
the enlistments from the towns—the cheerful, ragtime¬
singing individuals who were unashamed of calling them¬
selves ‘ Tommies.’ Cockney chirpiness could infuriate
SALISBURY PLAIN 131
Metaxa. But the dull, plodding, anxious ploughmen, the
nervous worried boys, all those whom the orgy of beast¬
liness had overtaken and mentally murdered, were his
proteges. He indulged in unlimited favouritism, though
it was a graded favouritism that never reached anywhere
near intimacy, except in the case of Malcom.
He stamped into his office one afternoon in mid-March
to find his clerk deep in a book and with his heels elevated
on the stove.
‘ Hell, Malcom, you might at least keep the fire going—
missing drills and parades and reading—Oh, God of
Battles, reading Guizot !—while I amass seemly cannon-
fodder for Krupp.’ He poked the fire irritably, drew up
a chair and sprawled in it tiredly, while Malcom flung his
book into the coal-bin and stretched and yawned in the
fug of the hut. Metaxa surveyed the bin-assigned
Guizot, reading aloud its title. ‘ History of Civilization.
. . . Why the devil read such muck ? ’
Malcom re-aligned his jaws. ‘ Why not ? ’
‘ Because it’s nonsense. Twaddle. Tripe. All this
evolutionary stuff.’
‘Eh?’
Metaxa grinned, his handsome face oddly un-military
under the peak of his hat. ‘ Just that. Oh, not the
biological part—our descent from the dear old ground-
apes of the Miocene. But the belief that civilization is
civilizing—it’s a dream of apeptic pedants in the British
Museum Reading Room. . . Civilizing ! Lord Christ,
I wish I had them at bayonet-practice ! ’
‘ But for civilization it’d be practice with tooth and claw.
After all, we climb. Even our beastliness is infinitely
less beastly than the primitives.’
‘ Climb be damned. Beasts ? There was never such
beastliness in the Old Stone Age as there is in Europe
now. Primitives ? You’ve never met them except in the
splurgings of some senile Haeckelian. I have. Lost
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
132
tribes in Siberia. People down Papua way. Old Stone
Age still, without metals or priests or gods or kings.
Kindly and care-free, like clean children. With children’s
angers and children’s loves. Quick, intelligent; lovable
animals. The modern picture of the primitive as a raving
ghoul is—raving nonsense.’
‘ But—savages, head-hunters, cannibals ? ’
Metaxa shrugged. ‘ They’re not primitives. They’re
the scum and backwash of surrounding civilizations
—though they don’t murder by proxy.’
Malcom stared into the fire. ‘ But, God—if that’s the
case all the last ten thousand years has just been training
in hate and murder and beastliness—beastliness that no
beast every knew. . . . Hell, it makes nonsense of history.
Ten thousand years of civilization no more than ’
The Greek yawned and jammed his be-putteed legs
against the wall. ‘ “ Emptiness and pain, and love it was
the best of them, and sleep worth all the rest of them.” . . .
Civilization’s no climb to a dawn. It’s mankind lost in
a pitch-black corridor.’
Subchapter x
Civilization no progress from the beast, but a mind-
tumour and a disease. . . . The last of Malcom’s book-
learnt illusions took flight before that one of many pitiless
expositions.
From the first the attraction of these two was mutual,
an eager and unescapable attraction, a love at once jealous
and tolerant. In him Malcom found at once the intel¬
lectual stimulus that cleared his mind alike of barrack-
room loathings and Glaswegian memories. And mid¬
way some argument or discussion Metaxa would break
off to tell of his own loneliness before they met.
‘ If you could know what it’s been, those eighteen
months since 1914. Not the mucky horrors, but the talk-
lessness ! Not a soul who’d ever heard of Siegfried or
SALISBURY PLAIN
i33
Tubal Cain or was interested in the morals of haddocks or
the length of the Cainozoic. . .
They were lovers vocal enough. Perhaps few of the
great lovers, the magnificent loves, have been wordless.
Heraclitus and his poet talked the sun from the sky ;
Metaxa and Malcom sometimes talked the moon into
morning in that little hut of an office, credited the while
by the depot with multifarious clerical activities.
Memories of Metaxa seated at his table, a parade state
or a nominal roll grasped and forgotten in his hand,
being hour-long and vehemently unaffectionate towards
all properly constituted authority whatsoever—he was
a philosophic anarchist—haunted Malcom for long years,
most wistful and absurd memories.
Yet there were curious gaps in their intimacy. Malcom
had told his own story in detail, but of Metaxa’s pre-war
life he learned little, except with regard to his years as
explorer. And the Greek seldom or never spoke of France
or what he had endured there : Malcom would meet the
reality soon enough.
Meantime, excused most parades and drills, Malcom
kept himself fit in the gymnasium, mostly at boxing, with
stray members of the gymnasium staff for sparring
partners. He had set himself with a dour determination
to master the technique of the curious and imbecile ‘ art.’
In the usual evening bout, a week after Metaxa’s arrival,
Wilsom found himself being carried out of the ring after
five minutes’ sparring with his unsportsmanlike pupil.
A fortnight later the depot heavyweight, a hirsute and
obscene ex-drayman who had patronisingly offered to
show Malcom some ‘ real scrapping,’ suffered the same
fate. Technically Malcom was not heavyweight, but
night after night he engaged a stream of aspirants to the
depot championship.
Metaxa came several times to watch those bouts, to
address Malcom as Private Maudslay, sonorously, and
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
134
to make approving and sergeant-major-like noises in
general. Then, in the privacy of their office or his room,
he would brood on the matter. ‘ A clear eye and some¬
thing in your wrists does it. You’re no boxer. Peasant
wrists and a philosophy of contempt. And you’re not a
clean fighter—heard the complaints last night ? You just
skim disqualification : you don’t play the game.’
‘ Quite right. I’ve stopped playing games. No intention
of playing the game. Why the hell should I ? I didn’t
compile the ritual of the dirty Bulford blood-worshippers.’
Indeed, it was with shrinking flesh that he drove
himself into each fight. Nevertheless, he found himself
in the inter-depot tournament shortly afterwards carrying
off the heavy-weight ‘ purse ’—an ornate wrist-watch.
Next morning Metaxa leant back in his chair and shouted
with laughter as he looked at his clerk’s bruised lips.
‘ Shades of Shelley and Karl Marx ! Especially Karl.
. . . You’re brutalizing the Proletariat.’
‘ Blast the proletariat. . . . Can’t you quash this
route-march to-night ? ’
Metaxa grew serious. ‘ Not even for you. You’ll be
glad of it—over there.’
In the mud and rain of that moist Spring the new
battalions of the New Army trained endlessly, intensively,
all over Salisbury Plain. Even as Metaxa’s shamelessly
favoured clerk Malcom did not escape his entire share in
marching, entrenching, and musketry. The same steady
eye and the same savage contempt for the business in
hand which had provided him with a wrist-watch made
him a first-class shot, and he was marked down accord¬
ingly on Metaxa’s careful lists.
He was marked down as a sniper ‘ over there.’
Subchapter xi
By some dubious means Metaxa acquired a second¬
hand motor-cycle and sidecar ; it had certainly been a
SALISBURY PLAIN
I3S
War Department vehicle originally and he and Malcom
spent all one afternoon in erasing the broad arrow from
the engine. Then the camp limits ceased to confine them.
Malcom would meet the depot sergeant-major half a
mile or so outside the lines, climb into the sidecar, and
be whirled away to Bristol, to Salisbury, to Devizes.
They spent their spare afternoons and Sundays on the
road, assuming to the eyes of the officious officer or military
policeman the appearance of a warrant officer and orderly
on urgent duty. Metaxa, without any protest at all from
Malcom, financed each expedition ; the War Office,
unaware of its generosity, provided the petrol.
One Sunday afternoon in early June, dipping up and
down the hill roads, they breasted a long slope and Mal¬
com shouted and stood up. On the brow of the opposite
hill great menhirs, black and wonderful, marched against
the sky.
‘ Stonehenge,’ said Metaxa.
They parked the sidecar and cycle, paid a shilling at a
cubby-hole, and went and inspected Stonehenge. Mal¬
com spent a happy half-hour in talking and speculating
and attempting to verify the orientation of the ‘ altar.’
To Metaxa the great stones conveyed little or nothing of
the spirit of their builders ; it required at least the elements
of sculptural adornment to interest him in the remains
of any vanished people. In the wonderlands of the Lower
Bronze Age he was the pupil and Malcom the professor.
He wandered round the menhirs, poking them with his
stick.
‘ Cut out those stones and brought them a distance of
at least seventy miles ? Bloody fools.’ He looked round
the vacant summer moors hazing into the Wiltshire hills.
‘ They were always half-wits in Wiltshire.’
Malcom lay down on the warm grass, threw away his
shapeless khaki cap, and closed his eyes. Metaxa wand¬
ered the inner circle of stones and then came near again.
136 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Remote with the Bronze Age sun-worshippers, Malcom
heard the scrape of boots on the altar-stone. Birds were
crying over the fields. It was very warm. Malcom loos¬
ened his collar and dozed.
‘ I remember in June two years ago ’
The voice of Metaxa, ebbing .and flowing in drowsy
sing-song, aroused him.
‘Eh?’
‘ June morning in England, and I—I was a fugitive in
South Arabia. Meyrin was the last they’d killed. They
gutted him with a jambiyah, and tied up salt and sand in
his entrails. I lay and watched them from a nullah.’
‘ Ugh.’
‘ Very. And then I’d crept and crawled and stumbled
north-eastwards for days—nights rather—across the
Mesaleekh. Nejd, you know. Cultivated strips and
villages after a bit, but all in the hands of the Wahhabis.
I’d been living on water-melons and samh shoots and some
pigeons I killed one night in a cote. I’d slept through the
days in irrigation ditches, in sand-holes, in the tombs of
saints ; once in a byre full of goats—I saw, smelt, dreamt,
and tasted goat for days afterwards. . . . But that morn¬
ing. You have never seen its like. Neither had I. Not
a Mesaleekh morning at all, but moist and wistful and
young. I stood in it, filthy and sand-caked, and sobbed,
and suddenly had a vision of England—God knows why,
for I hadn’t seen it for years. Not the real England at all,
of course, but Blake’s green and pleasant land, where
women were white and kindly and purchasable and no
men hunted the roads with superannuated Mausers. A
vision. I followed it.
‘ Exactly that. Walked upright and unconcealed. The
craziest thing. Went through a village, I remember,
with the women and children lining the doorways and
staring at me, and the men coming running with spears
and then stopping and staring at me also, and letting me
SALISBURY PLAIN
i37
pass. Walked dead eastwards till nightfall and then heard
the sound of the sea. No delusion. Sea it was—wildest,
treeless coast, and there, just below me, a boat that had
pulled in for water from a Muscat trading sloop. . . .
‘ Six weeks it took me to get home to Southampton.
The day after I landed war was declared, and I remem¬
bered the England of that vision in the hell of the
Mesaleekh and enlisted inside forty-eight hours.’
His auditor on the grass stirred. ‘ Yes, and ? ’
‘ And now, of course, I’m Sergeant-Major Metaxa,
D.C.M., twice wounded—once by one of my own
N.C.O.’s, who was suitably court-martialled and shot—
once mentioned in dispatches, and an expert in bombing
and Military Law.’
He laughed. There was such sudden bitterness in his
laughter as made Malcom fumble away from the subject.
‘ How’ll it all end ? ’ He sat up and looked at Metaxa
and Stonehenge. ‘ This War mess ? ’
‘ God knows.’
A blackbird was whistling down the hillside below
Stonehenge. Malcom stared in the direction of that
sound. He hardly knew that he spoke. ‘ And you and
me. . . .’
Metaxa laughed again. ‘ What does it matter ? There
is no you or me. Read Berkeley. Read the scientists.
Most likely we’ll be killed over there. And it doesn’t
matter, because—already we don’t exist. . . . Only a
temporary grouping of atoms endowed with a conceit
called personality. . . . Christ ! ’
Something snapped in his hands. It was the stem
of his pipe. He was staring, white-faced, at the summer
day.
‘ You and me, Malcom ! We’re going out there—again.
. . . Why should we, why the hell should we ? Were
there ever such damned fools ? Why go to any such
place ? Why the hell do the Germans keep pouring
138 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
into France and the Russians into Galicia ? They don’t
want to, any more than we do. They want to live at
ease and eat and drink and make love. ... Yet we’re
going, they’re going. . . .’
‘ Saviours of civilization. Read Mr. Asquith.’
‘ Saviours from what ? Oh, some day men’ll see war
for the blasted idiocy it is, whatever the priests and
patriots say. We’ll not manure the French fields with
bloody pulp for nothing. Somehow it’ll count. . . .
Poor lost and snivelling brutes from the caves of Mas
d’Azil ! . . . And over there in this sunshine there’s
that slavering beastliness blotting out the sky. . . .’
Malcom had nothing to say to that. Metaxa the
satirist, Metaxa the humorist, Metaxa the academic
anarchist—he had met them all, but never before this
tortured romantic. He did not look at him, but ached for
him, helplessly. Presently, in a shrill, queer voice, the
Greek began to speak again.
£ And yet—there’s meaning in it somewhere—our
blind adventure in civilization’s corridor of darkness.
Upwards after all, perhaps. Somewhere in the starless
ways of the mountain tunnels there’s light. . . . God,
was there ever such hero as Man ! Think of him, Malcom!
Struggling and falling and stumbling onward amidst
pits and traps and the ravings of his bestialized kin.
Blinded and maimed with the lies of the priests and
godmen, astray after will-o’-the-wisps in a thousand
stinking culs-de-sac—and yet, he climbs ! There’s
meaning—somewhere^in his blind adventure up the
mountain pass. Somewhere beyond this Defile of the
Beast in which we stumble and weep, somewhere beyond
your Walls of the World, there’s the flame of a splendid
Light. . . .’
They looked at each other, the younger man with his
savage cynicism of disillusion routed to a queer silence.
Metaxa stared unseeingly at the broken pipe in his hands,
SALISBURY PLAIN 139
and then dropped the fragments into his pocket and
stood up.
‘ Time to go back/ he said.
Subchapter xii
‘ What’s this place ? ’ demanded Metaxa, speeding
through the streets at a rate which made the policeman
on point duty wheel to look at their number. But the
obscurantist mud plastered on the plate still adhered.
Malcom peered at a sign-post. ‘ Sunninghill, Egham,
to come. This is Winchfield.’
‘ The hell it is.’ The ancient engine moaned as the
Sergeant-Major flicked the antiquated controls. The
sidecar rocked. Malcom snuggled down behind the
celluloid screen and pulled his greatcoat over his knees.
Dim fences and farms rose and whipped past on the
scudding road. It was seven o’clock in the evening.
In less than forty-eight hours they were leaving for
France. All passes had been cancelled, all men on
leave recalled. But at five o’clock a waiter from the
Sergeants’ Mess had brought a note from Metaxa. ‘ Meet
me outside Bulford on the London road in half an hour.
Show and supper in London.’
Metaxa also was for France. He had ‘ wangled ’ a
return to France when he might have stayed on at the
depot. It was an insane act that he did not discuss. There
was no need.
‘ London by eight o’clock ’ he had said as he picked
up his clerk and since then they had hardly spoken,
except when Malcom leaned out now and then and called
directions from the sign-posts. Goggled, Metaxa hung
on the handle-bars and heeded only to the road.
Amesbury, Andover, Whitchurch, Oakley, Basingstoke
they passed, and the light grew less, though the sun waited
for them and lighted their way through corridors of
tremulous hedges. Past long, gloaming-stilled fields
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
140
they swept, through drowsing villages ; once, for mile
on mile, at some loop-way, under an arch of trees : a
great, green, whispering tunnel. Malcom sat and
stared at the fields and all the night-shadowed security
of England like one in a dream.
God ! and in forty-eight hours. . . .
“ I cannot hope to tell of the vague and terrible
wonder that came to grip my heart then—wonder that
those English fields and hedges should stand on the
verge of sleep and not know the thing that I knew : I
might never see them again.”
In London at last, sitting beside Metaxa in the stalls
of a theatre, he covered his eyes with his hands and began
to laugh hysterically. The Greek shook him concernedly.
‘ Steady on, Malcom. What’s wrong ? ’
‘ All this—it doesn’t exist. You said so. A dream.
Lights and music. That girl’s hair—look at it. Clean
hands and shirts. Those bare shoulders. Dresses.
That stuff they’ve just sprayed to cool the place. . . .
Christ, they can’t exist—when there’s that thing over
in France ’
He struggled to rise But Metaxa’s hand pressed him
down. ‘ Don’t I know it ? But dream them, dream
them like hell ! Aren’t they worth the dreaming ? The
hair of that girl you pointed out—it’s a greater miracle
than the nebula in blasted Andromeda.’ He stopped to
jump up and cheered a lame act till his applause was
contagious, then urged a reluctant stalls to its feet as the
orchestra burst into the strains of a popular song which
usually chilled his blood and made his spine crawl in
distaste. ‘ Come on. All of you.’
They stood and sang—all of them, as he had commanded
—and drowned the voice of the paid singer on the stage.
Malcom heard Metaxa’s voice, minus its sing-song,
ringing out the feeble lines as though they contained a
greater profundity than any philosophy on earth :
SALISBURY PLAIN 141
‘ There's a silver lining
'Through the dark clouds shining ;
Turn the dark clouds inside out
Till the boys come home *
‘ To get their damn pockets turned inside out in place
of the clouds. Still—sing up, Malcom ! Morituiri te
salutant ! ’
Presently the entire theatre, crammed with men in
khaki awaiting their summons ‘ over there,’ took Metaxa
to its heart as unofficial stage-manager. In the intervals
he stood up and called out numbers to the perspiring
conductor : Tipperary, The Long Trail, Annie Laurie,
finally, and daringly, Nearer to Thee. The actors came
out on the boards and joined in the hymn prompted by
the atheist Greek.
‘ Poor primitives in the Defile ! Sing up, Malcom !
There’s no Leader or Light—but let’s pretend ! ’
At the end of the show a note was brought him from
the stage. Would he join in a supper ?
He did, taking Malcom with him. They sat in a
crowded restaurant, under the flare of bright lights, in
the din of an unending dance-band. They were a party
of fourteen or so, women, girls, and men, some in
uniform and some not. Malcom sat next a maudlin
Lieutenant-Colonel who for a time addressed him as
‘ chappie ’ and then became inextricably involved, as he
admitted, in trying to synchronize his eyes. Metaxa
he saw at intervals, at the other side of the table, seated
between two girls and making love to both with apparently
the greatest success. Every now and then the Greek
would rise with one or the other of them and spin away
amidst the tables, and then return to some half-finished
and never-finished course and the replenishing of his
glass. All glasses were constantly replenished, in spite
of the law. The Lieutenant-Colonel—he was a very
young Lieutenant-Colonel—became audible, hiccoughing
i42 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
a declaration. The supper was ‘ on ’ him. Nobody
disputed his claim.
Least of all Malcom. He had discovered the girl on
his left—a girl of whom he was to remember little
except the extreme hoarseness of her voice and certain
other unnecessary physiological details.. She insisted on
calling him ‘ Joe ’ and on laughing immoderately at
every remark he made. “ She was probably mildly drunk
by then. I was.”
He found himself dancing with her on one occasion,
and on another passing through the swing-doors at the
end of the restaurant-hall. She whispered to a discreet
attendant. They went up a flight of stairs, but did not
enter a room. The girl drew IVlalcom into a curtained
window-recess with a long, cushioned seat. Remotely
over the River a searchlight flickered in the sky. They
began to touch each other with urgent hands.
She bit his lips as they lay together—so painfully that
he took her by the throat and shook her. She fawned
on him with a Lesbian abandon. Suddenly the near
darkness became alive with tiny noises. Something on
her bared breast had snapped and was showering the
floor with tiny pellets. It was a rosary.
He crawled and searched in the darkness of the alcove,
fatuously intent on retrieving the scattered beads. The
girl adjusted her dress and powdered her nose by the dim
reflection of the searchlight. Then she got down on the
floor and joined in the search and forgot her intention
in solicitously powdering Malcom’s bitten lips. As
they came out of the alcove together his heavy Army
boot crunched to fragments the brittle Christ of the
rosary.
Going downstairs, they encountered Metaxa ascending,
a girl on each arm. In the restaurant the hoarse-voiced
girl was snatched from Malcom’s side, out of his life,
and away in the arms of a naval officer. Yawning every
SALISBURY PLAIN 143
now and then, ear-achingly, he made his way to the
table of the theatre-party.
It was deserted but for a single girl—one he had not
noticed before, with her back to him and seated, strangely
enough, in the chair he himself had occupied.
At the sound of his approach she turned round, smiled,
rose, and walked away through the swinging doors.
He sat down, abruptly, staring, puzzled. A man at a
nearby table turned about and looked after her also.
Another fit of yawning seized Malcom. Had seen her
before, somewhere, surely. . . .
Subchapter xiii
The next thing of which he was conscious was a
waiter shaking him and Metaxa, urgent and unsteady,
at the door, amid a crowd from the supper-party—
Metaxa embracing and being embraced by the two girls
who had climbed the stairs with him. They kissed
Malcom also. One of them was crying. So was Metaxa.
‘ Good-bye, my dears, and thank you.’
Good-bye, good-bye ! ’ they called as the two went
down the steps into a darkened and unfriendly London.
The Greek caught Malcom’s arm.
‘ Son,’ he said, ‘ I’m bloody drunk. In a minute I’ll
be drunker. Down street, turn left, across street is
garage. Unless it s moved. Moved.’ He turned to
wave a belated farewell to the empty doorway. ‘Good¬
bye, good-bye.’
T. he fresh air had sobered Malcom. ‘ How the devil
are we to get to Bulford ? ’ he asked at the garage entrance
as he wheeled out the combination and his battalion
Sergeant-Major stood leaning happily, if a trifle hazily,
against a wall. ‘ You can’t drive like that.’
Metaxa lurched to the sidecar, got into it carefully,
and sat down. ‘ No. You drive. Sober, Presbyterian.
Natural ascetic.’
i44 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Malcom knew little or nothing of the mechanism of a
motor-cycle. Metaxa appeared to have fallen asleep.
He shook him.
‘ Here, how do you change gears ? ’
‘ Mm. Pull down for top, pull right for second.
Wheel to the right, son Roger, he said, and the^ Lord
God give you joy of it. Morris. Great poet. He
snored. .
Malcom never knew how he did it, but he crept
through London and reached the western roads about
three o’clock in the morning. At Staines, as he stopped
to peer at a sign-post, Metaxa awoke and made a solemn
declaration. .
‘ I am a natural sceptic,’ he said, and fell asleep.
At a quarter to six Malcom stopped again and awakened
his passenger in front of their office in Bulford. As tie
Sergeant-Major stirred and yawned there flashed on
Malcom, irrelevantly, answer to that question with which
he had vexed his brain all the star-lighted miles from
London.
‘ By God ! ’ he shouted, ‘ That girl in the restaurant—
it was Rita. . . .’
Subchapter xiv
Forty-eight hours later they disembarked in France,
and went south and east for days, by changing trams and
camps. In a month’s time they were marching up under
the drumming roar of the great bombardment of July 10th,
and going into action at Trones Wood.
CHAPTER SIX
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST
Subchapter i
HE spent over two years in France ; he was not
once wounded or gassed or fever-stricken ; he
became a corporal and then a sergeant; he was twice
pressed to accept a commission, declined like Metaxa,
and was victimized in consequence ; he grew to regard
unclean equipment and unpolished buttons with a
passionate disfavour ; he robbed a German prisoner
of three hundred American dollars and then shot that
prisoner as the man turned on him threateningly ; he
sat three days in a shell-hole at Bois Louange, he and
two others, marooned in a maelstrom of retreat and
advance ; he found a rat-eaten woman’s corpse in the
depths of a staff dug-out in the Hindenburg Line ; he
commandeered an abandoned Leyland lorry in the
Spring retreat of 1918 and drove a score of men for
thirty miles, and fell asleep, and awoke still driving them ;
he lived a life so fantastic that his memory was to refuse
to treat it seriously, or, in self-defence, became deliberately
treacherous.
He never spent a ‘ first day in the trenches.’ They
massed in emplacements and sunken roads in front of
the gun-clamour of that July 16th and then went forward
into a draggled, copse-strewn waste, a-vomit in sudden
volcanic eruptions, drifting long clouds of gas. They
jumped the last bank of the sunken road and yelled and
went forward at a stumbling run. The air was filled with
a whispering rush of bullets—Malcom was to remember
that whispering sound first heard, like the sound of
exhausted hail. The forward sky flickered and winked
with gun-flashes ; behind, the sound of the British
barrage leapt forward and forward on their backs, like
the leaping of pursuing dinosaurs. The upper air was
146 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
populous and filled with an insane racket, while from
copses to left and right arose a whoop-whoop presently-
merging into the whoo-oo-oor of gun-belts. . . . Malcom
found himself plunging forward, an interested automaton,
above the rhythmic play of his Army boots. His company
commander raced three paces in front of him, sobbing
a foolish chant : ‘ Oh, you bloody bloody bloody—oh,
you bloody bloody swine ! ’ Suddenly his hat vanished
and with it the roof of his skull. He swayed and
fell. Malcom tripped over him, stumbled, recovered,
with vision below his eyes of a thing like an archaic
cranium filled with a seething mess of dun-coloured
jelly. ...
He was in ‘ A ’ company, ‘ B ’ was at its heels. Sergeant-
Major Metaxa, grinning, a knobkerrie in his hand, raced
past. By then the smoke-mist so patched ground that
they lost direction and found themselves enfiladed from
the right. The battalion’s attack was north of the Bois
de Trones and south of Longueval. From the trees to
the right, lines of echeloned machine-guns raved at
them. Men beyond Malcom doubled and crumpled and
sprawled—he saw one man impale himself on his own
bayonet—and suddenly a shell burst brightly against
the infernal wood and the gun-flashes. Unharmed,
Malcom ran forward through a raining spray of metal,
saw Metaxa and a few others, joined them, and was
presently fighting and falling and scrambling into the
pits of the machine-gunners.
Then something happened which he was never to
see recorded. The machine-gunners, as Metaxa’s
company leapt amongst them, cheered and laughed, as
though it was some game. Malcom stabbed one of
those laughing gunners through the stomach, and fell
on top of him in an attempt to retrieve his bayonet,
and was trampled underfoot by the others. When he
struggled up again his hands and tunic were soaked
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST
147
with blood and his mouth and throat sick with the smell
of excrement. . . .
Nine officers and four hundred and eighty other ranks
of the battalion failed to answer that night, and were
provisionally posted ‘ missing ’ until when and if their
exact fate could be ascertained. The most of them
had died like bogged flies in the spider’s web of trenches
and cellars which guarded the riven lands of Waterlot
Farm.
Malcom spent most of the night in a captured trench,
an acting-corporal, and, overcome by his queasy stomach,
again and again very sick indeed because of the smell
of his own body.
Subchapter ii
Delville Wood, Trones Wood, Longueval, Ginchy—
they marched and counter-marched, took and re-took,
stormed and fell back amid those immense names for
three weeks. Then they were relieved and marched
out and gave place to battalions of felt-hatted Australians
who were to die in the mud and rains and futility of the
Ancre. Thirty miles behind the lines, in rest-camp,
the depleted Norsex were joined by drafts from England
and set again to marching and training under an idiot
colonel who believed in the imminence of open warfare.
Malcom changed his tunic and acquired one that was
unstained and had stripes sewn on it. He became smart
and attentive in the presence of officers and blasphemous
and capable in the presence of those who lacked both
stripes and commissions. Metaxa organized vigorous
football matches and Corporal Maudslay, battalion
heavyweight, became a centre-forward of considerable
proficiency.
Indeed, the battalion Soccer team acquired a reputation.
It would go miles in lorries to play rival division teams.
In one away-match Malcom tripped over and sat on a
148 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
sturdy half-back who was blunt and blasphemous and
Scotch.
It was his brother Robert.
He had joined the Seaforth Highlanders, but was then
in training as a gunner for the Tanks. Amazed strangers,
they sat either side of a packing case in the barn of
Robert’s company, and looked at each other uncertainly
and unconvincedly. Robert tried to break through the
Veils of unreality.
‘ Christ—Malcom, little Malcom. A corporal—an
... d’ye mind when I smacked ye for stealin oat-cakes ?
. . . Never sent me that six pounds, never wrote.
Ginchy ? Christ, I was at Longueval. Why’d you
never write hame ? Auntie Ellen’s dead. We heard
you’d left Glasgow ; Auld Ian was there an looked in
to see ye, and you’d gane. . . . What’d you join an
English regiment for ? ’
‘ What do you think of it all, Robert ? ’
‘ It’s jist fair hell.’ He sighed. ‘ Though I dinna
say onything. . . . Hae ye ever seen a German ? ’
Malcom nodded. Robert smoothed his short, brindled
hair. ‘ Never seen ane o them. The daft B’s. Why
the hell did they start it ? Mebbe they didna. We’re as
daft as they are.’ He sighed again. ‘ God, I’d like richt
weel a plate o new bannocks and warm milk, and then
go ower the brae by Tocherty and see the Leekan lichts
below. Mind them, Malcom ? ’ He suddenly grew
shy. ‘ I was married afore I cam oot. Ane o the
Murray lassies.’ He had a flash of the old, whimsical
arrogance. ‘ Jean, the bonniest ane.’
‘ Jean was the bonniest,’ Malcom said, gently. Robert
kindled, his kind eyes shining.
‘ You mind her ? I wantit you there for my best man.
She’s kept a piece o the cake for you. I’ll write an tell
her to send it. . . . She’s lonely there, up in the cotter
hoose at Pittaulds. A weet summer, she says, but the
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST 149
corn comin fine. The clover’ll stand thick and bonny
below the Stane Muir at Chapel—mind the lang field ? ’
He glanced out below the barn eaves and muttered
to himself. ‘ They’ll be bringin hame the kye the
noo.’
And suddenly all that was peasant in Malcom wept
for his brother, this strayed, lost peasant. He sat and
gripped his hands in his pockets and held himself from
speaking, and went out to the darkness and the homeward
journey with his heart wrung in a passion of pity and rage.
Ten days later, in the attack on Thiepval, he saw his
brother, thrusting his gasping face from the port-hole
of a Tank, go by into the hell of bright fires and smashed
entanglements where the Wurtembergers had died.
He caught sight of Malcom, shouted something, and
passed, a man in a dream.
Malcom never saw him again.
Subchapter Hi
In. late 1917 he lay in a field of wheat, among wheat-
stalks and poppies, all one afternoon. It was a very
quiet afternoon. Between the lines in the Picard country
there was only an occasional rattat of snipers’ fire. The
Norsex had come in a week before, to take over from
French troops who had previously fallen back a distance
of some three miles. The wheat field now lying midway
the long, fresh scarrings of earthwork was still a recogniz¬
able field. It was a freak field and a brigade curiosity.
Several times both sides had tried to burn the wheat,
but it fired ill in that late, damp autumn. One shell-
hole, like a geyser-burst, lay almost midway the lines ; and
this shell-hole became a coveted point of occupation
throughout the day. From dawn one watched for the
Saxon sniper who was wriggling towards it ; found, one
shot him. Or the German look-outs watched for the
Norsex sniper, and shot him. It was a sport without
150 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
military significance. Occasionally those two snipers
stalked each other among the poppy-stalks and wheat.
Malcom had been out since dawn, and had forgotten
his water-bottle. Metaxa discovered this and crawled
out with it, and then perforce held Malcom company,
for the German trenches had been heightened during
the night and at least half a dozen rifles had attempted
to pick him off, following the undulations of the wheat.
He lay a little to the right of Malcom, deeper in the
shell-hole than the latter was. The place was pleasant
enough but for the stench from a sprawling figure in dank
grey-green. He lay half out of sight, that figure, his
clumsy field-boots cocked at a comical angle. There
was nothing dignified or impressive about him. He
was merely an unpleasant object which stank.
‘ Poor devil,’ said Metaxa. ‘ I like those Saxons.’
‘It’s a pity he’s mislaid his face,’ Malcom said,
indifferently. A movement on the new brown embanking
of the Saxon parapet had caught his attention. Some¬
thing greyish just verged the trench-edge for a moment,
and in that moment, his finger gentle upon the second
pressure, Malcom fired. Came the far clatter of a body
falling. Malcom ejected the spent round, clicked home
the bolt again, and slithered deeper into the shell-hole.
‘ Got him ? ’
‘ Yes. One of his eyes, I should think.’
They lay and listened to the shower of bullets pinging
overhead. Their own trench took up the challenge
and for a little a Saxon machine-gun bayed.
‘ You’d think there was a bloody war on,’ murmured
Metaxa.
Malcom glanced at him anxiously ; he had always an
absurd anxiety when Metaxa was with him under fire.
The Greek knew it and caught his glance and smiled
whimsically.
‘ I know.’ He chewed a wheat-stalk and meditated.
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST
IS*
‘ Though I’ve given up feeling that way about you.
You’ll be all right.’ Then : ‘ But I think myself I’m
fey.’
‘Eh?’
He pulled a poppy and pressed his face against it,
and for a little seemed to forget what he had been going
to say.
‘. . . flowers of Proserpine. A lordly Greek death
for a Cairene bastard to die—among poppies and wheat.
Not the kind that I’ll come to, I think. . . . Look here,
Malcom, I know I’ll go West in this show sometime. I
know it just as certainly as I know that to-morrow’s
sun’ll come up. It’s like walking through a fog to the
edge of a cliff. Somewhere I know I’ll fall off. I’m not
depressed or sick. I just know.’
Malcom had met several men with just such premoni¬
tions. Not one of them who stayed within his ken but
had been killed. Perhaps some sixth sense awoke in one
there, or evolved and shaped and came to being. He
was to remember that he attempted then neither consola¬
tion nor contradiction. He just lay and stared at his
rifle.
But Metaxa had turned on his back among the
crushed corn-stalks and brown earth and lay considering
the sky and inviting a stomach-wound. ‘ And it’s not
unpleasant, this death-sentence. Once I thought a man
would go mad with such knowledge as mine. But I feel
as sane as ever. Only, of what remains—Christ, how
I want to live it ! ’ He was silent for a moment and then
whispered to himself, remotely, almost in the thought-
images of the wistful Robert, dead and lost at Thiepval:
‘ God, the miracle of wheat. . . .’
He lay quiet for a little while, then turned his head
towards Malcom, restlessly. ‘ Wonder what’s beyond
the cliff, after all ? Thank God I’m an atheist ! . . . Did
you hear that R.C. padre last week asseverating that
152 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
anyone who goes West in the front line goes straight
to heaven—mixed symbolism and all ? ’
Malcom grunted. He considered the proper study of
R.C. mentality a subject for the pathologist.
‘ Yes—right to a de-loused immortality beyond the
reach of whizz-bangs. . . . What a life ! What a death ! ’
The Greek chuckled and stirred to exposition. ‘ Think
of the collisions among the various denominations
scooting skyward, all over the world at the moment, to
their various vexatious heavens. . . . Lord, what post¬
mortem retreats there have been : Paradise, Avilion,
Valhalla, Nirvana, Hades, Mictlan. . . . Wonder if
those rival blisses ever go to war ? Sure to. Must be
fun to be an Aztec ghost under Huitzilopochtli and lead
out a Mexican Expeditionary Force against Jehovah,
captaining the defunct Israelites. Or serve under Gabriel
when Jesus and Siva meet in dispute on some celestial
frontier. . . . Can’t you imagine the trumpeting and
tub-thumping and the posters pasted up all along the
Christian heaven : “ Why haven’t you military wings
up, young shade ? ” “ Jehovah expects every saint
post-dating the Reformation to do his duty.” “ Yahveh
wants you.” “ Armageddeon Courier ! Brightest News
and Pictures ! Virgin inspects detachment under Henry
VIII. Mohammed betrayed by a Houri: Reported in
Flight from Paradise.” ’
This was the kind of blasphemy they both found ex¬
ceedingly funny. Their laughter echoed up over No
Man’s Land. Malcom kept his eyes on the slumberous
Saxon lines the while Metaxa lay and searched the sky.
‘ Mictlan. . . . Those Central Americans were the
only logical theologians who ever lived. The Toltecs
and Aztecs, I mean. Not after centuries of progress
did they depart from the stern, unbending creed of their
fathers. They never transmogrified the old agricultural
cannibal sacrifice into a Communion with snippets of
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST 153
bread and sips of wine. All the necessary blood and none
of the unnecessary squeamishness. Your Wee Frees
were prinking Progressives compared with them. They
sat down to table after each sacrifice, nicely dressed in
scented clothes, and gossiped intellectually of art and the
weather and palace-building and the latest Nezahual-
coyotl ode the while they ate well-cooked cutlets sliced
from the slaves dragged screaming to the altar-stone an
hour before. . . . Christ—logicians who weren’t afraid
of the price of civilization ! . . . Different stock al¬
together from the Mayans.’
Malcom was mildly fogged, but interested. He knew
nothing then of Mexican archaeology, except what little
he had gathered in boyhood from the flowery pages of
the genteel Prescott. ‘ Much the same as the Aztecs,
weren’t they ? ’
‘ The Maya ? Good Lord, no. They weren’t Nahuas
at all. Doubt even if they were Red Indians. Never
read of them ? Never heard of your namesake, the Mayan
Maudslay ? . . . The only interesting people of pre¬
history—oh, not because my father was an American
and I’ve drunk cocktails in Greenwich Village.’
‘ Tell us about them.’
An aeroplane, black-crossed, droned overhead. A
Fokker fighter. In the north, beyond a clump of hills,
an artillery duel was creeping up to intensity against the
greyness of the afternoon, like a thread of mercury
creeping up a thermometer.
‘. . . came south into Central America two thousand
two hundred years ago, bringing with them a culture
which was ancient even then. They were alien to the
natives of the time: the Toltecs and Aztecs hadn’t
yet separated from the other Red Indian nations in the
north. And for seventeen hundred years, like men in a
nightmare, those lYIaya wandered Central America,
building cities and rearing stupendous monuments—
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
iS4
IVe seen photographs in the Peabody Museum and the
architecture’s extraordinarily good—and then abruptly
deserting cities and monuments and fleeing in a night.
They were old and decadent in Yucatan before the Danes
came to England. They were cannibals at the time of the
Norman Conquest. They left behind them, on temple
lintels and stelae and a few manuscripts, a script which is
still undeciphered. . . . That’s about all. They nearly
made me an archaeologist myself—I intended having a
shot at Central America when the Meyrin-Beard do
was over in the Mesaleekh. Think of them—cannibals
with a script—a script more ancient and involved than
the Chinese ! If a man could read the Mayan glyphs,
what story mightn’t they tell ? ’
‘ Raids and rapings, wars and widowings, hates and
horrors. The usual stuff.’
‘ Who knows ? They may have been the last fugitives
of drowned Atlantis. They may have evolved philosophy
before Plato, discovered gravitation before Newton.
They may have attempted and failed a civilization to
escape the horrors of civilization—half history’s a record
of such attempts. They may have built the City of the
Sun in some American bush—its ruins may lie there still.
. . . Compared with theirs our calendar is the work of a
dithering infant. They may once have had keys to all
the secrets of life and death and time.’ He rolled over.
‘ Perhaps the undeciphered glyphs contain the key to
even—that. ’
He nodded to where the Saxon lines were already dark
in the false twilight. Malcom lay beside him, his imagina¬
tion kindling, caught as ever by the wonder of such
fairy tale in the history of men.
‘ By God,’ he said, unconscious how far in the years
to come he was to pursue that resolution, ‘ I’m going to
learn more about your Maya.’
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST
i55
Subchapter iv
Early in 1918 they managed to get leave together—
their first leave since their arrival in France—and went
to Paris. There they spent a curiously oppressed eight
days, putting up at a little hotel, “ on the wrong side of
the Seine,” which catered almost exclusively for warrant
officers and N.C.O.’s of the British, Colonial, and Ameri¬
can armies. In Paris Malcom saw his first American ;
Paris was flooded with Americans.
‘ Negroes among them, too,’ he observed, unnecessarily.
Metaxa, eyebrows a-tilt, remonstrated. ‘ Coloured
men, Malcom, coloured men. No nigger alive admits
he’s black ; he is quite passionately coloured. Spectrum-
worship. . . . Fancy a white man speaking of himself
as a member of the bleached race ! Still, we wouldn’t
like to be called blancers. . . . Another bottle ? ’
They were sitting in the open air, looking at Paris.
Malcom shook his head.
‘ No thanks. Sour stuff.’
Metaxa ordered another bottle.
‘ I’ll drink your half. Then I’m going out to get a
woman. Coming ? ’
Slightly drunk, he leant his arms on the table and
grinned at Malcom’s unreproducible libel on French¬
women. After a solitary experiment Malcom had
practised a fastidious continence in France. All his life
there was something virginal in his nature which balked
at such ogling, leering, pawing—and yet matter-of-fact-
ness—as characterized the practice of French lust. Un¬
reasonably, he never ceased to detest the Latins for this
matter-of-factness which he himself championed in
theory. . . . Metaxa finished the bottle.
‘ Of course it’s foolishness and a waste of time—
not to mention that other waste you’ve so delicately
deplored. But what the hell does it matter to me ?
156 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Humanity might as well play itself out that way as any
other. Eve no children or any intention of fathering
any. Eve no faith in the future of those that are fathered.
Me, Em for the ants.’
‘ Eh ? ’
‘ The ants. When man wipes himself off the earth
as a disciple of Onan or in the next outburst of inter¬
national sadism, some other life-form will rise to take
control. Everything points to the ants. We blasted
mammals have had our show : we’re probably as doomed
as the dinosaurs. Way for the Insectidae ! I pin my
faith to the ants. . . . Christ, do you remember how I
bleated about the Defile of history that afternoon at
Stonehenge ? How the crook-boned apes might yet
reach beyond the sewers and cesspools of civilization to
the Light above the Pass ? What a bloody bleary an¬
thropoid I must have been ! ’
He had grown strangely bitter in the past six months.
Malcom watched him blankly.
‘ The Light—God, never ! A lump of seasonable
carrion in my belly and a warm hide against mine—the
best I can ever hope for. . . . Almost drunk again.
Em going. Go mad if I sit here and stare at the traffic
and think of the Line back there.’
He rose up, staggered a little, then put on his Sam
Browne and buckled it. ‘ How are you going to kill the
rest of the day ? ’
‘ Going to hunt up a book about the Mayans. Those
glyphs of theirs interest me.’
‘ The freak Azilian worrying over his grandmother’s
thigh-bone. . , . I prefer such members flesh-clad.’
He laughed, a little too loudly. ‘ Meet early to-morrow,
shall we ? Come to the Cafe Despruit at eleven ? ’
‘ Where is it ? ’
‘ Boul’ Mich’.’
Next day Malcom sat in the Cafe Despruit from half-
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST i57
past ten till half-past twelve, very little interested in
war-time Paris, but deep in the book he had purchased
that morning after a notable struggle to pronounce the
word ‘ Maya ’ French fashion. It was the Abbe Bras-
seur s translation of Landa’s Relacion de las cosas de
Yucatan which he had finally secured, and sitting reading
it he forgot for a little that aching unease awaiting him
and Metaxa in the east. It haunted him probably as
much as it did the Greek, though with an intense fore¬
boding oddly impersonal.
There came a rattling of chairs. Metaxa sat down
opposite him, ordered an absinthe, and drank the sickly
liquid with twitching lips. But he was not drunk and
showed no particular effects of dissipation but for an
odd look in his eyes, as though they had been sprinkled
with fine sand.
‘ Had a good time ? ’
. ‘ Bong> tray bong, as they say in the French classes
in Aberdeenshire. ... Oh, damned funny.’
‘ What ? ’ J
‘ Nine years ago my wife sat here with me in this cafe.
Her bag lay where you have that book. I remember the
nick in the arm of that chair.’
‘ Your wife ? I never knew you were married ’
Their eyes met and JVIalcom s shivered away from the
meeting. The Greek s voice droned in a thin, flat sine-
song. 6
Nine years ago. We’d been honeymooning in
England. T. hree months. Then we came through Paris
and later went on to Rome and so to Cairo. My architect
fees in Koubbah carried us through. We sat here one
afternoon and watched the Boul’ Mich’ go by. . . .
She was tired, I remember, and laid her head against
the back of that chair, and we were so friendly we
had no need to speak. Nine years ago. What’s the
book ? ’
158 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ Eh ? Landa’s Relacion. About the Mayans. Read
it ? ’
‘ I went to a Blue Lamp last night, Malcom, and bar¬
gained for a second-class “ amie,” because my money
was nearly done. The patronne had just one disengaged
at the moment, and sent me up to her. I went into the
room and—oh, Christ, Malcom—& was my wife ! ’
Subchapter v
He looked up and saw a patch of starlit sky, powdered
blue paling to a pearly effulgence. He stared at it un-
comprehendingly for a moment. And then he under¬
stood. It was moonrise.
He bit his lips and lay still, listening. The ravine
was filled with the mutilated undead. The stupefying
shock of wound and blow had passed, and agony with
distorted mouth whimpered amid the sprawling heaps.
A man somewhere to the right and below him cried for
water, pitifully, reasonably. ‘ Water—only a mouthful.
Only a mouthful, orderly. Oh, Christ, only a mouthful.
. . .’ Further up the slope someone screamed and
screamed, with a horrible rhythm in his screams.
Someone on the wire.
Presently, looking out and up, he saw against the
moonlight the sprawling brakes of wire, with broken
standards and torn stanchions, and beyond them, right
on the crest, a zig-zag against the sky, the German
trenches. He himself, tripping and twisting his ankle
in the evening attack of the Norsex, lay half-way up^ the
slope, but it was plain that not a man in ‘ A ’ or B
companies had gained the crest. Dark bundles of bloody
rags hung here and there amidst the strands. Above
him, to the right, half-hid by a little dip from the German
trench, but clear to his eyes in the ghastly light, one
figure hung upon the wire with drooping head and arms
outflung, grotesquely crucified. . . . Then the Maxim
THE DEFILE OF THE BEAST
bayed again and he ducked back into cover behind the
body of Sergeant Morgan, burrowing his chin in the mud
and feeling the dead body drum and quiver against his
steel helmet.
The Maxim choked and spluttered to silence. Some¬
where, behind, across the valley, a chloric light rose and
poised and burned with a green incandescence. He turned
ds head and watched it and then fell to listening again.
Should he attempt to crawl down the slope—or up to
that party which had gained the shelter of a shell-hole
just under the German wire to the left ? Had they
been wiped out ? The bombing of the spot from the
crest had ceased. ...
A great cloud blinded the moon. The machine-gun
opened again, raking the ground, apparently to guard
against the crawling approach of night-raiders. A bee
pinged and buzzed from the steel heel of his boot. His
rifle-sling, jerking free in the darkness, lashed him
across the face. The screamer on the wire ceased to
scream. The cries for water fell away into a drooling
under-moan.
Weie there any Germans left at all on the crest apart
rom those gunners ? Retreating everywhere, Metaxa
had said.
Metaxa ?
It must have been near midnight before the crucified
hgure on the wire awoke again to the torture of its torn
body and broke into screams and pleadings in a cres-
cen oing hysteria. The moonlight sprayed and dimmed
through the flapping of the ragged cloud-curtain, and
a com ay and heard the voice in the dance and sweep
of the frozen shadows. He lay and twisted and covered
ms ears and whimpered.
It was John Metaxa.
i6o
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Subchapter m
For hour upon hour—though they may have been
only so many minutes—he seemed to lie and listen to
the voiced anguish of the mutilated, mindless thing that
had once lived and moved and questioned the world and
loved him. And then an extraordinary calmness came
on him, that slobbering agony in his ears. He rose and
took his rifle and limped up the moonlit ravine, treading
and slipping amidst the spewn lumber of the dead.
He walked without concealment and without heed.
Once the machine-gun rattled down the slope again.
Not a bullet touched him.
With every upward step he took the screaming tore
more fiercely at his ear-drums. ...
When he stumbled into the leftwards crater under
the German wire he found some half-dozen men and a
corporal still alive. He stumbled amongst them, and
avoided a bayonet thrust, and was recognized.
‘ Christ, Sergeant, you ! Thought you’d gone West
with “A.” Where Ve you been ? ’
Malcom laughed foolishly and sat down and heard his
own whisper from very far away. ‘ The Defile of the
Beast ! The Defile of the Beast! ’ #
‘ Sorry I nearly jabbed you, but I’m jumpy as hell.
There’s a poor bastard on the wire there been screaming
his guts out. . . . Quiet now.’
‘ I killed him,’ said Malcom.
BOOK II
BIRTH-PANGS
Some work of noble note may yet be done,
Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods.
Ulysses.
L
CHAPTER ONE
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS
Subchapter i
FOUR years later he used to lie awake in his bed
in the Buxworths’ house in Chelsea and watch such
crudely tinted, retina-projected chromos of the War years
pass and re-pass in the darkness fading into London
dawns, the while the window-curtains grew grey and then
faintly stained with scarlet radiance reflected from the
River. He had developed the habit of awakening at
that hour, and in all he was ever to write there was dawn
symbolism and dawn analogies ad nauseam. Some mental
trick or twist such as awakens the fishermen with the
tides brought him out of sleeping with the coming of light,
into sharp and uncomforted wakefulness, to watch the
slow beginnings of day upon his window-sill. In such
hours every vivid incident of every year he had lived
would unroll on the film of his memory against the fading
twilight, torn pictures with ragged edges and faceless
puppets sprinkled with a leprous dust. . . .
But the Buxworths’ house: it was old, narrow, semi¬
detached, with an enormous basement damp as a cellar,
and sprouting grey-green fungi in unexpected corners.
George Buxworth, sweating through this basement with a
scuttleful of coal, would come unexpectedly upon those
fungi and invoke Christ, dispassionately. Jane Bux¬
worth waged unending war with them. The baby,
Steven, escaping her eye a moment, would wriggle towards
a new-silvered, lichenous growth ecstatically, prod it
stickily, taste it, and be sick.
Like Malcom, the baby had a habit of awakening at
dawn. He was thirteen months old, and very active, and
neither George nor Jane got much peace after his cere¬
monial wailings and preliminary Growings had announced
another day. He slept on a peculiar cot arrangement
i63
164 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
against their bed, but on a higher level, and would, every
morning, crawl the plank on to the parental couch and
land plumply and weightily on some portion of Jane’s
warm and placid body. Malcom would hear that thump
in the room below him : the ceiling was so thin that
George had resigned himself to the fact that his lodger
was unremote from much of his private life. He said
the position gave him the notion of a comfortably
Jehovahistic universe. . . .
After the preliminary shock would come tentative
scufflings. This was the baby exploring, seeking his
guiding light—George’s flame of red hair. The hair was
never pulled. Jane said Steven just sat and stared at it in
an unbelieving sort of way, or pried inquisitively into
George’s ears and eyes, or placed his hands on the
sleeper’s chest and peered into the cavity of his mouth.
At that George would groan and wake, sweep the baby
aside into the arms of the somnolent Jane, get out of bed,
stamp ill-temperedly and yawn, with a kind of hollow
moaning proceeding from his wind-passages. At exactly
that moment the alarum-clock would go off. It was
placed on the mantelshelf, at the other side of the bed
from George—so placed by George himself, because he
had found keeping it comfortably near at hand was useless;
in such latter circumstance he had merely reached out in
semi-consciousness, switched it off, and gone to sleep
again. So it was relegated afar off, on the theory that he’d
have to get out of bed and extinguish it, and thus be
thoroughly wakened. But when the baby overslept
himself to clocktime, the theory collapsed. Malcom
would hear a pillow hit the buzzing machine, a faint
crash as it and the pillow hit the floor, then a muffled
buzzing trailing into silence. . . . When, as was cus¬
tomary, Steven had evicted his father before the
set time, George, struggling midway in his shirt,
would be taken unawares by the buzzer and stumble
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS
i65
blasphemously amidst chairs and other impedimenta
in an effort to silence the product of his native
land. . . .
And, like Jehovah, Mai com would lie above, listening
to those things and watching the mornings of 1923-24.
Sometimes they were late in coming, for a dense foam
of fog would blossom up from the River and drape the
outside of the window with changing curtains of silk-
shot yellow. Then George, after silencing the clock
with a pillow, would reawaken late, start off late, door¬
banging thunderously, and they would hear the clat-clat of
his feet as he ran to catch a L.U.T. tram. Half an hour
later Malcom would hear Jane coming up the stair with
his delayed cup of tea. She would knock at the door
and come in, yawningly and trailingly, George’s old red
dressing-jacket negligently looped across her breast, her
pyjama-trousers belted so high that they always left
bare six inches or so of leg and ankle. The lodger would
sit up and take the cup, and they would yawn at each
other, friendlily.
She generally sat on the edge of the bed and smoked a
cigarette the while he drank the tea. She would sit on one
imperfectly trousered leg and swing the other, her
shoulders hunched, her short-cut brown hair falling over
her eyes as she regarded her rhythmic slipper. She had
the calmest of brown eyes and the calmest, Malcom
thought, of brown souls.
‘ Where are you going to-day, M.M. ? ’
‘ No idea. Wet ? ’
‘ ’S a fish. Hear George last night ? ’
‘ No.’
‘ ’D nightmare. Fell out of bed.’
‘ Christ.’
‘ He said more than that. Fell on a nail, I think.’
They would smoke and meditate on the nocturnal
gambollings of George. He would fall out of bed on the
166 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
very least provocation. He dreamt very active dreams
and insisted on living them.
‘ Eaoughh ! . . . Have to feed Steven. Coming down
to breakfast ? ’
She had been a Civil Servant in the days before George,
on leave from the Rhine, had married her. She made
horrible breakfasts, blackened and burnt. Malcom would
shake his head.
‘ No. Not hungry.’
‘ Liar. All right. Oh, George said he thought there
was a clerk’s job going in the counting-house of the
Crocodile.'
‘ It can go to blazes.*
‘ That’s what I told him you’d say. . . . There’s
baby.’
Or George himself, early awakened, would appear with
the same cup and stand beside the window going through
complicated physical jerks while Malcom, with faint
memories of Rita, advised and instructed him with parade-
ground-like obscenity. George got little exercise as
* literary ’ editor of the Crocodile.
1 Dry up, M.M. You’ll corrupt our dear soldiers.
See my yesterday’s review of Blankety-Dash’s new war
book ? *
It was the year of romantic war-books, when soldiers
still cheered as they went over the top, and loved the
colonel, and spoke of the enemy, indignantly, and with a
suitable aitchlessness, as Uns.
‘No.’
‘ Sloshed the bloody rat good and hard. Knew him
at Festubert. On the British staff ; never saw the front
line in his life. An empimpled little swine with a washy
eye and a dirty vindictiveness. Eh ? Oh, the usual stuff.
“ Such comradeship as men never knew before ”...
“ If ever the mother country should send her clarion-
call ringing across the world again ” ’
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS
167
‘ What’d you do, George ? ’
* Me ? Have the old lady smacked and put to bed
with a mustard-plaster. . . . Shoulder me gun like a
simple Nero. By God, I would. And I don’t think.'
He still found a simple pleasure in English slang
and colloquialisms, occasionally disastrously wrecked by
the insertion of an inappropriate ‘ gotten.’ The son of a
Chicagoan publisher, he had enlisted in the Canadians
in 1915, had become an infantry captain, had transferred
to the British Royal Engineers, had been three times
wounded and twice gassed. Reversing the order of
fiction and history, and following a very usual course
among American younger sons, he had settled in England
as the land of opportunities, his Army service standing
him good for naturalization. Malcom had met him in
the Rhine Occupation (they had both extended their
service beyond normal War engagements), and they had
fraternized with each other and the enemy to the pre¬
judice of good order and military discipline. George
had been demobilized in 1922, Malcom a year later.
‘ That bounty of yours must be slipping a bit low.
Why don’t you get a job ? I can edge the Crocodile
into providing you with something easy and lead-swinging,
if you still want a rest.’
‘ Damn the Crocodile. Scavenging’s not in my line,
George. I don’t want anything to do with Fleet Street.’
‘ We ain’t in Fleet Street, sir, she said, but in the
Lane of Shoe. What’s your lay to-day ? ’
‘ Hawking. Door to door, as usual. Chocolates and
Christmas cards.’
‘ But hell, it’s Spring.’
‘ All the cheaper, both of them. Nice line in robins and
homosexual saints, mum.’
‘ You’re potty. Honest to God, M.M., what the devil
are you wasting your life for ? ’
He would be honestly vexed over this matter at least
168 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
seven times a week. He had a bright grey eye and healthy
cheeks, and a broken, inquisitive nose. He got little
satisfaction from the ex-sergeant.
‘ For fun, George. Tm still—an explorer from Mars.
Don’t worry. I’ll pitch on something. There’s Jane
calling.’
So it would be. She would sing out ‘ breakfast ’ in
a high, clear tenor. They would avoid looking at each
other, elaborately, with visions of charred porridge and
blackened bacon. George would reclaim his lodger’s
cup and prepare to go.
Oh, dust and ashes, once found sweet to smell ”
See you to-night.’
Subchapter ii
He had discovered London. “ I don’t mean the place
exploited in guide-books and literary weeklies by those
odd little freaks of twitterment who imagine that London
is Fleet Street and the City, and find every stone and
corner hallowed by memory of that adipose conceit who
trailed across the late eighteenth century like a disgusting
slug. But the real London ”
Johnson’s London came hardly at all into that Autumn-
Winter of 1923 and Spring of 1924 when he knocked
from door to door as agent for Christmas cards and gramo¬
phones and deaf-aids and vacuum cleaners and floor-
polishes and photograph-enlargements and contraceptive
devices. His range ran from the Buxworths’ house in
Chelsea north through Kensington and Hammersmith
and Shepherd’s Bush, Netting Hill, Paddington, Kilburn,
Hampstead, north-east through Highgate, Hornsey,
Crouch End, Walthamstow, south-west through Holloway,
Stoke Newington and Kentish Town, out of regions where
festered the ancient lowly, the cheated of the sunlight,
with little money for sheer necessities, far less the luxuries
he hawked, into areas of grubby respectability and
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS 169
‘ No Hawkers’-defended semi-detachment. He became
acquainted with innumerable coffee-stall people and such¬
like folk and an authority on the whereabouts of unex¬
pected little parks and seats, haunted by mothers with
babies in the daytime and by prostitutes with clients in
the evening. He disentangled bus-routes and speediness
from tram-routes and cheapness. He accumulated stores
of wisdom regarding the inhabitants of strange roads
and lanes and lost little culs-de-sac piled behind Euston
and the White City and St. John’s Hospital. Backed by
the fact that his Army bounty was still unexhausted, and
that failure to gain profits was therefore no synonym for
immediate failure to exist, he did excellent trade in the
most unexpected merchandise to the most unexpected
clients.
There were scores of others in the same trade—many
of them ex-Service people, like himself. Some wore their
medals. Some, like Malcom, had their decorations lying
at the bottom of the English Channel. Some favoured
applying a sudden foot in a rapidly closing door, when the
hour was between noon and four o’clock and no men¬
folk about, and using a toothy snarl to force the pace and
trade. Others were experts in exhaustion and wan smiles.
He met one girl, May Laymore, with whom he struck up
a temporary partnership in a stationery-and-stamping-
machine business : the machine, after a few simple
pressures and adjustments, stamped any address required.
May carried the stationery. Malcom stamped.
They were ostensibly a married couple, and actually
so one particularly wintry night which overtook them far
up in the wilds of Whetstone, with much territory awaiting
their exploitation next morning—exploitation to be carried
out in haste, for their lay was being copied and others were
on their track with reductions and scrolled lettering. So
they stayed the night in a frowsy little hotel, sharing a
room for cheapness and warmth and to keep in accord
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
170
with their reputation. The dimly-illumined wallpaper
represented strange things like ineffective green cater¬
pillars crawling among decayed vegetation. The rain and
sleet slivered up and down the window-panes and under
the thin blankets the two hawkers hugged each other
desperately, more out of cold than affection. . . .
Yet even that incident, like every other of his hours
and days, merely deepened his detachment. An explorer
from Mars, unexcited, uninterested, he had watched the
new years rise and fade and rise again, bloodily manured,
from the fields of Flanders. In those London dawns in
the room above the River he would lie unstirred and
watch other Malcoms, dead, dispossessed, strange and
remote, incomprehensibly enthusiastic, incomprehensibly
alien : Malcom of the Dundon College, Malcom of Glas¬
gow, Malcom of Salisbury Plain, Malcom in France. . . .
He would close his eyes and turn to the wall again, with
the sounds of day-stirred London growing in volume
below him and the whistlings of some laden barge piercing
up from the mist-hazed River.
Subchapter Hi
George and Jane Buxworth charged their lodger ten
shillings a week for his room and would beguile him into
consuming carefully-plotted ‘ chance ’ meals whenever he
was absent-minded enough or hungry enough to be
unable to resist their charity. They would lay the most
elaborate traps to feed him forcibly. The baby Steven
was a notable auxiliary in their campaign. When Malcom
first arrived from Germany to stay at the Chelsea house
Steven was still being fed by Jane : she was the only
woman Malcom had ever seen feeding a baby, and she
did it in a fashion not only natural, but beautiful—“ two
very different things.” She did it in his presence. She
was the most calmly assured person he had ever met.
“ I watched her and almost felt proud to be a mammal,”
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS 171
The truth was that she found as deep—but no more
deep—a pleasure in the feeding of Steven as she did in
most things physical. She could eat her own charred
bacon with sacramental enjoyment, she breathed into
healthy lungs as though each breath of air was Alpine
oxygen. She had a physical enjoyment in living that
faintly interested and astounded Malcom, his own days in
the Ring and at strenuous fatigues long past. He was told
that while Steven was being born she had sat up in bed
and demanded to see her baby before he was well in
the world.
Fed, the baby would gurgle, sated, and then, if Malcom
was present, would turn his head and crow, desirously, for
his black hair. Malcom always obliged. Steven’s
tentative, sticky hands in his hair aroused inhimthe queer¬
est feelings. The baby seemed somehow to share them.
His starings of wonderment over Malcom’s dark poll
would cease suddenly and his solemn explorings result
in abrupt and quite unwarranted gurglings of mirth.
He would cling to Malcom’s hair and rock over a secret
jest, his toes curling ecstatically. When George was
present he would grin over those displays and utter
Rabelaisian warnings. Jane would survey lodger and
progeny placidly.
‘ You ought to get married and have a baby yourself,
M.M.’
‘ My God ! ’ George would appeal, shocked. ‘ Women !
What’ll they want us to do next ? ’
Jane would be unperturbed. ‘ Oh, of course, I mean
his wife. . . .’
One night, when they supposed him asleep, Malcom
overheard a drowsy arguing between George and Jane.
‘ What’s really wrong with M.M., George ? Was he
shell-shocked ? ’
‘ Eh ? I dunno. Why ? *
‘ Don’t be silly. You know he’s not, well—normal.
172 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
I think he’s married already and half lost his memory,
or something. Did you notice his face when I said he
ought to get married ? ’
‘ Hmph.’ Sound of an impatient floundering.
‘ Don’t wallow. . . . Well, did you ? ’
‘ You’ve been reading the serial in Peg's Paper—The
Mill-Girl's Triplets, or something. Go to sleep, my good
woman.’
Another grunt. Silence. Soliloquy.
‘ Some girl, I think. Perhaps in France. I think she
must have been going to have a baby. He’s crazy about
Steven. Secretly crazy. Doesn’t realize it himself. And
do you notice he never talks about France ? Only listens
to you and then switches on to something else.’
‘ Kept a vivandiere in a shell-hole, no doubt, and visited
her twice nightly. Christ, you women ! What do you
think we did in France ? Hung round red lamps all the
time ? ’
‘ Blue for officers, weren’t they, dear ? ’
Another silence. Then : ‘ Sorry, George. That was
mean. But M.M. worries me.’
‘ Why ? ’
‘ What’s he going to do with himself ? He can’t sell
bootlaces and Christmas cards forever. He has twice as
much brains as you have.’
‘ Thanks.’
‘ I’ve heard you say it yourself. And why does he hate
newspapers so much ? ’
Malcom leant out of bed, picked up a shoe, and dropped
it on the floor with a thud.
‘ Crikey ! That you, M.M. ? ’
‘ No other.’
Silence. Jane :
‘ Sorry to gossip about you, M.M., but you are a
mystery-bag, aren’t you ? ’
‘ Shut up, Jane. And you go to sleep, M.M. She’s
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS 173
gotten out of hand, but I’ll silence her though I’ve to use
agag-’
‘ Don’t bother. . . . There’s no mystery, Jane. I hate
newspapers because I was fired from one for stealing
money to finance a socialist group. I never mention
France because I murdered my best friend there. He
was caught on the wire and I went out and bayoneted
him. The baby business is about as simple. I was the
father of one that was never born. Its mother was killed
in an accident before we could get married.’
He heard George say ‘ Hell,’ inadequately. Then
Jane’s voice, clear and casual :
‘ Feel sleepy, M.M. ? ’
‘ Not a bit.’
‘ Neither do I. George’ll get up and make us some
cocoa.’
Malcom was already out of bed. ‘ He needn’t. I’ll
bring you some.’
He sat on the edge of their bed and they all drank, in
a dim radiance of starshine from the window. No light
was turned on, lest the baby awake and demand a share,
with his usual sociability. They felt they were stealing
a march on him.
It was the end of Spring. Looking through the window,
Malcom could see the far blur of whiskey advertisements
over the Thames. The River had brought a ghostly
warmth and sweetness out of its uplands into London,
and suddenly, for the first time since he had left it,
Malcom felt a pang of home-sickness for Leekan. Jane,
dim and cup-poising against the pillows, was displaying
what George characterized, sotto voce, as the cloven hoof
beneath the cocoa.
1 You really can’t go on as you’re doing, M.M. Why
don’t you join the socialists again—or the communists ?
Or write something ? You’re—oh, you’re very annoying
to be fond of.’
i74 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ You’re a dear, Jane. If we lived in Thibet I’d ask
George to share you with me. . . . Oh, I know I’m a
fool. But I can’t help it—don’t want to very much,
perhaps. Anthropophobia. . . . You two people—and
Steven—are the only people who don’t make me sick to
be intimate with. I’m poisoned, somehow. . . . And
I can’t read, far less write. I’ve tried. It’s like—like
going to the bottom of the sea without a diving-suit:
I just go blind and fuzzy. Do you think I sell bootlaces
from choice ? It’s the only job where I needn’t know any¬
one for more than five minutes on end.’ He thought of
May Laymore. ‘ Or not much longer.’
Jane didn’t seem to be listening. She was leaning
across the bed to look out of the window. ‘ I think it’ll
be a good day to-morrow. Sunday. We’ll all go and
picnic in Epping Forest. You can carry the baby,
Malcom.’ She was again facing him. ‘ You know, all
that you’ve said is—oh ! silly.’ Resolutely : ‘I’ll think
of things to-morrow and show you it is.’
Subchapter iv
Next morning George cooked an early breakfast while
Jane flapped a negligent duster and Malcom squatted
on the floor and built brick houses for Steven. As soon
as one erection was complete Steven would gurgle at it,
assume a cunning solemnity, reach out a sudden fist
and demolish it shatteringly. . . .
Sunshine filled the smokeless London Sunday as they
set out. It was nine o’clock and the River gleaming un¬
fogged. Jane wore a pink frock and a cloche hat, George
a horrible new suit with purplish effects, Steven the exig¬
uous white and Malcom the shabby garments provided
him on demobilization—all he possessed. At a kiosk on
the edge of the Forest George bought the Observer, to
sit on in case the grass should be damp and to spread over
his face in case he should want to sleep in the sun. u
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS 175
They had lunch by the edge of a thicket and a pond.
Steven, left unguarded, crawled off and attempted suicide
by drowning, and was rescued by Malcom in the nick
of time. It was very warm. The green of the trees some¬
times quivered to purple. The birds all over the Forest
were indulging in a quick, hot chirping, or standing and
genuflecting as they drank with beady eyes round and
unwinking. George, having read Mr. Garvin, groaned,
sat on a portion of him, covered his face with the rest, and
relapsed into sleep. A stray terrier came and sniffed at
him, brightly and suspiciously, till the baby routed it with
determined efforts to deprive it of its tail. Jane sat and
clasped her knees and pondered her lodger.
She did most of the talking. Malcom sat and listened
and watched Steven and occasionally looked at the talker’s
very white neck. He records a characteristic thought :
His wonder then that two civilized beings, inculcated with
the straying and shameful lusts of millenia, could sit and
like each other without having anything in common in the
way of food or desire. It was a stirring of his old, restless
curiosity and he sat astounded at it. Jane seemed to
know his thoughts.
‘ It’s funny you and I are so friendly, M.M., and
not a bit in love.’
He said something about George having been too
quick for him, and suggested drowning the journalist
while he slept. Jane observed her husband, placidly.
‘ He’s too wicked to drown. And I’m not the kind of
girl you want at all. I’m too English. You want someone
more like yourself—a dark and excitable person.’
‘ I’m not excitable, surely ? ’
‘ Of course you are. And sentimental. This girl of
yours who died, and your friend you killed so splendidly :
they still live so much for you that they’re killing your
life.’
‘ Is that sentiment ? ’
176 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ Yes. Pitiful, too, M.M. I know you’ve never really
thought of that friend, either. He’s just been an awful
ache, a live abscess in your mind. ... I think you’ve
almost completely forgotten the girl. What was the colour
of her hair ? ’
He pondered. A dim fairy smiled at him, colourless,
across the years. ‘ I don’t remember. . . . Well ? ’
‘ You’ve no right to forget—anything of her or of
him. They’re your life now. You’re killing, while you
keep them only abscess-alive, all the fine things they gave
you to carry on. They can see and feel things only
through you now : Sun, moon, stars, and oh, all the rest
of it: that pond there, and the Embankment under
rain at night, and the fun of sleeping with a girl and seeing
a baby twiddle its toes.’
She stopped, shading her eyes from the sun, and think¬
ing. She was of all people he knew the least poetical
and so could occasionally beat out poetry from sheer
plainness of words. ‘ For these they gave their immor¬
tality,' said a forgotten quotation.
‘ I’ll certainly fall in love with you in a minute, Jane.’
‘ Oh no, you won’t. Only with living again.’
I don’t think I was ever in love with living. It was
something else. ’ He sought back through dusty memories.
‘ Religion, I think.’
‘ Religion ? ’
‘ Oh, not gods and prayers and altar-whinings. The
light that never was. Something—some fairy-tale I
lived. It had to do with the horizon and the Milky Way,
I remember—Heaven knows why ! ’
She shook her head. George and the baby slept on
the Observer, Goths deaf to its urgencies. They seemed
very remote from the world of Chelsea.
‘ I’m not religious even that way. The good things
and the plain things are what I want.’
‘ Sleeping with George and having his babies and—
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS 177
and eating kippers and toasting your toes in front of
a fire ? ’
She took up the litany. ‘ And going through grass
barefoot—we do every year on our holiday in Norfolk—
and having a tide come splashing against your skin, and
feeling sleepy, and sleeping, and ’
And love it was the best of them and sleep worth
all the rest of them.” I agree. So what are you trying to
make me believe ? ’
‘ Why, that love and sleep aren’t the best of them—for
you. You’re meant for something different. You know
you are. You’d never really believe that thing you’ve
just quoted—not though you lived it for years. . . . And
that’s why I like you, I think. That’s why your friend
did—oh, perhaps he was tired and sick as well in that war¬
time, but it was the real you he loved. Must have been.
And the horizon and the Galaxy—they’re still there,
aren t they ? There’s still that Something you once
believed in.’
He stared at her, half-startled. ‘ Once. . . . Metaxa
said that.’
‘ Your friend ? ’
He nodded.
‘ And he knew—he must have known. You yourself
couldn t have borne to go on living if somewhere, deep
down, you hadn’t known it as well. ... Sit and think of
it, like a dear, and mind the baby. He’s wakened again.
I’m going to sleep down by that bush.’
I he baby stopped crawling on the smooth, cropped
grass. With determination in his eyes, his small posterior
bulging, his legs strained and pillar-like for the great
adventure, he was attempting to stand upright. He caught
Malcom s eye, gurgled a little self-consciously, and
promptly collapsed.
Malcom spent the afternoon teaching him to walk.
M
178 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Subchapter v
Next morning the Chelsea household overslept and
George had to go without breakfast. The postman had
brought a single letter. It was for the lodger and bore
the Leekan postmark :
‘ Dear Malcom,
I have been long writing you but here I am now*
We are all keeping well and getting on fine. I had a letter
from Jessie in Canada and she was asking about you.
Peter is foreman at Mains of Tulha. Tom and me manage
the Chapel fine. It is three years come yesterday since
father died. Tom has a lass now. Her name is Sarah
Mondynes. She fell into a hole in the moor and nearly
broke her legs last week. The hole was dug by Mr.
Stevenson, looking for bones. He was asking about you.
We hope you are getting on fine in London. Tom saw
the Dominie in Leekan on b riday and he was asking about
you. Miss Domina is coming home for her holidays.
She comes every year. She comes by boat.^ Roberts
wife married Jock Edwards three weeks ago. They have
gone to live in Dundee. He is a butcher. That is all the
news now so I will stop with love from Lilian and Tom.
Malcom took this letter out on the day’s rounds and
read it at intervals and thought of Leekan. June. The
hay would be coming fine as—God, how many years
before !  Robert, in the filth of France, had seen it
coming, that evening they sat together. Robert, forgotten
with all the rest of them, the ‘ bonniest ane 5 whom he
had adored in his shy fashion, who had lain in his arms at
the ‘ cotter hoose at Pittaulds ’—she was now the property
of the broad-buttocked Jock Edwards whom he had kicked
in the broom-thickets of Leekan School. . . .
He sat and thought of that incident. He sat by the pond
in Ravenscourt Park, watching the ducks diving for
AN EXPLORER FROM MARS
179
worms, remembering Leekan, Robert, Jock Edwards.
Jean—Jean something-or-other, and Domina Riddoch,
. . . The peewits crying and crying down the sun-hazed
Valley. The corn’ll be coming fine.
He sat up. What was that but Robert, unforgotten,
living in him. Jane—who would have suspected her a
poet !
A tramp came and sat down beside him and asked for
money. Malcom gave him a shilling and then disregarded
him, and fell to thinking again. His father, his mother,
dark and still, his boyish ‘ Azilian ’—that boy who had
practised gentlemanly gestures on Stane Muir—Rita—
Metaxa—Robert : if they were of him, living and undead,
all of them ? For what ? What had they laboured to
shape and bring to birth through him ? Something,
surely, after all. . . . For what equipping of what dream-
adventure, all unknowing, had they lived and died ?
And then, before his eyes, a vision in the sunlight
weather, a boy of five came up out of the years, stumbling
and plodding, a stone clasped in each small fist, his gaze
upon the horizon. . . .
Subchapter vi
He ate his dinner in a fuggy little chop-house near
Hammersmith Broadway. As he was going out the
proprietor, a small, anxious man, called him back.
‘ Your pack, mate. Leaving it behind.’
‘ So I was.’
He carried it out and went down to Hammersmith
Bridge and flung it overboard amidst a great circling of
excited gulls. It fell, fountain-splashing, scaring a
stray boatman. Malcom walked home to Chelsea, along
the embankment, startling Jane at the washing-tub.
‘ Hello. No trade ? Oh, if you’ve anything you
want washing, bring it down to me. I’ve lots of hot
water going waste. . . . Where’s your pack ? ’
i8o THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ It must be near Tilbury by now.’
‘ What ? ’
‘ You egged me on to do it. I dropped it over
Hammersmith Bridge.’
Her eyes lighted up, placidly. ‘ You’re mad. You
didn’t.’
‘ I did. I’m going home to Scotland for a while.
Oh, I’m coming back. I must get away from London
and think things out. You’re to blame.’
‘ Have you any money ? ’
‘ I’m all right. I’ve about fifty pounds. Hello ! ’
He had felt something poke against his knee. It was
the baby, Steven, pulling himself upright with a solemn
determination.
CHAPTER TWO
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE
Subchapter i
TWO days later he was in Leekan, and the morning
after his arrival was jerked out of sleep by the
sound of a clear, cool voice below his window.
‘ Tom ! Hello, are you in, Tom Maudslay ? ’
Tom ? Still drowsy, Malcom sat up in bed and
listened.
A low-voiced colloquy was taking place beside the
garden wall. He could not hear a word of it. Once an
ejaculation of surprise rose clear. Then a burst of
laughter. Finally there was the sound of quickly¬
retreating footsteps, as of those of a lightly-shod runner.
Malcom got out of the muckle bed wherein he and
three brothers had once slept and put his head through
the window. Directly beneath him his brother Tom,
the short and ruddy farmer of Chapel o’ Seddel, was
standing, a canny grin on his face, staring down the
road that led to the Valley. Malcom craned to look,
but the steadings hid his view.
‘ What’s the joke ? ’
Tom started and looked up.
* Hello, Malcom man. Sleep fine ? ’
‘ Fine.’
‘ That’s fine. We’ve jist had a visitor to see you.’
His grin deepened. His gaze strayed to the object he
was watching cross the Valley.
‘ See me? ’
‘ Aye, an she’s comin back. You’ll have to hurry up
an come doon. Breakfast’s nearly ready. ’ He shouldered
the stable fork he had been leaning on, turned away,
stopped, and grinned again, fascinatedly. ‘ God, I
wish she bided in Leekan. She’d waken it up ! ’
‘ Who ? ’
181
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
182
But the exasperating Tom had disappeared into the
byre. Malcom gave it up, indifferently, and, standing
in his pyjamas, filled an early pipe. In the stable the
three farm-horses clumped and tail-swished, each
munching a swede. Lilian was clanking her milk-pails
in the dairy. Malcom, pausing with lit match, was
aware of some scent of the morning and the Valley
momentarily puzzling him. He leant out of the window
again.
Clover ?
The Valley seemed drugged with the smell of it. Pie
turned his head. Above Chapel o’ Seddel, beyond its
firwood, Stane Muir was being lit by the sun into
polychrome sheets of fire—grey, wavering sheets of peat-
burn fading into the red-shot yellow of wood-flame,
into the golden purple of sacked palaces. . . . Heather ?
Who the devil had the visitor been ?
The sounds in the dairy ceased. Hurried footsteps
below.
‘ Mal-com ! Breakfast ! ’
He opened the bedroom door and leant over the
stair-rails, demanding information.
‘ Lilian ! ’
His sister emerged from the kitchen, stumpy and
red-cheeked as Tom, red-haired to boot, upturning a
cooking-flushed, freckled face.
‘ Who was Tom’s visitor ? ’
* Her ? Och, that was only Miss Domina.’ The
Lowland Scots of Chapel o’ Seddel, like that of the rest
of Leekan, had been anglicized almost out of recognition
in the ten years since 1914. ‘ She’s hame at the School-
house on holiday.’
‘ Domina ? Domina Riddoch ? ’
‘ That’s her. She came down the hill the noo nearly
naked and I ran in, I was sic ashamed, and left Tom
to go oot and speak to her. He didna mind ! ’
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 183
‘ Naked ? ’
‘ Gey nearly. Footba shorts and a vest. She’d been
havin a run ower the moor before breakfast—to waken
herself up, she told Tom. Found some rabbits in Tom’s
snares and killed them and brought them doon. . . .
Gracious, that’s yer bacon burnin ! ’
She fled. Malcom dressed, once or twice pausing
to listen to the day-awakened Valley. Backgrounding
the cry of the peewits, ceaseless as ever, was a sound
as unending, but plangent, rhythmic—the plashing of
the North Sea on the beaches of Pitgowrie. Chairs
scraped in the kitchen. He went down and found Tom,
Lilian, and the hired man—a colourless, ineffective
youth, a nephew of Mayven of Cairndhu—each seated
in front of an immense plate of porridge. Tom had a
motor-bike and sidecar and Lilian went to a picture-
house once a week, but the porridge survived all changes.
A smaller plate was set for Malcom. His bacon still
frizzled in the frying-pan. No one else ate it at Chapel
o’ Seddel. He was being treated like the foreigner he
had felt the night before.
‘ We’re off to start hay-cuttin in the lang field, Malcom.
But we winna expect the help you promised last night.
The visitor’ll be up for you at nine o’clock sharp, she
said.’
‘ Impudence,’commented Lilian, fussing overMalcom’s
plate.
‘ Och, I dinna ken.’ Tom swilled the creamy milk
round his bowl, mixed it satisfactorily, took a long drink,
and recommenced operations with his spoon. ‘ She’s
fine.’ He grinned at his brother. ‘ Only dinna fa in
love with her, Malcom. Ower much competition, they
say, though you’ll hae a clear day the day. “ Tell him he
can act as my beater,” she said, when I’d given her
leave to shoot rabbits up in the moor, and she’d found
out you were here. “ He’ll do that fine,” I said. “ He’s
184 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
been a sodger and can dodge your gun a right.” She
laughed and then off she ran, licht as a deer, wi hardly
a stitch or a steek on her. . . . God, she’s bonny ! ’
The hired youth produced a faint smirk.
‘ Bonnier than Sarah Mondynes ? ’
‘ Och, Sarah’s fine. Though she wears ower mony
clothes a the time.’
‘ Tom ! ’
This was Lilian. Malcom ate his porridge. His
curiosity was mounting.
‘ This—it’s the Domina Riddoch I used to go to
school with, isn’t it ? ’ (Tom nodded.) ‘ I’d almost
forgotten her. What does she want to see me about ? ’
Lilian ate bread and butter and marmalade. ‘ Hm,’
she commented, expressively, but obscurely. Tom
grinned again, without malice. He had turned out a
cheerful character.
‘ Oh, nothing, I spose. Wants to see you. You
baith live in London. She’s a chemist there, ye ken.
Comes hame for a holiday every year, an God, she aye
manages to shock Leekan.’ He turned to his sister.
‘ Mind that time in the kirk the year before last ? ’
The hired man guffawed, then choked on a final
mouthful. Tom thumped the choker’s back, helpfully,
choking himself. Lilian compressed her lips. ‘ I mind it.’
‘ What happened ? ’ asked Malcom.
‘ Och, it was only an accident. ... It was, Lil.
I dinna suppose she ever goes into a London church.
D’you, Malcom ? I wouldna myself if the picturehoose
was open here on Sundays. ... It was last year. She
turned up at the kirk wi her uncle—the Dominie, ye
ken. It was awfu hot weather, and the Reverend
Stevenson’s sermon was gey long an drawn oot. Aboot
half the congregation was jist noddin in sleep when
Miss Domina shook herself, pulled oot a case, cracked a
match, an lit a cigarette. Auld Ian nearly fell oot o
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 185
his pulpit. You could have heard a pin drop. And then
she gave herself another shake, looked round aboot
her, said “ hell ! ”—we a heard it—dropped the cigarette,
put her foot on it, an leaned back as though nothing had
happened. . . . God, ye could hae lit another cigarette
at her uncle the Dominie’s face, it was so red ! ’
‘ Showin-off,’ said Lilian.
‘ Och, she jist forgot. Anyhow, she’ll soon be here,
Malcom, an she wants you to bring some oatcakes on
the jaunt. The Schoolhouse’ll supply the rest o the
picnic, she said.’
Lilian got up. ‘ I’ll pack you some in a parcel noo.
You’re gettin a fine day. . . . One thing, you haven’t
a wife who can cite her as a co-respondent.’
‘ A what ? ’
Tom gave a grunt and rose to his feet. ‘ You’re in
for it a. See you enjoy yoursel. Come on, Willie.’
Malcom turned to Lilian as they clumped out.
‘ Co-respondent ? ’
‘ Aye, she was, right enough. Twice. It was in a
the papers.’
‘ Twice ? ’
‘ Aye. With only two years between the cases. The
Dominie could hardly look a body in the face when the
scandals happened in London. Puir man. And she
wasna defended at the courts, and there’s no speak o
her marryin either o the divorced men. . . . Mrs.
Greig o Redleafe was the only body in Leekan that
spoke to her about them when she came north—and she
got what she deserved, for she’s a gossipin auld wife.’
‘ What did she get ? ’
‘ It happened in the post-office, and the news o it was
a ower Leekan in an hour or two. Miss Domina just
smiled at her, friendly-like, and said, “ Quite true,
Mrs. Greig, though I don’t see how it’s any of your
b ” ’ -
186 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Malcom was refilling his pipe. ‘ “ Bloody,” ’ he
suggested.
‘ Aye.—“ business, unless you’re afraid I ask Greig
to sleep with me. Give him my love and tell him I’ll
come and twist his nose if he calls to me across a field
again.” And out she went.’
A chicken strayed in through the open kitchen door,
paused, chirawked urgently. Lilian glanced at the
kitchen clock.
‘ Michty, she’ll be here in a quarter of an hour !
Run oot and feed the chickens, Malcom, while I get your
parcel ready.’
A heat-haze already overhung all the Valley as Malcom
crossed the courtyard. From the lang field arose the
clang of Tom’s mower and the hysteric barking of Tom’s
collie bitch in pursuit of a mower-roused hare. The
chickens clucked and scrambled round Malcom’s boots
till he’d scattered them the last of the grain in the basket,
abandoned the basket to a scuffle of inquisitive pecking,
and himself climbed the steep grass bank that overlooked
the road into Leekan.
Right across the Valley, unchanged, rose the School-
house buildings. He stood and followed with his eyes
the track leading down from there across the shelving
ledges upraised of old by the Neolithic terrace-agri¬
culturists. Deserted. Near Leekan River, however,
just past the cotter-house where he and two others had
sheltered one storming night in 1913, was a moving and
nearing speck. . . .
He sat down and waited. Absurdly, he found his hands
trembling.
Subchapter ii
He scrambled to his feet.
‘ Hello, Domina.’
‘ Hello, Malcom. Hell, isn’t it hot ? ’
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 187
It might have been a tall boy—jacket, shirt, shorts*
puttees, boots—who promptly sank down in the grass,
almost into the place from which he’d risen. She shed
her gun to one side, her game-bag to the other, tossed
back her hair and looked up at him.
‘ You haven’t changed much.’
‘ You have.’
They looked at each other in a queer silence, Malcom
with sight of Domina’s face grave in scrutiny, conscious
that his own was as grave. He felt for his pipe. A little
smile came on her lips.
‘ Well ? ’
“ She was twenty-five years of age, five feet six and
a half inches in height, weighed one hundred and twenty
pounds in the nude, possessed a mole on her right
inquincal fossa and a scar across her left breast where six
stitches had been sewn in after a motor-cycle accident a
few months before. A small head, brachycephalic, with
exceedingly fine, blue-black hair growing higher on her
forehead than she liked ; accordingly, cut short except
for a heavy fringe, like that of a medieval page. Lobeless
ears. Eyebrows thick, but short-haired, meeting and
matting in a level line across her nose. Straight, short
nose. Eyes a little sunken, but set far apart, thereby, in
combination with those brows which met across her nose,
denying strict beauty and symmetry to her face. One
eye a liquid bronze, but the other, startlingly, much darker:
sometimes almost blue. Small mouth, full lips, the upper
slightly overhanging the lower, and that in spite of the
fact that her teeth bit as did those of the Cro-Magnon
men : her upper and lower teeth met edge to edge, not
in the scissors-like fashion of most moderns. Three or
perhaps four teeth stopped ; one, on the upper jaw,
with a dark lead filling, to attract attention to her mouth
in the same fashion as did the teeth-blackening of
primitive prostitutes. Skin like a gypsy’s skin : bronzed
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
a deep olive from tip to toe through much exercise
under-clad and much sun-bathing not clad at all. . . .
“ Such daub for Domina, the sunlight wheeling on her
beetle-wing hair that time we stared at each other above
the courtyard of Chapel o’ Seddel ! A composite daub,
over-smeared with later-learnt pigments, yet ineffective
still. I’d ply the colours deeper yet if I thought she
could ever live through any tri-dimensional art—procure
the measurement of her ankles, an analysis of her tibia,
an appraisal of her pituitary ”
‘ Well ? ’ she asked again. It had been a silence of
perhaps another minute. ‘ Do I pass ? ’
‘ Honours easy.’
Her hand swung out and touched the mere tips of his
fingers as she jumped to her feet. She picked up her gun.
She was almost as tall as he was. She smiled slowly, close
to him.
‘ We used to head the bursary lists together, didn’t
we ? ’
Subchapter Hi
‘ But he was right ! Goodness, ever so right ! A
fore-runner, your Metaxa.’
‘ How ? ’
‘ Why, this belief of his—about civilization. Every¬
one shares it now—or they soon will. Even the little
professional thinkers share it. Read Rivers and Perry
and Elliot Smith. The Darwin-Keith-Wells outlook is
dead as the dodo. ... Of course civilization’s beastliness.
There was never the raving primitive of the history-books.
There was never the cave man with a club. (The damn
lady novelists snooped round the Huxley laboratories
and invented him as a copulative substitute, poor things !)
There were the heroes of the Old Stone Age and then—
the discovery of agriculture in one or two places—
Atlantis and ancient Egypt. Seven or eight thousand
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 189
years ago. And civilization burst on the world like a
fever and an itch. . . . Goodness, the temperatures and
the scratchings it’s raised ! Gods and kings and wars,
priests and prayings and sacrifices. Man was man before
these came with civilization. And for eight thousand
years he’s been an aberrant lunatic, with just now and then
a glimpse of sanity. . . . Crikey, there’s a deer ! ’
It was three o’clock in the afternoon. They were far
in the broom-thickets on the western fringe of Stane
Muir, and high above the Valley—so high that they
overlooked both it and the sea. Even across this remoter
distance the sea-smell was half-drowned by the smell
of the hayfields. The Grampians strode up the northern
horizon in purple robes. Remote beyond the miniature
buildings of Chapel o’ Seddel, cattle, like toy-automata,
stood drowsing and tail-switching. Below them, left¬
wards, the sea-coast wound and rewound in splashes
of grey, that were granite cliffs, in splashes of golden
yellow, that were sand-dunes.
They had climbed and adventured, chased rabbits,
shot them, missed them, talked and argued, lunched
and drowsed in the sun, stirred themselves afoot again,
crawled through brakes and thickets, waited by warrens
innumerable since that meeting at nine o’clock. Domina’s
acket had been abandoned on a menhir of the Devil
Stanes ; her khaki shirt, thorn-ripped, open-necked,
was as mud-splashed as her shorts and puttees through
a moment of excitement and misadventure in crossing
a bog in response to the beater-hallooings of Malcom.
Malcom, hatless, his single shabby suit stained green
with mould, had suddenly found himself living and
thinking again with an intensity that was startling.
They had begun talking to each other, intimately,
unshieldedly, at once, the while they climbed from
Chapel o’ Seddel up to Stane Muir, without preludes
of politeness or hesitation. What’s this, and how’s that ?
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
190
And where did you go from Glasgow, and how many
girls have you had, and are you still a socialist and do
you believe in God ? ... To be broken into abruptly
by the bang of her shot-gun, her long-legged racing
across the heather after a wounded rabbit, her shouted
directions for him to drive the swarming game towards
a point of vantage : Stane Muir swarmed with vermin
which descended on Leekan in nightly hordes and
devoured the crops. . . .
‘ Mal-com ! ’ She’d appear out of clumps of whins,
dangling a couple of rabbits, and throw them on the
ground, and sink down herself, easily, gracefully, like
a trim bird. ‘ Hear the banging ? They came in a drove
and I browned them. Missed most. Foul shooting.’
She’d stretch out full length on the grass, hands clasped
behind her head. ‘ Yes ? Where were you ? Bulford ?
. . . Go on.’
And he’d go on, sitting a yard or so away from her,
looking down over Leekan, with an auditor who seemed
startlingly not one person, but three—Metaxa in a fresh
incarnation, Rita returned from the fields of asphodel,
and the two of them welded in a strange amalgam,
dominated, transformed, jeered at and bullied by the
personality of Domina herself. . . .
Hidden together under a gorse-bush, watching a
great open space pitted with the mouths of rabbit-runs,
the sun in the mid-afternoon sky, he’d finished.
‘ And I’ve come up here to—think things out. I
haven’t thought at all since that night when I heard
the screaming of Metaxa, impaled on the wire in the
Beast Defile. . . . God, what thinking can answer that,
what God or faith justify that horror ? ’
He’d sat for a moment with the brightness of the
Stane Muir sunshine darkened by the awful memory
that haunted his days. Not looking at him, she put out
her hand and just touched the tips of his fingers.
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 191
Physically the most fastidious of beings, she had a
horror of casual pawings and comfortings, and he was
to learn that that light touch of hers was the utmost
she ever admitted in casual caress. For a moment
she’d been silent, biting a long stalk of grass with
her even, Cro-Magnon-like teeth, and then turned to
him.
‘ But he was right ! Goodness, ever so right ! ’
Subchapter iv
They lay and looked at the sunlight dappling the
skin of the stray deer—a stag which had wandered down
from the Grampians. For a moment the great beast,
emerging into the open space of the rabbit-warren, stood
and sniffed the air. Then it caught the dull glint of light
on Domina’s gun-barrel, wheeled, and cleared a near
broom-thicket in one magnificent leap. They heard
receding crashings. Domina whistled and jumped to
her feet.
‘ That’s the end of the bunny-business here. They’ll
all lie up with brain-concussion. Goodness, isn’t it hot ! ’
She glanced down at herself with disfavour., ‘ That’s
another disadvantage of not having lived eight thousand
years ago—or five hundred hence.’
‘ What is ? ’
‘ Clothes, of course. Ugh, the beastliness of them !
The fun to live in a time when a naked body or a naked
thought didn’t raise the sniggering of the padded
civilized ! Poets had sense when they saw Adam and
Eve nude in Eden. One of those glimpses of sanity
that haunted the world. . . .’ Short, blue-black hair
flung back from her forehead, she stood and looked
down on Leekan ; she stood with a straightness that at
a second glance robbed her figure of any boy-like illusion.
Suddenly. ‘ And all this tremendous saga of yours,
Malcom—all the things you’ve done and seen—Rita as
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
192
well as your Metaxa—it stops being meaningless. There
is a meaning.’
‘ I’d like to believe it.’
She made an impatient gesture. ‘ You must believe
it. There’s no other way to sanity. There zvas a Golden
Age. We know it now. The legends didn’t lie. Once
upon a time there were neither metals nor wars, scandals
nor clothes nor kings. Proofs everywhere : we’d have
seen them everywhere if the last eighty years of science
hadn’t been infected throughout by Darwinism—oh,
the blindest bats, the Darwinians ! Eighty years of
gouty formulas and fuzzy incompetence. The conclusions
of biology clapped like a mustard-plaster on the skin of
every living, healthy enquiry. Skinned alive we’ve been !
. . . Cro-Magnon men, the people who painted the
caves of Altamira, the matriarchal societies that lined
the Seine when the Kelts came West—they were the last
freemen in Europe for thousands of years. Let’s make
some tea, shall we ? . . . Waken up, Malcom ! ’
‘ Eh ? But—all this sounds sense to me. Sense at
last. But—how does it help ? We’re a long way from
the Old Stone Age. We’re right in the middle of
civilization ’
‘ Not us.’ She had dropped her gun and was squatting
gathering twigs for a fire. She looked found at him.
‘ You and I are proof to the contrary at this very minute.’
He thought and spoke slowly, looking down at her.
‘ Because we’re up here together—alone ? . . . Isn’t
that proof how civilized we are ? ’
‘ Of course it’s not. Goodness, proof that the horrible
thing’s almost past ! If we were civilized—in Stage
One of the disease—you’d be sitting austerely apart
and waiting for me to cook your food and then share
your bed ; in Stage Two I’d be helpless and twitter
and you’d be lighting this fire for me and oozing a
ghastly patronage called chivalry and wondering how
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE
i93
far you’d be able to go later before I’d scream ! Instead
of which ’
Malcom heard his own laughter join with her clear,
cool peal. He picked up the battered billy-can which
had evidently done service in many a Schoolhouse picnic,
‘ I’m really not so helpless as I look. I’ll bring water.’
They made tea, ate the last of the Chapel oatcakes,
and counted the day’s bag. Caches of corpses lead
progressively down towards the Devil Stanes. The sun
was low above the Grampians. Domina lit him a cigarette
and lighted one herself and sought her usual posture—
the same one beloved of Metaxa.
‘ Lots of time. Let’s argue some more. Where
were we ? ’
‘ This Golden Age business. I suppose I’m stupid,
but I can’t see how it explains my—“ saga.” ’
‘ But it does. You’ve been passing through the last
stages of the illness. Like all the rest of us. Only with
worse delirium. Brain-fever : that’s all that civilization
is. It fell on men and they fought and slaved and
enslaved and imagined the filthy gods and built up the
filthy social systems. World-madness and nightmare,
a horrible film over the face of the earth—till the War
came and split it from head to foot and men began to
crawl out, shaking at the knees, sore-headed and dazed,
but recovering from the disease at last ’
‘ Recovering ? ’
‘ Recovering. Haven’t you seen ? Climbing out of
the pit of religion and morals and faith and fantasy and
fear, escaping belief in authority and tradition, good and
evil, gods and devils, heavens and hells, right and wrong.
. . . Oh, the stuff clings to us still. Fevers are sticky.
But it’s falling to pieces around us daily. Like caked
mud falling off us. And we’re coming into our own again.
That’s what the years of your saga did, Malcom. Finished
civilization. And it’ll never come back.’
N
194 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
She laughed and sat erect. ‘ You should hear uncle
on the subject. We’re agreed on the collapse, but not on
its desirability.’
‘ I can’t even agree to the first. I see no signs whatever
of the collapse of civilization. There are still towns and
ships and aeroplanes and—shot-guns.’
These aren’t civilization. They’re things made by
man in his madness ! He tore up rocks and bridged the
seas and counted the stars in his madness. And now he’s
wakened up to find all these implements and all this
knowledge to hand, and he’s going to use and improve
them sanely. Splendidly. Resume again that Adventure
the Old Stone Age men were out on when they lost and
forgot it in the herding of cattle and the sowing of seeds
and—and the castrating of eunuchs. . . . Atlantean
man, Magdalenian man, Maglemosean man—coming
into his own again. You’re one yourself, Malcom,
though you don’t know it. Neither afraid of the world
nor finding comfort in it. Only a challenge.’
‘ How the devil did all this come to you ? ’
She considered. ‘ Curiosity, I suppose. I’m an
analyst, you know. And hating second-hand opinions.
Found it out, read it, tried it out. Some thousands of
people in every country now must know the thing—
muzzily—from one angle or another. Some know it
from all points.—Oh, I don’t ! ’
‘ Supposing it’s as you say—civilization’s not the
machine, and the machine can be carried on without it.
What’s going to do the carrying on ? ’
‘ Primitive communal anarchy. It’s the natural associa¬
tion of all herd animals.’
‘ I’ve no fancy for the herd.’
‘ Can’t help your fancies. It’s inevitable. And even
the ancient communes had chiefs—the men of wisdom.
And the herd’ll be a world herd of men—not the bestial-
ized brutes that civilization has made of men.’
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 195
He lay and meditated this fantastic heresy that had
yet such ring of sanity. Sunset was nearing Stane Muir.
He looked over at Domina and found her looking past him,
towards the sunset. An obvious question rose to his lips.
‘ And women—the business of the sexes ? ’
‘What? Oh, we’re almost beyond the divorce courts
already ! ’ Still not looking at him, something like a
flash of amusement crossed her eyes. ‘ Primitive pro¬
miscuity, of course—with the aid of contraception' another
weapon left from civilization’s nightmare. In a few
generations there’ll hardly be a man alive who’ll know his
father, or, except in exceptional cases, care a tuppenny
damn who his father was.’
Queerly, he thought of his own father. Any great loss,
such severance of relationship ? Was not indeed father¬
hood the most artificial of claims ? And the expounder
of these outrageous opinions—what of herself ?
‘ And how far do you accept that personally ? Promis¬
cuity ? You’re one of the women who’ve escaped or are
escaping the codes and traditions. Supposing any
chance acquaintance—myself—were to attempt to
rape you up on this hill, what would you do ? ’
She abandoned the sunset. She looked at him from
under raised, insolent eyebrows.
‘ Is this a proposal ? ’
‘ A hypothesis.’
‘ Oh.’ The secret flash passed again across her eyes.
‘ It would depend. If I wanted you to, I’d go shares. If
I didn’t ’
‘ Yes ? ’
‘ I’d punch your head.’
Subchapter v
‘ Droves of stars to-night.’
‘ Eh ? ’
It was an hour later. Rabbit-laden, they’d groped their
196 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
way down through the Summer darkness to the circle of
Devil Stanes. Around them now the ancient menhirs of
the astronomer priests rose like ghostly sentinels of lost
millennia.
Stars, Malcom. Another herd just come out over
there. Goodness, look at the IVIilky Way. Tve never
seen it so clear.’
Aldebaran. Betelgeuse. Venus low down in the west
above the Grampians. And—unterrifying, the long-lost
friend of Leekan boyhood—the arched galactic splendour
of the central skies.
‘ Clear enough. Flat, like a biscuit, and we’re some¬
where near the centre.’
‘ I know. Centre of a finite universe. Einstein goes
round it every morning before breakfast.’ They stood
and grinned together in the dim starshine. Domina again :
‘ Beyond the last shores of darkness—fun to know what
was there ! ’
‘ We’ll never know.’
‘ Why not ? What are we alive for but to find out that ?’
She had left his side, searching for the jacket abandoned
inside the circle earlier in the day. Out of the dimness :
‘ That’s the Adventure that makes it worth while, now
we ve finished with gods and goblins. . . . Though we’re
hardly on the verge of it yet.’
‘ What ? ’
Vvhy, what all the Old Stone Age explorers were out
on what those Azilian ancestors of yours were on the
track of when they set out for Argyllshire—the Expedition
of Consciousness against the dead universe—and the
Thing behind it.’
He was startled. ‘ Expedition ’
‘ Never thought of it ? ’ A shadowy head appeared
close to his own. All the Leekan night was very still,
though growing colder. Here and there, in the Valley
below them, the paraffin lights were kindling.
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 197
‘ Eh ? Something like that—it was my private romance
for years. Jules Vernesque stuff. . . . What kind of
Expedition ? Symbolic ? Telescopes and spiritualists ? ’
‘ Goodness, no. Real. Actual. The plain Adventure
we’ll be out on again, now that the fever’s over. Clearer
every day. . . . Earth to the planets, to the fixed stars,
to the Milky Way ’
‘ Yes ? ’
She was silent for a moment. Then : ‘ My game ?
Fun to play it ! Why, then, somewhere beyond the rim
of the Galaxy and the rims of time, ten million years and
a day away, men’ll reach the palace of God and storm it,
and capture the engine-room and power-house, and then
—and then ’
It was clearer. She was a starlit silhouette, struggling
with a silhouette jacket. He helped her. She shivered
and turned up her collar. But she made no attempt to
move. He saw the faint sheen on her stilled, upturned
face.
‘ True—never anything half so true as that. . . .
Though I’ve only this minute invented it. . . . Goodness,
I’m to have children—sometime—just that those Titans
on the Rim of the Galaxy may have a little bit of me in
them ! ’
Something flashed and quivered a whirling beam of
light from the darkness of the coast. They waited. It
flashed again. Todhead Lighthouse. There was the
sound of a sudden yawn.
‘ The Adventure’s challenge to the stars. See it,
Malcom ? Hell, I’m so sleepy ! ’
Subchapter vi
“ Domina of that day on the hills ! Now that I pause
and re-read what I’ve written, I seem, in my effort to
explain how after a five years’ mind-trance I began to
think again, to have missed from the telling hours of that
198 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
day that would clarify the evolution of Domina herself
from an impish schoolgirl into an amoral anarchist. Of
the story told as frankly as my own I’ve made no mention,
hor, after all—though I can see her, be-sworded, a reckless
free-lance amidst its future pages—this is my autobi¬
ography, not Domina’s.
“ She was a B.Sc. of London, a metallurgist specializing
in phosphor bronze, employed in a semi-Government
experimental ‘ shop ’ in Woolwich. Pier salary was
eight hundred a year.
“ She had a flat in Chelsea, not half a mile along the
Embankment from the house where I had been living
with the Buxworths.
“ She had allowed herself, at the age of seventeen, to
be seduced by an acquaintance, a boy-officer in the
Gordon Highlanders, who was killed in France a few
months later, and since that first occasion—a very happy
occasion—had apparently regarded the physical dhioue-
ment of sex-relations as a normal and healthy exercise,
entirely unrelated to religion or morals. . . . But indeed,
she looked at the latter things, in their conventional
incarnations, much from the standpoint of a visitor at the
Zoo inspecting spotted hyenas through the bars of a cage
and vaguely surprised at their smell. . . .
“ These, like journalistic headlines, becrossed the
drowsy memory of her story as I undressed that night,
and tumbled into the muckle bed of Chapel o’ Seddel, and
left to my subconscious the task of unravelling the day’s
impressions. But neither conscious nor subconscious
grasped the fact that I had glimpsed but a single facet
of a personality as vivid and varied and bewildering as
the colours of a Stane Muir dawn.”
Subchapter mi
He was soon to “ glimpse another facet ”—dazzling,
infuriating. Late in the afternoon of the day following the
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 199
battue in Stane Muir a note came from the Schoolhouse
inviting him to tea. It was a note in the clipped and
angular hand apparently sacrosanct to the chemic mysteries
of metallurgy, and was brought by one of the Dominie’s
scholars, who gaped when he delivered it, recovered, and
fell into a garrulous account of an auld stane grave being
dug into at that very moment by the Dominie and the min¬
ister. Up on Pittendreich’s hill. And a the Dominie’s
class sent hame an oor earlier that they should hae been.
‘ A stone grave ? ’
‘ Aye. Ane o Pittendreich’s men was ditchin round
a bit hillock when the Dominie’s niece—the leddy frae
London, the fine ane that’s aye laughin an can play
footba so bonny—was speakin to him. His spade birred
on a stane and the leddy kent it was an auld stane grave.
So she sent him for Auld Ian an the Dominie an then
came doon to the Schoolhouse hersel an bade me bring
you the notie.’
By five o’clock Malcom had crossed the Valley and
knocked at the Schoolhouse door. A new housekeeper
was unnecessarily embarrassed over her befloured appear¬
ance. She had been making scones. ‘ You’ll be Mr.
Maudslay ? Na, they havena come back yet. They’re
a up at the auld grave—carryin on daft-like. Mebbe
ye’ll walk up an bring them doon ? ’
It was a field high up towards the rim of the Valley.
In the centre of a shelving brae a grass-covered mound
had lain unmolested for millennia, till Pittendreich’s
ditcher and Domina Riddoch had come upon it. Climb¬
ing to it, Malcom passed through gullies of gorse, and,
turning once, beheld all the Valley adrift with a summer
heat almost liquid. Then he came on the archaeologists.
The head of the mound had been shorn away. At the
bottom of the pit lay a dismembered skeleton, doubled up
on its right side, and singularly perfect. A little heap of
stone implements was piled on the edge of the grave.
200 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Domina and an old man were in the grave, kneeling, and
measuring with a tape-line. Another old man, with a
camera in his hand, stood and watched them, barking
sharp comments. 1 hey did not hear Malcom approach,
and it was a moment before he realized that the old man
in the pit with Domina was the Reverend Ian Stevenson
and the other the Dominie.
‘ The oldest Neolithic grave in Scotland,’ the Reverend
Ian was panting. ‘ Four or five thousand b.c.’
But that lump of a thing—that axe. How could a
Stone Age man have made it if he hadn’t imitated a metal
implement ? ’ This was the Dominie.
His niece raised a flushed face, caught sight of Malcom,
and laughed. ‘ Well, here’s someone who ought to know.
Azilian man.’
The old men turned and stared. Then the Reverend
Ian wheezed bulkily in his broadcloth and wiped his
hands and climbed out of the pit.
Malcom! ’ He peered at the new-comer short¬
sightedly. ‘ Man, you haven’t changed.’
‘ Nor you, sir. Hello, Mr. Riddoch.’
‘ Well, Malcom.’
They shook hands and stared at him, and looked from
him to Domina, and seemed slightly uncomfortable.
Domina in the grave wiped Stone Age dust from her
hands.
Let s go and have tea.’ She put one hand on the edge
of the pit and vaulted out of it, landing on her feet, like
a cat. The Reverend Ian regarded the performance in
delighted surprise. ‘ Could they do that in Neolithic
times, Mr. Stevenson ? ’
. was gallant. I here was nothing so bonny as you
in those days.’
She was in a kilted skirt and sweater, dusty brogue
shoes and stained silk stockings, but her dark hair and
unshed face and limber figure made beauty enough against
201
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE
that colourful hill-side. All three of them stood looking
at her in pleasure. She glanced from one to the other of
them, the secret flash of mirth for a moment lighting her
unholily pigmented eyes.
‘ I know. But it’ll all wash off.’
‘ I hope not.’ The Reverend Ian again.
She took his arm. ‘ Come down to the Schoolhouse
and we’ll see. Tea ?—Uncle ?—Malcom ? Oh ’
She turned to the latter. ‘ We’ve found a job for you.’
Subchapter viii
‘ This job ’ The Reverend Ian spoke the word
apologetically. He put down his cup and looked across
the Schoolhouse verandah at Domina and Malcom. ‘ It’s
not very well paid, I’m afraid, and I don’t know if you
would care for it. But Domina says you don’t care very
much for your present work as a—what is it ? ’
‘ Commission agent.’ Domina supplied the euphem¬
ism softly. Malcom hastily raised an empty but grin-
obscuring cup.
‘ Ah, yes, commission agent. One of those new
free-lance professions, I suppose ? Well, the Hanno
Society ’
The Hanno Society, a London organization of archae¬
ologists, explorers, and such-like folk, had the Leekan
minister on its council, and was at the moment seeking
a paid assistant to act under the direction of its present
unpaid but honourable secretary. An extremely difficult
business. There were so few young men with either the
necessary equipment or enthusiasm. He had mentioned
the matter while they were excavating the mound on
Pittendreich’s hill, and Domina had declared it was
exactly the kind of work Malcom was seeking 
‘ Well, Malcom ? ’
‘ But—have I the necessary equipment ? ’
Domina stirred in her chair, She had vanished after
202 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
their descent from Pittendreich’s hill and reappeared ten
minutes later miraculously transformed, so that for a
moment Malcom, rising with the others, had been aware
of an acute sense of loss. There was no trace of the hunter
of Stane Muir. In bland rose-red, a wisp of frock that
was almost a tunic, shoes and stockings to match, she
seemed to have casually sloughed a garmenture he had
taken for a personality. This sleek girl out of the Tatler’s
pages—Domina ! Her uncle had grunted. He had aged
and grown peevish, quite plainly suspicious of his niece’s
intentions towards Malcom.
‘ Exercises to correct. I’ll take a cup with me. Come
up later, Ian.’ And he had gone.
Now they sat finishing tea on the verandah and listening
to Domina’s flippant flouting of Malcom’s hesitations.
‘ Of course he’s equipment enough, Mr. Stevenson.
He’s soaked in all the old archaeological theories—all the
dud ones that the Hanno people believe in. He won’t
come out of them properly for some time yet, and by then
he can either desert the Hanno or start converting it.
. . . Converting it, I imagine. ... Do say you’ll take
it on, Malcom, if Mr. Stevenson can get you it. Great fun.
In the enemies’ camp, you know. They still believe we’ve
progressed since the Old Stone Age.’
The Reverend Ian was genial and tolerant. ‘ Well,
perhaps we haven’t, Domina, and you’re an original
Maglemosean woman, uncorrupted, come back to tell
us how much better they ordered things then. . . . No,
I don’t think we’ll go into it again. I’m not so supple as
I used to be and I just barely escaped with my life last
time. . . . But what do you say, Malcom ? Shall I
write London and recommend you ? ’
‘ Splendid of you, sir.’
‘ Then I’ll send off a letter to-night.’ He rose. * And
now I’m going up to see the Dominie about those photo¬
graphs. Come and see me in a week’s time. There should
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 203
be an answer by then and we’ll be able to talk without this
young woman of Maglemose ’—he patted Domina’s sleek
head—‘ putting me out.’
The door into the Schoolhouse drawing-room closed
behind him. Domina stretched and yawned in her chair.
‘ Decent old stick. Foul that he should be a parson.
You haven’t thanked me, Malcom.’
‘ I want to ’
‘ Oh Gawd ! ’ She was on her feet, twinkling down at
him amusedly. ‘ Let’s go and smoke in the honeysuckle
alley instead.’
‘ I can’t be put off as easily as that. Only I suppose
thanking you would be nonsensical. Those two days ’
He found himself in the Leekan evening, following a
sleeveless figure in bland rose-red through the School-
house garden, under the rustle of a gigantic yew, and on
to the smooth grass carpeting of the honeysuckle alley.
It was no true alley, but a secret garden, hid from the
Schoolhouse by the waving plumage of the yew, senti¬
nelled about by the honeysuckle bushes, and with no outlet
at the further end, though a dip in the entanglements of
honeysuckle lianas focussed a view of the evening Valley
and remote Stane Muir.
Midway the ‘ alley ’ was a lichened block of red sand¬
stone mounted with a cross-piece and gnomon much more
ancient than the Schoolhouse. Domina strolled past it
but Malcom halted and bent over the sun-dial. At no
remote date an oblong section of the sandstone had been
scraped and graved, amateurishly, but not unskilfully,
and he read aloud the words round which besieging
battalions of lichens were already preparing an assault.
‘ Tti uncertain day is mine in shadow-wars
With splendour of the sun :
But ah ! the standing steadfastness of stars
When all my hours are run ! ’
204 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ The old inscription was foul.’ Domina had turned
about and come to his side. ‘ Something about grasping
the.sunny hours with humble joy v Used to give me tummy-
ache even as a child. So I spent a couple of days last year
testing myself as a stonemason—not to mention as a
doggrelist.’
‘ I like a “ standing steadfastness of stars.” ’ He
straightened up. ‘ Those two days, Domina. . . . That
stuff you talked about—the Adventure. What are we
going to do about it ? What’s our job to help its begin-
ing again in this collapse of civilization ? ’
She had bent over a clump of honeysuckle, a dismayingly
akered and troubling figure. She turned round with a
bloom in her hand. A drowsy bee fell out of it and boomed
away into the evening.
Do ? Nothing that I know of, except heave a brick
now and then at the bleary bards still squatting in the
carrion-caves of civilization.’ She looked at him over
the bloom amusedly, impatiently. ‘ Oh, we can’t always
be seiious. Life s so short, we’ve such a little while in
the Adventure s march—and it’ll march anyway, whether
or not we try to help and organize it. . . . And it’s a bit
of a bore.’
He felt as though she had struck him in the face.
‘ Bore ? What’s the use of realizing the thing at all if
you do nothing to help it ? ’
She yawned. ‘No use.’ She flicked the honey¬
suckle ^ bloom over the hedge. Apparently it bored her
also. ‘ What are you going to do about it, anyhow ? ’
Pie stared at the sundial. ‘ I don’t know—yet. But
something. ’
We have lit in Malcom this day such a flame 
Me, I m going to live. Who was that little poet man with
the profile—-I can never remember his name—the man
who was going to live to kiss a thousand girls and write
a thousand poems ? ’
205
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE
‘ Brooke ? ’
‘ Was it ? Well, I’m going to dance a million dances,
read a million books, run a million metallurgical com¬
binations, have a million lovers ! I’ve thought ’
‘ Yes ? ’
‘ All those mothers of mine—I’m going to live the lives
they were cheated, collect and spend the wages that you
defrauded them ! ’
‘Eh?’
‘ Why, my own mother’s, her mother’s, her mother’s,
and so on back to the early Neolithic—all those poor
damn women who went through hell to give the dirty
peasants and priests and patriots and poets of civilization
easy times and well-cooked food and all the crazy satis¬
factions of lust and torture and sadism which were yours
—I’m going to live every unenjoyed life of those starved
mothers of mine who were killed and eaten in cannibal
rituals, starved to death, beaten to death, crippled in
crinolines and ghastly codes, robbed of fun and sunshine
and the glory of being fools and disreputable for over
six thousand years. . . . And I’m going to get every
woman alive to do the same ! ’
She stopped and laughed at herself and wandered to
the hedge and plucked another idle blossom. But Jie
had seen her face the face of a crusader.
‘ And where’s all this emancipated female cavorting
and caterwauling going to lead ? ’
‘ How should I know ? Or care ? . . . That’s not our
business. Goodness, no ! Our children’s, maybe, if
we have any. Journeys end in mothers’ meetings. . . .
\ ou men have made the world the dirty mess it is. So
you’ve unchained us and expect us to clean out the
Augean stable still without wages. \ou don’t mind us
wearing grooms’ breeches if only we’ll be nice and
respectful stable-lads. But we’re not having any, none
at all.’ She swung round on him, abruptly, mockingly.
206 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ Oh, Malcom, how long do you want me to sermonize ?
You are dull.’
‘ Am IP’ He considered her. ‘ I suppose so.’
He took her in his arms then, and raised her face in
the evening light, and kissed it. She kissed him in return
with a cool, sweet deliberation. Cattle lowed in the
Leekan pastures beyond the secret garden. She dis¬
covered an amused practicality.
‘ Let’s go over there.’
They went over and Domina was tender and a little
amused and then kindled, waywardly, to a moment of
passion that drowned them both. When he came out of
that long kiss her head lay back on the grass and her
throat was a white column in the dusk. She sighed and
smiled up at him, whimsically.
* That was lovely. Adventure enough ? ’
He did not answer, being still a little dizzy. The
love of Rita had been that of a passionate fairy, his
chance lustings in the intervening years affairs small in
range or experience. It was his first revelation of the
fact that love of a woman’s body might indeed ensnare
a man his whole life long, even when that body had
withered beyond desire and left only the memory of its
magic to encolour and enslave all hope and courage and
dignity. . . . They sat and smoked cigarettes, Domina
leaning her shapely back against the sundial, Malcom
asprawl at her feet. Suddenly he jumped up, startling
her.
‘ By God, I never knew that before. You can see
Todhead’s light from here.’
She looked towards where he pointed, to that greyness
in the mountain-block that marked the cleft to the sea.
They waited. Whirling, a great beam smote the evening
sky.
‘ By God ! ’ said Malcom. Then : ‘ Eh ? ’
She had dropped her cigarette. She was clasping her
THE WOMAN OF MAGLEMOSE 207
knees and staring seawards as well. She laughed at
him, but with an odd catch in her voice.
‘ Oh Malcom, my dear—if that—if that were the
answer ! *
Subchapter ix
She went away next day, on a sub-visit to another
uncle. Returning to Leekan a week later she learnt
that Malcom, in response to a telegram answering the
Reverend Ian’s letter, had departed for London as
assistant secretary of the Hanno Society.
CHAPTER THREE
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS
Subchapter i
HE was assistant secretary of the Hanno Society
for over five years. He assembled and dispersed
councils, engaged translators and corresponded with
members, edited the quarterly journal of the society and
carried out innumerable other offices. He became an
expert in matters as far apart as the morals of Marco
Polo and the fauna of Kerguelen. Pie talked with big-
game hunters, explorers, archaeologists, anthropologists,
geographers, artists, flat-earth freaks, hollow-earth faddists,
people who believed the earth went round the planet
Jupiter. He travelled across England several times,
and across Europe once (to Prague) in pursuit of rare
documents bearing on early exploration and discovery.
And for four out of those five years an exasperated
impatience drove his interests now this way, now that.
The secretary—the honorary secretary—of the Society,
the Hon. Reginald ffrench, an ethnologist of the British
Museum, was a small, polite, and agreeable man engaged
in an unending History of Exploration. This was to
begin with the voyage of Hanno and to end with Scott
at the South Pole. His new assistant flippantly suggested
beginning with Adam discovering the Persian Gulf and
ending with the first explorers reaching the moon,
thereby rousing interest in the first chapter with a
well-known character and closing on a dramatic episode
in the last, ffrench had been so long lost among manu¬
scripts and crania and ethnic calculations that he took
Malcom’s flippancy for advice—at least with regard to
the lunar explorers—and entered into correspondence
with every £ expert ’ who had a ‘ rocket ’ in mind or
being and sufficient mental glibness to believe he could
send a projectile to the moon.
208
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 209
Those experts could be met at any hour of the day
pushing through the swinging doors of the British
Museum, under the cynical stare of the Maya priest one
side the entrance and the Easter Islander the other. They
would search out ffrench and stagger his politeness and
credulity with large-scale diagrams and small-scale
models. Inevitably they would wind up with requests
for subscriptions. Sometimes they cornered him so
desperately that he would ring up Malcom at the Hanno
office in Bloomsbury Square, five minutes’ walk away,
and beg help towards a decision. This was a euphemistic
phrase for scaring out his lunatic visitors. At Malcom’s
questioning they would wilt, pridefully, jocularly, or
resentfully, and bang the Hon. Reginald’s door with
great force.
One, however, a retired major of artillery, proved to
be of different quality. He kept ffrench and Malcom a
long afternoon poring over his calculations and checking
them as far as their knowledge of mathematics and
ballistics went.
‘ With money and a Government grant and a proper
lab. ’ He sighed and smiled wryly. He had won
Malcom’s support, for he was neither showy nor cocksure.
‘ If your gun was for killing ’
The experimenter shrugged. ‘ Quite. I’d be mobbed
with State offers of assistance if I intended to blow up
New York from London. But the moon—oh, that’s
impracticable, and there mayn’t be anyone shootable
there.’ He rolled up his plans. ‘ There’s no such thing
as science, you see. Quack-medicining and muddlement.
There are hundreds of people who with leisure and
proper equipment could really build a science of science
and abolish unemployment and every other social
question en route. Where ? Everywhere—starving in
doss-houses or working eight hours a day in coal-mines
or nineteen hours a day as general practitioners, or what
2io THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
not. . . . Can’t be helped. They’re outside the scientist
trade unions, and the B.A. yawns politely when it hears
one or two of them annually. ’
‘ But it ought to be helped. Parliament ’
The artillery major stroked a silver-grey moustache
and stared at the Hanno’s assistant secretary in amiable
amusement. ‘ Parliament ? What political party would
bring forward a bill for the Handsome Endowment of
Genuine Research ? Might lead to the abolition of
politics entirely. Damnable, what ? And the moon’s too
useful as a repository of political promises to be tampered
with. . . . Besides, it would need a pretty intricate test
to separate the freak and sham from the genuine worker.’
He smiled again. ‘ It has taken you two an afternoon.’
He was killed a month later at his bungalow in Sussex
—‘ blown up,’ said the newspapers, and what became of
his calculations or what led to the accident neither
ffrench nor Malcom ever learnt. Besides, by then ffrench
had secured a holiday and gone to Germany to interview
fresh rocket men.
Malcom found himself astounded by a feeling of pain
as over a personal loss. Why on earth should he be ?
Reaching the moon ?
He went out of doors that night and stared across a
quarter of a million miles of space at the giant reflector
in the sky, that world of blazing deserts, ink-shadowed
ring-mountains and tenuous breaths of atmosphere that
mist the crater-bottoms under the telescopes of a Pickering
or a Warren de la Rue. Remote and strange and not so
very far ! . . .
And then for a moment he seemed to understand that
sense of loss he had felt at news of the experimenter’s
death. Domina Riddoch’s fantastic visioning of human
destiny, his own boy-dreams of the penetration of the
horizon, the storming of the World’s Wall—the symbol
of the Adventure itself hung there across the wilds
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 211
of space, challenged, if unconquered, by a fellow-
adventurer.
The Adventure of men—How to read the riddle of
the million roads that awaited it ?
Subchapter ii
The Hanno specialized in publishing not only modern
works dealing with genuine exploration—so few in
number out of the piles of MSS. which arrived daily
from half-baked male globe-trotters and lady explorers
who had not been even mildly grilled—but also reprints
of the accounts of early travellers, like its contemporary,
the Hakluyt. Most of the editing and translating was
done free of charge by members of the Society, and for
several years Malcom immersed his leisure moments in
the writings of Ibn Batuta, Gonsalez de Clavijo, Jon
Olafsson and others of even more remarkable adventurings
and nomenclature : they fed his wonder-lust as once
Flaubert’s Matho and Spendius had done.
He had returned to the Buxworths’ house in Chelsea,
to the boisterous welcome of George and Jane and the
sticky congratulations of Steven. Jane took a pro¬
prietary interest in his work, reading odd volumes of the
Hanno publications and voicing her gladness that she
had (in spite of this new view of civilization propounded
by her lodger) been born in the twentieth century and not
in one more primitive and undrained. The Crocodile
had begun to flourish, and its ‘ literary ’ editor with it.
Malcom had not been back in London three months before
the Chelsea house was overhauled from roof to basement,
the lichens evicted, the tiling renewed. The ceilings
were strengthened as well, so that he could no longer
carry on a conversation with Jane or George lying in bed
below.
Jane’s announcement that she was determined to have
another baby Malcom suspected was a direct result of
2i2 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
the new privacy. She and George wrangled over the
matter in the manner of people arguing the purchase of
a new piece of furniture.
‘ But what’s the poor little rat to live on ? 5 George
would demand with some heat.
‘ Oh, he can become a literary critic, like his father.
There are always funny little things writing books.’
Or found a school of journalism,’ George would
snort. ‘ Nearly everyone can blight. . . . Christ,
Malcom, did you ever hear the like ? Another kid when
the two staple industries of England are book-reviewing
and the “ littery ” vomitings of the unsmacked. “ Littery ”
is just right. . . . Little swine. Ever seen them at their
little troughs with their noses all pointed ? ’
‘ Who ? ’
The aspirants to five thousand a year and the shoes
of Shaw in your spare time, too.” Look here, you’ve
nothing on to-night. Meet me and I’ll show you a
selection.’
It never seems to have struck Malcom that the
‘ selection ’ of young writers which he scrutinized that
night may have been far from representative, and that
George Buxworth may have been—quite certainly was
—a prejudiced guide.
“ We pushed our way, as unostentatiously as possible,
to the back of the room. It was crowded—mostly by
young women with cigarette-holders, fountain-pens, and
negligently unbuttoned jackets. The evening’s lecturer,
a bloated little man like a toad which had hidden too
long among lichens, I had never seen or heard of before.
George had, however, and kept whispering biographical
details omitted, I suspect, from Who’s Who. . . .
My brief career as journalist had never brought me
in contact with fiction-writers. I learnt it was a good
thing to steal magazine-plots indiscriminately, because,
of course, it wasn t stealing. They had all been used
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 213
before. Another good point, when one took to writing
novels, was to get acquainted with likely reviewers.
, . . He thought bedroom scenes were being over-done,
and foresaw the swing of the pendulum towards the
more virile and open in fiction, though one must
remember that Cannes, Lido, and night-club studies,
with strong plots, were ever-popular. Detective
stories ”
The young women sat around, scribbling busily, the
only disturbing factor being, one gathers from Malcom,
George Buxworth’s frequent grunts and violent nose-
blowings. At the end of the lecture came questions.
What was the best length for a novel now ? Did the
libraries really insist on about 100,000 words, because
their subscribers preferred thick books ? Would ‘ moral-
experiment ’ novels go down ? The lecturer’s point
about becoming acquainted with reviewers—wasn’t it
also a good plan to cultivate publishers’ readers—invite
them to lunch, and so on ? . . .
‘ Bitches,’ said George, succinctly, when they had
groped their way out. ‘ Wish one would invite me to
a lunch “ in a private room.” I’d give her enough copy
for her next six novels—if she ever came out of hospital.
Ever read their stuff ? ’
‘ Don’t think so. What’s it like ? ’
‘ They’ve got formulae—and technique, oh, the
technique’s generally damned good : they work things out
in advance as an engineer blue-prints a bridge—for every
occasion. . . . Stale unmarital beddings and kippers
fired on oil-stoves: that’s Bohemianism. Baedeker,
Lane Poole, and a heterosexual native : that’s Romance.
A collier with complexes and an over-developed pituitary :
that’s Realism. . . . Christ, the young school of
novelists ! ’
‘ And what’s the remedy ? ’
‘ God knows. Drown the lot—especially the detective
214 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
storyists sadistic little swine ! ’ They had reached
Piccadilly Circus. They stood and watched the flickering
of a film-advertisement high up on the cliff-wall of a
building. George knocked out his pipe, refilled it, and
meditated. ‘ Though, of course, there are exceptions.
Sometimes you’ll open a young novel and find it naked
as a knife and as clean as rain, without any of the dirty
old swathings and stammerings. The kind of book
impossible to any of the Victorians, or even to the
Edwardians. Makes you believe in the first chapter or so
that there’s something new coming. But the promise
never lasts. The damned thing either turns out a re-hash
of Huxley-Lawrence phallus-worship, or a re-boost of
the R.C.’s, or a wallow in psychanalytic cess-pools.
. : . As though the author had stared out of a new
window for a minute and seen nothing and pulled down
the blind—with a shiver. . . . Eh ? ’
Pie found Malcom’s cold-blooded blasphemy amazing.
‘ Nothing ? But, Lord God ! Can't they see ? ’
Subchapter in
Apparently Jane won, for the new baby was presently
forthcoming, and was christened Malcom George.
Before this event, the Crocodile's prosperity had run
to a maid and a telephone and Malcom had suggested
that it was perhaps time that he took up his quarters
elsewhere. The Hanno paid him £300 a year—about
the same as the Glasgow Tribune (now long defunct)
had done. But the Buxworths would not let him go and
reproached him for the effect his desertion would have
on the health of Jane. So he stayed on, refurnishing the
room himself and having a soundless typewriter installed
a machine into which one inserted a page of paper
prayerfully, for the page was likely as not to be dis¬
covered inside the spring or the oiling-works as emerging
on the roller.
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 215
He came into the habit of doing much of the Society s
work in that room overlooking the River. Here also
it was that he tapped out those strange sonnets and
lyrics which were privately published by Harding under
the title of The Darkness Behind the Stars. It was also t
in those early days that he began to meditate the
beginnings of his immense Autobiography.
When he did not wish to be disturbed he posted a
card outside his door. Sometimes he would hear Jane’s
feet on the landing below as she stopped to apprise
herself whether or not he was at liberty to gossip. Steveii
had to climb further. He would pant up each step, sit
down on the topmost one, and regard the card dolefully.
Malcom would hear him and his shuffle of disappointment
as he prepared to turn about and descend, and would
generally relent and open the door.
‘ ’Splolin’,’ Steven would explain (he heard much of
explorers), and grin ingenuously, and sidle past towards
the bright and glittering machine on Malcom’s table.
The lodger told him innumerable stories, mostly para¬
phrases of narratives from the Hanno publications,
and Steven, even thus early, had determined to become
a traveller. He would pant up from the hall with
messages, somewhat delayed owing to the necessity of
‘ ’splolin’ ’ en route. Then thump agreeably on
Malcom’s door : ‘ ’Phone for Ma’com ! ’Phone for
Ma’com 1 ’
‘ All right, Steve.’
‘ All ri’, Steve. ’Phone for Ma’com ’—^urgently.
Late one afternoon, three days after the telephone was
installed, he panted up to Malcom’s room with the
usual formula. Malcom, busied in writing a polite
letter of congratulation and encouragement to a member
of the Hanno—one Newman, who was about to investigate
the geological formation of western Central America,
and appeared to expect the outside world to regard
216 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
his intentions with awe—abandoned his typewriter,
went downstairs, and picked up the receiver.
‘ Yes ? ’
‘ Hello. Is that Malcom ? ’
‘ Yes.’
‘ This is Domina. . . . Say Yes ! ’
‘ Oh. . . . Where are you ? ’
; In bed.’
‘ Good Lord, what for ? ’
Had an argument with a jar of acid in Woolwich.
No, no one threw it at me. Tests with some nitrates—
and the nitrates won. . . . Oh, only a scalded arm and
shoulder. But that’s not what I want to talk about.
Why haven’t you looked me up in London ? ’
‘ Forgot your address.’
‘ Liar.’
He abandoned that point. ‘ How did you find out
mine ? *
‘ Girl who does illustrations for the Crocodile—
Dorota Maxwell—knows Buxworth—knows me. Bux-
worth talks of you morning, noon, and night, it seems,
and^I recognized the prophet. . . . Are you listening ? ’
Then you 11 know what to do now. I’m having
tea in half an hour. ’
. was admitted, by a maid of exceeding prettiness,
into the barest flat he had ever seen. There did not
seem to^ be a superfluous article anywhere, except in
Domina s bedroom where chairs and side-table were
heaped with magazines, cigarette-packets, and unopened
cartons of chocolate. A disingenuous camibocker garment
which the invalid had been engaged in embroidering
with one hand had been hurled into a corner of the room
in boredom.
Domina was lying on her left side, facing the fire.
Her right arm and shoulder were swathed in bandages.
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 217
She twisted round to see him, hurt herself a little, and
swore. Her face was pallid, the heavy blue-black fringe
disarrayed on her forehead, and her eyes too bright.
‘ Hello, Malcom. Look prosperous. Tea, Iris.’
A bare arm came from under the eiderdown to meet
his hand. She nodded, expectantly. He bent and kissed
her, covering his mixed feelings with : ‘ Why on earth
do you use scent ? ’
‘ It’s the harlot in me,’ she explained, and put her
head down on the pillow again, and twinkled at him.
Abruptly, moving, she winced. Thereat he put his arm
under her, raised her up, punched the pillow and
rearranged the sheets.
‘ Thanks. You’re my only man visitor who has any
sense. They mostly dither and call for Iris.’
He learnt that the accident four days before had
been serious enough. The whole of her shoulder still
burned like fire. She had fainted, but had recovered in
good time to refuse the sanctuary of a hospital. “ She
had a horror of hospitals and being pawed over by callow
and aseptic hobbledehoys in search of experience.”
The maid brought in the tea while he was telling her
of ffrench’s lunar explorers. In the midst of laughter
over a Riigen rocket which had fallen off its pedestal
in a field and killed a straying and enquiring cow, she
suddenly reverted to his failure to call on her.
‘ Why ? ’
He had foreseen that question, but had no answer ready.
He sat and looked in the fire, searching for the answer.
It proved incredibly difficult. He put down his cup and
got up and walked to the window and looked out at
the Thames. He turned and found her eyes on him.
‘ Because—Good Lord, you don’t think I didn’t want
to come ? Especially after that incident in the honey¬
suckle alley—oh, even though there was no chance of a
repetition! . . , I’ve wanted to at times, quite damnably.
218 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
But you spoiled me for these things that day on Stane
Muir. You painted a clear picture of something that
has haunted me—dimly—all my life : the Adventure.
And I’m going to follow it—like hell. You preached a
view of human history and civilization that was like a
revelation to me : I’m going to pass it on to others, if
I can. . . . To you they’re just melodrama and mud-
slinging. To me they’re worth more than you or any
other human being.’ He paused. ‘ I must sound the
damnablest of prigs. I kept away from you because—
I thought you immoral, I suppose.’
She nodded to that, understanding. It had nothing
to do with her lovers. She had turned to the pillow and
he saw her face in profile, the black silk eiderdown leaving
sharp and clear her pallor of neck and cheek up to the
darkness again of her hair, her insolent upper lip a little
relaxed, the long, thick eyelashes drooping beneath her
brows—like a swift line painted from side to side her
face, those brows.
‘ Perhaps I am—immoral. Sometimes. I’m sure of it
myself. I want—oh, all the things I said—and did !—
in the honeysuckle alley. But the others as well; I
want the lot, Malcom ! Melodrama and mud-slinging ?
Goodness, do you think I haven’t seen the real thing as
well—that it hasn’t made me drunk and frightened ?
But how real is it, and how many realities are there ?
And what the devil can one do though it’s the only one ? ’
She moved impatiently. She whispered to the dancing
firelight. ‘. . . God and Mammon. . . . But I’m God’s
man, Malcom, if you can find him'for me.’
Subchapter iv
Presently she had recovered and returned to work
with her mysterious metals in Woolwich. George,
entering Malcom’s room one evening and finding his
lodger struggling into evening dress—a shoddy, ready-
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 219
made suit he had bought that day—shouted with laughter
and, unkindly, summoned his family. Malcom stood
in front of the mirror doing futile things with his tie the
while the Buxworths, George, Jane, and Steven, sat on
his bed and regarded him with mirth. George declared
his preference, any day, for a proletarian hawker to
a boorjoy archaeologist. . . . He wanted to know who
the skirt was.
It was two o’clock in the morning before they left the
ball and walked home along the Embankment, Domina
cloaked and in silver shoes and bare-headed as usual.
They stopped at one point and looked down at the gurgle
of the Thames. And Malcom made a sudden discovery.
‘ The worst of Mammon, you know, is that he’s such
a bloody bore.’
‘ Who ? ’
‘ Mammon. The castrated Mammon. Dressing up
and dancing and playing and galumphing to music,
eating unnecessary food, drinking unnecessary drinks,
swinging unnecessarily squawking squaws round a room
by their unnecessarily shaved arm-pits. What a bore,
even though there was nothing else ! . . . Lord, how
I’d like to help clean a sewer now or spread manure on
a turnip-field or—anything that’s real ! ’
‘ But exercise and amusement. . . . Malcom, that’s
just the old Presbyterian in you.’
‘ Is it ? He’s real, anyhow. Exercise and amusement
—when there’s that! ’ He pointed to a frieze of stars
above the Surrey bank.
Domina kicked a silver shoe against the parapet.
‘ You’re obsessed. Those stars—what can you do about
them ? How are they to take the place of dancing and
singing and fun ? ’
‘ If I knew ! ’
She lighted a cigarette, found it distasteful, and flung
it into the River. They watched it sail down through
220 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
the darkness till the water extinguished it. For a second
its sharp aroma was left in their nostrils. Domina
yawned. ‘ Fm thirsty.’
They had coffee at a small stall, deserted but for
themselves, a rickety, frowsy contraption whose proprietor
recognized Malcom from his hawker days. He glanced
doubtfully at Domina after he had served them, and
then, winking at Malcom, became hoarsely confidential.
‘ I don’t know,’ said Malcom, and then was aware
that his own hushed tones were ridiculous. ‘ Wait.’
He turned to Domina and explained.
‘ And you can’t tell him ? I should think it’s the
first thing to make sure of in the organized Adventure.
Men ! ’ She laughed. She was angry. ‘ Five children
already and his wife too shy to find out ? Tell him to
come over here.’
She entered into a startlingly direct conversation.
She wrote down several addresses, and the coffee-stall
keeper’s sweating confusion passed into gratitude and
relief. When they left she was silent for a little and
then laughed inconsequently.
‘ Remember pointing to the stars ? Where’s Venus ? ’
t Malcom laughed and touched her hand, admiringly.
‘ You are real enough, anyhow.’
The morning was growing white above the Thames
by Westminster. Domina yawned and peeped at him,
darkly, from under her long lashes.
‘ Don’t feel a bit sleepy, but we must get warm.
Let s toss to see who’s going to do the entertaining.’
So he tossed a penny, Domina called heads, and the
penny fell outside the radiance of the lamp under which
they were standing. They searched for it with a match
and a policeman came along the deserted pavement and
stood and considered them suspiciously. It was heads.
He took her up to his room, turned on the gas-fire,
went down to the Buxworths’ kitchen and made cocoa.
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 221
When he came back he found her asleep in his armchair.
She heard him coming and woke and smiled and he
kissed her and they forgot the cocoa.
Next morning Jane did not enter, but woke them with
a discreet knock and a tray with two cups left on the mat.
They had both overslept and Malcom went out to find a
taxi to take Domina to her flat and then to Woolwich
with all speed. When he came back he found her sitting
in the kitchen discussing domesticities with Jane and
running her hand through Steven’s hair. Jane and she
had established complete understanding.
‘ But don’t you want a baby ? ’ said Jane.
‘ Often. But I don’t want a husband. . . . Good-bye,
Steven. Kiss Auntie Dom. Good-bye, Mrs. Buxworth.’
‘ Good-bye,’ said Jane. ‘ Come often.’
Domina’s secret smile peeped out at them.
‘ Not too often.’
Subchapter v
Almost daily, passing into the British Museum, he
found his eyes travel from the enigmatic stare of the
Ancient Maya priest to Laurence Binyon’s lines engraved
in smoky indistinctness on the Museum facade. There
seemed some subtle connection between them.
They shall grow not old, as we that are left grow old,
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn :
At the going down of the sun and in the morning
We will remember them.
Nor had he ever forgotten Metaxa’s Mayans or that
long-lost book of the Abbe Brasseur’s he had bought
in Paris. They had merely receded into the mist-land
of memories along with Metaxa himself. In the years
from 1918 onwards they had seemed to fade to meaning¬
lessness with other foetal dreams and enthusiasms.
But now he began to find remote images and phrases
222
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
stir to the challenge of the stela-cast. He would see
again the Picard shell-hole, hear again the fantastic
theorizing of the one man he had ever loved. ‘ . . . the
key to all the secrets of life and death and time. Perhaps
the undeciphered glyphs contain the key to even—that.'
And he would see the Greek’s handsome head nod
towards the twilight and the Saxon lines, and then the
picture would roll up like a scroll and vanish, and, a
little heavily, he would trudge through the corridors to
ffrench’s department or enter the Reading Room for an
hour’s immersement in reports from the battle that was
already beginning to split the ranks of historians and
archaeologists.
For the leaders of the heresy championed by Domina
on Stane Muir were assailing the comfortable certitudes
of half a century, and the startled evolutionists were
retorting with a barrage of invective and insult. A fight
affecting the very foundations of human society, it went
unnoticed in the Press. Not so in the Hanno Society.
Malcom discovered members who would have delighted
in burning the heretic diffusionists as an auto-da-fe in
the middle of Bloomsbury Square. He had difficulty
in preventing each issue of the Society quarterly from
developing into a concentrated assault and battery on
Professor Elliot Smith and his lieutenants. He himself,
his sympathies instinctively with the root-beliefs of the
heretics, maintained a disappointed neutrality.
For this new-old view of history—that man, like the other
anthropoids, had been originally a decent and kindly
animal, no blood-drinking ghoul of the fevered Darwinian
imagination ; that civilization—Wars, cruelties, gods,
agriculture, temple-building—had been no more an
instinctive and inevitable development in the wide-scat¬
tered communities of the early world than it is instinctive
and inevitable for an orang-utan of the forests to develop
the tea-drinking habits of his kinsmen in the Zoo ;
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 223
that with the passing of civilization’s codes and tabus
the aberrant horrors of ten thousand years might pass away
as well: with all these opinions Malcom agreed. But the
diffusionists enormously weakened their case by maintain¬
ing that civilization first arose in but one locality, and
that locality Ancient Egypt. To Malcom it seemed plain
that the germs of the world-disease had fecundated in at
least two or three localities, and spread about the world
and met and overlapped and stewed to a greasy ferment.
... He devotes a large portion of his Autobiography
to proving that Ancient Atlantis, the home of Cro-
Magnon men, was the continent from which the early
American civilizations originated. He goes on, rather
naively, to upbraid the diffusionists for not following
out their conclusions to the logical extreme and attacking
contemporary religion, morals, ethics, politics. “ Domina
is the only logical diffusionist I have ever met.”
But, looking out at the world from the windows of his
Bloomsbury office or his room above the Thames, it
needed something of the faith that moveth mountains
to believe in Domina’s assertion that the War had liber¬
ated men from the civilized code and habit and outlook.
Religion, reinforced by the dreary mummeries of a
shamanistic spiritualism, held its own ; it did more.
It invaded the ranks of the physicists, stormed their
laboratories, and retired triumphant with the rather
shaky and illegible signatures of Einstein and Eddington
appended to a Declaration of Faith that there was
Really an Anthropomorphic Something. The jerry-
built commercialism misnamed capitalism had been
propped and pilastered anew on the bones of the dead.
It showed no sign of collapse. Demos, unaltered,
unchanged, sporting, obedient, fatuous alike in his
grovelments and growlings, grubbed an unchancy
livelihood in commercialism’s packed cellars or starved
and whined on unemployment doles. Below them all
224 THE thirteenth disciple
the faces of the ancient lowly still haunted the imagina¬
tions of men like Malcom.
‘ Oh, slain and spent and sacrificed
People, the grey-grown, speechless Christ ! ’
‘ Well, what are we going to do about it ? ’ Domina
would demand. ‘ Join the Labour Party and get presented
at Court ? ’ ?
‘ Co-respondents aren’t eligible for either honour,' he
would tell her, severely.
‘ Oh, I forgot,’ she would say, contritely. ‘ These
little habits ’
‘ But seriously, what the devil are the intelligent people
who think like us to do ? ’
‘ Nothing. Leave it alone. There’s nothing to be
done with it. For an archaeologist you lack perspective,
Malcom. The world’ll cure itself. It is curing. Civiliza¬
tion’s rotten right through, and all this religious revival
and war-mind and so on—they’re just temporary back-
ripples on the tide ’
She failed to follow her own advice with the coming
of the General Strike of 1926. She deserted the Wool¬
wich ‘ shop ’ and, undaunted by Malcom’s declaration of
neutrality, hired a motor-cycle and sidecar, packed an
admirer—possibly one of the co-respondents—into the
sidecar, and toured the home counties distributing
British Workers and egging on the strikers generally.
George Buxworth, with a grin, enrolled as a defender of
law and order, wore a special constable’s brassard, and
appeared to spend most of his time collecting exhausted
revolutionists and shepherding them inside Jane’s kitchen
and outside cups of cocoa. Malcom, retiring to his room
for nine days’ neutrality, abandoned his Autobiography
and devoted himself to the writing of the propaganda
novel of ‘ primitivism ’ which George Buxworth had urged
him to attempt.
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 225
He had finished a third of it when the strike ended.
Domina, unrepentant and apparently indispensable,
went back to the Woolwich ‘ shop ’; and George climbed
the stairs to see how his lodger was getting on.
He sat with the MS. in one of Malcom’s arm-chairs
and grinned and chuckled and wiped streaming eyes as he
went through the pages. ‘ Hell, M.M., you’ll be the
death of me yet ! Life with a vengeance—^without
fig-leaves or cherry-blossom.’ He finished it regret¬
fully. ‘ It’s the kind of thing James Joyce used to dream
of before he mislaid his English dictionary and took
to writing in a mixture of shorthand and Irish.’
‘ Well, what are its chances ? ’
‘ You might get it published in Milan—or in the
millennium.’
Subchapter vi
And still the enigmatic Maya stela looked down on
his diurnal journeyings into the Museum.
What if Metaxa’s jest had been no jest ? What if
the strange tribes of Atlantean refugees which descended
on Central America in 200 b.c. had indeed in their isola¬
tion developed some primitive approximation to twentieth-
century civilization, and fought the thing, and failed to
conquer it, and left enshrined in their unread writings
account of both fight and failure ?
Unread ?
Half-amused at his own romancing he began to read
books on the Maya problem ; in a fortnight’s time he was
attacking the subject with the sharp-edged singleness of
purpose of an athlete who had at length found a contest
worth his training. He revived his early Spanish with
the aid of a private tutor at the Berlitz School, and at the
same time, in the Museum Reading Room, plunged into
study of every document which dealt, even remotely,
with the pre-Columbian Central Americans.
p
226 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He was no more an ideal archaeologist, I think, than
he was an ideal writer. Both trades were auxiliary to
his purpose and dream. But within a year he had as good
a knowledge of the Maya and Mayan quarter-history as
may be obtained from the written materials—mostly
speculative or commentary—at the disposal of the modern
world. Then, with the confidence of ignorance, he set
about learning the modern Maya language.
He unearthed two grammars in the Reading Room and
struggled with them for a month, discovering an insane
language with innumerable rules, no examples, and
marshalled hosts of exceptions so numerous that “ a
Maya conversation must have been fought with nothing
but irregular troops.” The reality was, of course, that
the Maya tongue, evolved and used far from Europe,
made no submission to Western grammatical rules, least
of all to those of out-of-date Latinists. Thinking that
there might be more modern works, he consulted a
Spanish publishing house. It had never heard of them.
And then a chance meeting put fresh materials into his
hands.
It was at the Luxembourg frontier, returning from his
single journey across Europe. A fellow-traveller, a tall,
burly man with hair as black as Malcom’s own, had his
luggage strewn in front of him and was hard beset by
officials. His knowledge of French appeared to be as
limited as his knowledge of German. He appealed, in
desperation, to the waiting and stamping queue.
‘ <;Hay alguien en este cuarto que hable espanol ? *
Malcom sought among Castilian accentuations. ‘ Si,
senor. iQue se lo ofrece ? ’
The burly man was a Yucatecan, a sisal-grower
attending some exporters’ conference in Berlin. He
travelled to Paris with Malcom, heard of the latter’s
difficulties in the matter of Maya grammars, and pro¬
mised to do what he could in the matter.
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 227
A month later Malcom received a small package from
Merida in Yucatan. The package contained a tattered
little volume, together with a letter of much courtesy
and advice from Sr. Benito Torres, the distinguished
Americanist. Maya—it was practically impossible to
learn it from a text-book. Why not come to Merida and
learn it orally ? Sr. Torres proved himself a philologist,
and covered several pages with remarks on the Maya
language. The little grammar he enclosed was a copy
of that compiled by Pio Perez, and much used by Le
Plongeon.
Malcom abandoned the Museum for a time, and set
about devoting his spare hours to study of the horrible
tongue presumably used by the temple-builders of
Xibalba.
George or Jane would occasionally climb to his room
those Spring or Summer evenings of 1927, and attempt
to drag him out to a theatre or picnic ; they would sit
on the bed and turn over photographs of Maya objects—
probably the most depressing-looking objects in the
world—and ask him irreverent questions about the ancient
civilized cannibals. Did they prefer it stewed or grilled ?
. . . Steven would stare at the temple-photographs and
say ‘ Pritty ’ in a bored tone. The new baby, Malcom
George, was still at the stage of somnolent uninterest.
Domina was member of a Thames boating club. She
insisted on Malcom joining it, and he developed consider¬
able skill and thumb-callosities as results of long, solitary
rows from Chelsea to Mortlake and back again. But of
Domina herself he saw less and less. She appeared to
have abandoned many of her social gaieties, and, trans¬
forming a room of her flat into a laboratory (after shameful
wheedling and bedazzlement of her landlord) from
which would issue dreadful stenches and occasional
flares of fluid metal, experimented in pursuit of some
German research prize. Young men arriving to take her
228
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
to one or another promised amusement would be
blandly turned away by the pretty Iris, or else admitted
and conscripted as unpaid and unhonoured assistants
in odoriferous and frightsome operations.
She alternated those absorptions, however, with light¬
hearted “ orgiastic weeks ” in which Malcom had no
part. But twice, returning homewards late at night and
attracted by the light from his window, she dismissed
disgruntled escorts and climbed up the Buxworths’
stair to lounge in their lodger’s arm-chair in glistening
garments and enjoy herself by attacking Malcom and the
Maya impartially. . . . They were merely an insanitary
Neolithic people : Mongolian and Red Indian in stock :
well-known facts from the shape of their heads. As for
their unread glyphs, so far from being alphabetical, they
were probably the crudest pictographs ; and the Maya
themselves, so far from being in any way mysterious,
were trite and obvious both in their history and their
religion. They meant nothing to modern life and modern
needs. ... As for Malcom, he was the unsubdued
romantic, creating fanciful pictures in the forests of pre-
Christian Guatemala, because he shirked twentieth-
century Europe.
He told her about Metaxa and the poppy-field of
Picardy.
‘ So this Maya study now—it’s a kind of sacrifice to
the manes of Metaxa ? ’
‘ Don’t be an idiot, Dorn.’ He yawned and stood up,
and hunched himself against the window, his hands on
the sill and stretching himself in some weariness, looking
at her with remote eyes. He had never forgotten Jane
Buxworth’s words that Sunday on Putney Heath. ‘ It’s
search, not sacrifice. And maybe all that Metaxa wanted
of himself to survive survives in me now. I am as much
him as I am myself in lots of those things : more, I
sometimes think.’
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 229
He yawned again, very weary, and bent his head in his
hands, and Domina has told me of a swift and vivid and fool¬
ish thought she had at that moment, looking at him that
he was neither Metaxa nor Malcom, but Man himself. . . .
Subchapter mi
Gradually, out of all those months of study and con¬
centration, he began to upbuild in his mind, in speech
and gesture, thought and belief and habit, the people
who reared the great cities of Chiapas, Guatemala, Hon¬
duras and Yucatan, set the dated stelae in their plazas,
and lined those stelae with pebble-shaped glyphs in the
days when Christianity was dawning in Europe. And all
this was but a preliminary to an intensive study of the
undeciphered glyphs themselves.
In mid-April he resolved on a fortnight’s holiday before
beginning glyph-elucidation. He went down to a little
town in Devonshire, taking with him, with a kind of
shamed cunning in his attempt to cheat himself, a copy of
Forstemann’s book on the Dresden Codex—one of the
three surviving Maya MSS.—and a large photograph of
the most mysterious piece of sculpture in Maya art: the
Sacrifice of the Temple of the Sun in Palenque, depicting
two priests engaged in mystic devotions while to right and
left stand column on column of calculiform characters,
unread and unapprehended for over eighteen centuries.
His first day at the seaside town he passed in bored
misery, wandering the sand-dunes or the inland muddy
lanes where the Spring was so burgeoning. In the
evening he walked the beach under a great globular
moon and every pebble he kicked reminded him of the
quest he had resolved to forego for a fortnight.
Next day he gave up the pretence, stayed indoors, and
set to work on the glyphs of the right-hand panel of the
Sun tablet: those glyphs which stand behind the most
perfect figure in Maya sculpture. He disregarded every-
230 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
thing which seemed to bear any allusion to a date. Sun
and day, moon, weather and numeral signs, all known
since the discovery of Bishop Landa’s manuscript or
slowly spelled out by German and American investigators,
too frequently misled the modern investigator. Also,
it seemed to him that the probable solution lay, not—as
usual—in concentrating on a single glyph all the student’s
erudition, but in attempting to read the glyphs in groups.
He had accustomed himself to steady hours of unin¬
teresting work for the Hanno Society : *He had soaked
himself in Maya lore for over twelve months. But he
had never endured such mental strain as on that first
day, and at the end of it he was no further advanced than
at the beginning.
Next morning he abandoned the first two glyph-
columns—they are read in pairs—and took to the next
two. And there, presently, it seemed to him that he had
found a clue : a sign which he was certain represented the
single Maya word ‘ long lands.’ It was about noon when
when he came on it, and his excitement in attempted
checking and verifying was too much for his unreliable
stomach. He hastily abandoned both his lunch and his
original plan of studying the glyphs in groups. Instead,
he commenced the detailed investigation of each character.
And then took place one of the most tragic and thrilling
events of his life, and of all the explanations of it that were
afterwards advanced to him—mental collapse, delusion,
and what not—he never found one that was satisfying,
not even Domina’s triumphant assertion that he had some¬
how tapped back through the ‘ time-spirals ’ to the minds
of the original sculptors of the Palenque panel, fascinating
though that supposition was.
Without a scrap of evidence to support the statement
he records his belief that he succeeded, glyph by glyph,
with here and there unfilled gaps, in elucidating the entire
inscription on the Tablet of the Sun.
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 231
Of that his memory remained quite definitely assured.
But it was memory of watching another man seated at
work and making discoveries at which the spectator
peered ineffectually. Glyph by glyph he elucidated the
inscription which has puzzled and enthralled all American¬
ists for the past hundred years and has stood unread in
the Chiapas forests for over eighteen centuries. At the
end of four days all that remained for him to do was to
work out a coherent rendering of the inscription. Because
of the peculiar twist of Maya thought and speech and
script, he was in the position of one who had all the
letters of a puzzle in his hand—a gigantic anagram—but
with still the work of setting them in a frame so that
they might coalesce to meaning in the eyes of the alien
European. . . .
It was a windy night of stars in his sitting-room when
he arrived at that stage. He was to remember having the
windows wide open and leaning out to look at the sea,
and noting the rising of the gale. As he turned away from
the window the curtains bellied wildly behind him, but
he sank into a chair and clenched his temples over the
beginning of a headache which threatened to split his
skull. . . .
Next morning, his room a wreck from the effects of
the gale, he was discovered raving in some species of
cerebral fever, and while his landlady, greatly upset, was
fetching a doctor and sending a telegram to the Buxworth
address in Chelsea, his transcript of the Maya inscription
was (he was afterwards convinced) drifting far out on
the winds of the English Channel.
“ Poor Metaxa ! ”
Subchapter viii
George Buxworth came down from London, stayed
four days, saw Malcom’s delirium abate and pass, and
had him taken to a nursing home. George assumed airs
232 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
of shocked remonstrance. ‘ Cerebral fever ? Good God,
Malcom, it’s a novelist’s disease ! ’
Domina also came down, though she was not allowed to
see the patient. But she and George, going back, took
upon themselves to interview the Hon. Reginald in the
British Museum and obtain from him three months’
leave of absence for his assistant—granted very willingly
and kindly by the Hanno, with Malcom’s ordinary
salary left uncurtailed.
It was his first real illness since childhood. He lay
helpless and fretting in the nursing home while his late
lodgings were turned upside down in search for his lost
transcriptions, and the sunshine danced outside on the
clean-smelling waters. He would wake and doze and
wake again to that sunshine and sea-smell and fret his
temperature up to improbable heights as he thought
of his desperately wasted labour over the Palenque
panels.
Domina came on the scene again, six weeks later, when
he was convalescent and sitting on the veranda of the
nursing home meditating his return to London. She held
his hands, gravely.
£ We’re going for a walking-tour,’ she said.
He seemed in robust health but for the nervous
twitchings of his hands. ‘ I can’t. I’ve got to go back to
London.’
‘ Harvest’s early down here this year. We’ll meander
up through Cornwall, sleep in ricks and steal milk from
cows in the early morning. Take a hotel now and then,
when the weather seems dangerous for you. But it’s
going to be a perfect fortnight. I know it is. We’ve got
a whole fortnight to spend. ’
He was moved almost to weeping with irritation at her
density. ‘ You’re talking nonsense. I’ve got to find out
about my lost transcription and then go up to London and
see the Hanno ’
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 233
She stamped her foot, though the peeping smile came
from under her long eyelashes.
‘ Then it’s me or the Hanno, Malcom.’
He fretted at her, his hands shaking. ‘Don’t be an idiot.’
‘ I’m very serious. You see, I’ve won my research
prize. I’m going to Germany for a year. Sailing in three
weeks’ time.’
Subchapter ix
They went west into Cornwall for a week and then
turned northwards. The weather up to the time of their
setting out had been doubtful, but they followed on the
skirts of halcyon days that took their thoughts back to
the Leekan holiday two years before.
Domina, hatless, was clad in the simplicity of a tartan
kilt-skirt—a tartan to which she had not the remotest
claim—an open-necked sweater, and low-heeled brown
shoes with those over-flapping, be-slashed tongues beloved
of Gleneagles. Her only luxuries of apparel (Malcom
compared her to a tramp steamer with a state room) were
the silk stockings and underclothes for which she had
such a sensuous passion, on which she spent a tenth of
her income. ... Of all sounds of the Cornish roads
Malcom was best to remember that dim and faery
under-rustle of silken garments.
He himself was in ready-made flannels, hatless also,
upheld by an immense walking-stick, and carrying their
joint luggage in a tourist’s pack : pyjamas, towels, a comb
which presently aged to a grinning toothlessness, Mal-
com’s razor, soap, a ground-sheet, two feather-weight
mackintoshes, an elaborate saucepan-kettle-teapot, a
pound of chocolates (constantly renewed), Carlyle’s Past
and Presenty and a copy of Comic Cuts.
‘ If you fell down a hole and got killed with that lot,’
said Domina, cheerfully, ‘ wouldn’t the archaeologists of
the future have a devil of a find ! ’
234 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
It weighed light as a feather on Malcom’s shoulders
as he swung along the roads, up long, meandering paths,
down through sudden gullies to the sea, the sunlight
browning his skin, his nerves reasserting control, and
something like happiness in his heart.
Domina, sometimes beside him for long, quiet minutes,
on other occasions would vanish into wood or thicket or
up some shelving hill-side—for no particular reason except
that the Summer was in her blood, every copse a mystery,
every glimpsed footpath with a ‘ No Trespassers ’ notice
an invitation. She would disappear, and in ten or twenty
minutes he would see her remote in some field, deep in
converse with a pipe-smoking farmer, or emerging from
some farm-house, waving him to come up and share the
glass of milk that was always offered her. Below her
sophistication was an enviable, elemental simplicity
which allowed her to make friends without effort. Those
highway friends of hers—farmers, tramps, game-keepers
—would stiffen a little into formality at Malcom’s
approach, and when they were tramping on together again
he would vivisect his soul for reasons.
‘ I suppose it’s that infernal defensiveness that the
Army instilled into me in pre-natal days.’
le-es. People don’t like you readily, though there
are some  Generally I think it’s just your otherness
that freezes them up.’
‘ Otherness ? ’
‘ Don’t you know it ? As though you were looking at
something beyond the horizon.’
‘ It’s probably hunger.’ He would consult a map for
the distance to their next meal. ‘ I never had such an
appetite.’
They slept one night in a half-mown hayfield, on
swathes of ammoniac hay, with a waning moon above
them as they went to sleep and a fir-wood to their right.
Far away in the west the sun had gone down in a drowsy,
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 235
Leekan-like wailing of peewits. In the night-time a dog
from a nearby farm came prowling and scented them out
and, in outraged propriety, barked and barked despite
their wheedlings and soothings. They endured it for
a time and then emerged simultaneously from under the
hay, loaded themselves with stones, and chased the dog
for a quarter of a mile or so across stubble soft and yielding
below their bare feet. They had started in anger, but soon
it became a game, a play in the uncertain moonlight, and
they ran and shouted, daftly, pelting a cur which raced
round them and finally fled with frightened ‘ woof ! ’
being unaccustomed to moon-dazed lunatics. They could
smell the sea by then and were too wakeful to go to bed.
Sketchily clad, they explored hand-in-hand through
shadowy fields, scaring great horned cattle and once a
horse, which galumphed away into the dimness with
thunderous hooves. They found the sea at last, a smooth
beach of shingle. They shed what little clothes they had
on and ran down into the chill of water in the moonlight,
splashing each other and breasting out into mysterious
water still and silent, till a great comber would sud¬
denly erupt from it over their heads and smite the quaking
beach behind them. They came out and ran races to dry,
having no towels, and Domina, declaring herself a Mayan
priestess, danced a scandalous dance in the moonlight
till the moon, apparently overcome, went out. ... It
was hours before they managed to reach the hayfield
again and shelter and warmth under the swathes from
which the dog had evicted them.
They inspected grave cathedrals, basked on hill-tops,
lunched at public-houses—at one of them Domina drank
too much cider—and spent only two disagreeable and
stuffy nights in hotels : buildings raised to meet the needs
of the after-War automobile tourists. Rain drove them
to those hotels, and the first one refused them admittance
because they asked for a double bedroom and Domina
236 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
wore no wedding-ring. Also, they were probably dis-
reputable-looking enough : Malcom’s suit of flannels
considerably the worse for wear and Domina decidedly
crumpled and gypsy-like, her nose freckled by the sun,
her vivid blue-black hair an electric banner, not the
smooth, dead, unguented cropping of respectability. The
hotel manager who declined their custom was fat and
perspiring, his clerk a pale thing like a blindworm, and
their glances and refusal infuriated Malcom. But
Domina was merely amused.
‘ If it’s a wedding-ring that’s wanted, we can soon
settle that.’
So they went to a branch of Wool worth’s and spent an
exciting ten minutes illegally investing Domina with the
symbol proper to a double bedroom. She could not keep
her eyes from the sixpenny ring as they left the store.
‘ I feel like a prize chicken,’ she said. ‘ Or like Red-
leafe’s bull in Leekan. Only its ring is through its nose,
very sensibly.’
But the ring put a certain constraint on them, all the
same, and that night—in another hotel from the first—
he asked Domina to marry him.
She was brushing her electric hair. It was a warm
and cheerful room, deceptively homelike and comforting.
She looked at him with puzzled eyes, hesitated a little,
seemed about to laugh. Then she drew off the ring and
dropped it into the fire, crossed the room and opened the
window so that the curtain streamed. He turned round
and exclaimed as the draught hit him, and, suddenly found
Domina’s arms round his neck.
‘ Stuffy. We’re both getting it, M.M. That damned
ring ! What is there to sell our freedom for that we
can’t have now ?—Aphrodisiac bishops and eunuch
editors ? ’ She thought for a moment, her chin pressed
against his cheek. ‘ Or—do you want children, Malcom?’
He had a desperate desire to lie, to tie her down if he
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 237
might, to win a den and a warm room and her unstraying
loyalty. And then, as in a blaze of light, he saw her the
laughing dancer of the Cornish beach, his comrade of
the dusty roads.
‘ No,’ he said.
‘ Then there’s no excuse for marrying.’ She sighed
whimsically. ‘ We’ll just have to burn.’
Subchapter x
But as their holiday neared its end, as London and
every-day life and Domina’s Germany drew nearer, a
foreboding of loneliness as desperate as Metaxa’s in 1915
would come upon him. They camped one night on the
edge of a little fir-wood perched at the top of a Dart¬
moor tor. They had walked that day from Okehampton,
and up in this evening calm, with the windy spaces of
the moor about them, they made tea and boiled eggs and
then lay down side by side, reading Carlyle, and deciding
there was nothing in him. Presently the distant crying
of sheep lured away their attention from the dull acres of
Victorian bombast, and they lay and looked at the even¬
ing. They even neglected to follow up with the usual
antidote—a passage from the stained and tattered copy
of Comic Cuts, which also did duty as a tablecloth.
(It had been Domina’s idea to doctor the rolling Carlylean
periods with excerpts from Comic Cuts, and Malcom
confesses an inability, in the Buxworths’ house later that
year, to avoid picking up Steven’s peculiar literature and
following the adventures of his heroes.)
But that evening his old restlessness was back.
1 What the devil am I to do when this is over ? I can’t
carry on with the Maya—not for a long time, if ever.
The Hanno keeps me going only a few hours a day and
—Lord God ! ’
She ruffled his hair, and then, realizing the inadequacy
of that, brooded on him and Dartmoor.
238 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
* You’re the kind of desperate person who’s always
made the world uncomfortable for himself. . . . Oh,
I’m different. I can amuse myself, I can at least pretend
that God doesn’t matter, can enjoy novels and cinemas
and staring at pictures—all of which bore you to exaspera¬
tion. Do ? Why—start to clear up the mess and preach
the Adventure.’
‘ How ? ’
She lay and thought. ‘ Perhaps you were right, and
I—ever so wrong. Perhaps we’ll never escape from
civilization except by fighting it. Its foul marriage rings.
... I thought once its end was inevitable, but now—
Oh, I don’t know. All the signs of the change seemed
clear enough, but now they’re as muddled a riddle as your
glyphs. It may come back worse than ever—wars and
gods and classes and cruelty—unless we fight it. Start
the fight. Organize a society for all the shocking people
like ourselves. . . . Something new in politics, with a
platform of all those things that are never mentioned
and are uncomfortable and real. ... You could do it.’
He was silent. But Domina sat up in her enthusiasm.
It seemed to her a plan that had been in her mind for
years.
‘ Why, goodness, it’s what the world’s waiting for !
All the young and intelligent of England and the world.
. . . We’ve no choice in things, no voice in things. We
can never do anything through the old, cobwebby
religions, and the old and useless political parties—the
Conservatives sighing for the eighteenth century, the
Liberals dreaming of a chloroformed world in side-
whiskers and crinolines, the Labour Party—like a
Nonconformist dinosaur, with its nice little respectable
brain in its spine, not its head ! You can never fight the
returning beastlinesses through them—they’re part of
the beastliness themselves. Let’s fight them and it in
the open ! ’
THE RIDDLE OF THE GLYPHS 239
He stared at her. He put his hands on her shoulders
and shook her. He jumped to his feet.
By God, Dom, you’re a genius ! ’ He threw back his
head in challenge to the dimming, unpenetrated horizon.
‘ 1 ! . . . I wish we were back in London ! ’
CHAPTER FOUR
THE NEW SATANISTS
Subchapter i
‘ T>UT what’s the good ? ’ George Buxworth wanted
iJ to know. ‘ There are scores of piddling, ineffective
little societies like that. They yap at the heels of the
Labour Party and spend their lives seceding from this
and that, or hunting for heresy among their members.
They’re mostly manned by scrubby little writers who’ve
mislaid their chins ’ r
‘ For God’s sake leave your infernal novelists out of it,’
pleaded Malcom. ‘ Listen to what I intend. I’m not
proposing a spare-time political home for aesthetic
progressives. What I want to see organized is all
the good constructive immorality which is running to
waste. ’
‘ Sounds like a harlots’ trade union,’ said George.
‘ Still, go ahead.*
So Malcom went ahead, into interminable expositions
and discussions, first with George for audience and
opposition and Jane and Steven and Malcom George
sitting by as a sort of Distinguished Strangers’ con-
gerie, then with George as ally and fellow-expositor and
each of their new nominations as audience and oppo¬
sition, then as secretary of the temporary committee,
finally 
Finally, in February of 1929, eight months after
Domina’s departure for Germany, the committee
agreed on the issue of an advertisement to the weekly
papers.
The list of weeklies included every journal which
seemed to cater for ‘ professional ’ people, and the
advertisements (financed by the committee and quite
ruinous to its pocket) were all of a kind, displayed in a
neat little enclosure, so :
240
THE NEW SATANISTS
241
Secular Control Group : It is proposed
to found a Politico-Social society with the
above name and with an opportunist phil¬
osophy, policy, and outlook based on organ¬
ized and documented knowledge. Inquiries
by letter are invited to the honorary secre¬
tary, Malcom Maudslay, 33A Nunquam
Street, Chelsea, S.W. 6
The wording had been fought over again and again
before the advertisement was published. Malcom had
never before realized the difficulty of conveying in a set
space at once enough and not too much.
‘ It looks,’ said George Buxworth, coarsely, ‘ like a
cure for piles.’
‘ It’s intended to be,’ said Malcom.
Subchapter ii
The committee had met in the Buxworths’ drawing¬
room every Saturday afternoon for six weeks before the
issue of the advertisements. The smart maid would admit
the members and George and Jane receive them and
ply them with tea, while Malcom hovered, lightedly,
from the door to the fire, ‘ like a small boy with his first
birthday party,’ said Jane. . . .
The Secular Control Group rolls afterwards specified
the foundation members as George Buxworth, journalist;
Stephen Harding, publisher ; Malcom Maudslay, archae¬
ologist ; Ivor L. Moxon, garage proprietor ; Bhupen-
dranath Pratap, student ; John Stanley, aircraft designer ;
Jane Buxworth, ex-Civil Servant ; Stuart Isham, general
practitioner; Dorota Fenton Maxwell, artist; Domina
Riddoch, chemist.
But Domina’s part in the preliminary discussions was
Q
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
242
played by letter only for she was in her laboratory in
Chemnitz and not expected back until April of the year.
Malcom had talked to Buxworth and Moxon ; the
latter was a member of the Hanno Society and a man of
singular energy and imagination. Those two had secured
the interest of Harding and Stanley respectively, and
Dorota Maxwell, an acquaintance of George on the Croc¬
odile, had appeared on the scene in response to letter-
urgings from Domina in Germany. She it was who
brought in the Bengali—“ the son of a Calcutta factory-
slaver,” says Malcom, whatever that may mean. Jane
had produced her young doctor, Stuart Isham—a woman
in spite of her name. They might easily have secured
others to begin with, but Malcom vetoed this method of
recruitment ; they did not want a family party. So they
cut themselves apart from propaganda efforts while they
hammered out the question of a creed.
This proved difficult enough. It had to have definite
meaning, and yet not be so close and rigid as to exclude
those moderns with comparatively harmless fads attached
I to them like barnacles. Malcom made no insistence on
his diffusionist view of civilization. Domina was not so
accommodating. Stanley—thirty-three years of age, ex¬
pilot of the Air Force, part-designer of Schneider winners,
and a believer in helicopters—proved to be enamoured of
a kind of Wellsian-Shavian God, a harmless and agreeable
enough deity, and wished to have the Group described
as ‘ politico-religious.’
Moxon, lean, rakish, and middle-aged, with grey-
streaked brown hair and grey-streaked blue eyes, a gold¬
framed pince-nez and a gold-mounted petrol-lighter,
would arrive from Berkshire in a large and impressive
touring-car to combat any such idea.
‘ “ Religion’s ” a mistake. You’re bringing in Jehovah
by the back door.’
‘ Robbed of his night-shirt ’: George.
THE NEW SATANISTS
243
‘ And with a copy of the Outline of History under his
arm ’ : Harding.
‘ The Lord is a shoving leopard.’ This, sotto voce,
from Stuart Isham, and her only contribution to the pre¬
liminary discussions.
But Stanley had as supporter Dorota Maxwell, in
possession of very short skirts and hair, a piquant face
and a Bengali adorer. She would wave her long cigarette-
holder against Moxon’s poised petrol-lighter.
‘ You’re like Swinburne—whom your ancestor was
frightened to go on publishing back in the sixties. It’s not
that you disbelieve in God. It’s just that you’ve got a
spite against him.’
‘ “ Pioneers ! O Pioneers ! ” ’ George would remon¬
strate, soothingly. . . .
Moxon himself, however, was a Wellsian, believing the
world could be saved by the ‘ scientist.’ Domina’s
letters combated this idea with considerable pungency
and authority. ‘ Politico-scientific ’ would be ridiculous.
The average scientist was the most timorous and tradition-
bound of beings outside his own particular sphere of
research. ‘ Listen to the British Association in session,
yapping its respectful admiration of the Throne and the
bishops’ bench, and you’ll feel more inclined to hand over
control of the world to the nearest union of dustmen.’
There was also considerable debate over a name for the
proposed society. Malcom had begun with ‘ Union of
Scientific Control,’ but ‘ union ’ was vetoed as suggesting
a trade union, Court dress, Empire Loyalty, and fatuous
sentiments on the dignity of being grimy ; ‘ scientific ’
was quashed by the journalist, the publisher, and the
chemist. Domina herself, in a letter, was ribald enough
to suggest ‘ The Neo-Satanists.’ Buxworth, in a shocking
raid on Mrs. Eddy, capped this with ‘ Science and Health.’
Harding proposed ‘ Immorality Unlimited.’ Stuart
Isham, still sotto voce and irrepressible, advanced ‘ The
244 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
League of the Leopard ’ as a Spooneristic concession to
Stanley’s religious convictions. The admittedly clumsy
Secular Control Group ’ was a bad compromise for
which Moxon could claim chief credit.
Desultory if good-natured wrangling on all issues was
the rule. Not one of the committee had the same urge
and seriousness in the matter as Malcom. Like him, like
nine-tenths of the intelligent men and women in the
after-War years, they had contributed to public life no
more than a shrug of contemptuous indifference. It
was a meaningless simian brawl. Changes of state and
industry and social convention had gone on over or below
them and their kind, at the mercy of professional
politicians, propagandist journalists, priest-leagues, and
what not—“ the half-educated swarming to power from
both the gargoyles and the gutters of the rotten cathedral
of civilization.”
Attracted though they were to the idea of a society
which would crystallize into a code of action, however
loosely, their own straying hopes and likings and passion¬
ate rejections, the committee members found it hard
enough to slough years of cynicism and irreverent wit.
The repartee was extraordinarily good, but Malcom would
fret and shuffle his chair and George, the temporary chair¬
man, would glance at him and the rest of the room with
upraised brows.
I think we’ll get down to business. Otherwise our
secretary may burst a blood-vessel. . . .’
They treated him, Malcom records, with a patronizing
trust, and this is not difficult to believe. His thesis that
the Group’s ‘ philosophic ’ standing was “ belief in
modern ability to organize and direct the Adventure
of Mankind coupled with “ complete scepticism of all
traditional authority, codes, conventions, and dignities of
civilization unamenable or hostile to constant re-testing
and re-stating ” was accepted almost unamended.
THE NEW SATANISTS
245
No such unanimity, however, gave birth to the political
programme. Cutting it to an un-unwieldy minimum
proved the difficulty. Stanley was prevailed on to
abandon his demiurge, but endless other contentious
matters arose. Dorota Maxwell wished them to declare
in favour of ‘ free lust ’ (“ The futile fool ! ” comments
Malcom, bitterly and unjustly), and George Buxworth,
probably in revulsion from his daily diet of authors,
wished to have a vegetarian declaration of the Rights of
Mammals. Thereat Harding, seizing the opportunity
for a joke, protested on behalf of all plant life, quoting
Sir Jagadis ©ose on the terrors suffered by the common
cabbage uprooted and devoured. Pratap had Dravidian
ideas on dress reform, and his byronic shirt was kept out
of the programme only through the agile manceuvrings of
Malcom. Shorn of individual fads and obsessions, they
found themselves agreed on Eleven Immediate Propaganda
Points :
Social and Political
(i) . Abolition of the Legal Status of Marriage.
(ii) . State Propaganda and Enforcement of Birth Control.
(iii) . A General Tax to be levied for the Endowment of
Each Woman’s First Two Children.
(iv) . Complete Secularization of Education.
(v) . Disestablishment of Churches.
(vi) . Repeal of the Blasphemy Laws and Censorships.
Industrial
(vii) . Nationalization of Banks.
(viii). State to Acquire Controlling Shares of Principal
Industries.
Scientific
(ix). Compulsory PeriodicalDissolution and Reorganization
of all Chartered Learned Societies.
246 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
(x) . State to Acquire all Patents and establish a Depart¬
ment for the Endowment of Bona Fide Individual
Research.
Anti-war
(xi) . International Organization of Associations pledged
to both Passive Resistance and Sabotage.
Each Point was elaborately documented and its impli¬
cations made clear. The latter half of Point No. n
Malcom pressed through with a majority of one.
^ou 11 have to be damn careful of the wording,’ said
Harding, who had been in opposition. ‘ Otherwise, when
a war comes, the Secular Control Group’ll be declared
an illegal organization at once.’
t t course it will.’ Malcom lost his temper for once.
‘ What the hell else do we intend ? ’
Subchapter Hi
Answers to the advertisements began to come in from
all over the country in a thin stream of query. George
and Malcom sorted them out into four groups : The
Flippant, the Threatening, the Curious, and the Owlish.
They decided to disregard the second and fourth classes
there were amazing specimens in both, ranging from a
solemn warning by an English Mormon that Science
would soon be overthrown by Revelation to a pathetic
charge of plagiarism from a member of the Fabian
Society—-and concentrated their attention on the Flippant
and Curious, knowing that modern flippancy generally
covers a childlike longing for faith and belief in the
ultimate sanity of things. The ‘ thesis ’ and the Eleven
Points, set forth in a neat little booklet printed gratis by
Harding,^ were posted to selected enquirers, with a note
that the Points ’ had been merely tentatively agreed on.
Fhey despatched six hundred and eighty packages
and had between three and four hundred replies. For
THE NEW SATANISTS 247
over a fortnight the two of them, working in the evenings
and far into the nights, read and classified and filed
those replies. They were assisted by Jane and much
coffee, and worked amid an unending stream of mind-
relieving ribaldry at the expense of their correspondents.
Then a roll of names was drawn up and another letter
despatched to each individual who had swallowed ‘ thesis ’
and ‘ points,’ stating that it was intended to hire a
London hall for the inauguration of the Group and
enrolment of members, and inviting subscriptions of
ten shillings per head for this purpose.
‘ That’ll dowse them,’ said Harding, calling in and
producing his wallet. ‘ If there’s one thing an intellectual
can’t bear it’s parting with his money. I know. I’m one.’
Replies came in more slowly than before. They were
sorted out into the Sincere, the Apologetic, and the
Frankly Abusive. From the last group the perspiring
organizers, attended by Jane, learned that they were
confidence men, sex perverts, workshys, and certainly
agents of the white slave traffic.
At the end of a fortnight, however, they discovered,
rather breathlessly, that they had received over £70.
They set about hiring a hall.
Subchapter iv
The first meeting was fixed for the 15th of March,
1929, at 6.30 p.m. in the Lament Hall in the Strand.
On the night of the 12th, while the Buxworths and
Malcom sat in the drawing-room at 33A, busied over
interminable Group questions, a violent peal was heard
on the door-bell. Followed the sound of the maid’s
footsteps, a subdued colloquy in the hall, a remembered
laugh, then the drawing-room door was flung open and
Domina walked into their presence for the first time in
nine months.
They all stood up, talking, Malcom the last to find
248 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
his voice. Domina kissed each of them, impartially and
unembarrassedly, and then sank into a chair.
Well, how are the Satanists ? Goodness, it’s good to
see you all! ’
She was a little thinner, but still with that upright
carriage and clear, fine-textured skin. Her brows were
such a fine line of tracery from tip to tip across her
forehead that Malcom realized they must be tweezered :
some German frivolity. And then he saw her left hand.
The little finger was missing, and the polished tips of
the remaining fingers faintly but ineradicably stained a
metallic blue.
Good Lord, what have you been doing with your
hand ? ’
‘ Oh, a little experiment. But it’s all right.’
‘ You’ll blow yourself up some time.’
She twinkled at him delightedly, leaning forward in
her chair to the warmth of the fire. ‘ Like the frog in
the fable. . . . Where’s the baby ? Oh, in bed. . . .
I ran through the German course ahead of time. Going
back to Woolwich on Monday. Now tell me about
the “ Group.” ’
Two hours later she and Malcom walked along the
Embankment towards her flat under the frosty glitter
of the March sky, Rossetti’s ‘ spacious vigil of the stars.’
To their right the river swung in a long, black glittering
curve down towards Hungerford Bridge.
He told her he was to give the opening speech at
the Group meeting, and then abandoned that topic
abruptly, his attention caught by the cold overhead
splendour.
‘ Horribly remote. . . . Do you remember that night
on Stane Muir, Dom, and your human archangels on
the rim of the Galaxy millions of years away ? That was
the beginning of the Group.’
‘ I know,’ she said, softly.
THE NEW SATANISTS
249
But he could not bring down his fascinated gaze.
‘ Do you think we ever will—our descendants, I mean ?
Lucky devils to be born a million years from now 1 ’
‘ I know,’ she said again. ‘ Remember Fried lander ?—
“ For us the heat by day, the cold by night.
The inch-slow progress and the heavy load,
And death at last to close the long, grim fight
With man and beast and stone: For them, the Road ” ’
' You’ve a lovely voice, Dorn.’ A remote memory
stirred in him. ‘ Lord, Rita once said that about my
own—ages ago in Glasgow ! . . . “ Man and beast and
stone ”—the likeness of ape and tiger that the wheel of
civilization has imprinted in us all, down to our very
bones. . . . Can we ever beat them, after all—ever do
anything real ? When I’m tired like this. . . .’
Her maimed hand touched his in the darkness. ‘ I
didn’t finish Friedlander—
“ And yet, the Road is ours as never theirs !
Is not one joy on us alone bestowed ?
For us the master-joy, O pioneers—
We shall not travel, but we make the Road ! ” *
‘ We make the Road ! In spite of the ape and tiger.
Even though they pull us down, what does it matter ?
We’ve Man on our side, and he’ll beat them yet. . . .
And those stars—Goodness, America was once a million
times more remote ! ’
‘ God ! ’ he said, as at a sudden revelation, ‘ how I’ve
missed you ! ’
Subchapter v
The 15th of March, seven o’clock in the evening, and
before the eyes of Malcom a sea of faces as he rose to
speak. It was probably only a moment—though it felt
like an hour—before the initial stage-paralysis of his
250
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
tongue and senses ceased, and he became conscious of
his own voice, a trifle high-pitched, and of standing
detached, criticizing the content of his speech and the cut
of George Buxworth’s hair, seen out of the corner of his
left eye.
There were nearly three hundred people in the hall
thirty more than had sent in subscriptions. But
anyone was allowed to enter and the extra thirty was at
least partly composed of pressmen, among whom
Buxworth and Harding had been carrying out publicity
work for some time. The members of the temporary
committee were scattered throughout the body of the
hall, excepting Dorota Maxwell, who acted as stenographer
and wrote with such rapidity that she would pause in
occasional unemployment and tap her teeth with her
pencil—an idiotic and aggravating idiosyncrasy. He
could see Domina mid-way the chairs, her hair gleaming,
her shoulders hunched, sitting chin in hand and with
her head a little down-bent. Jane Buxworth was at
home with Steven and the baby. Harding showed up
in the front row, a sardonic thorn set about with over¬
blown young reporters looking about them disinterestedly.
Moxon sat far down to the right and was rapidly and
nervously kindling and rekindling his gold-mounted
lighter. Stanley and Stuart Isham were somewhere in
the vague blur of whispering back towards the rear,
Bhupendranath Pratap glinted, Gandhi-like, near the
door. Every now and then George, who had elected
himself chairman and introduced Malcom, ‘ the founder
of the Group,’ to deliver the opening speech, would
shuffle his feet unnecessarily. Malcom suspected he
was bored.
I became aware how thin and feeble my vocabulary
was, with what clumsy brush I was painting that vision
of sky-storming achievement Domina and I had glimpsed.
Could it really be conveyed in words to alien minds ?
THE NEW SATANISTS 251
. . . I remember floundering in a bog of surmise over
that, arguing the analogy of music to the music-deaf,
and finding, with a jolt of surprise, that while I had
been debating the matter I had still been speaking. . . .
What had I been saying ?
“ I closed with unnecessary speed, hardly touched on
the infamous Eleven Points, and sat down with an
abruptness which left George comatose and uncompre¬
hending in his chair for a moment.”
That moment supplied the first of the comic interludes.
A woman in the middle of the hall stood up, pointed a
finger at Malcom and shouted ‘ Blasphemer ! ’
George Buxworth stood up. ‘ Keep quiet, please.
You can speak later.’
‘ I will not keep quiet ! ’ She had black, frightened
eyes and a pale face with a rabbit-like mouth. She
waved a sheaf of papers. ‘ I will give witness as a servant
of God. That young man who has spoken is a luster
after women, a destroyer of religion, a forerunner of the
Antichrist ’
‘ Will you sit down ? ’ (‘ Christ, M.M., it’s Kate
from Hyde Park ! ’)
‘ I will not sit down ! I bear witness ’
The rest of her speech was lost by George snatching
Dorota Maxwell’s note-book from her hands and
thumping the table vigorously. People had been turning
amused faces towards the woman, but the chairman’s
action evoked surprising results in the rear of the hall.
There came shouts of ‘ Leave her alone ! Give her a
chance ! ’
This was accompanied by cat-calls and cheering.
Three young men stood up near each other and began
addressing the audience at the tops of their voices, one
declaring that birth control filled him with horror, as he
himself wanted to mother a large family, the second
appealing to all teetotallers to go home, the third, with
252 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
hair as bright and red as George’s own, demanding
monotonously what Gladstone said in 1888. At this
the two back benches burst into vociferous song, the main
consensus of opinion apparently being that in 1888
Mr. Gladstone had prophesied that it wasn’t going to
rain any more. . . .
The interrupters were medical students, hobbledehoys
of the London hospitals, and George’s callings were
entirely ineffective in stilling the tumult. Pratap had
vanished—very sensibly, and to summon the police,
as afterwards appeared—and Stanley was to be seen
arguing and struggling vainly in the midst of the student
phalanx. Malcom had had enough. His voice penetrated
to the front seats at least.
‘ Any men here who’ll help to clear the hall of those
damned schoolboys ? War-time chaps preferred.’
A dozen rose up, the platform was deserted, and the
next few minutes were mixed and impressionist. The
volunteers were arranging their ties and hair and Malcom,
considerably soothed, was wrapping up the bloody
knuckles of his right hand in Domina’s handkerchief,
when the Bengali returned with a policeman. Not a
single student was in the vicinity.
George Buxworth was panting a little as he and
Malcom regained the platform. He indulged in a hot
whisper.
‘ By God, M.M., I believe you broke that young
clodhopper’s jaw. You damned idealists aren’t safe.
. . . Say, that speech of yours : we’ll have a million copies
printed ! ’
The members of the audience had kept their seats, all
except Kate from Hyde Park, ‘ who had apparently
balked at bearing witness in a police court.’ The
volunteers pushed back to their places. The reporters
scribbled busily, and a hum of talk and laughter ran all
over the hall. As it was to prove, the Group could not
THE NEW SATANISTS
253
have had its first meeting better salted. George thumped
the table.
‘ You people, you’ve heard Mr. Maudslay. All of
you agree with his general thesis, or you wouldn’t be
here. We’ve about two and a half hours to settle three
matters : the Eleven Points, the temporary constitution,
and the formal enrolment of members. I propose an
hour and forty minutes to the discussion—ten minutes
to each question, speakers three minutes each and one
minute foi a vote. If the Point is entirely rejected it’ll
come up at the next meeting. Any objection to this
procedure ? ’
There was none. George nodded. Malcom smiled
down at his bloodied knuckles. ‘ Point No. 1 : Abolition
of the Legal Status of Marriage. . . .’ He surveyed half
a dozen figures standing up. ‘ The lady in red.’
Malcom, with a sudden, naive memory of a sixpenny
ring, leant forward to listen as Domina Riddoch, her eyes
on the clock, began to address the audience. . . .
‘ At two o’clock next morning George Buxworth and
I, re-elected honorary chairman and secretary respectively,
were yawningly sorting out the last of the sheaves of
memoranda handed us during the debates and looking
up in 33A’s Who’s Who the particulars of Seymour
Redland, described as a writer and schoolmaster, who
had been voted honorary treasurer. We had enrolled
two hundred and eighty-three members (including two
of the reporters), collected subscriptions from over two
hundred, and arranged a full-time discussion of the
constitution of the Group at a meeting to be held a fort¬
night later.’
Subchapter vi
The newspapers gave them a mixed reception, some
sneering at them as ‘ Utopians,’ others entrusting to their
readers stickfuls of account of how medical students
254 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
had attempted to break up an ‘ atheists’ meeting ’ at the
Lamont Hall. But two distinguished socialist writers
contributed articles of destructive criticism of the Group’s
programme to two Labour weeklies, and the day after
those appeared a Sunday newspaper with a wide circula¬
tion took up the Group as a stunt, denouncing it in a
leaderette as composed of advocates of free love, abortion,
industrial sabotage, and Army mutiny. . . . Next week
a shoal of enquiries came to 33A and Malcom succeeded
in extracting four hundred and seventy-eight new
members from the ranks of the enquirers.
It was but the beginning of a crowded seven months.
To Malcom it seemed he had never worked before, that
his struggle with the Maya problem had been child’s
play in comparison. Committees, organizing work,
lectures, debates—he flung all his energies into them,
yet in intervals of midnight silence in the Chelsea house
found time to continue that immense Autobiography of
his. Right up to October of 1929 he continued it and
then abandoned its scattered pages to dominance of an
unstirred desk in a deserted room.
“Worked—God, how we’ve worked ! George Buxworth
has deserted the Crocodile and taken to editing our
weekly, Control. I’ve been offered a paid secretaryship
and declined it. Our London membership has passed
the six thousand mark ; the Bristol, Manchester, and
Glasgow Groups are flourishing. We have designed a
constitution we believe unique, a series of rotating
committees which include all members in active,
compulsory work throughout the year, and ensures no
dead wood in the Groups. Bye-election candidates begin
to be startled by queries from the Group office and our
members are already working through nearly every
professional and scientific organization in the country.
We have been denounced by Conservative ecclesiastics
and Labour atheists, by deans, dons, and dunderheads
THE NEW SATANISTS
255
innumerable. Domina, chairman of the political com¬
mittee, has been interviewed by the Berline? Tagleblatt,
France is sending us enquiries. George Buxworth,
through Chicagoan connections, is already threatening
the morals of his native land with shocking consignments
of turpitude. Our Annual Conference meets in October
to thrash out numerous questions, including the final
wording of Point Eleven ”
The Annual Conference met, sat in session throughout
two drizzling October days, and decided by an over¬
whelming majority to delete the word ‘ sabotage ’ from
Point Eleven, leaving the Group committed to passive
resistance only in the event of War. Malcom sat and
listened to the decision, George, Domina, Harding, and
all the original members of the Group, with the exception
of Stuart Isham, voting against him. He looked round
the tables, then got to his feet and walked to the window
of the Conference room overlooking Trafalgar Square.
Below, a stranded party of Welsh miners had huddled
all day on the benches round the fountains. Malcom
pointed to them.
‘ We needn’t worry about those people being murdered
by peace-time commercialism now. In ten years’ time,
while you’re passively resisting, they’ll be dying like
flies on the wire entanglements of the next war. I resign
my secretaryship.’
And, in the midst of a dead silence, he turned and
left them.
Subchapter vii
His action astounded the Group. George Buxworth
was empowered to ask him to reconsider his resignation.
‘ Hell, M.M., you can’t leave us in the lurch like
this.’
‘ You’ll be all right, George. You’re chairman of quite
a respectable organization now. And if another war
256 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
does come they’ll merely give you a non-combatant
job as a nice little Conchie.’
‘ That’s damned unfair, Malcom.’
‘ I’m sorry, George, but I don’t go back to the
Group.’
Domina did not leave it at that. On the afternoon
after the Conference they met, as they had previously
arranged, and hired a boat and rowed away up by
Castelnau and Barnes. It was biting weather. Both of
them were in shorts and sweaters and the upstream row
was in vigorous talklessness. They turned round at
Mortlake and rested on their oars while the River carried
them down into a London kindling here and there
in the face of the dusk. Trees and bushes and cliffs
of buildings hesitated and hovered to right and left,
and an almost deserted flow of water swept eastward
under bridges quivering against the bronze-black sky
like dark rainbows.
‘ You’re behaving like an unsmacked schoolboy,
Malcom.’
‘Oh.’
She had twisted round to speak to him. Her face
flushed darkly.
‘ Oh, the damnedest schoolboy. This resignation
business  You know perfectly well the decision to
cut out “ sabotage ” was inevitable. . . . Forced on
the Group. The police were making things difficult
already. We were as near being illegal as it was possible
to be. If we’d kept the old constitution until the next
General Election and the Conservatives wiped the
floor with the Labourists—well ! ’
Malcom said nothing. There was appeal in Domina’s
eyes.
‘ What’s wrong with you, Malcom ? What is it ? The
anti-war point isn’t the whole of the Group’s programme.
What about the other things you’re deserting ? ’
THE NEW SATANISTS
257
4 The survivors of the next war’ll find them amusing
to read about in the Group’s minutes.’
4 You’re war-obsessed. Sabotage ! Blowing up
arsenals and munition-factories and derailing war-
trains. . . . It’s a dream.’
4 So I’ve realized. Much better to lie snug in bed,
passively resisting, and hear the guns across the Channel.’
4 Do you think we will ? Do you think, as a last
resort, we mayn’t come even to the melodramatic stuff
you champion ? But why put it in the constitution ?
. . . We’ve got to go on and fight the war-mind and
prevent a possibility of war. We’re going on. Don’t
think your desertion has killed the Group. Only—
oh, foul of you to desert ! ’
He could not resist that. They drifted under the
gilded pinnacles of Hammersmith Bridge. He tried to
be reasonable.
4 I’m deserting. I know. No excuse—except that
as I sat and listened to the Conference’s decision I saw
I could never have any hand in planning the Adventure.
Not for me. Realized I could never do anything in
policy and tactics. And then I looked out of the window
and saw those chaps in the Square and—God, the faces
of every one of them seemed the face of Metaxa that
last time.’ He laughed. 4 I suppose I want a holiday.’
She scowled at him stormily from below her straight
line of tweezered brows.
4 You want shooting. Do you think Group work’ll
always be easy for the rest of us, that we won’t have to
submit to the discipline of it ? Do you think I fancy the
opinions of Harding and Redland and those other damned
Wellsians and Darwinians ? But we’ve a common
objective, and I’ll stick it, though you couldn’t. . . .
Just plain lack of discipline.’
4 I know. I’ve no excuse.’
She swung away from him. Her hands were clasped
R
258 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
round her bare knees, her mutilated left hand with its
faintly stained fingers making deep indentations on her
skin. A fine down covered that close-textured olive
skin of hers, and he brooded absently upon the unreason¬
ableness of physical beauty : this wonder of her skin and
teeth and hair and eyes that made a corporate beauty,
something delicate and fine that never came in his arms
or was touched by his kissings 
The tide was coming up-River. They rowed for a
little. Suddenly she stopped, turned round. Bright¬
eyed.
‘ But it’s not. That wasn’t true—and I knew it. It
was irritability—oh, and a little spite. You’re—Goodness,
the lone beast, Malcom. People like you : I think they
must always have loneliness. You can never march
with the others, but always on the flanks or lost in front.
You fret and toil organizing the Expedition, but advancing
with it drives you frantic. . . . Don’t come back to the
Group, Malcom. Your resignation may have been the
best thing ever—may keep alive in our memories that
ghastly dream of yours if ever other means fail. . . .
Get away from us all, somehow. Go out into the wilds
and explore for the Hanno Society, and be lost and
desperate and happy. . . .’
‘ But how ? ’
‘ Oh, I don’t know. Go and convert the Eskimos
to the Adventure. Get sent to the moon by one of
ffrench’s rocket experts.’ She had sudden inspirations.
‘ Why, there’s your Maya ’
Subchapter viii
And, as though he had been awaiting the moment,
Simon Stukely Newman, in appearance and speech an
impossible American out of Sinclair Lewis, in profession
and hobby a desultory explorer, came into Malcom’s
life.
THE NEW SATANISTS
259
Malcom had known of him as a member and voluminous
correspondent of the Hanno Society, had replied to his
letters and queries briefly and compactly and never
given him a second thought. Now, on the 19th of
November, just emerged from several years of exploration
in the Central American bush, he called on ffrench at
the latter’s office in the Museum, overwhelming that
polite personage with data of research ‘ along the
geological line of the Azoic from Mexico to Southern
Guatemala.’ A trifle mazed, but indefatigably courteous,
the Hon. Reginald learnt, among other things, that his
visitor intended returning to his stamping-ground at
the earliest possible date, after the inevitable month in
Paris. ... It all seemed particularly harmless and
uninteresting and American.
But a few minutes later, in a state of much excitement,
he was ringing up the Hanno office for Malcom. The
latter, abandoning the proofs of his translation of
Cogolludo’s History of Yucatan, went across to the
Museum and was introduced to a short, sandy, fidgety
person with large, horn-rimmed glasses and exceedingly
yellow boots. He clasped Malcom’s hand with Babbitt¬
like impressiveness (‘ Boise City ? ’ said the experienced
• George, later, ‘ oh hell ! ’) and sat down and wriggled
a little and looked at ffrench. . . . Then the whole
business came out.
During his latest penetration of the Pacific littoral
above the Gulf of Tehuantepec the American had learnt
from a trustworthy guide that a great ruined city lay in
the eastwards bush, in a deserted tract of country. This
guide himself had once seen it, though it was unknown
to white men and only a rumour among the natives
generally. Newman had had no time to attempt a visit
to it, because of the rains ; besides, he himself had not
sufficient experience as an archaeologist to carry out
a detailed investigation. But he intended to make the
260 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
place during his expedition in the Spring of 1930, and
wanted a competent Americanist to go with him, photo¬
graph and map the ruins—almost certainly Mayan—
and look for inscriptions.
‘ You should find plenty willing to go,’ said Malcom.
The Boise City man had allowed ffrench to explain
so far. Now he came to the point himself.
‘ It’s this way. I read an article of yours in Antiquity
about the old Mayans, and I said “ That’s sense.” And
the Honourable ffrench here says you’re an authority,
and a competent young man whom the Hanno Society
might spare on research for a long vacation. My proposal,
sir, is that you come with me into Chiapas and Guatemala
on a year’s exploration. I’ll pay you anything in reason.
What do you say ? ’
‘ I’ll come,’ said Malcom.
Subchapter ix
They were to sail for Panama on Christmas week
and from there proceed up the Pacific coast to Soconusco
City. They lunched together several times at Newman’s
hotel, and Malcom records, in those last few pages of his
Autobiography, his amusement at the patronizing defer¬
ence paid to him. He took notes of the kit and equipment
needed and was given carte blanche to order both in
London. Details of khaki drill, leggings, and mosquito
nets strewed his room at the Buxworths’ house, plaster
of Paris and paper squeezes for the making of possible
casts had to be ordered, a medical chest laid in, two
large and complicated cameras purchased and tested
innumerable times in the studios of the Butcher company.
In spare moments he refurbished his Mayan in Pio Perez’
grammar and took to reading Spanish newspapers from
a Chelsea kiosk. Newman had gone to Paris and it
was a month before they would sail.
Domina was acquainted with young Lagniard, an
26i
THE NEW SATANISTS
archaeologist from a Liverpool museum who was in
London at the time, and who had been on one ot the
official expeditions to Lubaantun and the surrounding
country. She invited him and Malcom to dinner at
her flat. Lagniard disclaimed personal knowledge of the
Western Chiapas country, though he believed it had the
worst of reputations for various climatic reasons. It was
really outside the Maya territory proper—Old and New
Empire—and he did not conceal his polite opinion that
Newman was a credulous crank.
‘ If there’s anything at all certain it’s that the city¬
building Maya had little intercourse with the Pacific.
They were cut off from it by the Cordilleras. The only
peoples in those lands were barbarian Quiches. If there’s
a ruined city at all in that district it must be comparatively
small and unimportant. Probably Late Mexican-Toltec.’
Malcom laughed. His eyes had that remote, lighted
look that Domina knew so well. ‘ Perhaps it’s the
ruins of Tula, Tollan, the American City of the Sun
from which all the great heroes set out.’
Lagniard also found that idea amusing, and played with
it jocularly, but later, after he had left them, Domina
wanted to know more about it, and Malcom told her
of that strange city which haunted the memories and
imaginations of the pre-Columbian Americans—the home
of Kukulcan, whom modern research would identify
with a sun-myth, but whom he himself considered
an Occidental Buddha. The city—no doubt a dream
city, a New World Cosmopolis—of some lost Atlantean
poet.
She did not seem to be listening and he thought he
was boring her till, crouching in her chair, chin clasped
in her mutilated hand, she looked at him.
‘ You only half-believe that, Malcom. . . . Perhaps
there was once such a city and Newman’s guide has
seen its ruins ! ’
262 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
She turned away from his dreamy face and stared into
the fire. He had never been more remote. The chill
November air blew through the open window from the
River. He thought aloud.
. ^ half-think he s a crank myself—Newman. And his
city but Lord God, Dom, he was like an answer to
prayer ! ’
Then she asked a strange question, not looking at him.
Have you made your will yet ? ’
He stared. ‘ No, but I will before I go. Not that IVe
much to leave, but what little there is goes to you of
course—if you’ll have it.’
Still she did not raise her head as she put her next
question.
Then don t you think you’d better complete the
business and marry me as well ? ’
Subchapter x
They were married a fortnight later in the Chelsea
Registrar’s Office, with George Buxworth and Dorota Max-
well for witnesses, very solemn both, and George with
his hair cut. Domina, unhatted even for that occasion,
went through the short ceremony casually, as though
carrying out a light social duty. Malcom felt and prob¬
ably looked like a man in a dream.
Mrs. Maudslay. . . . Lord God !
But you’ve never explained, always put off answer¬
ing—what on earth have we got married for ? ’ he asked
as their train crawled out of Paddington, leaving the
waving George and Dorota behind. She did not answer
his question,^ but leant dangerously out of the window, her
cropped boy’s hair blown in the wind, curve from shoulder
to knee taut and strained, staring at the vanishing reek
of London. Then turned and dropped down beside him.
. Good-bye, Domina Riddoch ! . . . What for ? Oh,
just fun. Are you to have all the adventures ? Besides,
THE NEW SATANISTS 263
we can get divorced when you come back. . . . But don’t
let’s bother about that. Oh, Malcom, we’ve ten days
together, and then ’ _ }
‘ It might have been the moon. Central America’s
nothing to that. It was you who pushed me out on this.
Don’t you remember that evening on the Thames ?
It’s just a chance I’m not on the way to Copernicus or
the Lunar North Pole in some infernal rocket ! ’
She sighed and closed her eyes. And then a naive
thought came to her. She uncovered those unevenly
coloured eyes again.
‘ Malcom, do you love me ? Do you know we’ve never
said we love each other ? ’
He questioned the past. ‘ God,’ he said, ‘ neither we
have ! ’
Subchapter xi
They went to Wiltshire (because Domina wished to see
Salisbury Plain) and spent their ten nights at the Stone¬
henge Inn and their nine days, mostly sunny, frosty
weather, in wanderings as far afield as Salisbury and
Devizes and Upavon, near which latter place they sat one
long afternoon watching little fighter aeroplanes wheeling
and bucking in aerobatics over the country of the Sun-
stone Men. It was the region Metaxa and Malcom had
toured on the stolen motor-cycle thirteen years before,
and one morning he prevailed on Domina to go with
him on a bus-ride to Bulford. There were miles of empty
huts there, derelict, though a part of the camp was occu¬
pied, and he obtained permission from the. Royal
Engineers’ office to look round. And there still, at the
bottom of the remembered hut where he had once smitten
his tormentor Wilsom, was the little office in which he and
Metaxa had sat remote into joyous nights and jeered at
militarism and Guizot’s History.
He peered through the window. An old table rested
264 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
in front of it. It was the same table : he saw the black,
burnt patch where Metaxa had been wont to leave his
cigarettes till they smouldered to ash. . . . He stared
at that undying past till Domina caught his look, and
shivered, and drew him away, and outside those lines of
rotting memories he found the sun again and forgetfulness
and tiredness in a long tramp back to their room in Stone¬
henge Inn.
They played the lovers they had never declared them-
selves throughout five years of intimacy. He discovered
in her depths of tenderness and mystic poetry she had
never before uncovered to him. That haunting aura of
aloofness disappeared. He discovered that he had never
known even real physical intimacy with one whose passion
was as deep as those secret wells from which she refreshed
her spirit. They would lie unsleeping far into nights
and hear the sound of rain on the roof, the woof-woof-
woof of night-wings, and go back to their childhood in
Leekan for memories that seemed inexpressibly dear,
little things of touch and glance forgotten and resurrected
to startle the darkness with low laughter. They talked in
those hours of things deeper and more secret than may
ever be found in a book of such century as this. In some
strange, inexplicable way each seemed to the other
matured, with all the uncouth sophistication of youth
put by. J
Every morning when they rose from bed they would
see pillared Stonehenge rising from its hill-side. It
drew them often, those two who could never escape the
fascination of the lands and times and the dim peoples
who enghost the fringes of history, who rose out of mil¬
lennial peace into red centuries, whose gods are not even
names, nor their kings a memory.
But all their blind, wasted lives and histories—oh,
they 11 find meaning yet ! ’ she said one evening, when he
had been talking of the Chalcolithic priestmen and slaves
THE NEW SATANISTS
265
who had dragged the great menhirs into position. ‘ Some¬
time. When you and I are lost and forgotten dust in these
our bodies as they are, my dear Azilian ! ’
‘ They’ll probably dig up my bones and yours and
swear we were low-grade Celts,’ he laughed.
And then they would remember, and across them for a
moment would fall a shadow like a bright, keen pain.
Yet I think he had never the remotest suspicion of that
adventure to which she had committed herself, for which
indeed she had married him. Once he came on her sitting
silent in their room, looking across the dusking fields at
the great standing stones, and when he teased her she
said an inconsequent thing.
‘ I was thinking—of your adventure and of mine.’ It
seemed that she was about to say more, and he waited.
For a moment her face was resolute. Then she laughed
unsteadily and turned to his arms while the hours wheeled
by like homing birds. . . .
They were past. There came an early December
morning and Waterloo Station in a drenching downpour
of sleet. That, and a last picture : Jane waving farewell
with an immense blue handkerchief snatched from
George’s pocket, George’s red hair gleaming in the mirk
like a damp beacon, and Domina herself, perilously
poised on top of a pile of platform luggage, one hand on
George’s shoulder, standing mute and rigid until obscured
from view behind the window-blocking good-bye gesticu¬
lations of Simon Stukely Newman.
CHAPTER FIVE
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE
Subchapter i
EVEN before they landed at Soconusco City and went
up by rail through a pass of the Cordilleras to San
Juan Pachuca, the entries in Malcom’s diary are of a
facetious quality that entirely fails to conceal his exas-
peration. Soconusco witnessed a witless delay of weeks,
visits, applications, and the presentation of unnecessary
credentials to scent-reeking and adipose Mexican officials.
The hospitality of those officials and their polite and
sniggering suggestions of diversions appropriate to
travellers provided Malcom with sardonic reflections on
that festering immersement in virgins and voodoos
which has been the principal activity of the Latin genius
for the last eighteen hundred years.” The only English
books he saw on sale were works by Miss Victoria Cross
and Mr. James Branch Cabell. . . .
At Pachuca there was a similar wasting of precious
weeks and it was mid-March before they at length set
out on the south-eastwards trail to the village where
Newman was to pick up his guide. In front rode the
American, short and stocky, with an immense sombrero,
like an inverted cuspidor, on his head, and a gigantic
sporting rifle slung bandit-wise across his shoulders.
His mount was an exceptionally long-eared and pessim¬
istic mule with the bunched-up face of a cocker spaniel.
In the middle of the procession five more mules, laden
with baggage, provisions, and instruments, straggled
along under the charge of three abject Indies and four
unabject but scrofulous meztizos—one of them wore a
British Army tunic with the crown of a major still adhering
to the shoulder-band—whom Newman had hired to
supplement the activities of his personal servant, a vacu-
ously grinning Jamaican negro whom they had picked up
266
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 267
in Panama. In the rear rode Malcom, straight, dark-faced,
spruce enough in his new drill, one imagines, and making
little attempt to conceal his angry amusement over the
straggling inefficiency of the little expedition.
His mood of the time robbed him, I think, of much of
the brightness of sunshine and appreciation of the
quaintness of the people’s speech and dress and appear¬
ance. In ordinary circumstances they would have kindled
his ever-ready interest. He saw only a filthy, straggling
land, hot and moist and mindless and unclean, the natives
a sickly folk with lack-lustre eyes and voices, every horizon
the same unwinking bright painting of emerald overhung
by dark mosquito clouds. Newman had engaged him
as archaeologist, but appeared to imagine that this term was
synonymous with photographer. At Malcom’s point-
blank refusal to waste half their plates posing the expedi¬
tion’s leader amidst groups of dusky and unwashed
native belles, or chatting with unauthentic caciques, or
taking pretty-pretty views of woodscapes, Newman com¬
mandeered one of the Butchers himself and trained his
servant to carry out the constant snapshotting. He had
as great a passion for being photographed as he had for
arousing (as he sagely believed) the awe and wonder of the
natives. He would smile puffily and fatuously as some
languid group would gather round his geological fussings
above an outcrop of rock or his minute and clumsy
mountings of butterfly specimens or the like. He was
convinced that he was looked on as a medicine man,
a witch-doctor. . . .
“ He is a type common enough to our modern world,
though I have never encountered its American variant
before. George and Metaxa have been my only Ameri¬
cans. . . . His large and unearned income, I gather,
comes from an oil company, and he has spent his life
alternately poking about in various more or less unex¬
plored corners of his native continent, and then returning
268 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
to New York or London and posing as the traveller-
savant. He has, like most of those who have never
known mental discipline, a cocksure certainty in all
branches of modern knowledge—a certainty derived
from the study of innumerable ‘ popularizations ’ ap¬
parently written by the half-educated for the benefit
of the half-witted. He quotes those odd works of
American and English ‘ erudition ’ as though they were
complete and final authorities. His mind contains as
odd a hotch-potch of theories as his rucksack contains
geological specimens. He thinks Darwin was ‘ wrong,’
and that the human stock had a non-anthropoid origin ;
on the other hand, he has the utmost faith in the truth
and efficacy of some shamanistic formula called the
‘ Survival of the Fittest.’ This, as far as I can gather,
he takes to be a divine revelation of ‘ Science ’ giving
authority for all parasites of oil companies to draw divi¬
dends without working for them, for Cook’s-tourist
explorers to browbeat and maltreat Indies at pleasure ;
in fact, for most of the dirty white scoundrelism in the
world. . . . His intellectual guides are a trifle incon¬
gruous. He has, as a ‘ scientist ’ himself, a particular
admiration for Professor Henry Fairfield Osborne, and,
as a business man, for that champion of idealistic Big
Business, Mr. H. G. Wells, whose distinguished initials
he insists on pronouncing as ‘ Hay Jee.’ ”
That ‘ Hay Jee ’ ! Malcom would sit and bite his lips
and wait for it, watch for its approach the while Newman
boomed like a bombastic bittern, and the oil-lamp hung
from the roof of some native hut would collect the oddest
coverings of winged insects. They would pile upon that
lamp in strata, and as the lowest stratum calcined the next
would take its place in ecstatic suttee. The beds—hide
strung from four wooden corner-posts—would exude at
night marauding battalions of giant ticks : one would
pick off the sated and bloody monsters from one’s skin
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 269
next morning, generally under the vacuous grin of New¬
man’s Jamaican servant. Newman in sleep moaned and
snored fatly. In the dawn light he would show up greasily
under his mosquito net, for he rubbed himself from head
to foot every evening with a vile-smelling concoction
which certainly seemed to be efficacious. Rather than
attempt the penetration of his hide, so protected, all the
tick battalions in the hut would enter on indefatigable
route march across the floor to Malcom’s bed. . . .
He was sparing in washing, but when Malcom caught
a slight fever a week out from Pachuca through bathing
in a scummy lagoon, Newman ascribed his own immunity
to his ‘ good Amurrican blood.’ (He was of Jewish ex¬
traction, in spite of his meandering nose and sandy hair,
but either he or his ancestors had ratted to the Nords.)
He insisted on treating Malcom as a tenderfoot, posed him¬
self as the seasoned explorer, and the fact that the expedi¬
tion’s archgeologist could out-run, out-shoot, out-march
him made not the least difference. His Spanish was of
the poorest and he knew not a scrap of any Maya dialect.
He made solemn protests against Malcom using the latter
tongue.
‘ Say, you’re green to the country. You don’t get the
mentality of these nig-pigs. If they hear you speak their
own lingo they take liberties. It’s up to them to have had
some Spanish knocked into them by this time.’
“ I pointed out that there were no statistics proving
that the inhabitants of New York had all learned Chinese
on the off-chance of being accosted by a stray Celestial.
This led him into a booming, unhumorous disquisition
on white’s man’s prestige and the Nordic destiny. ... I
gather that my black hair puts me outside the triumphal
Nordic march.”
270
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Subchapter ii
Before they reached the guide’s village Malcom was
spending long hours in puzzling how Newman had ever
managed to carry out previous explorations and penetrate
into the bush as far as he had certainly done. The man
was incapable either of detailed organization or a reason¬
able time-table. At the village the matter was soon solved.
The solution was Ramon Pech.
The guide showed up on their arrival as a tall, pure-
blooded Mayan, a Yucatecan from Campeche, as his
name suggested, with a sloping forehead that might have
been copied from the Palenque panels. He had a sar¬
donic mouth, slit eyes, and a permanent puffiness on the
left cheek, induced by snake-bite. On the first morning
after joining Newman’s party he and Malcom took the
lead. It was impossible to ride and they had to plod
along the dry bed of a stream, with the mountains rising
green and pale saffron on their right, lacquered with
sunshine. Presently Malcom began to practise his Mayan
on a guide who stared his slit-eyed astonishment.
‘ You have been in this country before ? ’
‘ No. . . . Those expeditions are organized and cap¬
tained by you, aren’t they ? Well, what became of the
last two white assistants whom Sr. Newman brought up
from Soconusco ? ’
He had heard rumours of those assistants in Pachuca.
The guide avoided his eyes, as Malcom noted.
“ He told me that one had died of fever and the other :
of him he is not sure. It had been towards the season of
the rains. The senor assistant had been left to collect
botanical specimens and they had arranged to return for
him. Then the rains had come. They had not returned.
The Sr. Newman had declared that the assistant was
making his own arrangements to proceed to the coast.”
He was unwilling enough to part with this information
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE
271
and Malcom listened half-incredulous and half-furious.
He could see each scene as though it had been rehearsed
before his eyes : the young tenderfoot from America
allowed to catch fever, lectured, improperly doctored,
finally dying. And the second case—had it been pure
treachery or just cowardice on Newman’s part ?—fear
of himself being caught in the terrible rains ?
As they slowly fussed along under the Cordillera
shadows Malcom came to a curious conclusion. It was
this : In his original straying up from Soconusco, years
before, Newman had discovered the value of Pech as
a guide, and under that guidance had on each subsequent
expedition penetrated exactly the same distance as on the
first. They were in a tract of terra incognita—or rather,
on the fringes of one. On those fringes Newman had
meandered and ‘ explored ’ spasmodically for the past
two years, never penetrating any further through the bush
to the south-east, always making sure of his retreat in
advance of the rains. . . . The colossal vanity and coward¬
ice of the little man ! Malcom saw at last the reason for
the assistants. Each time Newman had set out with the
determination to have some discovery of note made—by
an assistant. . . .
Ramon Pech’s story of the ruined city was straight¬
forward enough. He and a party of Mexican miners had
once penetrated the country to the south—though they
had done it from the east, not the Pacific Coast—in search
of reputed silver lodes. They had found nothing but
dysentery and malaria, and, after losing themselves
for days, had abandoned the search and made their way
out to the Usamacinta River.
But the day when they had turned back—this had
been in the midst of flat and thickly forested country—
they had seen a strange sight at sunset—or thought they
saw it : a serration of hills rising above a thinning of the
western forest, and on one of those hills, so Pech had
272 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
thought, was a giant ruined ‘ church ’ and about the foot
of it more buildings and great pillars upright and prone.
The mining party had seen all this picture with some
clearness in the fading light, though the hills were five
miles or more distant and soon blotted out in the darkness.
They had made no attempt to cleave a way through the
jungle depths to it, superstition restraining them no more
than the common knowledge that at the sites of such lost
cities and buildings there is generally neither water nor
fruit. They had turned back. But the size of the ruins
in the sunset glow had stirred the wonder and kept green
the memory of Ramon Pech.
‘ And you believe we can reach them from this side,
that they’re beyond the jungle there ? ’ Malcom asked,
and pointed to the dark eastwards bulking of the forest.
‘ So I believe, senor. But ’ the guide glanced round
at Newman, and then, confident of the American’s
ignorance of Mayan, shrugged his shoulders—‘ there will
be no attempt to find them.’
Subchapter Hi
The Diary fades out into laconic notes on halts and
sunsets and temperatures till the entry opposite the 8th
of July :
“ io p.m. 109° my tent thermometer is registering
even now. The hottest day we have had, but the darkness
is worse. One can hardly breathe.
“ Oh that the mid west wind might blow.
That the small rain down might ram—
Christ, that my love were in my arms
And I in my bed again ! 
“ Christ, I wish she was ! ”
The 18th of August breaks into voluminous record :
“ 9*3° P-m- I05°- We are as far along the Cordillera
fringe as Newman has ever penetrated—that is, further
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE
273
than any modern white, though Pech tells me that in a
cenote thirty miles away to the east he once found a casque
and sword and other rusty pieces of armour. Probably
some straying Spanish conquistadores once perished there,
either of hunger or at the hands of the natives—Quiche.
But those natives have long vanished or—which is quite
possible—live in villages hidden in the jungle-scrub.
“ I have had neither the time nor inclination during
the past three months to convey to paper my opinions
of this imbecile pottering which Newman calls exploration.
We have dawdled from camp to camp along the unending
mountains, watched the sun rise over the miasmic forests
each morning, gone to sleep with the croaking of the bull¬
frogs in our ears every evening, listened ad nauseam to
our ‘ leader ’ berating or occasionally even beating his
grinning Jamaican. Sometimes Newman has halted
and commanded meaningless ascents of the Cordilleras
foothills or unnecessary sorties into the eastwards jungle.
Those sorties require hours of hacking with machetes
before we penetrate a few miles and then Newman, who
generally stays in the rear while the cutting is going for¬
ward, will give orders to stop, saying that he has acquired
‘ sufficient data ’ for the time being. ... At last, this
morning, I flatly refused to go botanizing in his company,
telling him that I had come out from England as archae¬
ologist and nothing else, and that if he has no intention of
attempting the Maya city I intend turning back and taking
half the bearers with me.
“ We have parted for the evening with relations more
than slightly strained.”
Next evening the quarrel was resumed again. Newman
blustered and swore at the mutineer and then confessed
that there would be no time to reach Pech’s ruins that
season—unless Maudslay cared to go on alone ?
‘ I’ll see you damned first,’ said Malcom, agreeably.
‘ Do you think I haven’t heard of your other assistants ? ’
s
274 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He looked at Newman closely. ‘ Suppose we leave the
mules and bearers here with Ramon Pech and push on
alone ? ’
. . . insane. Who was he to give orders ? The rains
would soon be on. . . . Anyhow, it was doubtful if the
guide had not been mistaken or lied about the whole
matter. . . .
‘ We’ll soon see about that,’ said Malcom, and shouted
1 Pech ! ’
The guide came and stood with his face in the light of
the tent lamp. Questioned in Mayan, he answered in
that language.
How long would it take to reach the eastward hills ?
Perhaps ten days, perhaps longer, and it would be very
desperate and uncertain travelling. The rains  
But Malcom had made up his mind. ‘ Listen. Get
a mule ready for the morning. We’ll take some clothes,
two rifles, and two machetes, the camera in my tent, and
some food. You and I will start at six to-morrow.’
The guide was alarmed. Newman’s interruptions in
Spanish had not left him unacquainted with the situation.
‘ But the Sr. Newman is my employer. Pie will not let
me go. He is afraid of those forests and of the carriers.
I wish to come with you, Sr. Maudslay, in spite of the
rains, but he would stop my wages, have me arrested by
the alcalde of Pachuca ’
“ I told him I would settle things with the Sr. Newman,
and dismissed him. When he had gone I made the situa¬
tion clear. I have seldom seen anyone in such a blue
funk. He had no objections to me making the attempt
on my own—indeed, it is probable that he brought me
from England with that thought in mind—but to rob him
of his irreplaceable guide ! He threatened, uncon¬
vincingly, to shoot me, to have Pech arrested by the
carriers, till I told him that if he prevented us leaving or
refused to await our return for three weeks or so I would
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE
275
get back to Europe somehow and publish full details of
his co-called ‘ explorations ’ ; also, that I would have
the fullest inquiries made as to the death of his last
assistant, my predecessor, whom he had abandoned to
die in the rains.
“ He shivered at that, very evidently wavering between
his immediate fear of the forest and Indies and the more
remote but shocking disaster of being shown up in the
scientific journals for which he has such reverence.
Finally he gave in.”
Subchapter iv
The forests closed around them, greener than ever,
stifling as death, with a vivid, damp heat that foretold
the approach of the rains. Malcom, who had Newman
sworn to await their return for a month, commandeered
the bearers to hack a way through the three-miles band
of jungle that arched the encampment.- Beyond that
were scrub and cactus bush waving high and yellow and
bursting in a distempered foam on the sides of the
Cordilleras. Then the bearers turned back and the two
men with the mule, loaded with camera and equipment
and paper squeezes and a little food and water, went on
over the brow of the nearest foothill, and next day turned
east and began to hack a way for themselves through that
tundra that was half a cane-brake.
And for the first time in long months Malcom was
light-hearted again. His notes, indeed, are characteristic.
“ What a bloody animal is the mule ! ” says the entry
opposite the 22nd of August, and nothing more. The
23rd blossoms out into a long account of their progress
that day—the worst they had made so far, over treacherous
ground riven here and there—“ sun-cracked, like the
moon.” Pech behaved wonderfully, to the surprise of
Malcom, who was incapable of understanding how he
himself, who at bottom cared so little for human beings
276 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
and so much for ideas, could arouse love in others.
Machete-swinging, the Mayan stamped in advance.
Behind, sweating, and swearing at the mule, you must
picture the advance of Malcom, thin since leaving the
coast, his narrow brown face sun-rawed and an incongrous
beard beginning to cover his cheeks and throat. He tells
of the agony that shaving was—“ Like pulling out the
hairs with a rope and pulley.” Unexpectedly, he fills
the rest of that page with the old joke about the best way
to avoid the necessity of shaving—“ Wait till the hairs
appear and then knock ’em back with a hammer ”—
and wanders into a disquisition, with examples, of
characteristic English humour : how fleas are best
killed by being turned on their backs and tickled to
death with feathers. . . . One gathers that Ramon Pech
was plentifully stocked with the common flea.
Next day was the 24th. They progressed only three
miles and, camping at night, saw that the forest was coming
down upon them again : the real forest, gigantic in ceiba
trees, festooned with creepers, choked with grasses and
cane and alive with vermin. There was still no sign
of Pech’s ‘ little hills.’ Out of the flare of sunset came
a squall of rain. They shivered all night under a dripping
ahuehuete tree, when, so Pech states, Malcom insisted
on talking about the lost Maya civilization, trying to
penetrate the ‘ time-spirals,’ perhaps, through the guide’s
subconscious. In the morning they found the mule
pawing and intractable. Great shallow, watery bloatings
were appearing under its skin. Ramon Pech averred that
it had been badly bitten and that they had best turn back.
Malcom swore at him. ‘ We’ll go on until the tenth
day though we’ve to crawl on our hands and knees. Or
at least I will.’ And then records in his diary : “ Ramon
swore also, in Mayan too erudite for me to follow. I
think he felt inclined to punch me on the nose. Under
similar circumstances I’d not only have felt inclined,
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 77
I’d have done it. Fifteen miles to-day by my pedometer.
Speaking of pedometers, I tried at lunch-time (baked
beans and sour oranges) to translate Mark Twain’s story
about that night when he got up and wandered his bed¬
room, looking for some object or another, with his
pedometer in his pocket. When finally he found a light,
hours later, he discovered that he had walked fifteen miles
since getting out of bed. ... It was an instantaneous
success. Ramon has been grinning over it ever since.
I hope they had jokes like that in ancient Xibalba.
And of course they had. The soft-headed ‘ reconstruc¬
tions ’ of Old Empire life which represent the Ancient
Mayans as perpetually immersed in building temples and
carving panels and indulging in ‘ phallic orgies ’ (though
if Domina’s parody of a Mayan priestess that night on the
Cornish beach was anything like the real thing, phallic
orgies must have been good fun) are mostly written not
by historians but little dried-up runts out of museum
corridors. . . .
“ We are now on the borders of Xibalba, the edge of
the ancient land where the Maya flourished so splendidly
and in such isolation about the year 100 b.c. All those
tracts to the east of us, now ‘ of life forsook,’ once swarmed
with the only civilization that has ever appeared in
America.”
He follows this up with a very vivid picturing, too
long to quote here, of those pre-Christian years and of
other aliens who may have wandered up from the far
Soconusco beaches through forest and bush : stray
Polynesians or Chinese, perhaps, arriving amazed at
last on the borders of the Maya land, being captured
and carried to Piedras Negras or Copan, spreading
the seeds of Buddhism.
“ And it all fluffed out like a rush-candle caught in
a draught of wind, though how and why there is nothing
more uncertain. Perhaps the glyphs of some lost
278 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
inscription tell the reason. Perhaps they stand recorded
in this very site we are seeking, and I’ll scrape round them
unavailingly, and photograph and paper-squeeze.”
He reverts on the 27th (the 26th is a blank page) to a
fantastic possibility regarding those hypothetical Chinese
sailors wrecked on American shores. Perhaps a party
was wrecked in the last years that sa he collapse of
Xibalban civilization, and fled westwards from the
Central land, with other refugees, to Ramon’s ruined
city. Perhaps one of them knew he was living history
and wrote an account of it all in the Chinese script, and
that account still survives sealed up in some tomb or
treasure-house.
I wonder if any of those Ancient Maya ever saw their
civilization, detachedly, as the diseased thing it was,
and something to be murdered before it murdered them ?
Perhaps Old Empire Copan had once its visionaries and
its Secular Control Group : even its Domina.
They seem no more incredibly remote in these
forests than does European civilization, London, its kings,
its priests, its gods, Salisbury Plain and the Secular
Control Group. Tramping behind Ramon Pech this
afternoon I fell into a reverie from which I could hardly
shake myself free (and I hope I’m not in for another
bout of fever) : We seemed not merely Ramon Pech
and Malcom Maudslay, but two eternal travellers from
that Time itself which the Maya worshipped, stumbling
over weed-grown civilizations innumerable, finding
beyond the next horizon no lost Atlantean city but the
ruins of London itself, forest-smothered and forgotten
for twenty hundred years, with the wild beasts lairing
in its palaces. . . .
Ramon discovers himself as a vigorous proletarian.
He tells me he always votes on the progressive ticket
and that the present Governor of Yucatan is not only a
pure-blooded Mayan but an equally pure-blooded
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 279
socialist. When the shades of Karl Marx and Ahmekat
Tutul Xiu join hands it is time to sing Nunc dimittis.”
And then, for the 28th, the seventh day out from
Newman’s camp :
“ Camped at sunset. Hills on the horizon.”
Subchapter v
Next morning they found a warm mist raining on them
like a fine white spume. The sun came up a red flow of
light, no orb, and for long the surrounding forest was
invisible beyond a few yards on each side. Then they
discovered the mule. It was dead and bloated and
stank most vilely. Ramon surprised Malcom by weeping
over its remains—a comic incident which so cheered him
that he equally surprised the guide by insisting on writing
a lugubrious epitaph for the mule and pinning it above
the tree-bole where they left the unfortunate beast.
Behind them was close on a hundred miles of forest and
scrub land to be retraversed, and they had seen practically
no game. Pech considered the provisions anxiously.
Malcom attempted to hearten him by pointing out that
such journey was nothing to that carried out by the
Mayan’s own ancestors who fled from the Old Empire
into Yucatan fifteen hundred years before ! . . . Mean¬
time, there was no question of turning back, with the
lure of those hills at last in the east.
But the hills were not so near as the sunset had seemed
to bring them. As the mist cleared they showed as a
faint tracery against the sunlight, at least fifteen miles
distant. Through his Zeiss glasses Malcom saw their
slopes mantled with the usual jungle-scrub. Ramon
confirmed that, as far as he was able to determine by
looking at them from a back view, those were the hills
on the eastern slopes of which he had seen the lost Maya
city.
‘ Then we’ll start,’ said Malcom.
280 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He was in a fever of impatience to set out, as Ramon
Pech records. They loaded themselves with a camera,
the paper-squeezes (though how they were to transport
to the coast any impressions, without a mule to carry them,
Malcom does not seem to have considered), a machete
each, and half of their food. The guide carried two
water-skins, one empty, one full. They cached the other
half of the provisions, their rifles, and various other
impedimenta. Malcom carried on his back a pick-axe,
for use in clearing the Maya city-site, and they entered
the forest.
The heat and the going were punishing, he tells. “ It
was by far the oldest forest-land we had passed through,
and the detritus was knee-deep and sometimes thigh-
deep, and swarmed with red ants. But the cane-brakes
thinned out after a bit till one could see long vistas
between the trunks, with the hills for background.
We rested at eleven, having done four miles, and I had
an inspiration. I asked Ramon if those hills had any
name, and he said None, as far as he knew. The map does
not mention them either. So, as Ramon renounced
the right, I christened them the Domina Range before
we reached them. Domina’s name goes well with hills,
unlike some of the sweethearts and wives with whom
explorers have afflicted the atlases. We started again
at two o’clock, after a siesta that was broken by a mamba
crashing on broken sticks not three feet from my head.”
They were holding in almost a straight line from their
over-night camp, and this was bringing them to the
southern edge of the Domina Hills. According to
Pech’s story the lost Maya city must lie on the extreme
northern foothills, eastern aspect, but this could not be
helped. It was impossible to strike a north-easterly
tangent, for in that direction the forest abruptly wallowed
away into a poisonous puzzle of slime and over-flowered
ponds. They intended making the southernmost fringe
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 281
of the Hills, passing round it, and then holding northwards
till they reached their objective.
Towards five o’clock the forest began to thin out,
but, unaccountably, the air grew heavier, greasier, and
breathing became an agony under their heavy loads.
To save their water, Malcom drank at one of the pools
and something in the water was so poisonous that he
vomited immediately afterwards, and felt odd spasms
of dizziness as they held on again. In the south he saw
the sky being painted by multitudes of shadowy fingers
—now a fine line of purple, now amethyst, now garnet,
each limning disappearing as another succeeded it. He
stopped and pointed out the phenomena to the hastening
guide.
The Mayan cursed. ‘ It is the coming of the rains,’
he said.
They plunged on ahead again, through the bushes and
shoulder-high coarse grass which had succeeded the
forest. Almost immediately afterwards the accident
occurred.
Malcom’s dizziness, he himself states, was the cause.
He missed a quite obvious crack and plunged into it the
full length of his right leg. The crevice was scarcely
eighteen inches wide but the edge caught and jarred
his falling body “ intimately. I screamed like a rat
and then the pain was gone. I heard the crack of my
fibula and then I think I fainted—incompletely. I
recovered to find myself vomiting again in an unrestrained
manner, and Ramon, having dragged me from the hole,
doing excruciating things to my leg below the knee. He
tried to mend me further up, but I was so sick he had
to stop.”
They were less than a mile from the Domina Range.
282
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
Subchapter vi
There follows both from the Diary and from Pech’s
account a record of splint-making, bandaging, crude
surgery, and desperation at the coming night and rain
which may well be omitted. Briefly, the Mayan succeeded
in staunching the flow of blood from Malcom’s injured
pelvis, and in setting his leg in rough splints. Not only
that, but he picked him up and carried him across the
remaining half-mile to the Hills. Shelter of some kind
was necessary, and the breath of the forest at evening
was poisonous.
But under the immediate brow of the southern hill
there was no shelter at all. It was scraped bare, glistening
volcanic slag, and the guide, after a rest during which
Malcom again lost consciousness, set out round its slopes
in search for some clump of bushes or projecting ledge
to ward off the coming storms. In the west, behind them,
setting the watching, silent forest alive with dark manes
and straining heads, as of great feathered serpents, the
sunset lingered. The guide had completely rounded the
shoulder of the hill when he observed, a few feet up
the twilight slope, something that looked like the mouth
of a cave. He rested again, and then pantingly bore
Malcom up to that blackness against a lighter dusk.
It was no cave, he saw then, but a shallow scooping
in the face of the rock, as though a quarry had been
begun by the men of ancient times and then abandoned.
It pierced eight or nine feet back into the hill, however,
and faced to the north-east, with an overhang projecting
beyond the entrance floor. Pech laid Malcom down
after flashing his electric torch over the dry floor in
search of snakes. Then he turned and ran down the
hill and hastened back to the spot where the accident
had occurred. By the time he returned, the wind was
sweeping across the Domina Range, and with the wind
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 283
came presently the first moaning downpour of the
seasonal rains.
Subchapter mi
“ Ramon at first refused to go,” Malcom records in
his Diary for the 30th of August, after an account of the
foregoing happenings. He writes in his usual floriferous
hand, but in pencil. “ But at last I made him see sense :
that he could do no good and would be little better
than a nuisance, that it was absolutely essential to get
back to Newman’s camp and bring Newman himself to
doctor me and a mule to get me back to the coast. The
rains aren’t so far advanced but that that can t still be
done. With the track more or less cleared he should
be back inside ten days. He swore that it was desertion
and invoked the saints—a thing, as I pointed out, that
no good socialist would ever do in Yucatan against
any such plan. But at last he rebandaged my leg, which
feels completely numb from the knee down, cut away
the leg of my breeches and bound me up with a puttee
and a handful of green leaves. The bleeding has stopped,
but the moving was damnable. If it were only my leg.
Then he rigged up the cover of the Butcher to
protect me in case the wind should veer and drive the
rain into the mouth of this recess. He has filled the
two water-skins, and if I go slowly the food should
last. Then he put my machete beside me, saw that the
blanket was all right, and fussed around till I had to point
out that the rain had stopped and he had better start
out. That was three hours ago. We shook hands and
he kissed me. Amazing thing to be kissed by an Ancient
Maya face from the Palenque stuccos ! I shouted after
him : I wanted to tell him to make Newman bring
up the other camera and the plaster of Paris, now we’ve
reached those hills. But I suppose he didn’t hear,
for he didn’t come back.”
284 THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
He had never been so completely alone in his life,
as he realized that night. The rains were descending
again, a solid sheet of water washing over the Domina
Range, and he lay for a long time in the darkness, wakeful,
seeing the ghostly play of water outside the entrance of
his shelter. He dozed and woke and dozed again till
dawn, and then woke to find his pelvis burning. That
burning pain did not wear off for several hours, and it
was noon before he noted that the rain had ceased.
“ It has not rained since then. All the afternoon
has been quiet but for the dripping of the water and the
sound of the rivulets streaming off the hills. But it is
impossible to see more than a few yards from the entrance
of my recess. The fog is as thick as wool and winds and
changes continually. I lie crosswise to the entrance,
and lizards slip in and out and halt and stare at me.
Once I thought I heard some animal come padding up
to the entrance, and stop and breathe and go away again.
But I must have dreamt it. I was very bored all this
afternoon and the light was fading before I noticed
something that had escaped me before. Ramon was
right. This is no natural hole in the face of the hill.
It is the beginning of a quarry. More exciting still,
the quarrying must have been done not with stone
tools, but with copper or bronze. The vault has a green
tinge that comes only from copper. . . . Our journey
has not been for nothing. Ramon’s city must be a
fact—and a city built by a bronze-using people ! ”
The first of September says simply, “ If only the fog
would clear,” the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th are blanks, but the
5th is lengthy, though the writing is curiously strained
and unfamiliar :
“ It rose to-day. The rain came on again just after
ten o’clock, and two hours later a hurricane that seemed
to rock the hills. The Butcher canvas was thrown down
on top of me and I was half-smothered and almost
THE VERGE OF ADVENTURE 285
fainting before I got it firmly wedged in position again.
I did not dream about that beast after all. It is a puma.
It came rushing in with the hurricane, and snarled, and
slithered on its feet at sight of me. I threw a stone at
it and it bounded out with a squawk. Only then I saw
that the mist had gone. Almost the whole of the Range
lay bare. It is not a straight sierra, but curves in an arc,
so that the further tip is almost due opposite. But
on all that further tip the shroud of fog lay unmoved.
“ There, if anywhere, is the city.
“ I could not get at my Zeiss. It is back in the rear
of the recess with the camera. Even with its aid I doubt
if I’d solve the mystery of that further tip, though it
cannot be more than half an hour’s walk away. Oh, my
God, if only I hadn’t been such a fool as fall in that
crevice. ...”
There is no entry for the 6th, the eighth day after the
accident, and the entry of the 7th appears to have been
attempted several times, abandoned, and resumed.
“ An hour after sunrise the fog rose for a moment,
then closed again as exasperatingly as before.
“ Got very little sleep throughout the night.”
Curiously, his thoughts strayed to Newman :
“ Not a human being at all with whom I wrangled and
bickered, but an ape, one of the horde of shiftless beasts
our civilization has manufactured, their simian excrement
befouling the passage of the Defile, their gibbered fears
and meaningless treacheries dogging every sted we take.”
The 8th opens with something illegible, and then :.
“. . . here, lost in the wilds of Central America, in
an old quarry of the Maya masons, perhaps within sight
of a city lost for two thousand years : this is a romantic
enough saga from the Azilian caves of Argyllshire and the
muckle bed in Chapel kitchen ! Ten months ago, yet it
seems only yesterday that I rowed up the Thames with
Domina, by Mortlake, and heard her urge me out on
286
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
‘ desperate adventures.’ . . . All my life, it seems to me
now, Fve groped and struggled on the verge of some
tremendous adventure. Is this a glimpse of it at last ? ”
“ 9th September : The stench is overpowering. I
think gangrene has set in.”
“ 10th September. That puma came again to-day and
would not go away for a long time. ...”
And then, somewhere in evening hours of alternate
waking and unconsciousness, while Ramon Pech, after
a fortnight’s staggering Odyssey to his village in pursuit
of Newman, was again nearing the Domina Range with
a carrier and three mules, while in the cave above the
slopes a beast squatted and licked its lips and crept
nearer a silent figure and halted again, the mists lifted
and swung aside from all the sierra, from the tips of the
further hills. And Malcom lifted his head and cried
out and searched desperately for his notebook and pencil
the while the puma backed snarling away.
For it was no ruined city at all that crowned the
Domina Range. Purple-blossoming, its terraces climbed
the slopes. Golden-towered and minareted, the City
of the Sun itself, it flashed in the evening light, a city
immense, banner-hung and splendid, recorded by a
straying pencil on an impossible page. . . .
Till suddenly the darkness swept moaning over the
Chiapas country and the pages lay smashed and torn
and stained with blood.
(And this is the end of Malcom Maudslay's saga.)
L’ENVOI
GEORGE Buxworth came down the steps of a
Chelsea house, lighted his pipe, and turned west¬
wards along the lamp-lit Embankment. He had passed
the last six hours in Domina Maudslay’s flat, in the
helpless capacity of Malcom’s friend and Stuart Isham’s
messenger.
God, what hours ! What a night!
He took off his hat and wiped his forehead. Jane
never had a time like that. . . . She’d be glad about
the baby.
A son for Malcom. . . .
He stopped and yawned and knocked his pipe against
the Embankment parapet. He felt very tired. He
glanced at his wrist-watch and then at the sky. The
darkness was thinning.
Already in the air there was a smell of morning.
'HE THIRTEENTh
DISCIPLE
I.LESLIE MITCHELL
‘i % ; ^ ~ ■’i.i i ■- nr h r - - Yh ■ “, nTi >r r - ^ ^ (ffl « r\ HHKHr. n n * n n> WrV,w “ n r - r -. -i,r iXSih ">> _]
.'• w' J* J,.t„ . ' Ji_'LH_h_hJi_>k-KJ-Uv^H ;■;H'-.XS »rnX ••. •. ■;K wh XH •.'Hmifc‘h '•. H 'k; H »-. i- -.'h n+ili h * *-, h h K •* VA H > hWS •» t
Kn. jmmmm
■ 5; S^^tHJVVV «
“ H v4 g 2 ^vf K« HH V'fH^K'W - nKnxSHH H.H|
"l 'h *“. ’*; K ~ h h ^ ■"*”■•. k W ,h *■ ^ h *- u H ’H "f'w *7 h i*“ H **. ~ ~ <- >*!.. ■*• n h r~ ^ “.^“On **. H ^ ^Wrtf" Ml
r.n>\_*•’>•%'►- 'umWtfin ^wh k s'*- ^ WV h 'h"^ .*•'- - -K>. “*''tXJi}“Jh
