H^KAIMES
MflKLE
>ZS'J_Th,MkHSE)
rf^
school
potl rock’s
HOUSF
tailor
ICKKNTS
GARPf NS
I TUt WAK   ,
1 MEMOR{\j,^|gC£L j
BOROUGH of SEGGET
H.HOOO.
?Hof maker
RAILWAY
STATION
p.pbat;
CAOCgR
National Library of Scotland
*6000156744*
CLOUD HOWE
[Novels by
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
SUNSET SONG
CLOUD HOWE
GREY GRANITE (in preparation)
These three novels will complete a trilogy
to be entitled "A SCOTS gUAIR”
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
CLOUD HOWE
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34. Paternoster Roto E.C.<\.
First published in Great Britain, July 1933
PRINTED IN
GREAT BRITAIN,
AT THE ANCHOR
PRESS, TIPTREE,
:: essex ::
TO
GEORGE MALCOLM THOMSON
NOTE
Colquohoun is pronounced Ca-hoon,
and Segget as with one hard g.
CONTENTS
PAGE
PROEM -------37
I. CIRRUS _______ 25
II. CUMUEUS - 60
III. STRATUS 154
IV. NIMBUS ------- 216
PROEM
PROEM
'JpHE borough of Segget stands under the Mounth, on the
southern side, in the Mearns Howe, Fordoun lies near
and Drumlithie nearer, you can see the Faurencekirk
lights of a night glimmer and glow as the mists come
down. If you climb the foothills to the ruined Kaimes,
that was builded when Segget was no more than a place
where the folk of old time had raised up a camp with
earthen walls and with freestone dykes, and had died
and had left their camp to wither under the spread of
the grass and the whins—if you climbed up the Kaimes
of a winter morn and looked to the east and you held
your breath, you would maybe hear the sough of the
sea, sighing and listening up through the dawn, or see
a shower of sparks as a train came skirling through the
woods from Stonehaven, stopping seldom enough at
Segget, the drivers would clear their throats and would
spit, and the guards would grin : as though 'twere a joke.
But God alone knows what you’d want on the Kaimes,
others had been there and had dug for treasure, nothing
they’d found but some rusted swords, tint most like in
the wars once waged in the days when the wife of the
Sheriff of Mearns, Finella she was, laid trap for the King,
King Kenneth the Third, as he came on a hunting jaunt
through the land. For Kenneth had done her own son
to death, and she swore that she’d even that score up
yet; and he hunted slow through the forested Howe,
it was winter, they tell, and in that far time the roads
were winding puddles of glaur, the horses splashed to
their long-tailed rumps. And the men of Finella heard
of his coming, as that dreich clerk Wyntoun has told in
his tale:
As through the Mernys on a day
The kyng was rydand hys hey way,
Off hys awyne curt al suddanly
Agayne hym ras a cumpany
17
B
l8 CLOUD HOWE
In to the towne of Fethyrkerne
To fecht wyth hym thai ware sa yherne
And he agayne thame faucht sa fast,
Bot he thare slayne was at the last.
So Kenneth was dead and there followed wars,
Finella’s carles builded the Kaimes, a long line of battle¬
ments under the hills, midway a tower that was older
still, a broch from the days of the Pictish men; there
they lay and long months withstood the folk that came
to avenge the death of Kenneth and the darkness
comes down on their waiting and fighting and all the
ill things that they suffered and did.
The Kaimes was left bare and with ruined walls, as
lohannes de Fordun tells in his time, a Fordoun childe
him and had he had sense he’d have hidden the fact,
not spread it abroad. Some kind of a cleric he was in
those days, just after the Bruce drove out the English,
maybe Fordoun then had less of a smell ere lohannes
tacked on the toun to his name. Well, the Kaimes lay
there in lohannes’ time, he tells that the Scots folk
halted there going north one night to the battle of Bara ,
and one man with the Scots, a Bombard he was, looked
out that morn as the army roused and the bugles blew
out under the hills, and he saw the mists that went
sailing by and below his feet the sun came quick down
either slope of a brae to a place where a streamlet ran
by a ruined camp. And it moved his heart, and he
thought it an omen, in his own far land there were
camps like that; and he swore that if he should survive
the battle he’d come back to this place and claim grant
of its land.
Hew Monte Alto was the Bombard’s name and he
fought right well at the Bara fight, and when it was
over and the Bruce made King, he asked of the Bruce
the lands that lay under the Kaimes in the windy Howe.
PROEM
19
These lands had been held by the Mathers folk, but they
had made peace with Edward the First and given him
shelter and welcome the night he halted in Mearns as he
toured the north. So the Bruce he took their lands
from the Mathers and gave them to Hew, that was well
content, though vexed that he came of no gentle blood.
So he sent a carle to the Mathers lord to ask if he had
a daughter of age for wedding and bedding; and he
sent an old carle that he well could spare, in case the
Mathers should flay him alive.
For the Mathers were proud as though God had made
their flesh of another manure from men; but by then
they had come to a right sore pass in the mouldering
old castle by Fettercairn, where hung the helmet of good
King Grig, who first had ’stablished the Mathers there,
and made of the first of them Merniae Decurio, Captain-
chief of the Mearns lands. So the old lord left Hew's
carle unskinned, and sent back the message he had more
than one daughter, and the Bombard could come and
choose which he liked. And Hew rode there and he
made his choice, and was wedded and bedded to a
Mathers quean.
But short was the time that he had for his pleasure,
the English again had come north to war. The Scots
men gathered under the Bruce at a narrow place where
a black burn ran, the pass of the Bannock burn it was.
And Hew was a well-skilled man in the wars, he rode
his horse lathered into the camp, and King Robert called
him to make the pits and set the spiked calthrops covered
with earth, traps for the charge of the English horse.
So he did, and the next day came, and the English, they
charged right brave and were whelmed in the pits.
But Hew was slain by an English arrow as he rode un¬
helmed to peer at his pits.
20 CLOUD HOWE
Before he rode south he had builded a castle within
the walls of the old-time Kaimes, and brought far off
from his Lombard land a pickle of weavers, folk of his
blood. They builded their houses down under the
Kaimes in the green-walled circle of the ancient camp,
they tore down the walls of that heathen place, and set
their streets by the Segget burn, and drove their looms,
and were well-content, though foreign and foolish and
but ill-received by the dour, dark Pictish folk of the
Mearns. Yet that passed in time, as the breeds grew
mixed, and the toun called Segget was made a borough
for sake of the Hew that fell at the Burn.
So the Monte Altos came to be Mowat, and interbred
with the Mathers folk, and the next of whom any story
is told is he who befriended the Mathers who joined with
other three lairds against the Lord Melville. For he
pressed them right sore, the Sheriff of Mearns, and the
four complained and complained to the King ; and the
King was right vexed, and he pulled at his beard—Sorrow
gin the Sheriff were sodden—sodden and supped in his
hrew! He said the words in a moment of rage, un¬
thinking, and then they passed from his mind ; but the
lairds remembered, and took horse for the Howe.
There, as they’d planned, the four of them did,
the Sheriff went hunting with the four fierce lairds,
Arbuthnott, Pitarrow, Lauriston, Mathers; and they
took him and bound him and carried him up Garvock,
between two stones a great cauldron was hung; and
they stripped him bare and threw him within, in the
water that was just beginning to boil; and they watched
while he slowly ceased to scraich, he howled like a
wolf in the warming water, then like a bairn smored in
plague, and his body bloated red as the clay, till the
flesh loosed off from his seething bones; and the four
PROEM
21
lairds took their horn spoons from their belts and supped
the broth that the Sheriff made, and fulfilled the words
that the King had said.
They were hunted sore by the law and the kirk, the
Mathers fled to the Kaimes to hide, his kinsman Mowat
closed up the gates and defied the men of the King that
came. So they laid a siege to the castle of Kaimes ; but
the burghers of Segget sent meat to the castle by a secret
way that led round the hills ; and a pardon came for
the Mathers at last, the army withdrew and the Mathers
came out, and he swore if ever again in his life he
supped of broth or lodged between walls, so might
any man do to himself as he had done to the Sheriff
Melville.
And for long the tale of Segget grows dim till there
came the years of the Killing Time, and the Burnesses,
James and Peter they were—were taken to Edinburgh
and put to the question that they might forswear the
Covenant and God. And Peter was old, in the torment
he weakened, but by him his son James lay on the rack,
and even when the thummikins bit right sore and Peter
opened his mouth to forswear, his son was before him
singing a psalm so loud that he drowned the voice of
Peter ; and the old man died, but James was more slow,
they threw him into a cell at last, his body broken in
many places, the rats ate him there while he still was
alive; and maybe there were better folk far in Segget,
but few enough with smeddum like his.
His son was no more than a loon when he died, he'd
a little farm on the Mowat’s land. But he moved to
Glenbervie and there took a place, and his folk had the
ups and down of all flesh till the father of Robert Burnes
grew up, and grew sick of the place, and went off to
Ayr ; and there the poet Robert was born, him that lay
22 CLOUD HOWE
with nearly as many women as Solomon did, though
not all at one time.
But some of the Burneses still bade in Segget. In
the first few years of King William’s reign it was one of
them, Simon, that led the feud the folk of Segget had
with the Mowats. For they still owned most of Segget,
the Mowats, a thrawn old wife the lady was then,
her sons all dead in the wars with the French ; and her
wits were half gone, it was seldom she washed, she was
mean as dirt and she smelt to match. And Simon
Burnes and the Segget minister, they prigged on the folk
of Segget against her, the weaver folk wouldn’t pay their
rent, they made no bow when they met the old dame
ride out in her carriage with her long Mowat nose. And
at last one night folk far from Segget saw sudden a light
spring up in the hills : it wavered and shook there all
through the dark, and from far and near as the dawn
drew nigh, there were parties of folk set out on the roads
to see what this fairely was in the hills. And the thing
they saw was the smoking Kaimes, a great bit fire had
risen in the night and burned the old castle down to its
roots, of the stones there stood hardly one on the
other, the Segget folk swore they’d all slept so sound
the thing was over afore they awoke. And that might
be so, but for many a year, before the Old Queen was
took to her end and the weaving entirely ceased to pay
and folk went drifting away from the Mearns, there were
meikle great clocks in this house and that, great cover¬
lets on beds that lay neist the floor ; and the bell that
rung the weavers awake had once been a great handbell
from the hall of the Mowats up on the Kaimes high hill.
A Mowat cousin was the heritor of Kaimes, he
looked at the ruin and saw it was done, and left it there
to the wind and the rain; and builded a house lower
PROEM
23
down the slope, Segget below, yew-trees about, and had
bloodhounds brought to roam the purviews, he took
no chances of innocent sparks floating up in the night
from Segget. But the weavers were turning to other
things now, smithying and joinering and keeping wee
shops for the folk of the farms that lay round about.
And the Mowats looked at the Segget burn, washing west
to the Bervie flow, and were ill-content that it should
go waste. But it didn’t for long, the jute trade boomed,
the railway came, the two jute mills came, standing out
from the station a bit, south of the toun, with the burn
for power. The Segget folk wouldn’t look at things, the
Mowats had to go to Bervie for spinners, and a tink-
like lot of the creatures came and crowded the place,
and danced and fought, raised hell’s delight, and Segget
looked on as a man would look on a swarm of lice; and
folk of the olden breed moved out, and builded them
houses up and down the East Wynd, and called it New
Toun and spoke of the dirt that swarmed in Old Toun,
round about the West Wynd.
The spinners’ coming brought trade to the toun, but
the rest of Segget still tried to make out that the
spinners were only there by their leave, the ill-spoken
tinks, with their mufflers and shawls ; the women were
as bad as the men, if not worse, with their jeering and
fleering in Segget Square; and if they should meet with
a farmer’s bit wife as she drove into Segget to go to the
shops, and looked neat and trig and maybe a bit proud,
they’d scraich Away home, you country cow !
But the Mowats were making money like dirt. They
built a new kirk when the old one fell, sonsy and broad,
though it hadn’t a steeple ; and they lived and they
died and they went to their place ; and you’d hear the
pound of the mills at work down through the years that
CLOUD HOWE
24
brought the Great War; and that went by and still
Segget endured, outlasting all in spite of the rhyme that
some coarse-like tink of a spinner had made :
Oh, Segget it’s a dirty hole,
A kirk without a steeple,
A midden-heap at ilka door
And damned uncivil people
I
CIRRUS
^EGGET was wakening as Chris Colquohoun came down
^rhe shingle path from the Manse. Here the yews stood
thick, in a starlings' murmur, a drowsy cheep on the
edge of the dawn ; but down the dark, as you reached
the road, you saw already lights twink here and there,
in the houses of Segget, the spinners’ wynds, a smell in
the air of hippens and porridge. But she'd little heed
for these, had Chris, she went quick as she looked at
the eastern sky, the May air warm in her face as she
turned, north, and went up the Meiklebogs road. So
rutted it was and sossed with the carts that there was a
saying in Segget toun : There’s a road to heaven and
a road to hell, but damn the road to the Meiklebogs.
But that didn’t matter, she wasn’t going there, in
a while she turned by a path that wound, dark, a burn
was hidden in the grass, over a stile to the hills beyond.
And now, as she climbed swift up the slope, queer and
sudden a memory took her—of the hills above the farm
in Kinraddie, how sometimes she’d climb to the old
Druid stones and stand and remember the world below,
and the things that were done and the days put by, the
fun and fear of the days put by. Was that why the
Kaimes had so filled her sky the twenty-four hours she
had been in Segget ?
Now she was up on the lowermost ledge, it lay dark
about, the old castle of Kaimes, no more than a litter
of ruined walls, the earth piled high up over the stones
that once were halls and men-shielded rooms. There
were yews growing low in a corner outbye, they waved
and moved as they heard Chris come. But she wasn’t
feared, she was country-bred, she wandered a little,
disappointed, then laughed, at herself, to herself, and
35
26
CLOUD HOWE
the place grew still. Maybe it thought, as did Robert
Colquohoun, that her laugh was a thing worth listening
for.
She felt her face redden, faint, at that, and she
thought how over her face the slow blood would
now be creeping, she’d once or twice watched it,
bronzed and high in the cheek-bones her face, and a
kindly smoulder of grey-gold eyes, she minded how once
she had wished they were blue ! She put up her hand
to her hair, it was wet, with the dew she supposed
from the dark Manse trees, it was coiled over either ear
in the way she had worn it now for over two years.
She turned round then and looked down at Segget,
pricked in the paraffin lights of dawn. They were going
out one by one as the east grew wanly blind in the van
of the sun, behind, in the hills, a curlew shrilled—
dreaming up here while the world woke, Robert turning
in his bed down there in the Manse, and maybe out-
reaching a hand to touch her as he’d done that first
morning two years ago, it had felt as though he wakened
her up from the dead . . .
So strange it had seemed a long minute she’d lain,
half-feared, with his hand that touched her so. Then he’d
moved, quiet-breathing, deep in his sleep, and the hand
went away, she reached out in the dark and sought it
again and held to it, shy. It was winter that morning,
they both had slept late from their marriage night; and,
as the winter light seeped grey into the best bedroom
of Kinraddie Manse, Chris Colquohoun, who had once
been married to Ewan, and before that time was Chris
Guthrie, just, had lain and thought and straightened
CIRRUS
27
things out, like a bairn rubbing its eyes from sleep. . . .
This was new, she had finished with that life that had
been, all the love she had given to her Ewan, dead, lost
and forgotten far off in France : her father out in the
old kirkyard : that wild, strange happening that had
come to her the last Harvest but one there was of the
War, when she and another—but she’d not think of
that, part of the old, sad dream that was done. Had
that other remembered the happening at all, his last
hour of all in a Flanders trench ?
And she thought that maybe he had not at all, you
did this and that and you went down in hell to bring the
fruit of your body to birth, it was nothing to the child
that came from your womb, you gave to men the love
of your heart, and they’d wring it dry to the last red
drop, kind, dreadful and dear, and deep in their souls,
whatever the pretence they played with you, they knew
it a play and Fife waiting outbye.
So she lay and thought, and then wriggled a little—
to think these things on her marriage-morn, the hand
she held now never held so before ! And she peered in
his face in the light that came, his hair lay fair on the
pillow’s fringe, fair almost to whiteness, his skin ivory-
white, she saw his brows set dark in a dream, and
the mouth came set in a straight line below, she liked
his mouth and his chin as well, and his ears that
were small and lay flat back, so, and the hand that
had tightened again in his sleep—oh ! more than that,
you liked all of him well, with his kisses in the
night that had only just gone, his kisses, the twinkle-
scowl in his eyes : And now it’s to bed, but I don’t
think to sleep. She had laughed as well, feeling only
half-shy. An awful speak, Robert, for Kinraddle s minister!
and he said Don’t ministers do things like that ? and she’d
28
CLOUD HOWE
looked at him swift, and looked quick away. Maybe,
we’ll see ; and so they had seen.
She stretched then, softly, remembering that, warm
under the quilt her own body felt queer, strange and
alive as though newly blessed, and she smiled at that
thought, in a way it had been, one flesh she was made
with a kirk minister ! Funny to think she had married
a minister, that this was the Manse, that she was its
mistress—oh ! life was a flurry like a hen-roost at night,
the doors were banging, you flew here and there, were
your portion the ree or the corner of a midden you could
not foretell from one night to the next.
She got from bed then and into her clothes, agile
and quick, and not looking back, if ministers ate as
well as they loved, Robert would be hungry enough
when he woke. Down in the kitchen she came on
Else Queen, ganting as wide as a stable-door, she
stopped from that, the Manse’s new maid, a handsome
quean, and she said Hello! Chris felt the blood in
the tips of her ears, she saw plain the thing in the great
lump’s mind. You call me Mrs Colquohoun, you know,
Else. And you get up smart in the morning as well, else
we’ll need another maid in the Manse.
Else went dirt-white and closed up her mouth. Yes—
Mem, I’m sorry, and Chris felt a fool, but she didn't
show it, and this kind of thing had just to be settled
one way or the other. My name’s not Mem, it’s just
Mrs Colquohoun. Get the water boiling and we’ll make
the breakfast. What kind of a range is this that we’ve got ?
That was that, and she had no trouble at all with
meikle Else Queen in Kinraddie Manse, though the speak
CIRRUS
29
went out and about the parish that Chris Tavendale, the
new minister’s new wife, had grown that proud that she
made her maid cry Mem ! every time they met on the
stairs, a fair dog’s life had that poor Else Queen, it
just showed you the kind of thing that happened when
a creature got up a bit step in the world. And who was
she to put on her airs—the daughter of a little bit
farmer, just, and the wife of another, killed in the War.
Ay, them that were fond of their men didn’t marry as
close as that on the death of the first, the Manse and the
minister’s silver the things that the new Mrs Colquohoun
had had in her mind.
Chris heard those stories in the weeks that went, if
you bade in Kinraddie and any ill tale were told about
you—and you fair had to be an angel in breeks if that
weren’t done and even then, faith ! they’d have said
there were unco things under your breeks—the very
trees rose and sniggered it to you, the kye lowed the
news from every bit gate. But she paid no heed, she
was blithe and glad, happed in her Robert and the near¬
ness of him, young Ewan as well, a third by the fire as
they sat of a night and the storms came malagarousing
the trees down the length and breadth of the shrilling
Howe. Behind and far up you would hear the hills
quake, Robert would raise up his head and laugh, the
twinkle-scowl in his deep-set eyes—The feet of the Lord
on the hills, Christine !
Ewan would look up, staring and still, Who’s the
Lord ? and Robert would drop his great book and stare
in the fire, That’s a tough one, Ewan. But He’s
Something and sure, our Father and Mother, our End and
Beginning.
Ewan’s eyes would open wider at that, My mother’s
here and my father’s dead. Robert would laugh and upset
CLOUD HOWE
30
his chair, A natural sceptic—come out of that chair, there's
over many of your kind already squatting their hams in
the thrones of the mighty !
So the two of them would crawl round the floor and
would growl, play tigers and beasts of like gurring
breeds, Ewan with his coolness and graveness forgot,
Robert worse than a bairn, Chris sitting and watching,
a book in her hand or darning or knitting, but not often
those. Robert got angered when she sat and darned.
What, waste your life when you’ll soon be dead ? You're
not going to slave for me, my girl! And she’d say
But you won’t like holes in your socks ? and he’d laugh
When they’re holed we’ll buy a new pair. Come out for a
tramp, the storm’s gone down.
And out they would tramp, young Ewan in bed, the
night black under their feet as cold pitch, about them
the whistle and moan of the trees till they cleared the
Manse and went up by the Mains, with the smell of the
dung from its hot cattle-court, and the smell of the
burning wood in its lums. You’d see and hear little
about you by then, just the two of you swinging up the
hill in the dark, till the blow of the wind would catch
in your throats as you gained by the cambered edge of
the brae.
Around them, dry, the whistle of the whins, strange
shapes that rose and were lost in the dark, Robert would
stop and would fuss at her collar, pretending he did it
to keep out the cold. But she’d grown to know him,
the thing that he’d want, she’d put up her arms round
close by his throat, and hug him, half-shy, she was still
half-shy. He’d told her that once and Chris had been
vexed, lying in his arms, for a sudden moment she had
touched him with lips fierce and sudden with a flame
that came up out of her heart, up out of the years when
CIRRUS 3I
she still was unwed : and he’d gasped, and she’d laughed
Do you call that shy ? Then she'd been half-ashamed
and yet glad as well, and fell fast asleep till the morning
came, and they both woke up and looked at each other,
and he said that she blushed and she hid her face and
said that one or the other was a fool.
But best she minded of those night-time walks the
first that took them up to the hills, a rousting night in
December’s close. They came at last on Blawearie’s
brae, and panting, looked down on the windy Mearns,
the lights of Bervie a lowe in the east, the Daurencekirk
gleams like a scattering of faggots, Segget’s that shone
as the blurring of stars, these were the lights of the jute
mills there. So they stood a long while and looked
down the brae, Kinraddie below them happed in its
sleep ; and Robert fell into a dreaming muse, as he often
did, with his mind far off. Chris said nothing, content
though she froze, after one peek at his stillness beside
her. Queer with him here on Blawearie brae, that once
was hers, if they walked down oyer that shoulder there
they’d come to the loch and the Standing Stones to which
she had fled for safety, compassion, so often and oft when
she was a quean. . . .
She could smell the winter smell of the land and the
sheep they pastured now on Blawearie, in the parks that
once came rich with corn that Kwan had sown and they
both had reaped, where the horses had pastured, their
kye and their stock. And she minded the nights in the
years of the War, nights such as this when she’d lain in
her bed and thought of the times that would come yet
again—Ewan come back and things as before, how
they’d work for young Ewan and grow old together, and
buy Blawearie and be happy forever. And now she
stood by a stranger’s side, she slept in his bed, he loved
32 CLOUD HOWE
her, she him, nearer to his mind than ever she had been
to that of the body that lay mouldering in France, quiet
and unmoving that had moved to her kisses, that had
stirred and been glad in her arms, in her sight, that had
known the stinging of rain in his face as he ploughed
the steep rigs of Blawearie brae, and come striding from
his work with that smile on his face, and his clumsy
hands and his tongue that was shy of the things that
his eyes could whisper so blithe. Dead, still and quiet,
not even a body, powder and dust he with whom she
had planned her life and her days in the times to be.
In a ten years time what things might have been ?
She might stand on this hill, she might rot in a grave,
it would matter nothing, the world would go on, young
Fwan dead as his father was dead, or hither and borne,
far from Kinraddie : oh, once she had seen in these
parks, she remembered, the truth, and the only truth
that there was, that only the sky and the seasons en¬
dured, slow in their change, the cry of the rain, the
whistle of the whins on a winter night under the sailing
edge of the moon—
And suddenly, daft-like, she found herself weep,
quiet, she thought that she made no noise, but Robert
knew, and his arm came round her.
It was Ewan ? Oh, Chris, he won’t grudge you me !
Ewan ? It was Time himself she had seen, haunting
their tracks with unstaying feet.
But the Spring was coming. You looked from the
Manse at the hills as they moved and changed with each
day, the glaur and the winter dark near gone, the green
came quick and far on the peaks the blink of the white
CIRRUS 33
snow-bonnets grew less, swallows were wheeling about
the Manse trees, down in the fields of the Mains you
could hear the click and spit of a tractor at work, far up
by Upperhill parks rise the baa of the sheep they
pastured now on Bridge End. It seemed to Chris when
those first days came that she'd weary to death with a
house and naught else, not to have fields that awaited
her help, help in the seeding, the spreading of dung, the
turning out of the kye at dawn, hens chirawking mad for
their meat, the bustle and hurry of Blawearie’s close.
But now as she looked on the land so strange, with its
tractors and sheep, she half-longed to be gone. It had
finished with her, that life that had been, and this was
hers now : books, and her Robert, young Ewan to teach,
and set a smooth cloth on the Manse’s table, hide in the
little back room at the top and darn his socks when
Robert didn’t see.
He was out and about on the work of the parish,
marrying this soul and burying that, christening the
hopeful souls new-come to pass in their time to marriage
and burial. He’d come back dead tired from a day
of his work, Chris would hear him fling his stick in the
hall and cry out Else, will you run me a bath ? And
because of those strange, dark moods she had met, Chris
seldom met him now on the stairs, she’d wait till he
changed and was Robert again, he'd come searching her
out and tell her the news, and snatch the book from
young Ewan's hand as Ewan squatted in the window-
seat, reading. A prig, a bookworm! Robert would
cry as he flung the book the other side of the room;
and Ewan would smile in his slow, dark way, and then
give a yell and they’d scuffle a while, while Chris went
down and brought up the tea. From that room you could
see all Kinraddie by day and the lights of Kinraddie
c
34 CLOUD HOWE
shine as night came, Robert would heave a great sigh
as he sat and looked from Chris to Kinraddie below.
Wearied ? she’d ask, and he’d say, Lord, yes, and frown
and then laugh : Looks everywhere that would sour the milk !
But my job’s to minister and minister I will though Kin¬
raddie’s kirk grows toom as its head. And would think a
while, It’s near that already.
Faith ! so it was, nothing unco in that, there was
hardly a kirk in the Mearns that wasn’t, the War had
finished your fondness for kirks, you knew as much as any
minister. Why the hell should you waste your time in a
kirk when you were young, you were young only once,
there was the cinema down in Dundon, or a dance or so,
or this racket or that; and your quean to meet and hear
her complain she’s not been ta’en to the Fordoun ball.
You’d chirk to your horses and give a bit smile as you
saw the minister swoop by on his bike, with his coat¬
tails flying and his wee, flat hat; and at night in the
bothy some billy or other would mock the way that he
spoke and moved. To hell with ministers and toffs of
his kind, they were aye the friends of the farmers, you
knew.
All the farmers now of Kinraddie were big, but they
had as little liking as the bothy for the Reverend
Colquohoun and the things he said. Would a man go
up to the kirk of a Sabbath to sit down and hear him¬
self insulted ? You went to kirk to hear a bit sermon
about Paul and the things he wrote the Corinthians, all
of them folk that were safely dead ; but Kinraddie’s
minister would try to make out that you yourself, that
was born in Fordoun of honest folk, were a kind of
CIRRUS
35
Corinthian, oppressing the needy, he meant those lazy
muckers the ploughmen. No, no, you were hardly
so daft as take that, you would take the mistress
a jaunt instead, next Sunday like or maybe the next,
up the Howe to her cousin in Brechin that hadn't
yet seen the new car you had bought; or maybe you'd
just lie happed in your bed, and have breakfast, and
read about all the divorces the English had from their
wives—damn’t, man! they fair had a time, those
English tinks ! You wouldn’t bother your head on the
kirk, to hell with ministers of the kind of Colquohoun,
they were aye the friends of the ploughmen, you knew.
And Chris would stand in the choir and sing, and
sometimes look at the page in her hand and think of
the days when she at Blawearie had never thought of
the kirk at all, over-busied living the life that was now
to bother at all on the life to come. Others of the choir
that had missed a service would say to her with a shy¬
like smile, I’m so sorry, Mrs Colquohoun, I was late;
and Chris would say that they needn’t fash, if she said
it in Scots the woman would think, Isn’t that a common¬
like hitch at the Manse? If she said it in English the
speak would spread round the minister’s wife was
putting on airs.
Robert’s stipend was just three hundred pounds,
when he’d first told Chris she had thought it a lot, and
felt deep in her a prick of resentment that he got so
much, when the folk on the land that did all the work
that really was work—they got not a third, with a
family thrice bigger. But soon she was finding the
money went nowhere, a maid to keep and themselves
CLOUD HOWE
36
forbye, this and that charity that folk expected the
minister should not only help but head. And they
didn’t in vain, he’d have given the sark from his back,
would Robert, if Chris hadn’t stopped him, and syne
given his vest. When he heard of a cottar that was
needy or ill he’d wheel out his old bike and swoop down
the roads, he rode with old brakes and they sometimes
gave way, and then he would brake with a foot on
the wheel, his thoughts far off as he flew through the
stour, if he hadn’t a broken neck it was luck. That
was his way and Chris liked him for it, though she
herself would as soon have thought of biking that way
as of falling off the old tower by the kirk, and lippening
to chance she would land on her feet.
Well, so, and most likely sparked up with glaur, he’d
come to the house where the ill man lay, and knock and
cry Well, are you in ? and go in. And sit him down
by the bed of the man, and tell him a story to make him
laugh, never mention God unless he was asked, and that
was seldom enough, as you knew, a man just blushed if
you mentioned God. So Robert would talk of the crops
and fees, and Where is your daughter fee’d to now ? and
The wife look fine, and I’ll need to he off. And syne as he
went he’d slip a pound note into the hand of the sick
bit man ; and he’d take it and redden up, dour, and
say Thank you; and after Robert went they’d say,
What’s a pound ? Him that gets paid as much as he does.
Chris knew that they said that kind of thing, Else
told her the news as they worked in the kitchen; and
she knew as well how the news went out from the Manse
of every bit thing that was there—Ewan, her son, how
he dressed, what he said; and the things they said and
the things they sang and how much they ate and what
they might drink; when they went to bed and when
CIRRUS
37
they got up ; and how the minister would kiss his wife,
without any shame, in the sight of the maid—Oh, Chris
knew most and she guessed the rest, all Kinraddie knew
better than she did herself how much she and Robert
might cuddle in bed, and watched with a sneer for sign
of a son. . . . And somehow, just once, you would hate
them for that.
You knew these things, it was daft to get angry, you
couldn’t take a maid and expect her a saint, especially
a lass from a cottar house, and Else was no worse than
many another. So in time you grew used to knowing
what you did—if you put your hair different or spoke
sharp to Ewan or went up of an evening to change your
frock—would soon be known to the whole of Kinraddie,
with additional bits tacked on for a taste. And if you
felt sick, once in a blue moon, faith ! but the news went
winged in the Howe, a bairn was coming, all knew the
date, they would eye you keen as you stood in the choir,
and see you’d fair filled out this last week; and they’d
mouth the news on the edge of their teeth, and worry it
to death as a dog with a bone.
But Chris cooked and cleaned with Else Queen to help,
and grew to like her in spite of her claik, she’d tried no airs
since that very first time, instead she was over-anxious
to Mem! Chris couldn’t be bothered in a while to
stop her, knowing well as she did that in many a way
she was a sore disappointment to Else.
In other bit places where a quean would fee, with
the long-teethed gentry up and down the Howe or the
poverty put-ons of windy Stonehive, the mistress would
aye be glad ofj a news, hear this and that that was
CLOUD HOWE
38
happening outbye, you’d got it direct from so-and-so’s
maid. But Mrs Colquohoun would just listen and nod,
maybe, polite enough in a way, but with hardly a yea or
a nay for answer. And at first a lassie had thought the
creature was acting up gentry, the minister’s wife : but
syne you saw that she just didn't care, not a button she
cared about this place and that, and the things that were
happening, the marryings and dyings, the hissings and
cuddlings, the kickings and cursings, the lads that had
gone and the farmers that broke ; and what this cottar
had said to his wife and what the wife had thrown at
the cottar. And it fair was a shock, the thing wasn't
natural, you made up your mind to give in your notice
and go to a place where you wouldn’t be lonesome.
So you’d have done if it hadn’t been Ewan, the
laddie that came from her first bit marriage, so quiet
and so funny, but a fine little lad, he'd sometimes come
down and sit in the kitchen and watch as you peeled the
potatoes for dinner, and tell you things he had read in
his books, and ask, What’s a virgin princess like—like
yon, Else ? And when you laughed and said Oh, but
bonnier a lot, he would screw up his brows, I don’t mean
that, is she like you under your clothes, I mean ?
You blushed at that, / suppose she is, and he looked
at you calm as could be. Well, that’s very nice, I
am sure—so polite you wanted to give him a cuddle,
and did, and he stood stock still and let you, not moving,
syne turned and went out and suddenly went mad in
the way that he would, whistling and thundering like a
horse up the stairs, with a din and a racket to deafen a
body, but fine for all that, you liked a place with a bairn
at play ; though not aye making a damned row, either.
So you stayed at the Manse as the summer wore on,
and you liked it better, and sometimes you’d stop—
CIRRUS
39
when outbye or gone up home for a day—in the telling
of this or that at the Manse, and be sorry you ever had
started the tale. And your father would growl Ay, and
what then ? and you’d say, Oh, nothing, and look
like a fool, and whoever was listening would be sore
disappointed. But you’d minded sudden the face of the
mistress, or young Ewan, polite, who thought you looked
nice : and it didn’t seem fair to tell stories of them.
And then, in the August, you were ill as could be,
and they didn’t send you off home to Segget, as most
others would, to the care of your folk. Faith ! you
half thought as the mistress came in and dosed you with
medicine and punched up your pillows and brought you
your breakfast and dinner and tea, that she was well
pleased to do all the work, you heard her singing washing
the stairs, the minister himself went to help in the
kitchen, you heard of that through the half-open door,
them laugh as the mistress threw water at him and the
scamper of feet as he chased her for that. When next
dinner came the minister himself came in with the tray
and his shirt-sleeves up, you blushed, and tried to cover
your nightie, he cried, All safe, Else, you needn’t he shy.
I’m old arid I’m married, though you’re pretty enough.
And somehow you just didn't tell that outbye, folk
wTould have said that he slept with you next. So you
lay in your bed and had a fine rest but that they tor¬
mented you to read books and brought great piles to
put by your bed, and themselves were so keen that you
fair were fashed, they would read you out bits, the
mistress or minister, sometimes tln.-m both, and you
never had had patience with books in your life. You
could never get in them or past the long words, some
thing there was that stood fast between, though you
knit up your brows and tried ever so hard. And you’d
CLOUD HOWE
40
drop the damn book when a minute was past and listen
instead to the birds in the trees, as the evening drew in
and they chirped in their sleep, and the low of the kye
in the parks of the Mains, and see through the swinging
of the casement window the light of the burning whins
on the hills, smell—you smelled with your body entire
—the tingle and move of the harvesting land. And
then you’d be wearied and lie half asleep, wondering
what Charlie was doing to-night, had he taken some other
quean out to the pictures, or was sitting about at some
bothy fire ? And would he come to see you as he’d
written he'd come ?
He came that Sunday, and the mistress herself it
was brought him up, he stood with his cap in his hands
and he blushed, and you did the same, but the mistress
didn't. Now sit down and talk and I’ll bring you both
tea. And off then she went, and you thought then, as
often, she was bonny in a way, in a dour, queer way,
with her hair dark-red and so coiled, and the eyes so
clear, and the mouth like a man’s, but shaped to a better
shape than a man’s, you stared at the door even after
she’d gone, till Charlie whispered, Do you think she’ll
come back ? And you said, No, you gowk, and peeked
at him quiet, and he looked round about as slow
as a sow and then cuddled you quick, and that was fair
fine, and you wanted a minute to cry in his arms, be¬
cause you were ill and weak and half-witted. You told
yourself that and pushed him away, and he smoothed
his hair and said, You’re right bonny, and you said, Z)ow7
haver, and he said, Well, I don’t.
The mistress and Ewan brought up the tea, then left
you enough together alone for the two of you to have
wedded and bedded, as you thought in a peek of a
thought that came. And you looked at Charlie, he was
CIRRUS
4i
sitting there douce, telling of his place and the hard
work there was, he’d as soon have thought ill as of dancing
a jig. Like a fool you felt only half-pleased to know
that, of course you didn’t want anything to happen, but
at least he should try to make out that he did, it was only
nature a man should want that, especially if you looked
as bonny as he said. So you were fell short with him
in the end, and he took his leave and the mistress came
up. And you suddenly felt a fool altogether, you were
weeping and weeping, with her arm about you, safe you
felt there and sleepy and tired. She said, It’s all right,
Else, sleep, you’ll be fine. You’re tired now you’ve talked
so long with your lad.
But you knew from her look she knew more than
that, she knew the thing you yourself had thought; and
you said to yourself when she left you that night, If I
ever hear any sfieak ill of the Colquohouns, I’ll—I’ll—
and afore you’d decided whether you’d blacken their eyes,
or their character, or both, you fell fast asleep.
Sometimes a black, queer mood came on Robert, he
would lock himself up long hours in his room, hate God
and Chris and himself and all men, know his Faith a
fantastic dream; and see the fleshless grin of the skull
and the eyeless sockets at the back of life. He would
pass by Chris on the stairs if they met, with remote, cold
eyes and a twisted face, or ask in a voice that cut like a
knife, Can’t you leave me alone, must you always follow ?
The first time it happened her heart had near stopped,
she went on with her work in a daze of amaze. But
Robert came from his mood and came seeking her, sorry
and sad for the queer, black beast that rode his mind in
CLOUD HOWE
42
those haunted hours. He said that the thing was a
physical remembrance, only that just, and Chris not to
worry ; and she found out that near the end of the War
he’d been gassed by an awful gas that they made, and
months had gone by ere he breathed well again, and the
fumes of that drifting Fear were gone. And sometimes
the shadows of that time came back, though his lungs
were well enough now, he was sure, though ’twas in the
months of his agony he’d known, conviction, terrible
and keen as his pain, that there was a God Who lived
and endured, the Tortured God in the soul of men, Who
yet might upbuild the City of God through the hearts
and hands of men of good faith.
But also Chris found it coming on Robert that
here he could never do good or do ill, in a countryside
that was dying or dead. One night he looked at Chris
and said, Lord! But for you, Christine, I was daft to
come here. I’ll try for a kirk in some other place, there's
work enough to be done in the towns. And thought for a
while, his fair head in his hands. Would you like a town ?
Chris said, Oh, fine, and smiled reassurance, but she
bit at her lips and he saw, and he knew. Well, then, not
a town. I’ll try to find something betwixt and between.
So he did ere a month was out, news came from
Segget its minister was dead, Robert brought the news
home : I’m to try for his kirk. And Chris said, Segget ?
and Robert said Yes, and Chris quoted the bit of poetry
there was, somebody they said in Segget had made it:
Oh, Segget it’s a dirty hole,
A kirk without a steeple
A midden-heap at ilka door.
And damned uncivil people !
Robert laughed, Well make them both civil and clean,
CIRRUS
43
Chris said, But you haven’t yet gotten the kirk, and he said
Just wait, for I very soon will.
Three Sundays later they set out for Segget, Robert
to preach there and Chris to listen, it was April, quiet
and brown in the fields, drowsy under a blanket of mist
that cleared as the sun rose, leaving the hills corona’ed
in feathery wispings of clouds, Chris asked their name, and
Robert said, Cirrus. They bring fine weather and they’re
standing still. There’s little wind on the heights to-day.
And Chris on her bicycle suddenly felt young,
younger far than she’d felt for years, Robert beside
her on his awful bike, it made a noise like a threshing
machine, collies came barking from this close and that,
but Robert ground on and paid them no heed, scowling,
deep in his sermon, no doubt. But once he swung
round. Am I going too fast? and Chris said, Fast?
It’s liker a funeral, and he came from the deeps of his
thoughts and laughed, Oh, Chris, never change and grow
English-polite! Not even in Segget, when we settle in its
Manse !
Syne he said of a sudden, a minute or so later, they
were past Mondynes and Segget in sight: Do you mind
how Christ was tempted of the devil ? And so was I
till you sfoke just now. I’d made up my mind I’d butter
them up, in the sermon I preached—just for the chance
of getting out of Kinraddie, settled in Segget, and on with
some work. Well, I won’t. . . . By God, I’ll give them
a sermon !
The old minister had died of drink, fair sozzled he
was, folk said, at the end; and his last words were, so
the story went, And what might the feare’s prices be
CLOUD HOWE
44
to-day ? No doubt that was just a bit lie that they
told, but faith ! he’d been greedy enough for his screw,
with his long grey face and his bleary eyes and his way
that he had of speaking to a man, met out in the street
or down by the Arms, as though he were booming from
the pulpit itself : Why didn’t I see you in the kirk last
Sabbath ? And a billy would redden and give a bit
laugh, and look this way and that, were he one of New
Toun. But more than likely, were he one of the spinners,
he’d answer: Maybe because I wasn’t there! in the
awful twang that the creatures spoke ; and go off and
leave old Greig sore vexed, he’d never got over the fact that
the spinners cared hardly a hoot for kirk session or kirk.
Ah well, he was a dead and a two-three came to try
for his pulpit, more likely his stipend, two old men came,
each buttered up Segget, you’d have thought by the way
the creatures blethered the Archangel Michael could have
come to Segget, and bought a shop, and felt at home as
he sat at the back and sanded the sugar. Folk took
that stite with a dosing of salts, then the third man
came and some stories came with him, ’twas the Reverend
Robert Colquohoun of Kinraddie, he’d been down there
only a bare two years, and half his congregation had gone,
they’d go anywhere but listen to him, he was aye inter¬
fering and preaching at folk that had done him no harm,
couldn’t he leave them a-be ? Forbye that he’d married
a quean of the parish, and if there’s a worse thing a
minister can do than marry a woman that knows the kirk
folk, it’s only to suck sweeties under the pulpit in the time
he’s supposed to be in silent prayer.
Well, Mr Colquohoun, he didn’t suck sweets, but he
did near everything else, folk said, and most of Segget,
though it thronged to hear him, had no notion to vote
for the creature at all.
CIRRUS
45
But when he was seen stride up to the pulpit, and
he leaned from the pulpit rails and he preached, the
elders were first of all ta’en with his way, and the old
folk next with the thing that he preached, not the mealy
stuff that you’d now hear often, but meaty and strong
and preached with some fire—and man ! he fairly could
tell a bit tale !
For he took his text from a chapter in Judges, his
sermon on Gath and the things that that Jew childe
Samson did, how at last the giant was bound to a pillar,
but he woke from the stupor and looked round about,
and cried that the Phihstines free him his bonds ; and
they laughed and they feasted, paying him no heed,
sunk in their swine-like glaurs of vice. Their gods were
idols of brass and of gold, they lived on the sweat and
the blood of men, crying one to the other, Behold, we
are great, we endure, and not earth itself is more sure.
Pleasure is ours and the taste of lust, wine in our mouths
and power in our hands ; and the lash was heard on the
bowed slave’s back, they had mercy on neither their
kith nor their kin. And Samson woke and looked round
again, he was shorn of his hair, bound naked there, in
the fights of the torches, tormented and chained. And
then sudden the Philistines felt the walls rock and they
looked them about and saw the flames wave, low and
sharp in a little wind; and again about them the great hall
groaned, and Samson tore down the pillars of the roof, and
the roof fell in and slew him and them. . . . And Samson
was rising again in our sight, threatening destruction
unless we should change, and free both him and the
prisoners chained in the littered halls of our secret he arts.
And maybe it was because it was Spring, new-come,
the sun a tong, drowsy blink in the kirk, and folk heard
the voice of the Reverend Colquohoun like the wind
46 CLOUD HOWE
they’d hear up under the hills, fine and safe as they
listened below, and who could he mean by Samson but
them, ground down by the rents they’d to pay the
Mowats ? Maybe it was that and maybe it was because
folk aye had prided themselves in Segget in taking no
heed of what others said, that they licked up the sermon
like calves at a cog ; and a fair bit crowd watched Robert
Colquohoun, him and his wife, she seemed decent and
quiet, mount on their bikes and ride home to Kinraddie.
Robert said to Chris, That’s the end of my chance.
But I’m glad 1 preached what I felt and thought. But Chris
had a clearer vision than his, They liked the sermon and
I think they liked you. They hadn’t a notion what the
sermon meant—themselves the Philistines and someone else
Samson.
Robert stared. But I made it plain as plain. Chris
laughed, To yourself; anyhow, we’ll see. And they rode
to Kinraddie, and the days went by, Robert didn’t
believe he would head the leet. But he found out,
for fun, all he could about Segget, from papers and
Else and lists and old books, there was less than a
thousand souls in Segget, and most of them lost, if you
trusted Else. Half of the Segget folk worked at the
mills—the spinners, as the rest of Segget called them ;
the others kept shops or were joiners or smiths,
folk who worked on the railway, the land, the roads,
and the gardens of Segget House. Robert found an old
map of the place and renewed it, playing as a boy with
a toy town.*
Chris leaned on his chair and looked over his shoulder
* See end-papers.
CIRRUS 47
his fingers nimble in limning New Toun (where the folk
had gone when the spinners came), Old Toun and its
winding jumble of lanes that bunched and clustered
around the West Wynd. South was the Arms, in the
Segget Square, the East Wynd dotted with a joiner’s, a
school, a tailor’s shop, a grocery, a sutor’s—and the
Lord knows what, Robert said as his pen swopped
down the Wynd to the Segget Square. Then it wheeled
about and went up The Close to the post-office-grocery-
shop combined, dotted the Segget smiddy beyond, and
syne lost itself in the Segget slums. . . . Chris saw on
the northern outskirts of Segget two dots for the Manse
and the steepleless kirk, and over to the west another
one still, Segget House, where the Mowats lived, the old
mill-owner new-dead, said Else, and his son, young
Stephen, at an English college.
And Robert would whistle as he looked at his map—
What mightn’t a minister do in Segget, with the help of
young Mow at or the folk of the schools ? And sutors are
atheists, hound to have brains, and extremely religious, all
atheists are. One could do great things with a village
League . . .
Then he would laugh, f ust playing with bricks ! Ewan,
where are those toys you’ve outgrown ?
Hie news that he’d topped the leet at the poll was
brought to Robert by an elder of Segget, it was Else
who opened the door for the creature, she knew him
well, but she didn t let on. It was wee Peter Peat, the
tailor of Segget, his shop stood mid-way the wind of
East Wynd, with his house behind it, he thought it a
castle. And he spoke right fierce, and he’d tell a man,
before you were well in the lithe of his door, that he made
a fine neighbour to those that were good, the best of
friends to his friends, he was, but God pity the man that
CLOUD HOWE
48
fell out with him, he’d never forgive an injury, never.
And he was the biggest Tory in Segget, the head of the
Segget Conservative branch, and an awful patriot, keen
for blood ; but he’d loup in his shoes as he heard his
wife, Meg Peat that was slow and sonsy to look at, come
into the shop, she’d cry Peter, I’m away. Mind the
fire and have tea set ready; and he’d quaver, Ay
Meg, like an ill-kicked cur. But soon’s she was gone
he’d look fierce as ever, ready to kill you and eat you
forbye, and running his tape up and down your bit
stomach as though he were gutting you and enjoying it.
Well, here he was standing, fierce as a futret. Is
the Reverend Mr Colquohoun indoors ? And Else said,
I’ll see ; what name shall I tell him ? And he said Gang
and tell him Peter Peat’s here.
Else went and found the minister in his study, and
the minister said Peat ? and looked at the mistress ;
and the mistress smiled in the quiet way she had, and
shook her head, and the minister shook his. Still,
kindling or peat, I suppose I’d best see him !
Else went down the stairs to where Peter stood.
Come in, and wipe your feet on the mat. He looked as
though he’d have liked to wipe them on her, but he
came in, fierce in his five feet two, the minister was
waiting and rose when he came. I’ve come from
Segget, Else heard the thing say, and the minister
answer as she closed the door, Oh, yes? Well, won’t
you sit down, Mr Peat ?
And then, a half hour or so after that, Chris heard
the closing of the Manse front door and syne the scamper
of feet on the stairs, she thought it was Ewan come in
from his play. But instead it was Robert, he burst into
the room, his face was flushed and he caught her arms,
and plucked her up from the chair she sat in, and danced
CIRRUS
49
her half round the great-windowed room. She gasped,
What is’t? and he said What, that? Peter Peat, the
tailor of Segget, of course. Then he dropped in the
chair from which he had plucked her, and sat there
panting, still holding her hands. Christine, you’re now
looking at Segget’s minister. And he’s promised that
never as long as he lives he’ll pray for All-hut the Prince
of Wales !
He told the story he’d gotten from Peter, and Chris
heard it later amended by Else, a warning that folk in
a pulpit speak plain. He was fell religious, wee Peter
Peat, an elder of the kirk and twice every Sunday he’d
nip up and down the pews with the bag ; and look at
you sharp to see what you put in. And once he cried
out to Dalziel of Meiklebogs, that was stinking with
silver but fair was right canny, No, no, I’ll not have a
button from you! And Meiklebogs reddened like a
pig with rash, and dropped a half-crown in the bag by
mistake, he was so took aback and affronted-like. That
was back a good while, in the days of old Nichols, the
last minister but one, he was, as proud and stuck-up as
a hubbley-jock, English, and he never learned to speak
right; and his prayers at first had fair maddened Peat.
For when he came to the bit about Royalty, and he'd
pray for the birn with might and with main, he’d finish
up And all hut the Prince of Wales. Now Peat he
was Tory and fond of the Prince, he went home to his
wife in a fair bit stew, What the hell ails him at the
Prince of Wales that he blesses all hut him, I would like
to know ? And at last he tackled old Nichols on the
matter, and the creature gave a bit sniftering laugh, and
CLOUD HOWE
50
said to Scotch ears he supposed that All-but was how
it sounded when he said Albert. And he spoke this
slow, in a sneering bit way, as though he thought Scotch
ears were damn poor ears, mostly bad in the need of a
clean—when manners were being given out he hadn’t
even the manners to stay and receive his, Peter Peat
said.
Chris woke on the morning of the move to Segget
with a start of fear she had over-slept. It was May,
and the light came round about five, red and gold and
a flow of silver down the parks that she knew so well,
she got from bed at the very first blink, Robert yawned
and sat up and remembered the day, and dived for his
clothes, no bath this morning she told him as each strug¬
gled into clothes. He said, Ah well, I’m not very foul,
and she thought that funny, and giggled and tangled
her hair with her dress; and he said, Let me help, and
his help was a hinder, it was only an excuse to take her
and kiss her, this day of all!
She pushed him away at last and he went, whistling,
two steps at a time down the stair, Chris heard Else
moving already in the kitchen and when she got down
found breakfast near ready, and Else all excitement, and
young Ewan up, his knickers pulled on the wrong way
in his hurry. She’d to alter that and try answer his
questions, and run to help Robert with the very last kist,
full up to the brim with books and such-like ; and he
swore at the thing and Chris sat on the top, and Ewan
came running and jumped there as well, and it closed
with a bang, and they all of them cheered.
They sat down to breakfast, famished already.
CIRRUS
51
Suddenly Else came running in—Mem, it’s started
to rain! with her face as though it were raining ink,
and thick ink forbye. So Chris had to quiet her, and see
Ewan ate, and Robert forbye, excited as Else. Then
they heard down the road the burr of a lorry, and Else
came again \ It’s Melvin from Segget.
So it was, they’d hired him to do the Manse flitting,
and had heard his character redd up by Else. He kept
the only hotel in Segget, the Segget Arms that stood in
the Square, the other inn down at the foot of West Wynd
had been closed when the local option came. Will
Melvin had been right well pleased over that, he said
if this was their Prohibition, then he for one was all for
the thing. He’d a face like a cat, broad at the eyes,
and he’d spit like a cat whenever he spoke ; he aye wore
a dickey and a high, stiff collar and a leather waistcoat,
and leggings and breeks, and he drove the two cars on hire
in Segget, and carted folks’ coals and attended the bar
when Jim the potman, that folk called The Sourock,
was down with the awful pains in his wame. Will Melvin
had married fell late in life, an Aberdeen woman, right
thin and right north, she kept a quick eye on the bar
and the till. And if she heard a billy give a bit curse,
as a spinner or a cottar might do from outbye, knowing
no better, they weren’t Segget folk, she’d cry out sharp
in the thin Aberdeen : None of your Blasting and Blas¬
pheming in here. So folk called her the Blaster and
Blasphemer for short, and if thoughts could have burned
she’d have needed to go and take out a life insurance
for fire.
Well, here was Will Melvin, he sat in the kitchen,
but got to his feet when Chris came in. Good morning,
Mem, and Chris said Good morning, and he asked, Will I
start then to load her up ? meaning the lorry, Chris saw, not
32 CLOUD HOWE
herself. And he said he had Muir, the gravedigger,
to help, and Chris called in Robert, and he came and scowled
because he was thinking of some other thing. But he
said, Hello, then, are we all ready ? Would you like a
dram before we begin ? Will Melvin said, genteel, Just
a drop, and would have sat and waited for the dram by
himself but that Chris asked, Isn’t there another with you ?
So John Muir was brought in from his seat in the lorry,
he was big and cheery and buirdly, John Muir, a roadman
of Segget, and the two had their dram, and John Muir
as he drank began to tell them of the awful time
he'd once had with a grave. He'd aye had a horror of
premature burial, a fell few there were that were buried
like that, when you dug up the coffins of folk of old time
and the boards fell agley you would sometimes see, through
the shrouds, the bones all bulging and twisted, the crea¬
tures had struggled down there in the earth, not dead
at all, gasping for breath. . . . Well, he’d been thinking
of that one night as he went to dig a new grave
by the kirk, it was windy weather on the winter's
edge. He'd only finished digging the hole, and turned
about, and straightened his back, when the earth gave
way and his feet as well. Next minute his head went over
his heels and flat in a puddle of red earth he went, right
down at the bottom of the grave he had dug, his head
half-jammed in under his shoulder. He nearly fainted
with the awful shock, syne cried for help as loud as he
could. But he heard long nothing, it was winter time,
the light was waning up on the hills, he looked up and
knew before long he d be dead. And he cried again
and as luck would have it the old minister heard his bit
yowl, and came canny and slow down through the graves,
and looked in the hole where John Muir was lying. And
he said . Who is t ? and John Muir was sore vexed. Oh,
CIRRUS 53
ay, we’ve been introduced, he cried back, so stand on no
ceremony—damn’t, get a ladder!
Maybe that was why he still gleyed that way and went
with a kind of twist to his shoulder, Chris thought; but
Robert just laughed and looked at his watch. Well, this
is a flitting, not yet a funeral. John Muir set down his
glass and gleyed cheery, Ay, well, it’ll end in that, come
time, you’d have thought he had something wrong with
his stomach. But he gleyed at Chris cheery as a cock
on a ree, and fell to with a will, him and Will Melvin, and
carried out tables and presses and chairs, and kists and
beds and boxes of dishes, and piled them up till the
lorry groaned. Will Melvin near did the same at the
sound and went spitting around like a startled cat.
Then they drove off, Robert went with them to help, Else
went as well in the back of the lorry, clasping the best
tea-set to herself, and giving young Ewan a wave as she
went.
The rain had cleared and Chris watched the lorry
lurch down by the Mains in the flare of the sun, they'd got
a fine day after all for the flitting. She liked John Muir,
if not Melvin much ; but then it was daft to judge folk at
first sight. Young Ewan came running and asked for a
piece, they sat together in the half-tirred rooms, and ate
some biscuits and looked at each other, with the bizz of
a fly on the stripped window-panes. Ewan asked why
they were moving to Segget, Chris tried to tell him, and
he listened, polite, and then went out and drowsed in the
grass till he heard the lorry returning from Segget.
They loaded up the last of the stuff, John Muir
climbed gleying up in its midst, and Chris locked the door
and left the key for the folk of the Mains to come up and
get, hid in a little hole in the wall. Then she went to
the lorry where Melvin was waiting, young Ewan beside
54 CLOUD HOWE
him, and climbed in as well; and the lorry wound out
through the bending of yews where long, long ago the
knight Wallace had hidden as the Knglish were looking
for him in the wars.
They saw not a soul as they passed the Mains, then
they swung out into the road that led south ; and so as
they went Chris turned and looked back, at Kinraddie,
that last time there in the sun, the moors that smoothed
to the upland parks Chae Strachan had ploughed in the
days gone by, the Knapp with no woods to shelter it
now, Upperhill set high in a shimmer of heat, Cuddies-
toun, Netherhill—last of them all, high and still in the
hill-clear weather, Blawearie up on its ancient brae,
silent and left and ended for you ; and suddenly, daft,
you couldn’t see a thing.
But that went by, Chris glad to be gone ; and the lorry
switched from the main road’s ribbon up by the old
thatched toun of Culdyce, and she saw the Howe spread
out like a map, there was Drumlithie down in its hollow,
a second Segget, but steepled enough. Mondynes that
stood by the Bervie Water, Fettercairn, where the soldiers
of the widow Finella had lain in wait to mischieve King
Kenneth. All the parks were set with their hoeing squads,
four, five at a time they swung by the drills, here and there
the hindmost man would stop, and straighten up slow,
a hand at his back, to look at the lorry—who’s could it
be ? And all the long line would straighten up, slow,
and catch a glimpse of Chris, in her blue, and young Ewan
in his, with his straight, black hair.
And there, as they swung by the Meiklebogs farm,
the hills to the right, at last lay Segget, a cluster and crawl
CIRRUS 55
of houses white-washed, the jute-mills smoking by Segget
Water, the kirk with no steeple that rose through the
trees, the houses of the spinners down low on the left,
though Chris didn't know that these were their houses.
Then the lorry puffed up to the old kirk Manse, on the
fringe of Segget, and Chris saw the lawn piled in a fair
hysteria of furniture. She jumped down and stood a
minute at gaze, in the shadows, the shadows the new
yews flung, the grass seemed blue in the blaze of the heat.
Then as Melvin backed back the lorry and Ewan went
running out over the lawn to the door, Robert came out
and saw Chris and waved, and was pleased as though
they’d been parted a year. He dropped the end of the
press he’d picked up, near dropped it down on the toes
of Muir (who gleyed as cheery as though ’twas a coffin)
and cried to Chris, Conte and see the new study. And
nothing could content him but up she must go, leaving
Melvin below to glower after the gowks.
Then two men came talking up the Manse drive,
Dalziel of the Meiklebogs and one of his men, Robert went
down to see who they were. Dalziel said Ay, you’ll he
the minister ? and smiled, he was bad in the need of a
shave, of middle height though he looked a lot less, so
broad in the shoulders, hands like hams ; and he smiled
slow and shy with his red, creased face, and he said that
he'd seen the lorries go by, and he knew right well the sore
job it was to do a flitting without much help. And all
the time he was smiling there, shy, he looked to Chris
like a Highland bull, with his hair and his horns and maybe
other things : there was something in his shyness that
made her shiver. Beside him, Robert seemed like a boy
from school, thin and tall with his slim, thin face; and
back of Robert was Else as she looked, not slim at all
but big and well-made, her head flung back in that way
56 CLOUD HOWE
she had and a look on her face as much as to say, Good
Lord, what’s this that has come to us now ?
Then they all fell to carrying in the Manse gear, and
Chris fled here and there in the house, a great toom place
that shambled all ways, there were stairs that started and
suddenly finished and steps that crumbled away into
gloom, down to old cellars that never were used. And
sometimes you’d think you would come to a room, and
you didn t, you came slap-bang on another, the windows
fast-closed and stiff with the heat. Chris told where and
how to place all the things, and Meiklebogs and Else
carried up the beds, and set them together, Chris heard
Else give orders and Meiklebogs answer, canny and shy,
You’ll be the new minister’s bit maidie ? Else said, There’s
damn the MAIDIE about me ; and Chris didn’t hear more,
but she guessed a bit.
John Muir came to her and asked where to put a
press and a bed and some other things she’d brought from
Blawearie the first flit she made. And she didn’t know,
in that crowding of rooms, till he said Would you maybe
like the gear altogether? and she said, Just that, in a
small-like room. So he carried the bed up and back
through the Manse, to a high-built room, it was three
stairs up. The place was so lost that the cleaners had
missed it, there were cobwebs looped from the walls
like twine. But through the window, when you
swung it out wide, you saw sudden hills rise up in
your face, with below you the roll of long, grass-grown
mounds. John Muir let down the bed with a bang,
the great heavy bed that had once been her father’s.
Chris asked him what were the ruins up there, and he said,
You’ve heard of the Kaimes of Segget ?
Chris leaned from the window and looked to the
west. And what s that to the left, that hiddle of houses? 
CIRRUS 57
Where the spinners hide, he told her, she stared, she
had thought them abandoned byres or pig-styes. But
Muir just gleyed and said they were fine—good enough
for the dirt that s in them. If you gave good houses to
rubbish like them, they'd have them pig-rees in a damn
short while. They’re not Segget folk, the spinners, at all.
Chris said Oh ? and looked at him, quiet, then they
went down to bring up the rest; and there was Meikle-
bogs met on the stair, smiling shy at that sumph of a
maid. And John Muir thought, You’d think he’d have
quieted by now. A man that can’t keep off the women by
the time he s reaching to sixty or so should be libbed and
tethered in a cattle-court.
Near twelve they’d the most of the furniture in, all
but a long table brought from the north, from the Manse
of Robert Colquohoun’s old father, solid and oak and a
hell of a weight. And then Else called that the dinner
was ready, Chris said they all must stay and have dinner.
Robert said Let’s eat it out on this table.
So Else served them the dinner in the shade of the
yews, and sat down herself when she’d finished with that,
Meiklebogs waiting to see where she sat, and sitting down
next with a shy-like smile. Robert came out, getting
into his coat, and stood at the end of the table a minute
and bent his head, fair in the sunny weather, and said
the grace, the grace of a bairn ; and they bent and lis¬
tened, all but young Ewan :
God bless our food,
And make us good.
And pardon all our sins.
For Jesus Christ’s sake.
Then they all ate up, Muir, Melvin, and Meiklebogs,
and the fee d man that blushed and was shy, not just
CLOUD HOWE
58
looked it, Chris liked him best, with that sudden com¬
passion that always came on her as she looked at one of
his kind—that conviction that he and his like were the
REAL, they were the salt and savour of earth. She heard
him, shy-like, say Ay, I’ve a spoon, as Else was asking,
and knew by the way that he mouthed the spoon that he
came from the North, as she did herself. And faith !
so he did, like her ’twas from Echt, and he knew fine the
place where once she had bidden, Cairndhu in the Bar-
mekin’s lithe. And he fair buckled up and he lost his
shyness, Ay, then, you’re a Guthrie ? and she said that
she was, and he said that they minded him long up in
Echt, John Guthrie, her father, the trig way he farmed :
and Chris felt herself colour up with sheer pleasure, her
father could farm other folk off the earth !
Then she fell in a dream as she heard them talk, the
rooks were cawing up in the yews, and you thought how
they'd fringed your pattern of life—birds, and the waving
leafage of trees : peewits over the lands of Echt when you
were a bairn with your brother Will, and the spruce stood
dark in the little woods that climbed up the slopes to the
Barmekin bend; snipe sounding low on Blawearie loch
as you turned in unease by the side of Ewan, and listened
and heard the whisp of the beech out by the hedge in the
quiet of the night; and here now rooks and the yews
that stood to peer in the twisty rooms of the Manse. How
often would you know them, hear them and see them,
with what things in your heart, in what hours of the dark
and what hours of the day, in all the hours lying beyond
this hour when the sun stood high and the yew-trees
drowsed ?
But she shook herself and came out of her dream,
back to the table and the sun on the lawn, daft to go
prowling those copses of night where the sad things done
CIRRUS
59
were stored with the moon. Here was the sun, and here
was her son, Ewan, and Robert, the comrade of God,
and those folk of Segget she had yet to know, and all the
tomorrows that waited her here.
But that night she had slept in fits and in starts,
waking early in that strange, quiet room, by the side of
Robert, sleeping so sound. Then it was the notion had
suddenly arisen, to come up to the Kaimes, as here she
was now, watching the east grow pale in the dawn.
Pale and so pale : but now it was flushed, barred
sudden with red and corona’ed with red, as though they
were there, the folk who had died, and the sun came
washed from the sea of their blood, the million Christs
who had died in France, as once she had heard Robert
preach in a sermon. Then she shook her head and that
whimsy passed, and she thought of Robert—his dream
just a dream ? Was there a new time coming to the earth,
when nowhere a bairn would cry in the night, or a woman
go bowed as her mother had done, or a man turn into a
tormented beast, as her father, or into a bullet-torn
corpse, as had Ewan ? A time when those folk down there
in Segget might be what Robert said all men might be,
companions with God on a terrible adventure ? Segget:
John Muir, Will Melvin, Else Queen ; the folk of the
grisly rees of West Wynd—
Suddenly, far down and beyond the toun there came
a screech as the morning grew, a screech like an hungered
beast in pain. The hooters were blowing in the Segget
Mills.
II
CUMULUS
^ROSSING the steep of the brae in the dark, by the
^winding path from the Manse to the Kaimes, Chris
bent her head to the seep of the rain, the wet November
drizzle of Segget. Then she minded a wall of the Kaimes
still stood, and ran quick up the path to stand in its lee.
That gained, she stood and panted a while, six months
since she’d been up here in the Kaimes—only six
months, she could hardly believe it!
It felt like years—long and long years—since she'd
worked as a farmer’s wife in Kinraddie. Years since
she’d felt the beat of the rain in her face as she moiled
at work in the parks. How much had she gained, how
much had she lost ?—apart from her breath, she had
almost lost that!
She felt the wall and then leant against it, wrapped in
her ulster, looking at Segget, in its drowse of oil-lamps
under the rain. Safe anyhow to go home this time. . . .
And she smiled as she minded last time she had climbed
to the Kaimes, and Segget had seen her go home—by the
tale they told all Segget had seen her and stared astounded,
a scandalled amaze 
But indeed, it was only Ag Moultrie that morning, as
ill-luck would have it, who saw her go home. She had
gone out early to the school to redd up, she went heavy
with sleep and her great mouth a-agant, as you well might
believe, though she didn’t tell that. Folk knew her fine,
all the Moultries forbye, Rob Moultrie had once been the
saddler of Segget, his shop lay down by the edge of the
Square. And as coarse an old brute as you’d meet, was
6o
CUMULUS 61
Rob Moultrie, though a seventy years old and nearing
his grave. Twas only a saddler s shop in name now,
the trade had clean gone this many a year. There was
still a britchen or so in the shop, and a fine bit bridle
Rob Moultrie had made in the days long syne when he
still would work. But his trade had gone and his sweirty
had come, he was never a popular man in the toun ;
he couldn’t abide the sight of the gentry, or the smell of
the creatures either, he said, and that was why he was
Radical still. And if he went on a dander somewhere,
along the road and he’d hear a car, toot-tooting behind
him, would he get off the road ? Not him, he’d walk
on bang in the middle, dare any damn motorist try run
him down. So sometimes he’d come back to Segget
from a walk, step-stepping cannily along the bit road, with
a two-three motorists hard at his heels, toot-tooting
like mad, and the shovers red-faced. Mrs. Moultrie
would be looking from the window and see, and cry as he
came, Losh, Rob, you ll be killed ! And he’d stop and
glower at her with his pocked old face, and his eyes like
the twinkling red eyes of a weasel, and sneer, the old
creature, shameful to hear. Ay, that would be fine—no
doubt you’d get up to your old bit capers. Get out of
my way! And he’d lift his stick, maybe more than do
that, syne hirple over to his armchair, and sit there and
stare in the heart of the fire or turn to the reading of his
old bit Bible.
For he’d never forgiven Jess Moultrie the fact that
more than a forty years before, when he’d met her and
married her, she’d been with a bairn. She told how it
was before she would marry, and he’d glowered at her
dour. More fool that I am. But I’m willing to take
you and your shame as well. And he took her, and
the bairn was born, young Ag, no others came and
62
CLOUD HOWE
maybe that was why he still kept up the sneer at his
wife. But she would say nothing, she was patient and
bowed, little, with a face like a brown, still pool; and
she’d say not a word, getting on with her work, making
ready the supper for Ag when she came. She cleaned
out the school and the hall and such places, did Ag, and
in winter made the school broth, as nasty a schlorich
as ever you’d taste. She looked like a horse ta’en out
of a plough, and her voice was a neigh like a horse’s as
well, and she’d try to stand up for her mother with old
Rob. Don’t speak that way to my mother! she would
cry, and he’d look at her dour, Ay, ay, no doubt she’s
precious in your sight. You had only one mother,
though three or four fathers ; and Ag more than likely
would start to greet then, she wasn’t a match for the
thrawn old brute, though a good enough one for most
other folk. And faith ! she’d a tongue for news that was
awful. Ake Ogilvie called her the Segget Dispatch, she
knew everything that happened in Segget, and a lot that
didn’t, but she liked best to tell of births and funerals and
such-like things ; and how the daughter of this or that
corpse no sooner looked on the dead than broke down—
and fair roared and grat when she saw him there. So folk
called her the Roarer and Greeter for short.
Well, then, it was her, to get on with the tale, as she
blinked her way in that morning in May, saw a woman
come down the hill from the Kaimes, and stopped dumb-
foundered : Who could she be ?
Ag was real shocked, for the Kaimes was the place
where spinners and tinks of that kind would go, of a Sab¬
bath evening, and lie on the grass and giggle and smoke
and do worse than that—Ay, things that would leave
them smoking in hell, as the old minister said that they
would. So no decent folk went up there at night, this
CUMULUS
63
creature of a woman was surely a tink. And Ag gave a
sniff, but was curious forbye, and crept canny along in
the lithe of the dyke that hemmed in the lassies’ play¬
ground from the lads’. So she waited there till the woman
went by, hurrying, bare-headed, with a stride and a swing
and a country-like gait. And then Ag Moultrie near
fainted with joy, though she didn’t tell you that when
she told you the story, she saw that the woman was Mrs
Colquohoun, the wife of the new minister of Segget.
Well, afore the day was well started all Segget had
heard that the wife of the new minister had been seen by
Ag Moultrie up on the Kaimes, she’d been out all night
with a spinner up there, Ag had seen them cuddling and
sossing in the grass. Folk said, By God, she’s wasted
no time; and who would the spinner have been, would
you say ? Old Leslie heard the story in the smiddy
and he said the thing was Infernal, just. Now, he minded
when he was a loon up in Garvock—And the sweat
dripped off him, pointing a coulter, and he habbered from
nine until loosening-time, near, some story about some
minister he’d known; but wherever that was and why
it had been, and what the hell happened, if anything ever
had, you couldn’t make head nor tail if you listened ;
and you only did that if you couldn’t get away. Old
Leslie was maybe a fair good smith : he was sure the
biggest old claik in Segget. He’d blether from the mo¬
ment you entered his smiddy, he’d ask how the wife and
the bairns all were, and your brother Jock that was down
in Dundon, and your sister Jean that was in a sore way,
and your father that was down with the colic or the like,
and your grandfather, dead this last fifty years. And syne
he d start on your cousins, how they were, and your uncles
and aunts and their stirks and their stots, their maids and
all that were in their gates: till your hair would be grey
CLOUD HOWE
64
and your head fair dizzy at the thought you’d so many rela¬
tions at all. And his face would sweat like a dripping tap
as he hammered at the iron and habbered at you and then
he’d start some story of the things he’d done or seen or
smelt when a loon up in Garvock, and the day would draw
in, the night would come on, and the stars come out, he’d
have shod all your horses and set all the coulters and you
near were dead for lack of some meat; but that damned
story wouldn’t have finished, it would be going on still
with no sign of an end, he’d start it the next time he saw
you or heard you, though you were at the far side of a
ten-acre field—unless you took to your heels and ran.
Well, about the only soul that couldn’t do that was
his son, Sim lyeslie, the policeman of Segget. He had
joined the police and had been sent back to Segget, and
still bade with his father, he was used to the blether :
and folk said if he listened with a lot of care, for a twenty
years or so at a stretch, he at least might find out what
really had happened that time when his father was a loon
up on Garvock. Folk called him Feet, Sim Feslie the
bobby, he’d feet so big he could hardly coup, there was
once he was shoeing a horse in the smiddy, an ill-natured
brute from the Meiklebogs ; and the creature lashed out
at him fair and square and caught him such a clour
on the chest as would fair have flattened any ordinary
man. But young Sim Feslie just rocked a wee bit, his
feet had fair a sure grip on Scotland.
Well, Feet heard the story of Mrs Colquohoun, from
his father, as the two of them sat at dinner. And he
kittled up rare, there was something in this, and maybe
a chance of promotion at last. So he went and got hold
of Ag Moultrie, the sumph, and pulled out his notebook
with his meikle red fingers, and asked was she sure 'twas
the minister’s wife ? And Ag said Ay, and Feet made
CUMULUS
65
a bit note; and then he seemed stuck, and he said;
You're sure? And Ag said Ay, I’m as sure as
death. Feet made another note, and scratched at his
head, and swayed a bit in his meikle black boots. It
fair was her ? and Ag said Ay ; and by then it seemed
just about dawning on Feet it really was her and nobody
else.
But Ag was real vexed, as she told to folk, she hadn’t
wanted to miscall a soul, God knows I’m not a body to
claik ; and she said when she’d finished with Feet and
his questions she went home and sat down and just
Roared and Grat, so sorry she was for the new minister.
And she’d tell you some more how the woman had looked,
her face red-flushed, with a springy walk ; and if you were
married you well could guess why all of that was—damn’t,
man, ’twas fairly a tasty bit news !
That night Feet went up and prowled round the Manse,
with his bull’s-eye held in his hand and his feet like the
clopping of a Clydesdale heard on the ground. He didn’t
know very well what he was there for, or what he would
say if Mrs Colquohoun saw him ; but he was awful keen
on promotion. And he said he was fine at detective-work,
like, and if honest merit were given its reward they’d
make him a real detective ere long. And Ake Ogilvie
said in his tink-like way A defective, you mean ? God, ay
and certificated!
Well, Feet had prowled round to the back of the
Manse, and had stopped to give his head a bit scratch,
when sudden the window above him opened and afore
he could move there came a bit splash and a pailful of
water was slung down his back. He spluttered and boas¬
ted and his lamp went out, when he came to himself he
was shaking and shivering, but the Manse was silent and
still as the grave. He thought for a while of arresting
E
66
CLOUD HOWE
the lot—ay, he would in the morning, by God ; and
turned and went home, running home stretches to
change his bit sark, in case he might catch a cold from
his wetting.
And, would you believe it, next day as he sat in his
office writing up his reports, his mother said, Here’s a
woman to see you. And Feet looked up and he knew the
quean, Else Queen, the maid at the Manse it was ; 'twas
said she’d been brought up as a lassie in Segget, though
her father had moved to Fordoun since then, now she
was fair a great brute of a woman, with red eyes and hair,
and cheeks of like tint. And she said, Are you Feet?
and Feet reddened a bit. I’m Simon Leslie the police¬
man of Segget. Well, I’m the person that half-dr owned
you last night; and I’ve come to tell you when you want
the same, just prowl round the Manse at such a like
hour.
And she didn’t stop only at Feet then, either. She
made for Ag Moultrie and told her the same, she would
have her sacked from her job at the school; and Ag
broke down and just Roared and Grat, she said she’d
never said an ill word of any, but what was the minister’s
wife doing on the Kaimes ? Looking at the hills and the
sunrise, you fool. Did you never hear yet of folk that did
that ? And Ag said she hadn’t; and who ever had ? Folk
shook their heads when they heard that tale, if the
woman at the Manse wasn’t fair just a bitch, damn’t !
you could only suppose she was daft.
Dite Peat heard the story and fair mocked at Feet.
What, you that were once in the barracks ? he said,
and lived in Dundon, and can’t manage a woman ?
CUMULUS
67
And he told a story, 'twas down in the Arms, about how
once when he was living in lyondon, he’d come there, he
said, on a leave from the Front, he hired a bit lodging
near Waterloo. And old Feslie that was standing by
said Eh? Would that be the place the battle was at? and
Dite Peat said, Oh, away to hell, a coarse way to speak to an
old bit man. Well, Dite had put up in his London room,
he saw the landlady was a gey bit quean, fair young and
fair sonsy, her man at the Front. And he tried this way and
that to get round her, keen for a woman but not a damn fool
like some that came back on leave from the Front, they’d
spend all their silver on whores, but not Dite, he wanted a
gratis cuddle and squeeze. Well, he waited and waited
about for a bit, and half-thought of getting the woman
at night, she was only English and they’re tinks by nature,
it wasn’t as though she was decent and Scotch. But she
locked up her door and went early to bed till there came
one night that he heard her scraich, and he louped from
his bed and he went to the door, and there she was stand¬
ing down in the hall, in her nightgown, the tink, and white
as a sheet. She’d a telegram held in her hands as she
stood, and was gowking and gobbling at the thing like a
cow, choked on the shaws of a Mearns swede. And Dite
called down What's wrong with you, then ? and she
laughed and laughed as she looked up at him, she was
young, with a face like a bairn, a fool, white, with no guts,
like the English queans. And she said Oh, it's just
that my husband’s dead, and laughed and laughed,
and Dite licked his lips, it fair was a chance, he saw it
and took it. Well, she wasn’t so bad, but far over-thin ;
and God ! she was fair a scunner with her laughing, every
now and then she would laugh like an idiot, he supposed
that the English did that in their pleasure. So he took
her a clour or so in the lug, to learn her manners, and
68 CLOUD HOWE
that quietened her down. Oh ay, she was tasty enough
in her way.
Some folk in the Arms asked what happened next,
did he bide there long ? Dite said Damn the fears. I
nipped out next morning, afore she awoke. She might
have tried on to get me to marry her. And he went on
to tell what tinks were the English, they’d rob right and
left if you gave them the chance. He gave them damn
few, but once out in France 
That fair was a sickener, you put down your glass,
or finished the dram and rose up and went out; and Will
Melvin looked mad as he well could look, Dite sitting and
telling a story like that, sickening customers away from
their drinks. But you couldn’t do much with a billy
like Dite, a dangerous devil when he got in a rage. He
looked a tink though he kept a shop, he and his brother,
wee Peter the tailor, hadn’t spoken for years, though
they lived next door. His father had lived with
Dite till he died, Dite saw to that dying, some said
helped it on. The old man had been one of the road-
mender childes, he worked with old Smithie and that fool
John Muir, he’d come back with his wages at the end of
the week and maybe he’d have spent a shilling on to¬
bacco. And soon’s he saw that Dite Peat would fly
up and take him a belt in the face, most like, and send
him to bed without any meat; and as he lay dying the
old man cried to see his other son, wee Peter, the tailor.
But Dite snapped Be quiet, damn you and your wants.
You ll see him in hell soon enough with yourself. That
was hardly the way to speak to your father, him dying
and all; and some folk stopped then going to his shop,
spinners and the like, they said Dite should be shot ;
and collected below his windows one night and spoke of
taking him out for a belting. But Feet, the policeman,
CUMULUS
69
came up and cried Now, you’ll need to be moving if you're
standing about here; and the spinners forgot the thing
they’d come on, and took to tormenting the bobby
instead, they carried him down the Drumlithie road and
took off his breeks and filled him with whisky; and left
the poor childe lying drunk in the ditch ; and went back
and fairly raised hell in the Arms, the Blaster and Blas¬
phemer near scraiched herself hoarse, the spinners had
new got a rise in their pay.
Ah well, that was how Dite Peat had escaped, spinners
and their like wouldn’t trade with him now, though most
other folk weren’t foolish as that. You went on as before
and waited the time when he and Ake Ogilvie would
yet get to grips, Ake hated Dite Peat as a dog hates
a rat.
Chris found it took nearly a fortnight to settle, the
whole of the Manse wanted scrubbing and cleaning, she
and Else Queen were at it all hours, Robert laughed and
locked himself in his room. But he came out to help
rig the curtains on rods, both he and Else were handy
and tall, they spent the most of one long afternoon
tacked up to the walls like flies in glue; and Chris
handed up rods and curtains and pictures, and this
and that, and hammers and nails; and Else and
Robert would cling to the walls, by their eyebrows some¬
times, or so it would seem, and push and tug and hammer
and pant. Else was willing and strong and enjoyed it,
she’d poise on the edge of a mantel and cry Will that
do, Mem ? and near twist her neck from her shoulders
to catch a look at some picture or other. Chris would cry
Mind! and Else : Och, I’m fine! and nearly capsize
;o CLOUD HOWE
from her ledge, and young Ewan, watching below, give
a yell of delight.
But at last all things were trig and set neat. That
evening, with Ewan bathed and to bed, Chris found Else
yawning wide as a door, and sent her off to her bed as well.
Chris felt she was almost too tired to rest as she sat in a
chair in Robert’s room ; and Robert knew and came and
made love; and that was nice, and she felt a lot better.
In the quiet and hush of the evening below you could see
the touns drift blue with their smoke, as though it was
they that moved, not the smoke. Robert sat in his shirt¬
sleeves, smoking his pipe, planning his campaign to
conquer Segget, as Chris supposed, but she closed her
eyes. In a minute she’d get up and go to her bed.
But Robert jumped up sudden and picked up his coat.
I know ! Let’s go and see Segget at night.
Chris thought If it wasn’t that I am in love—Goodness,
how far I could tell him to go ! But she said not a word
of that, but went down, and he groped in the dark and
found her coat, and she his, and next they were out on
the shingle, it crunch-crunched under the tread of their
feet, the moon had come and was sailing a sky, lilac, so
bright that the Manse stood clear as they turned and
looked back, the yews etched in ink, beyond them the
kirk that hadn’t a steeple, set round with its row upon
row of quiet graves, the withered grass kindled afresh
to green, in long, shadowy tufts that whispered like
ghosts. An owlet hooted up on the hill and through the
quiet of the night round about there came a thing like a
murmur unended, unbegun, continuous, the hum of the
touns—and that was queer, most folk were in bed !
Chris thought a thought and put it from her mind—an
awful woman to have wedded a minister!
Then she slipped her arm in Robert’s, beside him,
CUMULUS
71
Segget stood splashed in the light of the moon like a
hiddle of houses a bairn would build. Their feet were
quiet on the unpaved street, they smelt the reek of the
burning wood, and Robert said sudden, his voice not a
whisper, It’s like walking a town of the dead, forgotten,
a ruined place in the light of the moon. Can you think that
folk’ll do that sometime, far off some night in the times to be,
maybe a lad and his lass, as we are, and wonder about
Segget and the things they did and said and believed in those
little houses ? And the moon the same and the hills to watch.
Chris thought it most likely they would find these
enough, the hills and the moon, and not bother about
Segget, that lad and that lass in the times to be. So
they passed quiet down through the wind of East Wynd,
over to the right the hiddling of lanes where the spinners
bade, nearer the road and black in the moon the school
and the schoolhouse set round with dykes. They passed
a joiner’s shop to the left, Chris peered at the name and
saw ALEC OGIEVIE, then came to a place with shops all
around, a grocer’s shop with D. PEAT on the sill, fat
lettering over a shoemaker's—HOGG; and a narrow little
front that barked PETER PEAT. Beyond, to the right, a
lane wound down to the post-office kept by Macdougall
Brown, so Chris had been told, she hadn’t been there.
East Wynd to the left was now bare of houses, beyond
its dyke was the garden of Grant. And once they heard
through the night a crying, some bairn frightened or waked
in the dark, and a voice that called it back to its sleep,
all in a drowsy hush through the night. There’s honey¬
suckle somewhere, said Chris, and stopped to smell, as
they came to the Square, over here by the saddler’s shop.
But Robert was giving no heed to smells, he had
stopped and he said My God, what a slummock! And
Chris saw the thing that had now ta’en his eyes, the
CLOUD HOWE
72
War Memorial of Segget toun, an angel set on a block of
stone, decent and sonsy in its stone night-gown, goggling
genteel away from the Arms, as though it wouldn’t, for any
sum you named, ever condescend to believe there were folk
that took a nip to keep out the chill. . . . Chris thought
it was fine, a pretty young lass. But then as she looked
at it there came doubts, it stood there in memory of men
who had died, folk of this Segget but much the same still,
she supposed, as the folk she had known in Kinraddie,
folk who had slept and waked and had sworn, and had
lain with women and had lain with pain, and walked in
the whistle of the storms from the Mounth, and been glad,
been mad, and done dark, mad things, been bitter for
failure, and tender and kind, with the kindness deep
in the dour Scots blood. Folk of her own, those folk
who had died, out in the dark, strange places of earth,
and they set up THIS to commemorate THEM—this, this
quean like a constipated calf !
Robert said May God forgive them this horror ! And
look at the star on its pantomime wand. But still it’s a
star ; not a bundle of grapes. Folk’ll think it a joke when
we’ve altered things, this trumpery flummery they put up in
stone!
His dream again he could alter things here ! But
what kind of change, Robert, what can you do ? Things
go on the same as ever they were, folk neither are better nor
worse for the War. They gossip and claik and are good and
bad, and both together, mixed up and down. This League
of the willing folk of Segget—who’ll join it or know what you
want or you mean ?
He leaned by the angel, looked down at her, smiled,
cool and sure of his vision to-night. Chris, if ever
we’ve a child, you and I, and when it grows up it finds that
that’s true—what you’ve said—then I hope it’ll come here
CUMULUS
73
with Ewan, and a host of others of their own generation, and
smash this Memorial into smithereens for the way that we
failed them and left God out. Change ? It’s just that men
must change, or perish here in Segget, as all over the earth.
Necessity’s the drive, the policeman that’s coming to end
the squabbling stupidities of old 
Then he laughed. What, sleepy as that ? Let’s go
back.
He fair had plenty on his hands that summer, Feet,
the policeman, as the days wore to Autumn. First,
'twas the trouble in the roadman’s place, old Smithie
and the hay he nicked from coles and carted home
at night to his kye. His house stood side by side with
John Muir’s, both under the lee of the kirk and the Manse,
their back doors opened out on the land that stretched
east under the scowl of the hills to the lands that were
farmed by Meiklebogs. Muir kept no stock and he bought
his milk, but old Smith on the chap of dawn would be
out, up out of his bed and round to the byre, where his
cows and his two young calves were housed, none knew
where he bought the fodder to feed them ; and that wasn’t
surprising, he stole the damned lot.
He’d look this way and that, he’d a face like a tyke,
thin, and ill-made, with a bushy moustache; and then,
as swack as you like he would loup, canny and careful
in over a fence, and make up a birn of somebody’s hay ;
and be back and breaking his stones as before when the
next bit motor appeared on the road. Syne at night he
would load the lot on his byke and pedal canny without
any light, and nip up through Segget as the Arms bar
opened and folk had gone in for a bit of a nip, none out to
CLOUD HOWE
74
see; and syne he was home, and the cows, as hungry
as hawks, would low, old Smithie would give a bit low
as well, and stuff them with hay and pat at their shoulders,
daft-like, he near was crack about kye, he liked the breath
of the creatures, he said.
Folk said that the cows couldn’t be so particular,
else they’d fair get a scunner at his bit breath. For he
liked a dram and he took what he liked, he’d no more
than peek round the door of an evening (though the house
was his and all the gear in it) than his daughter would
cry Here’s the old devil home! and her bairns, the
bairns of Bruce the porter, would laugh and call him ill
names as they liked. And he’d smile and stand there
and mumble a while, though he wasn’t a fool in the
ordinary way ; and syne he’d go down to the Arms in a
rage and swear that before another night came he’d have
Bruce and his birn flung out of his doors, he was damned
if he’d stand their insultings longer. Well, damned he
was, for he kept them on, folk would once kittle up with
excitement when they heard old Smithie get wild and say
that, they’d ’gree with him solemn and say ’twas a shame
for a man of Segget to stand what he did; and they’d
follow him home when the Arms closed down and stand
by the door to hear the din. But all that they’d hear
would be Ellen his daughter, fat as a cow at the calving
time, cry Feuch, you old brute, and where have you been ?
And Smithie would just mumble and gang to his bed.
He’d another daughter as well as his Ellen, he’d
slaved to give her an education ; and faith ! so he’d done,
and made her a teacher. She lived in Dundon and never
came south. And the only thing Smithie said that he'd
gotten, for all his pains and his chaving for her, was one
cigarette : and that wouldn’t light.
Well, that Saturday afternoon in July, old Smithie
CUMULUS
75
was wearied with chapping at stones, and instead of steal¬
ing some hay outbye and rowing it home strapped over
his bike, he got on the bike and pedalled near home,
till he came to the new-coled hay of Meiklebogs. And old
Smithie got off and lighted his pipe and made on he’d got
off for nothing but that. There wasn’t a soul to be seen
round about, the park was hidden, and old Smithie was
quick, he nipped in over and pinched some hay, and was
back with the stuff strapped on to his bike—so quick
that you’d fair have thought it a wonder that his corduroy
trousers didn’t take fire. But no sooner was he gone
than Dalziel jumped up, he'd been hiding all the while
in the lee of a cole; and he ran to the close and got his
own bike, and followed old Smithie and shadowed him
home. Then he went down the toun and collected Feet,
and they came on old Smithie as he entered the byre,
the bundle of stolen hay in his hands.
And Feet cried out Mr Smith, I want you; and
old Smithie looked round and near dropped the birn.
Ay, do you so ? he quavered, and syne the old whiskered
creature fairly went daft, he threw the birn in Meiklebogs'
face. Take your damned stuff, I wouldn’t poison my
kye with such dirt!
Feet said, Well, I doubt this’ll be a case, but old
Smithie was dafter than ever by then. He said, Make
it two, and to hell with you both! and went striding
into his house as he hadn’t, striding that way, gone in
for years. His daughter, that sumph that was Mistress
Bruce, fair jumped as she heard the bang of the door,
she cried: You nasty old wretch, what’s the din ?
Old Smithie was fairly boiling by then, he said, Do you
know who you’re speaking to, Ellen? and she said, Ay,
fine, you disgrace to Segget; and at that old Smithie
had her over his knee, afore she could blink, she was
CLOUD HOWE
76
stunned with surprise. She gave a bit scraich and she
tried to wriggle, but she’d grown over fat and old Smithie
was strong. And damn’t! if he didn’t take down her bit
things and scone her so sore she grat like a bairn, her own
bairns made at old Smithie and kicked him, but he never
let on, just leathered his quean till his hand was sore, not
so sore as her dowp. That’s a lesson for you, you baf-
faced bitch, he said, and left her greeting on the floor,
and went down to the Arms, and near the first man that
he met there was Bruce, old Smithie by then like a fighting
cock.
Bruce was a dark and a sour-like childe, but he looked
near twice as sour in a minute when old Smithie took him
a crack in the jaw. What’s that for ? Bruce cried, and
Smithie said Lip, and came at him again, the daft-like
old tyke. Well, you couldn’t expect but that Bruce
would be raised, he was knocking Smithie all over
the bar when Mistress Melvin came tearing in. She
cried in her thin Aberdeen, What’s this ? Stop your
Blasting and Blaspheming in here. Bruce said, 1 haven’t
sworn a damn word, she said That’s enough, take your tink
fights out, sossing up the place with blood and the like. If
you’ve any quarrel to settle with your relations, go out and
settle it where folk can’t see.
And Bruce said Right; and took old Smithie out,
and gey near settled him entire, you would say. It just
showed you what happened to a billy that stole, there’s
a difference between nicking a thing here and there, and
being found out and made look a fair fool.
And next Sabbath MacDougall Brown, the postmaster,
came down to the Square and preached on stealing,
CUMULUS 77
right godly-like, and you'd never have thought that
him and his wife stayed up of a night sanding the sugar
and watering the paraffin—or so folk said, but they
tell such lies. He was maybe a fifty years old, Mac-
Dougall, a singer as well as a preacher, i’faith ! though
some said his voice was the kind of a thing better suited
to slicing a cheese. During the War he had fair been a
patriot, he hadn’t fought, but losh I how he’d sung ! In
the first bit concert held in the War he sang Tipperary
to the Segget folk, with his face all shining like a ham on
the fry, and he sang it right well till he got to the bit
where the song has to say that his heart’s right there.
And faith, MacDougall got things a bit mixed, he clapped
down his hand the wrong side of his wame; and Ake
Ogilvie that sat in the front of the hall gave a coarse
snicker and syne everybody laughed ; and MacDougall
had never forgiven Ake that. But he got on well with his
post-office place, Johnnie his son was a bit of a fool and
MacDougall sent him to take round the letters, it cost
him little with a son that was daft and MacDougall kept
the cash for himself. Forbye young Jock he’d two
daughters as well, the eldest, Cis, was bonny and trig,
with a grave, douce face, she went to the College but she
wasn’t proud, a fine bit quean, and all Segget liked her.
Well, MacDougall had a special religion of his own,
he wasn t Old Kirk and he wasn t of the Frees, he wasn’t
even an Episcopalian, but Salvation Army, or as near
as damn it. He went on a Sabbath morn to the Square
and preached there under the lee of the angel, that the
road to heaven was the way he said. He'd made two-
three converts in his years in Segget, they’d stand up and
say what the Ford had done, how before they’d met Him
they were lost, ruined souls: but now God had made
them into new men. And faith ! you would think, if
78 CLOUD HOWE
that was the case, the ford's handiwork was failing,
like everything else.
Well, that Sunday after the row at Smithie’s, he was
there at his stance where the angel stood, MacDougall
himself with his flat, bald head, and beside him his mis¬
tress, a meikle great sumph, she came from the south and
she mouthed her words broad as an elephant’s behind,
said Ake Ogilvie. She thought little of Cis, that was
clever and bonny, but a lot of her youngest, the quean
called Mabel—by all but her mother, she called her May-
bull. Well, they both were there, and the daftie Jock,
gleying and slavering up at the angel, and a two-three
more, the gardener Grant and Newlands the stationy,
them and their wives ; with the angel above with her
night-gown drawn back, right handy-like, in case it might
rap against the bald pow of MacDougall Brown. Mistress
Brown opened up the harmonica they’d brought, it groaned
and spluttered and gave a bit hoast, syne they started
the singing of their unco hymns, Newlands burring away
in his boots and MacDougall slicing the words like cheese.
Syne MacDougall started to preach about stealing,
with a verse from Leviticus for the text, though the case
of old Smithie had supplied the cause ; and they started
singing another bit hymn, all about being washed in the
Blood of the Lamb, the Lamb being Jesus Christ, said
MacDougall, he was awful fond of hymns full of blood,
though he’d turned as white as a sheet the time Dite
Peat had come over to kill his pig, and asked MacDougall
to hold the beast down.
Well, they were getting on fine and bloody, and having
fairly a splash in the gore, when MacDougall noticed
there was something wrong, the words all to hell, he
couldn’t make it out. Syne his mistress noticed and
screwed round her head, and she said What is’t? and
CUMULUS 79
saw MacDougall, red as rhubarb, he’d stopped his singing.
The rest of them had to do the same, for a drove of the
spinners had come in about, with that tink Jock Cronin
at their head, as usual, they were singing up fast and fair
drowning MacDougall, a coarse-like mocking at Mac-
Dougall’s hymn ?
WHITER than—the whitewash on the wall!
WHITER than—the whitewash on the wall!
Oh—WASH me in the water
Where you washed your dirty daughter.
And I shall be whiter than the whitewash on the wall 1
MacDougall waited until they had stopped, then he
cried to Cronin Have you fio vcspoct—you, John Cyonin—
for the Lord s Day at all ? And the tink said, Damn the
bit; nor have you. And MacDougall nearly burst to
hear that, he'd lived by the Bible all his life. And John
Cronin said You believe all that s in it ? and MacDougall
Brown said. Ay, I have faith. But Cronin had fairly got
him trapped now, he said Well, it says in the Bible that if
you’ve got faith you can move a mountain. That’ll be proof.
Move back the Mounth there in front of our eyes !
The spinners with him, a lot of tink brutes, all brayed
up then. Ay, come on, MacDougall! Move a mountain
—you’re used to move sand! MacDougall habbered
redder than ever, then he cried We’ll now sing Rock of
Ages. Jock Cronin cried Where’s the rock of your
faith? and as soon as MacDougall and his converts
began the spinners sang up their song as before, about
being whiter than the whitewash on the wall, and about
MacDougall’s dirty daughter; and such a noise was
never heard before in the Sabbath Square of Segget.
Old Teslie came by and he heard the noise, and he
knew MacDougall and was right sorry for him. But
8o CLOVD HOWE
when he came over and tried to interfere, Jock Cronin
cried Chvist, hcve’s Anauicis! And old Leslie walked
away, fair in a rage, and went up to the Manse to com¬
plain about them.
He arrived there just after the morning service, the
minister new back, and dinner-time done. And old
Leslie said ’twas Infernal, just, the way that they treated
a man nowadays. In his young days if a loon like that
Cronin had miscalled a man he d have been ta en out
and libbed. Ay, he minded when he was a loon up in
Garvock—
But the new minister rose up and said Well, I’ll
hear that again, I’ve no time to waste, with a look as
black as though he could kill you. And afore old Leslie
knew well what had happened he was out on the doorstep
and heard the door bang.
Chris heard the door bang and she saw old Leslie,
he was turning slow to go down the walk, crunching the
shingle under his feet; and suddenly you saw the old
man that he was, his back crooked into that queer-like
shape, cruel and a shame to get rid of him so, suddenly
you wanted to weep, but you didn’t, biting your lips as
you watched him go. Only a tiring old fool, as you
knew, and he’d come on Robert in that mad, black mood.
And yet—
Things like that caught you again and again, with a
tightening heart, when you had no thought—Robert in
weariness half an hour back, his head in his hands, as
he said What’s the use? Robert’s head as he prayed
to that God of his that you couldn’t believe in, though
you hid that away, what need to hint Robert with some-
CUMULUS
81
thing that never he or you could alter though you lived
forever ? So, in the strangest of moments it would come,
in a flame and a flash, a glimpse into depths that wrung
your heart, you’d see the body of Else as she bent, a
curve of pleasure that would curve yet in pain. You’d
see—^frightening the things if you cared to think in the
dark of the night in the quiet of Segget, the hush of the
yews out there on the lawn—the hopeless folly of all
striving, all hope. Sudden, in a Segget shop, maybe,
you’d glimpse a face like your father’s, near, alive and
keen with its bearded lips, and you’d think of your father,
long ago dead, bones rotted from flesh in Kinraddie
kirkyard—what had life availed him and all his long
years when he hoped for this and he strove for that ?
He died a coarse farmer in a little coarse house, hid in
the earth and forgot by men, as forgot as your pains and
your tears by God, that God that you knew could never
exist. . . .
Only with Ewan you’d never these glimpses into the
shifting sands of life, bairn though he was there was
something within him hard and shining and unbreaking
as rock, something like a sliver of granite within him.
Strange that his body had once come from yours in the
days when you were a quean unthinking, so close to the
earth and its smell and its feel that nearly he came from
the earth itself !
From that we all came, you had heard Robert say,
but wilder and stranger you knew it by far, from the
earth’s beginning you yourself had been here, a blowing
of motes in the world’s prime, earth, roots and the wings
of an insect long syne in the days when the dragons still
ranged the world—every atom here in your body now,
that was here, that was you, that beat in your heart,
that shaped your body to whiteness and strength, the
82
CLOUD HOWE
speed of your legs and the love of your breasts when
you turned to the kiss of your Robert at night—these
had been there, there was nothing but a change, in a
form, the stroke and the beat of a song.
And you thought how long, long ago with Will, your
brother, that time he came home from France, before
he went back and was killed in France you’d
said that the Scots were never religious, had never
BEFIEVED as other folks did; and that was fell true, and
not only for you, MacDougall that brayed by the angel
in the square, the folk that came to the kirk on a Sunday,
Robert himself—even Robert himself! There was
something lacking or something added, something that
was bred in your bones in this land—oh, Something :
maybe that Something was GOD—that made folk take
with a smile and a gley the tales of the gods and the
heavens and the hells, the afterlives and the lives before,
heaven on earth and the chances of change, the hope
and belief in salvation for men—as a fairy-tale in a play
that they’d play, but they knew the whole time they
were only players, no Scots bodies died but they knew that
fine, deep and real in their hearts they knew that here
they faced up to the READ at last, neither heaven nor hell
but the earth that was red, the cling of the clay where
you’d alter and turn, back to the earth and the times to
be, to a spraying of motes on a raging wind when the
Howe was happed in its winter storms, to a spray of
dust as some childe went by with his plough and his
horse in a morning in Spring, to the peck and tweet of
the birds in the trees, to trees themselves in a burgeoning
Spring. You knew, and you knew that they knew—
even Robert, holding to God in his blackest hour, this
God he believed was the father of men, pitiful, He was
Pity and a Friend, helpless even in a way as men, but
CUMULUS 83
Kind and Hero, and He’d conquer yet with all the legions
of hell to battle.
So Robert believed : but now, as you heard his feet
coming down the stairs in haste, out of his mood and
happy again, you knew that he knew he followed a
dream, with the black mood REAL,, and his hopes
but mists.
Chris remembered that dream of her own—she’d
been daft! she thought as she fled about next week’s
work. There was jam to make and she thought it fun,
and so did Else, they’d boil pot on pot and fill all the
jars, and forget about dinner. And Robert would come
sweating in from the garden and cry Losh, Christine,
where have you been ? I thought you promised to come out
and help. What’s wrong—nothing wrong with you, is there,
my dear ? Chris would say Only hunger, and he’d say
Not love ? and the two would be fools for a moment till
they heard the stamp of Else bringing in the tray. Syne
they’d each slip into a chair and look solemn ; but once
Else caught them and said to the minister Faith, I
don’t wonder! and looked at Chris; and Chris thought
that the nicest thing ever looked about her.
Ewan ran wild, Chris seldom saw him all the length
of the summer days, he was out in Segget, exploring
the streets, Chris at first had been feared for him—that
he’d fall in front of a horse, or a car, or one of the
buses that went by to Dundon. She tried to tell him to
be careful, then stopped, he'd to take his chances with
the rest of the world.
On the Saturday she and Robert looked up from
their work in the garden, and stood and watched Ewan,
CLOUD HOWE
84
hands in his pockets, no cap on his head, go sauntering
out through the gates of the Manse, his black hair almost
blue in the sun, and turn by the Meiklebogs, going to
the Kaimes, Chris wondered what he could want up
there ?
Robert said He’s seeking the High Places already,
and laughed, and went on with his digging, Chris the
same, sweet and forgotten the smell of the earth, you
thrust with your spade, the full throw of your body, so,
and the drill built up as you dug. Then the rooks came
cawing and wheeling in by, and they both looked up
from Segget to the Mounth, rain drumming upon it far
in the heuchs, cattle, tail-switching, dots on the heath.
Chris asked what the clouds were, up there by Trusta,
they piled up dome on dome in the sky, like the roofs of
a city in the land of cloud. Robert said Cumulus: just
summer rain ; and a minute later—Look, here it comes !
Chris saw it come wheeling like a flying of rooks,
dipping and pelting down from the heights, she looked
left and saw it through a smother of smoke, the smoke
stilled for a minute as it waited the rain, all Segget
turning to look at the rain. Then Robert was running
and Chris ran as well, under the shelter of the pattering
yews. There they stood and panted and watched the
water, whirling in and over the drills, the potato-shaws
a-bend in the pelt, the patter like hail and then like a
shoom, like the sea on a morning heard from Kinraddie,
the empty garden blind with rain. And then it was gone
and the sun bright out, and Chris heard, far, clear,
as though it never had stopped, a snipe that was sounding
up in the hills.
By noon they saw a drooked figure approaching.
Chris heard Else cry Are you soaked ! and Ewan answer
1 was ; but I dried, he’d some thing in his hand. Turn-
CUMULUS 85
ing it over he came up to Robert. Look, I found this up
on the Kdimes.
Chris stopped as well to look at the thing, the three
of them stood in the bright, wet weather, Robert turning
the implement over in his hands, it was rusted and
broken, the blade of a spear. Did they use it for
ploughing ? Ewan wanted to know, and Robert said
No, they used it for killing, it’s a spear, Ewan man, from the
daft old days.
Then Else came crying them in for their dinner, and
in they all went, as hungry as hawks. Ewan wanted to
know a lot more about spears, 'twas a wonder he managed
to ask all he did, him eating as well, but he managed
both fine ; he’d a question-mark for a brain, Robert
said !
But the most of his questions he kept until night,
when Chris bathed him and took him up to his room.
Why did the stairs wind ? Why weren’t they straight ?
Would it be long till he was a man ? Where was Christ
now, and had Robert met Him ? That’s an owl, why
don’t owls fly in the day ? Why don’t you go to sleep when
I do ? Does Else like Dalziel of the Meiklehogs much ?
I like the smiddy of old Mr Leslie, he says that when he
was a loon up on Garvock he was never let gang anywhere
near a smiddy, his mammy would have smacked his dowp ;
didn’t she like it ? I saw Mr Hogg, he said ‘What’s your
name ?’ Why is there hair growing out of his nose ? Mrs
Hogg is fat, is she going to have a calf ? Does she take off
her clothes to have it, mother ? Mother, have you got a
navel like mine ? I’ll show you mine, look, there it is, isn’t
it funny ? I’m not sleepy, let’s sing a while. Why 
He was sleeping at last, in the evening quiet, the
Saturday quiet, the sun not yet gone. Chris went down
to the garden and took out a chair, and leaned back
86 CLOUT) HOWE
in it with her arms behind her, drowsy, watching the
gloaming come. Robert was up in his room with his
sermon, he wrote the thing out when he’d thought of
a theme—he would think of a theme of a sudden and
swear because he hadn’t a note-book at hand.
This afternoon it had come on him suddenly. I
know ! That spear-blade that Ewan brought—where the
devil has he hidden the thing ?
At half-past ten next morning, the Sunday, Chris
heard John Muir and looked out and saw him, his
shoulder a-skeugh in his Sunday suit, come stepping up
the path from the kirk. There’s a fair concourse of the folk
the day ; and how are you keeping then, mistress, yourself ?
Chris said she was fine, and he gleyed at her cheery.
Faith, so you look, you take well with Segget. Well, well,
if the minister hasn’t any orders I’ll taik away back and tug
at the bell.
Chris heard that bell in a minute or so beat and clang
through the quiet of the air. It was time that she
herself had got ready, she sought out her hymn-book and
hanky and Bible, and inspected Kwan, and straightened
his collar. Then the two of them hurried through the
blow of the garden, and out of the little door let in the
dyke, and into the little room back of the kirk. There
the sound of the bell was a deafening clamour. Chris
brushed Ewan down and went into the kirk, and put
Ewan into a pew and herself went ben to the pews where
the kirk choir sat, Mrs Geddes, the schoolmaster’s wife,
there already, smiling and oozing with eau-de-Cologne,
whispered right low and right holy-like, Morning. A
grand day, isn’t it, and such a pity so few have come up to
hear the Lord’s word.
Chris said, Oh, yes, and sat down beside her, and
looked round as the folk came stepping in, slow, Hairy
CUMULUS
87
Hogg, the Provost, and his mistress, Jean, they plumped
in their seats and Hairy looked round and closed his
eyes like a grass-filled cow. Then the wife and queans
of John Muir came in, Chris had heard a lot about them
from Else. Else said she could swear there were times when
Muir wished he’d stayed where he was when he fell in
that grave. His wife was one of the Milton lot that
farmed down under Glenbervie brae, she deaved John
Muir from morning till night to get out of his job, a
common bit roadman, and get on in the world and show
up her sister, Marget Ann, that had married a farmer.
But John Muir would say Damn’t, we all come to the same
—a hole and a stink and worms at the end and his mistress
would snap, Ay, maybe we do, but there's ways of getting
there decent and undecent. And as for stinking, sfieak of
yourself. And, real vexed, she’d clout Tooje one in the ear.
Tooje was her eldest, fairly a gawk, and then clout little
Ted when she started to greet because she saw her sister
Tooje greeting ; and John Muir would get up and say not
a word but go dig a grave as a bit of a change.
Then Chris saw Bruce, the porter, come in, with the
mark on his jaw where his goodfather hit him, then
Leslie, the smith, paiching and sweating, he dropped his
stick with an awful clatter. Then she saw Geddes, the
Segget headmaster, sitting grim in a pew midway, his
rimless specs set close on his nose, looking wearied to
death, as he was. Robert had thought to make him an
ally, but he’d said to Robert, Don’t be a fool, leave
the swine to stew in their juice—by swine he meant
his fellow-folk of Segget. He would stand hymn-singing
with his hand in his pocket, and rattle his keys and
yawn at the roof.
Then Moultrie came in, a slow tap-tap, with his stick
and his glare, and stopped half-way, his wife, Jess
88 CLOUD HOWE
Moultrie, waiting behind, her hand on his arm, gentle
and quiet. But when he moved on he shook her away.
Chris had heard the story of him and of her and how he
had never forgiven her her daughter, Ag, whom they
called the Roarer and Greeter.
Then others came in, all in a birn, Chris didn’t know
some and of some was uncertain, she thought that one
was Ake Ogilvie the joiner; and a trickle of folk from
the farms outbye, a spinner or so, but they were fell
few, and Dalziel of the Meiklebogs, red-faced and shy,
funny how one couldn’t abide him at all.
Syne John Muir finished with the ringing of the bell
and came with his feet splayed out as he walked, and
his shoulder agley, down the length of the kirk; and
went into the little room at the back. Robert
would be there and Muir help him to robe. Syne the
door opened and John Muir came out, and swayed and
gleyed cheerful up to the pulpit, and opened the door
and stood back and waited. And Robert went up, with
his hair fresh-brushed, and his eyes remote, and sat down
and prayed, silent, and all the kirk silent as well, for a
minute, while Chris looked down at her hands.
Then Robert stood up in the pulpit and said, in his
clear, strong voice that hadn’t a mumble, that called
God GOD and never just GAWD, We will begin the
worship of God by the singing of hymn one hundred and
forty, (Our shield and defender, the Ancient of Days,
pavilioned in splendour and girded with praise.' Hymn
one hundred and forty.
Folk rustled the leaves and here and there a man
glowered helpless while his wife found the page; and
the organ started with a moan and a grind and the kirk
was a rustle with Sunday braws, folk standing and
singing, all straight arid decent, except young Ewan,
CUMULUS 89
a-lean in his pew, and Geddes the Dominie, hand
in his pouch.
Chris liked this hymn near as much as did Robert,
most folk stuck fast when they came to pavilioned,
Robert's bass came in, Chris's tenor to help, Mrs Geddes’
contralto a wail at their heels. Then down they all sat;
Robert said Let us pray.
Chris wondered what Robert was to preach to-day,
his text was no clue when he gave it out. Folk shuffled
in their seats, and boasted genteel, and put up their
hankies to slip sweeties in their mouths; sometimes
Chris wished she could do the same, but she couldn’t very
well, the minister’s wife. And all Segget lifted its eyes
to Robert, he flung back the shoulders of his robe and
began, slow and careful, reading from his notes; and
then pushed them aside and began a sermon on that bit
of a spear young Ewan Tavendale had found on the
Kaimes. He’d brought the thing up in the pulpit with
him, folk stopped in their sucking of sweeties and gaped.
And Robert told of the uses the thing had once had,
in the hands of the carles of the ruined Kaimes ; and the
siege and the fighting and the man who had held it,
desperate at last in the burning lowe as King Kenneth’s
men came into the castle : and the blood that ran on
this ruined blade for things that the men of that time
believed would endure and be true till the world died ;
they thought they were fighting for things that would
last, they’d be classed as heroes and victors forever.
And now they were gone, they were not even names,
their lives and their deaths we knew to be foolish, a
clamour and babble on little things.
So might the men of the future look back, on this
Segget here, not of antique times, and see the life of our
mean-like streets an ape-like chatter as the dark came
CLOUD HOWE
90
down. For change, imperative, awaited the world, as
never before men could make it anew, men of good will
and a steadfast faith. All history had been no more
than the gabble of a horde of apes that was trapped in
a pit. Let us see that we clean our pit-comer in Segget,
there is hatred here, and fear, and malaise, the squabbling of
drunken louts in the streets, poor schools, worse houses—
we can alter all these, we can alter them NOW, not waiting
the world.
Robert had launched his campaign on Segget.
That sermon fair raised a speak in the toun, as soon’s
they got out Peter Peat said Faith ! they’d fair made
a mistake in getting this childe. You wanted a sermon
with some body in it, with the hell that awaited the folk
that were sinners, and lay on the Kaimes with their
unwed queans, and were slow in paying their bills to a
man. And what did he mean that Segget was foul ?
A clean little toun as ever there was, no, no, folk wanted
no changes here.
Old Feslie said 'Twas Infernal, just, he minded
when he was a loon up on Garvock—
Rob Moultrie said Well, what d'you expect? He's
gentry and dirt with his flat-patted hair ; and speaking to
God as though he were speaking to a man next door—and
a poor man at that. Ay, a Tory mucker, I well may warrant,
that would interfere in our houses and streets.
Will Melvin said Did you hear him preach against folk
taking a dram now and then ? And if he himself wasn’t
drunk then I’m daft, with his spears and his stars and his
apes and his stite.
That fairly got Hairy Hogg on the go. He cried
CUMULUS 91
Ay, what was all yon about apes ? And him glaring at
me like a thrawn cat. If he comes from the monkeys
himself let him say it, not sneer at folk of a better blood.
Folk took a bit snicker at that as they went—damn’t;
the minister had got one in there ! And afore night had
come the story had spread, the minister had said—you’d
as good as heard him—that Hairy Hogg was a monkey,
just.
Well, it made you laugh, though an ill-getted thing
to say that of old Hairy Hogg, the Provost. Faith, he
fair had a face like a monkey, the sutor of Segget and
its Provost forbye. He’d been Provost for years, not a
soul knew why, or how he’d ever got on for the job ; or
what was the council, or what it might do, apart from
listening to Hairy on Burns. For he claimed descent
from the Burneses, Hairy, and you’d have thought by
the way he spoke that Rabbie had rocked him to
sleep in his youth. His wife had once been at
Glenbervie House, a parlourmaid there, and awful
genteel; but a thirty years or so in old Hogg’s bed had
fair rubbed gentility off of the creature, she was common
and rough as a whin bush now, and would hoast out loud
in the kirk at prayers till the bairns all giggled and old
Hogg would say, loud enough for the pulpit to hear,
Wheest, wheest, redd your thrapple afore you come here.
She would make him regret that when they got home,
she’d little time for any palavers, her daughter Jean that
was nurse in London, or Alec her son that clerked down
in Edinburgh. Old Hogg he would blow like a windy
bellows about Jean and the things she’d done as a nurse.
For when the bit King took ill with a cough she was one
of the twenty-four nurses or so that went prancing round
the bit royalty’s bed, she carried a hanky, maybe, or
such-like. But to hear old Hairy speak on the business
CLOUD HOWE
92
you’d have thought she’d cured the King’s illness herself,
and been handed a two-three thousand for doing it.
Yet damn the penny but her wages she got, said Mrs.
Hogg; what could you expect ? The gentry were aye
as mean as is dirt and wasn’t the King a German forbye ?
Young Hogg was at home now, on holiday like, he
meant to attend the Segget Show. You had seen the
creature, wearing plus fours, east-windy, west-endy as
well as could be, forbye that he said he had joined the
Fascists. Folk asked what they were, and he said they
were fine. Conservatives, like, but a lot more than that;
they meant to make Britain the same as was Italy.
And old Hogg was real vexed, he cried But goodsakes !
You’re not going to leave your fine job, now, are you, and
take to the selling of ice-cream sliders ? And Alec said
Father, please don’t be silly ; and old Hogg fair flamed :
Give’s less of your lip. What could a man think but that
you were set, you and your breeks and your Fashers and all,
with being a damned ice-creamer yourself ?
Alec said nothing, just looked at his quean, and she
and him sniffed, she was real superior, a clerk like Alec
himself down in Edinburgh. He’d brought her up on
holiday to Segget, he called her his feeungsay, not just
his lass : she wouldn't be able to stay for the Show, and
if any soul thought that a cause for regret, he’d managed
to keep a good grip on himself. The first time they sat
down to tea in Hogg’s house Alec finished his cup
and looked round the table. Where’s the slop-basin,
mother ? he asked, to show his quean he was real
genteel. But his mother was wearied with him and his
airs. Slop it in your guts! she snapped as she rose,
and less of your Edinburgh touches here !
CUMULUS
93
Segget Show was held in a park that was loaned to
the toun by Dalziel of the Meiklebogs. He blushed and
looked shy, Oh ay, you can have it, when Hairy Hogg
went out there and asked him. 'Twas a great ley park
with a fringe of trees, the hills up above, the Kaimes
to the left; and early on the evening afore Segget
Show there were folk down there marking out this and
that, the lines of the tents and the marquees and such;
the circle where the bairns would run their bit races and
folk that thought they could throw the hammer could
stand and show what their muscles were made of. Folk
came to Segget Show far and about, from Fordoun and
Laurencekirk, Skite and Arbuthnott, early on the
Saturday Segget awoke to the rattle of farm carts up
through East Wynd, down past the Manse, and so to
the park, carts loaded with kail and cabbage and cakes,
and hens and ducks in their clean straw rees, and birns
of bannocks and scones for show, and the Lord knows
what that folk wouldn’t bring to try for a prize at the
Segget Show.
It was wet in the morning, folk looked out and
swore, but by noon the rain had cleared off and
soon, as the lines of folk held out from Segget, there
came a blistering waft of the heat, men loosed their
waistcoats, some took off their collars, and paid their
shillings and went in at the gates, all except a crowd of
the spinners. They suddenly appeared near the big
marquee, and Sim Leslie, him that the folk called Feet,
went over and looked at the bunch fell stern, he hadn’t
seen them pay at the gate. But he wasn’t keen on
starting a row, just looked at them stern : and the
spinners all laughed.
There fair was a crush as the judges began, Hairy
Hogg was one, the minister another, Dalziel of the
94 CLOUD HOWE
Meiklebogs the third. They started in on the hens to
begin with, a lot from MacDougall Brown's of the post-
office. MacDougall stood by, looking proud as dirt, he’d
won first prize for his Leghorns for years. So he fell
near fainted when he got a green ticket, the second prize
only and not the red first; and he said to whoever stood
by to listen that it was that minister had done this
to him, he was scared at the way that MacDougall drew
folk away from the Auld Kirk’s preaching and lies.
But faith ! his Leghorns looked none so well, he’d been
mixing lime in their feed and the birds had a look as
though they’d like to lie down and burst. But they
daren’t, with MacDougall’s eye upon them, they stood
and chirawked, as though kind of discouraged when they
saw that they’d ta’en only second prize.
By then the judges were through with the hens, the
ducks as well, a childe from a farm out near by Mondynes
had ta’en every prize there was to be took. Syne the
judges turned into the big marquee, to judge the baked
stuff and the flowers and the like. The minister was
speaking as they went inside ; Hairy Hogg turned round
to hear what he said; and prompt his elbow knocked
over the dish that was set with the cakes of Mistress
Melvin. The landlady of the Arms looked at the
Provost as though she’d like to bash in his head, with
a bottle, and syne carve him up slow with its splinters ;
but she daren’t say anything, seeing it was him, and
he’d given the Melvins the catering to do.
So the Blaster and Blasphemer just smiled, genteel,
and got down and picked up her cakes from the grass,
the minister got down and helped her ; and smiled ;
(what was the creature laughing about?) But Hairy
Hogg said, for the marquee to hear, I want stuff set
out plain and decent, not pushed right under my nose
CUMULUS 95
when I judge. He spoke as though he were the Lord
God Almighty, and the bannocks sinners on the Judge¬
ment Day.
They couldn’t make up their minds on the pancakes,
there were two fine lots, one rounded and cut, neat¬
shaped and fine as ever you saw, the other lot not of
much shape at all, but bonnily fired, and the judges
stopped, and each ate a bit, of the well-cut at first,
they weren’t so bad, but looked better than they tasted.
Syne the judges bit at the ill-cut cakes, they fairly
melted in a body’s mouth, the minister had eaten up one
in a minute, and Meiklebogs nodded, and Hairy Hogg
nodded, and the Reverend Mr Colquohoun gave a nod.
So old Jess Moultrie had the first prize, faith ! that was
fairly a whack in the face for that Mistress Geddes with
her fine-shaped cakes, and her blethering of lectures at
the W.R.I. She was daft on the W.R.I., Mrs Geddes,
she said that folk in a village like Segget wanted taking
out of themselves. So she and some others started the
thing, they’d collect at all hours, the women of the place,
and speak about baking and minding the bairns, and how
to make pipes from the legs of old sofas! and hear lantern-
lectures on Climbing the Alps. Well, damn’t! she’d have
to do a bit climbing herself ere she learned to bake cakes
like the Moultrie wife.
By three nearly everything there had been judged,
most of the folk had scattered by then, to see the games
in the ring that Ake Ogilvie had set up for nothing, the
previous night. And well so he might, damn seldom he
worked, you couldn't get near to his joiner’s shop for
the clutter of carts, half-made and half-broken, lying
about, and the half of a churn, a hen-coop or so
and God knows what—all left outside in the rain and
sun while Ogilvie sat on a bench inside and wrote his
96 CLOUD HOWE
ill bits of poetry and stite—he thought himself maybe
a second Robert Burns. He was broad and big, a fell
buirdly childe, and it seemed fell queer that a man like
that couldn’t settle down to the making of money, and
him the last joiner left in the place. But he’d tell you
instead some rhyme or another, coarse dirt that was
vulgar, not couthy and fine. He was jealous as hell of
the real folk that wrote, Annie S. Swan and that David
Lyall: you could read and enjoy every bit that they
wrote, it was fine, clean stuff, not sickening you, like,
with dirt about women having bairns and screaming or
old men dying in the hills at night or the fear of a sheep
as the butcher came. That was the stuff that Ake
Ogilvie wrote, and who wanted to know about stuff like
that ? You did a bit reading to get away from life.
Well, Ake Ogilvie, him and his poetry and dirt, there
he was, on the edge of the ring. And inside the ring,
round about the hammer, were a pickle of those that
would try a bit throw. And Feet cried Back, keep out
of the way, and went shooing bairns at the ring’s far
side; and folk clustered around fair thick to look on,
old Leslie and Melvin the judges here.
The first to throw was a man from Catcraig, Charlie
Something-or-other his name, and he swung himself slow
and steady on his feet and syne took a great breath and
leaped in the air, and swung, and syne as his feet came
down his arms let go and the hammer flew out and
flashed in the air and spun and then fell—ay, a gey
throw, folk cheered him a bit. But one of his galluses
had split with the throw and he blushed to the eyes and
put on his coat.
Syne another childe threw, a farmer he was, the
hammer went skittering out from his hand, he laughed
in an off-hand way as to say he was just taking part to
CUMULUS
97
encourage the others. Syne folk saw that the third was
that tink Jock Cronin, one of the spinner breed, he
picked up the hammer and waited and swung, and
louped, and the thing went a good foot beyond any of
the earher throws that were made. ’Twould be a sore
business if the Cronin should win. His friends all
shouted, That’s the stuff, Jock! they were fair
delighted with their champion’s throw, with their
rattling watch-chains and their dirty jokings, the average
spinner knew as much of politeness as a polecat knows
of the absence of smell. The worst of the lot, folk said,
were the Cronins, they bade in West Wynd, a fair tribe
of the wretches, old Cronin had once been a foreman
spinner till he got his bit hand mashed up in machinery.
He’d fair gone bitter with that, they told, and took to
the reading of the daftest-like books, about Labour,
Socialism, and such-like stite. Where would you he if
it wasn’t for Capital? you’d ask old Cronin, and he’d
say On the street—where the capitalists themselves would
he, you poor fool. It’s the capitalists that we are out to
abolish, and the capital that we intend to make ours. And
he’d organized a union for spinners and if ever you
heard of a row at the mills you might bet your boots
a Cronin was in it, trying to make out that the spinners
had rights, and ought to be treated like gentry, b’God!
The worst of the breed was that young Jock Cronin,
him that had just now thrown the hammer. The only one
that wasn’t a spinner, he worked as a porter down at
the station, folk said that the stationmaster, Newlands,
would have sacked him right soon if only he’d dared,
him and his socialism and the coarse way he had of
making jokes on the Virgin Birth; and sneering at Jonah
in the belly of the whale; and saying that the best way
to deal with a Tory was to kick him in the dowp and
G
4'
98 CLOUD HOWE
you’d brain him there. But Jock Cronin worked as
well as he blethered, the sly, coarse devil, and he couldn’t
be sacked ; and there he stood with a look on his face
as much as to say That’s a socialist’s throw !
It was Newlands, the stationmaster, himself that
came next, you hoped he’d beat the throw of the porter.
But faith, he didn’t, he was getting fell slow, maybe it
was that or he wasted his breath singing at the meetings
of MacDougall Brown, the hammer just wobbled and
fell with a plop, if they didn’t do better at the second
round and third it was Cronin the porter would grab
the first prize.
But syne folk started to cheer, and all looked, ’twas
the Reverend Mr. Colquohoun himself, being pushed in¬
side the ring by his wife. Ay, that was well-intended
of him, now, you gave a bit clap and syne waited and
watched. And the minister took off his coat and his
hat and smiled at the childe that held out the hammer,
and took it and swung, and there rose a gasp, he’d flung
it nearly as far as the Cronin’s.
The second bout he landed well over Jock Cronin s,
plain it was between the spinner and him, the spinners
stopped laughing, crying, Come on, then, Jock! You’re
not going to let a mucking preacher beat you ? The
Reverend Colquohoun looked at them and laughed,
and syne spoke to Cronin, and he laughed as well, not
decent and low as a man would do that spoke to a
minister, but loud out and vulgar, he wished folk to
think that he was as good as any minister that ever
was decked. Then the childe with the galluses threw
once again, but he’d never got over the blush or the
galluses, he landed fell short and went off the field, and
Else Queen, the maid at the Manse, was his lass, and she
laughed out loud ; and that was ill-done.
CUMULUS
99
Syne Ake Ogilvie threw—ay, not a bad throw, but
shorter than Cronin’s, Ake did it with a sneer. Syne
Cronin again, and the hammer was flung with the whole
of his weight and his strength and it fell, crack ! a bare
foot short of his very first throw. And as the minister
stood up, arms bared, you knew well enough that he
couldn’t beat that; and then everybody knew that he
wasn’t going to try, he maybe thought it not decent for
a minister to win, he swung the hammer to give it a good
throw, but safe and not so far as Jock Cronin's.
But the spinners had broken into the ring, a birn of
them down at the farther end ; and as the Reverend
picked up the hammer and got ready to swing, one of
them cried, you couldn’t tell which, Jesus is getting a
bit weak in the guts.
The minister gave a kind of a start, you thought for
a minute that he wouldn’t throw. But instead he
suddenly whirled him about, and spun and swung and
had flung the hammer, so quickly you hardly saw what
he did. And the hammer swished and twirled through
the air, like a catapault stone or a pheasant in flight,
and landed a good three feet or more beyond the furthest
throw of the Cronin: and struck on a great meikle stone
that lay there, and stotted and swung, the handle swung
first, into the middle of the spleiter of spinners.
They jumped and ran and the hammer lay still, and
there rose such a yell from the folk that watched, your
lugs near burst in the cheering and din. The minister’s
face had reddened with blood, the veins were like cords
all over his face; and then he went white as ever again,
and put on his coat and went out of the ring, folk
cried, That was a Jine throw, minister, but he didn’t
say a word, just went off with his wife,
xoo CLOUD HOWE
Chris said, What’s wrong ? Then she saw his hanky
as he took it away from his lips ; it was red. He said
Oh, nothing. Gassed lungs, I suppose. Serves me right
for trying to show off.
Chris said You didn’t ; I thought you were fine. Robert
said I’m afraid not, only a fool. There, I’m all right, don’t
worry, Christine. Come on, we’ve to watch Ewan running
his race.
The bairns’ races were the next things set. Ewan
Chris watched lined up with the others, Geddes the school¬
master in charge of the lot, disgusted as ever he looked
with the job. They’d marked out a track through the
middle of the ring, John Muir stood down at the further
end, the bairns had to run to him and then back. Chris
watched Ewan, he was eating a sweetie, calm as you
please, his black mop blue in the sun, his eyes on the
Dominie, he didn’t care a fig. But as soon as Geddes
cried Run! he was off, he went like a deer, his short
legs flying, the other bairns tailed off behind, and Ewan
was first to reach Muir and go round him, swinging round
gripping at John Muir’s trousers ; and as he went by
the place where Chris stood, he looked at her and grinned
calmly as ever, and shifted the sweetie to the other side
of his mouth, and looked back, and slowed down, no need
to race. He was up at the Dominie first, at a trot, folk
round about asked who he was, as black as all that,
he was surely foreign ?
Then somebody knew and saw Chris stand near, and
cried out Wheest! but Chris didn’t care; she watched
Ewan take the prize and say Thanks, calm still, and
put the shilling in his pocket, and come walking back to
look for her, and stand grave in front of her as she
smoothed down his collar. Robert gave him a shake
and he smiled at that (the smile that so sometimes
CUMULUS loi
caught your heart, the smile you had known on the lips
of his father). Then Robert said Well, since we’ve
won all the prizes, let’s go and look for tea in the tent.
And the three of them set out across the short grass,
through the groupings and gatherings of folk here and
there, the show was fairly a place for a claik, one
gossip would now meet in with another she hadn’t seen
since the last Segget Show, and would cry Well, now,
it’s Mistress MacTavish! And Mistress MacTavish would
cry back her name, and they’d shake hands and waggle
their heads and be at it, hammer and tongs, a twelve
months’ gossip, the Howe’s reputation put in through a
mangle and its face danced on when it came through the
rollers.
There was a great crush in the tent they entered,
but Melvin came running and found them a table, the
gabble of the folk rose all round about, they nodded to
the minister and minded their manners, and reddened
when they thought that he looked at them, and took a
sly keek at the clothes Chris wore—faith ! awful short
skirts for a minister’s wife. Mrs Hogg was sitting at
a table with her son, him that she’d told to slop slop
in his guts, his quean had gone back, and folk saw the
damned creature trying to catch the minister’s eye.
But the Reverend Mr Colquohoun didn’t see, you were
torn two ways with scorn of the Manse for being so
proud, and with sheer delight at seeing the Hoggs get a
smack in the face.
Then it was time for the band to begin, folk trooped
out to see in the best of spirits, well filled with biscuits
and baps and tea ; but weren’t such fools as go over
close to the board where John Muir and Smithie were
standing, crying, Come on, folk, now, will you dance ?
Behind them the Segget band played up, Ake Ogilvie
102 CLOUD HOWE
there at the head of it, fair thinking himself of import¬
ance, like, with Jim that served in the bar of the Arms
and folk called the Sonrock because of his face, tootling
on his flute like a duck half-choked, and Newlands the
stationy cuddling his fiddle a damn sight closer than ever
his mistress, or else she’d have had a bairn ere this
not that you blamed him, she’d a face like a greip, and
an ill greip at that, though you don’t cuddle faces. And
Feet was there, he was playing the bassoon, he sat well
back to have room for his boots and looked as red as a
cock with convulsions. God ay ! it was worth going up
to the board if only to take a laugh at the band.
But not a childe or a quean would venture up on
the thing till at last Jock Cronin, that tink of a porter
that came of the spinners, was seen going up and
pulling up a quean. She laughed, and turned her face
round at last, and folk fair had a shock, it was Miss
Jeannie Grant, she was one of the teachers, what was
she doing with a porter, eh ?—and a tink at that, that
called himself a socialist, and said that folk should
aye vote for labour, God knew you got plenty
without voting for’t. Socialists with queans—well, you
knew what they did, they didn’t believe in homes or in
bairns, they'd have had all the bairns locked up in poor-
houses ; and the coarse brutes said that marriage was
daft—that fair made a body right wild to read that,
what was coarse about marriage you would like to know ?
And you’d stop from your reading and say to the
wife, For God’s sake, woman, keep the bairns quiet. Do
you think I want to live in a menagerie? And she’d
answer you back, By your face I aye thought that was
where you came from, and start off again about her
having no peace, she couldn’t be sweir like a man, take
a rest; and whenever were your wages going to be
CUMULUS
103
raised ? And you’d get in a rage and stride out of the
house, and finish the paper down at the Arms, reading
about the dirt that so miscalled marriage—why shouldn’t
they have to get married as well ?
Well, there were Jock Cronin and Miss Jeannie
Grant, they stood and laughed and looked down at the
folk. Syne some spinners went up, as brazen as you
like, giggling, and then a ploughman or so, syne Alec
Hogg that was son of the Provost, he had up Cis Brown
that went to the College, thin and sweet, a fell bonny
lass, she looked gey shy and a treat to cuddle. So there
were enough at last for a dance, and Ake waved his arms,
and they struck up a polka. There was fair a crowd
when the second dance came, you felt your back buttons
to see were they holding, and took a keek round for a
lass for the dance : and the queans all giggled and looked
at you haughty, till you asked one, bold, and then she’d
say Ay.
Charlie, the childe from Catcraig, went to Else, the
maid from the Manse, and said Will you dance? and
she said Can you? and he blushed and said Fine.
Else was keen for a dance and she left Meiklebogs, he
looked after her shy, like a shy-like stot, as she swung
on the board, a fair pretty woman. God, you hardly
saw her like nowadays, queans grown all as thin as the
handles of forks, and as hard forbye, no grip to the
creatures; and how the devil they expected to get
married and be ta’en with bairns you just couldn’t guess,
what man in his senses would want to bed with a rickle
of bones and some powder, like ?
Well, Else was up with the Catcraig childe, it was
Drops of Brandy and the folk lined up, Else saw the
minister, he smiled like a lad with the mistress
herself further down the fine. Ake waved his arms and
io4 CLOUD HOWE
you all were off, slow in the pace and the glide, then the
whirl, till the brandy drops were spattering the sky, the
board kittled up and the band as well, and you all went
like mad; and Else’s time when she did the line she
found the minister the daftest of the lot, he swung her
an extra turn right round, and he cried out Hooch!
and folk all laughed—ay, fairly a billy the new minister,
though already he’d started interfering with folk, and
he’d preached so unco, a Sunday back, that old Hairy
Hogg was descended from monkeys. . . . Had he said
that, then ? Ay, so he had, old Hogg himself had told
you the speak, it was hardly the thing to have said of
the Provost, fair monkey-like though the creature was.
. . . And just at the head of the dance as Else flew
round in the arms of her Catcraig childe, he gave a kind
of a gasp and his hand flew up to his waistcoat and Else
cried What? And the childe let go and grabbed at
his breeks, his other bit gallus had fair given way, he
slipped from the board with his face all red, and went
home fell early that evening alone, not daring to stay
and take Else Queen home.
The teas were all finished and Melvin had opened up
one of the tents for the selling of drams, folk took a
bit dander up to the counter, had a dram, and spoke of
the Show and looked out—at the board, the gloaming
was green on the hills, purple on the acre-wide blow of
heather. There was a little wind coming down, blowing
in the hot, red faces of the dancers, you finished up your
dram and felt fair kittled up ; and went out and made
for the board like a hare, damn’t! you might be old,
but you still could dance, you hoped the mistress had
already gone home.
There was old Smithie, well whiskied by now. He
cried each dance till he got to the Schottische, he stuck
CUMULUS 105
fast on that and shished so long yon thought the old
fool never would stop, his whiskers sticking from his
face in a fuzz, like one of the birns of hay he would steal.
And just as he paused to take a bit breath his eyes lit
down on his goodson, Bruce, and he stopped and said
What the devil’s wrong with you, you coarse tink, that
lives in my house, on my meal, and snickers like a cuddy
when a man tries to speak ? Bruce glunched up, dour,
Be quiet, you old fool, and that fair roused the dander
of Smithie to hear. Who’s a fool? By God, if I come
down to you— and he made a bit step, just threaten¬
ing-like, but he was over-near the edge of the board
to be threatening, even, next minute he was off, on top
of Ed Bruce, folk were fair scandalized and crowded
about, snickering with delight to see the daft fools, old
Smithie and Bruce, leathering round in the grass. But
down came the minister and pushed folk aside, angry
as could be, and folk stared at him. Get up there,
confound you, the two of you! he cried, and in a jiffy
had old Smithie up in one hand and Bruce in the other,
and shook them both. Haven’t you more sense than behave
like a couple of bairns ! Shake hands and shut up !
And so they did, but before the night was well done
the speak was all over the Howe of the Mearns that the
new minister of Segget had come down and bashed Ed
Bruce in the face and syne Smithie, and cursed at them
both for ten minutes without stopping. And a great lot
of folk went to kirk next Sunday that never went afore,
and never went again, for no other purpose than to stare
at the minister, and see if he’d be shamed of the coarse
way he’d cursed.
Well, that was the Segget Show and Games, by
eight and nine the older folk were crying ta-ta and
taiking away home, the farmers in their gigs spanked
io6
CLOUD HOWE
down by Meiklebogs, the Segget folk dandered home
slow in the light, it lay like the foam of the sea on the
land, soft, in a kind of blue, trembling half-mist, a half¬
moon, quiet, came over the hills and looked down on
the board where the young still danced. Else sought
out the mistress—should she take Ewan home ? But
the mistress shook her head, I’ll do that. Dance while
you’re young, hut don’t he too late; and she smiled
at Else the fine way she had, she looked bonny with
that dour, sweet, sulky face, the great plaits of her hair
wound round her head, rusty and dark and changing to
gold, Else thought If I were a man myself I’d maybe
he worse than the minister is—I’d want to cuddle her every
damned minute!
Young Ewan was beside her, he stood eating choco¬
late, he had eaten enough to make a dog sick, as Else
knew well, but he looked cool as ever, the funny bit
creature, and said Ta-ta, Else. Will Mr Meiklebogs
squeeze you under my window ? Else felt herself
flushing up like a fire, Maybe, if I let him, and Ewan
said Oh, do, and would maybe have said more, for
bairns are awful, but that the minister had hold of his
arm—Come on, or I’ll squeeze YOU. Ta-ta, Else.
So the three went home through the night-quiet
park, Robert and Chris the last of the elders to leave.
It came sudden on Chris, with her feet in the grass, her
hand in Ewan’s, that that’s what they were—old, she
who was not yet thirty years old ! Old, and still how
you’d like to dance, out under the brightening coming
of the moon, drop away from you all the things that
clung close, Robert and Ewan and the Manse—even
CUMULUS 107
Chris—be young and be young and be held in men’s
arms, and seem bonny to them and look at them sly,
not know next hour who would take you home, and not
know who would kiss you or what they would do. . . .
Young as you never yet had been young, you’d been
caught and ground in the wheels of the days, in this dour
little Howe and its moil and toil, the things you had
missed, the things you had missed ! The things that the
folk had aye in the books—being daft, with the winds
of young years in your hair, night for a dream and the
world for a song. Young ; and you NBVBR could be
young now.
Bike a sea you had never seen plain in your life, you
heard the thunder and foam of the breakers, once or
twice, far off, dark-green and salt, you had seen them
play, spouting and high on the drift of the wind, crying
in the sun with their crested laughters, hurrying south
on the questing tides. Youth, to be young—
High up and over the Kaimes two birds were sailing
into the western night, lonely, together, into the night
Chris watched them fade to dots in the sky.
The whisper went round the minister had gone, the
ploughmen and spinners gave a bit laugh and took a
bit squeeze at the queans they held ; and some of the
folk that were hot with their collars pulled the damned
things off and threw them in the hedge. In Will
Melvins bar was a roaring trade, old Hairy Hogg’s son
and Dite Peat were there, the both of them telling
the tale, you may guess, Alec Hogg of the things he had
seen in Edinburgh, Dite Peat of the things he had done
in London. God ! 'twas a pity they’d ever come back.
io8 CLOUD HOWE
Meiklebogs came talking into the bar, near nine that
was, folk cried: Will you drink ? and he answered
back canny, Oh, ay ; maybe one ; and had two or three,
and looked shyer than ever. Dite Peat roared With
that down under your waistcoat, you’ll be able to soss
up the Manse quean fine. Meiklebogs looked a wee bit
shyer than before, and gave a bit laugh, and said, Pegs,
ay.
Else had danced every dance since the dancing
began. When Charlie from Catcraig, the fool, disap¬
peared, Alec Hogg had taken her up for a while, and half
Else liked him and half she didn’t, he felt like a man
though he spoke like a toff. He asked in his clipped-
like way, You’re Miss Queen? as though he thought
it should be mistake. Else answered careless, Oh, ay,
so I’ve heard. You’re the son of old Hairy Hogg, the
Provost ? He grinned like a cat, So my mother says,
and Else was fair shocked, a man shouldn’t make
jokes about his own mother. So after a while she got
rid of the creature, and the next dance she had was with
Ogilvie the joiner, he’d left the band for Feet to conduct,
he swung her round and round in a waltz, his own eyes
half-closed near all that time. If he thought your face
such a scunner to look at, why did he ask you up for a
dance ?
Then Feet cried The last, and there was John Muir,
he’d grabbed Else afore any other could get near,
and he danced right well, Else warmed up beside him,
he cried out, Hooch! and she did the same, if he dug
graves as well as he danced, John Muir, he should have
had a job in a public cemetery. As Else whirled she
saw the blue reek of Segget, and the dusk creep in, it
was warm and blue, and the smell of the hay rose up in
her face ; there was the moon, who was taking her home ?
CUMULUS
109
She was over big and scared off the shargars; but
one or two childes she knew keen enough for a slow-like
stroll up to Segget Manse. But they looked at Dalziel,
that was waiting by, and turned away and left Else
alone. And the old fool said, with his shy-like smile,
Ay then, will I see you home, Else lass ?
Else said You may, since you’ve feared all the rest;
but he smiled as canny as ever and said Ay, he didn't
seem to mind that she was in a rage. The dances
were ended and the folk were going, streaming from
the park as the night came down, the band with their
instruments packed in their cases, and their queans
beside them, them that had queans, them that had wives
had the creatures at home, waiting up with a cup of
tea to slocken the throats of the men that had played
so well for Segget that afternoon. Here and there in
the park a bit fight broke out, but folk paid little heed,
they just gave a smile, that was the way that the Show
aye ended, you’d think it queer in a way if you didn’t
see a childe or so with his nose bashed in, dripping blood
like a pig new knived.
Jock Cronin and his spinners had started a quarrel
with the three fee’d men at the Meiklebogs. Jock
Cronin said ploughmen should be black ashamed, they
that once had a union like any other folk, but had
been too soft in the guts to stick by it, they’d been feared
by the farmers into leaving their union, the damned half¬
witted joskins they were. George Sand was the fore¬
man at the Meiklebogs, a great meikle childe with a long
moustache and a head on him like a Clydesdale horse.
He said And what the hell better are the spinners ? They’ve
done a damn lot with their union and all ? I sit down to
good meat when the dirt are starving, and another Meiklebogs
man cried the same, Ay, or a porter down at the station ?
HO CLOUD HOWE
What the hell has your union done for you ? I’ve more
money in my pouch right the now, let me tell you, than ever
you had in your life, my birkie. I could show you right now
a five and a ten and a twenty pound note.
Jock Cronin said sneering-like, Could you so ? Could
you show me five shillings ? and the childe turned red,
he hadn’t even that on him at the time, it had been
no more than an empty speak, and he felt real mad to
be shown up so. So he took John Cronin a crack on
the jaw, by God it sounded like the crack of doom.
Jock Cronin went staggering back among the spinners,
and then the spinners and ploughmen were at it, in a
minute as bonny a fight on as ever you saw in your life
at Segget Show. You’d be moving off the Show-ground
quiet with your quean, till you saw it start and then
you’d run forward, and ask what was up, and not stop to
listen, for it fair looked tempting ; so you’d take a kick
at the nearest backside, hard as you liked, and next
minute some brute would be bashing in your face, and
you bashing his, and others coming running and joining ;
and somebody trotting to Melvin’s tent and bringing out
Feet to stop the fight.
He was well loaded up with drink by then, Feet, and
he’d only a bit of his uniform on. But he ran to the
fighters and he cried Hold on! What s all this jookery-
packery now ? Stop your fighting and get away home.
But the coarse brutes turned on poor Feet instead,
it was late that night when he crawled from the ditch
and blinked his eyes and felt his head, the moon high up
in a cloudless sky, the field deserted and a curlew crying.
CUMULUS
m
All the folk had gone long ere that, even the youngest
and daftest of them gone, home from the Segget Show
in their pairs, there were folk at that minute on the
Laurencekirk road, a lad and his lass on their whirring
bikes, the peesies wheeping about in the moon, the
childe with his arm around the quean’s shoulder, the
whir of the wheels below their feet, the quean with her
cheek against the hand that rested shy on her shoulder,
so, home before them but still far off; and the dark
came down and they went into it, into their years and
to-morrows, they’d had that.
Some went further in business, if less far in mileage.
Near Skite a farmer went out to his barn, early next
morning, and what did he see ? Two childes and two
lasses asleep in his hay. And he was sore shocked and
went back for his wife, and she came and looked and
was shocked as well, and if they’d had a camera they’d
have taken photographs, they were so delighted and
shocked to see two queans that they knew in such a like
way, they’d be able to tell the story about them all the
years that they lived on earth ; and make it a tit-bit in
hell forbye.
Cis Brown had asked her father MacDougall if she
could stay on late at the dance; and he’d said that she
might, his favourite was Cis ; and so she had done and
at the dance end she had looked round about and had
blushed as she wondered would any one ask her to walk
home to Segget ? She was over young, she supposed,
for all that, a college quean with her lessons and career,
and not to waste her time on a loon. And she wished
that she wasn’t, and then looked up and saw a spinner,
a boy, beside her, about the same age as herself, she
thought. He was tall like a calf, and shy and thin, he
looked at her and he didn’t look—Are you going up home ?
112
CLOUD HOWE
She said she was and she thought as she said it,
What an awful twang those spinners speak! She was
half-ashamed to walk home with one. But so they got
clear of the stamash of the fighting, saying never a
word as they went through the grass. Then the boy
gave a cough, Are you in a hurry ? and Cis said No, not
a very great hurry, and he said Let’s go down by the Meikle-
bogs corn and home through the moor to the Segget road.
So she went with him, quiet, by the side of the park,
the path so narrow that he went on ahead, the moon was
behind them up in the Mounth, below them stirred the
smell of the stalks, bitter and strange to a quean from
Segget, she bent and plucked up one in the dark, and
nibbled at it and looked at the boy. Behind them the noise
of the Show grew faint: only for sound the swish of the corn.
Then the path grew broader and they walked abreast,
he said sudden, but quiet, You’re Cis Brown from Mac-
Dougall’s shop, aren’t you? Cis said Yes, not asking
his name, he could tell her if he liked, but she wasn't
to ask. But he didn’t tell, just loped by her side, long-
legged, like a deer or a calf, she thought, leggy and quick
and quiet. They heard as they passed in that cool,
quiet hour the scratch of the partridges up in the moor,
once a dim shape started away from a fence with a thunder¬
ous clop of hooves in the dark, a Meiklebogs horse that
their footsteps had feared.
Syne they came to the edge of the moor, it was dark,
here the moon shone through the branched horns of the
broom, the whins tickled your legs and Cis for a while
couldn’t find her way till the boy said Wait. I know
this place, I often come here. And his hand found hers
and she felt in his palm the callouses worn by the spindles
there, he’d some smell of the jute about him as well,
as had all the spinner folk of the mills.
CUMULUS
ii3
Water gleamed under the moon in a pool. Cis
stopped to breathe and the boy did the same, she saw him
half turn round in the moonlight and felt suddenly
frightened of all kinds of things—only a minute, frightened
and curious, quick-strung all at once, what would he do ?
But he did not a thing but again take her hand, still
saying nothing, and they went through the moor, the low
smoulder of Segget was suddenly below them, and below
their feet sudden the ring of the road. She took her hand
out of his then. So they went past the Memorial up
through The Close to the door of the house of MacDougall
Brown ; and Cis stopped and the boy did the same, and
she knew him, remembered him, his name was Dod
Cronin. And he looked at her, and looked away again ;
and again, as on the moor, queer and sweet, something
troubled her, she had never felt it before for a soul
—compassion and an urgent shyness commingled,
sixteen herself and he about the same, daft and silly to
feel anything like this ! He slipped his hand slow up her
bare arm, shy himself, he said something, she didn't
know what. She saw him flush as she didn’t answer,
he was feared, the leggy deer of a loon I
And she knew at once the thing he had asked. She put
up her hand to the hand on her arm, and next minute she
found she was being kissed with lips as shy, unaccustomed
as hers. And a minute after she was inside the door
of MacDougalTs shop, and had the door closed, and stood
quivering and quivering alone in the dark, wanting to
laugh and wanting to cry, and wanting this minute to
last forever.
H
CLOUD HOWE
114
Else Queen of the Manse had held home with Dalziel.
As they gained the road he turned round and said, with
a canny glance back to where folk were fighting : Would
you like to come ben the way for some tea ? Else was
still in a rage, she didn’t know why, or with whom, or
how it began, so she snapped: No, I wouldn’t, then.
Do you know what the hour is P Meiklebogs looked shy¬
like—she knew that he did, she could guess the soft-like
look on his face, she felt half inclined to take it a clout—
and said : Oh ay, but I thought that maybe you would
like to slocken up after the dancing about.
She might as well do as the old fool said, even though
there’d be no one else at Meiklebogs. Oh ay, she had
heard the gossip of Segget, about Dalziel and his various
housekeepers, though he did his own cooking now, as
folk knew: It was said that two hadn’t bidden a
night, two others had come to the Meiklebogs alone and
left in their due time, each with a bairn, a little bit present
from the shy Meiklebogs. Well, that didn’t vex Else,
the stories were lies, old Meiklebogs—he was over shy ever
to find out what a woman was like, unless it was out of a
picture book, maybe : and even then it was like he would
blush the few remaining hairs from his head. And even
were there something in the Segget gossip she’d like to
see the creature alive that would take advantage of her
—just let him !
So she nodded, All right, I’ll come up for a cup.
Meiklebogs said Grand, and the two went on, the moon
was behind them, in front was the smell from the coles
out still in the hayfield, tall, they’d had a fine crop that
year of the hay. As they came near the house there
rose a great barking, and Meiklebogs’ meikle collie came
out, Meiklebogs cried Heel! and the beast drew in,
wurring and sniffing as they passed through the close.
CUMULUS
ii5
In the kitchen ’twas dark and close as a cave, the window
fast-snecked, the fire a low glow. Meiklebogs lit a candle,
Sit down, will you, Else ? I’ll blow up the fire and put on
the kettle.
So he did, and Else took off her hat, and sat down
and looked at the dusty old kitchen, with its floor of
cement and its eight-day clock, ticking with a hirpling
tick by the wall; and the photo of Eord Kitchener that
everyone had heard of, over the fireplace, a dour-looking
childe. ’Twas back in the War-years that Meiklebogs
had got it, he’d cycled a Sunday over to Banchory, to a
cousin of his there, an old woman-body : and she’d had
the photo new-bought at a shop. Well, Meiklebogs had
fair admired the fine thing, he thought it right bonny
and said that so often that the woman-body cousin said
at last he could have it. But it was over-big to be carried
in his pouch, and the evening had come down with a
spleiter of rain. But that didn’t bog Meiklebogs, faith,
no I He took off his jacket and tied the damn thing
over his shoulder with a length of tow; and syne he put
on his jacket above it. And the cousin looked on, and
nodded her head : Ay, the old devil’s been in a pickle
queer places. But I’m thinking that’s the queerest he's ever
been in.
The dresser was as thick with dust as a desert, Else
bent in the light of the candle above it, and wrote her
name there, and Dalziel smiled shy. Will you get down
two cups from the hooks up there ?
Else did, and brought saucers as well, he gleyed at
them : Faith, I don’t use them. I’m not gentry, like.
Else said : Oh, aren’t you ? Well, I am.
He poured the tea out and sat down to drink it.
And faith ! he found a good use for his saucer, he poured
the tea in it and drank that way, every now and then
n6
CLOUD HOWE
casting a sly look at Else as though he were a mouse and
she was the cheese. But she didn't care, leaning back
in her chair, she was tired and she wondered why she’d
come here, with this silly old mucker and his silly looks;
and why Charlie had made such a fool of himself. Meikle-
bogs took another bit look at her then, she watched him,
and then he looked at the window, and then he put out
a hand, canny, on to her knee.
It was more than the hand, a minute after that, he
louped on her as a crawly beast loups, something all hair
and scales from the wall; or a black old monkey ; she
bashed him hard, right in the eye, just once, then he had
her. She had thought she was strong, but she wasn’t,
in a minute they had struggled half-way to the great box
bed. She saw once his face in the light of the candle,
and that made her near sick and she loosed her grip, he
looked just as ever, canny and shy, though his hands
upon her were like iron clamps. She cried You're
tearing my frock, he half-loosed her, he looked shy as
ever, but he breathed like a beast.
Ah well, we’ll take the hit thing off, Else.
Robert had gone to moil at his sermon ; Chris heard
the bang of the door upstairs. Ewan was in bed and
already asleep, hours yet she supposed ere Robert
came down. The kitchen gleamed in the light of
the moon, bright clean and polished, with the stove
a glow, she looked at that and looked at herself, and
felt what she hoped wasn’t plain to be seen, sticky and
warm with the Segget Show. She’d have a bath ere
she went to bed.
The stove’s red eye winked as she opened the flue,
CUMULUS
117
and raked in the embers and set in fresh sticks ; and on
these piled coals and closed up the flue. In a little she
heard the crack of the sticks, and went up the stairs to
her room and Robert's, and took off her dress and took
off her shoes, not lighting a light; the moon was enough.
The mahogany furniture rose red around, coloured in the
moonlight, the bed a white sea, she sat on the edge
and looked out at Segget, a ghostly place, quiet, except
now and again with a bray of laughter borne on the
wind as the door of the Arms opened and closed. Far
down in the west, pale in the moon, there kindled a star
that she did not know.
She stood up and went over and looked in the glass,
and suddenly shivered, cold after the dancing ; and drew
the curtains and lighted the lamp, and took off her clothes
in front of that other who watched and moved in the
mirror's mere. She saw herself tall, taller than of old,
lithe and slim still with the brown V-shape down to the
place between her breasts, she could follow the lines of the
V with her finger. And she saw her face, high cheek¬
boned and bronze, quiet and still with the mask of the years,
her mouth too wide but she liked her teeth, she saw
them now as she smiled at the thought her mouth
was too wide ! She loosed the pins in her hair and it fell,
down to her knees, tickling her shoulders, faith! it
was worse than a mane, a blanket, she’d cut it one day,
if Robert would let her. She caught it aside and suddenly
remembered a thing she’d forgot, forgotten for years, and
looked for the dimple she once had had, and found it, there
still, and saw her face flush faint as she minded, now
that she thought of the thing at all, she’d been told that
first night two years ago that the dimple was there—
Funny and queer that you were with a man ! You
did this and that and you lay in his bed, there wasn’t
n8
CLOUD HOWE
a thing of you he might not know, or you of him, from
the first to the last. And you could speak of these
things with him, and be glad, glad to be alive and be his,
and sleep with your head in his shoulder’s nook, tickling
his chin, you supposed, with your hair—you could do all
that and blush at the memory of a daft thing said on
your wedding night!
Then she remembered she’d wanted a bath. She
seemed to have stood there dreaming for hours, and found
her dressing-gown and her slippers, and went down the
stairs and turned on the taps. The water came gurgling
out with a steam, she saw her face in the shaving glass,
and stared at it—something happening to-night ?
She splashed for a little thinking of that, the water
about her stung quick at first; she saw herself fore¬
shortened and fragile, but fair enough still, so she supposed
—yes, she would think that if she were a man ! She
lifted an arm and the water ran down it, little pellets,
they nested under her cheek ; and ’twas then she thought
of the thing she would do. Yes, she would do it this
very night! .. . And because that wouldn’t bear thinking
about, here, she splashed herself and got out, Robert’s
mirror blinded in a cloud of steam. She opened the bath¬
room door and listened, there was no one to hear or
see for this once, she caught up her gear and ran quick
up the stairs, in the moving pattern of splashed moon¬
light high from the window set in the gable, and gave a
gasp as she felt a hand on her shoulder, the arm came
tight, she was kissed. Robert coming down had seen
the light splash as she opened the bathroom door.
She struggled away, I’ve no clothes on !
He said that he’d half suspected that, teasing her a
minute, then let her go. Then he said he’d go down
and get ready their supper, and went lightly down the
CUMULUS 119
stairs as a lad, it was Chris who now stood still and looked
down, high in her breast her heart beating fast. She
would, and this very night she would, in spite of what he
had told her and taught her !
She dressed and went down through the quiet of the
Manse, Robert popped his fair pow round the edge of
the door, Supper in the kitchen, or shall we he grand ?
She said she would like the kitchen as well and pushed
him into a chair as she spoke, and took off Else’s apron
he'd draped on his trousers, and set to the making of
supper herself. He sighed and stretched out and lighted
his pipe, and drew at it, looking out of the window.
There’s some thing in the night—or is it in you? He
stood up and walked to the window and peered, and
came back and looked at Chris for a while; and put out
a finger upon her forearm. Funny to think that was
once monkey-hair !
She said that it wasn’t, whatever his ancestors had
been, hers were decent, like Hairy Hogg’s, hers (they’d
both heard the story.) Robert chuckled over that as he
sat down again, the only result of his sermon so far to
drop a blot on the Provost’s escutcheon. Hopeless, the
Provost, and most of the others, Geddes, poor chap,
had mislaid his guts ; but he’d form that Segget League
even yet, wait till this young Stephen Mowat came home !
Chris asked when that was but Robert didn’t know,
he thought very soon, then grew puzzled again. Funny,
there really IS something about, and Chris said Maybe,
and keeked at him sly, as he sat there and puzzled, and
restrained herself from suddenly and daftly cuddling
him tight. When she opened the kitchen window wide
there came a faint scent on the tide of the wind, from the
garden, the jonquils and marigolds glowed faint and pale
in the light of the moon.
120
CLOUD HOWE
Then Chris set the table and they both sat down,
it was fine to work in her kitchen untrammelled, good
though Else was as a general rule, if it wasn’t for the fact
that the Manse was so big they could have done well
without a maid here. She said that to Robert, he
said Yes, I know, I feel that way myself—for
to-night! ^4 s though I could turn our Segget myself
into Augustine’s City of God. . . . Something in the night
that’s making us like this, and stopped and stared, Why,
Chris, you look different!
She said he was silly—or ’twas maybe the bath !
Then she felt herself colour with his eyes upon her. He
shook his head, An unusual bath! A mental one?
They’re uncommon in Segget.
He said That’s the first time I’ve ever heard you
bitter, and she said she didn’t feel bitter, she was
fine; and they washed up and dried in the moonlight
quiet, together and content and yet more than that,
once he brushed her shoulder as he went to and fro,
carrying the dishes over to the dresser; and he stopped
and scowled, sore-puzzled upon her, It must be that
monkey-hair that’s electric !
And then they had finished and a mood came on Chris.
Let’s go out in the garden. And they both went out
in the honey-dark shadows that the hedgerow threw,
warm, a little mist crept up from Segget, under the
nets in the strawberry patches the berries were bending
their heads full ripe, Chris knelt by a bed and found
one that was big, and ate half herself, Robert the other,
seeing it waiting there on her lips. And, as he laughed
and kissed her for that, something caught them both to
a silence, foolish and quiet by the strawberry beds.
The rooks chirped drowsily up in the yews as they passed
beneath to the sheltered wall where love-in-a-mist and
CUMULUS 121
forget-me-nots bloomed blue and soft even now in the
night, under the wall that led to the kirkyard, just low
enough for Chris to look over.
And so for a little she stopped and looked, that
third Chris holding her body a while, how strange it
was she stood here by Robert, so close that the warmth
of his body warmed hers—when in such a short time she
would die down there on a bit of land as deserted and left.
They were gone, they were quiet, and the tears that were
shed and the folk that came and the words that were
said, were scattered and gone and they left in peace,
finished and ended and all put by, the smell for them of
forget-me-nots and the taste of a strawberry eaten at
night and the kiss of lips that were hard and kind, and
the thoughts of men that had held them in love and won¬
dered upon them and believed in God. All that had gone
by, now under the gold of the moon the grass rose from
those bodies that mouldered in Segget, the curlews were
calling up in the Kaimes, the hay lay in scented swathes
in the parks, night wheeled to morning in a thousand
rooms where the blood that they’d passed to other bodies
circled in sleep, unknowing its debt. Nothing else they
had left, they had come from the dark as the dustmotes
come, sailing and golden in a shaft of the sun, they
went by like the sailing motes to the dark ; and the thing
had ended, and you knew it was so, that so it would
be with you in the end. And yet—and yet—you couldn’t
believe it!
Robert teased, Choosing a place for your coffin ? and
Chris said Just that, hut don't plant me deep / and he said
with a queer, sudden fear in his voice, he startled Chris
and she turned to look, Lord God, how I'd hate to be
'planted' myself! If I die before you, Christine, see to that:
that I'm sent for burning to a crematorium. I’d hate to be
122 CLOUD HOWE
remembered once I am dead. Chris thought in a flash how
Segget would take it, should he die and she get him a
funeral like that. They’d say, most likely, that I’d poisoned
you, Robert, and were trying to get rid of the evidence, you
know. He laughed, So they would ! and then laughed again,
a second laugh that was dreary, Chris thought. My
God, were there ever folk like the Scots ! Not only THEM
you and I are as bad. Murderous gossip passed on as
sheer gospel, though liars and listeners both know it is a lie.
Lairds, ladies, or plain fock Muck at the Mains—they’d
gossip the heart from Christ if He came, and impute a dodge
for popularizing timber when He was crucified again on
His cross!
Chris said That’s true, and yet it is not. They would
feed Christ hungry and attend to His hurts with no thought
of reward their attendance might bring. Kind, they’re so
kind. ... And the lies they would tell about how He
came by those hurts of His! 
And yet you don’t believe in a God. I’ve never asked
you, but do you, Chris ?
She bent her head as she answered. No, not looking
at him; but his laugh was kind. You will sometime,
however you find Him.
Then he looked at his watch, it was nearly midnight;
and suddenly Chris forgot the sad things. She ran
away from him and he came after, playing hide and seek,
daft bairns both, in the play and wisp of the moonlight’s
flow, till Chris lost breath and he caught her up : and she
suddenly yawned and he said, Bedtime. And Chris
minded now the thing she had planned, and lingered a
minute behind his step, shy as a bride to go with him.
The room was in shadow, for the moon had veered,
Robert moved about quiet and lighted the lamp, his
close-cropped hair lay smooth on his head till his clothes
CUMULUS I23
ruffled it up as he pulled them off. He looked over at
Chris, I m not sleepy at all. And said in that voice
that he sometimes used You look very sweet, Christine,
to-night. Did you know ?
She reached up then and put out the light, and changed
in the dark though he laughed and asked why. She
answered nothing, slipping in beside him between the
cool sheets, and lying so, still, she heard her heart hammer.
He lay quiet as well, then the curtain flapped and
bellied in the breeze, and you saw like a shadow the smile
on his face, it was turned to you and you turned to him;
and he said in a minute, Why, Christine! solemn, and
his hands came firmly under your chin to hold you so
and to kiss you, stern. And you knew that you stood
on the brink of that sea that was charted neither nor
plumbed by men, that sea-shore only women had
known, dark, with its sailing red lights of storms,
where only the feet of women had trod, hearing the
thunder of the sea in their ears as they gathered the fruit
on that waste, wild shore. . . .
So : and his lips were in yours, and they altered,
and you were gladder than you’d been for years, your arm
went round his bared shoulder quick . . . and suddenly
you were lying as rigid as death. Robert said, Tired
out, after all, Christine ?
For months after that she remembered that moment,
her voice hadn t come from her lips for a minute; then
she said, Just a bit, and heard him draw breath, and she
said again, soft, Not TOO tired, Robert, and had set
her teeth fast after that, for an age, the thunder of that
sea cut off by a wall, as she herself was, by a wall of fire ;
but she said not a word of either of these, stroked his hair
where it clung to his brow; and he put his>eadJomher
breast and slept, after a while ! and the house grew still.
124
CLOUD HOWE
She’d sleep soon herself, she’d put that dream by,
the dream of a bairn fathered by Robert—not now,
maybe never, but she could not to-night, not with memory
of that scar that was torn across the shoulder of this
living body beside her, the scar that a fragment of shrapnel
had torn—but a little lower it would have torn this body,
grunting, into a mesh of blood, with broken bones and
with spouting blood, an animal mouthing in mindless
torment. And she’d set herself to conceive a child—
for the next War that came, to be torn like that, made
blood and pulp as they’d made of Ewan—Oh, Ewan,
Ewan, that was once my lad, that lay where this stranger’s
lying the night, I haven’t forgotten, I haven’t forgotten,
you’ve a Chris that lies with you there in France, and she
shan’t bring to birth from her womb any bairn to die as you,
for a madman’s gab. . . .
Quiet, oh, quiet, greet soft lest he wake, who’s so kind
and dear, who’s so far from you now. But you’ll never
have a bairn of his for torment, to be mocked by memorials,
the gabblings of clowns, when they that remained at home
go out to praise the dead on Armistice Day.
Faith, when it came there was more to remember in
Segget that year than Armistice only. There was better
kittle in the story of what happened to Jim the Sourock
on Armistice Eve. He was aye sore troubled with his
stomach, Jim, he’d twist his face as he’d hand you a
dram, and a man would nearly lose nerve as he looked—
had you given the creature a bad shilling, or what ?
But syne he would rub his hand slow on his wame, It’s
the pains in my breast that I’ve gotten again \ and he
said that they fairly were awful sometimes, like a meikle
CUMULUS 125
worm moving and wriggling in there. Folk said he
fair did his best to drown it, and God ! that was true,
the foul brute would go home, near every night as drunk
as a toff, and fall in the bed by the side of his wife,
shed say You coarse brute, you’ve come drunken again;
but he d only groan, with his hand at his stomach, the
worm on the wriggle like a damned sea-serpent.
Well, the Sourock and his mistress kept a pig, and the
night of November the tenth Dite Peat closed up his
shop and came over to kill it. He fair was a hand at a
killing, was Dite, and the pig looked over its ree as he
came, and knew fine what the knife and axe were for.
feo it started to scraich, and Dite grinned at the brute,
Wait a minute, my mannie, I’ll let that scraich out. And
the Sourock's wife, that was standing by, felt queer
as she saw that look on his face, she thought him a tink,
but he fair could kill, not useless entirely like that
gawpus Jim.
So she asked Dite in for a dram ere he started, and
down he sat with his dram and his cake, and he drank
down the one like a calf with its milk and ate up the cake
like a famished dog. Syne he said it was over late to-night
to cut up the beast out there in the ree, he’d come over
the morn and see to that, Armistice Day would be a fine
time to do a bit cutting about among flesh—
mistress, I’ve seen humans carved up like pigs, like bits
of beef in a butcher’s shop, and it fair looked fine, as I
often thought, you couldn’t wonder at those cannibal
childes 
The Sourock s wife asked if he’d like to see her sick,
Dite said. Be sick as you like, I won’t mind ; you’ve an
uneasy stomach for a potman’s wife. And she broke
down and grat then and said what a fool she had been to
marry a creature like Jim, her that was a decent bit parlour-
126
CLOUD HOWE
maid once, with her wages her own and her fine new
clothes, Jim had sworn in those days he was fair tee-tee,
now he drank like a drain and stank like one, too, he
wouldn’t care a fig though he came of a night and found
her lying dead in her bed. Dite thought, B’God, if he’d
sense he’d dance! but he didn’t say that, he didn’t
care a damn for the Sourock’s wife or the Sourock’s
troubles, why should you care about any man’s troubles,
there were damn the few that had cared for yours—not
that you’d asked them, you could manage them fine.
So he rose up and said, Well, then, I’ll go out and have
a bit play with that beast in the ree.
She asked if he’d manage the thing by himself, she
was off for the night to her sister in Fordoun, soon’s
she’d laid his supper for the Sourock: not that she
supposed the sot would eat it, he’d come home and
just stiter to his bed, as usual. Dite said he would manage
fine on his own, and went out, and the Sourock’s wife a
bit later heard the grunt of the pig turn into a scream,
nasty to hear, and then it came shrill, and she put on her
hat and took her bit bag and went out and down by the
ree as she went, not wanting to look and see Dite at his
work of killing her pig for the winter dinners. But some¬
thing drew her eyes in over the ree, there was Dite
Peat, he was covered with sharn, he’d tripped in a rush
he had made at the pig, now he’d cornered it up at the back
of the ree. Its mouth was open and its bristles on end,
and it whistled through its open jaws like the sound of
the steam from an engine in Segget station. So she
didn’t look longer, went hurrying on, it had been a fine
beast, the pig, she remembered, would stand on its
trough with a pleased-like grumph as she scratched the
bristles on its back and lugs, fair a couthy beast, though
scared at the rats, it had once near tripped her as she
CUMULUS I27
stood in its ree, she thought the creature was making at
her: but instead it had caught a glimpse of a rat and was
trying to get behind her for safety. So she turned the
corner by Moultrie's shop and heard up in Segget the
pig scream again, and she found herself hoast, like a fool
of a bairn, with water in the nose—where was her hanky ?
And she suddenly thought of Dite Peat as a rat, a great
rat with its underhung jaw and cruel eyes, creeping on
the pig that was frightened at rats and had run once
frightened to hide behind her—och, she was daft or soft
or just both, and damn it! she couldn’t get at her hanky.
But Dite had cornered Jim's pig at last, as it swithered
its head he saw it set fine, and swung the bit axe, the
blade of it up, the pig screamed again and fell at his
eet with a trickle of blood from its snout and its trotters
scraping and tearing at the sharn of the ree. So Dite
turned the brute over, slow, with his axe, and took out
his knife and cut its throat, slow, and held the throat
open to let it bleed well. Syne he slung it on his shoulder
and took it to the kitchen, and hung it on a hook and left
it to drip.
It was fell dark then, as he slung the brute up, its
flesh was still warm, and it minded him well of the bits
of folk that a shell would fling Feuch ! in your face
with a smell of sharn, out in the War—He had liked it
fine ; there was something in blood and a howling of fear
that kittled up a man as nothing else could. So he left
the pig to drip in the dark, and it moved quick once, when
the sinews relaxed, and Dite gave a laugh and gave it a
slap.
'Twas near to ten when he took a bit dander back
again to the Sourock’s house, a blatter of rain was dinging
on Segget,. sweeping and seeping up over the Howe,
lying at night on the winter’s edge with its harvests
128 CLOUD HOWE
in, its potato-crops with dripping shaws in the rigs of
red clay. Dite pulled down his cap and lifted the sneck
and went into the house of Jim the Sourock. He cracked
a match and looked at the pig, it was getting on fine, had
near finished to drip, he would leave it now till the morn’s
night. And then—he was aye a coarse brute, was Dite
Peat, though you couldn’t but laugh when you heard
the tale—a grand idea came into his head, and he sat down
and thought it all out and syne laughed, and took down
the pig he had killed from its hook and slung it over his
shoulder and went, ben to the bed the Sourocks slept in,
a great box-bed that was half-covered in.
Dite threw back the blankets and put the pig down,
the near side of the bed where the Sourock’s wife slept
—all the wives of Segget slept at the front, a woman aye
sleeps at the front of the bed where she can get quicker out
than a man, that’s sense, for the lighting of the morning
fire or getting up in the dark to be sick, as a woman will,
when she’s carrying a bairn, and not disturbing her man
from his rest.
So Dite dumped down the pig in the bed, and covered
it up, careful and canny. And he took a bit dander up
through Segget, to freshen himself, as he said, for the
night; and syne he went home, for he was fell tired.
’Twas an hour or so later ere the Sourock came home,
he’d had to clear up the bar in the Arms, and lock the
doors and hand over the silver, and stoke up a fire for a
traveller childe that was spending the night in the Arms'
best room. What with one thing and another that night,
the drinks he had ta’en and the heat of the Arms, Jim
came through Segget with a head fair spinning. As he
crossed the Square he keeked at the angel, and damn’t!
there were two of the things up there, he stared at the
fairely stern for a while ; not decent for angels to cuddle
CUMULUS 129
like that. But then he decided he was fell drunk, and
shook his head, two angels still there, and went slithering
up through the lurching East Wynd.
Well, he got home at last through the drift of the rain,
there was hardly a light to be seen in Segget, it cuddled
up close in its beds and slept, with its goodmen turned
to the wall and its wives wearied with a day of bairns and
of claik, the bairns lying three-four in a bed, though five
or six among the tink spinners, they bred like lice and
they slept like them, too, Ake Ogilvie said—an ill bit
speak, a man couldn’t help the bairns that came, some¬
times a woman was just of the kind that would take if you
gave her no more than a squeeze, the next was cannier :
you just couldn’t tell.
Well, Jim the Sourock had been lucky so far, a fell
good thing, one Sourock enough ; but he wasn’t thinking
of that or aught else, for a while he couldn’t lay hands
on his sneck. But he got it at last and let himself in, and
sat down on the chair that stood by the door, and gave
a great paich and rubbed at his middle.
Syne he loosened his boots, not bothering with a lamp,
he knew better than that, he might fire the damned house;
so he got Ins boots off and left them lie there, and made
for the bedroom, holding to the wall, he would know the
way in his sleep by now. Then the first thing happened
that jaggered his night, his knees went bang ’gainst the
side of a tub ; he tumbled half-way into the tub, the
bottom was full of some sticky soss, the Sourock swore
and lurched up to his feet and wiped his hands on the seat
of his breeks, he supposed that the wife had been washing
fell late—the careless bitch to leave the tub there !
Well, he edged round about it and got to the door,
and stitered inside and grumbled out loud, Do you
know you’ve near broken my neck, eh, woman P
1
130
CLOUD HOWE
His wife said nothing, that wasn’t surprising, con¬
sidering that she was a five miles off. But the Sourock
had forgotten all about that, he went shoggling and
stitering about the room, pulling off his breeks and
his socks, nothing else, he aye slept in his drawers
and kept fine and warm. Syne he made for the bed
and went in by the foot, his left hand on the hump he
took for his wife. So he pushed back the blankets and
got in below, and felt about with his feet awhile to lay
them on his wife and get himself warm. But damn the
warmth could he find the night, so he reached out to give
the creature a joggle—Jean, are you wake ?
Well, the hump said nothing and the Sourock by
then had his head a bit cleared through the fall in the
tub. And he felt in a rage—Here, answer me, can’t
you? What’s wrong with the like of you, eh, the night?
And he put his hand under the blankets to feel her, so he
did, and nearly shot out of the bed. Jean—God, Jean,
but you’re awful cold !
She said nothing at all and he sudden felt ill. He
put out his hand, she was cold as a stone—worse than that,
the hair frozen hard on her skin, the Sourock was drib¬
bling and yammering by then, Jean, Jean, waken up;
you’re near frozen stiff! And at last he could bear the
thing no longer, and got from his bed and found a match
and lighted it up and pulled back the blanket. And he saw
a great gaping throat in the light, and the spunk went
out, his yell maybe blew it.
That was the story he’d tell to folk. For the rest,
you gathered he pulled himself together, and went out
to get some body go for the doctor : he was maybe a
bit fuddled, but he knew what he wanted and was keeping
quite calm, or so he would swear. That maybe was so,
and maybe it wasn’t, ’twas strange anyway if he felt
CUMULUS 131
like that, that when Peter Peat heard a bellow and
yammer and somebody beat on the door of his house like
the angel of God on the Judgement Day—and Peter
got from his bed and looked out, there was no angel but
Jim the Sourock, in his sark, with no boots or breeks on
either, his face and neck all covered with blood. And he
yammered in the light of Peter Peat’s candle—Z^’s in,
Peter Peat. Oh, Christ, let me in !
But Peter wasn’t near such a fool as do that. Go
home to your bed, he said, and keep quiet. Is this a time
to disturb decent folk ? Go home and sleep by your goodwife’s
side And he couldn’t say more, the creature of a
Sourock was fairly daft, he decided, for he yelped like a
dog hard-kicked, and vanished from the range of Peter
Peat’s eyes; and Peter closed down the window and
went back, canty, to sleep by his meikle wife’s side, like
a calf cuddling up to a haystack, folk said.
The Sourock was fair demented by then, he tried
the house of old Hairy Hogg, and the Provost came down
and keeked through the slit that was set in the door for
letters, fair gentry. And the Sourock cried Let me in,
oh, I m feared. And old Hogg said In ? To your sty\
you drunkard! You’re a fair disgrace to Scotland and
Segget. Go home like a decent man to your wife. The
Sourock vanished so quickly at that that the Provost
was fair convinced he’d obeyed—ay, there still were folk
had the power to rule, them that came of the Burnes blood.
Well, where do you think that Jim ended up ? Down
in the house of MacDougall Brown. MacDougall let
him in and heard his bit story, Cis got from her bed
and came down to hear. MacDougall cried on her to go
back, but she wouldn’t, she said All right, I won’t
look not decent for a lassie to look on a man when he
hadn’t on breeks, or not at least till she’d married one
CLOUD HOWE
132
herself, syne she’d think, said Ake Ogilvie, his breeks
were fair the best bit of the bargain, and the Scythian
childe that invented the things the greatest benefactor
of the human race.
Well, Cis boiled some water to wash the Sourock,
and MacDougall, it fair must have been a sore wrench,
made tea for the creature and he drank it up, and his
stomach for once didn’t turn at the taste. And he felt a
bit better and washed his foul neck, telling how his wife
lay with her throat cut out. MacDougall said, Ay, she has
met the Lord, as you yourself one day must do. Repent
and come to the arms of fesus—that’s what he’d planned
from the first, you gathered. Well, the Sourock said
that he would, by God, he’d be fair tee-tee from that
minute, he would; and MacDougall was pleased as
punch and near kissed him, he was awful fond of bring¬
ing souls to God, was MacDougall, and threatening the
souls with the pains of hell if they traded at any other
shop but his.
So he loaned a pair of his breeks to the Sourock, and
out the pair of them went together, and went canny up
to the Sourock’s house and ben to the room where the red
corpse lay, MacDougall carrying the lantern he’d lit. And
he lifted the lantern and glowered at the thing that was
lying there in the Sourock’s bed, and cried Hoots, man,
this is no the mistress and pulled back the blankets and
showed Jim the pig. And the Sourock glowered at it,
Well, then, I’m damned. Man, but it fair looked her
image to me.
They were into Armistice Day by then, though neither
MacDougall nor the Sourock cared, they shifted the pig
CUMULUS 133
and went to their beds, the rain held on through
the night, and morning came soaking laired across the
clay parks, the parks that begirdle Segget in red, in a
wheep of gulls driven in from the coast, if you drove
into Segget that day you'd have seen enough glaur
around to make you believe the tale that they never took a
good wash in Segget till the harvest was over and the bills
all paid. That was no more than a speak, you knew, but
it made a fine hit at the Segget folk, them so damned
proud of their Burgh and Kaimes, and their new bit kirk
that hadn’t a steeple, not so proud of their mills and the
spinners that made up the most of their population.
And faith ! by the time Armistice was out, it was less
proud than ever of its spinners, Segget.
The day had cleared by eleven o’clock, and folk
came taiking in round the angel that stood so bonny in
Segget Square. Ay, fairly a gey bit gathering, impressive
—except for the smell, Ake Ogilvie said. But he aye was
sneering something like that, the coarse brute, why
couldn’t he let folk a-be ? And you saw him there in the
midst of the lave, with his medals pinned on his waistcoat
flap, and his hands in his pockets, looking at the angel
as though he wouldn’t sleep with the lass though she
tried to come down and crawl into his bed. Sim
Leslie, the bobby, that folk called Feet, tried to form
a half-circle here, the Provost to the right, all hair
and horns, with his popping bit eyes and his ancestor
Burns, he was telling how Burns was a patriot childe,
aye ready to shed his blood for the land. Ake Ogilvie
said Ay. He slew a fell lot of the French—with his mouth.
He was better at raping a servant quean than facing the
enemy with a musket. And Hairy Hogg said that was a
foul slander, Ogilvie mad with jealousy, just, because the
dirt that he wrote himself was worse than dirt, compared
CLOUD HOWE
134
with the Bard ; and Ake said he’d rather be just plain
dirt than slush on a dung-heap, disguised as a flower ;
and young Alec Hogg, that was home from Edinburgh,
cried Cannot you leave my father alone ?
Ake looked him up and down with a long, cold stare.
I never touch dung except with a fork, hut give’s none
of your lip, or I’ll break my rule. Alec Hogg cried
Try it! and maybe in a minute there would have been
a fine bit fight on the go, right there by the angel in Segget
Square, folk round about looking shocked as could be
and edging nearer for a better look, when they saw the
minister coming from East Wynd, and the choir coming
with him ; and folk cried, Wheest!
’Twas him, the minister, that had started the thing and
had you all out in the Square to-day, old Greig, that filled
the pulpit afore him, hadn’t bothered to hold any service
at all, he’d over-much sense to catch cold in the Square.
But the Reverend Mr Colquohoun was fell keen, he'd
badgered folk to close up their shops and gotten the mills
to close down as well, he fair was a go-ahead billy, like,
though some folk said he was more than that, he’d barely
started interfering yet. ’Twas said he’d already the kirk
session against him, with his preaching for this and that
daft-like reform ; and he’d badgered Hairy Hogg near
from his wits—or what little wits were left the old Provost
—about the town council and where it might meet, and
what it could do, and who were the members, and why
didn’t they light Segget at night, did they know the
drains in West Wynd were bad, when were the mills
inspected, and how ? . . . Folk said the next thing you’d
find him keen on would be shifting the Kaimes for a seat
in his yard, ay, if the creature went on at this rate he’d
soon have all Segget on his hands to fight.
A raw wind blew down the Howe through the Square
CUMULUS 135
and fluttered the minister's robes as he prayed, his thin
white face down-bent as he prayed, his prayer just said
in an ordinary voice. It made a man kind of uneasy
to hear the way that he spoke to God like that—not as
any other ministers would do, as though they’d only
half-swallowed their dinners and had the remainder
still in their throats. No, no, the Reverend Colquohoun
spoke plain, some liked it that way, you were damned
if you did : and he asked the mercy of God on a world
unawakened yet from a night that was past. And he
said that God had made neither night nor day in human
history, He’d left it in the hands of Man to make both,
God was but Helper, was but Man Himself, like men he
also struggled against evil, God’s wounds had bled,
God also had died in the holocaust in the fields of France.
But He rose anew, Man rose anew, he was as undying as
God was undying—if he had the will and the way to live,
on this planet given to him by God. A pillar of cloud
by day and a pillar of fire by night—they had hung in
the sky since the coming of men, set there by God for
the standards of men, clouds and the shining standards of
rain, the hosts of heaven for our standard by night. .
A trumpet had cried and unsealed our ears : would it
need the lightning to unseal our eyes ?
And after a bit you stopped listening to that, you
didn’t know much about preaching and the like, but was
that the way a minister should speak ? You were damned
if you thought so : fair heathen it sounded. And you took
a canny bit keek round about, at the throng of the Segget
folk that were there—hardly a spinner, where were the
dirt ? There was Mrs Colquohoun, anyway, bonny in a
way, with a sulky-like face, a common bit quean the
minister had wifed, folk that had known her well in
Kinraddie said she had once been as blithe as bonny;
136 CLOUD HOWE
but now she was altered out of all manner, if they met
her and spoke to her and cried, Chris ! she would smile
and speak and be friends enough, but different somehow
—ay, she’d grown damned proud. Well, there she was,
and her son as well, the son of her first bit man you had
heard, with a cool, dark face, but not a bad bairn. Nearby
was the Provost and next him his son, the Fasher, rigged
out in his baggy breeks. MacDougall Brown was well
to the fore, not that he’d fought in the War, but he’d
sung ; and Peter Peat, the tailor, a terrible patriot; and
Dite, the foul tink ; and Dominie Geddes, and the three
women teachers ; and the porters and stationy, Smithie
and Ake. Will Melvin you could see near the Station
folk, John Muir and Bruce and a birn of the like. Syne
the minister held up his hand for quiet, and you knew
that it was eleven o’clock.
And faith ! The quiet would have been fell solemn,
but for a great car that came swishing up, from the south,
and turned, and went up East Wynd. Folk had stood
still like stocks of rags, but they moved then and stared
at the thing go by—all but the minister, he stood like a
stone. Then he said, low and clear, We will now sing
the hymn, lOur God, our help in ages past'.
You cleared your throat and looked right and left,
felt shy to be such a fool as stand there and sing
without a bit organ to help ; and the first few words were
a kind of growl, till you heard the minister himself sing
up. And just as folk were getting in the swing, the dirt
of spinners came down to the Square.
They came marching down through the Close from
West Wynd, a twenty or thirty of the ill-gettM creatures,
with their mufflers on, not in decent collars, their washy
faces crinkled with grins, marching along there four by
four. In front of the lot was that tink John Cronin,
CUMULUS
137
and over his shoulder he carried a red flag, and the spinners
behind him were laughing and joking, two-three of them
women, the shameful slummocks. Well, your mouth fell
open, as it damn well might, you had never yet seen
such a sight in Segget; and you stopped your singing,
and so did some more, and some after that, till the only
folk left were the Reverend Colquohoun, and his wife,
and Cis Brown, and that gawpus Else Queen. And then
Ake Ogilvie that hadn’t yet sung took a look round about
and started to sing, as loud as could be, as though he’d new-
wakened ; he did it to be different from others, as usual.
But afore folk could pipe up again to the thing the
spinners were close and J ock Cronin cried Halt! And they
swung round about him and stood in a circle, and next
minute they’d started singing themselves, loud as could
be and fair drowning the hymn, a song about shrouding
their dead in red, and about their bit limbs being stiff and
cold: and God alone knows what kind of stite.
Well, that fairly finished the Memorial Service.
The minister had turned as white as a sheet, he finished
his singing and so did his wife, here and there a man
in the crowd cried out, Have you no manners ?—
speaking to the spinners. And Feet, the policeman, went
over to them, Now then, you’re causing a disturbance,
he said, he was awful proud of that word, was Feet,
that he’d got in a book on how bobbies should speak.
But they took no notice, just stood round and sang, till
he pushed through the ring round that tink John Cronin ;
then they stopped and Cronin said Well, Feet, what’s up ?
Feet was fair roused, a patriot-like childe, he hadn’t
been out to the War himself, they wouldn’t let him go
with feet like that in case he might block up the trenches,
folk said. But he’d fair been a one for the War all the
same, and he wasn’t to see its memory insulted by a pack
138 CLOUD HOWE
of tink bruts that didn't wear collars—them and their
song about flinching and sneering from a scarlet standard
and God knows what. Who ever heard of a scarlet
standard ?—Just a tink way of calling their betters
bloody. ... So he said to Jock Cronin, Aren't you
black ashamed to break in on the War Memorial service?
And Jock Cronin said No, we’re not, you see, Feet, we all
had a taste of the War ourselves. Take a keek at our chests
now, Feet my lad, and then have a look at your own and see
if there’s anything on it the like of on ours !
And then you saw plain what he meant, he himself,
and all of the spinners that had marched to the Square,
had War-medals pinned on their jackets or waistcoats,
they were all of them men who had been to the War :
except the three women, and they wore medals sent on
to them after their folk were dead. Well, that fair
staggered Feet, and you felt sorry for him, especially as
you had no medal yourself, you hadn't been able to
get to the War, you’d been over-busy with the shop
those years, or keeping the trade going brisk in the Arms,
or serving at Segget as the new stationmaster. And well
you might warrant if the King had known the kind of
dirt that those spinners were he wouldn’t have lashed
out as he’d done with his medals.
But Jock Cronin pushed his way past Feet, and jumped
on the pedestal under the angel, and cried out Comrades
—not only mill folk, but others as well that I see down
there: WE went to the War, we knew what it was, we went
to lice and dirt and damnation : and what have we got at
the end of it all ? Starvation wages, no homes for heroes,
the capitalists fast on our necks as before. They’re sacking
men at the mills just now and leaving them on the bureau
to starve—that’s our reward, and maybe it’s yours, that's the
thing we must mind to-day. Not to come here and remember
CUMULUS 139
the dead, they’ve a place that’s theirs and we’ll share it some
time, they’re maybe the better compared with some that live
here in Segget worse-fed than beasts. It’s the living that’s
our concern, you chaps. Come over and join us, the
Labour Party. You first, Mr Colquohoun, you were out
there, you’ve sense.
And as the impudent brute ended up he waved his
hand to the Reverend Colquohoun, and for a minute after
that there was such a quiet you could near have cut it
and eaten it in chunks, it was that damned solid, while all
the folk stared. Syne the minister just turned his back
and said, cool, I think we’ll go home, Chris, to his
wife ; and she nodded and said nothing, they were both
cool and calm. It made a man boil to see them so
meek, damn t ! if you had been a minister, would you let
yourself be insulted like that ? No, you wouldn’t;
and neither would any minister in the days before the
coming of the War, the War had fair been a ruination,
letting tinks like the Cronins find out that their betters
ate and smelt just the same as themselves.
Well, next there was near a fight broke out. Ake
Ogilvie cried to Jock Cronin, Oh ay, and where the hell
did YOU serve in the War? And Jock Cronin said Up
in the front, my lad, not scrounging behind with the Royal
Engineers. No,you hadn’t enough brain for them,you poor
fool, Ake Ogilvie said, and would maybe have said more,
if the minister hadn’t turned round and cried, Ogilvie !
And Ake went off, and the spinners all laughed. Some
folk stayed near to hear what they’d say, most decent
bodies went over to the Arms and spoke of the things
they’d have done to the spinners if they’d stayed behind
in Segget Square.
140
CLOUD HOWE
Chris ran nearly all she way from the Square,
Mr Geddes and his teachers were coming for lunch (as
they called it, but they ate it just as a dinner); and the
meat was cooking in the Manse’s oven. Else you could
see flying on in front, as anxious as you, you’d left
Robert behind, he’d laughed and slowed down and lighted
his pipe. But you ran up under the drip of the yews,
through the Manse front door and through to the kitchen,
and there was Else with her face like a fire, leaning panting
up by the kitchen back door, and a burning smell from the
open oven. Else cried Well, I was just in time! and pointed
to the chicken out in its ashet, it had just begun to burn
at the top. And you said That was fine, you’re a blessing,
Else. Sit and rest a minute. Else took a look at herself
in the glass, I’ve a face like that flag the spinners were
carrying. Did you ever see such nasty brutes ?
Chris said they hadn’t much manners, she thought.
But she’d never before seen men with that flag, or
heard them singing the song about it—hirpling and
sad, but it caught you somehow, there was something
in it that you knew was half-true, true with a truth
that drew your mind back to Chae Strachan far in
your younger days, who had said the mission of the
common folk was to die and give life with their deaths
forever. . . . hike Robert’s God, in a way, you supposed.
And maybe that was Robert’s own thought, Chris
came on him in the sitting-room, standing and
staring queerly at Segget, harsh-blue, rain-driven, in
its clouded noon. Chris put up a hand on his shoulder,
Not vexed? The service was fine, and I liked what you
said. Robert squeezed her hand, My vanity’s vexed.
That’s all, I suppose, and those spinner chaps—a perfect
devil if they’re right, Christine. Chris said How right?
and he said Their beliefs—a war of the classes to bring fruit
CUMULUS 141
ty the War. Remember the Samson I preached that day I
tried for the kirk of Segget, Christine ? I suppose we saw
him in the Square to-day, with a muffler on and a thin, starved
look. If his betters won’t mend the world, HE may !
Then his gaze drew in, Lord, here they come. His
betters—well, well. They’re just at the door.
Chris herself went and opened the door, Mrs Geddes
came gushing in over the mat, Miss M'Askill behind,
sharp as a needle, the second teacher at Segget school.
She eyed Chris up and down as a ferret might, How
d’you do, Mrs Colquohoun ? Disgraceful exhibition
down in the Square ! Chris had heard of Miss M'Askill
from Else, straight as a pole and nearly as bare, and she
wore her hair in two great plaits, low down on her brow,
and it gave her a look like a stirk with its head in a birn
of hay ; and whenever she saw a new man in the toun
she’d stare at him till the man would blush, up and down
in the line of her stare ; and she’d give a bit sniff (or so
said Else), as much as to say What, marriage with you?
But damn the soul had offered that yet, not even
for a night at the furthest gait, Ake Ogilvie had said he
would rather sleep with a Highland steer in the lee of a
whin. Chris tried hard not to remember that, she would
laugh if she did: and so she did not, but shook hands
instead with Miss Ferguson next, her that they called
The Blusher in Segget. And she started to blush as
though someone had couped a jar of red ink on her
head at that minute, the blush came thicker and thicker
each second, till Chris felt so sorry she blushed as well.
Then Miss Jeannie Grant, dapper and trig, with a fresh,
fair face, Hello, Mrs Colquohoun ! What did you think
of the fun in the Square ? East, Mr Geddes, he looked
at you bitter, as though he thought you poor stuff like
the most of mankind, and shook your hand limp, and
CLOUD HOWE
142
trailed after the others, his hands in his pockets, till he
tripped on a toy of Ewan’s in the hall, a wooden horse,
and it fell with a clatter and Ewan came running out to
see why.
Mr Geddes had nearly fallen with the thing. Now
he picked it up a great splinter of wood torn out of its
side. Ewan said What a fool, man, why didn’t you look ?
and Chris cried Ewan ! Mr Geddes grinned. He’s right
enough, I suppose I’m a fool. I’m sorry, young man.
Ewan said So am I.
Chris wanted to giggle, but again did not, instead
looked solemn as a funeral, near—or two funerals if you
counted one of John Muir’s ; and separated the Dominie
and Ewan ere worse came ; and shooed Mr Geddes in
after his wife.
Robert was there, he’d greeted them all, and was
standing by with the sherry decanter. Mr Geddes had
lost the smile plucked out for Ewan, like a last swede
plucked from a frozen field, he said bitter as ever, A
drop, Colquohoun, and sat down and looked round the
room as though he thought damn little of any thing
in it.
And then Ewan started to sing outside, in the moment
when folk were sipping their sherry; and Miss M'Askill
near dropped her glass. Chris got to her feet and felt
herself blush, silly to do that, and she called out Ewan!
and he cried back Yes ? and opened the door. And
Chris felt a fool, the whole room looking at her. Why
were you singing that song just now ?
Ewan said, polite, / like it, mother. I think it’s a
bloody fine song, don’t you ?
Else saved the situation, as usual. They heard her
feet in the hall, Ewan vanished, and the door was stubbed
with a sudden click. Miss M'Askill said it was dreadful,
CUMULUS i43
dreadful, those spinners corrupting even the children.
Didn’t Mrs Colquohoun think the authorities ought to
take steps to putting it down ?
Miss Jeannie Grant was sitting by Robert, showing a
fine length of leg, nice leg, she said What’s ‘it’ ? Put a
stop to singing the Red Flag, do you mean ? And Miss
M Askill said, Yes, that fov one thing, theye aye plenty of
otheys—the ongoings in geneyal of those paid agitatoys.
And Miss Jeannie Grant said, Well, I’m an agitatoy, but
I get no pay. Wheye do the otheys get theiys ? I’d
like to apply! And Miss M'Askill looked at her so
awful, ’twas a wonder she didn’t shrivel up there and
then. But instead she just winked blithe at Chris, and
drank up her sherry and had some more.
Syne they were all speaking of the scene in the Square,
Geddes said bitter that the spinners had behaved as
you would expect such cattle to do, neither better nor
worse than other Scotch folk. All Scots were the same,
the beastliest race ever let loose on the earth. Oh
no, he wasn’t bitter, he’d got over that, he’d got over
living amongst them, even: their gossip that was fouler
than the seepings of a drain, there was hardly a soul
in a village like Segget but was a murderer ten times over
in word—they hadn’t enough courage to be it in deed.
Spinners were no worse than the rest, or not much. As
for this business of a Segget Deague, well, he voted Tory
himself every time, and no Dcague could remain non-
political long. His advice; Colquohoun leave the lot
alone, if there s anything a hog hates it’s cleaning its sty.
Robert asked Miss Ferguson what she might think
Miss Ferguson blushed till Chris feared for her vest!
her underthings would sure be on fire in a minute, she
stammered that she didn t know, for sure, some of the
spinners’ children were cruel, they’d get a girl in the
CLOUD HOWE
144
playground and tease her, or worse than that—and Miss
Ferguson blushed some more, a torrent, till Chris in pity
looked away, and thought herself of her own schooldays
and those things that were WORSE in the reek of the play¬
ground, hot and still on a summer day and a crowd
of loons round about you, laughing, with bright, hot eyes
and their short, fair hair, and cruel, eager fingers . . . but
she hadn’t much minded, she’d been able even then
to look after herself, it needed a sudden twist of her mind
to think, appalled, that Ewan might do that, might stand
by some girl and pry beastly in things—
She switched to listening to the talk again, Mrs
Geddes was having all the say now, the three teachers
had no other course, very plain, but listen to the Dominie's
wife with attention. And Mrs Geddes said what was really
wrong, with the whole of Segget, not only the spinners,
was Refusal to Co-operate in Fellowship. But the W.R.I
was to combat that, and she really didn’t think that this
Eeague was needed. The W.R.I. was to organize socials,
and teach the mothers all kinds of fresh things—basket
work, now, that was very interesting. . . . And she
shone and wobbled like a jelly from a mould, and Geddes’
look of contempt grew deeper. Miss Jeannie Grant put
her sherry-glass down. / don’t see anything your League
can do. But the Labour Party can here in Segget, if only
we make the branch strong enough ; and she looked as sweet
as an apple as she said it, and young and earnest, and
Chris half liked her, as though she stood on a hill and
looked down on her own youth only beginning the
climb, half-liking its confidence, pitying its blindness.
But she thought for that matter, again and again (and
more than ever since their coming to Segget) that she
was older than most she met, older even than Robert
himself—older than all but her own son Ewan !
CUMULUS
145
Then they heard Else stamping out in the hall, and
she rang the bell and they went through to dinner, Mrs
Geddes calling it lunch, of course, she was so genteel
Chris thought it a wonder she should ever open her mouth
for food. But she fair put away a good plateful and more,
for the chicken was golden and cooked to a turn, Robert
sat and carved when he’d said the grace, the grace that
Chris thought so childlike and kind :
God bless our food,
And make us good,
And pardon all our sins,
For Jesus Christ’s sake.
Syne Miss M'Askill was asking Chris, sharp, Are you
fond of social work, Mrs Colquohoun ? and Chris said
Not much, if you mean by that going round and visiting
the kirk congregation. Miss M’Askill raised up her
brows like a chicken considering a something lying on
the ground, not sure if it was just a plain empty husk,
or an interesting bit of nastiness, like. Mrs Geddes
said she was very disappointed, she’d hoped they’d have
Mrs Colquohoun to help—with the work of the W.R.I.,
she meant; and why didn't Mrs Colquohoun like visiting ?
And suddenly Chris understood her and hated her—
she minded the type, oh, well, well enough ! So she
smiled sweet at her and said Oh, you see, I wasn’t always
a minister’s wife. I was brought up on a croft and married
on one, and I mind what a nuisance we thought some folk,
visiting and prying and blithering about socials, doing
everything to help us, or so they woidd think—except to get
out and get on with the work !
Robert’s face went queer, a half-laugh, a half-scowl,
but Miss Jeannie Grant was delighted, she said And
get off your backs, you could surely have added ! You’re
K
CLOUD HOWE
146
a socialist the same as I am, you know. Chris shook
her head, she knew nothing about it, sorry already
she had spoken like that, Mrs Geddes had gone quite
white for a minute, Chris knew she had made an enemy
in Segget. The Dominie stared at his plate with a sneer ;
Miss M'Askill looked at Robert, brows up ; Miss Ferguson
looked at her plate and blushed ; only Ewan ate on, as
calm as ever, except when he said, Can I go now, please ?
Chris caught Miss M'Askill’s eye when he’d gone, it
said, plain as plain, A very spoilt child. And you sup¬
posed that it really was true, the truth as she’d see it,
who’d never had a child, who didn’t know the things that
bound you to Ewan, as though his birth-cord still bound
you together, he tugged at your body, your heart, at
your womb, in some moments of pity it was sheer, sick
pain that tore at you as you comforted him. But THAT
you could never explain to a woman who’d never had a
bairn, had never, you supposed, yet lain with a man,
known all the shame and all the red splendour and all
the dull ache and resentment of marriage that led to the
agony and wonder of looking on the face, sweet and blind
as the eyes of love, of a child new-born from your body’s
harbour. . . . And Chris roused herself, Mr Geddes—
pudding ?
Robert was trying to keep the talk going, but some
thing had spoiled the talk at the table—herself, Chris
supposed, with telling the truth. And she thought
They’re just servant-queans, after all, with a little more
education and a little less sense—these, the folk Robert
had thought could save Segget! It was hardly likely
he thought so now : what would he do with his Teague
and his plans ? Still wait for young Stephen Mowat
to come home ?
CUMULUS 147
Suddenly in the midst and mid of them all—the words
she now used, the thoughts she thought, the clothes she
wore and the things she ate—Chris would see her father’s
face from long syne, the jutting beard and the curling
lip—Come out of that, quean, with your dirt of gentry!
And because she knew in a way it was true, the gentry
that or but little more, sometimes she’d stop in the
middle of a talk, in the middle of a walk, in the middle
of a meal, and stare for so long that Robert would say,
We ve lost her again! Ewan, bring back your mother!
That feeling came over her later that day, when it
brought Stephen Mowat to tea at the Manse. Though
none of them guessed the fact at the time, it had been his
car that passed the service at eleven o’clock in Segget
Square : but ere well the car had reached Segget House
the news had spread all around the toun, young Stephen
Mowat had come home at last, from wandering about in
foreign parts after leaving his English university.
And his shover told as they passed the Square young Mowat
had looked and seen the angel, and had groaned aloud,
Oh Christ, even here—another bitch in a flannel shift!
The shover said they’d seen birns of the statues as they
motored up from England that week, lasses in bronze
and marble and granite, dancing about on pedestal tops,
he’d thought them bonny, Mr Stephen hadn’t, he
said that Britain had gone harlot-mad, and stuck up
those effigies all over the place, in memory no doubt of
the Red Ramps of France.
And the shover said he should know about queans,
young Mowat, considering the number he’d had since
he’d left the college a six months back. No doubt
he d soon have them at Segget House, he intended
to bide there and fee a big staff, and bring back the
148 CLOUD HOWE
the mills for himself, the estate as well, and the Lord
knows what.
Chris heard all this when the school-folk had gone,
from Else, when she went to the kitchen to help. But
Else needed no help, she'd a visitor there, Dalziel of
Meiklebogs it was. He smiled shy and rose when he
saw Chris come in, and she told him to sit, and Else poured
out the news. Chris didn’t feel excited, but she thought
Robert might. Well, that’ll be fine, no doubt, for Segget.
Oh, have we made any cakes for tea ?
Else said they hadn’t, but they damned soon would.
Out of the way, there, Meiklebogs, now! and pushed
him into a chair, he sat canny, his cap in his hands, and
watched while she baked. Chris went back to Robert
and told him the news.
He said Mowat home ? It’s an answer to prayer.
And just as I heard the black dog come barking! Let’s
celebrate! And he caught Chris, daft, and twirled
about the room in a dance. So they didn’t hear the knock¬
ing at the door, Else did, and went and brought Stephen
Mowat in. They came to the door of the sitting-room and
watched, till Chris saw them and stopped, and Robert
did the same. And Else said, Mr Mowat, Mem, and
vanished.
He’d a face that minded her of a frog’s, he was younger
than herself by a good few years, with horn-rimmed
spectacles astride a broad nose, and eyes that twinkled,
and a way of speaking that in a few days was to stagger
Segget. His brow went back to a cluster of curls, he
was charming, you supposed, as a prince should be,
and very likely damn seldom is; and he said he
was pleased to be back in Segget, looking at Chris
as though she were the reason, Chris had never met
in with his like before, and stood and looked at him,
CUMULUS
149
cool, in surprise, taller than he was, he was to say later
he felt he was stared at by Scotland herself. And once,
when drunk, he was to say to the Provost that she couldn’t
get over her blood and breed, she was proud as all the
damned clodhoppers were, still thought in her heart they
were the earth’s salt, and thought the descendant of a long
line of lairds on the level with the descendants of a long
line of lice. And he said by God, had it been a four
hundred years back, he’d have tamed that look quick
enough in his bed, maybe she lost something of her sulkiness
there. And Provost Hogg boasted and said Not a doubt ;
and started to tell of his ancestor, Burns. And Mowat
said, Who ? Oh, Robbie Burns ? A hell of a pity he
couldn't write poetry, and the Provost was vexed, but
then, 'twas the laird, just joking-like ; and he was the laird.
Chris heard of that later, she’d have needed second-
sight to know of the gossip that would be in the future :
she said she was glad to see him, she wasn’t, neither glad
nor sad, a funny little thing, was this what Robert
depended upon ? Funny that the like of him for so long
had lived on the rent of folk like hers. Syne she went to
the kitchen to see how the cakes came, they were brown
and steaming, set on the table, and Meiklebogs, shy, like
a big, sly steer, was sitting and eating one by the sink.
And because she just couldn't thole him at all, he made
her want to go change her vest, Chris smiled at him and
was extra polite, and hoped that he’d stay to tea with
Else ; and helped Else pile the things on a tray ; and they
carried it through and found Robert and the laird already
deep in the talk that was planned by Robert himself when
he first saw Segget.
Mr Mowat’s English bray sounded so funny that
Else gave a giggle and near dropped the tray. Is the
creature foreign ? and Chris said No ; and Else said no
CLOUD HOWE
150
more, but went solemnly in, and took only a keek or so
at the creature, a little bit thing in baggy plus-fours.
And he said Oh, thenks! and I say ! and How Jahly l
Else nearly giggled again, but she didn't, till she got to the
kitchen and there was Meiklebogs, and she gave him a
poke, I say, how Jahly ! You old devil, I’ve a good mind
to make up to the laird. What would you do then, eh, would
you say?
Meiklebogs smiled canny and said he would manage,
and Else stared at him and wondered again why she’d
ever allowed the old brute to come near her since she’d
wept in his bed that night of the Show ; she supposed she
was still in a kind of a daze at finding the old brute as
coarse as they’d said.
Chris sat in the sitting-room and listened to Mowat,
and handed him tea, he said he’d come back to look after
the mills and Segget in general, the curse of the age was
its absentee landlords, not social conditions or unrest or
suchlike. He was Jahly well sure he could buck up the
village—didn’t Mrs Colquohoun approve of that, now ?
he’d want her approval ever so much. And he flashed
her a long, bright, toothy smile, he’d fine teeth and knew
it; and Chris said, I don’t know. I’ll wait and see what the
bucking consists of. My father was a crofter and he used
to say you should trust a laird just as far as you can throw
him.
Stephen Mowat said he thought Mrs Colquohoun's
father Jahly, and glinted charming, and Chris gave him
up, and cleared off the tea things and came back and
listened. By then, so it seemed, Robert had told of his
plans, and was sitting now harkening to Mowat’s reply.
And the reply was : The thing that was needed everywhere
was Discipline, hwaw? and order, and what not. The
hand of the master—all the Jahly old things. He had
CUMULUS
151
been down in Italy the last few months and had seen things
there, Rahly amazing, the country awakening, regaining
its soul, its old leaders back—with a new one or so.
Discipline, order, hierarchy—all that. And why only
Italy ; why not Scotland ? He’d met other men, down
from 'varsity of late, who were doing as he did, going
back to their estates. Scotland a nation—that was the
goal, with its old-time civilization and culture. Hwaw ?
Didn’t Mr Coloquohoun agree ?
But Chris had been listening, and now she must speak,
she’d been trying to think as well as to listen, it was hard
enough, but words suddenly came: they both turned round
with a start as she spoke. A nd what’s going to happen when
you and your kind rule us again, as of old, Mr Mowat ?
Was there ever the kind of Scotland you preach ?—Happy,
at ease, the folk on the land well-fed, the folk in the pulpits
well-feared, the gentry doing great deeds ? It’s just a gab
and a tale, no more, I haven’t read history since I was at
school, but I mind well enough what that Scotland was. I’ve
been to Dunnottar Castle and seen there the ways that the
gentry once liked to keep order. If it came to the push
between you and the spinners I think I would give the spinners
my vote.
Mowat said Rahly ? staring at Chris, Robert stared as
well at her down-bent face—suddenly she’d seen so much
she didn’t say, all the pageant of history since history
began up here in the windy Mearns Howe: the ancient
rites of blood and atonement where the Standing Stones
stood up as dead kings; the clownings and cruelties of
leaders and chiefs ; and the folk—her folk—who kept such
alive—dying frozen at night in their eirdes, earth-houses,
chaving from the blink of day for a meal, serfs and land-
workers whom the Mowats rode down, whom the armies
harried and the kings spat on, the folk who rose in the
i52 CLOUD HOWE
Covenant times and were tortured and broken by the
gentry’s men, the rule and the way of life that had left
them the pitiful gossiping clowns that they were, an
obscene humour engraffed on their fears, the kindly souls
of them twisted awry and veiled from men with a dirty
jest; and this snippet of a fop with an English voice
would bring back worse, and ask her to help !
And then that went by, she was suddenly cool. It
was only a speak, a daft blether of words, whatever else
happened to Segget, to Scotland—and there were strange
things waiting to happen—there would never come back
that old darkness again to torment the simple folk of her
blood. Robert was speaking, he knocked out his pipe.
I’m afraid my wife and I think the same—as all folk
worth their salt in Scotland must think. There are changes
coming—they are imminent on us—and I once thought the
folk of some teaching would help. Well, it seems they wont—
the middle class folk and the upper class folk, and all the
poor devils that hang by their tails .' they think we can last
as we are—or go back—and they know all the while they are
thinking a lie. But God doesn’t wait, or His instruments,
and if these in Segget are the folk of the mills, then, whatever
their creed, I’m on their side.
Chris started and moved, she nearly had frozen,
leaning up here while the night went on, she ought to be
down in her bed, she supposed. The rain had cleared and
the stars had come out, frost was coming—there, bright
down in Segget, was a mantling of grey where the hoar
was set, sprinkled like salt on the cant of the roofs.
Beyond them there rose a red, quiet lowe, from the
furnaces stacked for the night in the mills.
CUMULUS 153
She stamped her feet and drew up her collar, watching
that coming of the frost below. This impulse to seek the
dark by herself ! She had left Robert up in his study at
work, Kwan in bed, young Mowat gone, and herself gone
out for a walk through the rain that was closing in the
end of Remembrance Day, wet and dank, as she d seen it
come. And it might be an age ere she came here again,
too busied with living to stand looking at life, with Hwan
at school and the campaign of Robert to conquer Segget
for God and his dream.
A pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night.
She raised her eyes and looked where the frost lay
bright in the west, where the evening star wheeled down
to midnight to lead her feet home.
Ill
STRATUS
TT was funny to think, this forenoon in June, how long it
had been since she climbed the Kaimes, here rose the
walls, in their mantle of heather, a blackbird was whistling
up in the yews, as she turned around slow she saw the
light flow up and down the hill as though it were liquid,
Segget below lying buried in a sea, as once all the Howe
had lain, Ewan said. Still weak, Chris halted and
sat on the wall, her hands below her, and looked at
Segget, and drew out her hands and looked at those,
so thin that almost she could see through them, so thin
her face when she put up her hand that the cheekbones
that once curved smooth under flesh now felt like twin
jagged crags of rock—a long time ere she’d look comely
again !
She leant her head in her hand a moment and waited
for the hill below to cease reeling—maybe she’d come
out too early from bed, this walk, Else had said she
mustn’t go far. But the Kaimes had called her after
those weeks of the smell of medicines, close fires, and the
pain that ran up and down her and played hide and
seek with every sinew and bone that she had. So up she
had come, the sun was up here, she was out of it for an
hour or so, out of the winking flash of the days, to sit and
look from the high places here, as Christ once had done
with the devil for guide.
Idly she minded that and smiled—it came of being
a minister’s wife. What had the devil said to Christ
then ? Maybe Just rest. Rest and have peace. Don’t
let them tear you to bits with their hates, their cares and their
loves, your angers for them. Leave them and rest!
Yes, He’d said that, there wasn’t a doubt, just as He
stood by her saying it now, telling her to rest for the
154
STRATUS I55
first time in years since that night when she last had
climbed up the Kaimes, telling her to rest and leave them
a-be her cares for Robert, for that other who came and
yet never came—for that third, that stranger whom
slow through the years she had grown to half-know as a
traveller half-knows the face of another on a lone road at
night, in the summer light of a falling star. . . . How
Segget would snigger if they heard her say that that
stranger desired was her own son Ewan !
Being young Ewan Tavendale wasn’t all fun, you’d to
get up as early as half-past six in the little room that
looked down on Segget. But it was a good room, the
best in the Manse, you could look of a night right into
the trees when the rooks came nesting, they had a
great time, fighting and mating and playing the devi.
Once you nearly fell out when two rooks were at it
mating, you’d wanted to know how it was done But
that was a long time ago, when a kid, you knew all about
it now, humans or rooks, mother or Robert, and there
wasn’t much in it, though the spinner kids of West
Wynd thought so. Charlie Cronin drew pictures in the
lavatories at school, the silly ass couldn’t draw at all.
So you drew some yourself to show how things were, he
turned red-faced when you drew IT so well. Ewan,
that’s dirty ! What was dirty about it ?
You would lie and mind these things of a morning
and stare at the ceiling and hark to the rooks moving
and chattering and swearing in the cold—how they did
swear as the daylight grew 1 Sometimes you’d wanted
to swear yourself, and you’d tried once or twice when
you were a kid, but it sounded half-witted, so you gave it
CLOUD HOWE
156
up. You couldn't see sense in rubbish like swearing,
any more than in speaking in Scotch, not English, as
mother did sometimes, and so did Robert, and so did
Else (but she couldn’t help it). Scotch was rubbish, all
ee's and wee’s, you didn’t even speak it in the school
playground. And the other kids had mocked you at
first, but they didn’t long, with a bashing or so.
Chris (and once Else) rigged you out of a morning,
now you did it yourself, nearly twelve years old. The
clock went birr as you looked at its face and you got out of
bed and out of your pyjamas, Charlie Cronin slept in his
shirt, he said only gentry wore things like pyjamas.
You were glad you were gentry, then, shirts got sticky.
Then you’d hear the clock going off down below, where
the new girl slept, she was shy and said Eh ? A
perfect fool, she near fainted one morning, in summer it
was, when she first came here. You’d thought you’d
go down and get a bath first before either Robert or
Chris should be at it. So you’d nipped down the stairs
without anything on, and as you came back she came from
her room, and gave a screech like a frightened hen, as
though she’d never seen folk without clothes. Charlie
Cronin said that his father, old George, would take off
his clothes slow bit by bit, the top bits first, and cover
himself up, and then the lower, and he’d cover that—
you’d supposed that Maidie herself was like that, a fool,
maybe frightened to look at herself.
So after that you had promised Chris that you’d wear
some clothes when outside your room, she’d said that
she herself didn’t care—and you said Yes, mother, I know
that you don’t. I once saw you with nothing on coming up
the stairs—a night long ago when I was a kid. I think it
was the night of a Segget Show.
She’d blushed, as though nearly as bad as the others.
STRATUS 157
but she wasn’t' you were glad, that your mother was
Chris. She didn’t know that you called her that, to
yourself, not aloud, aloud you said Mother. But
Robert, just Robert, he wasn’t your father. Robert was
fun when he wasn’t at work, with the kirk or the spinners
or his Labour plans—summers he took you and Chris
on your bikes out on far jaunts up and down the Howe,
to Edzell, to Brechin, to Garvock Hill where they boiled
the Sheriff but not Leslie the smith—you asked Robert
what he meant by that say, and he and Chris laughed
like a couple of fools. But out on picnics he changed and
was young, and would teach you to throw and do the
high jump, he could jump like anything, Robert, and
box. Everybody knew that in Segget now, they hadn’t
at first, especially the spinners, and had mocked at
Robert till he taught them manners. Charlie Cronin had
been jealous of him and of you, that was at first when
you first went to school, the first day he came swaggering
up and said Oh, you’re the dirt from the Manse, are
you ? And you said I’m not dirt, I’m Ewan Tavendale,
and he mocked at you till you hit him a bash,
right on the nose, and he bled and bled, though it
was only a baby bash, you were both of you just babies
yourselves. But you won that fight all the same, Mr
Geddes had watched it all from a window; and he went
to the Manse and told Chris about it; and she asked that
night Did he hurt you, Ewan ? and you said Ay,
all the kids had said Ay; and Chris said Oh, Ewan,
that was real like your father! Father had been killed
by the Germans in France.
Time for breakfast: and there was Robert, busy with
letters, and Chris, looking sweet. But she always did
that, even when she was angry, she could do nearly
anything, answer you anything, she couldn’t run maybe
i58 CLOUD HOWE
as fast as you could and she was a perfect fool about
flints, but she always told the truth about things, most
grown-up people told lies half the time. You didn t
yourself, it wasn’t worth the bother, explaining, and
trying to straighten things later.
And Chris would say It's nearly schooltime, and
you’d look at the clock, and see that it was, and Robert
would say, He's dreaming about flints! But you
hadn’t been dreaming, you’d been thinking of Chris,
she’d looked different of late in a puzzling way. Now,
if it had been any other woman in Segget, you’d have
known—but not Chris ! It made a cold water come in
your mouth, as though you were going to be sick, that
thought. And Chris said What’s wrong ? That’s a funny-
loon stare. And you said Oh, nothing. I’ll need to be going.
You kissed Chris every morning, one kiss a day ;
kisses were sloppy except for that one—like the taste of
honey up on a hill, clear, with the wind in the summer
south. Robert cried Ta-ta ! and you did the same, and
were out in the hall, where Maidie would be, tweetering
about and worrying again, wondering if breakfast were
over yet. You hardly ever took notice of her, not since
she’d screeched that time on the stairs. She d call Master
Ewan, is the breakfast done ? and you’d say I don t
know and leave her to twitter—who wanted to be
mastered like a kid in a book ?
Out from the Manse and down through the shingle,
giving it a kick and a plough as you went, under the
ferny tops of the yews, the rooks all wakened and
screeching, or off—all but the young ones, pecking,
gaping. If it was summer you passed under quick, they
dropped dirt down when you least expected, they
dropped it once on the Provost of Segget when he came
to see Robert and he walked back home with it white
STRATUS 159
on his hat and everyone laughed, and he nearly had a
fit when he found out about it.
He was frightened to be laughed at, most people were,
you didn’t care a button one way or another, they might
laugh themselves blue in the face at you, you were
yourself—and what did it matter ?
And there was the land and there were the touns,
Segget half-blue in its early smoke, you started early
and with time to spare to go round the toun and back
up to the school. So you'd stop and pull up your stock¬
ings to your knees, in shorts, and the shirt and tie that
Chris tied, you couldn’t get the knack of the thing, she
would say Oh, Ewan, you’ve forgotten to tie it at all!
and you’d say I forgot, and she’d ruffle your hair, Thinking
about flints again, I suppose ? She and Robert were
always joking about flints, and calling them wrong names,
and thinking that funny.
Down by Meiklebogs the curlews were calling, you
heard them above the shoom of the Mills, Robert said
something about that once—Twin daughters of the
Voice of God. You hadn’t bothered to find out what
he meant, though you bothered about most things right
to the end, sense to find out why this went like this, and
that was so, and the wheels went round, and some stars
twinkled and a lot did not, why people were ashamed
to be seen without clothes and didn’t like girls to go out
late at night, and hated capitalists, if they were spinners,
and hated spinners, if they were New Toun.
The curlew called and you stopped and listened, Else
would hear it at the Meiklebogs, you’d liked Else a
lot, though not all the time. Once she’d come to your
room late in the night, harvest, and was sloppy and
kissed you about, you hated slop and threw a book
at her, it hit her, she stared, you were sorry a bit.
160 CLOUD HOWE
There was a seagull up on that post, try a stone at it
—nearly its tail!—and there was Ake Ogilvie’s shop
beyond. Most mornings you loitered about at Ake’s,
he’d lean from the door with his compass in hand and
cry Well, then, have you learned your Burns ? ’twas
a joke between you, the poetry of Burns, silly Scotch
muck about cottars and women, and love and dove and
rot of that sort. Ake would recite you some of his own,
his green eyes twinkling and his eyebrows twinkling,
with a coating of sawdust sprayed on the hairs, and his
long moustache going up and down, so, and you’d stare
at him and listen a while, it was good enough, better
than Burns’s rot. Poetry was rot, why not say it plain,
when a man kissed a woman or a woman had a baby ?
Down past the house of Jimmy the Sourock, the
road had a dip and a hollow for years, the rain would
gather, deep, in a pool, you used to march through it,
your feet close together, and watch the water soak in at
the eyelets, and feel it trickling betwixt your toes : that
was when you were only a kid. Then Mrs Sourock would
look out and see, and cry she would tell the Mem at the
Manse, that was Chris she meant, and you didn’t care.
It was no business of hers to get mad because you liked
to wade in the water, especially as she herself was so
proud that her husband, the Sourock, drank nothing
but water, since he got that fright with the pig in his
bed. And every Sunday he went down to the Square, to
the service-meeting of MacDougall Brown, and sang
about blood, and you thought that funny, he’d been so
frightened at the blood of the pig. You’d once played
truant from the kirk to go down and watch MacDougall
Brown as he prayed, he opened his mouth and looked
as though blind, with his eyes like glass and his teeth
all black, perhaps he was frightened to go to the dentist.
STRATUS 161
A dentist came twice a week now to Segget, he hired
a room at the back of Dite Peat’s : and the first time he
came Charlie Cronin was there, hiding and listening
under the window to hear the howls when the teeth
came out. And the first to come was old Mrs Hogg,
she had a wart on her nose like Cromwell and hair growing
out of the wart as well, and she groaned like anything,
Charlie told. Then she said to the dentist How much
will that be ? and he said Half a crown, and Mrs Hogg
said What ? Half a crown for that, just pulling out a tooth ?
Why, old Leslie the smith down there at the smiddy used to
pull me all over the place with his tongs, and never would
ask a meek for it, either.
But you liked Mrs Hogg, she would cry as you
passed, Hello, Ewan lad, is there anything fresh? And
you’d show her the latest flints that you’d got, and
she wouldn’t just laugh or blither about Druids, as
everyone else in Segget would do, but would ask what
the hunters had done with the things, and she’d say that
that was amazing, just, what a thing it was to be learned
and young. She’d sense, Mrs Hogg, more sense than her
son, who sometimes came home on a holiday ; he spoke
bad English and wore bad breeks, and patted your head
and said Little man, or tried to pat you, you just stepped
aside.
Sometimes you’d look into Peter Peat’s shop, where
he sat on a table making a suit, he’d frown and motion
you to get off, he came every Sunday and listened to
Robert and hated his sermons and Robert as well. You’d
heard him one Sunday say to the Provost the minister
was nothing but a Bolshevik, just, as bad as that tink
John Cronin, the porter. Bolsheviks lived in Russia, you
knew, they’d closed all the kirks and they all worked
together and they hadn’t a king : and it sounded sense.
Iy
162
CLOUD HOWE
By now you’d got to the end of East Wynd, to the
Square where the War Memorial stood, the angel that
looked like Miss M'Askill, Miss M'Askill had eyes that
would lift up that way when she found something dirty
drawn on a slate. In lower East Wynd of a winter
morning half the lane was frozen to a slide, you took a
long run from Peter Peat’s shop and shot down the
Wynd on the frozen slide that came from the leaking
drains of Segget. By the Moultrie shop you’d to plan
your turn, else you’d batter yourself on the wall of their
house, as you’d done your second winter in Segget, the
whole of Segget seemed fallen upon you, and your face
had shifted, you sat on the ground and thought you
had lost it and felt it all over, it still was there, grown
bigger than ever, growing bigger and bigger every moment,
it seemed. It was while you were sitting there, licking
the blood, it trickled from your lips and tasted salt,
that old Mrs Moultrie came out and found you, she’d
heard the bang as you struck the wall, she said to Chris
when she took you home she thought that it was a cart
and horse. But you liked her in spite of clyping to
Chris, her face, brown, old, and tired and quiet as she
bathed you and whished as though you were a baby,
till you sat up and said I’m fine. Many thanks. Old
Moultrie was sitting in his corner, glaring, reading a
Bible, and you said Good day.
He’d taken no notice at all before that, he glared
some more, but you didn’t mind, you saw he really
was awfully shy underneath all the hair and the horns,
so you said, while Mrs Moultrie went out for a towel,
Do you like the Bible ? There’s a lot of rot in it. He
stood up, shaking all over, funny, and asked, And you’re
the minister’s bairn ? And you shook your head. Oh
no, I’m not. Robert’s only my stepfather, didn’t you know ?
STRATUS 163
My father was a crofter down in Kinraddie. Much better
than being a minister, I think.
Funny, he was friendly enough after that, and started
telling you stories of Segget, when there weren’t so many
of the gentry dirt sossing about with their motor-cars.
And you listened, polite, because he was old, a pity
besides that he was so shy. But Mrs Moultrie said to
Chris that you were the only soul in Segget he’d treated
to a civil word for years.
There was the Arms, not worth looking at, you threw
a stone at a cat in the Square and watched the dog up
against the angel, funny that dogs were so fond of that.
They really couldn’t want to, so often. Every day that
dog of Newlands came down, as you turned in the
Square to go up the Close, and did that against the
Memorial stone, you’d once told Robert, and he’d laughed
and laughed and said that the dog was a pacifist, maybe.
But one morning you stood and watched for the dog and
sure as anything along it came, and stopped, and relieved
itself by the angel; and the door of the Arms opposite
opened, and Mrs Melvin came out and said that you were
a dirty little brute to stand and look at a dog doing
that  Weren’t you black burning ashamed of yourself ?
She was soft in the head, why should you be shamed ?
Maybe she was drunk, but you didn’t say anything, just
looked her all over, from top to toe, to see if she’d fallen
while she was drunk, and then raised your cap and
went on to school.
Round by here you could see the Mills, in the big.
glass windows across the field the whirr of the wheels
as they caught the sun, the spinners at work in the dust
and the smell; but you liked the Mills, you’d been
down there twice, with Charlie, he said the folk in New
Toun were daft to speak of the folk in the Mills as only
CLOUD HOWE
164
spinners, there were foremen and weavers, and a lot more
besides ; but they all looked like spinners.
To the right, in the Spring and most of the year,
as you passed up The Close you would see in the park
the donkey that was kept by MacDougall Brown. If
you whistled one note, high up in your throat, you’d found
that the donkey would bray every time. So nearly
every day as you passed you whistled that note and the
donkey brayed, and you laughed, and he’d bray some
more and come trotting and push his long nose through
the fence and snuffle, but he never bit you as once Mabel
Brown. Mrs Brown spoke funny, and she called her
May-bull, and had a long story how the donkey once
bat May-bull when she went to play in the park.
There was the smiddy and it once was great fun, when
you were a kid, to lean up by the door and look at old
Teslie blowing the bellows, he'd turn round and sweat,
Ay man, is that you ? He called you man, but he
blithered a lot, you would hardly heed at all what he
said—about Chris, was she ill-like of late, would you say ?
and The minister’ll be gey fond of her, eh? and D’ye
mind your own father that was killed out in France ?
And you said you didn’t know to all of these questions,
because you couldn’t be bothered with them, and he said,
Eh man, when my father died I just roared and howled—
ay, loon, I’d a heart. And you said Like the Roarer and
Greeter, Miss Moultrie ? And he stopped and stared with
his mouth fallen open, and muttered that you were
an impudent get.
You’d take the West Wynd through the Old Toun
then, with its crumbling white houses and its washing to
dry, there was always washing to dry, never dried.
You knew a lot of the kids in West Wynd, they’d be
finishing porridge and pulling on boots, and they’d cry
STRATUS
165
Wait, Ewan! but you’d never wait, except for young
Cronin, he’d come slouching out and say Ay, Ewan, and
you’d say Hello, Charlie, and go on together, not saying
a thing till he’d ask, as always, Have you done your sums ?
Then you’d know that he hadn’t done his and would
bring out your book so that he might copy.
Funny that he couldn't do things like sums, you could
nearly do them with both eyes shut, and lean back and
go off on a think on flints while the other scholars were
finishing theirs; and Miss M'Askill would cry out,
Ewan! Have you finished already ? Show me your
sums. And you’d show them to her, she’d stand over
close, with an arm around your shoulder, like so ; and
you’d move away, though as slow as you could ; and
she wrote in your report to the Manse that you were
brilliant, but you hadn't enthusiasm; you supposed
because you hadn't enthusiasm for cuddling.
It had been different in the first two years, the youngest
room with Miss Jeannie Grant, Miss Grant was pretty
and laughed at you, and at everyone else, and kept her
cuddles for Charlie’s brother, or so you supposed. She
was going to be married some time to him, Jock Cronin,
that was only a railway porter, Chris said that job was as
good as another. But you didn’t think much of John
Cronin, yourself, he didn’t believe what he himself said,
he just said things and then tried to believe them—you
knew that well while you watched him sit, with Robert,
up in a room at the Manse, and talk of Segget and social¬
ism coming—it was all a fairy-tale, and he knew it,
why didn’t he say the things that he thought ?
You said that to Chris and she took your two shoulders,
and shook her head and looked at you, strange, Oh
Ewan, you’re hard and cool as—grey granite! When
you too grow up you’ll find facts over much—you’ll need
i66
CLOUD HOWE
something to follow that's far from the facts. And she
said something else, about a pillar of cloud, and was
suddenly angry, Don’t stare at me so! And you said
I'm sorry, and she shook you again. So am I, Ewan—
hut oh, you’re so cool!
Well, you saw nothing to make you excited, except
now and then a broad-flake flint. It was worth reading
history to get at these people, the makers of flints and
their lives long ago. Though most of the histories were
dull as ditchwater, with their kings and their battles and
their dates and such muck, you wondered how the people
had lived in those times. But especially before the
history-book times you wanted to know how men had
lived then and had read all the books you could find in
the Manse, and got money from Chris to send and buy
others, the lives of the people ere history began, before
the Venricones came to the Mearns. And young Cronin
would listen and say What’s the use ? Father says that the
only things we should learn are how to fight the caPITalists.
You didn't know about them, you asked who they were,
and Charlie said Folk like that mucker Mowat.
Mr Mowat lived sometimes in Segget House, but most
of the time he was down in Condon, sleeping with whores,
Charlie Cronin said. You asked what whores were and
he told you about them, what they did, how they slept
for money with men. You said that you didn’t see why
they shouldn’t, and Charlie said you’d a dirty mind, and
would soon be doing the same as Mowat. That was rot,
you hadn’t any use for girls, they could only giggle and
drift along roads, with their arms twined, and screech
about nothing. Or they played soft games in their own
playground, once you’d run through there for a cricket-
ball and the bigger girls were playing a game, When
will my true love come from the sea\ and the silly fools
STRATUS 167
pulled you in the middle and kissed and slobbered you one
after the other, you stood it as long as you could, then
pushed out, you didn’t want to hurt the fools and you
didn’t; but you had felt almost sick in their hands.
You told Chris that when she heard about it, she laughed
and said All lasses aren’t fools, and they think you a
good looking lad, I believe. So you said that you didn t
care about that, could you have a piece now and go up to
the Kaimes ?
You went often up there to seek round for flints;
when they dug the Kaimes they must have dug deep,
in a squatting-place of the ancient men, and mixed the
flints with the building-earth. You had nearly thirty
specimens already, properly labelled in a press in your
room, and each described on a ticket near. And you had
a catalogue, fairly complete, with diagrams of the ripples,
hinge-fractures, the ovates and such, and a drawing of the
best, a tortoise-core from the lyeachie bends. Most of
the stuff was late Bronze Age, when the hunters in
Scotland had still only flints.
Dinner-times you went home by the near way, quick,
stopping to throw up a stone at the rooks. Robert would
sometimes be there at the table, and sometimes was out
and about the Mearns, trying to raise his fund for the
miners, and raising little but temper, he said. Chris
never went with him at the dinner-hour, she would stay
at home and help Maidie at work, Maidie couldn’t cook a
dinner for toffee.
Sometimes Chris would be out at night when you
came back from the school for tea. So Maidie would give
you your tea, like a mouse, and you’d have it and help
her to clear and she’d say, Oh, Master Ewan, I ll do it
myself, but you took no notice, just went on and helped,
not heeding her blether you should do your lessons, any
i68
CLOUD HOWE
fool could do the lessons in ten minutes. Then you'd
climb to your room and look in your press, and dust here
and there that tortoise core, and a fabricator-cone you
had gotten near Brechin, and take them out and turn
them with care, the light waning and dying in from the
window as the day waned west from the slopes of the Howe.
And sometimes you’d raise your head and look up, when
the sun grew still on the peaks of the Mounth, by the
glens and the haughs you had searched for flints, and
think of the men of ancient times who had made those
things and hunted those haughs, running naked and swift
by the sunlit slopes, fun to live then and talk with those
people. Robert said that they hadn’t been savage at all,
but golden hunters of the Golden Age.
And once Chris came up as you stood and looked at a
new ripple-flake you had newly found, a summer night ere
you went to bed, you’d taken everything off, to be cool,
and stood by the window and traced out the whorls on the
red and yellow of the antique axe. Chris opened the door,
you felt the air waft, and turned and looked at her, her
standing so still. You asked was anything wrong,
she said No, giving a laugh, as though wakening up.
Only you looked like a hunter yourself, strayed and lost
from the Golden Age !
And Else went by, and looked through the door, and
suddenly flushed and ran up the stairs ; that was just a
week ere she went from the Manse.
Faith, that had fairly set folk agog, when that coarse
quean Else was sacked from the Manse. It just showed
you the way that the world was going, dirty spinners
that gave you their lip, work hard to get, so many sweir—
STRATUS
169
and ministers that couldn’t look after their queans.
Folk said they’d been at it a year and a half, her and
Dalziel of the Meiklebogs, afore that Sabbath night in
July when Mr Colquohoun came in on the pair, right
bang in the Manse’s own kitchen it was, Meiklebogs in
the way you’d expect a man in, Else Queen in a way that
no quean should be in, with a two-three bits of her rig
laid by. The minister had said This won’t do, Else,
fair mad with rage at old Meiklebogs, for he himself had
slept with his maid, and was over-mean to share the lass
out.
Some said that that was all a damned lie, the minister
had nothing to do with the quean, she’d left the Manse
of her own free will. The Reverend Mr Robert Colquohoun
wouldn’t bed with an angel sent down from heaven, let
alone a red-faced maid in his house, he was over decent
and fond of his wife. But you shook your head when you
heard that, faith ! it clean took the guts from a fine bit
tale. If he wasn’t the kind to go to bed with any bit
quean could you tell a man why he was chief with the
Cronin dirt, socialists that said you might lie where you
liked and didn’t believe in morals or marriage ?
And if some childe said that THAT wasn’t true, you
knew right well that he was a liar, you’d seen it all in the
People’s Journal, what the coarse tinks did in Russia
with women—man, they fair had a time with the women,
would you say ’twould be easy to get a job there ?
Well, whatever the thing that took place at the Manse,
and well you might wyte it wasn’t just prayer—with that
scowling brute, the minister himself, and his wife with
her proud don’t-touch-me face, and that meikle red-
haired bitch of an Else—whatever happened Else left
the Manse and took a fee at the Meiklebogs. And what
the two of them did when alone, with the night in about
CLOUD HOWE
170
and the blinds pulled down, you well might guess, though
you didn’t ask. All but Dite Peat, and he said one night,
when Dalziel came taiking into the Arms, with that shy¬
like smile on his unshaved face, and the yellow boots
that he wore for scuddling, Ay, Meiklebogs, you’ll sleep
warm now. She’s a well-happed quean, Else Queen, I
should think. Dalziel said nothing, just smiled like a
gowk and drank at his dram and syne had another, he
hadn’t a yea or a nay to say, it showed you the coarse
old brute that he was, and you nearly bursting your
bladder to know.
Some said they didn’t believe it at all, Dalziel of the
Meiklebogs a decent-like childe, and an elder of Segget
kirk forbye. So he might be, but you knew a man’s
nature, he needed a woman just now and again—no, no,
you didn’t blame him overmuch, but she fairly must be
an ill tink, that Else Queen. And you’d look at her hard
the next time that you met, not a bit of shame she would
show as she passed, just cry Ay, Fusty Face, so it’s you ?
and go swinging by with her meikle hips on the sway like
stacks of hay in a gale, well-fleshed and rosy, disgusting,
you thought, you’d feel as mad as a mating tyke at
Meiklebogs and his shameless sin.
But faith! ’twas the same wherever you looked.
There was Mr Mowat up at the House, folk said he’d
come back from a Eondon jaunt with two of the painted
jades this time, you’d hear their scraichs all over the
House ; and once the servant went in of a morning and
what do you think he saw in the bed ? Young Mr Mowat
with a quean on each side, he’d slept with the two and
he fairly looked hashed, the bitches just laughed as the
servant gaped, and one slapped Mr Mowat in a certain
place and cried Hi Solomon, here’s the head eunuch !
But you couldn’t believe all the lies that you heard.
STRATUS I7I
Young Mr Mowat was fairly a gent, and right fine if you
met him outbye, and speak civil; and say he Rahly was
glad that you’d met. He was maybe a bit daft about
Scotland and such, and a lot of dirt about history and
culture. But couldn’t a gent please himself with his
ploys, it kept him from wearying and did no harm ?
When the Mills closed down for a fortnight once, they had
over-much stock already on hand, he said he was Jahly
sorry for the spinners—and he couldn’t say fairer than
that, could he now ? So you couldn’t believe about the
two queans, and even were it true twas a different thing
 wasn’t it ?—a gent with his play, and a randy old
brute like that Meiklebogs man sossing about with a quean
half his age ?
Them that said Dalziel was an innocent childe fair got
a sore shock ere the year was out, Else at her new place
worked outdoor and indoor, she d to kilt her skirts (if
they needed kilting—and that was damned little with those
short-like frocks) and go out and help at the spreading of
dung, and hoeing the turnips and anything else, she was
worth her own fee and a joskin s as well. W ell, the
harvest came and it came fell heavy, Else helped at the
stocking and syne at the leading. That was a windy
September day, the other childes were down in the fields,
Else and Meiklebogs managed a cart, out in the park
Meiklebogs forked sheaves, big and thick, into Else Queen's
arms ; and she built them round and about the shelvins
till they rose four high and syne it was time for Meiklebogs
to lead home the horse, Jim, the roan, a canny old beast.
So home they would go and the stour would rise under
the grind of the iron wheels, up above the Mounth in
CLOUD HOWE
172
its mist of blue, Dalziel would look back now and again
and see that the corn was biding in place, and see Else as
well, lying flat on the top, with her eyes fast-closed, the
meikle sweir wretch.
So he led the roan, Jim, up the Meiklebogs close, and
round to the back of the Meiklebogs barn, high in the
wall a window was cut, and he planned that this load be
forked through the window for early threshing with his
new oil mill. He stopped the horse and he backed it
canny, the roan was old and he gave a bit groan, and
Dalziel gave the roan a belt in the mouth, the brute of a
beast to groan out like that, folk would think that it was
ill-treated. The roan looked surprised, as though he’d
done nothing; and Dalziel cried to Else Queen, Come on,
you’ll have to be up and doing some work.
She cried, I’ll soon do that, you old mucker, she
called him the terriblest names to his face, and all he
would do would be to smile shy, and stroke at his chin,
neither shaved nor unshaved. So he held, splay-footed,
to the front of the barn, and got himself in and climbed
to the loft, and keeked from the window, and there was
Else Queen, standing atop of the rows of sheaves, her fork
in her hand, waiting to fork. She cried You’re fair
getting old in the bones! and flung in a sheaf that
near hit his face, he smiled and said nothing, they
both set to work, her working as fast and as fleet as
you liked, Dalziel inside was bigging the sheaves, ready
for the first bit thresh at the place, the sun a blind fall
on the cart outside. And once when Dalziel took a
keek out he saw the sweat in a stream from Else, and
her eyes looked glazed, it would take down her creash.
Well, there happened near next the kind of a thing
that surely Else Queen had expected to happen, unless
she were innocent as the Virgin Mary, Ake Ogilvie said:
STRATUS
173
and he doubted that. And even She was hardly that
now, with Burns a hundred years in heaven. Folk
said What’s that? and Ake looked surprised—they had
surely heard of their own Great Poet ? Well, the creature
died and he went to heaven and knocked like hell on the
pearly gates. And St Peter poked his head from a
wicket, and asked Who’re you that’s making a din ?
And Burns said I’m Robert Burns, my man, the National
Poet of Scotland, that’s who. St Peter took a look at
the orders, pinned on the guard-room wall for the
day; and he said, I’ve got a note about you. You must
wait outbye for a minute or so. So Robbie sat there
cooling his heels, on the top of the draughty stair
to heaven, and waited and waited till he nearly was
froze ; syne the gates at last opened and he was let
in. And Burns was fair in a rage by then, Do you
treat distinguished arrivals like this ? And St Peter
said No, I wouldn’t say that. But then I had special
orders about you. I’ve been hiding the Virgin Mary
away. That was a real foul story to tell, it showed
you the tink that Ake Ogilvie was, interrupting the
real fine newsy tale of the happenings down at the
Meiklebogs.
For when they had finished with the forking, ’twas told,
Dalziel took a bit of a look round the barn and saw he
would need a hand to redd up. Get up from the cart
and come round, he cried down, I’ll need you to lend me a
hand in the loft. Else cried back, Havers! Do you
think I can’t jump ? And she put the end of her fork
on a stone that stuck out a bit from the wall of the
barn, and the prong-end under her arm, so, and next
minute sailed through the air like a bird and landed neat
by Meiklebogs' side. And then she went white and then
red of a sudden and Meiklebogs thought of the groan he’d
CLOUD HOWE
174
heard, it hadn’t been Jim the roan after all, ’twas Else
had been groaning afore, as just now. And he stood
looking sly as she sat on the sheaves, her face beginning to
twist and to sweat, she said Fm not well, send off for
the doctor. Then her time came on her and they heard
her cry, the fee’d men out in the Meiklebogs fields, and
came tearing home to see what was up. But by then the
thing was nearly all done, the bairn born out in the barn,
and Meiklebogs looking shyer than ever and getting on his
bike to go for the doctor.
But faith ! that was all he would do in the business.
He wouldn’t register the bairn his ; and when the young
doctor, McCormack, came up, and Else was moved to her
room in the house, and McCormack said Is the bairn
yours ? Meiklebogs smiled shy, No, I wouldn’t say that.
And McCormack said Who’s is it, then ? And Meikle¬
bogs never let on a word, just looked past the doctor and
smiled shy and sly ; and the doctor said Huh—immacu¬
late conception. Something in the air of the Meiklebogs.
You’ve had other housekeepers ta’en the same way.
Well, the story was soon all about the place, as scan¬
dalous a thing as ever you heard, Ag Moultrie, the Roarer
and Greeter of Segget, knew every damned thing that had
happened in the barn, more than an unmarried woman
should know, she said the bairn was Meiklebogs’ image,
with his eyes and his nose—and Ake Ogilvie said Ay,
faith! and his whiskers as well I could warrant. So
Ag told him if he couldn’t be civil and listen she wouldn’t
bother to give him the news ; and Ake said D’you
think I’ll suffer for that ?—not a neighbourly way to
speak to a woman that was trying to cheer you up with
some news.
Soon Else was up and about the place, and the bairn,
a loon, tried to get its own back on its father Dalziel, if
STRATUS
175
father he was. Its howl was near fit to lift off the roof,
Else let it howl and worked in the parks : as the season
wore on, were the weather fine, she’d take the creature
out to the parks, and when it came to its feeding time
suckle the thing on a heap of shaws. When the fee’d
men blushed and looked bashful at that, she’d cry What
the devil are you reddening for ? You sucked the same
drink before you met beer, fair vulgar and coarse she’d
turned to the bone, you’d never have thought she'd
worked in a Manse. Dalziel would hark, with his shy,
sleeked smile, saying neither yea nor nay to her fleers,
she would tongue him up hill and down dale when she
liked, and call him the foulest names you could hear.
But the foreman said she still went to his bed, or he to
hers—ay, a queer carry-on!
Till the business of Jim the roan put an end.
That came with the second winter’s close, when
Meiklebogs carted his grain to the station, he’d sold the
stuff for a stiff-like price, and put a young fee’d loon,
Sinclair his name, on to the carting with the old roan,
Jim. He fair was a willing old brute, the roan, he’d pant
up a brae till an oncoming body might think from the
other side, out of sight, that a steam-mill and thresher was
coming that way. But he never would stop, would just
shoggle on, with his great wide haunches shambling and
swinging, he’d a free-like way of flinging his feet, but
he wasn’t decked ; and he fair could pull.
Ah well, it came white weather of frost, the ground as
hard and as cold as iron, ribbed with a veining of frost
each morning, folk that you met seemed most to be
nose, and red nose at that when it wasn’t blue-veined,
CLOUD HOWE
176
Melvin at the Arms did a roaring trade, the water-
pipes were frozen in the Manse, and the horses of all the
farmers out about were brought to the smiddy to have
their shoes cogged.
But Meiklebogs was over busy for that, on the
Monday morning, the worst of the lot, he sent off Sinclair
with the last load of corn ; and afore he had gone very far
the loon was all in a sweat and a bother with his job, old
Jim the roan on the slide all the time, and the weighted
cart going showding and banging. Sinclair tried to lead
the old horse by the grass that grew stiff-withered by the
side of the road ; and that for a little while eased up the
beast, till they turned into Segget at the top of East
Wynd. There was devil a speck of grass grew there, and
near Ake Ogilvie's the ground was like glass, and young
Ewan Tavendale that came from the Manse had been
sliding there a half hour that morning. So when Jim the
roan came on that with the cart he did the same as the
Manse loon had done—took a run and a slide, and cart,
horse, and all shot down past Ake’s like a falling star—so
Ake Ogilvie said, a daft-like speak. The lot fetched up
near the Sourock’s house, the roan fell shaken, but he
didn’t coup ; and nothing of the harness by a miracle
broke. Young Sinclair had fairly got a fell fright and he
leathered old Jim round about the head with the reins
and kicked him hard in the belly, to make the old brute
more careful in future.
Peter Peat looked out and he nodded, That’s it,
nothing like discipline for horses and men ; and he looked
fierce enough to eat up old Jim, that was bending under the
ding of the blows his patient old head—ay, a fierce man,
Peter. And Sinclair, that was only a loon and a fool,
said, I’ll teach the old mucker to go sliding about, and
gave the old roan another bit kick, to steady him up, and
STRATUS 177
got on the cart, and sat him down on a bag of corn and
cried to the roan Come on, you old Bee !
So old Jim went on and he fair went careful, flinging
his great meikle feet down canny, the loaded cart swinging
and showding behind, the road below like a sheet of glass.
And he went fell well till the East Wynd sloped, down
and round by the Moultrie shop, and there they found it
a slide once again ! all the lasses and lads of Segget had
been there, the night before, with their sleds and skates,
and whooped and scraiched and dirled down the wynd,
on their feet sometimes, on their backsides next, near
braining themselves by the Moultrie wall, young Ewan
Tavendale the worst of them all—he fair could slide,
that nickum of a loon, with his black-blue hair and his
calm, cool eyes, he’d led the lot and could wheel like a bird
just in time to miss the bit wall that was waiting there to
dash out his brains.
Well, young Tavendale might, but old Jim mightn’t,
no sooner did his great bare feet come down on the slide
than the same thing happened as before. He started to
slip and the cart went with him, it half wheeled round
with the weight of its load, and reeled by the wall of the
gardener Grant and stotted from that, and the roan was
down, braking with its feet, that did little good. Sinclair
jumped off and fell on all fours. As he picked himself up
he heard the crash, and the scream that rose with the
breaking shafts, and he scrambled erect and looked down
the lane ; and the sight was a sickener, old Jim the roan
had run full tilt in the Moultrie wall, and one of the shafts
of the cart had snapped and swung back right in the horse’s
belly, as though the old brute were a rat on a stake. He
lay crumpled up, the cart broken behind him, young
Sinclair started to greet at the sight: and the noise of the
crash brought folk on the run.
M
178
CLOUD HOWE
Afore you could speak a fell concourse was round, old
Moultrie came hirpling out with his stick, and cried
What do you mean, malagarousing my house? and
Jess Moultrie peeped, and looked white and sick ; and Ag
came out and then nipped back quick, no doubt in order
to Roar and Greet. Will Melvin took Sinclair-over to
the Arms and had a drink down him afore you could wink ;
and young Sinclair stopped sniftering and habbering about
it, he was feared he’d be sacked by Dalziel for this.
And what can I do in the middle of the season if I lose my
job ?—I’ll just have to starve. You can’t get a fee for
love or money, right in the middle of the winter, you can’t.
And that old mucker Meiklebogs— But Mrs Melvin
came into the bar and said None of your Blasting and
Blaspheming in here. You’ll have to go out with your
swearing, young man.
So Sinclair went out and gaped like a fool at the folk
that had come in around to see Jim. He lay with his
eyes half closed and at last he’d stopped from trying to
rise from the ground, the end of the shaft was deep in
his belly and there was a smell fit to frighten a spinner ;
folk took a good look and went canny away, you hadn’t
time to stand there and stare, you might be asked to help
if you did, let Meiklebogs look to his old horse himself.
Sim Leslie, the policeman that folk called Feet, came down
and took his bit note-book out and asked young Sinclair
how it all happened ; and wrote it all down and looked at
old Jim, and frowned at him stern ; and then wrote some
more—no doubt the old roan’s criminal record. Syne he
said he’d ride over and tell Meiklebogs, and he did, and
when Meiklebogs heard of the news he smiled canny and
shy, and got on his bike, and came riding to Segget to see
the soss.
By the time he did it was nearly noon, Ake Ogilvie
STRATUS
179
down with his gun at the place, a crowd had gathered
to see the brute shot; but Dalziel wouldn’t have it,
No, bide you a wee. If the beast should be shot there
would be no insurance. Ake Ogilvie said Can’t you
see it’s in hell, with the shaft of the cart driving into
its guts ? But Meiklebogs just smiled shy and said noth¬
ing, except to Feet—that the horse was his property, and
he lippened to him it wasn’t destroyed. And Feet said
Ay. D’you hear, Mr Ogilvie? You’d better take home
that gun of yours. And Ake Ogilvie stood and cursed
at them both, and folk were shocked at the words he used,
calling Meiklebogs a dirty mucker when the man was only
seeking his insurance.
Well, there the roan lay all that afternoon, sossing
up the road, and it wouldn’t die. Folk came from far and
near for a look at old Jim the roan as he lay on his side,
as the afternoon waned he turned a wee, and the blood
began to freeze round the shaft that was stuck so deep in
his riven belly. But what with the folk that came in
such crowds, a birn of the spinners down from the Mills,
and the bairns as they left the school at four, the roan was
splashed an inch deep with glaur and hardly twitching
or moving by then. Meiklebogs had sent off a wire to
Stonehive, to ask about the insurance, like : but no
answer came, and he didn’t expect one, he’d the corn
loaded on another bit cart and went off home to the
Meiklebogs, attending to his work with his shy, sleeked
smile, the insurance his if the horse died natural. Once
or twice Jess Moultrie came out to the beast and held a
pail for it to drink out of, it slobbered at the warm water
and treacle, syne would leave its head lying heavy in
the pail, till Jess lifted the head and put it away ;
and all the while her face was like death, the
fool was near greeting over the horse, if she couldn’t
i8o CLOUD HOWE
stand the sight of the soss, why did she ever go near the
beast ?
It looked like a hillock of dirt by dark, and then Ake
Ogilvie that half the day had been seeking the minister,
that was off down the Howe, found him at last and told
him the tale. And folk said that the Reverend
Colquohoun swore awful—The bloody swine, the BLOODY
swine !—a strange-like thing to say of a horse. But Ake
Ogilvie said it wasn’t the horse but the folk of Segget the
minister meant. And that was just daft, if Ake spoke
true—that Mr Colquohoun could mean it of folk, real
coarse of him to speak that way of decent people that had
done him no harm. It just showed you the kind of a tink
that he was, him and his Labour and socialism and all.
And he said to Ake Ogilvie Get out your gun, and
Ake got it again, and the two came down, the roan lay
still in its puddle of glaur, the cart behind and the night
now close. And the circle of folk drew off a wee bit, and
the roan seemed to know the thing that Ake meant, for it
lifted its head and gave a great groan. The minister
looked white as a drift of snow, he cried Stand back
there—damn you, stand back! Ake, aim canny. And
Ake said nothing, but went up to the roan, and folk
looked away as they heard the bang.
Soon as Meiklebogs himself had heard of what
happened, and he did that in less than the space of an
hour, he was over at the Manse to see the minister, with
the shy, sly smile on his half-shaved face. And he said
They tell me, Mr Colquohoun, that you've had my horse
shot down in East Wynd. The minister said Do they ?
Then they tell you the truth. So Meiklebogs said he would
sue him for that, and the minister said he could sue and
be damned—And I'll tell you a thing that I am to do—
report you for cruelty by the very first post. You’re
STRATUS 181
the kind of scoundrel over-common in Scotland. And
Meiklebogs for once lost his shy-like smile. Say of
me again what you said of me now! Mind, there s a
witness to hear us, minister. The Maidie was near in the
hall, he meant her, but Mr Colquohoun was blazing with
rage. He said Get out or I’ll throw you out, and made at
Dalziel, and he shambled out, not such a fool as face up
to a madman, a creature that fair went mad on a horse.
Nor was that the end of his troubles that day, for
when he got home the news had reached Klse, she was
waiting in the kitchen when Meiklebogs came. He
smiled at her shy. Have you nothing to do but stand
about there and be idle, then ? Get my supper ready, or
I’ll need a new housekeeper. The foreman had come in
at the tail of Meiklebogs, and he heard every word that
the two of them spoke. Else said Is this true that I
hear of the roan? and Meiklebogs said Ay ; will you give me
my supper ? and Else said No, but I’ll give you my notice.
I’ve stuck queer things at your hands, Meiklebogs.
I’ve been crazed or daft that I’ve stuck them so long. But I
wouldn’t bide another night in your house. And Meiklebogs
smiled sleeked and shy, Ah well, just gang—with your
fatherless bairn. And Else said she’d do that, but the
bairn had a father, God pity the littl’un, the father it
had.
She was greeting by then, she’d been fond of the roan.
She hardly looked the Else that the foreman knew well,
raging and red-haired and foul with her tongue, she
stared at Meiklebogs as a body new waked out of the
horror of an ill-dreamt dream ; and she packed her things
and wrapped up her bairn.
The foreman met her out in the close and asked her
where she would spend the night, and he made a bit try
to give her a cuddle, maybe he hoped that she’d spend it
182 CLOUD HOWE
with him, her a tink-like quean, him buirdly and brave.
But instead she banged her case at his legs, near couped
him down in the sharn of the close, and held up through
Segget and down to the station, and took the late train to
her father s in Fordoun—the ill-getted bitch that she was,
folk said, to leave Meiklebogs without warning like that,
her and her blethering over a horse.
"there wouldn t have been half the steer and stour if
Mr Colquohoun had kept to himself. He’d need to leave
other folk a-be and heed to his own concerns, him, that
tink-cool stepson of his, for one—wasn’t he the loon what
had led the others in making the slide that mischieved
the horse ? He led most of the brains in ill-getted ploys,
folk told after that, though you hadn’t heard even a whis¬
per before. Twas said he would sneak in the lassies’
playground, and cuddle and kiss them when they were at
games, the ill-getted wretch, and at his age, too. Ay,
Mr Colquohoun was more in need of trying to reform young
Ewan Tavendale than interfering with a good, quiet
childe like old Dalziel of the Meiklebogs.
Old Eeslie said Ay—it was down at the Arms—or
getting that proud-looking wife with a bairn—damn’t!
is that an example to show, none of a family and married
five years ? Now, when I was a loon up in Garvock
and folk began to hem and talk loud, and look up at the
roof and hoast in their throats, and you couldn’t hear
more, and that was a blessing, the old fool could deave
a dog into dysentery. But still there was something in
what he was saying, other folk had bairns, they came
with the seasons, there was no escape were you wedded
and bedded. But Dite Peat said Isn’t there, now?
STRATUS
183
Let me tell you—and he told about shops in that lousy
hole, London, where things were for sale that a man
could use, right handy-like, and what happened then ?
You never fathered a family, not you, you could sin
as much as you liked and pay nothing. And Dite said
forbye it was his belief that’s what that couple did up
at the Manse, that was why Mrs Colquohoun went about
like a quean, with a skin like cream and a figure like that,
hardly a chest on the creature at all; instead of the
broadening out and about, looking sappy and squash like
a woman of her age. Damn’t, what was a woman in the
world for, eh ?—but to make your porridge and lie in your
bed and bring as many bairns into the world as would help
a man that was getting old ? Not that the hondon things
weren’t fine for a childe when he went on a holiday, like.
But if he himself were tied up, b’God, he’d take care he’d
his wife in the family way—ay, every year, with a good
bit scraich when it came to her time, that fair was a thing
to jake a man up.
That was a dirty enough speak, if you liked. Folk
looked here and there and Jim the Sourock, that had
gotten religion, cast up his eyes, he had grown so holy
with MacDougall’s crush that he called the watery the w.c.,
and wouldn’t have it that women had bodies at all more
than an inch below the neck-bone. But Hairy Hogg had
come in and sat down, folk cried, Ay, Provost, and
what would you say ? And Hairy said he thought Scot¬
land was fair in a way, and if Burns came back he would
think the same ; and the worst thing yet they had done in
Segget was to vote the Reverend Colquhoun-to the pulpit
—him and his Labour and sneering at folk, damn’t !
he had said we were monkeys, not men.
Some folk in the bar took a snicker at that, the story
was growing whiskers in Segget, but the Provost had never
CLOUD HOWE
184
forgiven the minister. And Hairy said it was his opinion,
from studying folk a good fifty year—and mind you, he
was no fool at the job—the minister took up with some
other woman. They said that the father of Else Queen's
bairn was old Dalziel of the Meiklebogs, but he, Hairy
Hogg, had his doubts of that. Had the minister ever
cast out with the quean ? No, when he’d meet her out and
about he’d cry to her cheery, as though nothing had
happened. If he couldn’t give a bairn to his mistress, the
minister, it was maybe because he was hashed other ways.
Damn’t, that was a tasty bit story, now, queer you
yourself hadn’t thought of that. But long ere another
day was done the news was spread through the Segget
wynds that the Reverend Mr Colquohoun, the minister,
had fathered the bairn of that quean, Else Queen, the
Provost had seen the two of them together, him sossing
the lass like a dog at its pleasure.
Ake Ogilvie heard the tale from the tailor, and Ake
said: Blethers, and even if it’s true what has the business
to do with old Hogg ? He himself, it seems, has done a bit
more than just lie down by the side of his wife—or that
gawpus he has for a son’s not his.
That was just like Ake Ogilvie, to speak coarse like
that, trying to blacken the character of a man that wasn’t
there to defend himself. Peter Peat said Well, I’m a
friend to my friends, but a man that’s once got himself
wrong with me—and he looked fierce enough to frighten
a shark; but Ake Ogilvie laughed, And what’s Colquohoun
done ? And Peter said Him ? A disgrace to Segget,
that should be a good Conservative. What is he instead ?
—why, a Labour link. But Ake Ogilvie just said
To hell with their politics, I don’t care though he’s trying
to bring back the Pretender, same as that snippet, fahly
young Mow at.
STRATUS
185
But Peter wouldn’t hear the gentry miscalled, and he
said that Jahly would come to himself, and take his right¬
ful place, you would see—at the head of the Segget Con¬
servative branch. Ake said He can take his place on a
midden, if he likes—and he’ll find they’ve much the same
smell. Peter asked what had much the same smell and
Ake said Tories and middens, of course, and Peter
Peat looked at him fierce, and left; that would learn the
ill-gettM joiner, that would.
Well, the news reached Cronin, the old tink in West
Wynd, him that was aye preaching his socialist stite ;
and he said that he thought the whole thing a damned
lie, an attempt to discredit the socialists of Segget.
Jock Cronin at the station heard it and said He’s all
right, Colquohoun, in an offhand way, to let you know
he and the Manse were fell thick and slobbered their
brose from the very same bowl.
Ag Moultrie, the Roarer and Greeter (for short), took
the news to the servants at Segget House ; and it spread
about there, and when young Mr Mowat came home from
a trip he had gone to Dundon, he laughed out aloud.
Some have all the luck. But if Mrs Colquohoun’s in need
of a bairn I’ll give half a year’s profits to provide her with one.
And you couldn’t but laugh at the joke of the gent.
Robert was away that New Year's Eve, into Aber¬
deen, he wouldn’t say why; but Chris could guess and
had laughed at him. Mind, nothing expensive. And
he’d said What, in drinks ? I’m going to squat in a pub
and swizzle confusion to all the sour sourocks in Segget!
Chris wished that it wasn’t a joke, and he would; he
kissed her and went striding away down the shingle.
i86 CLOUD HOWE
turning about to wave from the yews, his kiss still pressed
on her lips as she stood, and tingling a bit, like a bee on a
flower.
It was frosty weather as the day wore on, the sky
and the earth sharp-rimed with steel, no sun came, only
a smoulder of grey, Chris cooked the dinner with Maidie
to help, and remembered Else, she’d have been more
use. Maidie still Memmed like a frightened mouse, and
once when up and above their heads there came a crash
like a falling wall, she nearly jumped from her skin with
fright. Chris said It’s just Ewan, he’s moving his
press, and Maidie said, Oh, I got such a fright! and
looked as though it had lifted her liver. Chris left her and
went up to Ewan’s room, and knocked at the door, he
bade her come in, the place was a still, grey haze with
dust. She saw Ewan through it by the window ledge,
he’d stooped to look in the press he’d moved, it was
filled with his precious array of flints.
Chris asked what else he was moving to-day ? He
said Everything and set to on the bed, she sat down
and didn’t offer to help. His hair fell over his eyes as he
tugged, funny to look at, funny to think he had been
your baby, been yours, been you, been less than that
even—now sturdy and slim, with his firm round shoulders
and that dun gold skin he got from yourself, and his father’s
hair. He stopped in a minute and came where she sat :
I think that’ll do, I’ll dust after dinner.
So the two of them went down and had dinner alone,
Ewan said he’d have everything moved in his rooms ere
the New Year came and Chris asked why. He said
Oh, I like a new angle on things, and then he said Mother,
you wanted to laugh. What about? and Chris said You,
I suppose! You sounded so grown-up like for a lad.
He said nothing to that, but went on with his meat,
STRATUS
187
they didn’t say grace when Robert wasn’t there, that
was funny when you came to think of the thing, Robert
knew and knew that you knew he knew. But he was too
sure to vex about that, sure of himself and his God and
belief, except when the angry black moments came—
seldom enough in this last three years. Once he’d raved
Religion—A Scot know religion ? Half of them think of
God as a Scot with brosy morals and a penchant for Burns.
And the other half are over damned mean to allow the
Almighty even existence. You know which half you
belo?ig to, I think. Hate and fury in his face as
he said it, the day after the killing of Meiklebogs'
horse. Chris had looked at him cool and remotely then,
as she’d learned with the years, and he’d banged from the
room, to return in an hour or so recovered. What a
ranter and raver I am, Christine ! I think you’ll outlast
me a thousand years !
And now, on a sudden impulse, she said, Do you
ever think of religion, Ewan ?
He never said What ? or said your last word the
way other boys of his age would do ; he looked up and
shook his head, Not now. She asked when he had and
he said, long ago, when he was a kid and hadn’t much
sense, he used to be worried when Robert was preaching.
Chris said But he never tried to fear you, and Ewan
shook his head, Oh no, it wasn’t that. But I hated the
notion God was there, frying into every minute of my
life. I wanted to belong to myself, and I do; it
doesn’t matter a bit to me now. She understood well
enough what he meant, how like her he sometimes was,
how unlike ! So you think God doesn’t matter, then,
Ewan ? and he said, I don’t think He’s worth bothering
about. He can’t make any difference to the world—or I
should think He’d have made it by now.
i88
CLOUD HOWE
The evening came down before it was four, up in the
Mounth the snow came thick, sheeting hill on hill as it
passed on the wings of the howling wind from the haughs.
But the storm passed north of Segget, lying lithe, Chris
in the kitchen looked out at it pass, she was making cakes
and pies for the morn, Maidie tweetering about like a
bird Eh, Mem, but that's RICH, that’ll be a fine one !
Chris said Then be sure you eat a good share, you’re
still thin enough since you came to the Manse. Are you
sure you are well? And Maidie said Fine. She
blushed and stood like a thin little bird, Chris looked at
her quiet, a thin little lass—what did she think, what
did she do in her moments alone, had she a lad, had she
ever been kissed—or more than that, as they said in
Segget ? Not half the life in her that poor Else had ;
what would Else Queen be doing to-day ?
Dark. As they took their tea together, Ewan and
Chris, they left the blinds drawn and could see the night
coming stark outbye, growing strangely light as the day¬
light waned and the frost, white-plumed, walked swift
over Segget. Ewan sat on the rug by the fire and read,
his blue head down-bent over his book, Chris stared in
the fire and tired of that and finished her tea, and wan¬
dered about, and went to the window and looked at the
night. Then she looked at the clock. She would go and
meet Robert.
She turned to the door and Ewan jumped up, she
said not to bother, she was going a walk. He said absent-
mindedly, See you keep warm, and his eyes went back
again to his book.
Outside, she went hatless, with her coat collar up,
she found at the door of the Manse a wind, bright, keen,
and edged like a razor-blade, the world sleeping on the
winter’s edge, about her, dim-pathed, wound the garden
STRATUS
189
of summer, she passed up its aisles, the hoar crackled
below her, all Segget seemed held in the hand-grip of
frost. A queer thought and memory came to her then
and she turned about from going to the gate, and went
back instead by the side of the Manse, up through the
garden where the strawberry beds lay covered deep in
manure and straw, to the wall that girded the kirkyard of
Segget.
Here the wind was still, in the Manse’s lithe, she put
out a hand on the hoar of the dyke, it felt soft as salt and
as cold as steel; and idly, standing, she wrote her name,
though she couldn’t see it by then in the dark, CHRISTINE
COTQUOHOUN in great capital letters. And she minded
how once she had stood here before, four years or more,
after Segget Show ; and she and Robert were there to¬
gether and she’d thought of the vanished folk in the yard,
and planned to add to those that supplanted. And the
War-time wound that was seared on Robert had seared
that plan from her mind as with fire. . . .
It seemed this night remote from her life as the things
she’d dreamt as a quean in Blawearie, when she was a
maid and knew nothing of men, the kind of play that a
bairn would play : for her who stood here with life in her
again, unexpected, certain, Robert’s baby and hers.
And she found it strange in that icy hush, leaning there
warm, her hair bare to the cold, to think how remote was
that life from her now, even bairn for the thing that lay
under her heart was a word that she’d hardly used a long
time, thinking of it as a baby, in English—that from her
books and her life in a Manse. She seemed to stand here
by the kirkyard’s edge looking back on the stones that
marked the years where so many Chrises had died and
lay buried—back and back, as the graveyard grew dim,
far over those smothered hopes and delights, to that other
190 CLOUD HOWE
Chris that had been with child, a child herself or so little
more, and had known such terror and delight in that,
young and raw and queer and sweet, you thought her
now, that Chris that had been—the Chris far off in that
vanished year who had lain in terror as nights came
down with knowledge of the thing that moved in herself,
the fruit of her love for the boy she had wed, Bwan
sleeping so quiet and so sound in her bed. Remote and
far to think she was YOU !
Quiet in the dark she wrote with her finger another
name across that of her own, on the kirkyard dyke, and
heard as she wrote far up in the Kaimes a peesie wheep—
maybe a lost memory from those years in Kinraddie, a
peesie that had known that other Chris ! She heard a long
scuffling through the long grass, silver beyond the rim of
the dyke, some rabbit or hare, though it made her heart
jump ; and slowly she felt her finger rub out the name she
had written in hoar on the dyke—ill-luck to have done
that, she minded folk said.
A month ago since she’d known for sure, had puzzled
for days with the second no-go. Robert would frown,
What on earth’s gone wrong? You’re dreaming, Chris¬
tine ! and smile, and she’d smile, and puzzle again
when he’d left her alone. So it came on her in the
strangest places, she stood in MacDougall Brown’s to
shop, and MacDougall asked thrice what thing she might
want—Now, Mem—and she said—Did I want it at all ?
and then came to herself at his cod-like stare. So she
gave her order and went out and home, she supposed
MacDougall would manage to make out that was
another proof of her pride !—all Segget for some reason
thought her proud, maybe because she had taken to
thinking, not stayed as still as a quean in a book or a
quean in a bothy, from year unto year.
STRATUS
191
And when once Stephen Mowat came down to see
Robert, and she gave them supper and sat by to listen,
Mowat broke off the talk to say Rahly, Mrs Colquohoun,
do tell us the joke ! She said What joke ? And he said
The one that's making you smile in that charming way.
She’d said Oh, I suppose I am full up of supper ! And
he’d said he thought that a Jahly untruth, joking, polished
as a mart-day pig.
So at last she had known and woke one day sure ; and
lay and dreamt; and Robert got up—Feeling all right ?—
and she had said Fine. Robert, we're going to have
a baby. He stared—We?—the thing had staggered
him, she lay and watched, something moved in her
heart, laughter for him, a queer pity for him—oh, men
were funny and just boys to be pitied ! Well, I am,
she’d said, but you had a share. He was standing half-
dressed, with his fair hair on end, he sat on the bed and
stared and then smiled, slowly, with that crinkling about
the eyes she had loved near the very first time she met him.
Really and honest-to-God that we are ? And she’d said
it was real enough, how did it happen ? And he'd said
he hadn’t the least idea, and that struck them as
funny, they giggled like children; and after ’twas
Robert that went into long dreams. She’d say What
again ? and he’d say But Christine! A baby—Good
Lord, I hope it’s a girl! What does it feel like being as you
are—a nuisance, just, or tremendous and terrible? And
Chris had said that it made you feel sick, now and
then, and Robert had laughed at that, he wasn’t so
easily cheated as Mowat. Oh Chris Caledonia, Fve
married a nation !
Now, standing beside the dyke in the dark, she minded
that, it was true enough, somehow you did hide away
the great things, Scots folk had always done that, you
i92 CLOUD HOWE
supposed—in case they’d go blind in their naked shine,
like a soul in the presence of Robert’s great God—that
God he followed unfaltering still, and was getting Him
deeper in dislike than ever, with his preaching in Segget
the cause of the Miners. These were the folk that were
going on strike, in May, unless their wages were raised.
Robert said their case was a testing case, the triumph
of greed or the triumph of God. Chris herself had hardly
a thought in the matter because of that nameless doubt
that was hers—doubt of the men and method that came
to change the world that was waiting change—all the
mixed, strange world of the Segget touns, with its failing
trade and its Mills often idle. The folk of the Mills would
hang round the room where their dole was paid by a little
clerk, they’d laze there and snicker at the women that
passed, and yawn, with weariness stamped on each
face; and smoke, and whistle, and yawn some more.
Once she’d passed and heard some of them quarrelling out
loud, she had thought it must surely be over politics;
but instead ’twas the chances of a football match ! She’d
told Robert that and he’d laughed and said Demos /—
didn’t you know that the chap was like that ? But we ll
alter these things forever in May.
May : and the baby wouldn’t come till July, a good
enough month for a baby to be born, though Robert said
if they had planned it at all they would surely have planned
it better than that. July might be far too hot for comfort.
But he didn’t fuss round her, stood back and aside, he
knew it her work and that he’d little help—oh, different
as could be from the Ewan long ago, the frightened boy
who had so fussed about her—how they’d quarrelled, how
wept, how laughed in that time of the coming of that
baby that was now in the Manse—a boy, grown up,
remote from it all, remote enough with his books and his
STRATUS
193
flints, far enough off from being a baby, rather like a
flint himself in some ways, but of a better shape and grain,
grey granite down to the core, young Ewan, with its
flinty shine and its cool grey skin and the lights and the
flashing strands in it. Different from that, Robert’s
baby and hers—
She stamped her feet and woke from her dreaming as
down through the dark she heard on the shingle the
coming footsteps of Robert himself.
And next morning he said, Let’s go out a walk, up
in the hills somewhere—are you keen ? Chris said she was
and well before eight they were off, they met with Ewan
in the hall as they went, he said nothing at all about
going out with them, he always knew when he wasn't
much wanted. Chris kissed him and said they’d be back
for dinner ; syne she and Robert went up by the Kaimes,
and Ewan stood and looked after them—you could
hardly believe that Chris was so old.
Underfoot the frost held hard and firm in the rising
sun of the New Year’s Day, that sun a red smoulder
down in the Howe, the hoar was a blanching on post
and hedge, riming the dykes, far up in the Mounth the
veilings of mists were draping the hills, except that now
and then they blew off and you saw the coarse country
deep in the haughs, remote with a flicker of red on the
roofs of some shepherd’s sheiling high in the heath.
Robert was walking so fast that Chris for a while could
hardly keep up with his stride, then she fell into that and
found it easy, the Kaimes was past and above it the
path opened out through the ragged fringe of the moor
that came peering and sniffling down at Segget as a
N
CLOUD HOWE
194
draggled cat at a dish out of doors, all the country¬
side begirdled with hills and their companions the moors
that crept and slept and yawned in the sun, watching the
Howe at its work below.
They passed a tarn that was frozen and shone, Chris
tried the edge with her stick and it broke, and she saw
herself for a minute then, with the looped-up hair and the
short-cut skirts and the leather jacket tight at her waist,
high in the collar ; and the blown bronze of her cheeks
and hair and the stick in her hands and the fur-backed
gloves, she smiled at herself, for this Chris that she’d
grown. Robert stopped and looked back and was
puzzled, and came, and stood by her side and looked
down at that Chris that smiled remote in the broken ice.
Yes, not at all bad. See the childe by her shoulder ? Do
you think the two can be decently married ?
Chris said that she thought not, they’d something in
their eyes—and Robert kissed her then, iron, his hard,
quick kiss, the kiss of a man with other passions than
kissing: but wonderful and daft a moment to stand, on
the frozen moor, her head back on his shoulder, and so be
kissed, and at last released, Robert panting a little, and
they both looked away ; and then they went on, swinging
hand in hand for a while till they tired and needed their
sticks.
Robert went first, bare-headed, black-coated, he was
whistling Over the Sea to Skye, clear and bright as they
still went on, up through the wind of a sheep-track here
where the Grampians pushed out their ramparts in fence
against the coming of life from below.
By eleven they were high in the Culdyce moor, winding
the twist of its slopes in the broom that hung thick-
rimed with unshaken frost; for the sun had died away
in a smoulder, the Howe lay grey in a haze below, as they
STRATUS 195
climbed that haze betook itself from the heights to the
haughs, heachie towered high, its crag-head swathed
with a silk-web mutch. Trusta’s ten hundred feet
cowered west as if bending away from the blow of the
wind, the moors a ragged shawl on her shoulders, crouch¬
ing and seated since the haughs were born, watching
the haze in the Howe below, the flicker of the little
folk that came and builded and loved and hated and
died, and were not, a crying and swarm of midges warmed
by the sun to a glow and a dance. And the Trusta
heights drew closer their cloaks, year by year, at the snip
of the shears, as coulter and crofter moiled up the haughs.
Once Chris and Robert came to a place, out in the
open, here the wind blew and the ground was thick with
the droppings of sheep, where a line of the ancient stones
stood ringed, as they stood in Kinraddie far west and
below, left by the men of antique time, memorial these
of a dream long lost, the hopes and fears of fantastic
eld.
Robert said that they came from the East, those
fears, long ago, ere Pytheas came, sailing the sounding
coasts to Thule. Before that the hunters had roamed
these hills, naked and bright, in a Golden Age, without
fear or hope or hate or love, living high in the race of the
wind and the race of life, mating as simple as beasts
or birds, dying with a like keen simpleness, the hunting
weapons of those ancient folk Ewan would find in his
search of the moors. Chris sat on a fallen stone and heard
him, about her the gleams of the wintry day, the
sailing cloud-shapes over the Howe ; and she asked how
long ago that had been ? And Robert said Less than
four thousand years, and it sounded long enough to
Chris—four thousand years of kings and of Gods, all the
dark, mad hopes that had haunted men since they left
CLOUD HOWE
196
the caves and the hunting of deer, and the splendour of
life like a song, like the wind.
And she thought then, looking on the shadowed
Howe with its stratus mists and its pillars of spume,
driving west by the Leachie bents, that men had followed
these pillars of cloud like lost men lost in the high, dreich
hills, they followed and fought and toiled in the wake
of each whirling pillar that rose from the heights, clouds
by day to darken men’s minds—loyalty and fealty,
patriotism, love, the mumbling chants of the dead old
gods that once were worshipped in the circles of stones,
Christianity, socialism, nationalism—all—Clouds that
swept through the Howe of the world, with men that
took them for gods : just clouds, they passed and finished,
dissolved and were done, nothing endured but the Seeker
himself, him and the everlasting Hills.
Then she came from that thought, Robert shaking
her arm. Chris, you’ll be frozen. Let’s climb to the
camp. He had once been here with Bwan, she hadn’t;
the moor shelved smoothly up to its top, as they climbed
in view Chris saw two lines of fencing climbing each slope
of the hill, new-driven and stapled, the fences, they
met and joined and ended up on the crest. But before
that meeting and joining they plunged through the
circles of the ancient camp that had been, the turf and
the stones had been flung aside, Robert told that the
hill had been recently sold and the lands on either side
as well, and two different landowners bought the hill
and set up those fences to show their rights—what were
dirt like the old heathen forts to them ? Symbols
of our age and its rulers, these clowns, Robert said, and
the new culture struggling to birth—when it came it
would first have to scavenge the world!
Then he started talking of the Miners, of Tabour, of
STRATUS 197
the coming struggle in the month of May, he hoped
and believed that that was beginning of the era of Man
made free at last, Man who was God, Man splendid again*
Christ meant and intended no more when He said that He
was the Son of Man, when He preached the Kingdom of
Heaven—He meant it on earth. Christ was no godlet,
but a leader and hero—
He forgot Chris, striding up and down the slope,
excitement kindled in his harsh, kind eyes. And Chris
watched him, standing, her stick behind her, her arms
looped about it, saying nothing to him but hearing and
seeing, him and the hills and the song that both made.
And suddenly she felt quite feared, it was daft—as she
looked at the scaling heights high up, the chasms below,
and her Robert against them ! She put out her hand
and caught him, he turned, something in her face stopped
questions, all else, the pity and fear that had been in
her eyes. He didn't kiss her now, his arms round about
her, they were quiet a long moment as they looked in
each other, they had never done that that Chris could
remember, seeing herself globed earnest, half-smiling,
and with trembling lips there in the deep grey pools
that hid away Robert—never hers for long if ever at all,
unceasing the Hunter of clouds by day. The men of
the earth that had been, that she'd known, who kept
to the earth and their eyes upon it—the hunters of clouds
that were such as was Robert: how much was each wrong
and how much each right, and was there maybe a third
way to Life, unguessed, unhailed, never dreamed of yet ?
Then he said Now we surely know each other, and
she came from her mood to meet his with a laugh,
If we don’t we’ve surely done shameful things! And
they sat in the lithe of a heath-grown dyke and ate
chocolate Robert had brought in his pocket, and Chris
CLOUD HOWE
198
fell fast asleep as she sat, and awoke with Robert sitting
still lest he wake her, one hand around her and under
her heart, but far away from her in his thoughts, his eyes
on the sailing winter below and his thoughts with the
new year that waited their coming down through the
hills in the Segget wynds.
Chris watched the coming of that Spring in Segget
with her interests strange-twisted back on themselves, as
though she relived that Chris of long syne, far from the
one that had taken her place, that Chris of kirks and
Robert and books—they sank from sight in the growing
of the Spring, quick on the hills, on the upland parks,
you saw the fields of Meiklebogs change as you looked
from the window of that room in the Manse that John
Muir had set with Blawearie gear. It was there you
intended the baby be born, the only sign of insanity
yet, said Robert, laughing, and helping you change.
He seemed to have altered too with the Spring, the
black mood came seldom or never now, nor that red,
queer cough that companioned it. You’d hear him of a
morning go whistling away, under the yews, on some
kirk concern, blithe as though the world had been born
anew. It wasn’t only the coming of the baby that had
altered him so and kindled his eyes, all the air of the
country was filled with its rumour, that thing that
awaited the country in May, when the Miners and others
had threatened to strike. Robert said that more than
a strike would come, the leaders had planned to seize
power in May.
The red-ploughed lands steamed hot in the sun as
Meiklebogs’ men drove slow their great teams in the
STRATUS 199
steam of the waiting world of Spring, the rooks behind
them, Chris stood still and watched, and remembered,
and put her hand up to her heart, and then lower, by
belly and thigh ! and slow, under her hand, that shape
would turn, May close and July coming closer now,
she felt fit and well, contented, at peace.
Kwan knew now, he had stared one morningand then
asked if she was going to have a baby. Chris had said
Yes, do you ynind veyy Much ? and he had said No,
but hadn’t kissed her that morning, she watched him
go with a catch of breath. But by night he seemed
to have got the thing over, he put cushions behind her
when she sat at tea, grave, and with care, and Robert
winked at her. Ewan saw the wink and flashed his cool
smile ; and they all sat silent in front of the fire, with its
smouldering glow, they had no need to speak.
Then Maidie knew, as she watched Chris at work,
and tweetered the news to some quean outbye, and
the quean gasped Never! and told Ag Moultrie, the
Roarer and Greeter, met in the street. And Ag had
nearly a fit with delight, and before that night came
down in Segget there was hardly a soul in both touns
but knew the minister’s wife had taken at last—ay,
and must be fell on with it, too, by her look, so the
lassie Moultrie had said. Had Ag seen her ? you'd ask,
and they’d tell you Ay, she’d fairly done that, and Mrs
Colquohoun had told the bit news to Ag Moultrie herself ;
and syne broke down and just Roared and Grat on Ag’s
shoulder.
Old Leslie said ’twas Infernal, just, you’d have thought
a minister would have more sense. He never had thought
it decent in a minister to show plain to his parish he
did that kind of thing; and he minded when he was a
loon up in Garvock— Those nearest the door of the
200 CLOUD HOWE
smiddy nipped out, Ake Ogilvie near was killed in the rush,
and he found Old keslie habbering to himself, hammering
at a horseshoe, and far off in Garvock. What’s up
then, Leslie ? Ake Ogilvie asked, and Leslie said What,
have you not heard the news ? and told of the thing that
was on at the Manse, and might well have begun to tell
of Garvock, but that Ake, the coarse brute, said Well,
what of it ? Didn’t your own father lie with your mother
—the poor, misguided devil of a childe ?
Syne out he went swaggering and met with John Muir,
and asked if he'd heard what the scandal-skunks said ?
Muir gleyed and said Ay, and it made him half-sick,
and Ake said the same, they were both of them fools,
and cared nothing at all for a tasty bit news.
John Muir went home, never told his wife, she found
out herself nearly three days late; and fair flew into a
rage at that, to be so far behind with the news. Did you
know the news of Mrs Colquohoun ? she speired of
John and he gleyed and said Ay. And she asked
could he never tell her a thing, her that had to bide
at home and cook, and wash and sew and mend all the
time, with himself and two meikle trollops of daughters,
working her hands to the very bone? And John said
Well, it’s nothing to me if Mrs Colquohoun has keen
ta’en with a hairn—I’m not the father, as far as I
know.
Mrs Muir reddened up, Think shame of yourself
speaking that way in front of the lassies. Tooje was
standing with her meikle mouth open, drinking it up,
afore she could close it her mother took her a crack in
the gape. Tooje started to greet and Ted in the garden
heard the greeting, as aye she would do, and came tearing
in, and started to greet to keep Tooje company; and
John Muir got up with his pipe and his paper and went out
STRATUS 201
to the graveyard and sat on a stone, and had a fine read :
decent folk, the dead.
In the Arms Dite Peat said Wait till it comes. She’s
the kind that takes ill with having a bairn—over narrow
she is, she’ll fair have a time. I warrant the doctor’ll
need his bit knives. Folk thought that an unco-like speak
to make, he’d a mind as foul as a midden, Dite Peat:
but for all that you went to the kirk the next Sabbath
and took a gey keek at Mrs Colquohoun—ay, God I
she fairly was narrow round there, more like a quean
than a grown-up woman, with her sulky, proud face and
her well-brushed hair, she’d look not so bonny when it
came to her time.
Then Hairy Hogg heard it and minded the story of
what Mr Mowat had said he would give to take the
minister's wife with a bairn. You well may depend that
was more than a speak. Folk had forgotten it but now
they all minded, it was said in Segget it was ten to one
the bairn wasn’t the minister’s at all, young Mr Mowat
had been heard to say he’d given half of a whole year’s
profits for lying with that proud-like Mrs Colquohoun.
MacDougall Brown said ’twas a black, black sin, and he
preached a sermon in the Square next Sabbath, about
scarlet priesthoods living in shame; and everybody
knew what he meant by that, his son Jock wabbled his
eyes all around, and Mrs Brown shook like a dollop of
fat; only Cis looked away and turned red and shy, and
thought of Dod Cronin and his hands and lips.
The spinners didn’t care when the news reached them,
though an unco birn came now to the kirk that had never
attended a kirk before, the older men mostly, disjaskM,
ill-dressed, with their white, spinner faces and ill-shaved
chins, like raddled old loons, and they brought their
wives with them—the minister was fairly a favourite
202
CLOUD HOWE
with them. So might he be, aye siding with the dirt
and the Labour stite that the Cronins preached; and
twice he had interfered at the Mills and forced Mr Mowat
to clean out his sheds. But the younger spinners went
to no kirk, just hung about of a Sabbath day, and snickered
as a decent body went by, or took their lasses up to
the Kaimes as soon as the Spring sun dried the grass.
Most of the gossip Chris heard of or knew, and cared
little or nothing, folk were like that, she thought if
you’d neither books nor God nor music nor love nor
hate as stand-bys, no pillar of cloud to lead your feet,
you turned as the folk of farm and toun—to telling scandal
of your nearest neighbours, making of them devils and
heroes and saints, to brighten your days and give you
a thrill. And God knew they were welcome to get one
from her, she found herself liking them as never before,
kindled to new interest in every known face, seized
again and again in the Segget wynds—looking at the
rat-like little Peter Peat, at MacDougalTs bald head,
at the lizard-like Mowat—with the startling thought,
He was once a bairn! It nearly put you oh having
one sometimes ; and then again you’d be filled with such
a queer pity, as you passed, that Hairy Hogg would
go in and say to his wife—That Mrs Colquohoun she
goes by me and SNICKERS ! and his wife would say
Well damn’t, do you want her to go by you and greet ?
So April was here, with its steaming drills and the
reek of dung in the Meiklebogs parks; and in Segget
backyards a scraich and chirawk as the broods of the
winter gobbled their corn, you could hear the ring of
the smiddy hammer across the still air right to the Manse
—above it, continuous, the drum of the Mills. Young
Mr Mowat had new orders on hand and most of the
spinners were at work again. But early that week that
STRATUS 203
he put them on Stephen Mowat came down to the Manse,
with a paper in his hand and a list of names. He wanted
Robert to join the list, the O.M.S., a volunteer army,
that was being prepared all over the country to feed the
country in the Miners’ strike. And he said that they
didn’t always see eye to eye, him and Colquohoun,
but that this was serious : you Jahly well couldn’t let
a push like the miners dictate to the country what it
should do. And he said that Rahly Robert must join,
and Mrs Colquohoun as well, if she would ; and he
smiled at her charming, and showed all his teeth.
Robert said Well, Christine, what do you say ? and
Chris didn’t much care, for she didn’t much hope.
Then she looked at Mowat, elegant, neat, in his London
clothes, with his tended hair and his charming look;
and the saggy pouches under his eyes. And it seemed
she was looking at more than Mowat, the class that had
made of the folk of Segget the dirt-hungry folk that
they had been and were—made them so in sheer greed
and sheer grab. You had little hope what the Miners
could do, them or the labour leaders of Robert, but
they couldn’t though they tried make a much worse
mess than Mowat and his kind had done, you knew.
So you just said No; Robert smiled at Mowat.
That’s Chris’s answer, a trifle abrupt. And I can’t
help the O.M.S. myself—you see, I’ve another plan
afoot. Mowat said that was Jahly, what was the
plan ? And Robert said Why, do all that I can to
hinder the O.M.S. or such skunks as try to interfere
with the Strike.
Chris had never admired Stephen Mowat so much, he
kept his temper, charming, polite, she and Robert
watched him stride from the door, down under the yews,
and they later heard he had gone to the Provost and
CLOUD HOWE
204
gotten his help, and the same from Geddes, and the same
from Melvin that kept the Arms. Near everybody that
counted would help, except the spinners, the Manse,
and Ake Ogilvie—Ake had told Mr Mowat they could
hamstring each other, strikers and Government, for all
that he cared. And neither would MacDougall Brown
give his name, he said his living depended on spinners:
and if all the world renounced its sin the cares of the
world would be ended tomorrow.
And all the time he was saying this he was mixing
sawdust under the counter, canny-like, in a bag of meal.
Chris put the whole thing out of her mind, busied in
making the baby’s clothes, busied in going long walks by
herself, the last day in April she took Ewan with her,
across by Mondynes, till they saw far off, crowning
the hills, the roofs of Kinraddie. You were born over
there twelve years ago, she thought aloud as they sat
to rest, Ewan with his head cupped up in his hands,
his arms on his knees, his blue-black hair rumpled,
untidily tailed, in the glow of the sun. He said, Yes, I
know, and then looked at her sudden—but I say! I never
really thought of that. ... Or anyway, never as I thought
just now. She asked how was that, and he looked down
the Howe. Well, that I once was a part of you ; though,
of course, I know all about how babies come.
And for almost the first time in years he seemed
troubled, her boy, the fruit of herself, so cool, so kind
and sure and so stony-clear, troubled to a sudden, queer
brittle pity. Mother! And he looked at her, then
away, then came and cuddled her tight for a moment,
his arms round her throat Chris nearly was stifled ; but
STRATUS 205
she didn’t move, didn’t say a word at that strange em¬
bracing on the part of Kvan.
And May and to-morrow waited their feet as they
turned back quiet up the Segget road.
Ewan in his bed ; in the May-time dark Chris wandered
the sitting-room of the Manse, looking again and again
from the window at the mist that had come and grew
thicker each minute. Beyond her vision the yews, the
hedge : she could see but a little space from the window,
a space translit by a misty star, the lights far up in
Segget House.
What had happened to Robert—had he been in time ?
And at last she could bear it no longer, went out,
into the hall and put on her coat, and opened the door and
went down through the path, through the slimy, slow
crunch of the shingle, mist-wet. A light gleamed faint
in the house of John Muir and a dog barked loud from
old Smithie’s shed as he heard her footsteps pass in the
mist, it came draping its cobwebs across her face, she
put up her hand and wiped off the globes, from her lashes,
and stopped and listened on the road. Nothing to be
heard, the mist like a blanket, had Robert come up with
the spinners in time ?
They had gone to blow up the High Segget brig, a
birn of the spinners and one of the porters, the news had
been brought to the Manse by John Cronin, panting—
They've gone to blow up the brig and prevent the trains
that the blacklegs are running reaching beyond this, or
south from Dundon. Robert had jumped up—When
did they go ? and Cronin had said Ten minutes ago, I heard
of it only now in Old Toun, this’ll mean the police and
206
CLOUD HOWE
arrest for us all. Robert had said Oh, damn the fools,
and their half-witted ploys—blowing up brigs! Right,
I’ll be with you, and hadn’t waited his coat, had told
Chris not to worry and kissed her, and ran, long-striding
down through the shingle, Cronin at his heels and the
mist coming down.
Where were they now, what had happened at the brig ?
She pressed on again, that fear for an urge—a fool
to be out, maybe Robert would miss her. The mist was
so thick she could hardly see a thing on the other side of
the Wynd, she kept the leftward wall and held down,
past the locked-up shop of little Peter Peat, the shop
of the Provost locked up as well, and Dite Peat’s as well,
all three of them specials enrolled by Mowat to help
Simon keslie. But the station folk and the spinners
were out, so Robert had told her, and here in Segget, as
all over the country, the Strike held firm.
Had he and Cronin reached the brig in time ?
Now she was down in the Square, so she knew, the
lights of the Arms seeped up through the mist, the Arms
crowded with spinners as usual, few of them knew of the
thing at the brig, J ohn Cronin had said the folk who had
gone to blow up the place were no more than boys, and
daft at that, with their blasting-powder gotten or thieved
from the quarry at Quarles.
As Chris crossed the Square she met in the mist
two men who were holding up to East Wynd, Sim heslie
was one, and a man with a brassard, one of the specials,
she thought it Dite Peat. They peered in her face and
Sim keslie coughed, and the man with the brassard laughed
a foul laugh. Chris felt her blood go cold at that laugh,
she heard them engage in a mutter of talk as she hurried
down the road to the station.
There were lights down there, but still as the grave,
STRATUS 207
she stood and looked down, her heart beating fast. And
so, as she stood, slowly, quietly, under her heart her
baby moved. She gasped a little, she must go more slow,
she shouldn’t be out in the mist at all. Robert and
Cronin must have reached them in time.
But even yet she could not go back. She stood and
listened in the mist and heard the fall of it on the grass,
on the hedge, beyond the wall where she stood and leaned
—soft, in a feathery falling of wet, blanketing sound away
from her ears. She ought to go home, but how could she,
unsure ?
In that minute, far to the south the mist suddenly
broke and flamed: she stared: the flame split up
through the mirk from the ground. Then there came to
her ears the crack and crinkle of such explosion as she’d
heard before up in the Mounth-side Quarles quarry. She
knew what it meant; and started to run.
Beyond the railway lines was the path that wound
by the lines till it reached Segget Brig. Here the haw¬
thorns brushed her face and the grass whipped wetly about
her legs as she ran, not thinking, trying hard not to think,
to run fleetly, and gain the Brig, as she must—Robert
was there—Oh, and those fools !
The second explosion laid hand on the night and
shook the mist as a great hand might. Then it died, and
Chris found the true dark had come, it had seeped
through the mist like spilt ink through paper, and she
couldn’t run now, but walked and stumbled, and heard
no more for it seemed an hour.
Till far behind her there rose a whistle, a long-drawn
blast remote in the night.
She stopped at that and turned about, a whin-bush
lashed her face as she turned and then stood listening and
looking beside her. And far away north up the side of the
208
CLOUD HOWE
Mounth a line of lights twinked suddenly bright, and
moved and slowed and came to a stop.
Clenched hand at her throat, for that seemed to
help, she gasped and stared at that cluster at halt—some
Dundon train that had halted at Garment, in five minutes
more it would be in Segget, and the brig was down, and it
wouldn’t know—
Running again she felt that change, slow and dreadful
and sick in her body, her arms held out as she kept
the path; and she cried to the thing unborn in her
womb, Not now, not now ; and it moved again. Then
up the line she heard the skirl of the starting train,
its windows flashed, it purred from sight as it climbed
through the woods—she never could do it, try though
she might !
Yet, so at last, running, she did; and gained the
road with the station below. Down there was a flurry
and scurry of lights, behind on the road a scurry of feet.
She turned at that sound, saw a drift of men, she seemed
to know one : and cried out Robert!
The night quietened away in a mist of faces and
a kindled lantern and Robert’s voice. So later Chris
minded, and then the next hours closed suddenly up as
a telescope closes. One minute she was standing, her
teeth in her lip, harkening Robert tell how he’d gained
the brig, just in time, they’d done no more than test off
the powder, he and Cronin had stopped them at that;
and the next she was up in the Manse with Robert, as
she stood in the hall and he closed the door the hall
rose up and spun twice round her head, she stared at
the grandfather clock in the hall, for a minute she couldn’t
STRATUS
209
breathe, couldn’t move. Something suddenly flooded
her mouth, she sopped the stuff with her handkerchief—
red, and saw as last thing Robert’s startled scowl as he
leapt to catch her ; and then he quite vanished.
She opened her eyes in bed the next time, sick and
weak with the May light high and pouring into the room
in a flood, somebody she didn’t know near the bed. Then
the somebody turned and looked and Chris knew her, she
whispered It’s Else! and Else said Shish ! You mustn’t
move, Mem, and crinkled her face as though she would
cry. Chris would have laughed if she hadn’t been
weak, so she closed her eyes for another rest, maybe
another day, maybe a minute, and woke, and the
dark was close outbye, the first thing she heard as she
came from the dark the rake and tweet of the rooks in
the yews. She looked round about and saw Robert
and Ewan, Robert was over by the window, hunched,
with his shoulders and head black-carved in the light,
Ewan was sitting by the side of her bed, a hand on his
knee, his head down-bent, looking at a little flint in
his hand. She coughed: and both of them turned at the
sound, and she coughed again and saw with surprise the
stuff that spilt from her mouth on the sheet, not red, it
was brown, and she suddenly saw, vividly clear and
distinct, it was awful, horror and horror in Robert’s face.
Night, with a setting of stars, all alone, in the May
time dark, she knew it still May. There was a hiss
of rain on the roof, light rain, and all the house set in
silence but for that whisper of the falling rain. She
lay and suddenly knew the Thing close, a finish to the
hearing of rain on the roof, a finish to knowing of that
o
2io CLOUD HOWE
hearing at all, the world cut off, she felt free and light,
strung to a quivering point of impatience as she waited
and waited and the night went by—ready and ready
she waited, near cried, because the Thing didn’t come after
all. And grew tired and slept; and the Thing drew back.
Lord, Chris, you've given us a devil of a time !
She lay and looked at him and suddenly she knew,
wakened wide, she said And what happened to my baby ?
Robert said You mustn't worry about that. Get well, my
dear—he was thin as a rake, and near as ungroomed,
his hair up on end, she asked if Maidie had been
doing the cooking, for him and Bwan—and where
was Ewan ? He said that Ewan was at school to¬
day, seeing the doctor had found her much better.
As for Maidie, she’d proved no use at all, and he’d sent
for Else, Else had done fine. . . .
So it hadn’t been a dream Chris lay and knew as
the hours went by, and Robert went out and Else came
in ; and later the doctor and all fussed about her ; below
the sheets her body felt flat, ground down and flat, with
an empty ache; and her breasts hurt and hurt till they
saw to them, she hadn’t cried at all when she knew
what had happened, till it came for them to see to her
breasts, for a minute she nearly was desperate then.
But that was just daft, she’d given plenty of trouble,
said the Chris that survived all things that came to her.
So she gave in quietly, and they finished at last, and
she slept till Ewan came back from the school, and came
up after tea, and looked in and smiled.
Hello, mother, better ?
He came to the bedside and suddenly cuddled her ;
STRATUS 211
for a minute she was hurt with the weight of his head on
her breast, though she put up her arms about him. Then
something hot trickled on her breast, and she knew Mhat
 Ewan to cry ! that was dreadful. But he did it only
a minute while she held him, then drew away, and took
out his handkerchief and wiped his eyes, and sat down,
calm, but she didn’t care, reaching out and touching
his hand as he sat. Funny she should ever have feared
she would lose him, that already she’d done so, him no
longer a baby, remote from her thoughts or from thought
of her. How nearer he was than any there were ! She
said You must tell me, Ewan, what happened. When
was the baby born, was it dead ?
So he told her the baby was born that morning after
the spinners went to blow up the brig. Robert had gone
for the doctor and Ewan had stayed at home and tried to
look after her, though he didn’t know much of the things
he should do : as for Maidie, the girl was a perfect fool.
At last the doctor and Robert arrived, Robert sent off a
wire to Elsie at Fordoun, and they put Ewan out of the
room—he was glad, even though it was Chris, he’d a
beast of a headache. The baby had been born then,
it wasn’t born dead, though it died soon after, or so Ewan
heard. Else said that it was a boy, like Robert, but
Ewan hadn’t seen it: that was days ago, two or three
days before the Strike ended.
Chris remembered : What, is it ended, then ? Who
won? and Ewan said the Government, Robert raved
the leaders had betrayed the Strike, they’d been
feared that they would be jailed, the leaders, they had
sold the Strike to save their skins. Robert hadnt
believed the news when it came, that was the morning
that Chris was so bad and the two of them had sat in
her room—
212 CLOUD HOWE
Chris lay still and. said Thcmk you, Ewan, with a
little ghost of a laugh inside to know that he called her
Chris in his thoughts, as she’d thought he did ; and soon,
wearied still, she slept again, sleeping till supper-time,
it brought Else up with a tray and hot bottle, and
all things needed, she cried, right pleased, You’re fine
again, Mem ? and Chris said she was, she had to thank
Else with others for that.
Else said Devil a thanks—if you’ll pardon a body
mentioning Meiklebogs’ cousin in a Manse. I liked fine
to come ’stead of biding in Fordoun, with the old man
glunching at me and my bairn. Chris asked how the
baby was, and Else kindled, Fine, Mem, and fegs you
should see how he grows. And then suddenly stopped and
punched up the pillows, and set Chris up rough, and
began to chatter, like a gramophone suddenly gone quite
mad, with her ears very red and her face turned away.
Chris knew why she did it, she’d thought of that
baby she’d carried out dead from this room a while
back, she was feared that Chris might take ill again
were anything said to mind her of babies. But Chris
had never felt further from weeping, appalled at the
happening to Robert, not her.
Else told how the Strike had ended in Segget, folk
said that the spinners who went out that night and tried
to blow up the brig would be jailed. But there was
no proof, only rumours and scandal, and the burnt
grass in the lee of the brig. Sim Leslie, him that the folk
called Feet, had come up to the Manse like a sow seeking
scrunch, but the minister had dealt with him short
and sharp and he taiked away home like an ill-kicked
cur. The spinners and station folk wouldn’t believe
it when the news came through that the Strike was ended,
they said the news was just a damned lie, John Cronin
STRATUS
213
said it, and they wouldn’t go back, he and the minister
kept they from that till they got more telegrams up from
London. And Mr Colquohoun and Ake Ogilvie the
joiner, John Muir and some spinners had organized
pickets to keep Mr Mowat’s folk from getting to the
Mills. Syne they heard how the leaders had been feared
of the jail, and the whole things just fell to smithereens
in Segget. Some spinners that night went down the
West Wynd and bashed in the windows of the Cronin
house, and set out in a birn to come to the Manse, they
said the minister had egged them on, him safe and sound
in his own damned job, and they'd do to the Manse
as they’d done to the Cronins.
But coming up the Wynd they met in with Ake
Ogilvie, folk said that he cursed them black and blue;
and told them how Chris was lying ill and wouldn’t it
have been a damned sight easier for Mr Colquohoun to
have kept in with the gentry, instead of risking his
neck for the spinners ? The spinners all sneered and
jeered at Ake, but he stood fast there in the middle
of the road, and wouldn’t let them up, and they turned
and tailed off. A third were on to the Bureau again,
and Jock Cronin sacked from his job at the station,
and Miss Jeannie Grant hadn’t gone to the school, through
all the nine days she’d been helping the spinners: and when
she went back Mr Geddes said No, and folk told that she
would get the sack, too.
Chris said So it ended like that ? Else—was my baby
born dead, and was it a boy? Else went white and
wept a little at that, Chris lay and watched and Else
peeked at her, scared, she looked strangely un-ill with
that foam of bronze hair, and the dour face thin, but
still sweet and sure. Else said that it wasn’t, it lived
half an hour, the minister came up and baptized it
CLOUD HOWE
214
Michael, a bonny bairn, tiny and quiet, it yawned and
blinked its eyes just a minute—oh, Mem, I shouldn't be
telling you this!
Chris said But you should. Where is it buried?
and Else said 'twas out in the old kirkyard, there were
only the minister and Muir and herself, the minister
carried the coffin in there, and read the service, bonny
he did it, if it wasn’t for that fool fohn Muir that stood by,
like a trumpet, near, blowing his nose. And when the
minister came to the bit about Resurrection—I don’t mind
the words—
Chris said I do, and heard her own voice tell them
with Else near weeping again: I am the Resurrection
and the Life. He that believeth in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live.
Else gulped and nodded. And after he said that—
he didn’t know what he was saying, Mem, with his bairn new
dead and his Strike as well—he said AND WHO SHALL
BELIEVE ? quiet and queer. ... I shouldn’t be telling
you this, but oh ! you’ll have to hurry and get well for him !
Coming out of those memories given to the years,
Chris moved and looked at the waiting Segget, quiet
in the lazy spray of June sun, the same land and sun
that Hew Monte Alto had looked on that morning before
Bara battle. You were waiting yourself in a halt before
battle: all baitings were that, you thought, or would
think if you weren’t too wearied to think now at all.
But that would pass soon, you’d to get better quick
—quick and quick for the sake of Robert. Better, and
take him out of himself, Ewan would help, maybe Segget
even yet—
STRATUS 215
She rose slow to her feet and smiled at herself, for
that weakness that followed her when she stood up, with
the drowse of the June day a moment a haze of little
floating specks in her eyes. Then that cleared, and a
cold little wind came by, she looked up and saw a
thickening of clouds, rain-nimbus driving down upon
Segget.
IV
NIMBUS
JS^OW, with the coming of the morning, the stars shone
bright and brittle on the Segget roofs, the rime of the
frost Chris saw rise up, an uneasy carpet that shook in
the wind, the icy wind from the sea and Kinneff. Under
her feet the dark ground cracked, as though she were
treading on the crackle of grass, and as she passed through
the Kaimes’ last gate—far up, in the dimming light of
the stars, there fell a long flash from the arc of the sky,
rending that brittle white glow for a moment, its light
for a second death-white on the hills. Then she saw the
sky darken, and the corpse-light went: behind the
darkness the morning was coming.
So, walking quick to keep her feet warm, and because
she’d but little time left for this ploy, she gained the
Kaimes and halted and looked—not at them, but up at
the heights of the hills, sleeping there on the verge of
dawn. Nothing cried or moved, too early as yet, but a
peewit far in a hidden hollow, she minded how it was here
she had come—almost at this very hour she had come 
the very first night she had lain in Segget. And here she
climbed from those ten full years, still the same Chris
in her heart of hearts, nothing altered but space and time
and the things she had once believed everlasting and
sure—believed that they made her life, they made her!
But they hadn’t, there was something beyond that
endured, some thing she had never yet garbed in a
name.
She put up her hand to her dew-touched hair, she’d
climbed bare-headed up to the Kaimes, she had seen a
grey hair here and there last night. But it felt the same
hair as she felt the same self, its essence unchanged
whatever its look. Queer and terrible to think of that
216
NIMBUS 217
now—that all things passed as your life went on, but the
little things you had given no heed.
The wind goeth towards the south, and turneth about
unto the north ; it whirleth about continually, and the wind
returneth again according to his circuits.
That was Ecclesiastes, she thought; stilled; the dawn
pallid on her coiled, bronze hair.
In Segget below a cock crew shrill, she turned and
looked down at the shining of frost, remotely, and saw
it gleam and transmute, change and transmute as though
Time turned back, back through the green and grey of
the years till that last time here when she'd climbed the
Kaimes, her baby new dead and herself a live ache—
She had shown as little of the ache as she might,
in spite of the waste, she had hated that. So she told to
Robert and he laughed and said You sound like a woman
in an Aberdeen joke, his eyes with the beast of the black
mood in them. Waste? Good God, do you think that
is all ?
He flung away from her and walked to the window,
beyond it the smell and blow of the hay in the sleeping
parks of Dalziel of Meiklebogs. Then suddenly he turned—■
Christine, I'm sorry. But I’m weary as well, let’s not
speak of it more.
And she left it at that, he'd drawn into himself,
lonely, he sat for hours in his room, with impatience for
either her pity or help. So she buried herself in the work
of the house, and sought in her pride a salve for the sting
of the knowledge she counted for little with Robert,
compared with his cloudy hopings and God. She could
be strange and remote as he could. . . .
218 CLOUD HOWE
And it came with hardly an effort at all, they were
hurrying nods that met on the stairs and went to bed at
uneven hours; yet sometimes a hand seemed to twist in
her heart as she watched him sit at his meat in silence,
or at night when she woke and he lay asleep, with it seemed
the tug of lips on her breasts and the ghostly ache of her
empty womb—silent the yews in the listening dark.
Segget crowded the kirk the first Sunday in May after
the General Strike collapsed, to hear what that cocky
billy Colquohoun would say of his tink-like socialists now.
But he never mentioned the creatures at all, he preached
a sermon that maddened you, just, he said there was
nothing new under the sun : and that showed you the kind
of twister he was. Hairy Hogg, the Provost, came out of
the kirk, and said that the man was insulting them, sly,
trying to make out that the work they had done to beat
the coarse labour tinks was a nothing. Instead, now the
Strike was ended so fine, you’d mighty soon see a gey
change for the good, no more unions to cripple folks’
trade, and peace and prosperity returning again; and
maybe a tariff on those foreign-made boots.
But damn the sign of either you saw as that year
went on and the next came in, there was little prosperity
down at the Mills, they were working whiles, and whiles
they were not, young Mr Mowat went off to kondon and
syne from there he went off on a cruise, as a young gent
should ; but he fair was real kind. For he wrote that he'd
soon be back home again, and would see about pushing
the Segget trade, that would mean more men—but no
union men.
It wasn’t his wyte that he had no work, in spite of the
NIMBUS 219
spinners and their ill-ta’en grumblings. For they grumbled
still, though their union was finished—faith ! that was
funny, for you'd got from the papers that the men would
be fine if it wasn’t the unions—the Tory childes nearly
broke down and wept on the way the unions oppressed
the workers. The Cronins had all been sacked from the
Mills and no more of a Sunday you’d hear them preach
about socialism coming, and coarse dirt like that. Jock
Cronin, that had once been a railway porter, was down
now in Glasgow, tinking about, it fairly was fine to be
rid of the brute. Folk said that that Miss Jeannie Grant
had gone with him, some childe had seen her, down there
at a mart, all painted and powdered, she’d ta’en to the
streets, and kept Jock Cronin, he lived off her earnings.
Ay, just the kind of thing you’d expect from socialists
and dirt that spoke ill of their betters, and yet powdered
and fornicated like gentry.
But young Dod Cronin, that was a mere loon, he heard
the news, he worked out at Fordoun, and he went to the
smiddy and tackled old Feslie, with the sweat dripping
down from his wrinkled old chops. And Dod said What’s
this you’ve been saying of my brother? and old Leslie
said What? And who are you, lad? And Dod said
You know damn well who I dm. And if ever I hear you
spreading your claik about my brother or Miss feannie
Grant, I’ll bash in your old face with one of your hammers.
Old Leslie backed nippy behind the anvil and said
Take care, take care what you say! I’m not a man you
must rouse, let me tell you. And he told later on that
never in his life had he heard such impudence—'twas
Infernal, just, he’d a mighty sore job to keep himself back
from taking that Cronin loon a good clout. Now, when
himself was a loon up in Garvock— And you didn’t hear,
more, for you looked at your watch, and said you must go,
220 CLOUD HOWE
and went at a lick; and left him habbering and chapping
and sweating.
Young Dod was as mad as could be on the thing, he
went up to the Manse and clyped to Colquohoun ; and
Else Queen, that was back there again as the maid, told
that the minister said he was sorry, but what could he do ?
Young Cronin shouldn’t worry, you could only expect a
smell from a drain.
Else said the minister was referring to Eeslie: and
folk when they heard that speak were real mad. Who
was he, a damned creature that sat in a Manse, to say that
an honest man was a drain ? There was nothing wrong
with old Eeslie, not him, he’d aye paid his way, a cheery
old soul, though he could sicken a cow into colic with his
long, dreich tales and his habberings of gossip.
He'd aye been good to his guts, the old smith, and
faith, he grew better the longer he lived. At New Year
he took a bit taik down the toun, into the shop of Mac-
Dougall Brown ; it was late at night and what could
Brown do but ask the old smith to come ben for a drink—
not of whisky, you wouldn’t find that at MacDougall’s, but
of some orange wine or such a like drink, awful genteel,
though it had a bit taste as though a stray pig had eased
himself in it. Well, Eeslie went ben, and there sat the
creash, MacDougall's wife, and Cis, the fine lass, and the
other bit quean that folk teased and called May-bull.
Mrs Brown was right kind and poured out the wine,
syne she went and took out a cake from the press, there
was more than half of the cake on the plate, and Mistress
Brown cut off a thin slice, genteel, and held out the plate
to the smith.
And what did he do but take up the cake, not the
slice, and sit with it there in his hand, habbering and
sweating like a hungered old bull, and tearing into
NIMBUS
221
MacDougall’s cake, MacDougall watching him boiling
with rage—faith! speak about washing in the blood of
the kamb, he looked as though he’d like a real bath in the
smith’s.
Well, old lyeslie finished his bit of repast, and got
up, though he hadn’t near finished his story, about
Garvock, but he never yet had done that, though you’d
known him fine this last fifty years. But it was getting
fell late-like by then and he thought he’d better go take
a taik home, Mrs Brown had gone to her bed, and May-
bull, and the fine lass Cis had gone as well. MacDougall
showed him out to the door, and cried good-night, and
banged it behind him ; and old Leslie was standing
sucking at a crumb that was jooking about in an old
hollow tooth, when what did he see round the end of the
dyke that sloped to the back of MacDougall’s shop, but
a body slipping over in the dark.
Old Leslie wondered who it could be, and stepped
soft in the dark down the lithe of the dyke. Near to the
end he stooped and stopped, and heard the whisp-whisp
of some folk close by. And he knew one voice, but not
the other, ’twas the voice of Cis Brown and he heard her
say Not to-night—Mahel is sleeping with me. The voice
that the smith couldn’t put a name to said Damn her,
why doesn't she sleep with the cuddy? Cis laughed and
sighed and syne Leslie heard the sound of a kiss, dis¬
gusting-like, he himself had never all his married life
so much as pecked at his old wife’s face : and once
when she saw him without his sark, he’d been changing it,
careless-like, by the fire, she nearly had fainted, and so
near had he, they’d never been so coarse as look at each
other, shameless and bare, in their own bit skins. . . .
Well, where was he now with this story of Cis ?—Ay,
her slobbering her lad by the dyke. In a little bit while
222 CLOUD HOWE
they were whispering again, and the smith tried hard
to hear what they said, they spoke over low, the tinks
that they were, to make an old man near strain off his
neck from his hard-worked shoulders to hear what they
said. Syne that finished and Leslie heard footsteps
coming and dodged in the shadow of the post-office door.
And who should loup over the wall and go by but that
tink Dod Cronin, that had so miscalled him, him it had
been that was kissing Cis Brown !
But folk said that that was just a damned lie, Cis
Brown was as douce and sweet a quean as you’d find in
the whole of Segget, they said—old Leslie telling the tale
in the Arms was nearly brained by Dite Peat himself.
Dite said he liked a bit lie fell well, just as he liked to soss
with a woman, especially a woman he’d no right to, but
he wasn’t to hear that kind of a speak of Cis Brown, he
was fairly damned if he was. And others cried Ay,
that’s right, that’s right! and Feet, the policeman, said
to his father You’d better away home. Off the old smith
went, the coarse old brute; still habbering his lies and
swearing he’d seen Dod Cronin and that fine quean Cis
together.
Chris heard the tale, but she paid it no heed, with long
months of resting her strength had come back, she was
out in the garden of the Manse each dawn, digging and
hoeing as the Spring came in. Funny to think ’twas
nearly a year since she’d walked this garden, her child
in her body, and stood over there and looked in the kirk-
yard, and thought of the folk that had once been bairns,
and died, and nothing of them endured. And now she
herself walked free and young, slim as of old, if her face
NIMBUS
223
was thinner, but warm and kind, warm blood in her body,
she could see it rise blue if she looked at her hands loosen
their grip from the shaft of the graip, and her hair was
alive, that had gone a while dead, and crackled its fire
as she combed it at night, long hair that still came near
to her knees. And the baby she’d brought in the world
last year—
But she’d not think of that, not here in the sun,
the rooks a long caw out over the yews, sailing, sun¬
winking, dots in the sun, the clouds went wind-laden
down through the Howe, all the Howe wakening below
them to hear the trill and shrill of the springs of Spring.
So busied Chris was as the days grew warm, she’d found
in a garden what once in the fields, years before, on the
windy rigs of Blawearie, ease and rest and the kindness
of toil, that she saw but little or nothing of Robert—
no loss to him, with his bittered face, and no loss to her
now, they went their own ways.
Ewan was shooting straight as a larch, narrow and
dark, with a cool, quiet gaze, and a sudden smile that came
seldom enough, but still, when it did— Else said she could
warm her hands at that smile. He was out all hours of
the day, was Ewan, still at his flints, he’d raked half the
Howe, he’d been down by Brechin and Forfar for flints.
He was known in places Chris never had seen, the dark¬
faced loon from the Manse of Segget, that would ask if
he might take a look at your fields, and would show the
arrows and such-hke of old that the creatures of hunters
had used in their hunts. And the farmers would say,
Faith, look if you like, and Ewan would thank them,
charming and cool, a queer-like loon, not right in the
head, folk that were wice weren’t near so polite.
Some times, as the light of the Spring days waned
he’d come back from school and find bread and milk,
CLOUD HOWE
224
and bring them out to the garden to eat, and set them down
by a bed or a drill and take the hoe or the fork from
Chris, and start to work with quick, even strokes, the
down of a soft, fine hair on his cheeks, Chris would sit
with her knees hand-clasped, and watch him, the ripple
of his smooth, dark skin, he’d long lashes as well, that
were curled and dark, he worked with a cool and deliberate
intent at digging the garden as he did at all else. Once
Chris asked him, one of those evenings in April, what he
would do when he had grown up.
He stopped at the turn of a drill and looked at her,
he was leaving school and going to Dundon, up to the
college in the summer term. He said I’d like to be an
archceologist, but I don’t suppose that I’ll ever be that.
Chris asked Why not ? and he said that he thought it
unlikely you could be that without lots of money. He
would just have to face up to things as they were, jobs
scarce, and all the world in a mess.
Chris wondered what were his thoughts on the mess,
he had read nearly every book in the Manse, had he read
the books on Socialism yet ? She asked him that and he
said that he had, indifferently saying it, one of the books—
by a Ramsay MacDonald, all blither and blah. Charlie
Cronin, who had now left the school was a socialist, the
same as MacDonald, they were both very muddled,
they had no proofs and they hadn’t a plan, it was
spite or else rage: OR BECAUSE THEY WERE
FEARED.
Chris looked at the fairy featherings of clouds that
went south on the hurrying wind of the Howe, the green
of the hedges trilled low in its blow, you could feel in your
body the stir of the blood as the sap stirred sweet in the
hedge, you supposed. Spring and the time of young
folk and dreams, following cloud-pillars as they sailed the
NIMBUS 225
Howe ! . . . And maybe Ewan was doing no more in
that he refused all clouds and all dreams !
She said What are YOU going to do with the mess?
and he put down his cup and said Oh, nothing, and started
to weed in the strawberry patch : Unless I just must,
and he whistled to himself, calm and cool, with his dark,
cool face, he whistled and hoed in the evening light. And
Chris felt for him a tenderness, queer, not as though she
were only his mother but as though he were all young life
in an evening of Spring—thinking the world would dare
hardly intrude in their lives and years, but would stand
back and bow, and slip to one side to let them go by. . . .
She held out a hand—Help me up, son, Fm stiff. Growing
old, I suppose ; he stopped and looked at her, his gravity
suddenly drowned in that smile. I thought just now you
looked like a girl. There are some at the school who look
older than you.
But he gave her his hand and she jumped to her feet,
light enough still, and they looked at each other ; and
Chris put up her hand to his throat, making on that the
button there needed re-sewing, it didn’t, but she wanted
to touch that cool throat. He let her, standing there
quiet and alert, like the deer she had seen come down from
the haughs, with brindled pelts, in the winter-time—
not feared and not shy, cool, quick and alive, under
her fingers a little vein beat as she fastened his collar,
and Ewan said Thanks, and went on with his weeding,
Chris went to the house and looked at the clock and made
tea for Robert.
He was off at Stonehaven, a meeting of ministers,
called together to discuss the reason why every kirk in
p
CLOUD HOWE
226
the Howe grew toom, a minister would sometimes rise
of a Sunday and preach to a congregation of ten, in a
bigging builded to hold two hundred. So Robert told
Chris as he wheeled out his bike, that morning, under the
peep of the sun; and Chris had said Well, they surely
know why ? Do they need a meeting to find out that ?
Robert had looked at her withdrawn, remote, the
brooding anger not far from his eyes. Do YOU know the
reason? Chris had said Yes, the reason’s just that the
times have changed.
His unchancy temper quite went with him then,
By God, he sneered, isn’t that profound ? Chris flushed,
with an angry retort on her lips ; but she bit it back, as
so often she did, and turned indoors as he wheeled down
the Wynd—what a fool she had been to say what she’d
said ! kike telling an angry blind man he was blind. . . .
She would keep to herself, she was nobody’s serf.
But sometimes she ached for kind eyes and kind
hands. One night she had turned to him, kissing him
then, and he’d shrugged away from her—Not now,
Chris, not now. She had said in her hurt, And maybe
not again—when YOU would again, and had turned her
back and pretended to sleep, but had wept a little instead,
like a fool. Spring was here, she supposed it was that,
daft to desire what no one could give except with a flame
of desire in the giving.
So she waited this evening, with pancakes new baked,
they might live poor friends, with love and lust by, but
she still ate his meat and she owed him for that. Else
had the day off to go down to Fordoun, her baby bade
there in its grandmother’s care. In the cool of the kitchen
Chris stood for a while and watched Ewan kneel to a
thrawn-like weed, and saw him twist it up ruthlessly,
sure; she sighed with a smile at herself for that sigh.
NIMBUS
227
Were she sure of herself as Ewan of himself, she might
go her own way and not heed to any, have men to lie
with her when she desired them (and faith, that would
sure be seldom enough !), do and say all the things that
came crying her to do, go hide long days in the haughs
of the Mounth—up in the silence and the hill-bird’s cry,
no soul to vex, and to watch the clouds sailing and
passing out over the Howe, unending over the Howe of
the World ; that—or sing and be glad by a fire; or
wash and toil and be tired with her toil as once she had
been in her days on a croft—a million things, Chris-
alone, Chris-herself, with Chris Guthrie, Chris Tavendale,
Chris Colquohoun dead !
She lighted the lamp as she heard Robert come and
carried it through to the hall for him to see to hang up
his coat and his hat. He said You look very sweet,
Christine, there with the lamp, and held her a moment,
lamp and all, Chris felt her heart turn, with gladness—
then, queerly, she felt half-sick. . . .
He loosed her and followed her into the room, soft
happed in shadow in the loglight’s glow, she put down
the lamp and looked at him again. There was something
about him that wasn’t him at all—a filthy something, she
thought, and shivered. He said Not cold? and smiled
at her kind—ROBERT with eyes like a kind milch cow !
She went in a daze and brought in the tea, they sat
and ate by the open window, the world all quiet out and
about, except, sharp-soft in the fading light, the click
and scrape of the tools of Ewan as he redded and bedded
by the kirkyard wall. And again, as she looked at Robert,
Chris shivered—What’s ta’en you, Robert—Robert what
is it ?
He raised up his head and she saw his eyes smile.
Just something you’ll think is quite mad when you hear. . . .
228
CLOUD HOWE
And he told her then of the thing that had come
as he rode from the minister’s meeting at Stonehaven,
grinding his bike through Dunnottar’s woods, he had
looked once or twice from the road to the woods and saw
them green in the April quiet, the sunset behind him—
very quiet, Chris. He had ridden up there till the way
grew steep, the old bike was near on its last wheels now:
and just as he gained the near edge of the woods he got
from his bike and looked back at Stonehaven, in that
corridor of trees the light fell dim, a hidden place, no sun
came there. And, as he stood there and breathed in the
quiet, he saw the Figure come slow down the road.
He came so quiet by the side of the road that Robert
hadn’t heard His coming or passing, till he raised his head
and saw Him quite close, tired, with a white strange look
on His face, no ghost, for the hair blew out from His head
and he put up His hand to brush back the hair. And Robert
saw the hand and the pierced palm, he stood frozen
there as the Figure went on, down through the quiet of
Dunnottar’s woods, unresting, into the sunset’s quiet,
a wood-pigeon crooned in a far-off tree, Robert heard the
sound of a train in Stonehaven, he stood and stared and
then leant on his bike, trembling, suddenly weeping in
his hands.
Outside, the next day broke quick with wind, a grey
quick drive that was bending the trees, blowing its blow
in the face of the sun, Chris went to her room and dressed
in short skirts, the rig she’d once worn—it seemed years
before—that day she and Robert climbed up the Mounth.
She’d no fancy at all for that walk to-day, she found a
stick and went down through the shingle, and looked back
as she passed in the whisp of the yews, Ewan in his room;
NIMBUS
229
he stood near the window, some everlasting flint in his
hands. She waved to him, but he didn't see, then at
the turn of the dyke the wind caught at her breath and
her skirts and her hair.
Ake Ogilvie looked from his shop as she passed, and
gave her a wave and bent over his desk, his poetry maybe,
Robert said it was awful, the angry sneerings of a poet
born blind. . . . But Chris hurried on from the thought
of Robert, swinging her stick, the wind in her face, the
Sourock's wife looked out as she passed, and stared after
the creature, that Mrs Colquohoun, like a slip of a quean
she was, not decent, her that had had her two bairns, one
dead, the other upgrowing and nearly a man. She said
later on she was black-affronted as Mrs Colquohoun
reached the bend of the Wynd, the wind blew up the
creature’s short skirts, all about her, and instead of
giving a bit scraich and blushing to the soles of her feet,
as she should, she just brushed them back and went
hastening on—what was her hurry, no hat on her head,
and her fine silk breeks and nought else below ?
(And folk said What, had she nothing else below ? and
the Sourock’s wife said Not a damned stitch, fair tempting
the childes, half-naked like that, not to mention tempting
her death with cold.)
Past the shop of Dite Peat and Hairy Hogg’s front,
Alec, the son of the Provost, stood there, he had lost his
job in Edinburgh, Alec, Chris liked him better than when
she first met him, she cried How are you ? and he raised
his cap ; and Chris sped on, Alec said that night when he
looked in on Else, that Mrs Colquohoun looked more of a
boy than a grown-up woman who had a fine son. Else
said She both looks them, and makes them, my lad, what¬
ever she meant by that, if she knew ; but she kept him at
sparring distance, did Else.
230
CLOUD HOWE
Down at the edge of the Moultrie shop, where Jim the
roan had had such an ill end, Chris found herself in the
lithe of the dyke that shielded the plots of the gardener
Grant. It was here she nearly ran into Cis Brown,
running, with sober face and blown hair, Chris held her
and laughed and they steadied themselves, Chris asked
And how are things at the college? Cis coloured up
sweet, she said they were fine. She loitered a moment
and Chris looked in her face and caught there the glimpse
of a desperate trouble.
Something (what Chris of them all ?) made her say
I’m off for a long walk down through the Howe, I’m restless
to-day, would you like to come ?
At noon that day they stopped at a place, a little
farm high in the Reisk, over-topped by the wave of its
three beech trees, standing up squat in the blow of the
wind that came in a shoom from the Bervie braes. They
were given milk there, and new-baked cakes, and rested
a while, Chris glad of the rest, Cis lying back in her chair
with her face flushed to colour from the walk they had
come. They had come down the Howe from the Segget
haughs, past Catcraig, out on the Fordoun road, Fordoun
a brown, dull lour to the north, and so swung on down
past Mondynes, Kinraddie to the left, and then reached
the brig, Chris stopped and peered in the water below
and minded how once she’d done that, long before, in
a summer, and seen the school-bairns plash, naked and
dripping, in the shadowed shallows. Now the water
flowed under, free and unvexed, east, to twine to the
Bervie mouths, Cis leaned beside Chris and stared down
as well, and then said There is something I want to tell you.
NIMBUS
231
And Chris had said, gently, I think I know what.
Cis flushed up a moment and bit at her lip, she wasn’t
afraid, only troubled, Chris saw. And she said We’ll
go on, to the right, I think ; and so they had done, and
climbed up the brae to the Geyrie’s moor, and looked
back from there and saw all around the steaming teams
a-plod in the parks, shoring the long red drills of clay.
Up in the hills the mists had come down, as they watched
they saw a rain-cloud wheel out, down from the Mounth
on the roofs of Drumlithie, white-shining there on the road
to the South. Back and still back, line on line, rose the
hills, the guardian wall of the Mearns Howe, it came on
Chris as she stood and looked she’d never been beyond
that wall since a bairn. The peewits were flying in the
parks outbye, in the wind that came racing up from the
east was the smell, a tingle that tickled your nose, of the
jungle masses of whins that rose, dark as a forest, on the
Geyrie’s moor.
Chris said that she thought they might take that
way, Cis said Is it safe ? she had heard it was nearly
impassable with bog, holes in the earth where a cart could
lair, they sat on a gate and looked into its stretch, dark-
brown and green in the hand of Spring. And Cis’s
shyness and constraint had gone, she was calm and young,
they smiled one at the other, and Chris said suddenly,
Oh, we’re such fools—women, don’t you think that we are,
now, Cis ? To worry so much about men and their ploys,
the things that they do and the things that they think !
Cis said But what else is there to do ? They count for
so much—and sat and thought, grave, shy and sweet
as a wing-poised bird. Or maybe they don’t as much as
they think, but there wouldn’t be children without them,
would there? Chris laughed at that and jumped down
from the gate. I suppose there wouldn’t, but still—we
232 CLOUD HOWE
might try! Let's go through the moor : and so they had
done.
There they saw the cup of the Howe rise up to the
Barras slopes that led to Kinneff, on their right, dark-
mantled, lost in its trees, Arbuthnott slept on the Bervie
banks, clusters of trees, with the sudden gleam in the
wind and the sun of the polished gear, bridles and haimes,
on the straining shoulders of the labouring teams. Tike
going back into your youth, Chris thought, and sighed at
that thought and Cis asked why, and Chris said Because
I am getting so old, and Cis said That’s silly, I sometimes
think you’re the youngest of all the folk in Segget. And was
shy. Please don’t ever cut your hair, though I’ve had mine
cut: it’s lovely, your hair.
Chris said that she thought it wasn’t so bad, and
they came to a little bare patch in the moor, where the
whins drew aside their skirts and stood quiet, and right
in the middle a great stone lay, maybe a thing from the
antique times, and Chris sat on it and clasped her knees,
and Cis looked at her and then sat at her feet, Chris with
her gold eyes closed in the sun, the run and wheep of the
wind in her hair, the sun on her face : she could listen to
it now, aloof and sure and untroubled by things. And
she said to Cis Is the boy Dod Cronin ?
So she’d heard it all as she sat knee-clasped, there,
in the play of the wind and the sun, a tale so old—oh, old
as the Howe, everlasting near as the granite hills, this thing
that brought men and women together, to bring new life,
to seek new birth, on and on since the world had begun.
And it seemed to Chris it was not Cis alone, her tale—but
all tales that she harkened to then, kisses and kindness
and the pain of love, sharp and sweet, terrible, dark, and
the wild, queer beauty of the hands of men, and their
lips, and the sleeps of desire fulfilled, and the dark, strange
NIMBUS
233
movements of awareness alone, when it came on women
what thing they carried, darkling, coming to life within
them, new life to replenish the earth again, to come to
being in the windy Howe where the cloud-ships sailed
to the unseen south. She fell in a dream that went far
from Cis, looking up and across the slow-peopled parks
at the scaurs of the Mounth and its flying mists, beyond
these the moving world of men, and back again to those
clouds that marched, terrible, tenebrous, their pillars still
south. A pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night.
She said I must think, I'll get Robert to help ; and
Cis said The minister? and looked still more troubled.
Oh, Mrs Colquohoun, what have men to do with it, it’s not
their concern, they don’t understand. Dod doesn’t—he’s
frightened—for me or himself, but he doesn’t know this,
how queer it all is, and sickening, and fine—maybe I’m
sickening myself to say that ?
Chris said she thought she was sweet to say it, and
put her arm round the shoulders of Cis, and the girl looked
up, and her lips came to Chris's; and Chris thought at
that moment that no men could kiss—not as they should,
they’d no notion of kissing. ... Oh men, they were
clumsy from the day they were breeked to the day they
took off their breeks the last time !
The wind was coming in great gusts now, driving the
riven boughs of the broom, in times it rose to a scraich
round about and the moor seemed to cower in its trumpet-
cry. Cloud Howe of the winds and the rains and the sun !
All the earth that, Chris thought at that moment, it made
little difference one way or the other where you slept or
ate or had made your bed, in all the howes of the little
earth, a vexing puzzle to the howes were men, passing and
passing as the clouds themselves passed : but the REAT
was below, unstirred and untouched, surely, if that were
CLOUD HOWE
234
not also a dream. Robert with his dream of the night
before, that Face and that Figure he had seen in the woods,
Chris had listened to him with her head bent low, knowing
she listened to a madman’s dream. And Robert to dream
it! Robert who once followed a dream that at least had
the wind in its hair, not this creep into fear and the
fancies of old. But she’d seen then, clear and clear as
he spoke, the Fear that had haunted his life since the War,
Fear he’d be left with no cloud to follow, Fear he’d be
left in the day alone and stand and look at his naked self.
And with every hoping and plan that failed, he turned to
another, to hide from that fear, draping his dreams on the
face of life as now this dream of the sorrowing Face. . . .
And she’d shivered again at the filth of the thing, not
looking as she heard that crack in his voice, he was saying
he could almost have touched the Figure—God, Chris,
it was HIM, whom I’ve never believed! I’ve thought
Him only a Leader, a man, but Chris—I’ve looked on the
face of God. . . .
She’d sat and said nothing till that was impossible,
so to sit silent, and raised up her eyes, misty with pity, yet
repulsion as well. Robert had said quiet, And you don’t
believe ? And she said J don’t know, I don’t know—oh,
I’ll try ! And gripped his hand tight that he mightn’t
ask more—
She jumped up then from that seat in the moor—
Come on, I’m so hungry ! and the two of them went on,
through the whins with the scud of the clouds overhead,
that patched their faces in the sharp sun-fall, a snipe was
sounding up by the Wairds as they came to the shaven
lands of the Reisk, shaven and shorn in the greed of the
War. So, as they climbed they came on the farm, with
the three beech trees, and, beyond the horizon, poised
and glistening, the tumbling sea.
NIMBUS
235
And when they had finished with drinking their milk
and eating their cakes Chris offered to pay. But the
farmer’s wife shook her head, she’d not have it, she’d
heard of Chris from her son, she said, he lived in London
and wrote horrible books : but he and Chris were at
college together. Chris couldn’t mind much of the son
at all, she supposed they’d met some time or another,
but she didn’t say that, she and Cis cried their thanks, and
went on down the road, it was afternoon then, the sun
had wheeled round and was on the west slant.
Down in Arbuthnott they found a bus and with that
were carried down the road to Bervie, where the old brig
hung by the lazy drifts of smoke from the Mills that lay
in the hollow—mills half-idle, as were those of Segget,
Bervie above them, a rickle and clutter. They got from
the bus and looked at the shops, then went down to the sea
by a straggling lane, the sea was pounding into the bay
where no boats came because of the rocks—it frothed and
spumed like a well-beaten egg, out east a fisher boat went
by, into the mist and the Gourdon smell. Chris sat on a
rock and looked at the sea, very wakeful, but Cis went to
sleep in the sun, till Chris waked her up and they went
back again, and found a new bus to take them to Stone¬
haven, where they’d get yet another to take them back,
up the long roads, to Spring-green Segget.
And so, by the fall of night, they came back; and
Chris was tired, but her mind made up. Not even for
Robert could she change and pretend, though she’d not say
a thing that would hurt, could she help. She had found
in the moors and the sun and the sea her surety unshaken,
lost maybe herself, but she followed no cloud, be it named
or unnamed.
CLOUD HOWE
236
Next Sabbath the minister stood up in the pulpit
and preached from the Sermon on the Mount to Segget,
he said that the Christ still walked the earth, bringing
the only message that endured—though all else faded,
that was undying, they must search out the Christ, each
soul by himself, and find in himself what the world
denied, the love of God and the fellowship of men.
Folk listened and thought the man a fair scunner,
damn’t! you wanted a minister with spunk, whatever had
come over this childe Colquohoun, bleating there soft as a
new-libbed sheep ? Once he’d glowered as though he would
like to gut you, and thundered his politics, and you’d
felt kittled up, though you didn’t believe a word that he’d
said. But this Sunday he blethered away in the clouds,
folk came out and went home and were real disappointed,
minding the time when he’d said from the pulpit, right
out, that Hairy Hogg was a monkey—damn’t! he’d fair
fallen away since then.
And some of the spinners that came to the kirk, they
were few enough now, remembered the name they had
called the minister a long time back, they said that
Creeping Jesus was back, he’d got feared at the gentry,
the same as some others. Old Cronin himself it was that
said that, and by others he meant his own son Jock that
had led the Strike but a two years back, and had aye been
a right coarse brute, folk thought, though fair the apple
of his father’s eye. But Jock had gotten on well in
Glasgow, where he’d lived in sin with Miss Jeannie Grant,
he’d gotten a job on a union there and went lecturing here
and went blethering there, in a fine new suit and a bowler
hat, and spats, right trig, and brave yellow boots. And
he’d married Miss Grant, a three weeks back, and they had
a fine house on the Glasgow hills ; and wherever he went
Jock Cronin would preach alliance between all employers
NIMBUS
237
and employed, and say to the folk that came to hear him
that they shouldn’t strike, but depend on their leaders—
like himself; and take a smug look at his spats. When
news of that came up to old Cronin, he cursed his son in a
sickening way, and he said he’d never guessed he had
fathered a Judas that could sell out the workers for that—
not even for silver or a hungered guts, but spats, and a
house on the Glasgow hills, and a craze for a white-legged
quean in his bed.
Folk took a good laugh when they heard the news,
Jock Cronin was showing some sense, they said, he fair
had changed since the days when he’d go and break up
the meetings of MacDougall Brown. Next MacDougall
himself got a sore stammy-gaster, and so did the whole
of Segget; it gasped. That tale of old Leslie’s had had
the truth in it, though you’d hardly believe it again when
you heard it—it was all a damned lie and Cis a fine quean.
But then, when you met with her out in the street,
and looked, and heard the news from the Manse, she and
Dod Cronin to be wed in a week—your throat went dry,
you went into the Arms and had a bit dram and swore
at the bitch, all the folk said she was a foul creature, but
they said it with something catching their throats, they'd
been proud of Cis, all Segget had been, and here she was
showing herself in that way, no better than that tink
Else Queen at the Manse.
Ake Ogilvie said it was only nature, Cis or Else or the
whole jing-bang, what ailed the folk of Segget, he said,
was that they’d seen Cis as they might have been—clean—
and they’d liked her for what they had lost. He spoke
that speak to John Muir, the roadman, Muir gleyed and
skeuched and chewed the thing over, it didn’t make sense,
Ake seldom did.
He went out to dig a bit grave after supper, the
238 CLOUD HOWE
moon far up out over the Mounth, the sunset still far,
though the lines lay long, in long slants across the hay-
fields of summer, and smoke drowsed low on the Segget
roofs. In the kirkyard the grasses lay scythed as he’d left
them, and he walked through that grass, there was some
of it clover, bonnily scented with dead men’s manure.
So he came to the kirkyard corner and stopped, and
lighted his pipe and spat on his hands, and started in to
dig the bit grave, for one of the old spinner wives of
West Wynd.
All the land here about was thick with old graves,
he’d soon have to stop or start carting the bones to a pit
and bury them out and apart, to leave room for the rest
of Segget down there, eating and sleeping and having its
play, all coming to stour and a stink at the end. And
Muir gleyed down at the grave and dug, and minded of
Cis and the speak there was, Dod Cronin had been found a
job in Dundon and he and the lass were moving up there,
the best they could do to get out of their shame. God
knew there wasn't much shame in the thing, a lot over¬
rated, this bedding with a quean—you worked yourself
up and you got damned little, and where did it end then,
all said and all done ? Down here with the clay and the
grass up above, be you rich, be you poor, unwedded like
Cis, or as bonny as Mrs Colquohoun was bonny, or a
shameless limmer like one of the queans that young
Mr Mowat would bring to the House.
He fair was a devil among women, young Mowat,
gents were like that, Peter Peat said; but he’d time yet
to settle down bravely in Segget and take his natural
place at its head : and that was the Segget Conservative
NIMBUS
239
branch. Maybe he had had more queans than he should,
but he’d settle down bravely yet, you would see. Ake
Ogilvie said, No doubt—in his sham, a tink-like speak,
just what you expected, he was jealous as hell of the
gentry, Ake, nearly as bad as that creature Moultrie
that was now over stiff to crawl out at all.
One of the Mills had been idle for months, though
young Mr Mowat had come back from his sail. He was
no sooner back than a birn of the spinners went up to
the House in a deputation. But when the deputation
got there, and the servant had shown them into the
hall, and they stood there twisting their caps, fell shy,
they heard the crackle of a falling bottle and a hooting
and laughing as though lunatics were loose ; and out of a
side-door a quean came running, without a stitch on,
nothing but a giggle, she looked back and laughed at young
Mowat behind her, running and laughing with his wee
frog face ; and up the stairs the two of them went.
Well, the deputation blushed from head to heel; syne
one of them, the oldest operative there, said That’s
where the cash goes we make in the Mills, and they looked
from one to the other, old, hungry, and some of them were
gey bitter, most on the dole, on starvation's edge ; and
they stood in the rich, warm hall and looked round, at the
log-wood fire and the gleam of deers’ heads, and the
patterned walls and the thick, soft rugs. But the rest
said nothing to the speak of the first, they knew it was
useless trying to complain or to start that kind of socialist
stuff that the Cronins of old had preached in the Mills;
you’d seen the end of that with the Strike, young Mowat
was the only hope of the Mills.
He came down at last and was charming, polite, and
said it was Jahly to see them again. And he stood with
his back to the fire and said Hwaw ? and read them a
24o CLOUD HOWE
lecture on the awful times, he said that taxation was
killing the country, all they could hope at the coming
election was that the Conservative folk would get back,
stronger than ever in position and power, and reduce
taxation on men like himself. Then perhaps he would
manage to open the Mill. And he smiled at them, charm¬
ing, with his horn-rimmed eyes, but he offered no drink,
instead rang a bell, and the servant childe came and
ushered them out; and young Mr Mowat said it had
been J ahly; and that showed that he had a real good
heart.
Now, that was the first Peter Peat had heard about
young Mr Mowat and the wishes he had that the Tory
Party should get back again, they’d been holding office
but a bare five years and hadn’t yet had time to set things
right, being busied with breaking strikes and the like,
and freeing the working men from their unions, and seeing
that we had a real strong navy, and trying to get the
coarse foreign tinks to reduce their armies, a danger to
Europe. . . . Peter Peat had these facts at his finger-tips
and went up to the House to see Mr Mowat, and ask a
subscription for the Segget branch. And Mr Mowat
said it was Jahly to see him, Rahly Jahly, and sipped
at his wine, and the quean did the same, exploding
a giggle, sitting bare-legged on the back of his chair.
Yes, he believed in Devolution for Scotland, but not this
mad nationalism now rampant, only the Unionist Party
would see that Scotland got her just dues in the end. And
he told Peter more of the coarse new Nationalists, not the
flower of the country’s gentry, as once, Scotland had lost
her chance once again, the new leaders a pack of socialists
and catholics, long-haired poets, a fellow called Grieve,
and Mackenzie and Gunn, hysterical Highlandmen.
Well, he had Jahly soon finished with them, and would
NIMBUS
241
be glad to give a donation some time to the branch of the
Unionist Party in Segget.
And Peter Peat was fell happy at that—ay, the old
blood flowed in the gentry’s veins.
The Autumn came, the Election’s results, and Segget
was fair stammy-gastered at them, the Eabour tinks had
gotten in power, led by that coarse brute Ramsay Mac¬
Donald. You minded him and the things he had said,
long before, when the War was on ?—that we shouldn’t
be fighting the Germans, no, no, but leave them a-be,
they were much too strong. Ay, that’s what he'd said
and here he was now, at the head of the country, lording
it about, and not even maybe saying Sir to the King.
But others said the creature would fairly swank now, and
get the King to make him a lord, or a duke or something :
and Ake Ogilvie said he’d heard the title was Lord Loon
of Lossie.
But that was just one of his ill-natured speaks,
damn't! was he against this Government as well ?—after
going to all that stour to vote Liberal, instead of decent
and Tory like others. Hardly any of the spinners had
voted at all, they just hung about and smoked their bit
fags, or dug in their gardens back of the wynds, or stared
at the Mills with their hungry eyes. But Ake Ogilvie
had said he was voting Liberal, and had canvassed Segget
for the Liberal childe, doing him a sight more harm than
good, he said there was good in none of the parties,
Labour or Tory or Liberal or any : but the Tory name
fair stank in your throat, it was built on the purses and
pride of the kind of half-witted loon that mismanaged
the Mills; the Liberals were damn little better, he
Q
CLOUD HOWE
242
knew, but they had a great name that was worthy a
vote.
Hardly a soul paid heed to his blethers, just smiled
at him canny and said Well, we’ll see; and got ready
for the polling day to come to ride to Laurencekirk in the
Tory cars. Ake Ogilvie borrowed a Liberal car, and its
driver, and waited in Segget Square ; and the Tory cars
piled black with folk, getting off to vote for the gentry
childes that had promised them reischles and reischles
of tariffs ; but not a damn soul looked near Alec Ogilvie,
sitting with a sneering look in his car. And then the door
of the Moultrie shop was flung wide open and who should
come out, boasting and hirpling slow on his stick, but that
thrawn old billy, Rob Moultrie himself, leaning on a stick
and his old wife’s shoulder, he hobbled and hirpled over
to the car, near bent down double, Jess Moultrie beside
him. Ake jumped from his seat and helped the two in,
and stood back with a queer-like grin on his face—were
these all who championed Liberty here ?
But there was a fourth ; Ake had grown tired and was
crying to the shover that they might as well go, when he
heard a hail and looked over his shoulder. And there
was Mrs Colquohoun of the Manse, crossing the Square,
running like a lad, with a spray of blood on her dark,
soft skin. Sony I’m late, Ake, she said, and jumped
in ; and Ake got in himself and could nearly have cuddled
her.
But the Liberal man got a mighty few votes, the
Tory got in, as you knew he would do, if the rest of the
country had done half as well, where would these tinks of
socialists have been ? Selling spunks in the London
streets, or that coarse brute Ramsay MacDonald tracts.
And the Provost said in the Segget Arms ’twas an ill day
this for our Scottish land. What was it the poet Robert
NIMBUS
243
Burns had written ?—an ancestor, like, of the Hoggs,
Rabbie Burns. A man’s a man for a’ that, he wrote,
and by that he meant that poor folk of their kind should
steer well clear of the gentry and such, not try to imitate
them at all, and leave them to manage the country’s
affairs.
Deeper and deeper as that year slipped by, Robert
slipped from the life of his parish, he hadn’t bothered to
vote at all, he locked himself up long hours in his room,
dreaming or reading or just sitting still—alien to Chris as
that Figure he dreamt he’d met in the dark of Dunnottar
woods.
Nor was that meeting the only one, there were others
haunting the paths of his feet, times when he’d know that
Presence in his room, once in the midst of a sermon he
stopped, not staring or wild, but all the kirk watched him,
and he watched the door, and his eyes moved slow as
though following a figure that came down the aisle ; and
folk turned round and stared where he stared, and saw
nothing at all but the winter gleam of the cold kirk
floor, and beyond that the glass of the far, stained window
that looked on the tossing boughs of the trees. Chris
half-rose from her seat in that silence, she saw the sweat
bright on Robert’s still face. Then his eyes left the aisle
and he wiped his forehead, and went on in an even voice
with his sermon.
For outside these moments he was quiet and kind,
with a kindness Chris hated—for it was not his. It was
something borrowed from his unclean dream, not Robert
at all, a mask and a pose, a kindness he followed with
Fear for an urge. And a dreadful loneliness came upon
CLOUD HOWE
244
Chris, and a shivering hate for that cloud he followed,
that sad-faced Figure out of the past, who had led such
legions of men to such ends up and down the haughs and
hills of the earth. Christ ? So maybe indeed He had
lived, and died, a follower of clouds Himself. That
Figure she minded from school-time days, and even then
it had not moved her, it seemed a sad story, in mad, sad
years, it was over and done : and it left her untouched.
And it left her so still, it was only a dream that could alter
nothing the ways of the world. . . . Oh, why wasn’t
Robert like other ministers ?—easy and pleased and
hearty and glib, with no religious nonsense about them,
they led hearty lives and ate well at table, and took the
days as they found them come, and didn’t leave their
wives to think daft thoughts, and cry here, quiet, in the
dark, like a child, sometimes with the fear of a child for the
dark.
But she just had to meet it: and her life was still hers.
So she worked through that autumn tending the garden,
till almost the earth rebelled from her touch, she thought
with a smile, and welcomed the winter. New Year’s Eve
came in a bluster on Segget, in snow and a breaking of
sleet for sharp hours, there were spinners starving down
in Old Toun John Muir told Chris as he came in on Sunday.
And he said that another twenty were sacked, it was likely
the second Mill would close down.
Robert heard that story as well, and listened, and
said not a word, who once would have flamed into curses
and anger on the cruelty of men. But now he stood
up in the pulpit and preached, his text the saying of
Christ, Feed my lambs. And Chris sat and listened to
the gentle voice, and shivered as though at a filthy thing*
And she looked round quiet at the people he preached to—
the Provost Hogg with his heavy face, John Muir, with
NIMBUS
245
his skeugh and his puzzled eyes, Peter Peat the tailor,
red-eyed, like a rat, and the mean, close face of the
publican, Melvin. What hope in appealing to them for
help ?—were there but a flicker he had sold his soul to that
fancy and Figure for something at least. But they heeded
as little the whine of his Christ as the angry threat of his
Struggling God.
And that New Year’s night as she lay by Robert, in
the quiet and the dark, she knew fear again, fear for the
year new come to birth, for the man who lay so quiet
in his sleep, beside her, turned away from her touch,
low in the grate the coals were drooping, in a little red
glow, she watched them sink and fade and grow grey as
the dawn came dim over a world that was wrapped in
white ; and out in the yews the frozen rooks stirred:
and down in the kitchen Else Queen did the same.
That year brought plenty of changes to Else, before
it began there were rumours about her, Ag Moultrie one
morning was going by the Manse when she saw the door
of the kitchen open, and out, as quiet as an ill-getted cat
who should come stepping but that loon Alec Hogg ?
And he turned and gave a bit nod of his head, and Else
Queen looked out and nearly saw Ag, but she dropped
down smart in the lithe of a bush, and watched the two
part, and was fairly ashamed—to think that the son of
a man like the Provost should have taken up with a
harlot, just. And the more Ag thought of it, the more
she was shamed, till she just broke down and fair Roared
and Grat.
Well, she passed the news on in a neighbour-like way,
and folk were fair shocked, and snickered at the Provost—
CLOUD HOWE
246
ay, that was a nasty smack in the face for old Hairy Hogg :
had he heard the news yet ? And when it came out that
he hadn’t, just yet, there were half a dozen that took him
the news, you yourself were nearly killed in the rush,
there was never such a birn of boots needing mending,
Dite Peat went in with a pair, and his brother, and Bruce
the roadman, and syne Will Melvin. And old Hairy
sat like a monkey and blew on how well he could sutor,
and Dite Peat said Ay, and we hear you’ll be sutoring
soon for a marriage. Or is it a christening ? And they
all took a sly bit look at the Provost; and he habbered
and said What ? and so he was told.
Well, he couldn’t believe that speak about Alec, the
loon might be a bit of a fool and had lost his work in the
Edinburgh office, the place had closed down, that wasn’t
his wyte : but he wasn’t such a fool as take up with a
quean that once warmed the bed for that wastrel Dalziel.
And as soon as young Alec came home that day from some
gardening work he had gotten outbye the Provost cried
out, Come into the shop, and told him the coarse-like
speak in Segget. Alec Hogg said, Well, then, there’s
something in it. I like Else well and I mean to marry
her. When he heard him say that old Hairy near
burst, and he asked Alec Hogg did he want to bring them,
respectable folk, in shame to the grave ? And Alec said
No, he didn’t think so, he only wanted to bring Else
to tea. And the Provost said ’twould be over his dead
body if he did.
When that got around folk fair took a laugh—faith,
man ! that would fair be a funny-like sight, Else Queen
stepping over old Hairy Hogg’s corpse, and the old ape,
dead or alive, you could swear, taking an upward keek
as she passed. Else and Alec were watched fell close after
that, and once, when they took a walk up the Kaimes,
NIMBUS 247
that Spring, a windy Sunday in March, and sat in the
lithe to have a bit crack, there was nearly a dozen that
kept on their track, and Ag Moultrie, the Roarer and
Greeter of Segget, was up in the Schoolhouse watching
the pair with a spy-glass she'd borrowed at racing speed.
And the childes that had crept up the Kaimes to watch
near froze to death, for they didn't dare move, and Alec
and Else did not a damn thing, they didn’t even kiss all
the time they were there; and you well could warrant
if they didn’t kiss then, it was only because they had come
to a pass when neither kisses nor cuddles contented.
Well, Alec couldn’t marry, he hadn’t a meek, Else’s
wages went to the keep of her bairn, Dalziel of the Meikle-
bogs wouldn’t pay a penny. When Else had written
and asked him for that he had just smiled sly, and torn
up the letter. So things might well have stood as they
were but for the tink row that broke out in the house of
Smithie, the whiskered old roadman of Segget.
He hardly had seemed to alter at all, except that his
whiskers looked more and more still like the birns of hay
he would pinch from the parks. He still bade on with his
daughter and goodson, Bruce, folk said he had hell for a
life, though the house was his and all the gear in it, the
kye in the byres and the kirns in the creamery. But he’d
come home still of an evening from work and get no
friendly greeting from any, unless ’twas the kye, and only
from them if he brought them their meat: otherwise,
they would sulk. In his house his daughter would say,
Oh, it’s you ? Then clean your nasty big feet on the
mat. And old Smithie would glower at her sore, but
say nothing, it was years since the old bit creature broke
out.
But one Saturday afternoon in April, just as old
Smithie had stopped from his chapping out on the road
248 CLOUD HOWE
that led to Stonehive, and had wiped his long whiskers
and took a keek round, a lorry came down the road and
went skeugh, and nearly went into the west-side ditch.
Well, the lorry-driver swore like a tink, which wasn’t
surprising, he probably was one, and cried on old Smithie
to give him a shove. And he shoved, and old Smithie,
they shoved and they heaved, and swore at the lorry,
and chaved a good hour, 'twas a lorry-load of crates
of whisky and beer going north to Dundon, the lorry-
man told. And he said that he hoped that their guts
would rot, them that would drink but a drop of the stuff.
Well, at last they got the wheel from the ditch, and
the lorry-driver said he was bloody obliged. He looked
at his watch and said he must go, but syne he reached
back in a small bit crate. Here, I pinched two bottles
of this for myself, but you try one, it’s a fine-like drink.
And he said some more and syne he drove off, leaving the
bottle in old Smithies hands.
Old Smithie took a bit keek at the thing, a fattish
bit bottle of an unco-like shape ; and he took off the cork
and gave it a lick. That tasted as unco as the bottle
looked, sugary and sweet, and old Smithie thought, Well,
damn it, he surely thinks I’m a bairn, it’s a lemonade
drink, this Benny Dick Tine.
So he held the bottle to his mouth for a suck, and
down the stuff gurgled, and old Smithie paiched, and
wiped his long whiskers and curled up his nose—feuch !
it was sickening; but he fairly was dry. So he drank
down a half of the lemonade stuff, and corked the bottle
and put it in his pouch, and got on his bike and rode
home to Segget.
God knows what happened atween there and Segget,
he rode through the Square at the awfullest lick, and
nearly killed Melvin opposite the Arms. He was singing
NIMBUS
249
that his heart was in the Highlands, not here, Will
Melvin sore vexed to see him like that, if the coarse
old creature wanted to get drunk why couldn’t he come
down and get drunk at the Arms ? Will Melvin cried
Hi! and louped like a goat, and Smithie cried back
That’ll teach you, I hope, to bide out of my way, you
whiskied old wife! Syne he wheeled round and up the
East Wynd like the wind and narrowly missed running
into the dyke, and swung the bike over to the other bit
side, and nearly killed a lone chicken there ; and vanished
through Segget in a shower of stour, with Will Melvin
and the angel gaping together.
Ake Ogilvie told that he saw him go by, like a Valkyr
riding the wings of the storm—whatever that fool of
a joiner meant. But the next thing that happened
for sure was that Smithie got off at the door of his house
and went in. His goodson Bruce sat canny by the fire
and hardly looked up as he heard Smithie’s step. Then
Smithie said fust a minute, you, the sweir swine there,
and I’ll deal with you! and Bruce looked round and
there was old Smithie, with a bottle upended, sucking
like mad. And then he had finished and flung off his
coat, the daft old tyke, and let drive at Bruce, and near
knocked him head first into the dinner that was bettering
slow on the swey by the fire. Well, Bruce got up, he
would soon settle this, and his wife, old Smithie’s daughter,
cried out Crack up his jaw—don’t spare the old link !
But God ! she nearly died at what followed. Old
Smithie had fair gone mad of a sudden, he didn’t heed
the bashings of Bruce, not a bit, but took him a belt
in the face that near floored him, syne kicked him right
coarse, and Bruce gave a groan and caught at himself, and
as he doubled up old Smithie took him a clout in the face
with a tacketty boot, and for weeks after that it looked
CLOUD HOWE
250
more like a mess in a butcher’s shop, than a face,
that thing that the childe Bruce wore. Bruce was
blinded with blood, he cried Stop—I can’t see ! But old
Smithie had gone clean skite, what with his wrongs
and the Benny Dick Tine. Oh, can't you ? Well
then, you can damn well feel! And he took Bruce and
swung him out through the door, and kicked him sore
in the dowp as he went, and threw a chair at him, and
Bruce had enough, he ran like a hare, half-blind though
he was, and the Muirs all stood next door and gaped,
Mrs Muir and Tooje and Ted, all but John, he sat indoors
and gleyed quiet up the lum.
The next thing the Muirs saw was Mrs Bruce herself,
kicked out like her man and running like him, and syne the
bairns, and syne they heard sounds inside the house like a
wild beast mad. Then old Smithie started to throw out
the things that belonged to his daughter and his goodson
Bruce, a sewing machine and their kists and clothes, a
heap in the stour outside the door. Bruce had cleared
his eyes by then and come back, but old Smithie saw
him and chased him away, with a bread-knife, and came
back and danced on the gear, he looked like the devil
himself, said Ake, who had come up to see what the
row was about—if you could imagine the devil in whiskers
raising worse hell than was usual in Segget.
Well, he closed the door next and after a while some
folk went over and chapped at the door, but they got not
a cheep, and waited for Bruce, he’d gone to the smiddy
to borrow an axe. He came back with a fair-like crowd
at his heels. Feet the bobby came with him as well, and
just as they started in on the door Ake Ogilvie cried
No, damn’t! that wont do. And he said to Bruce Is this
your house, or his ? Bruce told him to mind his own
mucking business, and was raising his axe to let
NIMBUS
251
% at the door when Ake Ogilvie said, All right, then,
all right. It’s up to you, Feet. You’re supposed to defend
the law here in Segget. Here’s a man that has locked himself
up in his house, and you’re standing by and aiding and
abetting a burglar trying to get into the place.
That hadn’t struck folk afore, now it did, they cried.
Ay, that’s right, and Bruce glared around; and Feet
scratched at his head and took out his notebook. And
he said to Bruce that he’d maybe best wait, he himself
would call on old Smithie for a change, to open the
door in the name of the Taw. But all that they
heard after Feet had cried that were the snores of old
Smithie asleep on his bed.
He wasn’t seen in Segget till the Sunday noon, when
he crawled out to give some meat to his kye. But he
never left the house but he locked up the door, the
Bruces got tired of trying to dodge in, they said they
couldn’t bear the old brute, anyhow, him and his stink,
and they flitted to Fordoun, and Bruce got a job on the
railway there ; and old Smithie at last had his house
to himself, thanks to the lorry-man’s Benny Dick Tine.
And what all this clishmaclaver led to was Alec
Hogg getting the job on the road that had once been
Bruce’s, and the seat by the fire in old Smithie’s house
that was Bruce’s as well. For young Alec Hogg was a
skilly-like childe, right ready and swack and no longer
polite, he called a graip by its given name. As for
looking around for slop-basins these days, he’d have
eaten tea-leaves like a damn tame rabbit, and munched
them up with contentment, too. And he said to old
Smithie as they mended the roads there was nothing
like a damn good taste of starvation to make you
take ill with ideas you’d held, he had starved down
south when he lost his job, and near starved when he
CLOUD HOWE
252
managed to get back to Segget, his father, the old
mucker, would glunch and glare at every bit mouthful
he saw his son eat—his hands had never held idleceit’s
bread. He’d sneer at the table, the monkey-like
mucker, And what have your fine friends, the Fashers,
done for you ? And it was but the truth, they had
done not a thing; as for Fascism’s fancies on Scotland
and Youth—well, starvation’s grip in your belly taught
better. Scotland and its young could both go to hell
and frizzle there in ink for all that he cared.
And old Smithie thought that a fell wice speak, and
so did John Muir, and they’d sit and crack, the three of
them by the side of the road, and watch the traffic go
by to Dundon, the cars with gentry, the buses with folk.
And John Muir would gley Ay, God, and that’s sense. I
was once myself a bit troubled about thing—fair Labour
I was, but to hell with them all. Poor folk just live and die
as they did, we all come to black flesh and a stink at the end.
... And like fools we still go on with the soss, bringing
grave-fodder into the world. For I hear that you’re courting
Else Queen, are you, Alec ?
Alec reddened up a bit and said maybe he was;
and John Muir said Well, and he might do worse, since
women there were you’d to bed them sometime. And
he asked when Else and Alec were to marry, and Alec
said Christ, I haven’t an idea—we’ve no place to bide
though we married to-morrow.
And ’twas then that old Smithie said Have you no ?
You’re a decent-like childe and I like you well. Let you
and your wife come bide in with me.
NIMBUS
253
Else came to Chris and told her the news, Chris
said she was glad—and I know you’ll be happy. Else
tossed her head, God knows about that. There are worse
folk than Alec—at least, so I hear. And as for being happy
—och, nobody is !
Chris laughed at that and said it wasn’t true, but she
wondered about it in the fresh-coming Spring, maybe it
was Else had the sense of the thing—not looking for
happiness, madness, delight—she had left these behind in
the bed of Dalziel; only looking to work and to living her
life, eating and sleeping and rising each dawn, not thinking,
tiring by night-time and dark—as Chris did herself in the
yard of the Manse. And Chris raised her head as she
thought that thought, and heard the trill of a blackbird,
shrill, and saw the spirt of its wings as it flew, black sheen
of beauty, across the long grass : and the ripple and stilly
wave of the light, blue sunlight near on the old Manse wall.
And she thought that these were the only glad things—
happiness, these, if you found the key. She had lost
it herself, unlonely in that, most of the world had mislaid
it as well.
She minded then as she worked at that tree, an apple
tree, and set smooth the earth, and reached her hands in
the cling of the mould, that saying of Robert’s, long,
long ago, the day he unveiled the new-hallowed Stones
up by the loch on Blawearie brae—that we’d seen the
sunset come on the land and this was the end of the
peasants’ age. But she thought, as often, we saw more
than that—the end forever of creeds and of faiths, hopes
and behefs men followed and loved: religion and God,
socialism, nationalism—Clouds that sailed darkling into
the night. Others might arise, but these went by, folk
saw them but clouds and knew them at last, and turned
to the Howe from the splendid hills—folk were doing so
CLOUD HOWE
254
all over the world, she thought, back to the sheltered
places and ease, to sloth or toil or the lees of lust, from the
shining splendour of the cloudy hills and those hopes
they had followed and believed everlasting. She herself
did neither, watching, unsure : was there nothing between
the Clouds and the Howe ?
This life she lived now could never endure, she knew
that well as she looked about her, however it ended it
could not go on; she was halted here, in these Segget
years, waiting the sound of unhasting feet, waiting a
Something unnamed, but it came. And then—
She stopped in her work and looked down at herself,
at her breast, where the brown of her skin went white at
the edge of the thin brown dress she wore, white rose
the hollow between her breasts, except where it was
blue-veined with blood ; funny to think that twice in her
life a baby had grown to life in her body and herself
changed so to await that growth, and still she looked
like a quean, she thought, breast, hips, and legs, and she
liked her legs, even yet, as she looked at them with a
smile, at the line of herself as she squatted to weed,
nice still to cuddle spite her sulky face ! Had she lived
in the time of the golden men who hunted the hills by
the Trusta bents there would have been cuddles enough,
she supposed, fun and pain and the sting of the wind,
long nights of sleep in a heath-hid cave, morns shining
over the slopes of the hills as you stirred by your man
and peered in his face, lying naked beside you, naked
yourself, with below the Howe just clearing its mists
as the sun came up from an alien sea—the Howe, un¬
named and shaggy with heath, with stone-oak forests
where the red deer belled as the morning grew and the
Bervie shone; and far over the slopes of the Howe you
could see the smoke rise straight from another cave,
NIMBUS
255
and know your nearest friends a day off; and you’d
not have a care or a coin in the world, only life, swift,
sharp, and sleepy and still, and an arm about you, life
like a song, and a death at the end that was swift as
well—an hour of agony, or only a day, what woman
feared death who had borne a child ? And many enough
you’d have borne in the haughs and been glad enough
of their coming in that day, undreaming the dark to¬
morrows of the Howe that came with the sailing ships
from the south. . . .
And, kneeling and cutting at a wallflower clump
that had grown over-large for its portion of earth, Chris
smiled as she thought of her talk with Else on this
matter of humankind itself growing over-large for its
clump of earth. Else had stood and listened with red-
tinted ears, and stammered and blushed, it was funny
and sad, Chris knew how she felt, she had once felt the
same. Else said Oh, Mem, but I couldn’t do that—it
wouldn’t be right to do anything like that! Chris said It’s
surely better to do that than have the bairns that you can’t
bring up ? Else shook her head, They’ll just come, and
well manage. But I couldn’t do things to myself like
that.
Robert had overheard Chris as she talked, he had
heard the talk through the kitchen door, coming down the
stairs in his silent way. And when he and Chris were
alone together, he said You shouldn’t have said that,
Christine, gentle and quiet and even of speech. Chris
had shivered a little and drawn further away. Why
not ? she asked, and he said Because we have no rights in
these matters at all. We have meddled too much with our
lives as it is; they are God's concern, the children who
come.
For a minute Chris hardly believed what she heard,
CLOUD HOWE
256
she had stared at him, at his masked face ; they themselves
had done this thing he denounced. . . .
All the next afternoon, as it seemed to Chris, she
heard the rumour and hum of the wedding, down in the
hall of the Segget Arms. It had turned to a day sun-
blown and clear, the earth was hard as she weeded the
beds, clumps of begonias under the dykes, back of
the Manse the chickens of Muir were deep in a drowsy
scraiching, well-fed. Chris went and looked over the wall
and watched, and laughed a little at the courting play
of an over-small cock with a haughty, shamed look,
as though it thought mating a nasty thing, but yet was
right eager to make half a try. There were lots of folk
who had minds like his !
Robert and Ewan were both at the wedding, Robert
returned as soon as he might, Chris heard him climb
up the stairs to his room. The noise went on far into
the night, stirring in sleep towards the Sunday morning
Chris heard the light step of Ewan go by. Next morning
he wasn’t stirring as usual, and she carried a cup of
tea to his room, and knocked and went in and he still
slept fast, lying straight, his dark hair thick as a mop,
she stood and looked at him and tickled his arm, and he
woke up lightly, as he always woke. Oh, it’s you, Chris !
and stared a moment: I’m sorry, Mother !
She said Oh, I’m Chris as well, I suppose, and sat
on the side of the bed while he drank, the morning growing
in the yews outside, promise of another day of summer
yellow on the ivied walls of the Manse. She asked how
the wedding had gone, and he yawned, so grown-up,
and stretched while she caught the cup ; and he said that
NIMBUS
257
the wedding had gone off fine, except that folk were afraid
of Robert, he’d changed so much, with never a laugh.
Ewan had heard Dite Peat say of Robert—
Chris said Yes, what did he say of Robert? and Ewan
lay and looked at her, calm and cool. He said that
Robert had lain with Else, he knew bed-shame in a man
when he saw it.
Chris said You didn’t believe that, did you ? Ewan
yawned again, I don’t know ; he might. Though I shouldn’t
think it likely, he has you to sleep with : and you must be
very nice, I should think.
Chris felt the blood come swift in her cheeks, and a
moment the wildest feeling of fear ; and then that went
by, she’d be honest as him. She said Oh, I think I am
nice to sleep with. You’ve to be terribly in love with some¬
one for that—it makes all the difference, as you’ll know
some time.
He said, politely. Yes, I suppose so, he hadn’t much
interest in the matter at all; and told some more of
the fun at the wedding, the Provost and MacDougall
Brown had both sung, the Provost banking and braeing,
bass, MacDougall strong on the Blood of the Eamb.
There had been lots to eat and lots of dancing, Ewan had
danced with most of the women, rather fun, though
most were too fat round the hips, the hips were the things
that counted, he’d found. He’d told Else that and she’d
said she was shocked, but he didn’t suppose that she was,
very much. And then Alec Ogilvie and Dite Peat had
quarrelled, it seems they had hated each other for years,
and kept away from each other for years, neither one
nor the other sure that he’d win. It was round about
seven o’clock that it happened ; they went out to the
back of the Arms to fight, Ewan didn’t hear till the
fight was near done and went out and saw Dite Peat
R
CLOUD HOWE
258
on the grass, his eyes closed up and rather a mess, Ake
Ogilvie being helped into his coat and wiping a trickle
of blood from his nose. And Ewan had felt a bit sorry
for Dite—goodness knew why, the dirtiest rat.
Chris asked what time he’d reached home and he
said Not till this morning some time, nearly two. I took
a friend of Else’s to Frellin, the servant-maid at the Manse
up there. Chris asked was she nice ? and Ewan gave a
shrug, I thought her rather a boring young beast, she wanted
me to make love to her—uf to a point, I suppose, I don’t
know. Chris asked And did you? and Ewan said No,
but I thought I would try to teach her a lesson. You know
I’ve got strong wrists ?—I get them from you—so I held her
with one hand and smacked her with the other, and fatted
her all neat and nice again, and put her in through the
Frellin Manse gate, and came home to my bed: I felt a bit
tired.
Folk said he fair was a nickum, that loon, young
Ewan Tavendale that came from the Manse, and went to
the college at Dundon each day, cool and calm you’d
see him swing by, no hat on his head be it sun, be it sleet,
folk said he was proud as dirt: and for why ? He was
only the son of a crofter, just, killed in the War, and only
his luck his mother had married into a Manse. He
never went by with a loon-like slouch, or reddened
up, loon-like, over the lugs, if he met with a covey of
queans in the Square—damn’t, there was something
unnatural about him, a sly young brute, you could
well believe. And what though they said he did well
at college ? No doubt his step-father, the minister
Colquohoun, did all his lessons and he got the credit.
NIMBUS
259
Then the speak got about from the Frellin Manse
that he’d taken a lass from the wedding of Else, the lass
that idle young thing Jeannie Ray, and she’d thought to
have a bit play with the loon—she often would play
about with the loons and get them sore in a way to have
her, syne leave them looking and habbering like fools.
But she’d got a sore stammy-gaster with Ewan, the coarse
young brute assaulted the quean, and left her greeting
on the Manse door-mat. And she told the news to a
crony in Frellin, and the crony giggled and passed it on,
and it reached Ag Moultrie, the Roarer and Greeter, and
she nearly exploded with shame and delight. And next
time she met in with Ewan she cried, Ay, Ewan, what’s
this that I hear about you and that lass Jeannie Ray down
at Frellin Manse ? And the loon said I’m sorry I don’t
know what you’ve heard, Miss Moultrie, but no doubt
Seggct soon will. Good morning. And he smiled, polite,
and passed on, not a bit ashamed, and left Ag to gape.
And not only that, she felt a bit feared, it was fair un¬
canny, a loon like that.
And a queerer thing followed, her father was dying,
Rob Moultrie that said he wasn’t her father, the coarse old
brute still tormented his wife with the speak that Ag was
no daughter of his. Well, he was down and fast sinking
at last, about time that he was, the snarling old sinner.
And near to the last, when he’d got gey low, he said that
he’d like to see the young man, Ewan Something his name
was, up at the Manse, he’d like to see him and nobody
else. Ag sat by his bed and she heard the bit blither,
and she said to him, soothing, You’re wandering a bit.
He doesn’t know you, the young man at the Manse. And
Rob Moultrie said Go get him at once, you goggle-eyed gowk,
with your claiking tongue. He’s more kin of mine than
you’ll ever be, you with your half-dozen fathers or more.
26o
CLOUD HOWE
So Jess Moultrie trudged away up through Segget, and
gave in the message, and young Ewan came down,
and went in and sat by the bed of old Moultrie, not
feared as a loon at the breath of death, but cool and
calm, as though it were nothing. Folk sat outbye and
couldn’t make out the words that the two spoke one to
the other, except that they heard Ewan Tavendale
say Yes, I’ve noticed that, and Yes, that’s worth knowing.
And he shook hands with Rob when at last he stood
up, and didn’t make on, as any other would, that old
Rob would soon be up and about, instead he shook
hands and wished him Goodbye, and went out as calm
as he had come in—ay, a heartless young mucker if
ever there was one, whatever could Moultrie have wanted
with him ?
Rob wouldn’t hear of the minister coming, and died
without a prayer in the house, and that was queer in a
childe like him, fell religious and fond of his Bible. Ag
cried that her father had died unblessed; and when he
was dead she just Roared and Grat.
They buried the old tyke on a hot, quiet day, Mr
Colquohoun thinner and quieter than ever ; but he had a
fine voice as he read out the words, lower than once it had
been, more genteel, he fairly had quietened down, had
Colquohoun. Once on a time at a burial service folk said
the minister would speak out as though he fair meant
that the dead would rise up some day, and live once
again, and it made your hair crawl—it was all in the
Bible, no doubt, and right fine, but you knew the whole
thing just a stuttering of stite. But now the minister
spoke earnest and low, with a kind of a whine that you
heard undisturbed as they lowered old Moultrie down
in the clay, with his ill-led life and his ill-getted ways,
his hatred of gentry, his ill-treating of Jess. Well, that
NIMBUS 261
was his end, and you felt undisturbed, all but John Muir,
as he told to Ake later.
For it came on him when the folk had gone, and he
worked there alone in the stilled graveyard, and watched
the figure of Colquohoun move off, that something was
finished and ended in Segget, more than old Moultrie,
older than him. And a queer qualm came in the pit of
his wame, he stopped in the sun to gley in a dream, ’twas
as though they were shadows in the sunblaze he saw, nothing
enduring and with substance at all, kirk and minister,
and stones all around graved with their promised hopes
for the dead, the ways and beliefs of all olden time—no
more than the whimsies a bairn would build from the
changing patterns that painted the hills.
And faith, there were more than enough of those
changes, folk woke to the fact of ill changes in Segget,
you'd to count your silver now ere you spent it, there
wasn’t a soul but was hit some way, prices so high and
the spinners, the dirt, with hardly a meek to spend in
shops. Whiles one of the Mowat mills still joggled
along, as it wore to Autumn you’d see its smoke
like a lazy snake uprise in the air. But it joggled half¬
hearted, there was fell little traffic, the stationy,
Newlands, said so little jute came in he wondered the Mill
kept going: and he tried to get spinners to do what he
did, bawl for the Blood of MacDougall’s L,amb ; and no
doubt he fair was a pious childe, though you thought
yourself that praying for blood was hardly the way to
start a jute mill.
The Segget wynds were crowded with spinners, lolling
about in the sun, the dirt, you turned one moment
262
CLOUD HOWE
from cursing the brutes for their sweirty and living
off the like of yourself, and the next you had nearly
moaned your head off that there wasn’t a thing they now
bought in your shops. Dite Peat was the first to feel the
bit nip, he’d never done well with the spinners, Dite,
since that time long back he'd mishandled his father.
But up until late he’d managed to live, with trade from the
rest of Segget New Toun, though most from the country¬
side out around. Well, he found that the farms were
failing him now, cottar folk got their meat from the vans
on the roads, and all the farmers had gotten them cars
and went into Stonehaven or even Dundon: in the end
Dite Peat was rouped from his door. It lent a bit of
excitement, that, Dite’s stuff sold up while he stood and
looked on, still bearing the marks of the knocks he had got
in that tink-like fight with the joiner of Segget.
Folk wondered what would become of him now, it
was said he hadn’t a meek of his own : and though when
it seemed he owned a bit shop folk bore with him and
his dirty jokes, they weren’t such fools as to do that now
and cold-shouldered him everywhere that he went. And
down in the Segget Arms one night when he started in
with his dirty tales, Alec Hogg was there and he said
You shut up, -were sick of you and the things you can do—
though you can’t keep your shop-roof over your head.
Dite bared his rotten brown teeth like a dog, but other
folk were crying That’s right, and he didn’t dare make
a set at young Hogg. That was near the end of the
brute in Segget, he went to Meiklebogs and asked for
a fee, folk told that Dalziel had ta’en him on cheap—
Dalziel whose new housekeeper was in the old way;
faith ! with Dite Peat at the Meiklebogs as well, the
question of fatherhoods in the future would be more of a
complication than ever.
NIMBUS
263
For bairns came thick as ever they'd come, folk cut
their costs in all things but cradles, down in Old Toun
they squawked into life, the bairns, in rooms that were
packed out already. The less the work the more of the
creatures, they bred fair disgusting old Teslie would say,
and it showed you the kind of dirt that they were, living
crowded like that, four-five in a room, in houses that were
not fit for pig-rees. 'Twas Infernal, just: the men
should be libbed : now, when he himself was a loon up in
Garvock—
But his trade at the smiddy was failing as well, though
he habbered and blethered as much as ever, you’d fell
often hear the anvil at rest and look in and see old Teslie
sit there, sitting and staring down at his pipe, it gave you
an unco-like feeling to see him. There were fell few jobs
came down from the Mills and a mighty few from the
farms outbye, with their new-like ploughs that needed no
coulters, if they broke a bit they looked in a book and
sent away to the makers for’t. Not like the days of the
crofter childes, when in and about from Kinraddie,
Arbuthnott, and half the hill-land betwixt Segget and
Fordoun, the folk of the lost little farms would ride with
plenty of trade in a small-like way.
The only creature that seemed to flourish as the
harvest brought a dour end to the weather and the clouds
rolled slower over the Howe was Will Melvin that kept
the Segget Arms, him and that sharp-tongued besom his
wife, the spinners would go down to the Arms and get
drunk, instead of biding at home in their misery and
cutting their throats, as decent folk would.
Mr Mowat came suddenly home to Segget and sacked
every servant he met in the House ; he said that he J ahly
well must, he’d no choice, he was taxed to death by those
Labour chaps. Then he went to the kirk, the first time
264 CLOUD HOWE
in years, and sat and listened to a dreich-like discourse
—God ! there was something queer with Colquohoun.
But he kept his eyes, Mr Mowat, folk told, on Mrs
Colquohoun and not the minister, as she sat in the choir
with her sulky-proud face, and her swathings of hair,
ay, she’d fairly fine hair, herself looking up at the pulpit
as though she didn’t know Mr Mowat looked at her—
and didn't know, as everybody else did in Segget, that
he’d been the father of that bairn of hers that died away
a three-four years back.
Mr Mowat never went near the Manse now, he hadn’t
done that since the days of the Strike, nor the Geddeses
either since Mrs Colquohoun had raised a row at the
W.R.L And what do you think that row was about?
A socialist creature had offered to come down from
Dundon and lecture on birth-control: and all the folk
were against it at once, except the tink bitch the minister
had wed. . . . And what might IT be ? you asked, and
folk told you: just murdering your bairns afore they
were born, most likely that was what she herself did.
She did her own work in the Manse nowadays, they had
had to draw in their horns as well, no other maid took the
place of Else. And the Sourock’s wife was fairly delighted,
the said getting down on the floors to scrub would be an
ill-like ploy, she would warrant, for the brave silk knickers
that Mrs Colquohoun wore. Eor the Sourock’s wife
had never forgiven the minister’s wife her bit under-things,
and the way she voted at the General Election.
But syne news came that fair raised a stir, the
Eabour Government thrown out at last, and that fine-
like childe, Ramsay MacDonald, was in with the Tories,
and said they were fine. And them that had wireless
sets listened in, and Ramsay came on with his holy-like
voice and maaed like a sheep, but a holy-like sheep,
NIMBUS 265
that the country could yet be saved: and he’d do it.
Ay, he’d grown a fine chap and had got back his guts,
you were pleased to hear as the maa went on, now he
had jumped to the gentry’s side. And no doubt you
would see fine changes in Segget.
But Chris watched that and the life in Segget with a
queer apprehension holding her heart. One evening she
climbed up to Ewan's back room, where he sat at a little
desk he had there, reading a text-book, his head in his
hands. He jumped up when she came and found her a
seat, polite and kind, though remote with his book till
she asked him what the book was about. So he told her
the stuff was geology, he was studying the strata of the
last Ice Age that came in Scotland long years ago, when
the bergs came drifting down by Dundon and folk looked
out from their mountain eyries and saw the peaks and the
glaciers come. Chris sat and listened, hands clasped
round her knees, looking at Ewan’s head in the light,
smooth and dark and yet shot with gold, the pallor of
the lamplight upon his hair—grey granite below as grey
granite above.
Then her mind switched away to what he was saying,
she thought And the thing is happening again—all over
the world the Ice was coming, not the Ice-time that
ended the Golden Age, but the Ice of want and fear and
fright, its glacier peaks on the sky by day, its frozen
gleam on the sky by night, and men looked out bewildered
to see it, cold and dank, and a dark wind blew, and there
was neither direction, salvation, nothing but the storming
black lour of the Clouds as the frosts and the fog of
this winter came. . . .
266 CLOUD HOWE
Ewan had twisted around, he said Mother! sharp,
and jumped to his feet and shook her. Chris came to
herself with a start, and stared. What’s wrong? she
asked, and he said You looked—fey.
She seldom heard a Scots word from Ewan, he brushed
them aside as old, blunted tools, but the word had come
on his lips as though sudden he’d sought in English
and English had failed. She laughed and said Did I ?
and ruffled his hair, and he grinned at her, quiet, he’d
been quick, but not feared—he’d do strange things yet
in the world, Ewan, who hadn’t a God and hadn’t a
faith and took not a thing on the earth for granted. And
she thought as she held him (he endured that, polite)
he was one of the few who might save the times, watching
the Ice and the winter come, unflustered, unfrightened,
with quiet, cold eyes.
And she smiled at that and her prideful dreamings
for the child of her womb, an idle woman’s pride: and bade
Ewan good-night and went down to the kitchen to leave
it neat for the morning’s work. ’Twas then that there
came a knock at the door and Else Queen that was now
Else Hogg stamped in, with the washing she did each
week for the Manse, she cried Well, Mem, have you heard
the news ?
Chris asked What news ? and Else sat down and
gasped, I fair had to run to tell you. It’s about Mr Mowat—
but surely you’ve heard ?
The story, she said, was all over Segget, Mr Mowat
was ruined and hadn’t a penny, the whole of Segget
mortgaged to the hilt. The last time he came back from
Eondon he d tried to raise a bit loan at any damn price ]
and he’d gone to his Dundon bankers and tried, and they’d
said they must see the jute in his mills. So they sent a
man down, Mr Mowat met him and dined him and
NIMBUS 267
wined him up at the House, it minded old Sinclair, the
last of the servants, of the good old days when young
Jahly Mowat would come back with a half dozen whores in
his car. Ah, well, the banker childe was fell canny, he
drank but little, and that with suspicion ; but Mr Mowat
soaked like a drouthy fish, and then said Right 0, we’ll
go down to the Mills.
There were two main storage sheds at the Mills, one
was near empty, said young Mr Mowat, the other well
filled with new bales of jute. And Mr Mowat showed
the first of the sheds, there was only a bale or so in the
place, but when they came to the other bit shed, and the
sliding doors slid back in their slots, there were the bales
packed up to the roof, so tight they nearly bulged through
the door. You see, we've a Jahly good stock at the Mill,
said Mr Mowat, and the bank man agreed.
So the bank childe went back to Dundon and reported,
and they loaned Mr Mowat a five hundred pounds. And
the creature vanished, none knew where he’d gone;
and this last week or so the bank grew suspicious. It
sent a man down to Segget yestreen, and he went to the
Mills and what did he find, down there at the shed that
had seemed so packed ? That there was no more than
a curtain of bales, stacked up to the roof at the shed’s
near end, the rest of the shed was as toom as your hat,
Mr Mowat had swindled the bank to the end : and now
the bank had ta’en over the Mills.
Chris asked what that meant and Else didn’t know,
except that all the folk left at the Mills had been sacked
that evening and the Mills closed down. And folk were
saying they never would open, it wouldn’t be worth it,
with trade so bad ; and nobody knew what the spinners
would do that had waited for years for their jobs to
come back.
26« CLOUD HOWE
And the winter was coming. Down in Old Toun a
weary indifference lay on the wynds, they paid no heed to
the new Election, Chris herself didn't bother to vote
—were the liars and cheats called labour or Tory they’d
feather their own nests and lie to the end.
Rain held the sky at November’s end, she saw the
streaming parks of Dalziel lift and move under the
freezing haze that sailed and swam by the base of the
Mounth, the curlews had ceased to cry on the Kaimes and
of nights the sounds of the trains came blurred, those
nights that the great lighted buses would lighten, suddenly,
firing the walls of the room where she lay by the side
of Robert unsleeping, him sleeping so sound that he
sometimes seemed dead. How to sleep, how to sleep
when your mind took hold, in the dark, of the plight
of the Segget wynds ?
They had brought in a thing they called the
Means Test, spinners who had had the dole over long
were told that their relatives must keep them in future.
Chris had stopped by the door of Ake Ogilvie’s shop, and
he told her that things were black in Old Toun, the
Wilsons had been cut off the dole altogether because
their old grannie had the Old Age Pension—the three
of them to live on ten shillings a week. How could they
pay their rent on that ? Since the Mowat creditors
took over the place they were forcing payments right
through the nose, they’d already had Feet up at the
eviction of a two-three families out of their houses, if
houses you could call them—they smelt like pig-rees.
Old Cronin had been cut off the Bureau as well because
young Charlie was fee’d up at Frellin, and stayed at
home to look after his father : and how could they live
on the pay of a loon ? And there were worse cases
than these, far worse, God damn’t! you had never
NIMBUS
269
much liked the spinners, but the things that were hap¬
pening near turned you sick, it was kicking in the faces
of the poor for no more than delight in hearing the
scrunch of their bones.
Chris said They wont stand it, there’ll be revolution,
and Ake sneered Revolution ? They’ll starve and say
nothing. Or ‘Come walk on my face and I’ll give you a
vote!’
Then the news went round that old Cronin was dead,
found dead in his bed by his young son Chae, Chae
blubbered the old man had no firewood for days, and
nothing but a pot of potatoes to eat. Folk wouldn't
believe that blither at all, it couldn’t be true, for it
made you shiver—no, no, 'twas only another damned
lie, that kind of thing never happened in Segget. Would
you find that news in the Mearns Chief 1—you wouldn’t,
so you knew that it couldn’t be true, the Chief said week
by week we were fine, and Scotland still the backbone
of Britain, and the Gordon Highlanders right gay childes,
not caring a hoot though their pay was down, and Progres¬
sives just the scum of the earth that planned to take bairns
out of the slums and rear them up in Godless communes,
and a woman Naomi Mitchison coarse, for she said not
a word about Christ in her book. . . . Ay, the Mearns
Chief was aye up-to-date, and showed you a photo of
Mrs MacTavish winning the haggis at a Hogmanay
dance.
That son of old Cronin’s, Jock was his name (you
surely minded when he was in Segget ?) had done right
well for himself, folk said. He was now a National
Labour supporter, one of Ramsay’s new men down in
Glasgow, and would likely get into the Parliament soon :
and he was starting on a lecture tour—The Country First,
Parties Must Wait. By that, of course, he meant the
270 CLOUD HOWE
political parties, not the kind he would hold in his Glasgow
house—he spoke and acted the gent to the life.
But Charlie said his old father had seemed to shrivel
up when he heard of the tour ; and the last time Charlie
had been to his father he hardly had spoken a sensible
word, just muttered over one of his socialist books,
by Ramsay MacDonald, till the light grew dim, so faint
that he couldn’t have seen to read.
He told that to Ewan when he came to the Manse to
arrange the burial in Segget kirkyard, he and Ewan
hadn’t met for a long time past, chief enough though
they’d been at the school together. And Charlie was shy
and he said to Ewan, I hear, Mr Ewan, you’ve clever
at college, and stood and shuffled his great glaured boots,
and his hands were heavy and calloused and cold, holding
the clumsy cap in his hands. Ewan said I’m all right.
Sit down. Like some tea ? and went ben to the kitchen
where Chris made a cake. It’s young Charlie Cronin,
and mother, he’s hungry. Chris said she’d bring some food
on a tray, but Ewan said No, you see he would guess I
knew he was hungry and that would offend him. I’ll take
in some and well eat it together.
So he did, though he’d only new-finished his dinner,
Chris peeped at the two of them, sitting and talking, with
a twinge of pride and wonder for Ewan, and a twist of
pity in her heart for his friend, with his shy red face and
his clumsy hands. Then she went back to her work, and
they ate; and when Charlie Cronin at last went away
she heard Ewan make a dive for the bathroom and be
suddenly, exceedingly, very sick there. She took him
a glass of water to drink, and he smiled and drank and
said that was better : white-faced and black-haired, but
still cool enough. Chris thought at the time ’twas because
of the food he'd eaten to keep the Cronin lad company;
NIMBUS 271
but she wasn’t sure later, for she found out that Charlie
had told him black tales of the things in Old Toun.
And that night she went up to his room and found
Ewan, staring out at the fall of sleet, a pelt and a hiss in
the moving dark, his head in his hands, not reading as
usual. She touched him, quiet, and he started a little.
Oh, nothing, he said, I’m fine, don’t worry. I was
trying to remember old Cronin s face.
He was turning to look in the face of Eife.
That was the Sunday ; on Monday folk woke to a
blinding pelt of rain-sheets on Segget and down and
across the steaming Howe where the churned earth lay
with its quagmired pools, the hills corona’ed dark with their
clouds. Robert went early up to his room and Chris
was making the dinner in the kitchen when she found
John Muir at the kitchen door. He looked stranger
than ever she had seen him look, John Muir, and forgot
to call her Mem. He said a gey thing had happened
last night; and gleyed at her queer and gave a queer
cough.
Chris said, What’s happened? Sit down, you look
queer. And he sat and told her the unco-like tale.
She had heard of the Kindnesses ? Well, they were
folk that bided down in Segget Old Toun. At least
they had done till a three days back, Kindness himself
was an ill-doing childe, and weeks behind with his rent,
folk said. His wife was a lass from Kinraddie way,
she’d a bairn only a three weeks old, and had near gone
272 CLOUD HOWE
daft when the landlord’s folk came down to the house
to turn them out. Sim Leslie had gone to see it was
done, and thought nothing of it, he was used to that now.
Well, out they’d been turned, their bit gear in the
streets, you minded that Saturday streamed with sleet,
and the house they’d been in was at Segget’s tail end,
and few folk saw the thing that went on, or cared to be
out in weather like that, and Kindness himself was a
surly brute. He got sacks and happed up the most of
his gear, and prowled Segget for hours to look for a place.
But he wasn’t well known and he wasn't well liked, so
he came back at last somewhere about midnight, and broke
in a window and put his wife in, she had stood in the lithe
all those hours in the sleet with her bairn in her arms and
must near have been dead. She sat in the kitchen the
rest of the night, Kindness himself had brought in a chair,
then he prowled some more, for he couldn’t sleep.
But worse was to come with the Sunday morning;
the policeman, Sim Leslie, that folk called Feet,
came on them early and miscalled them for tinks, and
took Kindness’s name in his little note-book, as though
the fool didn’t know it by now, and said there would
be a court-case about this. Syne he turned them out
and boarded the window, and went off and left them,
and a neighbour nearby took in the wife and bairn for
a while. But she hadn’t an inch of space to spare, and at
last, as the night came, Kindness came back and said
he’d gotten a place where they’d bide, he didn’t say
more, a surly bit brute.
Well, his wife went with him through the pelt of
the sleet, and got to the end of Old Toun to the place, and
that was an old deserted pig-ree, from the time when
folk in Segget bred pigs, long ere the Mills or the spinners
came. You could get inside if you got down and crawled,
NIMBUS
273
Kindness had taken a mattress in there and a stump of
a candle and some of their things. Mrs Kindness was
feared at the dark and the sounds that the old ree made
as the night wore on, but they put out the light at last,
fell tired, and went to sleep in the sound of the rain.
It must have been somewhere near morning they
woke, Mrs Kindness woke up with her bairn screaming,
not just the cry of a bairn in unease but a shrill, wild cry
that near feared her to death. She tried all she could to
comfort its wail, then the light began to peek in the pigsty
and they saw the reason for the bairn’s screams, the rats
in the night had gnawed off its thumb.
John Muir cried Mistress, don't take on like that!
and caught Chris’s arm and put her in a chair. And then
as he straightened up from that he saw the minister stand
in the door, he’d come quietly down as he came these
days, and he looked like Chris, he had heard it all. But
he only said John, where are they now ?
Muir skeughed and said that he didn’t well knowj
he’d heard that folk had ta’en meat to the ree, and
Kindness was off for a doctor, ’twas said, walking all the
way to Stonehive. Robert said Walking?—his face
looked queer—WALKING ? Chris, I'll go for those folk.
Will you get a room ready before I come back ?
She worked as quick as she could when he’d gone out
into the shining pelt of the rain. But it nearly was
noon ere Robert came back, the woman looked only a
slip of a quean, Robert carried the bairn, it had ceased
to cry, whimpering and weeking soft like a kitten. The
woman stopped and looked at Chris with the shamed,
strange eyes of a frightened beast, Chris squeezed her
s
CLOUD HOWE
274
hands for a moment, just, and was rough, and told her
where her room was, and was rough that she mightn’t
break down and weep. And she took the bairn and
bathed the torn thumb, though it nearly turned her sick
as she worked; and the bairn weeked like kitten hurt.
Then she carried it up to its mother, waiting, in the spare
bedroom with the blazing fire.
She left them there and came down to find John Muir
come back with the Kindness gear. He told her the
minister was off to Stonehaven, on his bike, to try and
overtake Kindness, the minister himself would hold on
for the doctor.
Kindness reached back to the Manse about three,
and an hour or so later Robert and McCormack, Robert
soaked and shivering from his ride in the rain. The
doctor went up and bade a long time and then came
down to the hall and Chris. He shook his head and
stubbed up his bag.
I came over-late. Poison and shock. The woman
didn’t know it though she had it beside her. The baby’s
been dead this last hour or more.
In the dead of the night three nights after that, Chris
woke, she was sharply and suddenly awake, Robert
beside her coughing and coughing. She got up and pad¬
ded to his side of the bed, and he had not known that
her warmth was gone, all his body was in such a heat;
but he saw her against the light from the windows.
He said I’m all right, go back to your bed and instantly
fell to his coughing again.
Chris put on a dressing-gown and went down,
and .made iand brought up a hot lemon drink, he
NIMBUS 275
drank it and thanked her, she put out the light, his
body still burned as she lay by his side. But presently
the cough died away and she slept, and didn t awake till
the morning came, Robert’s cough awoke her, that and
the sound of the wind as it swept the snow down on
Segget, piled up on the edge of another New Year.
With the coming of the day the wind rose and rose
and rattled at the window-hasps of the house, the skirl of
it in the old roof-tops and wailing down the long, winding
chimneys. Robert kept to his bed, Chris had made
him do that, almost by force, he had suddenly smiled
—smiled so that her bowels had seemed turned to water,
with that flare of the hot old love that was gone. If I
was a wkih again, I’d hold YOU, you wyctch of a woman
to bully me like this ! Chris said You’ll be welcome to hold
me as you like—when that cough’s bettef, not until then.
He stroked her arm, the flame in his eyes: Strong and
comely still—I’ve neglected you, Chris ! Then he coughed
for a while and when he came to, lay quiet, listening to
the day go on.
The Kindnesses had gone to friends in Dundon, and
left no relic but a snow-happed grave, and this cough that
Robert had got in his throat, and that memory that woke
you, sick in the night, of the rats that fed on a baby s
flesh. And men had believed in a God and a Christ, men
had believed in the kindness of men, men had believed
that this order endured because of its truth and its
justice to men. . . . Robert was sound beside you in
sleep, but once he moved and muttered in dreams. He
said Oh, I can’t, I can’t—oh, my God! Chris happed
him close and again sought sleep, and the next day
came, and he woke to that coughing, and Chris saw
a spray of blood on the pillow.
She said I must send for a doctor, Robert, fear
CLOUD HOWE
276
in her heart, though none in her voice. But he shook
his head, his eyes grown remote. I’ll be all right,
I’ll look after myself. And after he’d eaten a slice of
toast and had drunk some tea, he didn’t cough more, and
asked for a pad of paper and pencil, he wished to write
out his to-morrow’s sermon.
Chris knew he wouldn’t be able to speak it, a week
at least ere he'd rise from his bed ; but she took him the
paper and pencil to quiet him, and stood by a while till
at last he looked up—Yes, Christine? his eyes far from
her again. So she turned to her work with a daft, dull
pain, daft ever to think that THAT could come back.
Ewan helped her that morning, scrubbing the hall,
bringing in coal, the wind still raged, a steely drive that
was edged with sleet; as the day wore on it froze up again.
When she went up that afternoon to Robert’s room the
door wouldn’t open a while though she pushed, then it
did, and the stinging air smote her face, the window
wide open, the room ice-cold, Robert lying half-naked
asleep in his bed. He woke as he heard the sound
of her come, his face was flushed in spite of the cold,
he said that he’d tried to sleep and couldn’t, he’d felt
choked and opened the window and slept. Where had
the pad for his sermon gone ?
Chris went down to Ewan to wire for the doctor.
When he came in the evening he sounded Robert’s lungs,
Robert lying quiet, his eyes far away ; and the doctor
was puzzled, though he chatted and joked. But later,
downstairs, he said to Chris, There’s something queer in
Mr Colquohoun s lungs—oh no, this cold’s not on to them
yet. Was he ever gassed in the War, do you know ? There’s
the strangest contraction in both upper lungs. I’ll be back
fell early the morn’s morning, keep him in bed and keep him
warm.
NIMBUS
277
Ewan went up about six and came back and said that
Robert was sleeping again, but there was blood on his
pillow, fresh. Chris got up to change it, she ached in
each limb, but Ewan said that he'd done that already,
and Robert wasn’t waked up from his sleep. Sit down
and rest, and he forced her to sit, and they sat a long
time looking into the fire, hearing the blast of the wind
over Segget. But near eight or nine when they went to
their beds the wind seemed to die in the cry of the yews,
Ewan went to the window and called Chris to look. So
she did, and stood by his side in the dark, and looked
on a sky that was burnished in steel, rimed with a pringling
frost of stars, nothing moved or lived, the yews stood
black, the garden hedges rose up in the silence as if to
listen to the void star-glow. . . . Ewan said You'll
catch cold, and blinded the window, and above their heads
they heard Robert cough.
Next morning John Muir came early to the Manse,
he said that he’d tell the congregation there wouldn’t be
a service; and Chris agreed. But then, as they stood
together in the hall they heard the sound of an opening
door, and looked up, and Chris gave a gasp and cried,
Robert! He was coming down slowly, his hand on
the rails, he said I’m all right; I MUST take the
service. He’d a handkerchief up to his mouth, saying
that, and stopped and coughed, and Chris wrung her
hands. Robert, go back to your bed—-you must.
He shook his head, he was fully dressed, even shaved,
I’ll take the service as usual. There’s nothing in a cough
to stop me, is there ? AND I HAVE SOMETHING TO
SAY TO THE FOLK.
278 CLOUD HOWE
Chris had stood enough, now she knew at last if she
didn’t win now she never would win. She said Robert,
for me. I’ve never asked much—for me, and I’ll never ask
another thing : Will you please go back ?
Ewan had come out of his room and looked down,
and he saw Robert's face for a moment twist, as if in pain,
then it altered again, back to the dark, dreaming look that
they knew. It’s you or the kirk, Chris, and I’m the kirk s
man.
For a second it seemed to Chris she’d be sick, she
gave the funniest dry laugh at that thought, with that
gripping in her stomach and that pain in her throat.
Then that went by, she was suddenly cool, she heard
herself say, All right, here’s your coat; and found a
coat for him in the hall, and a muffler, and wrapped it
about him, as she finished with that he stared at her
queer, the ice broke round his eyes. He said suddenly,
Chris—my dear, dear Chris! and kissed her with that
look, not with his lips, not in front of John Muir, and she
smiled at him, white. Then he went out across the
chill blow of the wind, his feet rang sharp on the frozen
ground. Chris caught Ewan’s arm and shook it—Go
with him ! I’ll come as soon as ever I’m dressed.
She fled and changed in a flurry and was down, and
across through the snow-wrapped garden before the kirk
bells had ceased from their sudden clamour. She raised
her eyes as she hurried through the kirkyard, and saw
the Mounth as though suddenly halted, watching, and
staring down at Segget, the far peaks under their canopy
of cloud, the nearer bare but for a snow-pillar she saw
rise up from the Eeachie bents and whirl in the icy blow
of the wind.
NIMBUS 279
Folk said that the kirk at Segget nowadays was a
fine bit place to go for a sleep, the Reverend Colquohoun
was as quiet as a cow with his blethers of Jesus and
Brotherhood and hove and the Sacred Heart that still
bled for men. You could pop a sweetie or so in your
mouth and take a bit snore as the sermon went on,
even Hairy Hogg confessed it was quiet, they had fairly
tamed that creature Colquohoun, with his coarse-like
suggestings the Hoggs came from monkeys, when instead
they were all descended from Burns. And Ake Ogilvie
said Well, monkeys for me !
They were both of them there, both Ake and the
Provost, that Sunday, and Mistress Hogg came as well,
she was failing a bit, but still as sharp-tongued, she had
said to her son when he married Else Queen—Ay, you’re
keen on the bowl in spite of the slop. She sat by her
man, Else and Alec sat near, and it tickled you a bit
to see Meiklebogs—behind, ill-shaved, smiling shy to
himself, he had come back to kirk since Colquohoun
quietened down.
The kirk began to fill up a bit, old Leslie came in,
he was getting fell done, and you thought as you watched
him paich down the aisle he never would finish that
story about Garvock. And damn’t! you felt almost
sorry about that, worse folk than old Leslie, his son Sim
for one, promoted now, he was leaving Segget, if it wasn t
he had such feet as he had you’d have said he d grown
overbig for his boots.
That fair was a hell of a clamour Muir raised, Will
Melvin came in in the middle of the ring, like a pot-bellied
cat, his thin mistress behind, they were making money
like dirt, folk said. Dirt unto dirt, ’twas the way of all
flesh was Ake Ogilvie’s speak about that—aye the same,
he’d miscall both the good and the bad in Segget, and
28o
CLOUD HOWE
didn't seem to see any difference at all 'tween an ill-
doing brute like that tink, Dite Peat, and his brother,
Peter, that owned his own shop.
There was wee Peter Peat up near the choir, looking
round him right fierce to see folk were quiet, his mistress
beside him, and the Sourock’s wife, the Sourock himself
would be down in the Square, singing about Blood in
MacDougall’s band—he’d never gotten over that mess in
his bed when Dite Peat had left the pig he had killed.
God ! the frost was fair driving the folk to the kirk;
you moved over a bit to let a childe in: young Cronin,
you saw, from the Manse at Frellin, the only one of the
spinners that had come; the coarse creatures hadn't
a care for religion. Charlie Cronin blushed and opened
his Bible and sat like a duck on the edge of egg-laying,
fell decent-like and shy ; and you thought to yourself
that Geddes, the headmaster, might well take a lesson,
there he was, all asprawl in his pew, showing no respect
or example at all; and that nasty bit sneer on his face
as he sprawled.
Syne you saw the choir was beginning to fill, Miss
Ferguson first; God I how she still blushed. Ake
Ogilvie said she’d have a blush on her face if ever
they exhumed her corpse from its coffin. Beside
her Miss M'Askill sat down with a jerk that couldn’t
have been good for her spine, you’d have thought,
especially as the bottom of that looked ill-padded. She
hadn’t got a man, and there seemed little chance that she
ever would now, things as they were—damn’t, Segget
affairs were fair in a state, you could only hope, with the
National Government, they’d alter some time afore
Segget was dead. Ramsay MacDonald had said that they
would, if we all went poorer, ate less, and spent more
■—ay, fair a fine childe, with a right clear mind, Ramsay
NIMBUS 281
MacDonald, as the English knew well, they couldn't
breed the like of Ramsay in England: though Ake
Ogilvie said they smothered them at birth. But that
was just one of his tink-like says, the English aye needed
the Scots at their head, right holy and smart at the
same bit time.
John Muir had finished with his ringing at last, and
went gleying down the aisle as of old, one shoulder first,
and brought in the minister. Faith, he looked white,
you'd heard he’d been ill, some cold or such like, a nothing
at all. He climbed to the pulpit and coughed and sat
down, and looked down the kirk—damn t! a queer-like
look, near the kind he would give in the days long syne
when he was so keen on changing the world.
Syne you saw that you'd fair been mistaken in that,
he was praying, with his head laid down in his hands;
you felt a bit better to see him like that, decent and
douce, as a minister should be—not trying to alter things
as he’d done—who the hell wanted alterations in Segget ?
Folk were fine, if it wasn’t that there wasn’t any work,
and meat a bit scarce, and you hadn’t a notion what your
bairns would find to do in the world, when they grew up
and found it full up of the ill-getted bairns of spinners,
and such. Ah well, they’d just have to gang their own
gait, with the help of some guts and the rock of Christ’s
kirk.
Young Ewan Tavendale came in and sat down, and
looked round the kirk and up at the pulpit as though he
owned both and was frighened at neither—faith, folk
were right, an impudent get, with no respect for God
or man. Then, as the playing on the organ stopped,
the far door opened to Mrs Colquohoun, white-faced and
proud, like a proud quean still, hurrying to take her seat
in the choir. Half-way to that she stopped and looked
282 CLOUD HOWE
up, at her man who sat so quiet in the pulpit—folk saw
the look and kittled to interest, could the two of them
have had a row in the Manse ?
The minister gave out the psalm, but so low you
hardly heard the words that he said; and you spent so
long looking up the passage that the singing was over
afore you had found it. Syne the minister was praying,
you bent your head, a fell dreich prayer and only half-
heard. But then as he finished and gave out his text
folk fairly louped in their seats as he spoke, his voice
had a ring like a sudden bell:
>i< * *
My text is from the twenty-third chapter of St Luke,
verse forty-two : AND HE SAID UNTO JESUS, LORD,
REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COME ST INTO
THY KINGDOM.
It is nineteen hundred years since that cry was heard,
it is sixteen hundred years since the holy Catholic Church
was established in temporal power. In the early days after
the death of Christ His return was hourly awaited—His
followers, scanty, assured, looked to His coming within a
few months or years at the most, they were certain He would
come again and redeem the evil of the world that had murdered
HIM. And the years went by : and He tarried still. But
that Hope and that Promise it was that bore the Cross to
triumph at last in Rome, all over Europe ; that uplifts it
still. And still the Christ tarries and the world remains,
LORD, REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COMEST
INTO THY KINGDOM.
NIMBUS 2®3
In Seged a week ago to-night, in this Christian village,
a man and a woman were driven from their home and had
no Place to lay their heads. In the night a rat came and fed
on their child, eating its flesh in a sacrament of hunger—
LORD, REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COMEST
INTO THY KINGDOM!
In the years when the Great War ended the world seemed
to turn in its sleep and awake, a new promise cried all about
the earth, the promise of the Christ fulfilled m Man—fulfilled
in the movements of pity and hope that men called by many
names meaning the same. Against ignoble oppressions
and a'bitter tyranny the common people banded themselves
at last—in a Christ-like rage of pity to defend their brothers
who sweated their blood in the mines, to give warmth and
light and ease to us all. And the leaders of the great Nine
Days days filled with the anger and pity of the Christ
who drove the money-changers from the Temple courts
looked in their hearts and found there fear, heard the crunch
of the nails that were driven in through the shrinking hands
of the Christ. And they sold Him again, his promise m
Man, each for their thirty pieces of silver.
LORD, REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COMEST
INTO THY KINGDOM.
This year, when hunger and want filled the land, the
counsellors of the nation told for our guidance that more
hunger and poverty yet must come, an increasing of s npes m
the name of the Law, of Good Government, Order m this
Christian land, in this nineteenth century since the Christ died
and came into that Kingdom of the Soul which the Churches
proclaim that he came into—
284 CLOUD HOWE
LORD, REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COMEST
INTO THY KINGDOM.
AND IT WAS ABOUT THE SIXTH HOUR, AND
THERE WAS A DARKNESS OVER ALL THE EARTH
UNTIL THE NINTH HOUR.
AND THE SUN WAS DARKENED, AND THE
VEIL OF THE TEMPLE WAS RENT IN THE MIDST
So we see, it seems, in the darkened sun, in the rending
veils of the temples and kirks, the end of Mankind himself
in the West, or the end of the strangest dream men have
dreamt—of both the God and the Man Who was Christ, Who
gave to the world a hofe that passes, and goeth about like the
wind, and like it returns and follows, fulfilling nothing.
There is no hope for the world at all—as I, the least of His
followers see except it forget the dream of the Christ, forget
the creeds that they forged in His shadow when their primal
faith in the God was loosed—and turn and seek with un¬
clouded eyes, not that sad vision that leaves hunger unfed,
the wail of children in unending dark, the cry of human
flesh eaten by beasts. . . . But a stark, sure creed that will
cut like a knife, a surgeon’s knife through the doubt and
disease men with unclouded eyes may yet find it, and far
°ff yet in the times to be, on an earth at peace, living and
joyous, the Christ come back—
His voice had sunk near to a whisper by then, so that
folk in the back of the kirk couldn't hear, all the kirk
sitting and staring in silence. Then he started again,
he said, very clear, and once again, slowly, terrible to hear,
as a man who cried from his soul on a friend who had
passed beyond either helping or help :
NIMBUS 285
LORD, REMEMBER ME WHEN THOU COMEST
INTO THY KINGDOM!
* * * *
Chris was never exactly sure of what followed. But
she got from the choir stalls and ran up the aisle, the
frozenness gone that had hemmed her in took scarcely a
second to move from that moment when Robert had
stopped, the queer look on his face. For he stared
down the kirk as though Someone stood there. And
then a bright crimson thing came on his lips, and down
at the kirk’s far end a loon screamed.
John Muir reached the pulpit as quick as she did,
she saw Ewan, swift and dark, stand up, Ake Ogilvie
as well, the rest of the folk stared and stared in a frozen
silence, from them to the silent figure up there. Chris
ran up the pulpit-stair, opened the door, Robert’s
head had fallen forward in his hands, and all the pages
of the Bible below she saw soaked in the stream of blood
from his lips.
And somehow it did not matter, she had known,
she put out her hand and put back the hair, from his
forehead, gently; and looked at the faces of the congre¬
gation. She wetted her lips and tried to speak, to be
cool and tell them the minister was dead, and the service
was ended, would they please go ? And then at last
she heard herself speak, in strange words not her own,
unbidden to her lips:
It is Finished.
Now, with the broadening of the day, she could see
the peaks of the Mounth wheel one by one into the line
286
CLOUD HOWE
of the flow of the light, dun and sun-riding they rode down
the Howe. Trusta towered first and north and north
the peaks came fast, sun on the Howe and day on the
Howe, her last day in Segget ere she went elsewhere,
to new days and ways, to changes she could not foresee
or foreknow. Round her the new year wakened to life,
she saw the steam of a ploughing team, a curlew was
calling up in the broom.
She moved and stretched in weariness then, the
morning weariness before you right woke, so standing she
minded the way that Robert would bless the folk of
Segget on Sabbath. And, queerly, her hands shaped into
that gesture, with Segget rising in its driftings of smoke,
and the hills behind, and all time before.
Then that had finished ; she went slow down the
brae, only once looked back at the frown of the hills, and
caught her breath at that sight they held, seeing them
bare of their clouds for once, the pillars of mist that aye
crowned their heights, all but a faint wisp vanishing south,
and the bare, still rocks upturned to the sky.
THE END
