R, 17U \(o
First journey
National Library of Scotland
‘B000054136*
TIMBUCTOO
NIGER
BY THE SAME AUTHOR
Novels forming the trilogy, A Scots Quair
Part I. Sunset Song (1932)
Part II. Cloud Howe (1933)
Part III. Grey Granite (1934)
MUNCiO PARK
NIGER
THE LIFE OF MUNGO PARK
BY
LEWIS GRASSIC GIBBON
EDINBURGH
THE PORPOISE PRESS
FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1034
BY THE PORPOISE PRESS
I33A GEORGE STREET, EDINBURGH
LONDON *. FABER AND FABER LIMITED
24 RUSSELL SQUARE, W.G. I
PRINTED IN SCOTLAND
BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO. LTD.
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, GLASGOW
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
TO
COMPTON MACKENZIE
PRELIMINARY NOTE
I think I have read almost everything by or about
Mungo Park—everything which still survives in
print or manuscript. Two interesting letters from
the Peebles days seem to have found their way to
America, and, though I tried, I could trail them to
no more definite locality. More exhausting was the
experience of reading a certain private collection,
and then being denied the right either to quote from
it or to mention the owner’s name ! This incident
provided me with the interesting alternative of
either cultivating a partial amnesia with regard to
what I had learned, or of consciously bearing that
information in mind and disregarding it as unim¬
portant. I followed the latter course, recasting
slightly the last third of this book.
The Peebles and Colonial Office records have
supplied certain negligible sidelights on exits and
entrances, dates and departures. But the Travels in
the Interior Districts of Africa, iyg^, iygy, with an
Appendix containing Geographical Illustrations of Africa,
by Major Rennell (1799) and The Journal of a Mission
in the Interior of Africa in 1805, by Mungo Park ; to¬
gether with other documents, official and private, relating to
the same Mission ; to which is prefaced an Account of the
Life of Mr. Park (1815) remain the fons et origo of any
7
biography of Park. Most biographers, it is true,
instead of looting these rich galleons of the requisite
treasure, cower down in the shadow of their hulks,
shamefacedly. I have been moved to no such shame.
Similarly, in their acceptance of the explorer’s view
of his own rectitude in the conduct of the Second
Expedition, I have found the attitude of other
writers impossible. The worst example is T. B.
Maclachlan in Mungo Park (1898), the last attempt
at a more or less full-length biography. A much
better book is ‘ H. B.’s ’ Life of Mungo Park (1835),
sincere and serene in the conventions of camouflage
peculiar to its age.
Doubt has been thrown on the veracity of the
account of the guide, Amadi Fatoumi, which did
not come to light until six years after the close of the
Second Expedition. I see no reason to doubt
Fatoumi in the main details of his narrative, and
have incorporated these details in this book without
other acknowledgment of doubt or indebtedness
than this.
L. G. G.
1933
8
1 Mungo Park the elder farmed at Fowlshiels, four
miles from Selkirk, a pleasant place, with the
Yarrow below and the lour of Newark across the
valley. In summer this was a country of green and
gold and the blue blur of heath, but in winter
a frost-bitten stretch, with the sough of the wind
raging down the valley of the Yarrow and turning
its placid waters mottled-green and lapping its
drifting mists against the grey whinstone wall
of the Fowlshiels biggings. But for Mungo it is
probable neither sun nor storm were agents of
colourful scenic change : they were facts to be
faced in his fight with the dour acres of Fowlshiels,
ploughed with the wooden plough of those days,
a sturdy figure, the ploughman, in the hodden
grey that Burns had made the traditional garb of the
land and period—even if economic fact had de¬
signed a more enduring costume.
The portrait of Mungo the elder is a mosaic, built
up against the greens and greys of Fowlshiels, built
up of casual references in the letters and allusions
of his son, glossed and varnished in the references of
the genteel biographers of an earlier day who
sought for the origins of that son. He had the usual
Scots passion for education—that passion com¬
pounded of a belief that education meant power and
knowledge and the ability to climb from the sodden
9
rees of the farms to the comfort of kirk and manse,
compounded of that and a dour desire to beat the
next man in an argument. It had, and has, some¬
thing of the same quality, this Scots desire and
pride in education, that the Chinese merchant has
in almost exactly similar circumstances when he
moils to make of his sons members of the literati,
those who pass the Examinations and attain the
ranks of the blessed. But Mungo went beyond the
reach of most of his contemporaries, even to the
extent of employing a private tutor for his family.
Where he came from there is no knowing, except
from the soil, up out of its darkness with that horde
of men of like kind, the dour even-tempered peasants
of Scotland. But when he settled at Fowlshiels he
married a daughter of John Hislop of Tennis, a
i woman of great prudence and sense ’,—else indeed
she would not have survived, we may guess, the life
that awaited her at Fowlshiels. There Mungo took
her and installed her and proceeded to beget upon
her in the three-roomed house with the brownstone
walls a family of thirteen.
The winds came down the Yarrow in winter, the
springs came greening its banks and the dark clay
rigs of Fowlshiels, summer broadened across and
about them, autumn brought the flay of flails in the
barns of Fowlshiels ; and throughout a space of
twenty years, in the fashion of her time, Mistress
Park went perpetually bowed in the ungracious lines
of pregnancy, exercising that prudence and good
sense as she might, and apparently not unsuccess-
10
fully. Her son’s biographers make of her a hand¬
some personage, as they do of her consort: they were
probably both constitutionally cold and cool, and
treated to an unbroken silence discussion of those
intimacies which produced their family. They re¬
garded each other, no doubt, with that mixture of
sardonic humour and iron tenderness that was of
their life-quality—an attitude ground out in steel
with the wear and moil of their years, its tenderness
made up of sudden unloosenings of the bonds of
sheer pity and compassion one for the other.
For the matrix that produced Mungo Park, the
now ruined whinstone house, mantled with ivy and
set with a neat little tablet, is unconvincing enough
unless one remembers the quality of his father and
mother, and the life they led. To cram a family of
thirteen, not to mention an altogether improbable
maidservant, inside the compass of those narrow
walls, and imagine it a winter night with the elder
Mungo coming laired from the fields, the cruse-lamp
with a murky splutter on the earthen floor and the
plain walls, the scrubbed table and the shining
dresser, is to reach to a type of life now remote from
anything in Scotland or outside the huts of the
Esquimaux. It is to penetrate below the gentility of
polite commentators and realise the changes of a
hundred years that have made that life impossible,
even as, in a fashion, they have made impossible the
production of such personalities as the seventh child,
the third son, who presently came to bless the union
of the Parks of Fowlshiels.
2 It was an era and a district producing Scotsmen
of note. The eighteenth century’s sunset shone
forth, and many Scotsmen spawned. Hogg, the
Ettrick Shepherd, was born at Ettrickhall in 1770, a
year before the birth of the younger Mungo ; John
Leyden, the orientalist, was born at Denholm four
years after him. And in that year 1771 a puny
child, Walter Scott, was born a few months before
that September the 10th when Mrs. Park’s third son
came through the humble portals of all birth into
the daylight of Fowlshiels’ dark kitchen.
The family had thinned out. Three were already
dead when Mungo arrived, and blinked his eyes,
and waited throughout the months and years of
babyhood the impingement of those multitudes of
impressions upon his mind which were yet to make
of him—such the play of chance—alien and different.
The chickens came chirawking into the doorway
and pecked at crumbs on the floor of the kitchen
while he lay in his cradle and watched them, and
blinked drowsy eyes, and was fed intermittently and
efficiently by the handsome and prudent mother who
was generally a whirlwind of energy engaged in
baking, brewing, and washing, directing, darning,
and scolding. The clamping feet of his father would
wake him from sleep, and perhaps, though seldom,
the touch of a rough-grained hand on his cheek.
12
But that unseldom, for it would have been gyped
foolishness, and folk must work, and get on with
their work, and see to the making of silver, and that
all the bairns are well-rigged when they gang to the
kirk of a Sabbath. Of unnecessary affection, none.
So young Mungo grew out of swaddling clothes
into a thickly-breeched childhood. Because second-
sight in the Scots was a fiction not yet invented in
the fertile shallow brain of that other Scot born in
the same year as Mungo, the parents of the young
Park neglected to foresee the curiosity of later
generations in the acts and actions of their third son.
But letters and biographies march the same phrases
meticulously across his early childhood as across his
later years. He was quiet, restrained, grave of de¬
meanour, proper and shy—a fit subject, in fact, for
the psycho-analysts as yet inapparent upon that un¬
happy era. No child should be any of these things :
they were made up of his world of multitudinous
sense-impressions superimposed with the most
narrow and Spartan code of conduct ever invented
outside Laconia.
On the unimaginative this code of suppression, of
non-joy in the Sabbath, of the hearty eating of tire¬
some food, of conventionality of expression and
demand, sat lightly enough : probably most of
Mungo’s brothers and sisters accepted it cheerfully
and grew up and slipped it aside—on to the
shoulders of their own children. But on Mungo, as
on many another imaginative child, it fell like a
stifling black blanket. He invented the proper re-
13
sistance : gravity (exaggerated till it was unduly
noticeable) of outward demeanour to hide the bur¬
geon of his soul beneath.
He was a handsome boy, as later a man, brown¬
haired, tall for his age, with finely cut nose and a
shapely if unaggressive chin. One may reconstruct
the Mungo of childhood and adolescence by modi¬
fying the well-known portrait and garbing it in
breeches and grey woollen stockings, giving it a
rounder face, and eyes surely with not that coldest of
gold glints in them. There were times in his early
life, no doubt, when he mislaid the gravity and
steadiness of demeanour so heartily approved by his
parents and contemporaries, and played the devil,
and romped, and tore his clothes, and lay on his
back and peered at the clouds and wondered on
God and birds and beasts and how babies really
came and were created, and why you shouldn’t
swear or scratch in the kirk. Nevertheless, there is
record of but one occasion when his defensive
armour slipped aside—and that almost certainly an
occasion neatly staged.
The occasion was an evening, Mungo grown to a
grave schoolboy, deep in books. The servant was
sweeping the floor and in the process sweeping up
great quantities of printed leaves torn from a book.
Mungo’s mother was in the room, and Mungo him¬
self. ‘ You’re destroying the book,’ Mungo pro¬
tested. The servant tossed her head : 4 They’re
only old Flavel’s.’ To which the dark-faced boy
retorted gravely, to the delight of all his bio-
14
graphers, ‘ Ay, you, or somebody else, will one day
be sweeping up my book-leaves and saying they’re
only old Mungo Park’s.5
One would like to know if he really meant that,
or if he glanced virtuously at his mother as he said
it. His mother’s comment was more than charac¬
teristic, it was national : ‘You poor useless thing,
do you think that you will ever write books ? ’
Mungo’s retort is not recorded. Doubtless he
remained grave and taciturn, at least until he left
the room and was out through the smells and
cluttered action of the farmyard down to the drum¬
ming Yarrow banks, still happily unsung by Words¬
worth. There, and to the surrounding hills, he
went often, ‘ to read poetry ’. This was mostly
collections of songs and sagas of the Scottish Border,
meaty dour stuff, filled with tales of raids and riots,
border flights and border fights, Childe Rolands and
Dark Towers. Plus these were the lesser gods of the
Scots pantheon, witches and wizards and kelpies
and the like, unchancy infernal fauna, all sung in
laggard anapaests. On Yarrow Mungo devoured
much of this stuff, and no doubt made of himself a
knight, a crusader, a wandering minstrel. He also
read novels—they do not tell us what novels. No
doubt they were those oddly constipated pseudo¬
religious tracts beloved of his time.
He had been sent to the Grammar School at
Selkirk. To and fro he tramped every day, a
distance of several miles, and is reported as cold and
taciturn at school as at home. He was probably
!5
inordinately shy, what of his suppressions and with
his readings, cowardly as only a Scot can be
cowardly. But one of his biographers finds this
unpalatable, and smarms upon the record the affir¬
mation ‘ Some sparks of latent spirit which occa¬
sionally flashed forth protected him from any
attempt at insult, to which his unsocial disposition
might have subjected him on the part of his noisy
school-fellows.’ But rather, one can hear their howls
of amusement, his school-fellows, surrounding and
tormenting in some playground corner a brown¬
faced silent boy.
His schoolmaster in later years had nothing to say
of him except that he was exceedingly fond of read¬
ing and 4 always the head of his class . Books, and
still the solitudes of the hills and windings of Yarrow,
remained to comfort him from both the raucous
voices of his schoolmates and the fatuous expecta¬
tions of Fowlshiels.
But at last in his fourteenth and fifteenth years he
had to face up to those expectations and make an
important decision. He had been early destined by
father Mungo and Mistress Park for training as a
minister of the Kirk of Scotland. He was so obvi¬
ously qualified by (yet again) ‘ the gravity and
steady decorum of his manner ’. And, just as it was
the ambition and intention of every Scots farmer to
produce at least one son who should receive college
education, so naturally it was expected of that son
that his education would flow from him in pulpit
periods. Curiously, one realises that the attitude
16
had litde relevance to religion. The Scots are not a
religious people : long before the rise of the his¬
torical school of criticism the Presbyterian Scot had
realised that religion is little more than the ghost of
archaic science haunting the busy ways of the world,
the world of birth and death and the coming of
spring and mating, sinning and begetting. It was
no sacrifice to a God, no holy dedicatee the elder
Parks visualised. In common with their class in
Scotland they saw, very practically, that the
minister lived in a manse, had a servant, was paid
some deference (almost exclusively a secular defer¬
ence) and had, in fact, an effective voice in things.
This indeed is the function and privilege of the Scots
minister : he is less a priest than a Spartan ephor,
elected by the people to hold the nobles and the two
kings in check, to examine into the morals of the
people, and to settle minor disputes. In addition,
it was also expected of him in Mungo’s day that he
be an adept in interpretation of the Christian Scrip¬
tures, and capable of expounding with some oratory
a ferocious metaphysical system which both he and
his hearers would know (coming from the byres,
and the ring of coulters in ploughed ground, and
women in travail, and the kindliness of tired men) to
be false and irrelevant.
Mungo refused to be a minister.
He felt he had c no call it is recorded, and the
fact worried his contemporaries, proud of him later
as an explorer, and a pious one at that. It may
puzzle a later inquirer, even as it awakens his first
B
genuine thrill of interest in the boy. Why did he
refuse the Church, the obvious refuge not only for
his apparent gravity and decorum, but for his
mental fears and imaginings liable to such sad
bruisings in the sterner ways of the world ? Why
not carry the Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border and
his novels, books and books and yet more books,
into the refuge of a manse, a pulpit, a shovel-hat and
a hilarious collar ?
But the books had brought him more than the
tenebrous imaginings of fear. The Scots ballads
could have widened his geographical horizons little :
they deal with the doings of a little people on a dark
little stage, an unhappy questing people, haunted
by the unpleasant physical after-effects of death. So
we must leave to the nameless novels the main¬
springs of Mungo’s refusal—these, and no doubt
other books that lifted his horizons from around the
dreaming banks of Yarrow and flung them far across
the deserts of Africa and the snows of America and
the heights of the Hindu mountains into strange
lands and climes, where beasts were un-Scots and
untamed, and in blue waters strange plants waved
their glassy fronds and the oyster opened its pearl-
lined valves. . . .
Perhaps not only the books. Mungo had lain on
the grass and the heath and the bells of the hills,
looked at the twining convolutions of the buttercups,
the purple bells of the heather-drops, watched the
busy insect-world at its play of life, looked at the
blood pulse down the veins in his own arm. He had
18
seen the play and perhaps the majesty of life. How¬
ever unhappily grooved his mind by his early sur¬
roundings and scoldings and commendings, it was
brightened and sharpened to a curiosity that no
manse would ever satisfy.
He elected to study medicine.
!9
3His gravity ‘not altogether thrown away’, he
was bound apprentice in his fifteenth year to a
local practitioner, one Thomas Anderson of Selkirk.
This was in 1786. Thereafter, for a space of three
years, he disappears into incidental mention and
doubtless much earnest and fatiguing study. The
three years saw him in occasional attendance at the
Grammar School of Selkirk, studying classics and
mathematics, in both of which he was ‘very apt .
For the rest he no doubt pounded the medicines and
rode the rounds with his master, finding such excite¬
ments of life and death as there was in the medicine
of an age without anaesthetics or a knowledge of
antiseptic principles, without the stethoscope
which Lannaec did not perfect until 1816—or the
clinical thermometer.
Most surgery was rough and ready : the patient
was drugged or alcoholised or simply held down by
strong hands and operated upon to the sound of his
cries and the unshielded stench of cut flesh. In the
more normal physicians’ routine, then as now, pills
of various sizes, colourings and degrees of un¬
pleasantness and effectiveness relieved the inner ills
of the farmers and shopkeepers and cattle-dealers of
Selkirk and its environs. Mungo gathered to him¬
self a good practical training, but, or so it would
appear, no great liking of his profession. Yet he
20
kept his own counsel, dark and grave, and in 1789
matriculated and went up to Edinburgh—by coach,
travelling tall and dark and hardly yokel-like at all,
the mask almost perfect already in encounter with
all but such contemporary intimates as Anderson’s
children, Alison and Alexander. Ailie was a light¬
hearted tease, vexing Mungo from his safe solem¬
nities.
He was at Edinburgh for three sessions. There he
developed a passion for botany, an outcome of much
wandering the lonely hills in his childhood. Besides,
in that age botanical knowledge stood the medical
practitioner in much good stead.
Presently Mungo’s researches had the assistance
and encouragement of a family relation who was in
some measure as remarkable a man as Mungo him¬
self was to prove.
This was his brother-in-law, James Dickson, seeds¬
man of London. Dickson had been born in Scot¬
land and had migrated early to London, to become
a nurseryman at Hammersmith. He was more than
a mere gardener, however, a botanist to boot, and a
very good one in the opinion of his time. Before he
returned to Scotland and met with and wedded one
of Mungo’s sisters, he had published a book on
Cryptogamia, a prosy little, pompous little book in the
style of the period. But he was an enthusiast,
sincere enough, and the year before Mungo matri¬
culated had assisted in an important event in
London. This was the foundation of the Linnaean
Society in company with Sir J. E. Smith.
21
His brother-in-law came north just as Mungo was
finishing with Edinburgh. Dickson proposed a
botanising tour in the Highlands, and Mungo
assented, shyly. They departed from Edinburgh,
apparently on their own, and leave no route or
account of their travels. Doubtlessly they botanised
and amassed specimens and speculations, and were
grave good Lowlanders on the unchancy fringes of
the country of the more excitable Highlanders.
More important, Dickson was one of the very few
men who ever succeeded in breaking through the
glassy armour of the solemn youth who companioned
him. Somewhere and somehow on that expedition
in the summer of the Highlands, Mungo opened his
heart to brother-in-law James, and expressed his
violent distaste for a general practitioner’s life in
Scotland.
Dickson’s comments remain unchronicled. But
he set about practical means to assist Mungo. At
the Linnaean he had come in contact with Sir
Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society since
1778. Apart from being a botanist, and a man of
a singularly volcanic temper, Banks had seen and
experienced most of the strange things that a
curious-minded man might see and experience in
that age when the fringes of the world were still un¬
mapped. He had voyaged to Newfoundland, col¬
lecting plants. When Cook sailed round the world
in 1768-71, Banks had outfitted a ship to accompany
him. On that expedition he compiled his remark¬
able Journal and returned refreshed to cast his eyes
22
over the unbotanised Hebrides. Exploring these
and Iceland the year after his return, he was the
first to make Staffa and its wonders known to the
world. ... A remarkable and likable soul, and the
ideal patron for Mungo, as Dickson saw ; accord¬
ingly, he set about arranging a meeting.
Mungo came to London. From the beginning
Banks had a compassionate fondness for him, the
slim handsome youth with the dark face and flaming
hair, the polite manner and the occasional twinge
of nervousness. The older man questioned the
younger and found him singularly difficult to help :
he was either too shy or too uncertain. Banks gave
up the matter in some puzzlement, and Mungo,
unemployed, retired to Selkirk and the household
which had dimly backgrounded his student years.
His father and mother were both ageing hardly,
Yarrow looking a smaller and meaner stream. His
schoolmaster seemed shrunken greatly when Mungo
tramped into the town to see him. These were un-
happy months in his life. His parents shook their
heads over him—not even a stickit minister, but a
stickit doctor, goodsakes ! He fled often to the hills
and the peace of them. Something was ready and
waiting his conquest, but the road to it blinded in fog.
And no doubt he prayed for advice. Prayer, cere¬
monial prayer, was part of life’s routine at Fowl-
shiels. The invocation to the Almighty to alter his
immutable laws and interfere in an arbitrary
manner with creation was a recognised spiritual
exercise among the Parks : Mungo acceded to the
23
practice with a formal sincere devotion. The re¬
markable piety which was to sustain him in the
wilds of the Niger country was even then developed
to the full—remarkable in the sense that it seems as
though Mungo himself knew it for what it was : a
psychic exercise, refreshing and sustaining, quite
apart from the fact that the Almighty might or
might not pay it heed.
He was comely and an interesting young man.
Women looked at him kindly at kirk and in street,
the Edinburgh student, a doctor nearly. But
Mungo paid them no heed. He had sublimated too
many vagrant impulses between the sharny close
of Fowlshiels and the Grammar School of Selkirk to
unleash them on the subject of women : he waited
for wider horizons to release him.
For he had a very passionate love for his mother—
and this had set in a mould his whole love-life.
Women were always mother-women to him. He
was never, it seems, a lover, and in that was as
characteristic of one great division of Scots as Burns
was of another. He saw them as pitiful and kindly
and very frail and shining people : he was a
feminist without a philosophy and before feminism ;
and it is one of the loveliest traits in the close dark
heart so rigidly constrained behind the genteel blue
coat with brass buttons.
Suddenly he received a message from Fondon
that Sir Joseph Banks had found him a position as
assistant-surgeon on the Worcester, an East Indiaman,
about to sail for Bencoolen in Sumatra.
24
4 He was twenty-one years of age, tall, broad-
chested, muscular, with the solid frame of the
Scots peasant redeemed of its usual squatness by his
height. The brow and chin were model features,
the eyes had a certain closeness. He had a fine
Greek nose and his hair had a downy youthful wave.
He was very young. Boarding the Worcester, he
felt himself authentically launched on the adventure
of life. He might have written verse about it or sung
songs or disported himself in a like kindly manner
but for the fact of Fowlshiels. So instead he sat down
and wrote a letter to Anderson in Selkirk :
‘ I have now got upon the first step of the stair of
ambition. . . . The melancholy, who complain of the
shortness of human life, and the voluptuous, who think the
present only their own, strive to fill up every moment with
sensual enjoyment : but the man whose soul has been
enlightened by his Creator, and enabled, though dimly,
to discern the wonders of salvation, will look upon the
joys and afflictions of this life as equally the tokens of
Divine love. He will walk through the world as one
travelling to a better country, looking forward with
wonder to the author and finisher of his faith.’
Perhaps teasing Ailie would read that and be im¬
pressed.
Again, just before the Worcester sailed :
‘ I wish you may be able to look upon the day of your
departure with the same resignation that I do on mine. . . .
25
May I rather see the green sod on your grave than see you
anything but a Christian.’
It is almost the most appalling example in letters
of the humorless piety of adolescence. But Anderson,
that genial soul, seems to have remained uninfuri¬
ated. Perhaps he realised that the letter was Mungo’s
reaction to the sudden realisation of the straying de¬
lights and tenebrous terrors of the world faced alone.
So he was lifting his voice in protest, protesting and
protesting, his heart singing within him as he traced
the route to far Bencoolen. He was not merely an
insufferable young prig : he was a boy trying hard
to be grown up in the only fashion he knew how.
Dr. Anderson rode to Fowlshiels and showed the
letters to the Parks. They were greatly impressed.
Mungo sailed. He sails out of his own biography
for the space of nearly a year. The ship wandered
round Africa in the easy-going sailing of those days,
dawdled across the glassy North Pacific, put in at
Bencoolen, and drowsed there, gathering its cargo.
We catch a glimpse of Mungo, botanising on land—
it is possible that he botanised a considerable dis¬
tance up into the interior and stared at the Sumatran
mountains and wondered what was beyond. And
he dredged the shore waters and studied the fish,
and drew up a paper for the Transactions of the
Linnaean Society describing eight new and hitherto
unchristened fishes. He was happy, though the
mountains vexed his horizon. He had no vision of
that destiny that was being prepared for him with
the death of Houghton in Moorish Ludamar.
26
5 That blank in Mungo’s biography the chronicler
fills in with an outline of the Niger’s. The
rumour of the Great River beyond the Great Desert
had haunted the fringes of Mediterranean history
for over two thousand years. It was the second great
mysterious river of the ancient world, the primal
Nile taking first place. Civilisation arose, an acci¬
dent from an accidental starting-point, on the banks
of the Nile and from there spread abroad the antique
world of the Golden Age hunters, carrying agri¬
culture, the first social classes, the first kings and the
first gods to many races of men, lifting them to
economic security and debasing their minds and
hearts in the ritual of kingship and temple. It
spread abroad Asia and Europe and far to America :
more slowly it seeped south into the dark continent
where it arose. Even at the present day there are
little lost tribes in the heart of Africa that still live
the life of happy primal innocence which all our
fathers led ere corn and the gods, Pandora’s gifts,
were let loose on the world.
The Mediterranean lands grew histories. Kings
rose and dominated and founded dynasties. Sailors
sailed the seas for Givers of Life, gold and pearls.
Travellers penetrated down through the fertile
North African fringe and gazed at the great barrier
of the Sahara. What lay beyond ?
27
There were many guesses and many tales. There
the world ended, a burning waste where the phoenix
and the salamander alone disturbed the bright play
of the sunshine on the glistering sands. There was
the world’s end. But presently these tales failed to
satisfy. From Punt the Pharaohs sent westwards
expeditions into the lands of the blacks, carrying to
the forest folk the secrets of planting and reaping,
the institution of kingship, the practice of slave¬
raiding. It is possible that those late dynastic
Egyptians even reached Lake Chad, penetrated
beyond that and looked upon the rolling majesty of
a river that rivalled the Nile, flowing through the
jungles broad and majestic, without boat or skiff on
its placid waters. But their tale almost perished with
them. They had but the vaguest notion of this
Great River’s location.
But in 600 b.c. the Carthaginians circumnavi¬
gated Africa in the service of King Necho. Beyond
the Great Sands was a mighty land that waved its
jungles down to the seashore, that kindled its fires
at night along the shores and was filled with strange
beasts and men and plants. Civilisation had pene¬
trated far into Africa by then. By another hundred
and fifty years, when Hanno, that first of the true
explorers, reached as far south as Sierra Leone, the
natives were in organised tribes, no doubt mutually
hostile. They demonstrated from the shore their
marked lack of affection for the Carthaginians.
Hanno captured a couple of gorillas, had them
skinned, and turned back.
28
With the murder of Carthage by Rome the great
sea-voyagings round Africa ceased. The Romans
drew North Africa under their power. They had
little taste for the sea, but much for more and new
land. They sent great expeditions into the Sahara.
Most of them never returned, and were doubtless
whelmed in the sands. But some, perhaps, actually
penetrated to the Upper Niger and founded small
kingships there, till time and the blacks wiped traces
of them from the face of the country. Herodotus had
heard of the Great River, crocodile-laden, ‘ dividing
Africa as the Danube does Europe ’. But he thought
it flowed from the Nile westwards. In Pliny’s time
it is possible that a Roman expedition actually pene¬
trated to the Niger, surveyed it, and returned to the
Province of Africa. But the whole incident is
wrapped in a mist of doubt.
In the ninth century of the Christian era the
Southern Sahara began to feel the effects of the
Islamic invasion of North Africa. Mixed drifts of
Libyan-Berber-Arabs crossed the great desert and
came in contact with the barbaric negro tribes on
the upper waters of the Niger. Wars raged un¬
endingly ; the negro displayed as resolute a power
to resist political subjection as a high ability to
absorb cultural elements. Little states of half-
breeds came into being, flourished a while, and were
smothered in great tribal swayings to and fro. To
European eyes, ironically, those centuries of war and
heroism, oppression and hope, are no more than
Chesterton’s ‘ small, dark, cloud, where the tortured
29
trumpets scream aloud and the dense arrows
drive \
But presently, on the middle Niger, there arose to
being two great negro kingdoms, Songhay and
Bornu. Each had under its control territory to the
extent of a million and a half square miles. Their
kings were great potentates : there was a great
Black civilisation long ere there was a great Euro¬
pean. The Niger drained it—still mysteriously.
For Ibn Mohammed al Idrisi’s map, published in
1153, showed the Niger rising in the Nile and flow¬
ing thence across Africa into the Atlantic. Ibn
Batuta, who visited Timbuctoo in 1353 and voyaged
down the Niger to Songhay—decaying Songhay—,
knew the falsity of the Nile for the rising point of the
Great River. But he also was unsure of where it
reached the haven of ocean—if reach it it did.
Perhaps it was lost in the 4 sands of the interior
Though they make no mention of the fact, it is
obvious that to these Arab geographers the puzzle
of the river was the direction in which, a full-flowing
stream, it ultimately flowed. Four hundred years
after Ibn Batuta, determination of that flow of the
Niger was to crown as the pinnacle of his achieve¬
ments the person of a tall young man tramping shoe¬
less, ragged and alone down the jungle to its banks.
In the early fifteenth century the Portuguese com¬
menced to plant trading-stations—slave and gold
trading-stations—up and down the West African
coast, coming in the process on the mouths of the
Senegal and the Gambia, great and authentic
30
drains of inner Africa. The rumour of the Niger
was known to Europe, and for a time it was assumed
that the Gambia was that river under a different
name, and that far on its upper waters stood Tim-
buctoo the mysterious, the African El Dorado, its
gold roofs shining under the blaze of the tropic sun¬
shine, its hundred palaces lifting their airy pinnacles
against the blue of desert and jungle. Like Manoa,
like Lhasa, it was the focus of much romantic talk
and writing for several hundred years.
By the early seventeenth century the decline of
Portuguese power on the West Coast had set in. In
1618 the English African Company was formed to
trade with the abandoned coast. The English had
known this coast since the days of the Elizabethan
pirates, who would raid it for slaves in the intervals
of raiding Spanish America for gold and acquir¬
ing immunity for their nauseous butcherings and
cruelties under that happy cloak, patriotism. (Their
activities may be said to have first coined for that
word its reputation as the last refuge of scoundrelism.)
The African Company was in the tradition. It was
genteelly patriotic as it flogged the slave-gangs up
the gangways of its ships and exchanged bad rum
and calico for gold dust and human merchandise
with the black headman of the coast. Stations were
established at Cape Coast Castle and Fort James on
the Gambia, and to these centres trailed down the
negro slave caravans from that mysterious interior
of which the traders heard in wild rumour.
But two years after the founding of the Company
31
Richard Jobson’s expedition sailed up the Gambia
as far as Tenda, and as definitely put an end to one
rumour as it confirmed another. The Gambia was
not the Niger. But Timbuctoo was a reality—so
Jobson’s informants swore—4 with roofs covered with
gold
The French came trading to the West Coast as
well—all those lands that now belong to them—and
early concentrated on the Senegal, founding stations
far up its course which changes in trade and the
times would leave to long periods of abandonment
and then see revived to fresh activity. Rumours of
the Niger came to them also, contradictory as
always, giving its risings and settings in every point
of the compass. But the main drift of rumour
roused it on its long journey from an inland lake,
and sent it flowing west to the Atlantic.
Yet down the West Coast no great river emerged
except the Congo. Could the Congo be the Niger
under a fresh name ?
32
/T To men in the days when Mungo rode the rounds
U of Anderson’s patients in Selkirk the lie and flow
of the Niger were still as debatable as the meaning
and origin of the Martian canals are to us. Now it
is a far-off tale, this tracing of the Niger’s course,
and only the human incidents of accident and
encounter in the tales of the explorers preserve any
interest. We know now that the main stream of the
Joliba in that far day, as now, rose in the Liberian
mountains less than 150 miles from the West African
coast. Instead of flowing towards the sea, it
streamed towards the interior of Africa, gathering
waters from innumerable tributaries, and passing
through a multitude of countries ruled by negro
kinglets till beyond Sego, the capital of Bambarra,
it diffused itself into a vast sweep of interlocking
lakes and swamps subject to annual inundation.
Below Timbuctoo (no river-port, but inland) it
gathered itself together again, and, swollen with the
waters of a new tributary, the Bani, flowed south¬
east as the Kwara, passing through the disrupted
kingdom of Songhay and so through the Benin lands
of cannibals and exquisite wood-carvers till it
finally completed its 2,600 miles journey by emerg¬
ing on the Atlantic, seeping through a vast delta of
120 miles into the Gulf of Guinea. Well down the
river where it became the Kwara stood a town with
o
the name of Boussa—a name that still for the student
of exploration has the flavour of old tragedy.
None of these facts were known to the English
African Association formed in 1788 under the im¬
petus of the indefatigable Sir Joseph Banks. Sir
Joseph wanted the Niger explored and the trouble¬
some matter of its final end cleared up once and for
all. Lord Rawdon, the Bishop of Llandaff and
Messrs. Beaufroy and Stewart he co-opted as fellow
foundation-members. All were men of standing, all
were classical students who had read Herodotus.
The Bishop was an Abolitionist, but otherwise a
gentleman. The objects of the expedition were
defined, unnecessarily,s as the encouragement of the
scientific exploration of Africa5.
Within five years of its foundation the Association
had despatched three explorers into Africa in pur¬
suit of the Niger. The first, Ledyard, an American
marine, had some idea of tackling the problem from
Libya. But he died in Cairo ere his mission was well
begun. Lucas, the second man selected, had once
been a slave in Morocco. He proposed to travel to
the Niger country across the Sahara, and actually
set out on that mission from Tripoli. But, after five
days travel, he turned back his caravan, having come
into collision with ‘ revolting Arabs 5 (he referred to
their political activities). The next selection of t e
Association was Major Houghton, fort-major at
Goree, where the great French aerodrome is now
built, a man of singular courage and address, m the
phrase of the time, and well acquainted with Arabic.
34
Houghton’s venture progressed further than that
of either Ledyard or Lucas. With assistance and
co-operation from a white slaver on the Gambia,
one Dr. Laidley of Pisania, Houghton passed
through the negro 4 kingdoms 5 of Woolli, Kasson,
and Kaarta. Beyond Kaarta was Ludamar, a
4 kingdom ’ of half-breed Arabs—4 Moors ’ as they
were dubbed in the nomenclature of the times.
Jarra was the border town and Houghton wrote
from there his last and characteristic letter to
Laidley five hundred miles away :
4 Major Houghton’s compliments to Dr. Laidley ; is in
good health, on his way to Timbuctoo ; robbed of all his
goods by Kend Bular’s son.’
With this last cryptic message, Houghton dis¬
appeared into Ludamar, was again robbed, crawled
on his hands and knees to a Aloonsh village, was
there refused food, and either allowed to starve to
death or knocked on the head and his body dragged
into the woods.
News of the catastrophe filtered down to the coast
with the slave caravans, and Laidley sent it on to
the African Association in London. The third
venture had not been lucky. Banks and the others
looked about for someone to take the place of the
unfortunate Houghton. A young and unemployed
Scotsman, lately returned from a voyage to Ben-
coolen in Sumatra, and living with his brother-in-
law in London, was recalled to Sir Joseph’s mind as
a suitable person. Why yes, he remembered Mr.
Park. If Mr. Park would apply with due form—
35
Mungo leapt at the opportunity. It seemed that
all his life he had been waiting for this to happen, or
at least all the uneasy months since his return from
Bencoolen. ‘ I had a passionate desire to examine
into the productions of a country so little known,
and to become experimentally acquainted with the
modes of life and character of the natives.5 In this
arid phrase he disguises his excitement.
He was accepted by the Association and told to
prepare for a speedy departure to Africa. He went
home to Scotland and looked in at Fowlshiels. The
elder Parks heard him and bade him a shyly sar¬
donic godspeed. He walked into Selkirk to see
Anderson and noted how Ailie was now a woman,
though still so gay and hoydenish. But her eyes
widened with admiration when she heard of his
mission.
Then he bade them goodbye and went south,
through the English spring, to Portsmouth, through
a soft land burgeoning green and sweet under the
fall of rain. Lost and naked a year later in the
tropical jungles he was to take that picture from his
mind and look at it often and long.
36
7 His instructions had sufficient latitude and
clarity. On landing in Africa, he was directed
to c pass on to the River Niger, either by the way of
Bambouk, or by such other route as should be found
most convenient. That I should ascertain the
course, and, if possible, the rise and termination of
that river. That I should use my utmost exertions
to visit the principal towns or cities in its neighbour¬
hood, particularly Timbuctoo and Houssa ; and
that I should be afterwards at liberty to return to
Europe, either by the way of the Gambia, or by such
other route as, under all the then existing circum¬
stances of my situation and prospects, should appear
to me most advisable.’
Cool and collected though he was, the dark young
man in blue coat with brass buttons, with beaver
tile respectworthily poised on his head, it is unlikely
he was visited by any forward vision of those circum¬
stances in which he would turn to regain Europe.
All that was hid in a quivering haze, a dry haze
through which shone the sultry lands, and, winding
tenebrous, the Lost River of the Negro continent.
Both fulfilment of Yarrow and freedom from Fowl-
shiels was awaiting him there at the end of the
voyage of the brig Endeavour.
The Endeavour traded with Gambia in beeswax
and ivory, was skippered by a Richard Wyatt, and
37
bore Mungo as its solitary passenger when it sailed
from Portsmouth on the 22nd of May, 1795- Mungo
had letters of introduction to Dr. John Laidley, that
gentlemanly slaver and merchant on the Gambia
banks who had befriended Houghton, a letter of
credit for £200, an umbrella, a pocket sextant, a
thermometer, and a few changes of linen. It would
be interesting to know, behind the polite phrasings
of his chronicle, his opinion on the adequacy of the
£200. Concerning the rest of his equipment, how¬
ever, he had no doubts at all. He was especially
fond of the umbrella.
{ On the 4th of June we saw the mountains over
Mogadore.’ Evidently he saw them rise in poetry
as well as in fact, and stared with a quickening of
blood at that first glimpse of the mysterious con¬
tinent. Then the peaks closed away in the sunhaze
while the Endeavour coasted down the African shore
for another seventeen days. They were days weary¬
ing enough in the smell of the hot seas and creaming
surf and the dim company of Captain Richard
Wyatt, that respectable man. But the cool and
diplomatic Mungo officially records the voyage as a
pleasant one of thirty days. Probably he removed
the beaver tile and sighed with satisfaction, never¬
theless, as one morning they warped their way into
Jillifree, a town on the northern bank of the River
Gambia, and opposite to James’s Island, an early
port of the English.
Wyatt had put into Jillifree to trade ; and here it
was that Mungo first looked upon the negro at home
38
and in authority. Jillifree lay in the ‘ kingdom ’ of
Barra, and the Emir of that indefinite territory laid
a duty of £20 or so on every vessel that sought his
harbours. Chattering, grinning wide-lipped, and
quite disregardful of the cool observant gaze of
Mungo, the servants of the chief magistrate of
Jillifree—el caid, or ‘ the Alkaid ’ as Mungo somewhat
stutteringly dubs him—swarmed on board the En¬
deavour. Maize, cotton cloth, elephants’ teeth and
gold dust Mungo saw or heard were brought down
the rivers to Jillifree to trade with Europeans. It was
a thriving and busy place, with a seemly hustle of
which Mungo approved.
He does not tell us if he landed there, but that is
the probability, making notes and edging a cautious
courteous way through the bazaars, considering the
shape of the natives’ skulls, the tonation of their
voices, the appearance of their earrings, and their
habits in coition. Such of these observations as
were seemly and exploratory Mungo committed to
paper, regained the Endeavour, took to the smell
and cockroaches of his bunk (but probably noted
neither), and on the 23rd saw Jillifree hull-down to
the north.
They passed up the river to the southern side and
so up a creek which can still be identified, bright
with rotting mangroves, to the town of Vintain.
Vintain was the chief trading station for Europeans,
and an important port of call for Captain Richard
Wyatt, in search of beeswax.
Here, disregarding the town, its buildings, appear-
39
ance, and extent, Mungo made researches into the
origin of the beeswax. So doing, he discovered two
nations in occupation of the territory around Vin-
tain, and, indeed, much beyond Vintain. Of these,
the collectors of beeswax were the Feloops, c a wild
and unsociable race \ They were, indeed, the
hinterlands negroes, still largely untouched by Arab
culture or civilisation. They lived in villages re¬
mote in the forest, collecting beeswax, growing
cotton, and carrying on the ancient life of the
archaic civilisation, diversified in its solemnities by
copious draughts of mead. Mungo records that
they collected honey and made mead 4 much as in
Great Britain ’. Immersed in these pursuits and
refreshments, the Feloops generally employed mem¬
bers of the second nation in the district to act as
traders. These were the Mandingoes, concerning
whom we shall again meet Mungo discoursing.
Three days’ residence in Vintain completed
Captain Wyatt’s business, and the Endeavour was
sailed or warped down the hot creek into the brown
flow of the Gambia. Then they held up the river,
flowing deep and muddy, with the slime and shine
of the mangroves on the distant banks, and much
toil and exertion in these windless reaches. Beyond
the jungle bush showed up great stretches of
malarial swamp. Mungo inspected the Gambia
fish, and found no species at all known to Europe.
He records that sharks were very plentiful at the
mouth of the river. Upstream, amid the mangrove
reaches, showed the saw-like toothed jaws of croco-
40
diles, which Mungo called alligators. He was far
from the kindly fauna of Fowlshiels.
The dense and swampy country unfurled slowly,
day on day, in an intensifying heat and stench. But
at last, six days after leaving Vintain, they reached
up-river to Jonkakonda, where the Endeavour was to
carry out the main part of her lading.
This was Mungo’s port of disembarkment. Cap¬
tain Wyatt despatched a messenger to Dr. Laidley
informing him of the presence of the composed
young traveller. Laidley lived at the village of
Pisania, six miles up-river. He lost no time in des¬
cending to Jonkakonda to welcome Mungo. They
liked each other at once. It was no season for
commencing the journey into the interior, and
Laidley invited Mungo to spend the intervening
time at his house in Pisania.
So at daybreak on the 5 th of July the young Scots¬
man set out with a guide on the first lap of his
journey into the interior of Africa. Riding for six¬
teen miles, he came to Pisania, where Laidley and
two others, of the name of Ainslie, had set up a
trading post. Their trade was largely in slaves, of
whom they retained large gangs as personal servants.
But the main part of the river commerce in ivory
and gold was also in their hands ; in spite of the
fact, Mungo assures us, apparently without inten¬
tional quibble, that< they were highly esteemed and
respected by the natives at large \
41
8 Settled in Laidley’s house, Mungo set about
learning Mandingo, the lingua franca of the
country, and acquiring all relevant and irrelevant
knowledge possible of the lands through which he
must travel. Laidley helped greatly in this ; so (the
beginning of that suspicious association with slavery
which was afterwards to reflect seriously on Mungo’s
impeccable character) did the slatis, negro mer¬
chants who traded chiefly in slaves. They were
mostly liars or unreliable, those slatis, and Mungo
appears to have summed them up with as cool a
patience as he did the rest of the fauna and flora of
the remarkable country on the edge of which he sat
in survey. For more than three weeks he kept at
study of the language and study of the natives, study
of the country, its products and appearance, and
piled up careful notes on all five subjects.
Only a few of these carry interest to this day.
Feloops and Mandingoes we have already met.
Further study of the former acquainted Mungo with
their gloomy and reserved disposition, their love of
feuds, and their fondness for mead intoxication.
But these unpraiseworthy characteristics were in
some degree counterbalanced by qualities of grati¬
tude and trustworthiness. Also, they were fond of
the English, as Mungo notes with a bland approval,
and had on various occasions taken up arms in
42
defence of English ships against French privateers.
The picture of the grateful negro defending the
grateful slaver against the latter’s enemies presented
itself to Mungo without any humour at all. Instead,
he was moved to wish that the minds of a people
so determined and faithful, could be softened and
civilised by the mild and benevolent spirit of
Christianity ! ’ The mark of ejaculation seems
warranted.
The Jaloffs (he heard) lived inland, between the
Senegal River and the Mandingo states on the
Gambia—a warlike people who appear to have had
a considerable admixture of Arab blood. They were
divided into a number of states and tribes, at
constant feud. In the intervals of feuding, the
Jaloffs manufactured a c very fine cotton cloth ’.
Verging on Gambia territory were also the
Foulahs, more Arab even than the Jaloffs, a pastoral
people without definite and distinct social organi¬
sation, apart from those imposed by the inhabitants
of the alien states into which they had gradually
penetrated, coming from the interior with their
flocks and herds.
But the most powerful and numerous of all the
negroid racial groupings, Mungo gathered, was the
Mandingo. They came from an interior country,
Manding, and had established a number of c king¬
doms ’ in the Gambia hinterland. Like the other
tribes, they had been permeated by Arab influences;
the chief magistrate in each town was el caid, which
is good Arabic ; the courts were called palavers,
43
which is mutilated Portuguese. Superimposed upon
the ancient negro tribal customs we catch sight of a
grotesque admixture of Mohammedan law and
European ethic. With these had come an exceeding
fondness for litigation, and Mungo discovered them
fully equipped with professional advocates what
I little expected to find in Africa ’). Nevertheless,
they were in general a c mild, sociable, and pleasing
people ’. Mungo was to have much to do with these
Mandingoes in subsequent days.
For clothes, the majority of the inhabitants, of all
tribes, wore a loose frock and drawers, with sandals
on their feet and white caps on their heads. The
women wore elaborate loin-cloths ; to which they
added a further loose piece of cloth, draped negli¬
gently around the shoulders. They undraped it, no
doubt, with a like negligence.
Around Pisania, and far into the interior, the
proportion of free to unfree was about one to three.
Three-fourths of the inhabitants were slaves cul¬
tivating the land and herding the cattle. Never¬
theless, they had certain privileges, these domestic
slaves. They could not be sold to fresh masters
without consent of the entire village. Nor could
they be wantonly slain. In both of these matters, as
Mungo was to find, their condition differed materially
from that of the unfortunate enslaved who came
from the interior—captives of war and the like
driven down to the coast for export in the ships of
the white traders.
The country stretched up the shores of the river,
44
through the boundaries of many indeterminate
states, a flat hot land, presenting in general a tire¬
some and gloomy uniformity to the eye. Neverthe¬
less, it was rich and fertile, as the cultivated patches
showed. Maize and rice were the principal crops
raised ; cotton and indigo were also grown, for
home use and export. Mungo was intrigued to find
among the states a commodity of commerce known
as shea-butter. It was a kind of margarine, ex¬
tracted from the kernel of a nut ‘ and an admirable
substitute for butter ’. Salt was traded inland, as
always in Africa, the interior a salt-hungry land.
Such was the painted backcloth to the stage
awaiting its hero.
45
9 It had yet to await him a while. Mungo, meti¬
culously note-taking amid the sour heat and
sourer mosquitoes, was congratulating himself that
he had escaped the fever which generally attacked
newcomers to the Gambia. But his immunity was
only temporary. On the 31st of July he went out
to observe an eclipse of the moon ; next day he was
down with fever, and passed into delirium.
For nearly a month he lay in this condition ; hot
and stifling the days in the Pisania hut, with little
to read and few to speak to, for Laidley appears to
have been gone here and there on various com¬
mercial concerns, and the Ainslies were busied with
their own affairs. Probably they thought of Mungo
as an interfering amateur, and his cold, chill manner
repulsed them.
He lay in bed and longed for recovery and the
interior.
By the first week in September sufficient strength
had returned for him to emerge from the hut and
take short walks in and around Pisania. His
hunger for knowledge of everything on the fringes
of the land of his exploration was again moving him
to activity. It moved him too soon. On the 10th
he rambled too far under the midday sun, and
returned home swaying in an apparent condition
that would certainly have been misinterpreted in
46
Selkirk. It was fever again ; fortunately, this was
a mild attack. He lay in his hut and listened to the
torrential drumming of water on the roof.
The rains had come and through the windows and
door he could see the blinding fall and pelt for
tedious hour on hour. Sometimes it would slacken
off, dry, and the heat would grow stifling till the
day waned into night and the chorusing voices of
Africa kept Mungo from much-needed sleep—the
laughter of hyenas and the whining of jackals ; and,
booming loud and staccato above all else, the calling
of the bull-frogs. Then the thunder would growl
again above the dripping bush and muddy-watered
Gambia, and the rains resume in the stifling dark of
the nights.
Gambia flowed slow and brown with detritus, and
the plants and weeds around Pisania flourished in a
rank luxuriance. Mungo has little to tell of the
hours of boredom and weariness that were surely
his, even though Laidley had by now returned and
had taken to nursing the invalid and beguiling some
of the wearier hours with tales and information.
September swam past in a mist of hot rains, and
still Mungo remained in bed, wasted considerably,
and weakened. But his constitution was also being
thoroughly inoculated against the mischances of the
future. Gambia waters rose and rose. At last, a
month or so after Mungo had taken to his bed the
second time, they reached high-water mark—fifteen
feet above the high-water mark of the tide. There¬
after they commenced to sink. Mungo heard
47
through nights and days the gurgle of the receding
waters as the rains cleared from the land, and the
voices of the frogs grew muted in distance as their
pools dried up. With that double departure his own
strength returned. He burned it alive in himself,
anxious to have finished with this prelude.
It was the season for travelling. Harvests would
be in, the natives cheerful and well fed and un-
obstreperous, provisions cheap and plentiful. No
caravan for the interior was yet ready to set out, but
Mungo was impatient to be gone, and coldly sus¬
picious of the character of the slatis who controlled
such caravans. So he resolved to wait no longer,
but to depart unprotected, on his mission in quest
of the elusive Great River of legend.
48
I was the 2nd of December, 1795, when
^ Mungo left Pisania, and turned the head of
his horse along the banks of the Gambia. This
animal, small, spirited, and much to be travailled,
Mungo had purchased for the sum of £7 10s. od.—
half the price of a slave. Behind him there rode on
ass-back or trudged on bare feet a small caravan of
six attendants and companions.
Of the latter, two were free negroes—Madiboo,
travelling to Bambarra, and Tami, a native of
Kasson, a blacksmith returning to his home after
four years of employment in the coastal lands. Both
were Mohammedans, both were to prove very trust¬
worthy and likable friends of Mungo. However
they regarded him at first, in the hot tracks and the
dangers of the following nights these two succeeded
in penetrating the icy reserve that cased about the
young white, and, whatever else they found below
it, found little or nothing of white snobbery or white
disgust. The two other companions were slatis,
slave-merchants travelling into the interior as far
as Bondou. Mungo accepted them with the same
cold and friendly interest as he accepted all else.
Besides companions he had two negro servants,
procured him by Laidley. One, Johnson, a freed-
man who had been a slave in Jamaica, was hired
for the sum of a £1 a month, to be paid to him on
q.n.
49
D
the journey, and a further ten shillings a month, to
be paid to his wife during his absence. Johnson
was to prove a bending reed. Of quite other
quality was the slave Demba, the Sancho Panza to
Mungo’s Quixote, loaned by Laidley and promised
his freedom on Mungo’s return to the coast, if the
latter should give a good account of his services.
Mungo had purchased two asses for the use of the
two blacks.
‘ Thus I had no less than six attendants, all of
whom had been taught to regard me with great
respect, and to consider that their safe return here¬
after, to the countries on the Gambia, would depend
on my preservation.’
Thus Mungo. But it is difficult to conceive how
either the slatis or Madiboo and Tami had need to
worry greatly over his preservation. The two latter,
at least, had no intention of returning to the coast.
This extract may be regarded as little more than
writer’s patter, the while Mungo draws breath,
mounted, pale-faced, tall, in blue coat and nankeen
trousers, and prepares to ride out on his mission.
He took with him, he tells, provisions for only two
days, some beads and tobacco with which to pur¬
chase a further supply, some changes of linen, an
umbrella, the sextant, two compasses, and a ther¬
mometer. His arms, carried by himself and his
blacks, were two fowling-pieces and two pistols.
Laidley and the Ainslies, with some of their
negroes, rode with him through the first two days.
Laidley was apparently of the opinion that he would
5°
never see Mungo again. Probably the Ainslies felt
the same, and all accompanied the traveller in a
kind of compassionate curiosity. The forest tracks
opened up, the sun beat down, and presently
Pisania, with its memoried rains and sounds and
smells, disappeared in the rear.
Somewhere in the afternoon they reached the
village of Jindey, on the Walli Creek, a branch of the
Gambia, and the Ainslies and Laidley took Mungo
to the house of a negress who had once been the
mistress of a white trader. This had raised her
status considerably in the eyes of her fellow-
natives—a status which Mungo would have us
believe his arrival confirmed. He tells us no more
of the lady than that she was known as the Seniora :
he had little interest in the relicts of departed
traders. Evening came and the four white men
strolled out in the cool to an adjoining village, the
property of a hospitable slaver whose barbarous
name Mungo transliterates as Jemaffoo Mamadoo.
Jemaffoo had a bullock killed in honour of their
arrival ; and while, in Mungo’s phrase, the ‘ beef
was preparing ’, Jemaffoo and his guests exchanged
smoking-room stories. The least indecorous of these
diverted Mungo considerably :
4 Many years ago (said the relator) the people of
Doomasansa (a town on the Gambia) were much
annoyed by a lion that came every night and took
away some of their cattle. By continuing his depre¬
dations, the people were at length so much enraged
that a party of them resolved to go and hunt the
51
monster. They accordingly proceeded in search of
the common enemy, which they found concealed in
a thicket ; and immediately firing at him were
lucky enough to wound him in such a manner, that,
in springing from the thicket towards the people, he
fell down among the grass and was unable to rise.
The animal, however, manifested such appearance
of vigour, that nobody cared to approach him
singly ; and a consultation was held concerning the
properest means of taking him alive ; a circum¬
stance, it was said, which, while it furnished un¬
deniable proof of their prowess, would turn out to
great advantage, it being resolved to convey him to
the coast and sell him to the Europeans. While
some persons proposed one plan, and some another,
an old man offered a scheme. This was, to strip the
roof of a house of its thatch, and to carry the bamboo
frame (the pieces of which are well secured together
by thongs), and throw it over the lion. If, in ap¬
proaching him, he should attempt to spring upon
them, they had nothing to do but to let down the
roof upon themselves, and fire at the lion through
the rafters.
‘ This proposition was approved and adopted.
The thatch was taken from the roof of a hut, and
the lion-hunters, supporting the fabric, marched
courageously to the field of battle, each person
carrying a gun in one hand, and bearing his share
of the roof on the opposite shoulder. In this manner
they approached the enemy ; but the beast had by
this time recovered his strength ; and such was the
52
fierceness of his countenance, that the hunters,
instead of proceeding any further, thought it prudent
to provide for their own safety by covering them¬
selves with the roof. Unfortunately, the lion was
too nimble for them ; for, making a spring while
the roof was setting down, both the beast and the
pursuers were caught in the same cage, and the lion
devoured them at his leisure, to the great astonish¬
ment and mortification of the people of Dooma-
sansa ; at which place it is dangerous even at this
day to tell the story, for it is become the subject of
laughter and derision in the neighbouring countries,
and nothing will enrage the inhabitants of that town
so much as desiring them to catch a lion alive.’
The tale of these Gambian Wise Men of Gotham
preceded the feast on the newly-slaughtered bullock.
Then the four went back through the paths and the
raucous silences of the African night to Jindey and
the house of the trader’s relict. It was the last night
that Mungo was to spend in the company of white
men for nearly two years.
For, after noon on the following day, the 3rd of
December, Laidley and the Ainslies drew rein and
bade Mungo goodbye. He responded with his usual
serene decorum, waved them a dignified farewell,
and then, with his six attendants at his heels,
turned and rode slowly down a forest track into the
dark obscurities of treey Africa.
53
UHere a mood of despondency came upon him,
and for a little while, riding, he thought with
a sinking heart of the lights and comforts and seemli¬
ness of Christian society. He might never see it
again, but vanish amidst these dark kingdoms as
had Houghton and many another. The mysteries
that had drawn him from Scotland looked bleak and
unfriendly a while, as he reflected that a white man
in the interior was merely < the object of curiosity or
plunder 5.
But he probably gave little sign of his feelings, and
the mood passed. About three miles on from his
parting with the white slavers a body of native
militia suddenly appeared, blocking the forest track
and halting the small caravan.
They were now in the ‘ kingdom ’ of Walli and
these were its customs officials. They informed the
caravan that they must either accompany them to
Peckaba, the capital, to present themselves to the
king of Walli, or pay customs dues on the spot.
Mungo pointed out, in Mandingo, and with a cold
reasonableness, that as his journey was not one of
traffic or commerce, there was no excuse for levying
a tax upon him as was done on slatis and such-like
merchants. Customs was unimpressed. Rapidly
sophisticated as the natives were becoming in this
region, they had not yet attained to appreciation of
54
such niceties in Scots law. They blandly retorted
that it was usual for travellers of all descriptions to
make presents to the king ; and added as an after¬
thought that without making such a present Mungo
would not be allowed to proceed. Mungo surveyed
them coolly, saw that they were in too great
numbers to be beaten off, c and withal very noisy ’.
He accordingly handed over eight shillings-worth
of tobacco, for the king’s use, and the border guard
waved him on.
At sunset they reached a village near the town of
Kootacunda. Here they lay for the night in peace.
Next morning Mungo assembled his caravan and
pushed east. In the forenoon they passed Koota¬
cunda and so came to the Walli-Woolli border.
But again, in these borderlands of fantastic nursery
nomenclature, there were customs dues to be paid.
They were then allowed to cross from inhospitable
Walli, and rested for the night at the village of
Tabajang.
Woolli was another Mandingo state, and here, as
elsewhere, the Mandingoes Mungo found divided
into two social classes, the free and the unfree, and
two religions, the Mohammedan and the followers
of the native cults. Religions and social grades
were not, however, synonymous, for Mungo gathered
that the < king ’ of Woolli was a pagan.
Mungo rested well and undisturbed in spite of the
clang of Tabajang’s name. Probably it was here
that he first met and ate the succulent kouskous.
Morning came, and Johnson and Demba assembled
55
Mungo’s effects for the next lap of the march. This
was Medina, the capital of Woolli.
They reached it at noon on the 5th of December,
this town of Arab nomenclature, the most consider¬
able native city on which Mungo had set eyes. He
rode through a gate in its high clay wall and saw a
city of some eight hundred or a thousand houses,
some clay-built, some of reeds. The wall and fence
had once been imposing structures before the house¬
wives of Medina were let loose on them : they
plucked the stakes for firewood, records Mungo.
Riding to Medina, he found the country rising about
him into gentle acclivities, a sunshine land, with
wooded hills and villaged valleys. Cotton and
tobacco patches showed bright through the greenery
with their ant-like gangs of slaves at work ; the hill¬
sides were green with maize. It was a peaceful and
fertile country, and Mungo, reaching Medina peace¬
fully, set down his careful notes on it after obtaining
a lodging in the hut of a near relation of the king.
Refreshed, he set out in the afternoon to pay his
respects to the dusky king Jatta, having first been
informed by the king’s relation that he must on no
account offer to shake hands with the king. Primed
on this fine point in Woolli etiquette, Mungo appears
to have made no faux pas, coming into the presence
of Jatta squatting on a mat in front of his door.
Around was his court. It appears to have been a
moment of relaxation. The courtiers were singing
and clapping their hands. Mungo, not misinter¬
preting this for applause, made a formal salute and,
56
with the same attitude of respect as he would have
carried before a Selkirk magistrate, informed the
king of his purpose in entering the country and his
desire to pass through it.
King Jatta was an old and kindly man who had
assisted Houghton and appears to have looked on
white men with considerable favour. He told the
young traveller in the blue coat that he had full per¬
mission to pass through Woolli ; and added the
gracious information that he would pray for the
traveller’s safety. Mungo records his graciousness
without apparent reserve. He was a king and
gracious ; that he was also a negro and a savage
did not confuse these facts in the mind of the genteel
young Scot. Hearing of the king’s promised prayer,
one of Mungo’s attendants, probably Demba, burst
into a song—some kind of hymn, Mungo gathered,
for at every pause king and courtiers beat their fore¬
heads with their hands and cried Amen !
These necessary preliminaries satisfactorily con¬
cluded by both Mungo and the blacks, Jatta and
Mungo entered into matters of business. A guide
was promised the latter through the remainder of
Woolli; and Mungo, returning to his lodging, diplo¬
matically despatched to the king an order on Dr.
Laidley for three gallons of rum. Plus the guide,
this order evoked from the benevolent ruler of
Medina a quantity of provisions for Mungo’s
caravan. It was a pleasant city and a pleasant
ruler : only once was Mungo to look upon his like
again.
57
Here white men were not unfamiliar phenomena.
But it would be different when he had passed the
borders of Woolli, as the old king took care to im¬
press on Mungo when the latter went to the palace
next morning to procure the promised guide. The
black ruler was seated in front of his tent, on a
bullock-hide, warming himself at a great fire lighted
to drive off the chills of morning ; he had been
ruminating the matter of the young man throughout
the night, and on Mungo’s arrival strongly and
benevolently advised him to give up his intended
journey. He remembered the passing of Major
Houghton, he told, and how the fact was well
known that the latter had been killed beyond the
borders of Woolli. East of Woolli, no white man
was safe.
Mungo listened politely and answered that it was
impossible for him to turn back. Jatta shrugged
and gave up the thankless task of advising the
traveller, and told him the guide would be ready in
the afternoon. There was a sad lack of efficient
time-tables at Woolli.
Two o’clock brought the guide, however, and
with some impatience Mungo again assembled his
caravan, and passing through the housewife-
despoiled fortifications of Medina, set out for Kon-
jour, a small village still in the Woolli kingdom.
Konjour was reached at five o’clock. Here
Mungo halted for the night and purchased a sheep.
It was killed by Madiboo and Tami with all the
ceremonies necessary for such an event, and Mungo,
58
deep in his notes, was presently aroused by the
sound of an angry dispute. Johnson, his servant,
and the other two blacks were quarrelling as to who
should possess the sheep’s horns. Mungo intervened
and awarded one horn to Johnson, one to the
negroes. This judgment of Solomon concluded, he
turned back to his notes, recording that these horns
were considered objects of considerable value. They
were used as wallets or sheaths for carrying written
Koranic prayers. Whether a black was a pagan or
a Mohammedan, he considered such a prayer as an
amulet of singular efficacy, guarding him against
the bites of snakes, and even (though this must have
been somewhat of a strain, upon even simple native
faith) of alligators. Writing, as Mungo noted with
young and characteristic shrewdness, is considered
a magical attribute among the unlettered, the
magic lying rather in the actual writing than in the
purport of the words written. Remote in the east
a time was waiting when he himself was to put the
fact of this superstition to good account.
He was passing through a land and villages that
about that time were producing some of the finest
examples of native wood-sculpture. But Mungo
mentions no specimens, which is curious in more
ways than one, considering how careful he was to
note each detail in ornament and furnishing. Prob¬
ably these carvings seemed to him, as to many
another, mere barbaric botchings of good wood.
For two days he marched deeper into the interior,
and leaves us no more than notes of dates and halts.
59
On the night of the 7th he reached the village of
Malla ; midday of the 8th he and his caravan
arrived at noon at the town of Kolor. Kolor was to
supply the English and several other European
languages with a new term of opprobrium of in¬
estimable value in the courtesies of political and
theological controversy. This was Mumbo Jumbo.
For outside Kolor Mungo gazed in considerable
puzzlement upon a ‘ sort of masquerade habit ’
made from the tree-bark, and hanging up empty
awaiting further employment. Questioning his
companions, he was told the uses and purposes of
the suit. It was used by the unchivalrous Mandingo
for keeping their consorts in good order and morale.
Most Mandingoes of any pretence to social rank had
more than one wife. Genteelly, Mungo observed
that the ladies are bound frequently to disagree
among themselves and disturb the peace of their
lord, and, possibly, his bed. So the wily Mandingo
had invented the ritual of Mumbo Jumbo in prefer¬
ence to the divorce court.
The outraged husband, or an agent, would hie
himself off to the forest near his village or town,
garb himself in the bark-robes of Mumbo Jumbo,
and wait till the fall of night. With the coming of
dark the natives would hear a dismal howling rise
from the depths of the trees. Then Mumbo Jumbo
himself would be seen entering the town, and making
for the town bentang. This was a large platform of
interwoven canes built round the central tree of the
village plaza, and used as the town hall and lounging-
60
place in general. Hearing Mumbo Jumbo’s ap¬
proach, the inhabitants would assemble in the half¬
darkness, men and women, the women being
excused absence on few pretexts. Then a deal of
solemn dancing and invocation would take place.
There would also be singing, Mungo informs us,
but refrains from mentioning the nature of the songs.
Probably they were unprintable. Throughout this
unau then tic jollification all the married women
would wait uneasily, casting back their minds on
such crimes of omission and commission as had
marred the connubial harmony of late. Then, near
midnight, Mumbo Jumbo would abandon prelimi¬
naries and get to business. This he did by indicating
the offender he had come to chastise. Thereon the
woman would be seized, stripped naked, tied to a
post, and vigorously flogged by the Mumbo Jumbo.
It was, in fact, a court of correction.
The unflogged women on each occasion, Mungo
notes, seemed the most vociferous in their denuncia¬
tions of the victim—a fact which might be paralleled
in the psychology of all races. The flogging would
last a considerable while till c daylight puts an end
to this indecent and unmanly revel ’.
Next day they left Kolor and held by a waterless
track through sparsely forested country to the village
of Tambacunda. Still Mungo travelled unmolested
and unhindered : the expedition was in good
fortune. But he was still not far from the coast.
Tambacunda is passed with no more than euphon¬
ious mention ; on the 10th he slept at the town of
61
Kooniakary, on the nth, near noon, he came to
Koojar. This was the last large eastwards town of
the kingdom of Woolli the hospitable. Two days’
journey beyond were the beginnings of the kingdom
of Bondou.
62
I OHe was now on the verge of country untra-
^versed by any European except the unfor¬
tunate Major Houghton. But Woolli’s last town
proved as hospitable as its first. The inhabitants
stared at the tall young man, perspiring in blue coat
and nankeen trousers, with a mixture of c curiosity
and reverence 5 and invited him to a wrestling match
at the bentang tree. Here Mungo sat and witnessed
the prowess displayed by various combatants who
had anointed themselves with the native margarine,
shea-butter, and grappled and clung and threw one
another to the music of a drum. There succeeded a
dance in which each dancer had his legs and arms
decorated with little bells, a pleasing innovation.
Mungo sat and enjoyed it all with that singular
incapacity for surprise which was his. The flare of
lights about the bentang, the tinkle of the bells, the
posturing negroes, the heat, the smells and the hum
of the insects are as missing from his account as is
any picture of himself—alien and amazing, but
unamazed, bending a dark, composed face into the
sprayings of the torchlight to watch with a cool
detachment the gesticulations and posturings.
The guide the king of Woolli had provided, far
back in Medina, was now due to return to his home.
Mungo presented him with some amber beads, and
sought out new guides who would also be water-
63
carriers. For beyond Koojar, on the two days’
journey to the borders of Bondou, was a waterless
desert. Three elephant-hunters, having at the
moment no elephants to hunt, offered their services.
Mungo, somewhat imprudently, not only engaged
them, but paid them in advance. Pleasantly com¬
posed by several draughts of very good beer, he
retired for the night.
Next morning he encountered his first example of
African perfidy. One of the elephant-hunters had
absconded, pay and all. Mungo thereon com¬
manded the other two to load their calabashes with
water, and hastily summoned his caravan, and
marched out from Koojar. He was determined not
to allow these water-carriers out of his sight. Beyond
Koojar his caravan halted Mungo, while a charm
against the dangers of the wastes was prepared by
the simple and economical means of each negro
spitting upon a stone and then hurling the stone far
down the track they were to take. Satisfied with
this propitiation of the fussy forest devils, the
caravan fell to the march again until noon. Here,
in the waste land, they came to a large tree, called
by the natives the Neema Taba, says Mungo. It was
decorated with innumerable scraps of cloth, tied on
by travellers about to cross the tundra. Mungo
sought a rational explanation for this custom,
unaware it was one spread widely across the world
by the archaic civilisation, and known even in the
reaches (and quite as irrationally) of his own far
Scotland. With a bland acquiescence in native
64
custom, he himself< suspended a handsome piece of
cloth on one of the boughs \
A well was rumoured to be near at hand. Mungo
had the asses unloaded and fed, meanwhile sending
one of the elephant-hunters to look for the well and
planning to halt the caravan beside it for the night.
The elephant-hunter returned with a blanched face :
not only was the water black with mud, but near at
hand were the marks of an encampment but
recently deserted. Bandits were undoubtedly in
the neighbourhood, his attendants impressed on
Mungo. Somewhat reluctantly, he allowed the
asses to be re-loaded and marched forward again
through the cactus-clumps.
Noon passed and the evening with its coolness
came on. Exhaustion had come before that, and,
utterly wearied, Mungo at length brought his
caravan to halt beside another watering-place.
Here the scare about bandits still held his attend¬
ants. They lay down in the pitch African night in
the middle of a cleared space, Mungo, negroes, and
asses, a gunshot from any bush. The negroes agreed
to go sentry-go in turn. Fatigued, but imperturb¬
able, Mungo slept.
Dawn awoke them, Mungo had the calabashes
hastily filled at the bandit-haunted watering-place,
and they crossed the border into the kingdom of
Bondou. Tallika was the nearest town, inhabited
chiefly by Foulahs, merchants and the like who
lived by furnishing provisions to the slave and other
caravans passing up and down from the coast to the
GN- 65 E
interior, and by the sale of elephant-ivory. Ele¬
phants were plentiful in the back-reaches of Bondou,
though Mungo himself never glimpsed them. Never¬
theless, when he told his companions how the
elephant had been elsewhere domesticated with
considerable success, they bared their teeth in wide
grins. Good liars were liked in Bondou.
About eleven o’clock on the 13th of December,
they came to Tallika, and Mungo made his way to
the hut of the king’s tax-gatherer. This individual
permitted Mungo to pass the night in his house, and
agreed to desert the tax-gathering of Tallika and
guide Mungo on the road to Fatteconda, the
capital. Mungo sat down in the sunset quiet and
wrote a letter to Laidley, and handed it to the master
of an ivory caravan bound for the coast.
They had journeyed in a somnolent peace and
contentment hitherto ; but two miles or so out
from Tallika next morning, a violent quarrel broke
out between Tami, the Kasson blacksmith, and
another individual whom Mungo neglects to intro¬
duce by name. It may have been Madiboo. They
cursed each other very hotly, the blacksmith casting
biological doubts upon his opponent’s parentage.
Thereat the opponent drew his cutlass and was
about to dispatch Tami when the others seized and
disarmed him. Mungo was moved from his cold
impartiality a moment. He informed Tami’s
opponent, with a chill disinterest, that if he con¬
tinued the quarrel, he (Mungo) would shoot him
without further ceremony. This ended the incident.
66
The caravan resumed its way, sulkily, the negroes
casting puzzled looks on the cool young man on
horseback, hitherto so mild.
They had passed from the straggling forest
country into a fertile plain. Nightfall found them
at a village, Ganado, where Mungo observed a re¬
conciliation effected between Tami and his name¬
less opponent. They exchanged presents and went
through the African equivalent of kissing again with
tears. Everyone cheered up and ate a large supper.
A straying negro minstrel approached the festal hut
and amused the company, says Mungo, with c di¬
verting stories ’, and played some sweet airs, by
blowing his breath upon a bowstring, and striking
it at the same time with a stick.
At daybreak next day, the 15th of December, the
slatis, the Serawoolli slave-merchants, parted com¬
pany with Mungo’s caravan, going their own way
south. They parted with some affection, and
prayers for Mungo’s safety. His following was now
reduced to four, plus the Tallika tax-gatherer.
Ganado passed into the early day-haze ; the sun¬
shine grew stifling as the day wore on. They
crossed a branch of the Gambia where the steep
banks were a-flower with mimosa, and blindingly
sweet with the smell of it. Mungo surveyed its
waters as his horse splashed through, and observed
a number of large mussels in the ground. The
mimosa, being inedible, he took for granted.
The noon-heat put riding out of the question for
once. They camped under the spreading boughs
67
of a large tree, resting, and ate and drank pounded
corn and milk purchased from some passing Foulah
herdsmen. Sunset brought them from the forest
to the high-walled town of Koorkarany, where Tami
had relations. Mungo resolved to halt for two days,
and explore the town.
68
I OHe was hospitably received. Koorkarany
J- ^ was a remote outpost of Islamic learning, with
a mosque and a marabout. The latter was in
charge of the municipal library, a number of
Arabic manuscripts which he showed to the traveller.
In exchange, Mungo showed him a copy of an
English-Arabic grammar he carried. The mara¬
bout, who probably had no conception of its use or
meaning, politely expressed his admiration.
Evening of the second day ended these intellectual
revels. Mungo drew together his depleted caravan
and rode out of courteous Koorkarany. Three
miles away they halted for the night at a village with
the improbable name of Dooggii, a village of plenty,
where provisions were so cheap that Mungo pur¬
chased a bullock for half-a-dozen small amber
stones. He did this with a cool calculation : the
more provisions he had, the greater the number of
laggard negro loungers who would accompany him
while those provisions lasted. And the forward
country had a reputation for bandits.
Next morning, in admiring escort of Mungo and
the remains of the bullock, a large portion of the
inhabitants of Dooggii expressed their intention of
accompanying him as far as the next village, re¬
joicing in the equally improbable name of Buggil.
They seem to have tailed off as the day wore on,
69
however, though Mungo devotes his diary for the
day to no further mention of them at all, but to a
contrivance used in the land for urging forward the
refractory ass : c They cut a forked stick, and put¬
ting the forked part into the ass’s mouth, like the bit
of a bridle, tied the two smaller parts together above
his head, leaving the lower part of the stick of suffi¬
cient length to strike against the ground if the ass
should attempt to put his head down. After this,
the ass walked along quietly and gravely enough,
taking care, after some practice, to hold his head
sufficiently high to prevent the stones or roots of
trees from striking against the end of the stick,
which experience had taught him would give a
severe shock to his teeth.’
Buggil was a miserable and miserly place. No
provisions were offered, and there was no bed in the
hut where Mungo lay down. Imperturbably as
ever, he records that the Buggili were very good at
digging wells.
Midday of the next day, the 19th, found his
caravan descending into a deep valley, and along
the bed of a dried-up river-course. The mimosa
blossoms were everywhere abundant. It must have
been pleasant riding for once. But the courteous
land of Woolli was left behind, and the white man,
though an object of curiosity, no longer one of rever¬
ence. Evening brought a village which Mungo
neglects to name, with a cold severity. Here the
natives were clad in a fine gauze, well calculated to
display the shapely thigh. This especially was the
70
case with the women : they displayed themselves in
an altogether unrestrained manner to Mungo.
Worse still, they expected a reciprocal exhibitionism.
They swarmed about the tall young alien from the
banks of the Yarrow, begging for beads and amber,
stole the buttons off Demba’s coat, tore Mungo’s
cloak, and played the devil generally. They were
proceeding to other and more intimate researches,
when Mungo tore his cloak from their grasp,
mounted his horse, and fled from the village. Even
so, a ‘ body of these harpies ’ followed him for half
a mile. His coolness had been routed for the first
time in Africa.
His caravan, probably giggling, came up, and
they rode on, still east, reaching Soobrudooka in the
evening. No shelter was offered the travellers here
in spite of the fact that Mungo (whose company,
what with the more voracious of the hangers-on,
still numbered fourteen) purchased a sheep and a
quantity of corn. A heavy dew fell in the night, as
they slept by the asses’ load, and Mungo, with
chilled bones, took the road gladly enough next day,
holding on through a country where the forests drew
back their skirts to leave wide fields of corn waving
green and fertile in the hot sun. They were nearing
the banks of the Faleme river.
Here a village hove in sight where Mungo halted
for an hour and inspected the native fishing in great
detail. Walls of stone were built in converging
fashion across the stream, causing strong currents,
and the negroes wove strong baskets of split cane
7i
(nets, in fact), which they set between the stones to
catch the fish. Small hand-nets were used to catch
a Faleme sprat, greatly esteemed as a paste. The
negroes pounded them in wooden mortars and dried
them in lumps in the sun—an odoriferous proceed¬
ing. These pemmican loaves were exported into the
distant and fishless Senegal hinterlands.
The village also discovered to Mungo an old
c Moorish shereef’, probably an Arab negro half-
breed, who told him he had seen a white man before,
not in Bondou, but eastwards in Kaarta. This
white man had been Major Houghton, and the
shereef told Mungo that Houghton had undoubtedly
perished in the country of the Moors. This en¬
thusiastic re-recounting of Houghton’s fate, every¬
where encountered, began to bore Mungo. He
presented the shereef with some sheets of paper (on
which to write charms) and resumed his journey
along the Faleme.
Next morning was the 21st of December. Mungo
could proceed up the river no further. His direction
again lay west. He hired a canoe to ferry over his
bundles, and himself rode through the stream, the
water coming as high as his knees. How his
followers crossed he makes no mention, disregarding
them, as usual, except when mention is essential to
explain his route or fortunes. Climbing up from
the Faleme, they neared Fatteconda, the capital of
Bondou. Here Mungo was invited to rest in the
house of a < respectable slati ’ ; and here, after some
account of his further adventures in Fatteconda, he
72
sets forth a minute description of Bondou in his
usual manner.
The ruling caste was the Foulah, ranking them¬
selves with the white men, Mohammedans in nearly
every case. The king himself, however, was a
pagan, though one with the Moorish name of
Almani. They were a kindly pastoral people,
leaving the trade of the country in the hands of the
Mandingoes (probably autochthones) and the Sene¬
gal Serawoollies. One of the innumerable south¬
wards extensions of the Berber peoples, they were
yet not greatly given to religious persecution of their
pagan fellow-citizens—they had no need to resort to
such methods of persuasion. Multitudes of small
schools had been established in which pagan as well
as Mohammedan children were taught to read the
Quran, and instructed generally in the religion of
the Prophet. c Many of these little schools I visited
in my progress through the country, and observed
with pleasure the great docility and submissive de¬
portment of the children, and heartily wished they
had had better instructors and a purer religion,’
observes Mungo with a Selkirk-like sententiousness,
and possibly (this being long after the days when he
rode amidst the schools and scandals of these little
kingdoms) an eye to his fellow-prigs in the reading-
public.
He had been travelling into a congeries of little
‘ kingdoms ’, sometimes at war, generally living in a
state of guarded neutrality one to the other. ‘ Bon¬
dou is bounded on the east by Bambouk ; on the
73
south-east and south by Tenda and the Simbani
Wilderness ; on the south-west by Woolli; on the
west by Foota Torra ; and on the north by Ka-
jaaga.’
Coming from the south-west, Mungo’s route was
to cross the country and strike northwards into
Kajaaga—a black kingdom, as he gathered in Fatte-
conda, not one settled by the browny men from the
north. There lived the Serawoollies, great traders
in slaves and gold.
An hour after his arrival in Fatteconda, a Foulah
messenger came from the king of Bondou requesting
Mungo’s attendance upon his majesty ‘ if I was not
too much fatigued ’. Taking Johnson, his inter¬
preter and servant, with him, Mungo set out with
the Foulah, who began to behave suspiciously,
guiding them quite out of the town and across some
cornfields. Mungo halted and asked point-blank
where they were going. Thereon the messenger
pointed to an individual squatting under a nearby
tree. It was the king of Bondou, an equally sus¬
picious soul, who was in the habit of receiving
visitors in this detached spot, and interviewing them
alone.
74
1 /L r^^ie C monarc^1 ’ beckoned, and Mungo drew
-L J^nigh. The king invited him to share his mat.
Mungo, with a polite obsequiousness, acquiesced,
and commenced to outline his travels and intentions.
Almani listened without any comment. He pro¬
bably considered Mungo a liar, for he broke in to
ask if the latter desired to purchase slaves or gold.
c Neither,’ said Mungo. The surprised king sur¬
veyed him doubtingly, and then dismissed him until
the evening, promising him a supply of provisions.
Mungo retired to his lodging with some qualms of
doubt, for he had heard of Almani’s character before
coming to Fatteconda, and how he had maltreated
and robbed the unfortunate Houghton. c As I was
now entirely in his power, I thought it best to smooth
the way by a present ; accordingly, I took with me
in the evening one canister of gunpowder, some
amber, tobacco, and my umbrella ; and, as I con¬
sidered that my bundles would inevitably be
searched, I concealed some few articles in the roof
of the hut where I lodged, and I put on my new blue
coat, in order to preserve it.’
Thus guarded and equipped, he set out for the
royal residence, a collection of mud houses sur¬
rounded by a high mud-wall. The sentry at the
gate stood armed with a musket : muskets were a
common form of tax paid by slabs passing through
75
Bondou. Inside Mungo found himself in a maze of
passages. Wherever there was an opening stood
another musket-armed sentinel. At the entrance to
the Almani’s own courtyard Johnson and the tax-
gatherer of Tallika took off their sandals, for this
was holy ground. The tax-gatherer then uplifted
his voice and called the king’s name until he was
answered from within.
They were bidden to enter. Almani sat on a mat
and took to questioning Mungo again, and with con¬
siderable suspicion, it would seem, though Houghton
surely had returned much the same answers to his
questions. He found it inconceivable that anyone
in his senses should journey through the dangers of
foreign countries merely to look on those countries
and their inhabitants. At this Mungo blandly
offered to display the contents of his packages to the
king., who would then see that he was no trader.
Somewhat taken aback, Almani took refuge in a
sulkysilence till Mungo brought forward his presents.
At first all went well. Almani showed particular
delight in the umbrella, furling and unfurling that
proof of a superior civilisation with great zest, to the
admiration (and probably the acute danger) of his
attendants. However, the presents had merely
whetted his appetite. He commenced a long and
involved address on the excellent qualities possessed
by the whites. He was particularly struck by their
immense wealth and good dispositions and fine taste
in garmenture. In fact, and alas, he wanted
Mungo’s new blue coat.
76
Mungo assessed the situation, and, as usual, took
the correct line. The command of this African king
could be no more effective than his request. Very
quietly Mungo removed his coat and laid it at the
hungry monarch’s feet.
Moved by shame or gratitude, Almani sent him
back to his hut in company with a large supply of
provisions, and directed him to return the next
morning. Mungo slept with what equanimity he
could, and with the coming of morning light again
repaired to the royal abode. Almani was in bed—
sick, he declared, £ and wished to have a little blood
taken from him ’.
Mungo acceded to his request with a dour
pleasure. He bound up one of the royal brown
arms, and advanced with his lancet. Thereat
Almani s courage suddenly went. He postponed
the operation until the afternoon, at the same time,
and somewhat ambiguously, declaring that he
already felt better. It was probable enough.
Meanwhile, he observed that his women would
very much like to see Mungo, and had him conveyed
to the court and huts c appropriated to the ladies ’,
as Mungo courteously phrases it.
They were a dozen or so in number. They seem
to have been mostly negroes, Serawoollies or Man-
dingoes, not Foulahs, black, comely, kinky and
kindly. They found Mungo a fine diversion, and
played with him as with a new toy. Politely
obsequious, he listened to them beg for amber,
physic, and blood-letting, and put them off as well
77
as he could. The whiteness of his skin and the
prominence of his handsome nose intrigued them
considerably : they advanced startling theories to
account for both. The whiteness of the skin, they
insisted, had been produced by dipping the infant
Mungo in milk ; the unsightly nose had been en¬
couraged to its present protuberance through un¬
ceasing pinching. Mungo, with probably a rapid
flight of thought to the dairy at Fowlshiels and a
picture of his mother ritually immersing him in the
precious cream, politely failed to correct the seraglio.
Instead, he flattered them basely, complimenting
them on the glossy jet of their skins and the lovely
depression of their noses. . . .
It must have been an amusing scene, the dour
Scot paying heavy compliments and the giggling
black women insisting coyly that he was a base
flatterer, a honey-mouth. Further, they insisted
that flattery was not esteemed in Bondou, and to
prove the point they loaded him with presents at
parting, a jar of honey and some fish. The harpies
of the nameless village apart, Mungo was to prove
a staunch favourite with the women of Africa.
That evening he paid a final visit to the king.
Almani and he exchanged compliments and some
small presents, and Mungo was informed (probably
in return for the blue coat, Almani s slumberous
conscience still troubled over the matter) that he
could pass out of Bondou duty-free.
78
CIt was the 22nd. Next morning Mungo
marched out his caravan, depleted in several
senses, from Fatteconda, and took the northwards
road. But the heat that day was as from the mouth
of a furnace. He halted about eleven o,clock at a
village he leaves unnamed, and determined to pass
the rest of the day and the night there. Probably,
though he makes no mention of the fact, he was
physically and mentally little at ease, what with a
fortnight s trek through the negroid kingdoms,
strange food, strange faces, the ordeal of Fatteconda’
the blank sense of lostness far from his own kind.
But his fellow-travellers were uneasy. The village
was on the boundary between Bondou and Kajaaga,
they pointed out, a place dangerous for travellers’
what of bandits and raiding-parties. It was advis¬
able to cross this waste debatable land without
further halt.
Mungo agreed coldly. With moonrise that night
they set out, the first time he had travelled abroad
in the African forest after dark. The air was waiting
and still in the deep solitude of the forest; the great
trees clustered about to watch them pass in the
moonlight, and the depths of the woods were alive
with the bowlings of wild beasts. It was Africa still
untouched by the marauding hunter armed with
the weapons of the whites. Wolves and hyenas
79
prowled the dim tracks ; they glided like shadows
from one thicket to another in the flow of light from
the great red moon. Dreams of Fowlshiels fulfilled !
Towards dawn they halted at a village and re¬
freshed themselves and their asses, then pushed on
to Joag in the black kingdom of Kajaaga, called by
the French Gallam It was Christmas Eve, but
Mungo seems to have been unmoved to the requisite
pious reflections. He saw Joag rise up, a town of
some two thousand inhabitants, walled, the walls
loop-holed for musketry. Inside that wall, he found
all the houses miniature replicas of the city—each
wall-surrounded and also loop-holed. They took
no chances in Joag.
Mungo was hospitably received and entertained
by the headman, the duti; and notes the latter
title displacing the Arabic el caid ( Alkaid ) of the
Foulah kingdom of Bondou. But Islam, negro
though the inhabitants were, had penetrated into
Kajaaga territory as well. The headman was a
Mohammedan, though an unfanatical one. Mungo
strolled out and viewed the town and its industries.
Madiboo, who had accompanied Mungo from
Pisania, comes in for mention at Joag. His father
and mother lived at the neighbouring village of
Dramanet ; and towards nightfall he led Mungo
and Tami the blacksmith over to Dramanet to look
on at a dance of welcome. Large fires had been
lighted, and the negroes of Dramanet danced with
great abandon to the music of four drums. The
dour young prig in the blue coat, so cold and kindly,
observes delightfully : The dances, however, con¬
sisted more in wanton gestures than in muscular
exertion or graceful attitudes. The ladies vied with
each other in displaying the most voluptuous move¬
ments imaginable.’
Mungo retired shocked, and walked back to Joag
in the moonlight. There, for some reason, he made
his bed on the bentang, the great platform under
the usual tree in the village plaza, not in the house
of the village duti. Probably it was too hot to sleep
indoors. Johnson and Demba slept near by. Well
after midnight Mungo was awakened by a hand
tugging at the musket which lay beside him.
Saying not a word, he himself seized the weapon
and clung grimly to it. Thereon the hopeful muske¬
teer desisted for the moment, but sat down confi¬
dently on the bentang platform, apparently to await
reinforcements or the dawn.
Shortly afterwards Madiboo and Tami the black¬
smith came hasting through the night, returning
hot-foot from the dance at Dramanet with dis¬
turbing news. This was that a party of horsemen,
ten in all, of the army of Batcheri, king of Kajaaga,
had arrived at Dramanet during the festivities and
questioned the dancers as to the whereabouts of the
white man journeying through these lands. In¬
formed that he was at Joag, this cavalcade had
ridden off in that direction, and Madiboo and the
blacksmith had cut through a nearer way to give
notice of their coming.
Even as Mungo sat up in bed to listen to this tale,
g.n. 8l
p
he and his people heard the sound of hooves. The
ten sinister horsemen rode up to the bentang, dis¬
mounted, and seated themselves, musket in hand.
The duti, very troubled, was now on the scene,
and Mungo observed to him, loudly, that he hoped
whatever the newcomers had to say they would say
in Mandingo, as he did not understand Serawoolli.
It was near dawn. The newcomers on the bentang
growled an assent. One of the negro horsemen
acted as spokesman, a short man loaded with
charms.
In a lengthy African address he informed Mungo
that he had committed a crime in entering the town
without paying duties or making a present to the
king. Wherefore all his goods were forfeited.
Further, he was to be conveyed to Maana, the king’s
town, to explain his conduct to that dignitary in
person.
As if at a signal, the rest of the horsemen stood up
around Mungo, and asked if he was ready to proceed
to Maana. A remarkably involved scene followed.
Mungo answered obsequiously that he was quite
willing to go with them, but first he must feed his
horse and settle his bills with the duti. The horse¬
men appear to have assented to this. What was
more remarkable, they made no objection to Tami
the blacksmith drawing Mungo out of hearing and
protesting in great fright against Mungo going to
Maana. For Tami was a native of the nearby state
of Kasson, and there was reason to believe that war
would soon break out between that principality and
82
Kajaaga. Discovered as an alien enemy in the
country, as he assuredly would be discovered by the
prying royal guards at Maana, Tami would be
enslaved and lose all the fruits of his four years work
at the coast.
Mungo returned to the bentang and laid Tami’s
case diplomatically before the horsemen, saying
merely that the blacksmith was a native of a dis¬
tant country, and entirely unconnected with him
(Mungo). He should therefore be allowed to stay
in Joag.
More arguing took place as the African day
brightened over the stilled curious town. The
horsemen insisted that Tami also should go to
Maana. Mungo insisted that he should not. To
confirm this opinion, he drew aside the duti arid
asked his advice. That magistrate, ill at ease, was
nevertheless friendly to Mungo and decidedly of
the opinion that he should not go to Maana if he
could possibly help it. The king of Kajaaga had a
poor reputation among his subjects.
Back to the bentang again went Mungo, and had
a respectful speech addressed to the leader of the
ten horsemen, pointing out that he had sinned un¬
wittingly, that he did not wish to go to Maana,
but that he was now ready to pay the customs
dues.
He handed to their leader the five drachms of gold
presented to him by Almani of Bondou. But
hereon the horsemen lost patience. They seized
Mungo’s baggage, tore it open, rifled it of what con-
83
tents they fancied, and departed, loaded with booty
and half of Mungo’s possessions.
He was now in very desperate straits. He had
nothing left to trade for food in his long journey in
search of the elusive Niger but a few beads and
some amber. Here in Joag he dare not produce
them, for word that he still had such treasures would
undoubtedly reach the ears of the rapacious king or
his horsemen. His black attendants he found very
thoroughly frightened. They begged him to turn
back, while Tami the blacksmith throughout the
day tried as well as he might to hide himself from
the gaze of the Kajaagans. The sun climbed and
the heat of noon smote down on the hot platform
where Mungo sat hungry, chewing a dry straw for
lack of dinner, and revolving through his mind
plans for pushing on with the coming of night. As
the day waned hungrily his situation appeared the
more desperate, but he faced it coolly enough.
There would be no turning back.
And then a romantic incident of kindliness took
place, the first of many in the wild lands he was
traversing. An old woman slave passing by the
bentang with a basketful of groundnuts stopped
and asked Mungo if he had had any food. He
thought she was teasing him and made no answer,
but Demba, his slave, answered that he had not :
the white man had been robbed of all his goods by
the king’s horsemen. Thereon the slave presented
Mungo with several handfuls of the precious nuts,
and went on her way, leaving him for a moment
84
awkward enough, suddenly very near tears at that
unexpected kindness, but already seeking to orient
the act into priggish phrases that would leave him
unmoved.
He ate the nuts, perhaps shared them with the
others who sat hungry and hot on the platform, and
then fortune turned her wheel yet another point.
Kasson, the blacksmith’s native country, lay east¬
ward of Kajaaga, not a Serawoolli but a Man-
dingo land. It was ruled by one Demba Sego Jalla,
and this potentate had despatched his nephew, of
the same name, to attempt to settle the disputes
which were bringing the two countries to the verge
of war. The young African diplomat had met
with no success in his mission. He had turned to
ride home when he heard of the white man at Joag.
And here he now was before the bentang platform,
offering his services to guide Mungo out of un¬
friendly Kajaaga into friendly Kasson.
They set out next morning, December the 27th,
Mungo riding in the midst of a numerous company,
in his second-best blue suit, impoverished, uncertain
of the future, but with at least temporary friends.
Beyond Joag Johnson insisted on sacrificing a white
cock, not to Aesculapius, but to the tree-spirits : he
bound the chicken to a tree and left it there. Mungo
priggishly admired his piety, but £ laughed at his
folly’.
They were passing through the healthiest and
most fertile country that Mungo had yet entered.
The forests towered green and tremendous on the
85
high lands, but the valleys were cultivated and
fertile, the air was clear and sweet, warmed and yet
drained by the windings of the Senegal river. Hills
towered on the skyline, blue-painted : in the
valleys the mimosa were in bloom. And through
those valleys the son of a peasant from the valley of
the Yarrow rode by the side of a black noble ex¬
changing genteel courtesies.
At noon they came on the town of Gungadi, with
a mosque that was turreted—t on the pinnacles of
which were placed six ostrich eggs ’. Evening
brought in sight the wide flow of the Senegal river
through a lush countryside. They halted for the
night in sight of that cool torrent, and next morning
marched up the river bank to the village of Sayee,
below a great cataract. The spray and the thunder
of it filled the air.
Across the river was the country of Kasson.
Mungo’s company halted and yelled and fired their
muskets till a canoe was paddled across the Senegal
to take them from Kajaaga’s inhospitable shores.
86
I /T There was trouble in crossing the Senegal.
J- ^The horses were seized and hurled over a
cliff in a fashion which the young Scotsman found
extraordinary enough. Below, in the water, other
negroes urged them forward. The asses led Mungo’s
convoy two hours’ wet chase to and fro the banks.
Mungo was not amused.
Finally, after numerous ferryings, the original and
apparently only canoe returned for Mungo and
Demba Sego, that hospitable diplomat. Nearing
his native shores, unfortunately, his diplomacy was
wearing thin. Scarcely was the canoe launched
than he commenced to investigate an article of
Mungo’s luggage, and in his eagerness to apprise
himself of the treasures in a tin box overset the
canoe. Wet, dripping, and Mungo politely mur¬
derous, they returned to the shore, re-embarked,
and crossed into Kasson.
No sooner were they landed than the egregious
Demba Sego addressed a short speech to Mungo,
pointing out the benefits the latter had incurred
from his Kasson escort, and hoping that these would
be repaid by a handsome present. Mungo accepted
the situation—Kajaaga to Kasson, devil to deep sea
—coolly enough : the Senegal dip had reinforced
his natural clear-eyed appraisal of things. Robbed
though he had been at Joag, he must consent to be
87
robbed anew. He handed over fourteen shillings-
worth of amber and some tobacco ; Demba Sego
accepted the present with apparent contentment and
without any shame. Then they re-aligned their
damp and dripping caravan and wound off into the
interior of the new ‘ kingdom
The nearest town in Kasson was Teesee, unwalled
but for a clay castle in which abode its headman, an
elderly Mandingo negro bearing the flippant name
of Tiggity Sego. Besides being the brother of the
king, who dwelt at the distant capital of Kooniakary,
this dignitary was the father of the astute Demba
Sego. The night of the day that they forded the
Senegal from Kajaaga, Mungo and his company
reached Teesee, and next morning Demba Sego
presented Mungo to his father. In the short parley
that ensued Mungo explained his reasons for tra¬
versing the country, and, as usual, was considered
a liar. Tiggity, however, made no other remark
than that Mungo would have to visit the king in
Kooniakary before quitting the kingdom. Mungo,
dourly surprised at being left unrobbed, regarded
the elderly headman with premature approval, and
returned to his lodging.
That afternoon, driven to it by extremes that are
left unrelated, one of Tiggity’s slaves fled into the
bush. A hue and cry was raised in pursuit. Demba
Sego came and begged the use of Mungo’s horse for
the hunt. Mungo consented readily, and looked on
coolly enough at the return of the slave, who was
scourged and manacled. By placating Demba Sego
88
he hoped to be allowed to proceed swiftly through
the country.
He was mistaken. For eight days he wandered
the streets of Teesee, watching the play of native
life, listening to native tales, noting down this and
that curiosity of conduct or ethic. For Demba
Sego, once having mounted Mungo’s horse, had
taken more than a fancy to that animal and had
ridden off on it on a mission to a northerly land,
Gadumah, inhabited by ‘ Moors ’. Mungo curbed
his patience as well as he might; ate the strange and
not over-clean foods of Teesee ; noted that the
women of the town were never permitted to eat
eggs ; meditated at some length upon this fact, with
that owlishness of which only a Scotsman is capable ;
attended a court-case where a Mohammedan priest
was tried and found guilty of amorous intercourse with
the wife of a young negro ; and longed for the return
of his horse. It was advancing into the New Year of
1796. He had been over a month on the road.
War and rumour of war was all over this congeries
of little kingdoms that fringed the Senegal. Teesee
expected to be attacked by the ‘ Moors ’ of Gadu¬
mah : it was a place half-pagan. Though unwalled,
Tiggity Sego was preparing it for a siege, laying up
quantities of provisions brought in from the sur¬
rounding country. Mungo wandered out of the
town on the 4th to watch one of these siege-trains
entering Teesee, complete with musicians. Still
there was no return of Demba Sego or his horse.
But the following day there was a curious happen-
89
ing throwing some light on the state of affairs in
these lands. An ‘ embassy ’ arrived from Almani
Abdulkadder, ‘ king ’ of Foota Torra, a north¬
westwards country which Mungo’s march had
avoided. It was Islam girt up, and presented
Teesee with an ultimatum : either the inhabitants
must publicly profess the Mohammedan religion en
masse or Foota Torra would side with Kajaaga in
the coming war.
After some consultation, the inhabitants of Teesee
announced their unanimous and complete con¬
version to the tenets of Islam militant. Eleven
prayers according to the Mohammedan rite were
offered up by the inhabitants. Mungo looked on
with a cold interest, his mind on his horse and the
Niger.
Three days later Demba Sego returned. Mungo
reclaimed his jaded mount and prepared to set out
for the capital, Kooniakary. He laid this plan
before Tiggity. That rubber-like ancient suddenly
proved recalcitrant. What was Mungo’s haste ?
And what small present was he to receive in return
for the hospitality extended to the stranger in
Teesee ?
Mungo retired to sleep upon this question. Hardly
was he awake next morning when Tiggity’s son and
a search party arrived to collect the ‘present’.
Knowing that resistance was hopeless, Mungo was
not unprepared, though as coolly polite as ever. He
offered Demba Sego another fourteen shillings-worth
of amber and ten shillings-worth of tobacco. The
90
young negro took the presents, surveyed them very
coolly, and then laid them down. Was this all ?
Thereon he and his party flung themselves upon
the luggage of Mungo and his servants, gutted the
bundles, gathered up about half of the contents, and
departed, laden and laughing. Plus the similar
robbery that had taken place in Kajaaga, three
quarters of Mungo’s original luggage had now
disappeared.
91
There was no help for it. Mungo surveyed
1 i his littered luggage, assayed the loss, and
observed his attendants exceedingly dispirited.
Coolly, he purchased a sheep, had it killed and
roasted, and watched the blacks recover, as Africans
and Scotsmen are apt to do after a good meal. Then
he lay down with determination to quit Teesee at
daybreak on the morrow.
He did so, without opposition. It is one of the
most remarkable features of his journey, this habit
of constantly entering towns without opposition,
being there abused or maltreated, and then allowed
to depart, not only without opposition but appar¬
ently to the completest indifference of his enemies of
church and state. Teesee slept. Mungo’s men rode
and plodded forward through rugged country. Hills
rose ; about midday from a rise Mungo halted and
looked at the far hills that surrounded Kooniakary.
The record sinks into notes of travel and halt,
halt and travel, for over two days. They crossed
another tributary of the Senegal, passed yet another
Medina (for once Kasson had been a country held
by the Foulahs, those Arab half-breeds), and so came
in mid-afternoon of the second day in sight of the
village of Jumbo. This was the native village of
Tami the blacksmith from which he had been
absent at the coast for four long years.
Tami had an uproarious welcome from his fellow-
townsmen, Mungo watching with a close curiosity,
and, over one incident, with one of those sudden
flashes of understanding that are as lightning-
flashes in the drabness of his record. This was the
meeting of Tami and his mother.
‘ The blacksmith’s aged mother was led forth,
leaning upon a staff. Everyone made way for her ;
and she stretched out her hand to bid her son
welcome. Being totally blind, she stroked his hands,
arms, and face with great care, and seemed highly
delighted that her latter days were blessed by his
return, and that her ears once more heard the
music of his voice. From this interview I was fully
convinced, that whatever difference there is between
the negro and European in the conformation of the
nose and the colour of the skin, there is none in the
genuine sympathies and characteristic feelings of
our common nature.’
Mungo had sat down in the shade of a hut and
for a while was completely unobserved by the re¬
joicing throng around Tami. That African Ulysses
had launched into telling the tale of his adventures
far from Kasson in the strange lands of the Gambia,
and of his hectic return from there, greatly assisted
by a white traveller. s And there he is,’ concluded
Tami dramatically, pointing to the place where
Mungo sat.
They stared at Mungo as though he had dropped
from the clouds. Jumbo had never seen a white
man before. The woman and children drew away
93
open-mouthed : indeed, for a long while the children
would not be comforted whenever the young Scot
turned his eyes upon them, but buried their faces
in the places where their mothers, if Christians,
would have worn petticoats, and wailed loudly.
Fortunately, the adults soon recovered from their
surprise, and came pawing and rejoicing around
Mungo. He received the attentions of the black
half-naked villagers with his usual cool politeness.
Jumbo feasted him and the blacksmith far into
that night, the woods re-echoing to the songs for the
exile’s return. Tami probably drank too much, as
the feast lasted far into the next day. Somewhere
in the course of it he declared his undying devotion
to Mungo and his intention not to abandon him
until he (Mungo) had reached Kooniakary at least.
Mungo received this declaration of alcoholic regard
with his usual placid unsurprise, and prepared to
march next day.
This day was the 14th of January. With Tami,
Madiboo, Johnson and Demba, he journeyed south¬
wards through the woods to a village called Soolo.
Here lived a slati who was in debt to Laidley, in
distant Pisania, to the value of five slaves. Mungo
had been entrusted to collect the debt. In spite of
this fact, the slaver received him hospitably, and
was still entertaining him when Mungo was apprised
of the fact that the Kasson government had not lost
interest in his movements.
A party of horse appeared before the hut of the
slave-merchant, led by the king’s second son, one
94
Sambo Sego. They demanded in some heat why
Mungo delayed in arriving at Kooniakary.
Apprehensive of darker things awaiting him on
the morrow, Mungo reassembled his caravan and
set out with this new escort.
They passed through the hills that guarded
Kooniakary, coming to it an hour after dark. It
was a great sprawling waste of huts, this capital, and
into one of these Mungo stumbled sleepily, the hut
of Sambo Sego. There, as usual not undressing,
he lay down and slept, wondering if the head of the
Sego family would prove as unpleasant as his
relatives.
He was agreeably disappointed when next morn¬
ing brought an interview with the king, sitting upon
a mat in the large royal hut. Demba Sego Jalla
was about sixty years of age, and had treated
Houghton with great kindliness when that unlucky
traveller passed through his capital. He told
Mungo, yet again, that Houghton had been mur¬
dered by the Moors : the name was beginning to
have an ominous sound in Mungo’s ears. Making
no claim on Mungo’s meagre belongings (he had
not yet secured the price of the Laidley slaves from
the slati of Soolo), the king dismissed him with the
present of a large white bullock, a particular mark
of favour. Mungo prepared to march eastwards as
soon as possible.
But a new obstacle arose to his plans. Apart from
the impending war between Kajaaga and Kasson,
news spread about that Kaarta, the kingdom to the
95
east through which Mungo proposed to travel in his
search for the Niger, was soon to be invaded by the
forces of the great country of Bambarra, a negro
principality still more deeply in the interior. Mungo
would find himself involved in the marching and
counter-marching of the tribesmen. Making en¬
quiries, he determined to strike directly northwards,
through the country of Fooladoo, the original home
of the Foulahs, and prosecute his search by march¬
ing along the northern border of war-threatened
The king sent word that Mungo might take that
route if he chose, but that he (the king) could supply
him with no guide if he did, as there was a treaty
between Kaarta and Kasson by which all eastwards
travellers passing through Kasson were sent forward
to undergo the customs dues of Kaarta. Mungo
decided that immunity from war in Kaarta would
not be compensation for the fact of being left without
a guide to the borders of Fooladoo. Accordingly,
war or no war, he determined to hold on through
troubled Kaarta as soon as definite news of the state
of affairs in that country reached him.
He retired to Soolo, to the hospitality of the slave-
trader, to writing up his notes and to strolling about
the rich fertile lands that interwove with the hills
round Kooniakary. Those hills above Soolo were
pitted with caves where wild beasts laired by day
and from which by night they came howling forth
to prowl the huts of Soolo. One night Mungo was
awakened by the sound of a wolf-raid on the village
96
cattle-kraal. The beasts were ultimately frightened
off, but not before they had killed five of the cattle.
There were other wolves. Africa spoke. Africa
gossiped. The news spread about that the white
traveller had received great sums from the slave-
slati. One morning the unpleasing Sambo Sego
arrived with his horsemen to demand from Mungo
half of the immense sums paid to him by the slave-
trader. This money, he said, was the king’s right.
Probably his father was unaware of the raid, but
Mungo was only too well acquainted by this time
with the loose and indefinite authority carried by the
various members of an African royal family. He
prepared to part with half of the sum already
received from the slave-trader.
His meekness seems to have infuriated that indi¬
vidual. He intervened, and forced upon Sambo
Sego a compromise—thirty-two shillings-worth of
various kinds of European goods and a 4 donation ’
of powder and ball. Mungo comments on the entire
transaction without either abuse of Sambo or praise
of the slave-merchant. His chronicles meticulously
lack abuse.
It was the ist of February before messengers
brought to Soolo news that the war had not yet
commenced between Kaarta and Bambarra. Pos¬
sibly Mungo might succeed in penetrating through
the former country before the great Bambarran
army invaded it.
Mungo made hurried preparations to depart on
the attempt, and on February the 3rd took the east-
g.n. gy G
wards tracks through the hot rugged country, bid¬
ding farewell to Tami the blacksmith, who probably
loved him (though Mungo does not know that
word). It was tough travelling, by a rocky track
through low hills in the burning air. Rightwards
ran the river Krieko, a tributary of the Senegal. In
front walked the two guides provided Mungo by the
king ; behind came Mungo on horseback, browner
and spare and with worn clothes and cool look, and
behind him, with their asses, Demba and Johnson.
It was two months since they had left the coast, and
still the rumour of the Niger was distant.
98
“I QThey were nearing the borders of Kaarta, a
-L Ofact made evident by the stream of fugitives
pouring into Kasson. Bambarra was expected, as
usual, to win in the coming war. On the afternoon
of the 4th of February they came to a large village,
Kimo, ruled by one Madi Konko, the eastwards
captain of the Kasson lands. Here the Kasson
guides returned, amid the streaming of fugitives from
Kaarta into Kasson, to take part in Kasson’s war
with Kajaaga. Probably the comparative ease of
Mungo’s passage through the hilly grounds around
Kimo was due to the fact that the inhabitants were
distracted with news of the coming hostilities.
Madi Konko, of the interesting name, was prevailed
upon, after three days, to provide Mungo with one
of his sons as a guide. Probably he cursed him as a
nuisance and got rid of him gladly. Mungo set out
again across rough and stony country, still holding
by the banks of the Krieko.
Rightwards sprawled the many-villaged valleys
between the hills that separated Kasson and
Kaarta. Over those hills, as the afternoon of the
8th of February wore to evening, came further
streamings of fugitives from threatened Kaarta.
The negroes were flying westwards with goods and
families and such-like effects, and Mungo spent
many hours threading their flight. South-east,
99
very distant in the glare of the sun next day, rose
the hills of Fooladoo.
It was the gth of February before the caravan
passed into Kaarta, descending a rocky precipice
into the bed of a dried-up stream which Mungo
refers to as a c romantic glen putting it to com¬
parison with the vales of his Border minstrelsy.
The trees met overhead for long distances in
tenebrous tunnels and they travelled in cool shade,
undisturbed and pleased. Mungo removed his
beaver tile and wiped a tall damp forehead. At
the foot of the river-course the trees drew back and
they were on the verge of a barren waste separating
the two kingdoms.
They crossed it, stopping at a water-hole where
some shepherds dwelt in great affluence, with such
store of the wealth of this world that they seldom,
says Mungo, asked any payment for the provisions
they gave to travellers. News of the invasion had
left them undisturbed. They fed the Scot and his
slave and servant and Madiboo, and watched them
ride out of their lives, into Kaarta’s border town of
Feesurah.
Here Mungo, obtaining lodgings, but apparently
making no official contacts, prepared to halt for a
day the while his various grimy changes of under¬
linen were washed—had washed from them the
stains and sweats of two months, the grime and
smoke of the fires and moulds of Bondou, Kajaaga,
Kasson. Mungo rested, trying to learn what was
happening in the eastwards country. He arranged
100
for his landlord, a negro who had cheerfully em¬
braced the full tenets of the Mohammedan religion
and at the same time kept faithfully to a full observ¬
ance of the pagan rites, to act as guide next day.
In the morning, however, this much-begodded
black demanded from Mungo such an exorbitant
sum for the lodging of the latter and his companions
that the Scot point-blank refused payment. There
were certain limits in money-matters—at least so
far as private robbers, apart from official ones, were
concerned.
Surprisingly, Mungo’s attendants failed their
master very completely, threatening, both Demba
and Johnson, to abandon him to his fate unless he
settled matters with the landlord. This is a
mysterious moment in Mungo’s career, for fear of
hostilities in the future could have had no just
pressure upon his black companions at the moment.
Possibly they were leagued with the landlord.
Mungo, assessing things again with cool wisdom,
saw there was no help for it. He overpaid the
landlord by making him a present of a blanket—it
seems to have been Mungo’s only blanket—and
took the road for Kemmoo, Kaarta’s capital.
But outside his native town of Feesurah the land¬
lord insisted on halting and going through a
bewildering amount of ceremonies, Mohammedan
and pagan, to ensure their safety on the road. He
whistled and prayed extensively, the while Mungo
regarded him in some doubt, suspecting that he was
summoning fellow-bandits to the robbery of the
101
white man. No bandits appeared, however, and the
landlord at length declared that the way was now
safe and fully sanctified.
They pressed forward through trackless cultivated
lands with deserted villages : the inhabitants had
fled to Kasson. Sunset brought them to the village
of Karankalla, and, before lying down to rest in one
of its huts, Mungo looked on the extensive ruins of
the place, plundered and burned by the army of
Bambarra nearly four years before.
Kemmoo was but a short day’s journey from
Karankalla, and for once Mungo took the road
easily. He and his attendants wandered from the
path as the day rose, and picked such fruits and corn
as the fleeing inhabitants had left behind. Mungo
wandered far from his companions, and at last lost
them. He rode his horse up a rise to look about him,
and then encountered a ludicrous adventure.
Two negroes on horseback came galloping
through the bushes, halted at sight of him, stared
appalled. Mungo urged forward his horse towards
them. At that one of the horsemen, casting on him
a look of incredulous disgust, rode off at breakneck
speed ; the other, overcome by this first gaze upon
the full horror of a white man’s countenance,
covered his eyes with his hands and burst into
prayer. Praying, and still covering his eyes, he
rode slowly away.
A mile to the east, however, he and the other fell
in with Mungo’s attendants and told them of the
hideous apparition they had encountered, a devil
102
with a ghostly appearance who had descended from
the sky in a cold blast of wind. Mungo’s cold look,
his mask from Fowlshiels, had summoned up an
appropriate African myth to account for it.
At noon, collecting his attendants, Mungo rode
across a two-mile plain which had been cleared of
wood and scrub as a measure of defence. Midway
on this plain squatted Kemmoo. Mungo entered it
through a staring throng which appears to have
overcome its revulsion and turned it into curiosity.
Mungo lodged in a hut by the king’s orders ; it was
found impossible to keep out the incredulous
inhabitants. Thirteen times the hut filled and
cleared as successive crowds entered to gaze upon
the blue coat and black tile of Mungo, that horrific
apparition from the banks of the Yarrow. Then
the king’s messenger came and led Mungo into the
royal presence, through twisting lanes of huts and
courts high-piled with fodder in preparation for the
siege by the Bambarran army.
This king had the prepossessing name of Daisy
Koorabarri. Daisy, however (which modern phil¬
ologists would transliterate unhumorously as Desi),
was a title, though this Mungo learned later. He
squatted throughout the reception on a bank of
earth, clad in a leopard-skin, his household about
him, arrayed, conjoint, warriors to the right, women
and children to the left. The Daisy was an unusual
man. He heard Mungo’s story of the object of his
travels and did not believe him a liar !
He is an attractive figure ; one would like to hear
103
more of him. But Mungo, as usual, was concerned
only with the king, not the individual. From him
he learned that all communications between Kaarta
and Bambarra were now over. Mansong, king of
Bambarra, was already at the head of his army,
marching up from Fooladoo to invade Kaarta :
going towards Bambarra Mungo would undoubtedly
be robbed or slaughtered as a spy of the Kaartans.
The Daisy advised Mungo to return to Kasson and
wait a more favourable opportunity for pushing
forward on his search. He did not wish the white
men to say that one of their number had been
murdered in his country.
This scrupulousness of a native chief in the remote
interior, with little to fear from white powers, and
himself at the moment engaged in war with a
powerful neighbour, reads as surprisingly now as
perhaps it felt to Mungo a hundred and forty years
ago. Yet not for a moment did he think of taking
the Daisy’s advice. He had made little or no
progress in his exploration as yet. To rest even a
little while in Kasson would be fatal : the hot
season was approaching and after it the dreaded
rains. If possible he must have reached the Niger
and traced at least a part of its course and turned
about and reached the coast again before the
coming of those rains.
He thanked the Daisy and declined his advice.
If the latter could not give him a guide into
Bambarra, could he at least provide him a guide as
near as possible to its hostile frontiers ?
104
Koorabarri brooded upon the matter, a kindly
ruler vexed by war and greater matters, but still
willing to help this freakish traveller. One route
remained open, he said—from Kaarta into the
kingdom of Ludamar, a principality of the c Moors
Mungo might take that, and have a guide ; but it
was a route by no means free from danger.
Mungo thanked him : he would journey into
Ludamar.
They fell to lighter conversation then, the Daisy
asking how the riverine states had treated him in
his journey up from Gambia ; and, doubtlessly
moved to the joke by Mungo’s solemn countenance,
feigned to believe him a raiding slaver who would
return to the coast with a great train of captives !
No doubt the court grinned suitably.
But the interlude was brief. A messenger arrived
with a foam-spattered horse and disturbing news.
The Bambarran army had marched through
Fooladoo and was on the road to Kaarta.
Mungo returned through the town to his lodging
—a town much be-mosqued and crowded with the
Kaartan army, negroes with great cutlasses, with
muskets, with antique weapons long ante-dating
both. The Daisy sent Mungo a sheep for his supper,
and while they dressed it the evening prayers were
announced from the mosques not by the call of a
muezzin but by blowing a wailing blast through
great horns made of elephants’ tusks—a melodious
sound, melancholy and strangely close to the sound
made by the human voice. So dusk came down
105
over waiting Kemmoo, waiting under the threat of
invasion, and with Mungo’s strange apparition
forgotten.
He slept, woke early next morning, and sent his
horse-pistols and holsters to the king as a present.
Weapons he had found of little use in his travels :
his was long before the day of the native-defying
explorer in an armoured tank.
In return, just as morning came on Kemmoo, the
Daisy sent back an escort of eight horsemen for
Mungo. Shortly afterwards three of the Daisy’s
sons appeared, at the head of a cavalcade of two
hundred, and undertook to see the traveller on his
way. He left the town in triumph.
It was February the 13th. Evening brought the
village of Marina. The king’s sons had returned
with their cavalcade and left Mungo with his eight
guides. They were hardly of the quality of their
master. At night robbers broke into the hut where
Mungo’s baggage was bestowed and stole clothes,
beads and amber. In the morning Mungo dis¬
covered the theft and reported it to the Kaartan
guides. They made no investigations and no
enquiries. Probably they themselves were the
thieves.
Mungo accepted the situation, and, having
exhausted the best part of the morning already,
relinquished the argument and urged his laggard
escort and attendants on the trackless road to the
Niger again.
He was in Lotus-land, though he had not known
106
it. In mid-afternoon his armed escort saw a couple
of negroes squatting amid the bushes at a distance,
and instantly presumed the squatters were runaway
slaves. Forthwith the escort cocked muskets and
rode at full speed in the direction of the negroes, ex¬
pecting them to turn tail and flee. They did no such
thing. Instead, rising at their leisure, they picked
up their bows, strung them and affixed each a couple
of arrows betwixt their teeth in reserve. Somewhat
dashed, the escort halted and growled questions.
The imperturbable negroes replied that they were
gathering tomberongs—they were gathering the berries
of the Rhamnus lotus—lotus fruit in Kaarta !
Mungo rode nearer and inspected the negroes’
baskets. They were filled with yellow-coloured
berries c of delicious taste ’. An agreeable drink was
made of them. And that was all. Lotus-land was
a hot, prickly, active and altogether degenerate
land from the sleepy afternoon of contentment and
myth.
107
“I r\That evening half-a-dozen of the guides
-L s turned back. In the afternoon of the
following day Mungo’s caravan came to a town
called Funingkedy, where the inhabitants, viewing
the travellers from afar, took alarm at sight of the
turban which one of the Kaartans wore. They
imagined that a troop of Moorish bandits was
approaching. But Mungo, whatever else he looked,
had no resemblance to any conceivable bandit,
and the alarm quieted away.
He slept that night at the house of a Gambia
slave-trader, in his usual contentment with such
company.
The road to Jarra, the Ludamar border town,
was infested with bandits. Mungo waited in the
town till a considerable body of travellers might set
out for that centre. Funingkedy was meantime in
a state of considerable woe and confusion. People
of property were fleeing to Ludamar to escape the
effects of the war : fled, their own effects, in the
shape of cattle, were being impounded by raiding
‘ Moors ’ from the very country to which they had
fled. Mungo himself from the walls of Funingkedy
on the afternoon of the 16th was witness of one of
these raids, and the terror in which the 4 Moors ’
were held. Five horsemen were observed driving
the town’s cattle-herds close to the wells outside the
108
walls. There, very coolly, they selected sixteen of
the best, and drove them away across the border
at full gallop.
None of the inhabitants made any show of
resistance, except one young negro outside the town.
Him the Moors shot from his horse, and rode on.
Funingkedy’s single hero was brought within the
walls, and Mungo asked to attend him. He found
that a musket-ball had passed through the young
negro’s leg below the knee, fracturing both bones.
In the medical science of Mungo’s day there was
little hope for such a case. Nevertheless, possibly
with cold qualms at the result, Mungo proposed
that he operate and cut off the young man’s leg
above the knee.
Funingkedy greeted the proposal with horror.
This white-faced stranger was evidently worse than
a bandit. He delighted in deliberate torture. The
young man was hastily removed from his care and
consigned to that of some Mohammedan ‘ priests ’.
These, seeing that he would not recover, and that
he was a pagan, very practically set to equipping
the dying boy for the accidents and ferocities of the
next world as a slight change to the accidents and
ferocities of this. Mungo stood by and watched
while a c priest ’ whispered and whispered in the
dying youth’s ear, commanding him to repeat the
whisper. This at last he was able to do, crying,
‘ There is no God but God, and Mohammed is his
Prophet.’ He died that evening.
Another idle day passed. But by nightfall of the
109
17th a caravan of thirty people had been drawn
together to travel into Ludamar. It was resolved
to set out at night, to evade the prowling bands of
thieves on the roads. Till midnight travel they did
at great speed and in great fright, when they halted
at a nameless village where none of Mungo’s
fellow-travellers could sleep because of the cold.
The thermometer was at 68 degrees.
At daybreak on the 18th of February, 17965
Mungo crossed the border of Kaarta and entered
the Moorish kingdom of Ludamar, where unpre¬
cedented tribulations were to beset his search for the
Niger. Of the Kaartan-Bambarran war that arose
behind him he has left the most interesting account
in his own words :
‘ This war, which desolated Kaarta soon after I had
left that kingdom, and spread terror into many of the
neighbouring states, arose in the following manner. A
few bullocks belonging to a frontier village of Bambarra
having been stolen by a party of Moors, were sold to the
Booty, or chief man of a town in Kaarta. The villagers
claimed their cattle, and being refused satisfaction, com¬
plained of the Booty to their sovereign, Mansong, king of
Bambarra, who probably beheld with an eye of jealousy
the growing prosperity of Kaarta, and availed himself of
this incident to declare hostilities against that kingdom.
4 With this view he sent a messenger and a party of
horsemen to Baisy, king of Kaarta, to inform him that the
king of Bambarra, with nine thousand men, would visit
Kemmoo in the course of the dry season ; and to desire
that he (Baisy) would direct his slaves to sweep the
houses, and have everything ready for their accommoda-
110
tion. The messenger concluded this insulting notification
by presenting the king with a pair of iron sandals ; at the
same time adding, that “ until such times as Daisy had
worn out these sandals in his flight, he should never be
secure from the arrows of Bambarra”.
‘ Daisy, having consulted with his chief men about the
best means of repelling so formidable an enemy, returned
an answer of defiance, and made a Bushreen write in
Arabic, upon a piece of thin board, a sort of proclamation,
which was suspended to a tree in the public square ; and
a number of aged men were sent to different places to
explain it to the common people. This proclamation
called upon all the friends of Daisy to join him immedi¬
ately ; but to such as had no arms, or were afraid to enter
into the war, permission was given to retire into any of
the neighbouring kingdoms ; and it was added, that pro¬
vided they observed a strict neutrality, they should always
be welcome to return to their former habitations. If, how¬
ever, they took any active part against the Kaartans, they
had then “ broken the key of their huts, and could never
afterwards enter the door ”. Such was the expression.
‘ This proclamation was very generally applauded ; but
many of the Kaartans, and amongst others the powerful
tribes of Jower and Kakaroo, availing themselves of the
indulgent clause, retired from Daisy’s dominions, and took
refuge in Ludamar and Kasson. By means of these deser¬
tions, Daisy’s army was not so numerous as might have
been expected ; and when I was at Kemmoo, the whole
number of effective men, according to report, did not
exceed four thousand ; but they were men of spirit and
enterprise, and could be depended on.
‘ On the 22nd of February (four days after my arrival
at Jarra), Mansong, with his army, advanced towards
Kemmoo ; and Daisy, without hazarding a battle, retired
to Joko, a town to the north-west of Kemmoo, where he
111
remained three days, and then took refuge in a strong town
called Gedingooma, situated in the hilly country, and
surrounded with high walls of stone. When Daisy de¬
parted from Joko, his sons refused to follow him, alleging
that “ the singing men would publish their disgrace, as
soon as it should be known that Daisy and his family had
fled from Joko without firing a gun They were there¬
fore left behind, with a number of horsemen, to defend
Joko ; but, after many skirmishes, they were totally de¬
feated, and one of Daisy’s sons taken prisoner; the re¬
mainder fled to Gedingooma, which Daisy had stored
with provisions, and where he determined to make his
final stand.
‘ Mansong, finding that Daisy was determined to avoid
a pitched battle, placed a strong force at Joko to watch his
motions ; and, separating the remainder of his army into
small detachments, ordered them to overrun the country,
and seize upon the inhabitants before they had time to
escape. These orders were executed with such prompti¬
tude, that in a few days the whole kingdom of Kaarta
became a scene of desolation. Most of the poor inhabi¬
tants of the different towns and villages being surprised in
the night, fell an easy prey ; and their corn, and every¬
thing which could be useful to Daisy, was burnt and des¬
troyed. During these transactions, Daisy was employed
in fortifying Gedingooma. This town is built in a narrow
pass between two high hills, having only two gates, one
towards Kaarta and the other towards Jaffhoo. The gate
towards Kaarta was defended by Daisy in person, and that
towards Jaffnoo was committed to the charge of his sons.
When the army of Bambarra approached the town they
made some attempts to storm it, but were always driven
back with great loss ; and Mansong, finding Daisy more
formidable than he expected, resolved to cut ofThis supplies,
and starve him into submission He accordingly sent all
112
the prisoners he had taken into Bambarra, and having
collected a considerable quantity of provisions, remained
with his army two whole months in the vicinity of Gedin-
gooma without doing anything decisive. During this time
he was much harassed by sallies from the besieged ; and
his stock of provisions being nearly exhausted, he sent to
Ali, the Moorish king of Ludamar, for two hundred horse¬
men, to enable him to make an attack upon the north gate
of the town, and give the Bambarrans an opportunity of
storming the place. Ali, though he had made an agree¬
ment with Mansong at the commencement of the war to
afford him assistance, now refused to fulfil his engagement,
which so enraged Mansong, that he marched part of his
army to Funingkedy, with a view to surprise the camp of
Benowm ; but the Moors having received intelligence of
his design, fled to the northward, and Mansong, without
attempting anything farther, returned to Sego. This
happened while I was myself in captivity in Ali’s camp, as
will hereafter be seen.
‘ As the king of Kaarta had now got quit of his most
formidable antagonist, it might have been hoped that
peace would have been restored to his dominions ; but an
extraordinary incident involved him, immediately after¬
wards, in hostilities with Kasson, the king of which
country dying about that time, the succession was disputed
by his two sons. The younger (Sambo Sego, my old
acquaintance) prevailed, and drove his brother from the
country. He fled to Gedingooma ; and being pursued
thither, Daisy, who had lived in constant friendship with
both the brothers, refused to deliver him up—at the same
time declaring that he would not support his claim, nor in
any way interfere in the quarrel. Sambo Sego, elated with
success, and proud of the homage that was paid him as
sovereign of Kasson, was much displeased with Daisy’s
conduct, and joined with some disaffected fugitive Kaar-
113
q.n.
H
tans in a plundering expedition against him. Daisy, who
little expected such a visit, had sent a number of people to
Joko to plant corn, and collect together such cattle as they
might find' straying in the woods, in order to supply his
army. All these people fell into the hands of Sambo Sego,
who carried them to Kooniakary, and afterwards sent
them in caravans to be sold to the French at Fort Louis,
on the River Senegal.
‘ This attack was soon retaliated ; for Daisy, who was
now in distress for want of provisions, thought he was
justified in supplying himself from the plunder of Kasson.
He accordingly took with him eight hundred of his best
men, and marching secretly through the woods, surprised
in the night three large villages near Kooniakary, in which
many of his traitorous subjects who were in Sambo s
expedition had taken up their residence. All these, and
indeed all the able men that fell into Daisy’s hands, were
immediately put to death. _
‘ After this expedition, Daisy began to indulge the hopes
of peace. Many of his discontented subjects had returned
to their allegiance, and were repairing the towns which
had been desolated by the war. The rainy season was
approaching, and everything wore a favourable appear¬
ance, when he was suddenly attacked from a different
quarter.
‘ The Jowers, Kakaroos, and some other Kaartans, who
had deserted from him at the commencement of the war
and had shown a decided preference to Mansong and his
army during the whole campaign, were now afraid or
ashamed to ask forgiveness of Daisy, and being very
powerful in themselves, joined together to make war upon
him. They solicited the Moors to assist them in their
rebellion (as will appear hereafter), and having collected
a considerable army, they plundered a large village be¬
longing to Daisy, and carried off a number of prisoners.
114
‘ Daisy immediately prepared to revenge this insult ;
but the Jowers, and indeed almost all the negro inhabi¬
tants of Ludamar, deserted their towns, and fled to the
eastward ; and the rainy season put an end to the war of
Kaarta, which had enriched a few individuals, but de¬
stroyed the happiness of thousands.’
fk The first village reached in Ludamar was that
^ vJ of Simbing, where Major Houghton had
halted to write his last letter to the coast. Mungo’s
company, however, made no halt there, but pressed
on towards Jarra. Rocky hills towered to the north.
By a stream Mungo saw wild horses disporting—
horses which the natives hunted for food. At noon
walled Jarra came close enough for Mungo’s eyes
to observe it clearly : a town of houses of stone and
clay, sun-bleached, an Arab town differing very
greatly indeed from the African villages of Kaarta
and Kasson. Mungo was in a new land, where the
proportion of 4 Moorish ’ blood was much higher
than in the south, where the inhabitants considered
themselves definitely a superior race—Saharan
mulattoes, treacherous and debased from the norm
of human kindliness by the rule of life led under the
green flag of their bestial faith.
Hardly had they entered the town than Mungo
was apprised of the fact that here dwelt two
populations—the haughty riders of the waste, the
kingly folk, and the subject negroes. The latter got
hastily out of the way of a passing mulatto horseman.
The whip ruled the blacks in Jarra. It was a very
terrifying city from the point of view of Johnson
and Demba.
Mungo had been given an order for money, to the
116
value of six slaves, on a Gambia slati who had
corresponded with Laidley in remote Pisania. The
slaver was sought out and received the traveller
hospitably, though he could raise cash only to the
value of two slaves. Nevertheless, he assisted
Mungo to exchange his beads and amber into gold,
a more portable form of currency, and more easily
concealed from the mulatto Moors.
Mungo’s two attendants, cowed by the over¬
bearing appearance of the Moors in the streets,
refused point-blank to accompany him into the
dangers of Ludamar. Johnson appears to have been
the moving spirit in this revolt, nor was it, as Mungo
saw, an unreasonable one. They might very
probably be seized and sold into slavery. Ludamar
was an unhealthy land for the unprotected negro.
Mungo resolved to escape from it as soon as
possible, and cross south-eastwards into Bambarra,
for somewhere in that land flowed the Great River.
Accordingly he had a messenger despatched to the
Emir of Ludamar, one Ali, at Benowm, asking
permission to proceed on this route. With the
messenger he sent five garments of cotton cloth,
and then settled down to await his return in the
scowling unquiet of the Moorish town.
A fortnight went by. Mungo’s blacks still
lingered beside him, unable to make up their minds
either to desert him or to go with him. Then at
last one of Ali’s slaves arrived with directions (so he
pretended) to guide Mungo on the road to Bam¬
barra. Mungo prepared to depart.
1 r7
At that Demba the slave ceased wavering in his
allegiance and resolved to accompany his master.
But Johnson, the freeman, would not venture the
tenebrous routes.
Mungo thereon made copies of all his papers,
handed them to Johnson to take back to Laidley in
Pisania, left with the slave-trader much of his
luggage, that the Moors might have fewer induce¬
ments to plunder him, and on the 27th of February
rode forth from Jarra into the land where Houghton
had been murdered.
It was waste sandy land, on the southern fringe
of the Sahara. The riding was toilsome and
difficult and he made but slow progress through the
maze of walled villages for several days. The
further he proceeded, the greater grew the propor¬
tion of Moors. Finally, on March the 1st, he rode
into the town of Deena, and encountered the ruling
race of Ludamar at its worst. He lodged at the
house of a friendly, though frightened, negro, in
company with Ali’s guide, Demba, and a black
slave whom the Gambia trader of Jarra had loaned
him. It was night-time. Soon the news of his
arrival spread abroad in the town, and a great
crowd of Moors came to make sport of the Christian.
Mungo was hissed at and abused, teased like a
monkey, made sport of for a very long time. He
sat still and paid his tormentors no heed, or
patiently wiped his face as they spat on it to rouse
him to anger. Angered, he might fight, and they
would have excuse to seize his property. But with
118
a cool resolution he refused to be moved, the dark-
souled Scot who sought the Great River. Sud¬
denly the Moors remembered that it was unneces¬
sary for Mungo to commit any crime in order that
he might be robbed. Was he not a Christian, and
therefore lawful spoil of the true believers ?
With yells they seized his baggage, tore it open,
stole what they desired, and departed.
He records the incident in the barest of phrases.
And that that haughty spirit suffered in the incident
is by no means clear. He was remote, young,
wrapped in his purpose ; more, there begins to
show from now onwards in him that result of his
early training that can be called nothing else than
a courage of cowardliness. He was to descend into
depths of humility and servility from which the
average man would have revolted readily, even at
the cost of his life ; and, in similar measure, he was,
coldly and cool-bloodedly, to take risks and make
ventures from which the average man would have
turned away appalled.
One of these he resolved on now, as he stood
robbed and spat upon in the hut of the frightened
negro of Deena. The slave from Jarra refused to
accompany him any further ; so did Ali’s guide ;
and so, even, did the faithful Demba. It was a
madness to go on in this country of devils.
Mungo looked at them all with cold eyes and
assented. Then, at two o’clock in the morning,
he mounted his horse, rode him silently out of
Deena, and faced the journey alone.
IX9
Beasts howled about him in the moonlight, but
made no attack. Half a mile from the town he
heard someone hail him in the moon-sheen, and
looked back and saw the faithful Demba trotting in
his tracks. The slave could not allow Mungo to
face the wastes alone. They conferred for a little,
Mungo perhaps with a slight twinge of emotion,
and Demba offered to go back to the town and try
and prevail on the slave of Jarra to go with them
as well.
Mungo waited in the moonlight, hearing the
cough of a hunting lion. Then Demba came back
through the shadows in company with the Jarra
slave, and they travelled on through the morning,
across the sandy wastes, and on still until noon,
putting as much space as possible between them¬
selves and Deena. Near noon they came to a
deserted village and Mungo sent the Jarra slave to
fill a calabash with water at the pond that shone
at a little distance. But as he neared the pond the
slave heard the even nearer snuffle of a lion, and
ran back to Mungo.
Thirstily they pushed on, and in the late after¬
noon reached a village of the Foulahs where they
were spared insult and permitted to sleep.
Next day was the 4th of March. Mungo had
swung southwards by now. The waste scrubland
had given way again to woods and cultivated
patches. After noon Mungo saw his first cloud of
locusts in migration. Presently the trees grew
black with them, and 4 the noise of their excrement
120
falling upon the leaves and grass resembled a
shower of rain \ Mungo halted his horse and shook
a tree to watch the great cloud of insects fly forth
from it.
At two o’clock they came to the town of Sampaka,
a large place once part of the kingdom of Bambarra,
but surrendered by that country to the Moors of
Ludamar at the conclusion of the last war between
the two countries. Here Mungo lodged at the house
of a negro who engaged in the somewhat risky (as
Mungo describes it) trade of manufacturing gun¬
powder. For this native manufacture sulphur was
brought across the great desert from the Medi¬
terranean. It was a poor powder, pounded in a
wooden mortar, and Mungo noted the bluntness
of its explosion compared with European powder.
Keeping this route, and though still in Ludamar,
Mungo was now in territory definitely negro in
population and sympathies. He had, it seemed,
escaped the Moors with no more than a brush. His
cool spirits rose next day as they marched through
fertile land where herds of hobbled camels were
feeding. Evening brought him to a town where he
was welcomed with song and dance music : he is
almost the only white man on record who has found
the music of the native flute agreeable, or even
endurable. So great a crowd assembled in his hut,
however, to stare at him, not jeer at him, that he
had to sit still until nearly midnight lest a movement
disturb the throng.
By morning he considered this more than enough
12 I
of a good thing, and next day took himself and his
attendants to the nearby village of Dalli, there to
rest until a caravan of travellers could be got
together to proceed to the town of Goomba, on the
Ludamar-Bambarra frontier.
Dalli was a pleasant spot. No Moors appeared.
The headman entertained Mungo hospitably, very
proud of a white man in his hut, and Mungo him¬
self relaxed after the strain of Jarra and Deena.
He sat in conversation and gossip with the blacks,
liking both their company and their manners.
Beer was brought and distributed. It was very
good beer. The young Scot drank it and thought
it as good as he had ever tasted in Great Britain.
The horror of the Moors was past and done with.
He relaxed with the beer and good company,
dreaming again the boy of Fowlshiels, seeing him¬
self on a boat on the Niger, sailing down by
templed Timbuctoo. . . .
122
"I At that moment a band of Moors entered the
JL hut. They had tracked Mungo from Sam-
paka, coming to convey him, by Ali’s orders, to
Benowm.
It seems that for once Mungo’s mask of coolness
shivered from his face, caught as he was in his
dream of the Niger. He stared, suddenly no more
than a boy, at them in such surprise and terror that
the Moors, moved perhaps by his youth and alone-
ness, told him he had nothing to fear. All that Ali
wanted was to show him to his wife Fatima. That
lady had heard of Christians (as ladies in Europe
had heard of the unicorn, and apparently with much
the same feelings), and wished to look upon such a
peculiar animal. Looked on, he would undoubtedly
be released and dismissed with a present.
The black slave from Jarra slipped away from the
hut and disappeared. Mungo never saw him again.
He knew the Moors too well. Seeing that resistance
would be useless, Mungo collected both his goods
and his self-possession, and allowed himself to be
guarded back along the track he had traversed a
day before.
On the road they overtook a woman and two boys
who had been robbed by another party of Moors.
Neither white Christian nor black pagan could look
for much mercy from the Moor at this time of the
123
year, when his fanaticism was whetted by bodily
discomfort. The great fast of the month of Ramad-
han had just been ushered in.
They rode out for Deena on the morning of the
nth. Mungo had a calabash filled with water,
from which the Moors drank freely during the
journey, in spite of their fast. At Deena Mungo
found one of Ali’s sons in residence, and procured
an interview with him. It was an inauspicious one.
The Moor and a half-dozen of his companions were
at their ceremonial ablutions, and at first took little
or no notice of Mungo. Then the 4 prince ’ picked
up a double-barrelled gun, handed it to Mungo,
and commanded him to dye the stock blue and
repair one of the locks, which had broken.
Mungo protested, with obsequious politeness, that
he knew nothing of the gunsmith’s art. Thereat
Ali’s son, who was either crazed or merely caprici¬
ously cruel, demanded a present of knives and
scissors. Mungo was assuring him, through Demba,
that he had no such articles in his luggage, when the
Moor snatched up a musket, levelled it at Demba’s
head, and was about to pull the trigger when one of
his companions, through compassion or prudence,
wrested the gun from him and signed to Mungo and
his slave to clear out.
They returned to their hut, Demba very badly
shaken. Even his allegiance could not endure the
thought of re-facing such chances of cold-blooded
murder as that endured in the hut of Ali’s son.
Curiously, he seems to have said nothing to
124
Mungo of the matter. But that night he attempted
to escape. The attempt proved abortive from the
first. The guard of Moors slept across the door of
the hut. Demba returned to sit shivering until day¬
light. Mungo slept.
Next day they set out for Benowm, where the
Emir was in residence. They were back in the waste
scrubland whence Mungo had imagined he had
escaped three days before. Here the sun shone
burningly. The watering-holes were drying up in
this coming of the hot season. Presently the caval¬
cade was without water, and chewed gum as a
substitute.
Towards five in the afternoon they sighted
Benowm, no town but a wide encampment of hair
tents. Amidst these wandered, odoriferously, camels,
cattle, goats, and Moors. There was much stench
and a drowsy life. It abandoned its drowsiness at
sight of Mungo.
The men by the wells, drawing the evening water,
flung down their buckets, horsemen mounted their
horses, and a great concourse poured out on horse
and foot to stare at the Christian. It was the free
life of the Moor. This was the Emir’s property, no
doubt, but they might tease and poke and examine
it for all that. They pummelled and prodded the
young Scot, examined his hat, his clothes, his
buttons ; one demanded threateningly that he re¬
peat the declaration that there was no God but God
and that Allah was his Prophet. Mungo maintained
a ‘ prudent silence \
125
At last the concourse took to motion again, and
Mungo was conveyed through the winding lanes of
tents to that of the Emir of Ludamar. He was an
old man, white-bearded, sullen, venerable and ras¬
cally—a truly Moorish ruler. As Mungo arrived the
Emir was sitting on a black leather cushion engaged
in barbering his upper lip. In front of him knelt a
female attendant with a looking-glass. Ali glanced
at the stranger sullenly, and only paused from the
clipping to enquire of the escort whether Mungo
could speak Arabic. c Being answered in the nega¬
tive, he appeared much surprised, and continued
silent.5
The women, whom Mungo even in this pass refers
to as c the ladies ’, were less reticent. They searched
his pockets, shrieked with laughter over his general
appearance, counted his fingers and toes to make
sure that he really was human, forced him to un¬
button and display his whiteness and probably more
convincing marks still of his humanity, though
Mungo is silent on that point. His torment was
ended only with the announcement of evening
prayer by a marabout.
Thereat the Moors began to drift away, but with
no great zeal. The Christian was too good sport to
abandon in a hurry. Ali was seized with a subtle
idea. He commanded some boys to bring a wild
pig, and, on the animal being tied to the tent-
strings, gestured benevolently towards Mungo. Here
was his supper. Let the Christian kill and eat the
hog.
126
Mungo was intensely hungry. He was also in¬
tensely prudent, strung up, and watchful. He re¬
plied that he never ate hog’s flesh. Thereat, in the
belief that hogs hated Christians as their inveterate
devourers, Ali commanded that the pig be released
in the hope that it would attack Mungo.
The pig’s sympathies, however, proved definitely
pro-Christian. The animal ran amok, biting indis¬
criminately every Moor it encountered. But Mungo
it avoided religiously. Finally it took refuge under
Ali’s couch, though unfortunately it failed to bite
him.
The entertainment for the moment suspended,
Mungo was conducted to the tent of Ali’s chief slave.
He was not allowed to enter, however, but was pro¬
vided with a mat, some boiled corn, salt and water.
With this fare and furnishing he passed an uneasy
night ; the Moors of the encampment hardly went
to bed at all, coming in parties to poke the Christian
to find where the squeak came from.
127
C\ At sunrise next morning Ali appeared on the
m scene and gestured Mungo to follow him. A
hut had been provided where the Christian could
shelter from the sun. Mungo found the hut cool,
pleasant, and clean ; but in the centre, tethered to
one of the hut supports, was the pig which had
played such an heroic part on the previous evening.
The entertainment was about to begin again.
The pig, indeed, is the real hero of that day. Boys
assembled in the hut and teased the animal to add
to the discomfort of Mungo ; thereat it broke from
its tether and bit them viciously. Mungo refrained
from cheering. Presently the adult Moors began to
assemble : their manners were slightly less good
than those of the pig. Mungo was commanded to
take off his stockings and show his feet : the Moors
stared astounded. Real feet! Then his coat and
vest. Finally, probably all his garments.
The Moors came and went in relays, chattering,
guffawing, staring, particularly intrigued by Mungo’s
buttons. From morning till night he sat in the
sweating stench of the hut, disrobing and robing
before his tormentors with a passive meekness.
Then night came down, and Ali sent him some food
and water. Mungo lay down to sleep with thoughts
that escape his genteel pages.
But even in the night he was to find no rest. His
128
guard kept lighting wisps of grass and throwing them
in the tent to make certain that he and Demba (who
had shared with him the torments of the day) were
still unfled. About two o’clock in the morning
Mungo awoke to the presence of a creeping body in
the hut. It was someone come to rob or murder him.
Probably the latter. When the hand of the marauder
actually touched his shoulder, Mungo sprang to his
feet. Thereat the Moor, startled, did the same and
turned to flee. In the pitch blackness of the hut,
however, he stumbled over the sleeping Demba.
The latter yelled. So did the Moor, pitching head¬
foremost on the tethered and valiant pig. The pig
added its yell, a third chorus, and then, deciding on
direct action, bit the Moor in the arm. The Moor
yelled louder than ever.
Most of Benowm camp arose in alarm. Ali him¬
self came hasting to the scene : his haste suggests
that the marauder was one of his envoys, and that
Ali had been waiting for news of the Christian’s
death. Pig-defended, Mungo was still unharmed.
Disappointed, Ali went back to his tent, while the
imperturbable Mungo resumed his sleep.
He had need of it. Morning brought back his
tormentors, adults, and a cloud of boys, the tor¬
mentors of the pig. All that day, and for three more
days, Mungo submitted with a staggering humility
to insult upon insult. Never once did he lose his
temper, kicked, spat upon, jeered at : there was the
Niger beyond all this.
In the heat of the day waning into the discom-
G.N. I2g
i
forts of the night he remembered that fact : sleep¬
lessness, lack of food, even of water, did not drive it
away. Probably his tormentors were crueller in this
season than in any other, sufferers under the rigours
of Ramadhan. But they must have seemed an un¬
ending three days.
By the 17th of March, however, Mungo began to
lose novelty and the prudent Moors to cast about on
a method to make him a useful being of the com¬
munity. Demba had already been impounded for
hay-making. Now it was decided to make the young
Christian a barber. He was given a small razor and
ordered to shave the head of one of the Emir s sons.
Coolly, he had resolved that the best method of
attaining to freedom was to prove himself incredibly
useless. Accordingly, the watching Emir had the
shock of seeing the head of his offspring red-gashed
by the clumsy hand of the Christian. The razor was
immediately snatched from Mungo and he was
ordered from the tent. He went, obsequious, polite,
and found a night’s sleep.
But next day brought a disturbing visitor, in the
person of Johnson, his freeman servant, bundled
into the camp of Benowm by four Moorish horsemen.
The unfortunate had been seized at Jarra before he
could escape back over the border into Kaarta. He
was led to All’s tent ; with him were taken all the
belongings Mungo had left with the Gambia slaver
in Karra, except, fortunately, his papers.
Ali had the bundles searched and regarded them
with disappointment. There were few treasures.
130
Probably the white man kept them on his person.
That evening Ali despatched three servants to
Mungo’s tent and demanded that he hand over all
his baggage. There were many thieves about and
it was unsafe for Mungo to have his possessions un¬
guarded.
Mungo had no doubt of the thieves. Ali was
their Emir. All his belongings were taken away.
He had not changed his shirt since that remote
washing-day at Feesurah. He was not allowed to
change it even now. With his resolution a little
shaken, but cool enough still, he concluded that this
would not be the end of the robbery. Accordingly,
he buried one of his compasses in the sand floor of
the hut. Without a compass he would be utterly
doomed.
It was a wise precaution. Morning brought
suddenly again Ali’s three servants. Mungo was
seized, searched, stripped, robbed of all his gold,
amber, his watch, and all his other instruments,
including his second compass. The proceeds were
hurried to Ali’s tent, and regarded without any
great enthusiasm. Still little treasure. But the
compass excited curiosity, especially the little bar
of iron in the heart of it, pointing northwards cease¬
lessly however the instrument was moved or turned.
Ali sent a messenger to bring Mungo and question
him on this magic.
Mungo lied magnificently, considering the short
warning he had and the fashion in which lies usually
stuck in his throat. The needle, he said, pointed
I3I
northwards because his mother lived far beyond the
confines of the Great Desert. While she lived, the
needle would always point that way ; when she died
it would point to her grave. Ali was amazed and
awed, and did not, as he might, command Mungo
to set about the instant manufacture of a score or so
of such handy instruments. Instead he handed him
back the risky magical device, and dismissed him.
Mungo was now alone in the deeps of Africa, with¬
out a change of clothes, baggage, a horse ; but with
two compasses. Could he possibly survive ?
He was, in the future, to find a time when he had
even less gear to encumber him. But of that time he
slept unforeseeing. Next day Ali, his headmen and
the priests held a council to decide on the Christian’s
fate. News of it was brought to Mungo by the son
of Ali whom he had shaved so disastrously. The boy
bore him no grudge ; indeed, apparently liked him,
and was worried over the news he whispered. Some
of the council had proposed to put the Christian to
death ; others, to hack off his right hand ; finally,
it was decided to put out his eyes, after he had been
seen by Ali’s wife, Fatima, at present in the north
of Ludamar.
Mungo tells us nothing of his feelings when he
heard this news. He slept that night undisturbed
by Moors. Next day, the 21st of March, he went to
Ali’s hut and asked permission to return to Jarra.
Ali was surrounded by Mohammedan teachers, the
Bushreens. They whispered warily to the Emir that
the Christian was seeking to escape. Thereon Ali
132
flatly refused his request, pointing out that Fatima
had not yet seen him. When the queen had satisfied
herself by gazing on the full horror of a Christian’s
countenance, Mungo would be released and given
back his horse.
He went back to his hut and brooded on this
reply. The heat was stifling on that desert edge.
Escape was impossible without a horse, and to cross
the sands, alone, in the stifling glare, madness. But
the longer he delayed the worse was the forward
route.
For now the season of the great rains drew nearer,
and when, if ever, he won out of the Moorish lands
and passed south to the negro states he would pass
into a lush and flood-ridden land. The Niger ?
Suddenly his resolutions cracked : he was very
bitterly alone and desperate, the cool youth who had
withstood so much, alone, and remote from help,
lost in the midst of an alien and hostile people. . . .
He tossed restlessly on the sand that night while the
Moors peered in at him, igniting scraps of grass to
see that he had not escaped.
By morning he was shivering in fever. He
wrapped himself in his horseman’s cloak, to induce
the freeing sweat. But scarcely had he done so
when a party of Moors, bent on sport, came into the
hut and pulled the cloak away. The Christian made
signs that he was sick. This was great fun. The
true believers prodded him and teased him, holding
the cloak from him, spitting upon him, till at last
even the patient heroic cowardice of Mungo almost
133
reached an end. Almost he started up to drive a
fist or a foot in one of those grinning faces, to feel
the pleasure of bones breaking under his hands, to
strike and strike and if needs be die in the pleasure
of striking. . . . And then he remembered the
Niger.
He got to his feet, staggering, and made his way
out of the hut, and so from the camp. A little
distance beyond it was a grove of trees ; for a time
left in peace, he lay down, the fever racking him.
But soon the Christian was observed. One of Ali’s
sons was despatched to the grove with a band of
horsemen. Mungo raised his head and begged to
be allowed to lie where he was for a little. But the
Moors were wearied of him by this time. One of
them drew a pistol, and while his companions stood
idly by, presented it at Mungo’s head, and pulled
the trigger twice.
By some accident the weapon failed to go off.
As the Moor was cocking it a third time, Mungo
got to his feet, and made his way back to the camp.
The Moors went with him, driving him into Ali s
tent. The white-bearded ruffian who ruled Lud-
amar Mungo found much out of temper. He sat
and heard the account of Mungo’s c attempted
escape ’ and then called for the pistol of the Moor
who had attempted to settle the boring matter of
the Christian out of hand. The weapon in his hand,
he had Mungo informed that if he was seen
outside the limits of the camp again, he would be
shot out of hand.
134
That afternoon a minor sandstorm fell on the
camp, and passed by together with Mungo’s fever.
Excitement and the fears of the day had sweated
it out of him. In the late afternoon a deputation
of the Moorish women waited upon him, on a
blushful mission. This was to ascertain, by actual
inspection, whether Mungo’s genital organ had
been suitably circumcised, or whether, like the
pagans, a Christian was also unclean in this matter.
It was not the kind of request common either to
Selkirk or the student’s lodgings in Edinburgh.
Probably Mungo had never yet slept with a woman.
But he was learning fast. He had long laid aside
the tabus of Yarrow. He replied that it was not
the custom in his country to give ocular demon¬
strations in these matters to a large crowd at a time.
But if the rest would retire, leaving the youngest
and prettiest of the women (he pointed to her), he
would be pleased to satisfy her curiosity completely.
Kinder, as usual, than the men, the women
found the handsome stranger an agreeable wag.
Probably they had made the request merely to
tease him. They retired, laughing ; and the pretty
one, though she might have liked to remain for
the inspection, forbore. She had Moorish male
relatives. Instead, she contented herself with
sending him meal and milk for his supper. It was
an incident of light comedy in the threatening
tragedy of Benowm.
O The days dragged by. Mungo lay in his hut
^ O and watched them go, and turned and
sweated on the moist hot sands, and wrote up his
notes ; and smelt the smells of the camp, and heard
the thin whine of the Moorish voices, and saw
friendly only the face of Demba—yet that a
permanently terrified face. Four months since he
had left the coast, and he was yet (he guessed) long
leagues from the Niger.
Ali told him nothing of his plans. When would
Fatima journey down to look on this curiosity she
had had plucked for her amusement ?
On the morning of the 28th of March a curious
incident occurred, showing the comparative freedom
with which the Moors behaved towards their rulers,
showing also that in Ludamar, as in Scotland, there
were individuals who could rise above the herd-
prejudices and act according to more ancient codes
than the Mohammedan. Mungo’s horse had been
ridden away many days before by a cattle-driver.
Returning this morning, he came to Mungo’s hut
with the present of an antelope’s leg, and the news
that the horse, safe and sound, had been left
tethered in front of Ali’s tent. A little later Ali
himself sent word that Mungo must be prepared
to ride with him that afternoon, on a visit to some
of his women.
136
The visit was inside the camp. But the riders of
Ludamar would not stir a bare yard without their
horses. Arriving to collect the exhibit, Ali and his
courtiers, casting their eyes over Mungo, were
suddenly and sincerely shocked. This was at sight
of his nankeen breeches, tight, indecent in their
tightness to the point where the Emir s women,
however they might debate the Christian s circum¬
cision, would otherwise have good proof of his
virility. Mungo was ordered to wrap himself
in his cloak, very closely. Murder, thievery and
fornication were the ruling passions of the ruling
caste in Ludamar : but Mungo’s nankeen breeches
had shaken them.
Four of Ali’s wives were visited. At each tent
Mungo was presented with a bowl of milk and
water and a stare of affected horror. The women
Mungo’s ‘ ladies ’—were extraordinarily stout and
haughty, unbending a little to examine Mungo’s
skin and hair, but shocked at the disgusting white¬
ness of the former. Fat, brown and prolific, Ali s
wives were yet preferable to himself. The visits
dragged out. Evening came on. Mungo s escort
tired of convoying him from tent to tent and
resolved on a little sport to refresh themselves.
Mounting their horses, they galloped around Mungo,
threatening him with their muskets, making mimic
charges upon him with levelled lances, pulling up
suddenly and showering him with dust. He
withstood it all, obsequiously.
Again the days dragged. He stared out at the
137
passing life of unbearable Benowm, at the Moors
who fed their horses on milk and starved their
slaves, at the play of this alien life in all its heat-
ridden drab aspects. On the 3rd of April a child
died in the tent next door to Mungo’s. Thought¬
lessly, its parents neglected to accuse Mungo of
having killed it by magic or the evil eye. The
mother howled. Visitors came. These howled.
Cool and professional, Mungo peered at the funeral
in the hope of observing and reporting upon the
ceremonial of the burial.
The heat he found almost unbearable. Even the
currents of air blowing infrequently through the
crevices in his hut were warmed as though from a
furnace-mouth. It was impossible to walk out of
doors bare-footed : the sands scorched the feet.
Night brought little ease, but cloudings of flies
and restless tossing in the sweating dark.
One day a great sandstorm hit the camp and
half-wrecked it, blowing down one side of Mungo’s
hut. The glaring blue placidity of the sky was
broken. A steady wind arose and blew from the
jungles of the south. Next day the thunder and the
lightning wove a garment of cloud over Benowm,
and brought the blessing of rain, sweetening the air.
Benowm lost its sickly appearance and smell for a
day.
On the evening of the 10th a Moorish wedding
took place. Mungo went to witness it, and was
soon bored by the screaming and drum-beating.
He returned to his hut and was just lying down to
138
rest when an old woman appeared, carrying a
wooden bowl. She informed Mungo that she had
brought a present from the bride. Somewhat
surprised, he sat up to see it. Thereat the old
woman discharged the contents of the bowl in his
face. It was urine.
For a moment it is probable that the Christian’s
temper almost gave way. But an equally sur¬
prising thing followed. The old woman gave him
to understand that no malice or mischief was
intended. This was c a nuptial benediction from
the bride’s own person’, and a mark of singular
favour. Wiping the filth from his face, Mungo sent
the lady his acknowledgments.
Still Fatima tarried in her southwards journey to
gaze upon that rare freak, a Christian. Mungo
stared at the evening beams crossing the floor of his
hut, day on day, and bringing the comparative peace
of night. The nights were tolerable compared
with the day.
Teasing the Christian had revived as a sport.
Ingeniously, Mungo hit on a method of diverting
his tormentors into educators. He pretended a
passionate desire to learn Arabic. Whenever a
particularly malevolent face appeared in the open¬
ing of his hut, Mungo would obsequiously beg
assistance in the formation of an aleph. The plan
worked excellently. Greasy tormentors turned to
sweating instructors, scrawling the looping Arab
symbols in the sand to help excavate the Christian
from the pits of his ignorance. So the days passed.
139
He remained in the same hut with Johnson and
Demba. The former had quite lost his spirit,
half-starved as the three of them were. They were
supplied with food once a day, at midnight. This
was a bowl of kouskous, together with some salt
and water. Sometimes the attendants brought the
meal ; sometimes they forgot. Mungo, with a cool
curiosity, observed the effects of hunger and priva¬
tion upon himself, how sheer agony of hunger might
be transmuted into a sharper interest in Arabic,
for example.
At length the drowse of life in Benowm was
broken. The Emir resolved to ride north and
fetch his laggard consort, Fatima. This was on the
16th of April. Two days later, a fresh visitor took
up residence in Mungo’s hut. He was a merchant
from Walet, a town in the state of Biroo. Strangely,
he refrained from spitting upon Mungo. He had
travelled afar and acquired the easy tolerance of all
travellers, even those of Islam. Timbuctoo ? It
was a little town in the south-east, small compared
with Houssa or Walet. Did Mungo intend to
journey there ? Then he had better avoid the
Walet route. Christians were looked upon as the
devil’s children. No Christians were to be found
in the country, though there were Jews in Tim¬
buctoo itself. But even these wore the same clothes
as the Arabs, and said much the same prayers.
His presence nevertheless cheered Mungo, and
he spent a comparatively easy week in conversation
with this ‘ shereef’. On the 24th another arrived,
140
one Sidi Mohamed Moora Abdalia. This latter
was no negro-Arab half-breed, but a native of
Morocco, driving down to Benowm and the saltless
lands of the negro kingdom five bullocks loaded
with salt. He had once resided in Gibraltar, the
Sidi, and could speak a little English.
He must have seemed and sounded like an angel
from heaven the first few moments when Mungo
discovered him. He had crossed the Sahara in a
five months journey, trading and marching, and
gave Mungo an account of his itinerary, and was
altogether as pleasant a man as the other merchant.
But their pleasantness did not extend itself into
hospitality. Food for Mungo and his attendants
arrived at uncertain hours : for two successive nights
no food came at all. The merchants, well fed,
conversed amiably and regarded the starving
Christian with a polite curiosity.
At length Demba could bear it no longer. He
stole out to a negro village nearby and begged from
door to door, returning with a few handfuls of
groundnuts. Mungo ate these and revived for a
little. Demba and Johnson were soon prostrate.
Despite his resolution, as the hours wore into days
and still no food came, Mungo found himself
affected by fainting-fits when he attempted to sit
up, and by a dimming of his eyes.
The merchants had gone. Food came at last.
Mungo, with difficulty, stirred his exhausted blacks
to interest in it. It was the 29th of April. Suddenly
news came that Mansong, king of Bambarra, was
141
about to invade Ludamar. Benowm was thrown
into confusion. One of Ali’s sons came riding into
the town of tents and ordered them to be struck
immediately and all the cattle driven away to the
north. Mungo looked on at the scramble and
confusion of a Moorish settlement threatened by
invaders. Northwards (but where exactly was not
yet divulged) Ali was gathering the army of the
tribe about him.
Next day Benowm struck camp. Baggage was
piled on bullocks, and the fat females who had been
roused to a tepid curiosity on the subject of Mungo’s
generation and genitals were piled on top of the
baggage. Camels groaned under concubines. Con¬
cubines groaned under canopies and the stress of
fear. Benowm decamped.
Mungo went with it, but whether on foot or
horseback he does not say. The country was sandy
waste. But towards evening they came in the
neighbourhood of a thick low wood and a negro
village. Mungo and a portion of the refugee
exodus halted here, Mungo and his blacks left to
fast, as usual.
Next day, the ist of May, Mungo stole out to the
negro village and begged food from its native
governor, the duti. His wants were readily supplied.
Like themselves, the negroes saw in him the
tormented slave of the Arabs.
142
O^For nearly two months he had been a captive
the Moors—captured to satisfy a whim of
Fatima, the chief wife of the Emir Ali. Now, on the
3rd of May, together with the hasting exodus from
Bambarran-threatened Benowm, he came through
thick woods to Ali’s new camp. Near at hand was
Bubaker, a town of the helot negroes. Mungo
looked out on a city of black tents.
As soon as possible he made his way to Ali’s tent.
The Emir was unaccountably kindly. Probably he
was bathing in uxorious delights. He shook hands
with the astonished obsequious Mungo and con¬
ducted him to Fatima’s room. Here was her
Christian.
The queen of Ludamar had long black hair and
a fat brown body. Womanlike, having had Mungo
detained a prisoner two months and submitted to the
filthiest of torments, she pretended to be shocked
at his very presence. Presently curiosity overcame
affectation. She began to question him through an
interpreter as to the customs of the Christians.
Hearing how these savages lived, she felt pleasantly
superior, and presented Mungo with a bowl of milk.
Dismissed to a new hut, Mungo took up through
reeking days the threads of much the same life as at
Benowm. But the heat had grown steadily worse.
The fiery rays, reflected from the desert sands that
J43
fringed the woods, seemed to strike under his
eyeballs and set his head afire. His tongue moved
in a dry mouth, for water was very scarce. Day
and night the wells were crowded with cattle,
lowing and fighting with each other to come at the
troughs ; excessive thirst made many of them
furious ; others, being too weak to contend for the
water, endeavoured to quench their thirst y
devouring the black mud from the gutters near the
wells, c which they did with great avidity though
it was commonly fatal to them .
In this sheol of heat and thirst none suffered more
than himself. Demba had been provided with a
skin for carrying water ; but every time e
attempted to fill it at the wells the Moors beat him
away. Mungo went and begged a little water
from Fatima. Sluggishly curious that Christians
should suffer in this fashion, she allowed him a little
from her own store. It merely whetted his cravings.
Demba would no longer venture near the wells,
where blows and threats awaited him, and no
chance of water. Had the followers of the Prophet
dug the wells, the shepherds would ask, that they
might be defiled by the slave of a Christian hog .
Mungo and Demba took to begging water
throughout the camp from negroes and slaves who
had been more fortunate than themselves in essays
upon the wells. They were given a little now and
then Mungo began to weaken, was often delirious,
especially with the fall of night, in the unease of
half-sleep. He would hear rise in a volume-roar the
144
placid waters of Yarrow, sweet and grey and
crystal-clear, and go scrambling down its banks
from the grey homely lour of the biggings of
Fowlshiels—down and down to drink there and
lave there and forget the dream of the Great River
he sought. Sobbing, he would come from sleep in
the stifling dark, alone, a captive, in the hot dark
only the tormented breath of his slave-boy, Demba.
One midnight, the fever upon him, he resolved
to try his own fortune at the wells. They lay at a
distance of about half-a-mile from the city of black
tents. He set out, staggering with weariness. It
was pitch dark, moonless, with a shimmer of stars.
Beyond the woods he stood in doubt, and then was
guided towards the wells by the lowing of the heat-
maddened thirsty cattle. Even at this hour the
shepherds were toiling there, filling the troughs in
the light of great torches. By that the approach of
the Christian was descried. The Moors paused in
curiosity to hear his request, and then drove him
away with curses and abuse.
But Mungo had sharpened his spirit to a steel¬
like point on humiliation and insult. Beaten away
from one well, he would try another. So the
thirsting hours wore on, with the dawn near. At
last he came to a well where an old man and two
boys drew the water. Hearing his request, the old
man readily acceded and drew him up a bucket
of water. Mungo was about to take it in his hands,
when superstition suddenly overcame the old
Moor’s kindness. He recollected that this was a
145
G.N.
K
Christian, and his touch polluting. Turning round,
he poured the water into a nearby trough, where
three cows already drank, and indicated to Mungo
he could share with these beasts.
So the son of Mungo Park of Fowlshiels, that cold
prim youth who had landed neatly clad and com¬
posed on the Gambia beaches six months before,
knelt down in rags and filth among the kine, and
drank and slobbered in their trough, crying with
delight and fever as he drank.
But now the worst of the hot season was waning.
Winds arose and whirled the desert sands icily about
the encampment. Clouds came flooding up from
the south, dimming the flare of the midday sky,
and with them, presently, the flow of sheet-lightning
unending upon the African horizon. The rainy
season was near at hand. To Mungo this presented
a new terror. The Moors were accustomed to
retreat further out into the desert to escape the rains
of the jungle belt. Would they take him with them ?
But a fortunate accident prevented this. Daisy,
the heroic king of Kaarta, having beaten the Bam-
barrans and his own rebels, threatened Jarra, the
frontier town on the Ludamar-Kaarta line. In
Jarra were several hundred refugee and rebel
Kaartans. They sent an embassy to the Emir Ali
to hire a couple of hundred of his horsemen as
mercenaries with which to assail Daisy, and Ali
resolved to set out and treat with them in person.
If only he would take his Christian captive as far as
Jarra—
146
Mungo went to Fatima’shut and begged her to pre¬
vail on the Emir to this extent. The heavy Moor
woman stared at him dully, then in a kind of stupid
compassion. She would do what she could. She did.
Ali consented to Mungo’s accompanying him to the
frontier town—a half-promise of liberty, as it were.
In preparation for this move, Mungo’s bundles
were excavated from All’s tent, opened, spread out
in the sun, and inspected by the Emir and his
consort. Mungo was called in attendance to
explain the nature and use of the various articles
of apparel, and doubtless restrained himself with
difficulty from a hungry gazing upon his changes of
linen. But restrain himself he did, and was polite
and slavish while initiating the Moors into the
methods of putting on European stockings above
desert-calloused feet. They were greatly tickled.
On the evening of the 25th of May Mungo was
called to the tent of Fatima, who £ with much grace
and civility ’ returned to him part of the clothes
which Ali had stolen. That same evening his horse,
with saddle and bridle, was also returned. Next
morning, after twenty-three days of such experi¬
ences as he was never to forget, Mungo rode out of
the camp of Bubaker in company with Demba and
Johnson, and with a guard of Moors.
The heat shimmered greyly under a louring sky.
Pale, haggard, dirt-caked and ragged, the young
Scot rode his horse into the south with already
dreams and plans for the Niger unfolding and
re-blossoming in his mind.
147
CT But his trials among the Moors were not yet
^ ^ ended. Coming that night to Ali’s camp in
the desert near some wells, Mungo’s escort found
the tents too over-crowded to contain a Christian.
Accordingly, he was detailed to spend the night in
an open space in the midst of the tents.
Lightning bestrode the north-east all night, as
Mungo saw wakening from uneasy sleeps. At
daybreak a heavy sandstorm commenced, blowing
about the ears of Mungo and the horses and asses
which also occupied the central space. Presently
the animals became irritated under the stinging
particles of sand and ran about like mad creatures.
Mungo had difficulty in saving himself from being
trampled to death.
The storm cleared. The day drowsed past. But
early next morning the Moors were astir, and
ordered Mungo to saddle his horse and prepare to
ride south. At that moment Ali’s chief slave
approached Demba and addressed him in
Mandingo, c In future Ali is to be your master.’
Mungo and the slave stared at the messenger
uncomprehendingly. But he repeated his remark,
adding that not only was Demba taken possession
of, but that all the Christian’s effects except his
horse and Johnson were to be sent back to the camp
at Bubaker.
148
For once Mungo was roused to a white heat of
rage. He ran to All’s tent and found the evil old
man squatting at breakfast in the sunlight. Mungo
told him that Demba was not a slave, had com¬
mitted no crime, and could not be enslaved in
Ludamar. Surely both he and his master, who also
had committed no crime, had suffered enough
already ?
For answer Ali replied with a malignant smile
that if Mungo did not mount his horse immediately
he also would be sent back to Bubaker a slave.
Mungo stared at him a moment, his hands itching
to grip the shrivelled brown throat, regicide riding
his mind in a white heat. . . . Then his hands
dropped and he turned away to bid goodbye to
Demba.
They had journeyed together from Pisania,
through all the dangers and discomforts of the
negro kingdoms, through Woolli, Kasson, Kaarta,
endured the torments of captivity, drank the last
drops of water from a waterskin together. Demba
had penetrated through the cold reserves of the
young white man to that clear-eyed, if dark-souled
self that lay beneath ; Mungo had found the young
negro cheerful and happy and kind. ... For once
he broke down and wept in front of the sneering
Africans. Then swearing to Demba that somehow
he would procure his freedom, Mungo mounted his
horse and rode south and never saw Demba again.
On the southwards road in the next three days
Ali gradually mustered his levies. Finally, on the
149
2nd of June, he entered Jarra with some two
hundred horsemen and immediately set about
intimidating the refugee Kaartans into paying him
a large bribe.
Mungo made his way to the house of the Gambian
slave-slati : the old man stared at him as one
returned from the dead, then welcomed him, fed
and clothed him. Hardly had he rested than
Mungo set about the attempt to procure Demba’s
release from Ali. He had the slave-trader approach
the latter and offer the value of two slaves for the
Gambian youth. Ali replied significantly that he
would not sell the boy back to the Christian, but
that the slave-trader might, in the future, purchase
the boy for his own uses. Demba, as Ali knew,
spoke Bambarran, and would be useful to Mungo
should the latter succeed in crossing the border
from Ludamar.
It is evident that Ali had no intention of releasing
his Christian toy. He played with him, in feline
fashion, and found amusement in the gaunt cheeks
and savage obsequiousness of Mungo. On the 8th
of June, having raised the price of his promised
help to the refugee Kaartans against their own king,
he departed to Bubaker, instructing Mungo to wait
at Jarra until he returned. He calculated that the
white man would be unable to escape back into
Kaarta and its war-disturbed lands ; equally,
he would hardly dare push on into Bambarra with¬
out guide or interpreter. But Mungo grimly pre¬
pared in secret.
150
Next day was the Ludamar Saturnalia, the Banna
Sake. Mungo, religiously note-taking again, saw
slaves clad and happy, hunger banished from Jarra
for a day. But meanwhile the war-clouds began to
roll ominously up towards the frontier town. A
wounded man staggered in with the news that the
heroic Daisy of Kaarta, not content with repulsing
the Bambarrans and subduing his own rebel
subjects, had made war on Sambo, king of Kasson,
Mungo’s ancient enemy, and carried fire and sword
into his territory. Further, hearing of the Moor-
aided army which the Kaartan refugees were
raising against him in Ludamar, he was marching
his army up against Jarra itself.
At this news the refugee Kaartans sent urgent
messages to Ali, calling on his promised two
hundred horsemen. Mungo prowled the streets
and heard the news. Presently the messengers
returned from the north. Ali was sorry : his
cavalry were otherwise engaged.
The refugee Kaartans, desperate, decided to risk
a battle with their own forces. Mungo saw them
assembled on the evening of the 18th June, under
the walls of Jarra. Eight hundred strong, they
departed with nightfall, into Kaarta and the south,
to do battle with the redoubtable Daisy. Turning
back from watching that spectacle Mungo felt the
falling of raindrops on his face. The rainy season
had commenced.
How should he act ? The slave-trader was
evidently uneasy at his presence and wished to be
151
rid of him. He had no money, no instruments, few
clothes and only one jaded horse. He had no
servants if he went forward—for Johnson was
steadfast in refusing to accompany him. And he
could not speak the language of any of the forward
countries.
But he could not return to England. The Niger
had faded a little, we may imagine, in the thirsts
and sands of Bubaker. Pressing up in its place came
now shame at the thought he had accomplished so
little. He would press on, though he must do it
alone : and anyhow, he thought grimly, if the rains
held he was unlikely to die of thirst.
Suddenly there came news of the civil war in
Kaarta. The refugee-rebels from Jarra had seized
a town and enslaved its inhabitants, though they
did not dare engage the Daisy in open battle. Pre¬
sently, laden with booty, the visitors marched back
into Jarra, driving cattle and slaves. Mungo
looked on with a cool interest, seeing nothing in the
incident to help his plan. He was mistaken. The
Daisy of Kaarta was not the man to brook such a
raid, whether or not it came from over the border
of a powerful state like Ludamar.
He marched north with a revengeful and starving
army. On the 26th of June he captured Simbing :
messengers brought the news that he would be in
Jarra the next day. Terrified, the Jarrans set about
the evacuation of their town, trailing away towards
Deena and hoping to gain the shelter of the Bam-
barran border. All the next day Mungo watched
152
from the wall the ant-like crawl of refugees stream¬
ing eastwards. Night fell with the exodus still in
full swing.
In the forenoon of the 27th, however, the Jarran
sentinels gave the alarm. The Daisy was close to
Jarra. In the night-time the rebel Kaartans had
gone out to engage him, but had fled without
striking a blow. Instantly the town was flung into
great confusion, and Mungo sat and debated his
own fortunes in this coming invasion while around
him sounded the screaming of strayed children,
the calling of demented women, and the scrape
and clop of hooves of hastily-ridden horses. The
Daisy had treated him kindly ; but would his
followers—especially if they came upon him sud¬
denly in the midst of the sack of a town and
mistook him for a Moor ?
Johnson was now prepared to accompany him a
little distance. Mungo found his horse, saddled it,
and together with the black rode out through the
confusion of invasion-threatened Jarra. Herds of
sheep, cows and goats choked the roads. Men
carried their sick and aged. Women were bur¬
dened with children too small to walk. Mungo’s
heart was moved to a spasm of compassion for the
refugees : then he shut his mind away from their
plight and turned it to his own.
For two days, halting now at one village, now at
another, the Jarran exodus poured south-eastward
towards the Bambarran country. Then the tempo
slackened. Mungo and Johnson halted for two
153
days at the village of Queira while Mungo groomed
and fed and refreshed c that small, but very hardy
and spirited beast5 which he had ridden since he
left Pisania, seven months before.
In this confusion of war and retreat he imagined
himself forgotten or abandoned by the Emir of
Ludamar. He was mistaken. On the afternoon of
the ist of July a party of Moors arrived to take him
back to Bubaker.
154
cy /T With their usual dilatoriness, however, they
^ ^ put up at the house of the village duti.
Johnson spied upon them and told the news to
Mungo, who was tending his horse in a field outside
the village. Mungo almost fainted, remembering
the horrors of Bubaker, seeing himself undergoing
them for many more months, perhaps a slave all
his life in the desolate lands that fringe Sahara.
He resolved to escape that night, riding into
Bambarra himself. Johnson, reasonably, • refused
to accompany him. He was to make his way back
to the Gambia with a slave-caravan.
Nevertheless, all that night the black spied on the
movements of the Moors the while Mungo prepared
his scanty wardrobe and collected some provisions.
He had two shirts, two pairs of trousers, two pocket-
handkerchiefs, an upper and under waistcoat, a hat,
and a pair of half-boots. Apart from his horse,
this was the total of his possessions. He had no
money and no trade articles of beads or amber with
which to purchase guidance or protection in the
wild lands towards the Niger.
About daybreak the Moors, who had chattered
all night in the hut of the duti of Queira, fell asleep.
Johnson came and whispered the news to Mungo.
A cold sweat broke out on the latter’s forehead.
Gripping his bundle of clothes, he made his way
155
to the outskirts of the village, stepping cautiously
over sleeping negroes—sleeping in the open, the
refugees of Jarra. Here his horse stood saddled in
readiness, and here, in the false dawn, he shook
hands with Johnson, mounted, and rode away
towards Bambarra.
Each bush that waved by the track seemed to
him to hide a Moor. He became conscious how
ragged were his nerves, and attempted to calm
himself. Then it was he stumbled upon disaster
again. Losing his way in the uncertain light, he
had approached the watering-place of Queira
where Moorish shepherds gathered with their
flocks. The well-guardians recognised the Chris¬
tian, and set up a howl of recognition ; Mungo
put his horse to a trot, and, though the shep¬
herds followed him for about a mile, hooting
and stone-throwing, they did not overtake him.
It was evidently merely an idle sport to bored and
idle men. Mungo heaved a sigh of relief. He had
escaped.
At that very moment he heard a loud halloo
behind him, and looked back. Three Moors,
well-mounted and brandishing muskets, were rid¬
ing in his track.
The courage of despair came on Mungo. He
wheeled round his horse and rode back to meet
them.
The Moors seemed a little surprised. Mungo
stared at them indifferently. So let it be. Captivity,
death, what did it matter ? His captors wheeled
i56
round their horses and rode by his side, and he
looked forward to the long rides up through the
bitter lands of Ludamar and the long months and
perhaps years that awaited him there.
Then came an unexpected turn of events. The
Moors demanded to see the contents of the bundle
he carried on his saddle.
Wondering, he opened it for them. They turned
over his gear in apparent disgust, stole his cloak,
clapped spurs to their horses, and rode away.
Mungo, in a daze, called loudly upon them to
return his precious cloak. For answer, one of them
presented his musket at the Christian’s head and
told him to get about his business.
The morning behind them, they disappeared.
Slowly the situation dawned on Mungo. They
were no emissaries of Ali. They were merely Moors
engaged in supplementing their ordinary incomes
by a little honest robbery.
He had escaped.
!57
ey n His route was east-south-east, avoiding Deena
^ l and making for the Bambarran borders. It
was a wild sandy land, with here and there clumps
of ragged trees erupting from the tundra—a debat¬
able land belonging neither to Kaarta, Ludamar nor
to Bambarra. Under the glow of the sun its desola¬
tion became every moment the more obtrusive.
But for long it looked to Mungo a land of peace, a
haven of safety. He had escaped.
He straightened his shoulders and sat upright on
his horse. A murmuring of old songs came to his
lips, a great gladness to his heart. Penniless but
happy, he rode forward into the sun-glow. Far
down in the east a range of hills winked and shone
in the bright day.
About ten o’clock he made a detour from the
track to avoid the neighbourhood of a herd of goats.
Probably they were guarded by Moors. Noon
approached. Some of his light-heartedness began
to evaporate under the stress of thirst. Abandoning
the track to avoid the goats, he seemed to have
abandoned all road to human habitation. He urged
his horse up a little incline and looked about him.
Nothing moved or cried in that desolate land. The
sands were a winking mirror flinging the heat back
blindingly upon the burnished bronze mirror of the
sky. The trees and cactus-clumps wilted under the
158
glare. Mungo’s tongue clove to the roof of his
mouth. He dismounted from his horse and climbed
a tree the better to view the countryside, but still
saw no signs of a well or of human habitation.
In mid-afternoon he came on two Moorish boys
guarding a herd of goats which they told him be¬
longed to Ali. They stared their wonder at his
appearance, but were merely shy, not insolent.
They had no water : they had seen no water any¬
where. Mungo thanked them and rode on.
His lips were by this time ridged and inflamed,
his mouth felt like a volcanic cavern. He plucked
the leaves of some shrubs and chewed them. But
even the leaves seemed to have no moisture in them,
and merely increased his thirst. Sometimes the
world about him reeled and grew dim, and he rode
half-delirious. In a clearer moment towards sunset
he again dismounted from his horse and again
climbed a tree. Everywhere around stretched the
same dismal landscape, the horizon as level and
uninterrupted as that of the sea.
Descending from the tree, he stared at his horse.
There was no need for it to perish as well as himself:
it was too weak to carry him further. He was
fumbling at the bridle and saddle to remove them
and allow the beast to shift for itself when he
fainted.
When he recovered his senses the night had come
down, and with its coming was a little wind that
blew in his face. His horse stood patiently beside
him. Revived, he got up and resolved on another
J59
attempt to reach a well or a village. Driving his
horse before him, he stumbled through the evening.
The wind rose. Presently he saw a play of light¬
ning pallid upon the north-eastern horizon. With
that to companion him he stumbled forward hope¬
fully. It was now quite dark. Thunder growled
over the desolate treey countryside. Then Mungo
heard the pattering of the thousand footsteps of the
rain, and halted, and raised an open mouth to the sky.
Instantly his mouth was filled and choked with
particles of sand. So stingingly were they driven
upon his face that for a moment he was blinded ;
his face and neck and shoulders smarted under the
sting of the sand-hail. Sobbing, he mounted his
horse and drove it under the lee of a bush. The
sandstorm raged by. Mungo spat the dust from his
mouth and trudged forward again.
About ten o’clock the thunder again awoke, and
again there came the pattering of the storm’s feet.
But this time it was really rain. Mungo halted and
tore off his clothes and spread them on the ground.
The thunderclap broke overhead. Blessedly re¬
freshing, the rain pelted him and his horse, drench¬
ing both, drenching again and again the clothes
spread out on the sand. Mungo quenched his
thirst by wringing out the water from the clothes
into his mouth, all in the deep moonless dark. 1 he
provident shower had saved his life.
Revived, he tramped on again, consulting his
compass every now and then by the flashes of lig t-
ning. About midnight that ceased and darkness
160
unrelieved fell upon him and his weary horse. Now
he could not see a hand’s breadth in front of his eyes,
and groped forward with outstretched fingers.
Suddenly his horse flung up a startled head. Look¬
ing askance, Mungo perceived a distant light among
the trees.
Here was surely a village and shelter. But as he
neared the light and heard the calling of voices and
the lowing of cattle, Mungo saw that it was merely
another Moorish watering-place. In the light of the
torches a party of Ludamar herdsmen were drawing
water for their cattle. Mungo, hungry and again
thirsty though he was, turned to sneak back to the
trackless woods. But in the darkness he almost
stumbled over a tent, and was seen by a woman who
screamed in alarm. Others came running to look.
Mungo and his horse hid behind a bush, and waited
for the noise of the search-party to die away.
He travelled all the remainder of the night. At
daybreak the croaking of frogs led him to some
shallow pools in the woods, frog-filled, so that it was
difficult to see the surface of the water. Mungo beat
away the frogs with a branch of a tree, allowed his
horse to drink, drank himself, and climbed a tree to
spy out the land. Remotely, east-south-east from
the pools, a pillar of smoke rose blue in the quiet air,
It was some twelve or fourteen miles distant. All
that forenoon Mungo pressed on towards it through
the scrubland, his horse very fatigued. Near noon
he came on a corn plantation where negroes worked,
and was told that the village nearby was a Foulah
on. 161 i.
village, Shrilla, owned by the unescapable Ali, Emir
of Ludamar. In other circumstances Mungo might
have mounted his horse and spurred from the spot.
But both he and his horse were too exhausted to
venture further in the heat of the day. He rode into
the village and sought out the duti’s hut.
The duti refused him either food or drink. Un¬
surprised, and well acquainted by now with the
most likely place to obtain succour in an African
village, Mungo directed his steps to the poorest
quarter. In front of a hut an old woman sat spin¬
ning cotton. Mungo made signs to her that he was
starving. Thereat she laid aside her distaff,
beckoned him into the hut and fed him on a dish of
kouskous. Mungo devoured it with a sleepy grati¬
tude. He had not slept for a very long time. But
in retrospect, at least, he was moved to appropriate
Biblical genuflections :
‘ Overcome with joy at so unexpected a deliverance, I
lifted up my eyes to heaven, and whilst my heart swelled
with gratitude, I returned thanks to that gracious and
bountiful Being, whose power had supported me under
so many dangers, and had now spread for me a table in
the wilderness.5
These Psalmistic exercises completed, Mungo
overheard a whispering outside the old woman’s hut.
Some Foulahs had assembled and were debating the
impounding of Mungo, and forwarding him captive
to Ali. Mungo hastily finished the kouskous, went
out of the hut, tied up some corn for his horse in a
bag, and set out in a northerly direction to give the
162
villagers the notion that he had nothing to fear from
the Moors, and, in fact, was travelling into their
country. The village children followed him for a
mile or so, crying rude things. Mungo would
willingly have wrung their necks. Instead, he smiled
upon them politely. Thereat they abandoned him.
Relieved of their presence, he sought shelter under
a large tree, spread himself a bed of twigs, and fell
blissfully and completely into a profound sleep. But
even in this he was not allowed to remain for long.
Three Foulahs passed by about two o’clock and,
observing Mungo asleep, were suitably shocked!
They took him for a Moor and imagined he had
overslept the midday prayer. They shook him
awake. Mungo stared at them, saddled his horse in
dead silence while they looked on, and rode off to
the south-east.
The country took to itself a greener and more
fertile aspect. He was passing from the regions of
the scrubland into the true African forest again.
The grass rose lush and gigantic. Behind the great
tree-boles the shadows lay fervid and blue. Near
sunset Mungo’s horse came upon a track through
the forest, and followed it until midnight, when the
track ceased in a pool of rain-water. Here IVIungo,
dismounting and feeding his horse, determined to
camp. It was a silent and solitary place. He made
his bed under the stars and lay down to resume the
sleep from which the three Foulahs had evicted him.
But, in the northern sands, he had forgotten the
accompaniments of forest life in the night. Droves
163
of mosquitoes came from the pool to vex him. Now
and then a lion howled dangerously near at hand ;
and twice, when he had dozed off uneasily, he awoke
to the squall and cry of wild beasts hunted or hunt¬
ing under the trees.
He turned on another shoulder and let them
squall.
At daybreak he resumed his ride through the now
silenced woods. The forest thinned out. Low hills
appeared before him. Wild hogs grunted amid the
tree-clumps, and he saw ostriches and antelopes
upon the hills. About eleven o’clock he climbed a
tree and surveyed the countryside. Several miles
distant in the south were red patches in the forest¬
land. He judged these to be cultivated tracts and
rode towards them.
He was not mistaken ; they were Foulah fields,
surrounding a village of Foulah tents. Here neither
the name nor the fanaticism of Ali were emulated.
One of the natives summoned Mungo into his tent
and fed him on a dish of boiled corn and dates,
asking no return. The shepherd sat and watched,
amused by his freakish visitor. The shepherd’s wife
and offspring were less amused. The children
huddled up to their mother in the darkness of the
tent, and howled their horror of the Christian.
Their mother was scarcely less moved. At last she
could bear it no longer, and c crept slowly towards
the door, out of which she sprang like a greyhound,
and was instantly followed by her children ’. Mungo
and the shepherd continued on good terms. Cutting
164
some brass buttons from his once gay coat, Mungo
purchased a small bag of corn for his horse, and
again set out on his travels.
Near the end of the daylight, he came on a track
that wound definitely through the woods in the
direction of Bambarra. This he followed. But
about eight o’clock, hearing the noise of a party of
men approaching from the Bambarran border, his
confidence forsook him. He rode his horse into the
shelter of some thick woods that grew by the side of
the track—a dangerous retreat, for it was in such
clumps that wild beasts laired. Fortunately, he trod
on none. He dismounted and listened. The voices
came nearer. Mungo grasped his horse by the nose
to prevent him from neighing, and listened in a
silence broken by the pounding of his own heart.
The newcomers from Bambarra had seen him or
his shadow glide round the thicket. They searched
it in an idle fashion, missed Mungo, and went on
their way into the night.
He crept out, his face a fine mist of sweat, and
mounted the weary horse. Towards midnight the
croaking of frogs guided him to a pool. There he
and the horse drank, their faces darkly mirrored in
the starshine. Near at hand, in an open space, grew
a great tree. Mungo tethered the horse under it and
himself lay down to sleep.
165
O Q It was a hungry forest. Towards morning he
^ Owas wakened by the patter and scuffle of a
pack of wolves circling the tree. The morning was
scarcely yet come, but he saw the light gleam in
their eyes. He rose and rode away into that morn¬
ing, and the wolves gave him up.
Somewhere in that morning he passed over the
border of Ludamar into long-sought Bambarra.
The country became cultivated. About ten o’clock
he came in sight of high-walled Wawra, and rode
through its gates, wearily unobservant, to the hut of
the duti. That individual, one Flancharee, had once
been a slaver on the Gambia. He received Mungo
with a hospitable surprise, and provided him with
food and a bed. The young Scot lay down on a
dried bullock’s hide and slipped over a precipice
into a pit of sleep.
But two hours later he woke to the sound of an
argument. The Wise Men of Wawra had assembled
to peer at the traveller. Some averred he was an
Arab : others that he was certainly the Sultan of
some Moorish state. Flancharee observed dryly
that Mungo was none of these things, certainly a
white man, and certainly a poor one at that.
Mungo rested for the remainder of the day in
Wawra. Flancharee’s welcome ebbed towards
evening. He seized on the bundle on Mungo’s
166
saddle, opened it, and examined its contents. The
examination must have confirmed his previous
guess : this white man was a poor one. Disgusted,
Flancharee directed Mungo to depart in the morning.
The morning came in rain. Mungo rode out
through it in the direction of a village called
Dingyee. For about a mile a negro traveller
accompanied him on an ass. At the end of the mile
the ass decided against the journey and kicked its
rider off. The rider picked himself up and obedi¬
ently returned to Wawra. The ass passes un¬
saga5 ed from the story.
In Dingyee Mungo was hospitably entertained by
an old Foulah who had developed a remarkable
theory. White men knew a lot. This knowledge
they lodged in their heads. White men had hair.
Therefore, were one lucky enough to secure suffi¬
cient hair from the head of a white man to construct
a reasonably large charm, one would automatically
come into a great deal of white wisdom.
Mungo remarked, with sardonic politeness, that
he had never before heard of so simple a mode of
education. But he had no objection to enlightening
the darkness of the old Foulah. ‘ And my landlord’s
thirst for learning was such that, with cutting and
pulling, he cropped one side of my head pretty
closely ; and would have done the same with the
other, had I not signified my disapprobation by
putting on my hat, and assuring him that I wished
to reserve some of this precious merchandise for a
future occasion.5
167
About midday on the 8th of July, he arrived at the
village of Wassiboo. A dense forest lay to the south.
Through this was his route. But it was a forest
without tracks, and he must wait for guides.
Four days went by. Mungo rested and fed his
horse, and stared at the sky for signs of the rains.
The sun shone from a clear sky. Abandoning his
notes, Mungo went out with the hospitable villagers
to help them sow their crops in a rich earth. They
were a happy and a well-fed folk, though they had
to go armed even to the fields because of the con¬
stant threat of Moorish raids.
On the evening of the nth a party of refugee
Kaartans, evicted from Jarra, arrived in Wassiboo.
Transferring their allegiance from the Daisy to Ali,
they had found themselves even more bitterly
oppressed. Now they purposed seeking out Man-
song, the ruler of Bambarra, and offering allegiance
to him. They offered to guide Mungo through the
trackless southern woods as far as the town of Satile.
At daybreak on July the 12th, all mounted,
Mungo and the Kaartans entered the forest. In the
dense avenues they made good progress, for the
underbrush was thin. Twice they halted at water-
holes as the day passed, and once at the ruins of a
village destroyed in the wars. Emerging from the
forests in the later afternoon, the cavalcade was
sighted by the toiling inhabitants of Satile, engaged
on their plots of land. Instantly a wild hullabaloo
broke out. Satile slaves galloped hither and thither,
driving the cattle into the town. Drums beat and
168
summoned the inhabitants to arms. The new¬
comers had been mistaken for a band of Moorish
marauders.
The gates were shut in their faces, and a long
argument through them took place with the duti of
Satile. Convinced of their harmlessness at last, that
official ordered the gates to be opened and the
travellers admitted. Meantime the sky had become
overcast and a stiff wind blew. As Mungo sought
his bullock-hide bed in the village guest-house he
heard the wailing coming of the rain on the roof.
Next morning he and the Kaartans rode through
a land rivuleted and green and refreshed with the
night’s tornado. But Mungo’s horse had had its
spirit broken while a fellow-captive with its master
among the Moors. By noon it was too exhausted
to bear him further. They were again deep in
forest-land. Mungo dismounted and told the
Kaartans to go on ; he would follow when his horse
had rested a little.
It was a land of contrasts—of bands of thieves and
bands of harassed kind-hearted refugees. The
Kaartans refused to leave him. This was lion
country, and though a lion might fear to attack a
body of men, it would, if hungry, have no such
scruples in attacking a single individual. Finally it
was agreed that one of the blacks should stay with
Mungo and assist in driving the horse, while the
others went ahead to the town of Galloo to procure
lodgings.
Presently Mungo and the black, assiduously beat-
169
ing forward the horse, emerged from the forest in
sight of Galloo, standing at the lip of a green and
fertile valley. Rocky hills rose about it, a pleasant
town to look upon after the dripping dankness of
the forest. Its duti was equally pleasant. He pre¬
sented the travellers with a sheep for themselves and
corn for their horses.
It was, indeed, a land of corn that through which
they were progressing towards the mysterious Great
River of which Mungo now heard more and more.
The land was fertile and the inhabitants hospitable,
in accordance with a law of social development of
which Mungo had never heard. Sometimes they
were loaded with more provisions than they could
eat. Mungo’s horse recovered considerably, while
he himself had allowed the dread of the Moors to
slip from his mind. Yet they would still raid down
as far as this from Ludamar, though the cavalcade
saw nothing of them then, nor were to see anything.
By the 18th of July, however, they were coming
into more populous country, daily traversed by
caravans of natives journeying to and from Sego,
the capital of Bambarra. The villagers were now
less hospitable. Sometimes Mungo and the Kaar-
tans passed from village to village, begging for food
and being refused it. Mungo’s horse was again a
miserable wreck. More often than not he got off
and drove the beast before him, rather than ride it.
Rains came with nearly every sunset, drenching the
weary travellers and turning the forest paths to
winding tracks of glaur.
170
On the morning of the 19th the party set out for
Doolinkeaboo. Mungo’s fellow-travellers had had
their care and compassion for him worn thin in the
week’s journeyings. Presently they disappeared,
leaving him to follow barefoot, driving his gaunt-
ribbed Rosinante. So it was that he met his first
slave caravan.
It was coming from the direction of Sego, a band
of seventy slaves, many of them women, many thin
and staggering with fatigue. They were tied neck
to neck by thongs of bullock-hide, and the headman
in charge of the caravan told Mungo they were to be
driven up through the Sahara, five months’ march,
and sold in Morocco. Mungo stared at him and
them, politely curious. One wonders how many of
those slaves survived that march.
The owners of the caravan followed at a distance
of a few hours behind. In the late afternoon they
encountered Mungo. Here, in Bambarra, they were
politer than in Ludamar, though very inquisitive.
The Christian looked too poor to rob and too peace¬
able to provoke. They rode on and left him to
trudge the miry tracks, very footsore.
Doolinkeaboo was a miserly village. Mungo’s
Kaartans had pushed on ahead, but Mungo was
forced to pass the night there. Its headman limited
his hospitality to the offer of a drink of water. Next
morning, having procured a little meal to mix with
the water, Mungo (with perhaps a sigh of memory
over the flowing brose-caps of Fowlshiels) drank
down the tasteless mess, and took the road again.
171
Those endless trackless roads haunt his tale. But
the object of his search was close at hand, though
hidden yet in the ventures and fortunes of two days.
He came to a watering-place where some hospitable
Foulahs gave him a drink of milk. Here he found
two negroes who were journeying to Sego, and who
did not refuse his company when he offered to com¬
panion them. Well fed and complacent, they could
bear even the company of this poor white trash.
In the afternoon the three of them came to a small
and nameless village where some sort of public en¬
tertainment was in progress Everyone was drinking
beer—great quantities of beer, women mixing freely
with the men. The three travellers were invited to
join in the revels, and Mungo’s throat was cleansed
of much dust and aching unease in the excellent
beer of Africa. Many of the natives were intoxi¬
cated, he tells. But he offers none of his usual re¬
proofs on such un-Selkirk-like behaviour. They
might drink, he probably felt, and be damned.
Nearing the capital of Bambarra, the ragged
white man became an object of mirth. The two
negroes repented of their good-nature in allowing
him to travel with them, being sensitive souls in
whom ridicule bit deeply. Children hooted from
the village gates. Bourgeois Bambarrans drew aside
their skirts in distaste as the barefooted dusty un¬
shaven Mungo plodded forward behind his stagger¬
ing horse. Proletarian Bambarrans grinned widely,
exchanging broad witticisms. Here was a pilgrim
from Mecca, they called : you could see it by his
172
clothes. And his horse ! God of the Prophet, was
it a horse ? Of course it was a horse—only a trifle
sick. . . . And so forth. Mungo smiled upon the
wits and meekly declined jocular offers to purchase
his beast as a zoo curiosity. He could withstand
with ease the guffaws of Bambarra after enduring
the buffets of Benowm.
As darkness came down they reached a small
village where Mungo succeeded in obtaining food
for himself and some corn for his horse in exchange
for one of his precious brass buttons. It was lion
country. The gates were closed soon after sunset
and no one allowed to go out. Mungo, lying down
to sleep, heard the roar of the beasts and their
snuffling inquiries outside the gates. Poor Rosinante
trembled. Mungo tossed from side to side on his
hard bed, vexed by mosquitoes and that bright
possibility awaiting him on the morrow. Finally,
finding it useless to court sleep, tired though he was,
he got up and prowled the hours of the dark.
Long before daylight he had his horse saddled and
waiting, and watched with impatience the sky flush
in the amethyst of the African dawn. Presently the
birds began to call, the strange birds of the African
wilderness. Cattle lowed and moved in the kraals.
Yawning and sleepy, the guardians of the gates
flung them open. Mungo and the two blacks took
the road to Sego.
It was market-day in the capital, and the roads
were crowded. Some stopped and gaped at Mungo
with open mouths. Everywhere his advent was
i?3
greeted with giggles. Sego had seen many funny
sights, but none quite so funny as this. Imperturb¬
able, Mungo rode forward. Presently he overtook
a body of horsemen who turned out to be the fugitive
Kaartans who were going to Sego to ask the pro¬
tection of Mansong. Rather ashamed of their
recent desertion of Mungo, they offered to introduce
him to the ruler of Bambarra when they should come
to the capital.
Here a stretch of marshland edged the road, with
tall grasses which cut off the view. But presently
one of the Kaartans pointed ahead, < Geo qffili—See
the water ! 5
A moment later Mungo saw it himself—c the long-
sought-for majestic Niger, glittering to the morning
sun, as broad as the Thames at Westminster, and
flowing slowly to the eastward. I hastened to the brink
and, having drank of the water, lifted up my fervent
thanks in prayer, to the Great Ruler of all things,
for having thus far crowned my endeavours with
success.5
Thalassa ! Thalassa !
174
Cy Q Here was the Great River—and flowing towards
*** the rising sun. That much at least he had
ascertained. But how could it flow eastward and
yet emerge on the western coast ? Did it, after all,
seep away into the sands of the interior ? Mungo
stared at its placid waters with a kindling heart.
Only by embarking on these could he hope to
answer that question, and only by obtaining an
audience with Mansong, the king of Bambarra,
could he hope to proceed on the journey.
He made his way into the nearer town. The
Kaartans had disappeared. Probably they found
him, poverty-stricken, an embarrassing companion,
a hang-dog poor relation, in these citied surround¬
ings. Now Mungo was made aware that Sego con¬
sisted of four separate towns, two on the northern
bank and two on the southern. Mansong resided on
the south bank. It would be necessary to obtain a
passage across the river.
There were three ferry routes and innumerable
ferrymen, as Mungo discovered when he made his
way to the bank. Also, there was a great crowd
awaiting transport across to the south bank. The
crowd stared and giggled. Mungo surveyed it
blandly. Sweating, the slave ferrymen pulled off
with loaded canoes. Here the currency was the
cowrie shell, that ancient symbol of the fertility of
J75
women. Mungo had no cowries, nothing to pay in
the country’s currency for his passage to Mansong’s
town apart from a few surviving buttons.
He sat down to await his turn in the great flat-
bottomed canoes. They were so large that even
horses were being ferried across. In the sun-
shimmer the walls of south-bank Sego glimmered
white. The crowds around Mungo had every
appearance of prosperity, and far as the eye could
see beyond the town-walls lay fertile and cultivated
fields. No wild and deserted river-stretch, but a
prosperous and civilised countryside in which he
came upon the Niger. He was greatly cheered, in
spite of the sun-glare.
But meantime news had been carried to Mansong
that a white man, that unicorn of the African
interior, was waiting on the north bank and was
coming to see him. Mansong received the news
uneasily. The mullahs probably dictated the
message he sent across the ferry : Mungo must not
cross until he obtained permission.
What was he to do then ? Mungo enquired. The
messenger scratched his head. Spend the night at
that village along the bank, he advised. In the
morning he would come back with further instruc¬
tions.
Dispirited, Mungo turned his weary horse in the
direction indicated. The shimmering Niger lost
something of its brightness.
The villagers would have none of him, regarding
him with fear and repulsion. Foodless, and without
176
water, he sat all day in the shade of a tree, watching
the sky becoming overcast with heavy rain-clouds.
Sunset drew near, and he became faint for lack of
food. This again, and the Niger beside him !
He took the bridle and saddle from his worn horse
and slapped the animal on its lean haunch. It must
shift for itself. Then, remembering the plenitude
of wild beasts in this neighbourhood, he prepared
to climb into the tree and spend the night there.
But again a woman of Africa took compassion on
him, a peasant woman returning from her work in
the fields. She stopped and looked at him without
fear and asked what was wrong. As well as the
parched nature of his throat would allow, Mungo
explained that he had had no food or water for
many hours. The woman stared her pity, and then,
more practical, caught up his bridle and saddle and
gestured to him to follow her.
The darkness had come down as Mungo came to
her hut. A fire burned smokily in front of it. The
woman went in and lighted a lamp, spread a mat,
and invited Mungo to sit down. Her daughters,
sitting spinning in the hut, gazed their astonish¬
ment. But this was a peasant woman of the same
nature as her of Fowlshiels, strong and self-reliant.
She went and broiled fish for Mungo and presently
came back with the dish. While he fed she turned
her eyes away from his famished attack on the food
and ordered her daughters to get on with their work.
There was probably a dryness in her own throat, as
in Mungo’s.
G.N.
177
M
The light flickered in the crude lamp as the
women fell to their task, presently breaking into a
sweet and plaintive song on Mungo and his con¬
dition :
The winds roared and the rains fell ;
The poor white man, faint and weary,
Came and sat under our tree.
He has no mother to bring him milk,
JVb wife to grind his corn
Cho. : Let us pity the white man,
No mother has he.
Mungo turned his face to the wall and wept.
He stayed three days in that village by Niger-
bank, waiting for Mansong’s messenger to return.
The villagers presently lost their fear of him, and
came and gossiped sympathetically. From them
Mungo learned that the Moors and slatis in Sego
were already plotting against him, suggesting to
Mansong that he was a spy. On the forenoon of
July the 22nd, a tardy messenger arrived from the
Bambarran court. Where were Mungo s presents
for the king ?
In Ludamar, retorted Mungo, stolen from him by
the Moors. The messenger retired abashed.
Next afternoon another came. He brought in his
hand a bag which he handed to Mungo together
with the king’s message. The latter was that Mungo
was to depart at once from Sego. The bag con¬
tained a present of five thousand cowries, sufficient
to pay for the provisioning of Mungo and his horse
through a period of nearly two months.
178
Mungo sat and stared dazed at this wealth
suddenly thrust upon him. Then he learned from
the guide that Mansong, though naturally suspicious
of a white man who was reputed to have come into
his dominions solely to look upon the Great River
(were there no rivers in his own country, and was
not one river like another, anyhow ?), would never¬
theless have admitted him willingly enough to south-
bank Sego but for his Moorish counsellors. As it
was, Mungo’s life would be seriously endangered
from the fanatical populace if he crossed the Niger.
The king had done what he could. Let Mungo
depart.
He does not seem to have hesitated a moment in
his choice. This was the Niger : but it was not yet
Timbuctoo. He resolved to press on to that city
by way of Sansanding and Jenne.
Mansong’s messenger agreed to guide him to the
former. Mounting his horse, Mungo bade farewell
to the African woman who had succoured him, tied
his wealth to his saddle-bow, and rode through the
heat of the rest of that day till he came to a village
where some acquaintances of his guide lived. Here
Mungo was hospitably received, but fell in with a
garrulous individual who proceeded to curdle his
blood. Jenne ? True it was nominally a Bam-
barran town. But most of the inhabitant were
Moors, hating Christians like poison. They would
probably murder or enslave him. And even if he
escaped them, what would his fortune be in still
more distant and still more savage Timbuctoo ?
179
But Mungo was not to be turned back. He had
learned too little to have definite information of
value to his employers, suffered too much not to
believe he could endure hardships in the towns of
Niger-bank. All the next day he journeyed by that
placid slow-flowing river, through a rich and fertile
land that minded him of England, so kempt and
clipped it was. Here was the home of the shea-
butter industry ; the trees hung ripe with the nuts.
Villages, fishermen’s villages, drowsed on the Niger’s
banks. It was a land of peace.
Sansanding was reached towards five o’clock in
the afternoon. It was a large walled town, con¬
taining from eight to ten thousand inhabitants.
Here the ruling caste was again the Moor, and
Mungo directed his guide to conduct him to the
house of the duti by as secret a way as possible. In
the narrow tortuous streets they nevertheless en¬
countered many of the negro populace. These
mistook Mungo for a Moor and made way for him
with the usual fear of negroes for the oppressor. All
went well. Mungo endeavoured to look as Moorish
as possible, and the deception was passing off
happily until, emerging near the river bank, they
came on a genuine Moor. This individual, having
glanced at Mungo, set up a loud howl of distaste,
and summoned a number of his countrymen. The
whole pack swarmed at Mungo’s heels as he made
his way to the house of the negro duti.
By the time he reached that house his convoy had
swelled to hundreds, negroes and Moors. A babel
180
of different dialects smote the air. Half-a-dozen
different men and women claimed acquaintance
with Mungo. One woman even declared that she
had kept house for him for three years at Gallam on
the Senegal. While Mungo was denying acquaint¬
ance with the lady, the Moors shouldered the
negroes aside, and commanded Mungo to declare
his religion.
Mungo pretended an obtuse ignorance of what
they meant. Thereat they summoned two Jews to
hold converse with him. These far stragglers from
the tents of Israel Mungo regarded with a priggish
dislike. And them also he pretended he could not
understand. The Moors lost patience. One, a
shereef from a town in the Sahara, was the ring¬
leader. He proposed to have Mungo dragged to
the mosque and there made to repeat the cere¬
monial prayers.
At this point, however, the duti, somewhat timor¬
ously, intervened on behalf of the c king’s stranger ’
and saved him from immediate physical violence.
To quiet the threats of the Moors he consented to
ascend a high seat by the door of the mosque.
There, until sunset, he sat and was stared upon by
the inhabitants of Sansanding—a populace so
anxious to gaze upon him that they climbed walls
and peered from windows and stood on each
other’s shoulders. Mungo sat prim and polite, dis¬
regarding their more obnoxious remarks as well as
he might.
Sunset brought relief. The duti had him con-
181
veyed to a neat little hut surrounded by a courtyard.
But even here the Moors broke in, climbing over the
mud-wall, to see Mungo perform his evening de¬
votions—and eat eggs. Mungo answered that he
had no objections to eating the eggs, if they would
bring them. Thereon, watched by a multitude, the
duti laid seven hen’s eggs in front of Mungo and
waited for him to commence operations. Mungo
remarked that he never ate raw eggs, a remark
received with considerable surprise by the entire
throng. Sansanding understood that white men
lived on raw eggs.
Convinced at last that he was amenable to more
ordinary fare, the duti had a sheep killed and part of
it roasted for Mungo’s table. About midnight the
yawning Moors, cheated of any great measure of
amusement after all, began to trail out of the court¬
yard. Mungo was asked for a written charm by the
duti, and wrote him out the Lord’s Prayer. Then
he lay down and slept.
He left Sansanding early the next morning and
for three days rode forward as rapidly as possible
along the Niger banks, passing from village to
village without interference and everywhere hospi¬
tably entertained until he reached the Foulah town
of Nyamee. Here the duti refused to see him, but
sent his son to guide Mungo through the thick
woods about that place.
It was again a land of lions. The duti’s son kept
peering fearfully at every bush they passed. Mungo
asked him in some impatience what he feared, and
182
received the lion alarm somewhat sceptically.
Shortly afterwards he saw his first giraffe. It
trotted away sluggishly, turning a tall neck to
observe if the Scot and his guides were in pursuit.
Mungo’s horse would have had difficulty in pur¬
suing a tortoise. Presently the forest thinned, and
they came on an open waste dotted with ragged
bushes. Suddenly the guide called out in alarm—
c A very large lion ! ’—and gestured to Mungo to
turn and ride back.
Mungo knew better. His horse was incapable of
flight, and probably the guide had been mistaken.
He rode slowly forward. The guide had not been
mistaken. At his next ejaculation ofc God preserve
us ! ’ Mungo raised his head and saw a great lion
squatting by a bush, regardant, his head on his
paws, his eyes surveying the travellers with a mild
disinterest.
Mungo felt his heart beat painfully. He pulled
his feet from the stirrups in order to throw himself
on the ground when the beast sprang. The horse
moved slowly forward. The lion watched them go
by. Mungo heaved a sigh, and refrained with an
effort from imputing a minor miracle to the Al¬
mighty.
They left the woods and took to a swampy track.
Lions were seldom found in swamps. Sunset
brought them to the village of Modiboo, ‘ a delight¬
ful village on the banks of the Niger ’ it seemed to
Mungo at first sight. Here the Great River flowed
wide and majestic, gathering its waters from many
183
a streaming rivulet of the forests ere it entered the
heat-belts of Timbuctoo and swung about on its
long mission down to the open sea. Out from
Modiboo were green islets where Foulahs pastured
their herds in safety from the lions.
But the paradise was undefended against mos¬
quitoes. It was as hospitable to the latter as to
Mungo. They assembled in battalions and with
whirs of delight, feasting on his white flesh and
savouring its unaccustomed bouquet. Ragged and
shoeless Mungo had little defence against them.
All night he tramped up and down his hut, fanning
himself with his hat. By morning he had developed
a slight fever which showed in his eyes and gestures.
The duti of Modiboo had no passion for nursing
the sick. One glance at Mungo, and he summoned
a servant to guide the white man out of the village
and on the road to Kea. Mungo rode with a
swimming head. His horse shambled, similarly
afflicted. Half-a-dozen miles from Modiboo, the
horse stumbled and fell, and refused or was unable
to rise. Mungo saw that it was finished. He re¬
moved the saddle and bridle from the much-tried
beast, patted it, gathered grass for it to eat if it
should live, and then followed his guide through a
long and headachy hour’s tramp to Kea.
Here the duti, a surly ancient sitting by the wall-
gate, declined to know Mungo. The latter ad¬
dressed him with his usual politeness. The duti was
unmoved, observing sardonically that fine speeches
didn’t move him, he knew a thing or two, he did.
184
At that moment a fishing-boat came paddled down
the Niger close to the shore. Here was a method of
getting rid of this ragged alien. The duti summoned
the fisherman to take Mungo out of his sight.
Here the guide turned back, and the negro fisher¬
man, with considerable reluctance, allowed the
ragged and flushed-faced Mungo on board. At four
o’clock, after some fishing exploits by the way, they
came to Moorzan, a town on the northern bank.
Mungo desired to cross to Silla, a much larger place
on the south bank, and, having attained that haven,
appears to have remained considerably at a loss for
the rest of the day. Probably he was dazed with
fever. He sat down under a large tree.
Silla was delighted. It thronged out in hundreds
to look at him and speculate on him. As a front
line of spectators moved off, another took its place.
But they threw neither insults nor old boots, as at
Benowm. They had the good humour of civilised
humankind inspecting a strange but harmless
animal. Towards the fall of darkness, Mungo made
his way into the town. Rain was coming on. The
duti proved of a surly nature and only after long
entreaty would he allow Mungo shelter. That
shelter proved to be a vilely leaking hut. Here
Mungo laid down his aching bones and an aching
head, and, somewhere in the darkness of that night,
came to a hesitating decision.
He could go no further. Even with the king of
Bambarra’s cowries he was poorly equipped to press
the down-river search. Probably they would not
185
act as currency in the Moorish lands along the Niger.
And in those lands, footsore, unmounted, ragged,
what protection would he have ? The rainy season
had definitely come down, closing many routes. So
it closed down his hope of reaching Timbuctoo.
He resolved to turn back.
O Alt was the morning of July the 30th, 1796,
O V/ when Mungo, having collected a vast and
varied amount of information concerning the
forward waters of the Niger, the towns of Timbuctoo
and Houssa, and the habits of the man-eating
inhabitants of Maniana, had himself rowed across
the Niger to Moorzan, and from there set out on his
return to the coast, five hundred miles away.
The Niger was now in flood with the rains, and
it was impossible to go up river except by canoe.
After some bargaining, Mungo hired a canoeman
for the sum of sixty cowries, and was paddled up
the river to Kea, where the duti, that hard-headed
antique, insisted that he pay down another forty
cowries for the privilege of passing the night in a
leaking hut in company with a black slave. Too
weary to argue, Mungo lay down in the hut, and
in the nighttime found that the slave had taken
compassion on him and covered his rags and sores
with a cloth to keep away the mosquitoes.
Next morning Mungo set out for Modiboo in
company with the brother of the duti of Kea, a
gushing negro who offered to carry the saddle of
Mungo’s horse : Mungo still had the saddle borne
with him in his travels. Now, when Sego was
reached, he resolved to present it to Mansong. The
track led along the river bank, and all went well
187
for a time, till the negro observed in the mud the
pug-marks of a lion. Thereat, with great prudence,
he suggested that Mungo walk in front. If the lion
was hungry, it was surely better that he should
eat a white scarecrow than a respectable black.
Mungo mulishly refused to see this point of view,
and they stood and squabbled in the path. It was
a far cry from the days of the cool and composed
young Scot who rode into the woods of Woolli.
Finally the duti’s brother hurled the saddle to the
ground and disappeared into the woods.
Mungo shrugged his shoulders, and resolved to
burden himself no longer with the saddle. Accord¬
ingly, he detached the stirrups and flung the thing
into the Niger. At that the duti’s brother, who had
been hiding behind a bush, jumped into the river
in pursuit of the saddle, fished it to the bank with
his spear, and again disappeared amid the trees.
Mungo resumed his way alone, wary for lion.
Late in the afternoon he reached Modiboo and
found there his late guide, complete with saddle.
He had been afraid Mungo would inform Mansong
of his conduct. While they stood in argument,
Mungo heard the neighing of his horse. The beast
had been rescued from the woods by the village
headman. That worthy pressed Mungo to take it
away : it was eating its head off.
Next morning Mungo set out for Nyamee.
Presently it began to rain. By the time he reached
Nyamee it was pelting. For three days the sky
cascaded water, while Mungo sat in a hut and looked
188
out at it. On the 5th of August the sky cleared
and he took the westwards road again. The
savannahs were knee-deep in water. Mungo waded
through them hour on hour, driving his horse
before him. He came to Nyara, and stayed there
for another day of rain, then took to wading the
swamps again.
The roads grew worse and worse in the following
days. On August the 10th Mungo joined company
with a Moor and his wife who were riding into Sego
to sell salt. They were mounted on bullocks and
conversed in friendly fashion with Mungo. But they
knew as little of the country as he did. Presently
the woman, mounted on her bullock, set out to
cross a stretch of swamp while Mungo and the
husband eyed her venture with a prudent interest.
Half-way across the expected happened : the
bullock sank to the flanks in a hole, hurling woman
and salt among the reeds. The husband stood
petrified for some time, Mungo notes, he himself
standing by and regarding with a polite disinterest
the efforts of the Moorish lady to prevent herself
from drowning.
At sunset, still on the road to Sego, they came to
the village of Sibity. The rain had come on again.
The headman received Mungo coldly, and lodged
him in a damp and shaking hut. Mungo lay awake
in hourly expectation of the roof falling in under
the pelt of the water. Thrice throughout the night
he heard the crunch and crumple of other huts,
and in the morning counted fourteen which the rain
189
had whelmed since the beginning of the rainy
season. Sibity’s architecture was as indifferent as
its hospitality. The duti compelled Mungo to
depart at once on the road to Sandsanding.
He found himself now a suspected person,
shunned by the inhabitants of the villages which
had formerly received him with open arms. It was
said that he was a spy. Mansong had listened to
this tale, and had sent out various messengers to
have the white man arrested at Jenne and brought
back to Sego. These messengers had gone on down
river, and missed Mungo, now turned in his tracks.
None of the natives showed any eagerness to arrest
Mungo ; equally, they refused to assist him.
In Sansanding, the duti, formerly Mungo’s pro¬
tector against the Moors, refused to see him
publicly ; but he came to the white man privately,
under cover of darkness, and told him the news,
strongly advising him to avoid Sego.
Mungo took the road early next morning,
unobserved of the hostile Moors. As he neared the
negro village of Kabba in the afternoon, a black
came running from the gates, caught his horse by
the bridle, and led him round the walls of the town.
Then, pointing into the west, he told Mungo, to
begone at once, or it would be the worse for him.
Mungo argued the point : he could not spend the
night in the woods at the mercy of the rains and
wild beasts. Thereat the black, and some others
who had come running out from the village, urged
him not to be a fool, and begone while he could.
190
The reason suddenly dawned on Mungo. Man-
song’s messengers must be in the village, waiting
to arrest him, and these blacks were attempting
to save him out of pure goodness of heart. He
struck spurs into his horse and rode into the
woods.
Three miles away, as the day waned, he came to
a village which refused to admit him, closing up its
gates. Mungo tried another village, with similar
fortune. Women again came to his aid, and he
was permitted to sleep in a drying loft. Again it
rained in the night. Pushing off early next morning
Mungo was forced to another decision of import¬
ance. By the alternate warnings and hostilities of
the villagers, it had become clear to him that to
venture into Sego would be equivalent to running
his head into the jaws of one of those lions he heard
prowling the village boundaries at night. He must
avoid Sego and leave Bambarra as soon as possible.
In what direction ?
Ludamar was an impossible route. Directly into
Kaarta was equally out of the question. Should
he swim the Niger and hold due south for Gape
Coast, through the mysterious kingdom of Kong ?
This was the most attractive route in many ways.
But also it was the most uncertain—it would mean
venturing into lands of an unknown language and
civility. Halting under a tree to fight the matter
out, he decided he would hold due westwards along
the Niger as far as he could, and then trust to
fortune to lead him through Manding and Foola-
191
doo, whose mountains had towered in the south as
he had made his eastwards journey through the
negro kingdoms many months before.
That night he lodged in a Foulah village, paying
two hundred cowries for the privilege. Dawn on
the 24th of August found him holding his way
through populous and well-cultivated tracts he had
not previously traversed. The inhabitants took
him for a Moor. He looked as Moorish as possible,
yet had not sufficiently the look to cheat the duti of
Binni village, who almost turned him adrift that
night in spite of the fact that he had paid for his
lodging. Again a woman interceded for him.
But the further west he went, the scarcer grew
provisions. The inhabitants were saving against
the duration of the rains. For two days now he had
subsisted on raw corn, like his horse. He began to
ache unhappily. Bending from his saddle by a
wayside pool, he would see a haggard young-old
face surmounted by a tattered mop of hair. His
person was clad in ludicrous rags. But he still had
a few cowries left and a change of clothing cannily
retained for the worst emergencies.
On the 15th of August ‘ I passed a large town called
Sai, which very much excited my curiosity. It is com¬
pletely surrounded by two very deep trenches at about
two hundred yards distant from the walls. On the top of
the trenches are a number of square towers, and the whole
has the appearance of a regular fortification. Inquiring
into the origin of this extraordinary entrenchment, I
learned from two of the townspeople the following parti-
192
culars, which, if true, furnish a mournful picture of the
enormities of African wars. About fifteen years ago when
the present king of Bambarra’s father desolated Maniana,
the Booty of Sai had two sons slain in battle, fighting in
the king’s cause. He had a third son living, and when the
king demanded a further reinforcement of men and this
youth among the rest, the Booty refused to send him.
This conduct so enraged the king, that when he returned
from Maniana, about the beginning of the rainy season,
and found the Booty protected by the inhabitants, he sat
down before Sai with his army, and surrounded the town
with the trenches I had now seen. After a siege of two
months, the townspeople became involved in all the
horrors of famine ; and whilst the king’s army were feast¬
ing in their trenches, they saw, with pleasure, the miser¬
able inhabitants of Sai devour the leaves and bark of the
Bentang tree that stood in the middle of the town. Find¬
ing, however, that the besieged would sooner perish than
surrender, the king had recourse to treachery. He
promised that if they would open the gates, no person
should be put to death, nor suffer any injury but the
Booty alone. The poor old man determined to sacrifice
himself for the sake of his fellow-citizens, and immediately
walked over to the king’s army, where he was put to death.
His son, in attempting to escape, was caught and massacred
in the trenches, and the rest of the townspeople were
carried away captives, and sold as slaves to the different
Negro traders.5
Leaving Sai, he came to a village where, bearded
like the pard, he was mistaken for a Moorish
shereef. A pious villager bestowed on him a gift
of corn, asking merely his good Islamic blessing in
return. Mungo solemnly blessed him in plain
English and they parted mutually satisfied.
N
Evening of this day brought a less agreeable
adventure. He came to the village of Song. The
inhabitants closed the gates, refusing him admit¬
tance. Lion-marks were all about the road he
had traversed to the village, and Mungo, with a
sinking heart, determined to keep as close as he
could to the gate. Perhaps the lions would not
venture so near. He tethered his horse and lay
down under a tree. Presently, very weary, he fell
asleep. But about ten o’clock the hunting roar of
a lion aroused him, and, unarmed and weak for
lack of proper food, his courage went. He banged
desperately at the gates of Song. Song’s guardians
told him to begone ; then relented, and said they
would question the duti. The lion growled,
briskly, even nearer. Mungo heard the pad of its
great paws, and the rustle of the beast in the long
grasses. It stood outside the range of his vision,
tail-switching. He bolted back to his tree and
climbed high.
Song, yawning, wakened its headman. Yawning,
but refreshed by a nap, he consented to come to the
gates. Mungo was hailed down from his tree, and
complimented (perhaps mistakenly) on the mod¬
eration of his language. He could be no Moor,
they were convinced, for no Moor yet ever waited
any time at the gate of a village without cursing
the inhabitants.
Mungo felt an unexpected fellow-feeling with
Moors.
In spite of the sour wetness of the flooded lands,
194
he was slowly recovering from the effects of his last
bout of fever. Exactly a year before, and five
hundred miles away on the Gambian coast, he had
been recovering from the first fever he had met with
in Africa.
195
Q "I The country began to rise into hills. Tall
-L mountains towered to the west, their summits
hid under the louring canopies of rain. The Niger
had now risen to such height as to overflow to a
wide extent the flat lands that bordered it, and the
tracks amid the fields had long since disappeared.
Mungo and his horse splashed through mud and
water mile on mile, the horse up to the belly in
water. At last, crossing a swamp, the horse slipped
into a pit and was almost drowned. So was
Mungo. He dragged out his woebegone mount,
and surveyed his own reflection. He was plastered
from head to foot in mud.
There was nothing to be done in the matter but
ride on. Shortly afterwards he passed the village
of Callimana. Callimana held its sides and rocked,
shouting that here were a couple of dirty elephants
come to town. Mungo rode on, seeking the town
of Yamina, sacked a few years before by the Daisy
of Kaarta, but slowly recovering to prosperity.
He purchased some corn on the outskirts, and then,
in order to satisfy his still-unextinguished passion
for note-taking, rode through the town-centre.
His heart missed a beat as he saw great numbers of
Moors in the streets. People stopped and stared
astonished. Assuming an air of indifference,
Mungo rode briskly out of Yamina before the
196
inhabitants could recover sufficiently to question
his origins or theological notions.
That night, the 16th of August, he received
hospitality from the headman of a village called
Farra, and next day took his way through a land
even more deeply flooded than hitherto. Presently
the road forsook the lowlands, seeping wet, and
climbed for safety to the shoulder of a hill. Mungo
climbed with it, passing ruined villages sacked by
the Daisy in his raids and wars. Near one of these
ruins Mungo climbed a tamarind tree, tasted its
fruit, and found it sour. Then he hung in the
branches and surveyed the dripping world below
him. The Niger seemed to have broadened into a
lake, reflecting the great sailing barges of the clouds
mile on mile from a tideless surface. And the worst
of the rains had not yet come.
That night he was received with hospitality
again, and next day was astir early, feeding his
horse. Still, miraculously, it held out against
complete collapse. Here the country grew great
mattings of grass and reeds, and Mungo was unable
to survey the lands he traversed. Presently, in that
green reed-jungle, he lost the track for several hours.
At length he caught a glimpse of the Niger far to
the left and made his way towards it through
squelching bogs. About two o’clock he came to
the banks of a small river, and saw a track wind up
from the other side. In weather less moist this had
been a ford. Now the water flowed high and
strong and rapid. Mungo sat down and stared at it.
197
But no one came to tell him what to do. With a
groan he took off his clothes, tied them above his
head, and dragged his horse into the water in an
attempt to gain the opposite bank. The water rose
rapidly to his neck, and the full force of the stream
was slewing him about when he heard a voice hail
him from the bank he had just left. It was a black,
in considerable distress. He yelled to Mungo to
come out at once : the river swarmed with man-
eating alligators.
Hesitating not at all, Mungo splashed back to the
bank. The black had not observed before that he
was a white man. Now as Mungo’s unshielded
person arose from the water, he gasped with a hand
at his mouth, * God preserve me, who’s this ? ’
Mungo explained—he was now in a country
which spoke almost pure Mandingo and he was
easily understood. The black’s astonishment mod¬
erated, and he assisted Mungo to cross the river by
the aid of a canoe.
That evening brought the traveller to the walled
town of Taffara. The duti being newly dead and
no new headman elected, the inhabitants prudently
declined to entertain him. Mungo spent the better
part of the night under the village bentang, later
in the corner of a damp court. He succeeded in
begging a little food for himself, but none for his
horse. Next day, very hungry, he held through a
rain-gloomy land. At the village of Sooha, while
he was begging food from the duti, and being told
by that individual that there was none to spare, he
iQ8
observed a slave digging a hole in the ground with
a spear. As the duti continued to eye him bitterly
and mutter in his beard words like ‘ Good for
nothing ! 5 and c A plague ! 5 Mungo arrived at
the conclusion that the slave was digging his grave.
He prepared to decamp forthwith, when the grave¬
digging slave, his pit ready, went away and a
moment later returned with the corpse of a boy,
quite naked. This corpse the slave carried by an
arm and a leg, and when he reached the side of the
pit hurled it therein with such savage indifference
as Mungo had never seen. He felt sick and rode
away.
Coasting the Niger and spared the rain for the
rest of the day, he came to the great salt market
of Koolikorro. Here he managed to find lodging
at the house of a much-travelled Bambarran trader,
whose travels, though they had made of him a child
of Islam, had not lessened in any degree his belief
in the power of charms. This, indeed, was what
procured Mungo his lodging. Hearing that the
dirty elephant was a Christian, the merchant
brought out his writing board and offered to cook
Mungo a fine dish of rice in return for a written
charm against the machinations of wicked men.
Mungo complied without scruple, covering the
board from top to bottom with scrawled gibberish
at which the merchant gazed in a satisfied awe.
4 To be certain of having the full force of the charm,
he washed the writing from the board into a
calabash with a little water, and, having said a few
J99
prayers over it, drank this powerful draught ;
after which, lest a single word should escape, he
licked the board until it was quite dry.’
The news spread through Koolikorro. The
headman sent his son for a charm. Mungo, com¬
pleting unarduous tasks as a literatus, ate largely,
was given a good bed, and slept the sleep of the just.
For two days, splashing through swamps and
swimming minor rivers (with his records concealed
for safety in the crown of his much-battered beaver
tile), Mungo held uncertainly westward, along the
banks of the Niger. It was a land of floods and low
hills, continuous rains and jungles of reed. The
further he went, the more uncertain he became of
the nearest way to the coast. But, on the evening
of the 23rd, coming to another great salt market,
Bammakoo, he was lodged with some hospitality
at the house of a Serawoolli negro and visited by a
number of Moors. Far from their own country,
they were reasonably polite and given to gossip.
All agreed that Mungo would find it almost
impossible to proceed westwards at this time of the
year. The rains and the Niger floods had closed
up all the routes. The best thing he could do was
to halt in Bammakoo for many weeks.
But he had not sufficient of the cowrie money
left him to last more than a few days. In the
morning he pressed his landlord for definite
information. Was there no single route still open
to the westward ? The negro scratched his head
and then shook it—a native gesture of assent. Yes,
200
there was one—northwards, over the hills, to the
town of Sibidooloo. Sibidooloo attained, Mungo
might, with the aid of God and great good luck,
travel forward through Manding, the original home
of all the Mandingoes.
An itinerant Jilli Kea, or singing man, offered to
guide Mungo over the hills to Sibidooloo. They
set off on the morning of the 24th of August up a
rocky glen. The rocks were ironstone and schistus,
with detached pieces of white quartz, Mungo noted
in a sudden recrudescence of geological interest.
Possibly his companion was similarly engaged, for,
reaching a village in an hour or so, he declared that
they had strayed from the right road, and would
never reach Sibidooloo at this rate. Thereat,
slinging his drum upon his back, he clambered up
the hills and disappeared, absent-mindedly for¬
getting Mungo and his needs. The latter, after
sardonically admiring the black bard’s agility,
sought through the hills for a path that his horse
could travel.
He was in a maze of small valleys. To the
south-east towered gigantic a misty range of
mountains. Villagers told him that these guarded
the mysterious kingdom of Kong. But Kong was
out of the question for him to visit.
Night was coming. He had attained the north¬
west side of the hills and was looking around for a
suitable tree to shelter under in the fashion to which
he had become all too accustomed, when the horse’s
weary pace brought him to the lips of a fertile
201
valley and so to a ‘ romantic village called Kooma \
Kooma was romantic in that it belonged to a
Mandingo merchant who had fled the wars to take
up his life anew and apart in these glens, subject
to neither the patronage nor the outrage of the
bickering kings. Here he and his family dwelt in
obscure retreat, a pocket of contentment and
prosperity in war-vexed Africa. Visitors were
scarce phenomena in Kooma, and Mungo was
welcomed with open arms.
But he might not stay even in this kindly village
where he and his horse were fed, and a fire lighted
in his hut. The rains followed in his tracks. He
found two Kooma shepherds who were journeying
towards Sibidooloo, and with them to companion
him set out next morning up the steep and rocky
tracks through the hills. His horse frequently
stumbled. Unshod, it had cut its hooves on the
sharp quartzite splinters of the hills. The path
grew ever steeper, and Mungo, had his stumbling
horse stumbled a little more than usual, would
have been hurled over a precipice to certain death.
He had taken too many risks to let this disturb him,
and rode ahead imperturbably.
The shepherds grew tired of waiting on the
stumbling Rosinante and gradually drew ahead.
About eleven o’clock, when Mungo had dismounted
by a wayside rivulet to drink, he heard a wild scream¬
ing break out ahead. Imagining one of the shepherds
had been seized by a lion, he vaulted on to his
saddle and looked about him. There was no sign
202
of either shepherds or lions. Mungo urged forward
his horse, calling out to his late companions : so
calling, his eyes fell on one of the shepherds, lying
in the long grass by the side of the road. Mungo
imagined him dead, but when he had ridden
nearer, was startled when the corpse raised his head
and whispered that the track was infested with
armed men. His companion had been seized and
arrows fired at himself as he escaped.
Mungo looked about him. At a little distance
an armed black sat on the stump of a tree, regarding
him unpleasantly. The heads of six or seven more
appeared above the tall grass. The shepherd,
recumbent on the ground, evidently escaped their
attention. Mungo did not. He rode towards them,
blandly, and inquired if they were elephant-
hunters ; and had they had a good bag ?
Without returning an answer to this flippancy,
one of the blacks commanded him to dismount ;
then, changing his mind, waved a hand for Mungo
to proceed on his way. So he did, thankfully ; but
had gone but a little way when he heard a loud hail
behind him. The elephant-hunters were running
in his tracks, commanding him to halt.
There was nothing else for it. Up came the
blacks, and, having concocted the tale to suit the
occasion, informed him that they had been sent by
the king to seize him and convey him to Foola-
doo.
Mungo shrugged and went with them. The
forest grew thicker. Here the sun fell hardly at
203
all through the spreading branches. Suddenly
Mungo’s escort halted. This place would do.
Immediately one snatched off Mungo’s hat,
another cut off the solitary metal button remaining
on his waistcoat ; finally, to make sure of the nature
of the haul, they stripped him naked. He made no
resistance : it would have meant instant death.
One stared loutishly at the compass, and, when
Mungo begged for its return, cocked a musket and
swore to shoot the white trash should he lay hands
on it. Mungo did not lay hands on it. It was a poor
enough haul they had made, but robbers could
not be choosers and they made no complaints.
Instead, they commenced to debate an interesting
point : Should they leave the white man naked,
or give him something to shelter him from the
sun ?
The second school of thought carried the day.
The worst of Mungo’s two shirts was returned to
him, and the most ragged of his pairs of trousers.
Then, driving his horse before them, the robbers
vanished into the forest. Mungo called after them,
asking for his hat. In its crown all his memoranda
were concealed. The robber who had taken this share
of the plunder weighed the thing in his hand for a
moment. It was both heavy and uncouth. With
an appropriate exclamation, he hurled it back at
Mungo.
A few moments later he stood alone, in the wilds
of Africa, without a horse, without weapons,
without money, in the two miserable rags left to
204
him. He was five hundred miles from the nearest
European settlement. The rains still held. He
was completely abandoned, £ naked and alone ;
surrounded by savage animals, and men still more
savage \
205
Q Oln this situation, Mungo recollected his
ij lu religion, that of the Established Kirk of
Scotland. As always, recollection of his God
stirred and cheered him. It was inconceivable that
his deity should abandon him in these wilds,
without hope or succour. The gods of the nations
whose lands he had traversed abandoned their
worshippers with the greatest complacence as the
occasion arose. Mungo, convinced of the superi¬
ority of his own deity, prepared to face Africa
again.
Further, at this moment, and in accordance with
the best conventions of the genteel religious
literature of his century, his eye lit on c the extra¬
ordinary beauty of a small moss, in fructification.
. . . I mention this to show from what trifling
circumstances the mind will sometimes derive
consolation ; for though the whole plant was not
larger than the top of one of my fingers, I could not
contemplate the delicate conformation of its roots,
leaves, and capsula without admiration. Gan that
Being (thought I) who planted, watered, and
brought to perfection, in this obscure part of the
world, a thing which appears of so small importance,
look with unconcern upon the situation and suffer¬
ings of creatures formed after his own image ? -
Surely not ! ’
206
Surely not. Inspired by this fine admixture of
sceptical doubt of his own mental equipment and
hazy acceptance of his physical importance, Mungo,
who had sunk to the ground overpowered, stood up
again. He felt strangely and serenely reinvigorated.
A conviction came upon him that help was close
at hand.
Nor was he mistaken. At a village a little further
on he came on the two shepherds. Both had
escaped the robbers, both stared at Mungo as an
apparition from the dead. Then they guided him
on through the hills for the rest of the day and at
sunset brought him to the gates of much-desired
Sibidooloo—hill-defended, in a fertile valley.
Here his luck held. The headman—all over
Manding known as the Mansa—sat on a mat in his
hut, smoking his pipe, when Mungo was brought
before him. All the time Mungo was telling his
tale of highway robbery and despoilment, the black
ruler sent up clouds of contemplative smoke. But
he proved less phlegmatic than his appearance
warranted. At the end of Mungo’s recital he
commanded him to sit down, and swore that
everything of which he had been robbed would be
returned to him. 4 Give the white man a drink of
water,’ he concluded magnanimously.
For two days Mungo sat in Sibidooloo, waiting
to hear news of his missing property. But pro¬
visions were very scarce, and he anxious to press on
to the coast. He interviewed the Mansa again,
and that individual, smoke-blowing, gave him
207
permission to go on as far as a village called Wonda.
There he hoped Mungo would tarry until news of
the thieves came through. c Give the white man a
drink of water/ he concluded magnanimously.
Wonda Mungo reached about noon of the next
day, the 30th of August. He found it a small town
with a mosque and a school. The latter also acted
as guest-hut, and here Mungo was allowed to take
up residence the while he waited for news from
Sibidooloo. His head frequently swam in attacks
of malaria. Once or twice, sitting dozing at nights,
he fainted. Still no news came, and, what with the
fact that his clothes were perpetually damp, the
fever mounted. His situation was very desperate,
for famine had begun to walk the land, and he
observed his landlord bend on him a scowling
glance.
He took to hiding during the greater part of the
day, out of doors, in the cornfields or under trees,
dozing and waking there unhappily through the long
blink of the African day, seeing pass in front of his
eyes an unending slow gleam of pictures, drowsing
to sleep and dreams of England, Yarrow-bank,
of the red months of heat in the horrors of Benowm
and Bubaker. At night he would creep back to the
guest-hut and the muttered reproaches of the
landlord.
The famine increased. Mothers sold their
children to the village Mansa in exchange for a few
days’ corn. Hearing of this, Mungo, his Scots
sentiment not yet withered, desired to look on the
208
face of the female monster who had consented to
one of these monstrous transactions. One of the
women was pointed out to him. She had nothing
cruel or savage in her countenance : it was merely
a thin human face, bitterly emaciated. Manners
makyth monsters.
Then, on the morning of September the 6th,
hope revived. Two men came plodding up the
tracks from Sibidooloo, driving in front of them an
antique wreck, bearing a bundle. It was Mungo’s
horse, and the bundle his clothes, recovered from
the robbers. No tale of the recovery came with
these effects, and Mungo seems to have been too
busied in examining them to make inquiries. He
found his pocket-compass broken to pieces, and
stared at that discovery aghast.
Yet something of the wreck was retrieved, and
now he could push on with some more help than
that of Shanks’s mare. He was mistaken. Next
morning, out grazing, Mungo’s horse, a laggard
skeleton with a thin covering of skin, fell into a well.
Mungo went and looked at the beast and mentally
gave it up. A great disgust with horses came upon
him. The villagers were less pessimistic. They
assembled in some numbers, and lowered an
athlete who fastened withies under the horse’s
belly. So they drew it up, and presented him to
Mungo.
But Mungo would have none of the beast. He
made him a gift to the village Mansa, sent back the
saddle and bridle to the smoke-blowing Mansa of
o
Sibidooloo in thanks for that potentate’s drinks of
water and recovery of his possessions, and prepared
to set out for the coast on foot. He had exchanged
the fragments of his boots for sandals ; his land¬
lord had furnished him with a spear and a leather
bag in which to carry the miserable tag-end of his
baggage. On foot through the squelching roads
he set out, sick, staggering, and resolute.
For two days, with varying fortune, he wandered
from village to village. The Niger was long lost to
view j his only concern now was to reach the coast
ere he died of exposure. In that starving country
this was a clear enough likelihood. He lay all the
night of the gth of September, without food, at the
village of Nemacoo. All the next day it rained,
and the inhabitants kept to their huts. But in late
afternoon a trader, one Modi Lemina Taura,
hearing of the white man so journeying in the
village, came to see him, and was astounded and
distressed at Mungo’s condition. He himself had
a house in the next village, that of Kinyeto, and in
Kinyeto he promised Mungo a welcome.
All the next day Mungo tramped through the
stinging rainfall, seeking Kinyeto. He had hurt his
ankle on the way, and by the time he arrived at
Taura’s village in the evening it was red and
inflamed. Next day it was swollen to such a degree
that Mungo could not set his foot on the ground, and
Taura asked him to stay in his hut till it mended.
For three days Mungo lay and watched it mend.
The rains kept on, dripping from the roof-sides,
210
drumming on the roof-ridges, in the air the smell
of mould and green vegetal life in surgence. Mungo
slept and slept, saving his strength for that second
vision that now led his eyes—the coast—as once
the Niger had beguiled his feet eastwards into the
interior.
His ankle-swelling down, he set out again on the
14th, hobbling on a staff. Fever had returned as
the ankle bettered : he was delirious all the night of
the 15th and 16th, in a hut in the village of Dosita.
It was a hilly and inhospitable land ; the villages
crouched in the valley amid their terraced planta¬
tions. At Mansia the headman demanded payment
for the small provision of corn he provided for the
white man’s supper. Mungo answered that he had
nothing left to pay with. Thereat the headman
impounded his spear—until the morning.
Suspiciously, Mungo considered there were other
considerations moving the landlord. He sought
round the village until he found a venturesome soul
among the blacks, willing to share the guest-hut
with him. This individual brought his bow and
arrows, and he and Mungo lay down in a light
sleep.
About midnight Mungo awoke to the sound of
someone approaching the door. Starting up on his
elbow, he saw a man stepping cautiously over the
threshold. Immediately Mungo snatched up the
bow and quiver. At the sound of its rattle, the
intruder fled, but not before Mungo’s companion,
peering after him, identified the intruder as the
211
village Mansa. Later, after Mungo had barricaded
the door with a block of wood, a heavy weight in
the night pressed against it with considerable force.
Mungo called aloud to his companion to let
whoever was out there enter. As his companion
made to obey they heard the sound of running
footsteps in the dark.
At dawn Mungo’s companion stole into the
Mansa’s hut and stole back Mungo’s spear. Then,
bidding farewell to this nameless companion of his
dark hours, Mungo trudged away through the hills.
Towards evening these petered out in a wide
slope, and at the bottom of this slope he came upon
the town of Kamalia, where they dug gold from the
hillsides. Here the Mohammedan converts, the
bushreens, lived apart from the pagans, and here,
in the house of one of those bushreens, Karfa
Taura, brother of the hospital merchant of Kinyeto,
Mungo found sanctum.
He found more. Karfa, when Mungo entered
his hut, was seated on a mat with some fellow-
slavers, reading from an Arabic script. He asked
if Mungo understood what he read. Mungo shook
his head, in little mind for discussions of the
sickening pot-hooks of Bubaker. Thereat, with a
grin, Karfa remarked that he had in his possession
one book which the white man would surely
understand. He had this book brought, and Mungo
recognised it as the English Book of Common
Prayer. It had journeyed up from the coast in the
spoil of some caravan.
212
The slatis who were sharing Karfa’s hut glowered
sideways on Mungo in considerable distrust. A
white man ?—with that yellow hide and that long
beard ? And who ever saw a white man so ragged
or so forlorn, or, for that matter, wandering the
countryside like an idiot when he might have
stayed at the coast in comfort and grown wealthy
and fat with slaves in his barracks and fat women
in his bed ? It was more than likely this was some
villainous Moor.
But Karfa, convinced by Mungo’s evident under¬
standing of the Prayer Book, had no doubts at all,
and sat and listened to all Mungo’s story as the
ever-threatening rain resumed and drummed across
the roofs of Kamalia. Go west ? That would be
impossible for many months to come. Right in the
track lay the wilderness of Jallonka, with eight
unfordable rivers, swollen by the rains, traversing
it. No one ventured on that track until the rains
subsided and the grass was burned, unless he sought
certain death.
The wearied young Scot made an impatient
gesture. Quite so. But what else was there for him
to do ? He had no money to pay for his keep in
Kamalia through long months. He must either
die here or risk dying in the wilderness. Personally,
he preferred the chances of the wilderness.
He was unaware, while protesting thus, that he
was looking upon his saviour. Then Karfa out¬
lined his plans. He himself, when the rains had
cleared, was proceeding down to the Gambia.
213
Didn’t the white man know that he was a slave*
trader ? He was—the greatest of slave-traders.
Very good. Throughout the next few months he
would collect a great caravan of slaves here in
Kamalia. Why should not Mungo wait till the
caravan was ready to move, meantime living on
Karfa’s bounty ? When they reached the coast,
Mungo could repay him as he thought proper.
It sounded like the voice of an angel in a dream,
that of the slave-trader to the wearied youth who
had sought and attained the Niger, and turned
back from it into a waste of rain and malaria-
haunted days. He managed, with a relic of native
caution, to ask Karfa if the price of a slave would be
sufficient for all this attendance when they reached
the coast ? Karfa answered in the affirmative, and
Mungo was delivered.
But for the happy accident of his coming to
Karfa’s house, it is probable that he would have
pushed on the next day and perished in the
Jallonka wilds. He never forgot this fact in the
succeeding days, remembering it to Karfa’s credit
—remembering it, perhaps, to the credit of all
slavers when at last he sat down to prepare a nar¬
rative for publication from that mass of memor¬
anda he had carried through the African jungles
concealed in the roof of the famous beaver tile.
214
Q QYet, saved though he was from starvation or
^violent death in the flooded Jallonkadoo, the
fever woke again in him, this time to alarming
temperatures. Karfa had provided him with a hut
for himself, a mat to sleep on, and all necessary
furniture known to Kamalia. Twice a day he sent
slaves with food and water. But he knew even less
of treating a fever than did Mungo, that graduate
of contemporary European science, whose know¬
ledge was negligible. Weak and delirious though
he frequently found himself, Mungo took pains to
conceal the fact as much as possible. Karfa was
kind—yes. But should he find he had a dying man
in his hands, one who would never survive to repay
him in the Gambia, would he not more than likely
turn him adrift ?
He assumed the appearance of a visitor of normal
interests and in the enjoyment of normal health.
Probably he looked like a partially revivified corpse,
and did Karfa an injustice, the slaver staring at him
in polite surprise as he staggered out on formal
visits by the side of that individual. Down poured
the rains. Through them, staring, bearded, yellow¬
faced and haggard, Mungo staggered on rounds of
visits to Karfa’s friends. He was twenty-five years
of age, but he looked nearly fifty. At last, on one of
those jaunts, seized by a fit of faintness, he fell
215
headlong into a clay pit. Karfa, repressing mirth,
dragged him out, and politely assured him there
was no need to abandon his hut at all when he was
in such a condition. Let him remain in it and he
would soon recover.
Freed of that haunting vision of himself turned
adrift, Mungo kept his bed for a long five weeks,
while the rains fell and fell, and seemed unceasing.
Bright and translucent they waved their misty
veils down over the ringing hills, and Mungo’s
fever, quietening away one day, would revive the
next. Sometimes, in hours of daylight, when the
rain had cleared for a little, he would crawl to the
door of his hut and sit in the sunshine, with closed
eyes, day-dreaming dourly. In other and more
frequent hours of the day and night, darker
memories came on him, doubts and a despair of
himself and all he had done. Karfa had loaned
him the far-travelled Book of Common Prayer, but
in those hours it was little help ; not till conval¬
escence came did he turn to it and its politic
sonorities for the help which that lost starved thing
within him, his genteel eighteenth-century soul,
called for so urgently.
Convalescence came with the clearing of the
weather. The sun returned in full force on a
country matted with vegetation. The air smelt
strong and quick. Mungo had his sleeping-mat
dragged out to the shade of a tamarind tree, and
there, through long hours, drowsed his way back
to health and a polite curiosity in all things, flora
216
and fauna, about him. Opening his eyes and
gazing upon the coming of the corn, he felt as
though he with it had returned from Persephone’s
kingdom of shades.
Kamalia was a halting-post for slavers and their
cattle. One day a Serawoolli slati arrived from
Sego, the capital of distant Bambarra. In common
with other slavers, he took an instant dislike to
Mungo and his influence over Karfa—he of the
Prayer Book. Innumerable tales, mostly dis¬
creditable, were whispered to Karfa concerning the
character and activities of the white man. But
Karfa, either out of goodness of heart or from policy,
turned a deaf ear to these shady informants. So he
turned to the Sego slati. Mungo, with the help of
the sun and a shaky convalescence, wandered out
to look at that individual’s convoy, sitting chained
and half-starved.
As he surveyed them with his usual polite
disinterest one of them begged him for a little food.
Mungo answered he had none to give—he himself
was a stranger and an alien here. Thereat the
chained black exclaimed, ‘Yet I have given you
victuals when you were hungry. Have you forgot
the man who brought you milk at Karankalla ?
But the irons were not then on my legs ! ’ Mungo,
in some horror, recognised him, and begged some
groundnuts from Karfa to feed the one-time
freedman. He had been captured by the Bam-
barrans and sold into slavery ; four days later he
departed from Kamalia and out of Mungo’s life.
217
The weeks dragged by. Karfa had gone to the
great slave-trading centre of Kancaba on the Niger
to make up his caravan for the Gambia coasts.
Mungo, left in the care of the village schoolmaster,
won back his strength, and sat long hours in the
shade of his hut or out under the tamarind tree,
jotting down notes on the customs and habits and
fortunes of the men of that region bounded by the
12th and 15th parallels. In Mungo’s day publica¬
tion of these notes was to send a wave of interest
through all the reading public, but they belong,
these notes, to an age when scientific comparison
and observation was barely beginning among
travellers. Mungo wrote with a strange admixture
of genteel admonition and genuine cold-blooded
impartiality, the first overpowering the second in
just the places where it should not. Also, he
generalises to an unwarranted extent, describing
customs as general when they are particular to one
phase of culture and one tribe. This was partly
due to lack of a knowledge of other languages than
Mandingo. Mandingo, indeed, is the folk and the
speech with which he is best acquainted, and his
notes have still value with respect to that people
and their state a hundred and forty years ago—
whether in their methods of smelting iron in
circular towers of clay or their habit, in the marriage
ceremony, of rousing the newly wedded couple to
inspect the sheets.
It was now mid-December. Looking out from
his hut, Mungo saw the rains clear off from the
218
surface of the drenched earth. A dry and parching
wind blew from the north-east, rapidly soaking up
the moisture from the flooded lands and bringing
trees and plants to sudden leafage. The world
steamed : Mungo felt as though he steamed with
it. For the first time in months he could lie down
in clothes that were dry, if ragged. Balance and
clearness came with that good wind : he was never
to forget the blowing of those fresh days from the
dry wastes of the Sahara as he and the schoolmaster
of Kamalia sat and compared notes on the
Mohammedan and Christian faiths, and Mungo
discovered that the Muslim also had a knowledge
of the old Testament heroes, Abraham, Abel,
Solomon, even here in the wilds of Africa. Politely
complimenting the schoolmaster on his erudition,
he was nevertheless politely regretful that the
Mohammedans should have such advantages over
Europeans in these lands ; and drew up a short
scheme, which never came to fruition, for trans¬
lating the Bible into Arabic and distributing it up
and down the wild lands he had trod. This he
envisaged as c ameliorating manners
Meantime the long grasses that matted the
countryside around Kamalia grew dry and
withered. Every year at this season it was burned
by the natives to clear the roads for transport,
and to clear the ground and manure their crops.
Mungo one midnight went out to see the flames.
Earth and sky seemed ablaze for many miles around.
Through that general dun lowe great pillars of fire
219
marched and countermarched as the night waned
to dawn. In the daytime great pillars of smoke
were vanishing eastwards over the horizon leaving
a blackened countryside.
But under that blackness the new verdure was
coming. Still not over-hot, the sun shone down, and
the clink of the slaves’ tools in the plantations
around Kamalia rang pleasantly in the ears of
Mungo as he sat at his notes, bearded and thin, but
less yellow-faced now. His hands had ceased to
tremble in ague, and he could walk now without
crutches to his tamarind tree and drowse.
December passed and New Year came. Where
had he been this time a year before ? Under the
tamarind tree he lay and dreamt back across the
wild routes of his exploration. Ah, he remembered
now. In Teesee of Kasson, in the city of Tiggity
Sego, waiting the return of his horse. He wondered
if that horse was still alive.
On the 24th of January, the genial Karfa came
back to Kamalia from Kancaba. Thirteen prime
slaves, lashed neck to neck, trudged at his heels.
Mungo, diligently note-taking, went amongst them
and questioned them on their antecedents and
opinions. Eleven of them had been slaves all their
lives : they had merely, in the Bambarran-Kaartan
war, suffered a change of master. All of them stared
at Mungo in horror. Finally, one of them plucked
up courage to ask if it was really true that his
countrymen were cannibals.
Mungo tried to reassure them. He thought his
220
own beard was at fault, but further inquiries
elicited the information that it was the common
belief among slaves travelling towards the coast
that the white men purchased them for no other
purpose than to transport them across the water to
their own lands and there devour them in sickening
orgies. White men were a foul and unclean race,
of low mental and moral calibre.
Mungo noted down all this and pried round the
slave huts, much as Leonardo da Vinci pried round
the execution pits, in search of further information.
Slaves ordinarily were chained leg to leg and neck
to neck. But the sullen or discontented were
further secured by a heavy billet of wood stapled
about the ankle. Every morning, being valuable
cattle, they were led out to the shade of Mungo’s
tamarind tree and encouraged to sing and play ;
nighttime saw them back in their huts under a
strong guard. Mungo records his appreciation of
the good treatment undergone by the slaves.
The slaves themselves appear to have been less
appreciative. One night one of them, after hours
of heroic labour, opened the rings in his fetters,
pried up the staple, and made his escape. He was
the only one. Had Mungo himself seen the
escaper in the midst of his labours he would un¬
doubtedly have fetched out his notes and written
up the entire procedure, neither hindering nor
helping.
February came. Kamalia grew crowded with
slavers and their merchandise awaiting the move
221
of the great caravan on the first stretch of its
journey down to the Gambia. Again and again
Mungo put his few effects together under the
impression that the caravan would depart on the
next day. But the merchants awaited signs for a
lucky march, or had daughters to marry, or a
ceremony to observe, or just one more slave to
purchase. Finally, the fast-month of Ramadhan
was upon them when it was wellnigh impos¬
sible to travel day in, day out, without food or
drink from dawn till sunset. Mungo sat down to
endure it.
He fasted three days, politically, to show respect
for the creed of his host, and then went note-taking.
The days dragged past. It grew very hot again.
The last day of the fast-month came, and the native
Mohammedans assembled in the fall of the evening
to welcome the new moon. It was cloudy weather,
a dragging wisp of vapours passing from the face
of Africa in the rear of the rains. No moon could
be seen, and with inward groans the more zealous
Mohammedans went home to fast anew. But
hardly had they gone when Selene obtruded a horn
from under the sailing cloud-drift. Drums and
musket-shots greeted her. Ramadhan was over,
and the slave caravan might set out for the coast.
The augurs determined the 19th of April as the
lucky day for the departure. Only with that ^
decision did it come on Mungo how homesick he
was, how he hated Africa and the browns and
blacks of the African faces, their drums, their
222
slaves, their superstitions, their drinks and their
sickening foods. England and Yarrow—white
faces, courteous voices, grey buildings under a
grey sky—they seemed part of another existence,
and his return to them as struggling up, resurrected
from the dead.
He again assembled his bundles, and on the
morning of the 19th of April, 1797, trudged out
from Kamalia eastwards in company with seventy-
three others, slaves and slavers.
223
Q A Many of the slaves had been in irons for years,
^3 accustomed, when they walked at all, to take
short mincing steps as result of the heavy fetters
between their legs. They suffered considerably by
the time they had gone a mile ; two were unroped
and allowed to follow more slowly, in charge of an
overseer till they came to the walled town of Mar-
raboo. Here the caravan gathered fresh provisions.
At the next village, that of Bala, they spent the night
of the 19th, and late next day reached Worumbang,
on the frontier between Manding and Jallonkadoo.
The great Jallonka wilderness was near at hand,
and Mungo tightened an already overstrained belt
in preparation. Fortunately, the caravan decided
to avoid the wilderness as far as possible by a detour
to the town of Kinytakoorro. On the 21st they
hurried forward at a run rather than a walking pace
as the heat of the day rose. Mungo and the light-
loaded merchants set the pace. Behind, sweating
under burdens, came the slaves. Behind these
walked more of the merchants, whips in hand.
Mungo heard the crack of those whips rise louder as
the hours went by.
They came presently to the Dangerous River,
Kokoro, a tributary of the far Senegal. It was
dangerous because of its crocodiles. Mungo saw
none : the river had already fallen from the spates
224
of the rains to a trickling stream. The caravan made
a short halt, and then splashed through and climbed
the banks on the road to Kinytakoorro. Two
slaves, a man and a woman belonging to a slati of
Bala, proved especially laggard throughout the
course of the day. Lashed by the whips, they
stumbled forward until about three o’clock in the
afternoon, when they began vomiting in an unre¬
strained manner, as Mungo observed with interest.
They vomited clay : they had been eating quantities
of clay through hunger or desperation.
The caravan entered Kinytakoorro in style, with
drums and singing men. Here they were provided
with lodgings, slaves and free, and took up residence
there until the 22nd of April. That day they
marched only seven miles. This brought them to
a village which believed itself about to be invaded
by the Foulahs. The villagers had abandoned the
plain and taken to the rocky hillsides. There they
had built temporary huts and assembled great piles
of stones to roll down on the heads of trespassers.
Mungo greatly admired these defences, and, with a
passing twinge of regret that he had not arrived at
the village at the time when the Foulahs were carry¬
ing out siege operations, prepared to enter the
Jallonka wilderness.
Some little way within its borders they came on
two looted and burned villages : the Foulahs had
been here. At ten in the morning another Senegal
tributary hove in sight, so thick with shoals of fish
that the very water tasted and smelt fishy. This is
225
G.N.
P
Mungo’s one fishy tale. Beyond this stream the
caravan drew in to a semi-military marching
order—guides and young men in the van, women
and slaves in the centre, free men of consequence in
the rear.
Jallonka : Mungo stared about him in surprise.
Here was no wilderness, but a well-wooded land of
glen and hill. Partridges and guinea-fowl clucked
in the undergrowth, disturbed by the feet of the
slaves. Deer trotted away in dappled herds. Pre¬
sently they came to another stream where Mungo
stripped and bathed and felt greatly refreshed. The
caravan halted, sweating, and looked on. Three
miles further on they halted at the verge of a thick
wood, and made camp for the night. They had
travelled a good thirty miles that day.
The fires kindled. Karfa sent a slave to make a
brushwood bed for Mungo. Kouskous was eaten,
the slaves put in irons. Then Mungo and his
compeers lay down to sleep with Jallonka about
them. Sleep came but slowly to Mungo, what with
the continual howling of wild beasts in his ears.
Also, ants got into his clothing and went through
unhasting evolutions and excavations all through
the hours of the night. Day-coming was a relief.
Hot gruel was served to the slatis and Mungo and
the other free men. The slaves looked on hungrily.
One of Karfa’s slaves, a woman named Nealee, was
offered some as a special favour and declined it,
sulkily. She was to regret that ere the day was spent.
Jallonka wilderness suddenly changed in character.
No longer did they march through a fertile forested
land but wild and rocky country, without shade for
a great part of the way. Mungo’s feet were cut and
bruised to such an extent that he was in fear of the
caravan’s going ahead and leaving him to perish
in that waterless land. But he soon observed that
many of the others were in similar straits, particu¬
larly the woman Nealee. Her load was taken from
her and piled on that already carried by one of
her fellows. Karfa was a kindly slaver.
About eleven o’clock they came to a small stream,
and rested there, laving their faces. Unfortunately,
despite the heat and the rough track they had
crossed since daybreak, there were still some ad¬
venturous and restless souls in the caravan. Some
of these pried around the bank of the stream until
they came upon a hive of wild bees in a hollow tree.
They were proceeding to take out the honey, when
the largest swarm that Mungo had ever beheld
emerged from the tree and put the entire caravan
to flight. Merchants and slaves scattered yelling
in all directions, Mungo himself proving so fleet of
foot that he outdistanced even the most persistent
denizen of the hive. He was accordingly in a posi¬
tion to take notes, as usual. Far beyond the stream
the caravan gradually drew together again, licking
its wounds or sucking out stings. Then an ap¬
praisal of casualties was made and it was discovered
that many of the slaves had dropped their burdens
in the flight, while the woman Nealee herself was
missing.
227
The slavers hit upon an ingenious idea. A slight
wind had got up from the west, blowing towards the
rivulet and the hive. Setting fire to the grass,
several of the slavers pursued the widening sheet of
flame back to the stream. The bees fled. Pushing
through the debris of the flames the slavers came
on the lost bundles and also on the sulky and un¬
fortunate Nealee. She had crawled to the side of the
stream and attempted to escape the bees, bound as she
was, by throwing water over herself. The bees had
disregarded the water and stung her from head to foot.
Karfa and his friends bent over the slave and
picked out as many of the stings as they could see,
and then washed her from head to foot and rubbed
her with bruised leaves to ease the pain. Nealee
accepted these attentions, but, through her moans
of pain, declared she was unable to walk another
step. Karfa threatened and cajoled for a while.
Then whips were applied to the blistered black hide
of the slave-girl. After the third or fourth lash,
Nealee screamed, staggered to her feet, and trudged
on with the rest of the caravan.
But her trials for the day were not yet over. In
the afternoon she attempted to escape. She was
overtaken in the long grass where she had fallen
down exhausted, and bidden to rise. She tried but
could not. Again she was lashed with the raw-hide
whips. Still she lay unmoving. Karfa saw that
valuable merchandise was being damaged. He
ordered her to be placed on the ass which carried
the caravan’s dry provisions.
228
But the ass would have none of this. It bucked
and kicked in such a manner that the black girl was
unseated again and again. At last a temporary litter
was constructed and Nealee laid down in it. In this
manner she was carried forward until darkness fell,
and the caravan camped for the night.
The slaves had had no food for a day. Some of
them were very exhausted, travelling under a hot
sun with burdens upon their heads. Manacled and
sweating, they sat and snapped their fingers, a sure
sign, says Mungo, of desperation in a negro. Ob¬
serving this finger-snapping, the slatis immediately
put the slaves in double chains, while the most de¬
spondent were led apart from the rest and had their
hands tied to cure their despondency. In the
morning, says Mungo, ‘ they were found greatly
recovered ’.
Next day was the 25th of April. The caravan
roused with aching limbs. None ached so much as
the flogged and bee-stung Nealee. She could not
stand, far less walk. Karfa had her tied on the ass’s
back as the caravan set out, her feet under the belly,
her hands round the beast’s neck. She was quickly
thrown off, and had one of her legs damaged. The
caravan became impatient and a unanimous cry
arose c Gut her throat, cut her throat ! ’
Mungo’s note-taking passion suddenly deserted
him. He marched ahead with the body of the
caravan, while a group drew in around the tortured
body of the black girl. About a mile further on, one
of Karfa’s domestic slaves drew level with Mungo.
229
He had Nealee’s single garment slung on the end of
his bow and remarked casually, e Nealee is finished.’
Mungo asked how—had he cut her throat ? The
slave replied that Karfa and the Kamalia school¬
master had been against that. Nealee had merely
been stripped and left, still chained, to perish in the
wilderness.
The schoolmaster, an enthusiastic Mohammedan,
was greatly upset by the incident and fasted the
whole day as a penance. Nealee, being devoured
by wild beasts back in the wilderness, would no
doubt have felt consoled. Mungo records how upset
the whole caravan was over the incident—even
those who had cried out that the girl’s throat be cut.
The incident had upset their digestions.
They pressed on at the same exhausting speed as
on the former day. The slaves shuffled forward un¬
murmuring, apprehensive that they might share
Nealee’s fate. Mungo was soon dripping with sweat
and limping bloody-heeled. He threw away his
Sego spear : it was no help as a staff and unneeded
for protection. Noon came : they raised their heads
and saw on the forest fringe a great herd of elephants
feeding. For a moment the caravan shook in
apprehension, and then crept past on silent feet.
The great beasts paid them no heed.
Jallonka still about them, they camped that night
by a small stream, and next morning took their way
over a low range of hills, trackless and rocky, which
tore at the feet of black and white. The sun now
blazed in full heat on the parched treeless country.
230
Afternoon took them across the Boki stream and so
to a cross-roads. Here were the marks of many
horses’ hooves. Karfa and his peers debated these
marks and decided that a band of mounted men,
and therefore plunderers, was in the region.
Accordingly the caravan was dispersed and
wandered through the grass and weeds for the rest
of the day, mixing their tracks to throw pursuers off
the scent. Sunset brought them to a white sand
well, and here they rested for the night.
Great thickets of dry bamboos obscured the
western trail. They struggled through them the
next morning and knew at their hither side that
the wilderness was being left behind. Afternoon
brought them to Sooseeta, their first village in five
days’ march. They had crossed Jallonka at its
narrowest stretch, a distance of a hundred miles.
Sooseeta they found almost destitute. Its inhabi¬
tants had had no corn for a month, living on mimosa
seeds and seeds of the bamboo-cane. Much
affected at this tale of hardship, the soft-hearted
slavers shared their evening meal with their hosts.
In return the hosts during the night attempted to
abduct a boy belonging to the schoolmaster of
Kamalia. The boy woke and yelled, was smothered
to silence, and carried captive away. In the woods,
however, his captor discovered that he was the
property of the schoolmaster, whose place of resi¬
dence was only three days’ journey away. Dis¬
gusted, he stripped the boy and released him. Kept
as a slave, he would be recognised too easily.
231
They were travelling now through the real land
of African rumour and romance. There was no
central authority among the Jallonkas. Tribe
warred on tribe. Thieves strayed about the land
in gangs. Next day the caravan came to Manna,
and there paid tribute for the privilege of crossing
the Black River near that town—crossing it on a
singular bridge made of two trees ‘ tied together by
the tops 5 and slung from bank to bank. They paid
and hurried across, quaking.
The villages refused them food or shelter all that
afternoon. Worse came. Towards twilight news
was brought that a band of two hundred Jallonkas
had assembled at the town of Melo with intent to
fall upon the caravan and despoil it. Karfa
instantly altered the route of march to evade this
fate, and towards midnight they approached
another town, Koba. Outside its walls they halted
and called the roll, to discover that a free man and
three slaves were missing.
Everyone presumed that the slaves had murdered
the free man and made their escape. A party was
sent back to investigate the route for clues. Mean¬
time Mungo and the rest of the coffle lay down in
a cotton field, and watched the lights of Koba, de¬
siring to enter it, and yet afraid of the possible con¬
sequences. They had had no food, slavers or slaves,
for over twenty-four hours.
Towards morning the search party returned with
the news that there were no signs of the slaves or the
free man. The hungry caravan received the news
232
with indifFerence. Finally, as the hasting African
day came up out of the east, it was determined to
enter Koba, risk or no risk.
Koba received them with a business-like geniality,
sold them ground-nuts, and allowed them to rest in
the huts for the day. Before noon the free man and
the slaves put in an appearance—they had been lost
in the bush as night fell, and the free man had
chained the slaves and stood guard over them like
a good and faithful servant. Mungo approved of
him, coldly.
Meanwhile Karfa had determined to halt in
Koba until he had collected an armed guard of
mercenaries. On the 30th of April, with a sufficient
number of these marching in and around the
caravan, it got in motion again, passing in the
course of the day through a village with the pleas¬
antly tinkling name of Tinkingtang. Beyond here
rose mountains, serrating all the western sky, and
Mungo, trudging along in his dress of a slave-
merchant, viewed them with apprehension as he
thought of his naked feet.
They climbed. The air grew thinner and colder.
On the western slopes of the mountains they tra¬
versed a silent land, stony and barren, where only
the wild birds cried. The slaves panted, deep¬
breathing, under their burdens. Mungo looked
back to see that barrier tower up behind him,
cutting off the dark Niger lands in which he had
adventured, reddening as the day waned.
With that day waning they came to another
233
village, Lingicotta. 4 Cotta 5 was the district suffix,
meaning town. They stayed there three days,
allowing the slaves to recuperate and devour the
last of the provisions. Help was near at hand : the
home-town of the schoolmaster of Kamalia was
Malacotta ; there he assured them of food in plenty.
They halted at noon on the 3rd of May at a village
on a westward-flowing stream, waiting for news of
the messenger whom they had despatched to Mala¬
cotta. Mungo looked down at his stained and
tattered self and then at the swift-flowing waters.
Here was blessed relief. He stripped on the banks,
to the alarm of the natives. They came shouting
the news : Didn’t the fool realise that the water was
deep ? If he ventured into a pool the water would
come over his head—and where would he be then ?
In hell, of course. Swimming was an unknown art
in the village near Malacotta.
At ten o’clock a party of men was seen nearing
the village from the west. It was the messenger and
the schoolmaster’s brother. Biblically, they fell on
each other’s black necks. The prodigal had re¬
turned, and the parable was fulfilled to the letter.
Not only he but Mungo and the whole caravan was
entertained to three days’ feasting in pleasant Mala¬
cotta.
234
O C Mungo was now definitely in land unremote
^ ^from the coast. Leaving Malacotta, the
caravan threaded the great hills of Konkadoo,
‘ the Country of Mountains in the blinding glare
of heat. These were the great gold-bearing hills of
West Africa ; the natives smashed the white
quartz with stone hammers to bring forth the tiny
grains they showed to Mungo. He looked at them
with a polite disinterest, staring into that waiting
west that was still so far to seek.
For four days they climbed and adventured in
this hill-land. On the road Mungo encountered
his first negro albino, and stared at him in con¬
siderable distaste, a dank cadaverous creature. The
negro stared back an equal disgust. Probably he
was no true albino, but a native afflicted with
leprosy. On May the nth the weary footsore
caravan arrived at the town of Satadoo, where the
inhabitants lived in a state of terror on account of
the raiding depredations of the nearby Foulahs.
These raiders would descend through the forests at
night and carry off men and women into slavery,
blandly abducting them from the verge of the
cornfields, or even when they gossiped around the
village-well. The caravan made haste to be gone.
Next day they came to a ford in the Faleme River.
Long months before, Mungo had encountered and
235
crossed this river in far Bondou, in his journey into
the dark eastern lands. Beyond was a village called
Medina, and as they rose from their lodgings
there on the morning of the 13th of May, they were
joined by another slave caravan. Karfa and the
Serawoolli newcomers agreed to join forces, for in
front of them lay a long and dangerous tract of
forest.
As usual when facing such a portion of the march,
the Africans went at a headlong pace which Mungo
kept to, gasping. The slaves of the caravans
panted and groaned in distress. Near noon one of
these, of the Serawoolli caravan, dropped his load
in exhaustion. The lash was applied, the sound of
it ringing through the forest. Mungo stopped and
noted the procedure with a calm disinterest.
Dragged to his feet again, the load was replaced on
the flogged slave’s back, and the caravan resumed
its racing speed through the track overtowered by
dark forest boles. A mile from the place where he
was flogged, the slave again dropped his bundle.
Again the whips of the slavers were brought into
play, and again the wretched black resumed his load
and staggered forward. Near two o’clock the heat
became stifling and the caravan was obliged to halt.
The slave lay and gasped by a pool of water, and
was so obviously exhausted that even his master
saw it. Reluctantly he freed this unprofitable
merchandise from the rope of the gang, and left
him to be brought into the next town in the cool of
the evening.
236
This town was Baniserile. Here Mungo witnessed
a curious example of the power of affection over
hygiene. One of the slavers in the caravan was a
native of the place, though he had not seen it for
three years. He was welcomed with loud rejoicings.
At the threshold of his house his intended bride
brought him a gourd of water in which to wash his
hands. No sooner had he done so than the bride-
to-be elevated the calabash to her mouth and
drank down the water with every appearance of
enjoyment. Mungo greatly approved this mani¬
festation of ‘ fidelity and attachment \
Towards eight o’clock of that evening the slaver
who had been left in charge of the exhausted slave
back in the woods entered the town alone. The
slave, he reported, was dead. No one had any
doubt of how he had died. He had been despatched
by a knife-thrust, or else hamstrung and left to
perish.
The morning of May the 16th saw the caravan
winding out from the streets of Baniserile and
taking the road westwards through land again
densely afforested. The hills were a shimmer far
down in the east. In the afternoon they came to
Kirwani, the great iron-smelting town of the
district. Here Mungo was pleased to observe how
the natives used cattle dung to manure their fields,
a thing not attempted elsewhere in the Africa he
had travelled. Civilization was spreading. They
lay down in huts and awaited the morning.
Morning brought a slaver of the place who
237
proposed a deal with Karfa. He had in his
possession, he said, a slave who was dangerous for
the reason that he came from a nearby territory.
He might easily escape and return to his home.
Would Karfa exchange one of his slaves for this
individual, whom he could easily convey to the
coast, far from his home ?
Karfa, his hesitations oiled with a gift of shea-
butter, agreed. The slave was brought and told
the news. He leapt to his feet and bounded over
the courtyard wall. He was immediately pursued,
overtaken, kicked, brought back, and placed in
irons. Then Karfa handed over his exchange, and
the caravan resumed its way to the coast.
They had come to the verge of the wilderness of
Tenda, a rugged land of forests and thickets of
bamboo, shelving towards the south-west. Hardly
had they entered it when they encountered a
caravan coming from the Gambia, and bearing
trade goods and bad news. Slaves would hardly
sell at all on the coast : no slaving ships had
arrived there for many months. At this news the
Serawoolli caravan made up its mind not to
attempt the Gambia but to turn northwards into
Kajaaga. Mungo saw them depart with relief.
They were a cruel and unkindly people compared
with his favourite Mandingoes.
The heat grew burning and the bamboo thicket
difficult to penetrate. It was a waterless tenantless
land—tenantless except for lions. At sunset they
arrived at a pool of water under a great tree, and
238
were greatly rejoiced at the sight. But as next day
promised a march of equal fatigue, Karfa resolved
to spend the night in travel, rather than the hot
sun-hours.
With this resolve, the tired slaves were roused
from where they lay and the caravan drawn into
a compact body. It filed away through the
bowlings of the beasts. It was cool and terrifying
in the forest. Near daybreak they halted and
called the roll, fearing that some slaves might have
slipped away during the dark hours. Instead, it
was discovered that a free woman was missing.
Either she had mistaken her road or a lion had
seized her. Either way, the caravan cursed her,
but resolved to send back a search party. Three
miles back inside the forest they came upon the
woman, stretched by the side of a small stream, not
dead, but fast asleep. She was roused, without
politeness, and hurried on to rejoin her waiting
fellow-travellers.
Marching again, unslept though they were, they
reached the walled town of Tambacunda—a
hospitable town, though it caused them to halt for
four days while an unending palaver went on
regarding a woman who had bigamously married
a second husband while the first remained distant,
but alive. Mungo did not see the end of the
dispute : probably it is still going on. They left it
to drone on under the bentang tree and took the
road again on the morning of the 26th.
It was again wild and rocky country, its forests
239
alive with wild beasts and the calling of troops of
monkeys amid the trees. Streamlets flecked this
land in bright ribbons, seeking the bosom of the
Gambia. Fish was added to the caravan’s scanty
diet, but otherwise there was little amelioration of
the journeying. On the 30th May they came to
the village of Jallacotta, still suffering from raids by
Foulah bandits from Bondou. The day before the
arrival of Mhngo and his caravan these bandits had
descended through the forest and stolen twenty
head of cattle.
The slaves in the caravan were a thin and
unhealthy folk by this time, and one was found
unable to proceed any further. His master
arranged to exchange him with one of the slave
girls of the town. 4 The poor girl was ignorant of
her fate until all the bundles were tied up in the
morning, and the coffle ready to depart ; when
coming with some other young women to see the
coffle set out, her master took her by the hand and
delivered her to the singing man. Never was a face
of serenity more suddenly changed into one of the
deepest distress ; the terror she manifested on
having the load put on her head, and the rope
fastened round her neck, and the sorrow with
which she bade adieu to her companions, were
truly affecting.’ Mungo was genteelly moved.
At nine o’clock that day they crossed a large
plain covered with ciboa trees, and so came to a
tributary of the Gambia. Beyond this ford the
singing men with the party burst into song, for
240
they had now reached the ‘ West country The
Land of the Setting Sun. That day it hardly
seemed that it would set at all. It blazed down on
the unshielded heads of Mungo and his companions,
so that they plucked leaves from the ciboa palm and
bore these over their heads as umbrellas. Presently
the sun vanished and the rain came, the umbrellas
submitting to double service. The country was
level, with a clayey soil which the water presendy
churned into an agreeably moist mud, refreshing
to the parched feet of the travellers. With sunset
the rain had cleared and they sheltered for the night
under the leaves of a large tabba tree, near the ruins
of a nameless village.
At two o’clock of the following afternoon, Mungo,
raising his bearded face, looked once again on the
Gambia. It was eighteen months since he had last
seen it.
Q.N.
241
Q
Q iC They were on the borders of the kingdom of
O Owoolli. On the morning of the 4th of June
Karfa’s slave caravan arrived at the walls of Medina,
where long before Mungo had been entertained so
hospitably by the venerable and kindly Jatta. From
a customs officer he heard that Jatta was lying
dangerously ill. But Karfa would halt the caravan
for no enquiries. Medina’s towers faded behind
and Mungo tramped on into the west.
Two days later they came to Jindey, where Mungo
had parted with Laidley and the two Ainslies
eighteen months before. In all that time Mungo had
not once seen a white face (unless that of the albino in
Konkadoo) nor heard the sound of an English voice.
Here Karfa decided to leave his slaves until
better times came at the coast, and he could sell
them with some profit. He, Mungo, and a Foulah
merchant prepared to set out for Pisania. In that
last moment Mungo, strangely moved from his
usual calm rectitude, remembered the slaves who
had trudged behind him over so many dreary
African miles ; he remembered their kindness and
their care for him, laden down though they were
by far heavier torments of their own. Something
caught him almost to tears as he went and bade
them farewell. He gave them his good wishes : he
had no more to give them.
242
On the gth of June he and his two companions
reached the house in Tendacunda where the aged
Seniora, that relict of a coastal trader’s embraces,
kept her house. She stared at Mungo. A white
man, ragged like that and bearded like this ? He
was undoubtedly a Moorish imposter.
Mungo succeeded in proving his identity and his
innocence, and then sat down in a house with
European furnishings to hear the story of his own
demise. The news had drifted through the black
kingdoms back to Gambia that, like Houghton, he
had been killed by the Moors in Ludamar : none
had ever expected to hear of or see him again.
Neither Demba nor Johnson had reached the
Gambia ; so far as Mungo was to know, those
two servants of his never did reach the coast,
slain or enslaved in the lands of the barbarous
Moors.
But already in these lands the dirt and disease
and the long days of torture were enwrapping
themselves in Mungo’s mind in the glamour of a
far-off tale.
Next morning one of the Ainslies came riding
through the woods to carry Mungo to Pisania :
the news of his return had spread like fire. Laidley
was trading down the coast, but would soon return.
Mungo rode to Pisania on horseback, the impressed
Karfa trotting at his heels. Beyond the trading
station as they emerged from the woods they saw
the Ainslie trading schooner swinging on the
sluggish Gambia tide, and Karfa, who had never
243
seen a ship before, spent his hours in Pisania staring
at it openmouthed.
Two days later Laidley returned from his trading
and received Mungo as one returned from the dead.
The cold young man had had a place in the heart
of the genteel white slaver. Mungo asked for the
clothes he had left in Laidley’s care, and found
them intact and got into them with the feeling that
he was sloughing his skin. A razor removed the
venerable beard that through a long year and more
had sprouted so richly on his chin, and he emerged
on the sight of the dumbfounded Karfa as a strange
alien boy.
He was little more in years : he was twenty-six
years old. But in the last eighteen months of his
life he had lived richly and fully and wonderfully,
to the crown and peak of twenty-four years of
dreaming existence.
The hot season burned on the Gambia. Mungo was
sick with desire for the grey quietness of the English
skies. And still there came no ship. Laidley at
Mungo’s instruction paid double hire to the slaver
Karfa, who went back to his caravan atjindey.
Mungo settled down for many months, as he thought,
to wait for the hot season to pass, the rains to drench
the land and pass, and a ship at length to come.
But on the morning of the 15th of June the
American slave-ship, Charlestown, was seen warping
a slow way up the mangrove swamps. She was
hailed and slowly brought in to anchor. She had
come for slaves.
244
All the Gambia slave-huts were filled with the
merchandise, awaiting shipment, and in a few days
Captain Charles Harris had disposed of his cargo
of rum and tobacco in exchange for a hundred
blacks. Then he proposed to sail up the coast to
Goree and complete his cargo there.
Mungo sat and debated the matter. To go with
the Charlestown would mean that he would be taken
far out of his direct route, and cross the Atlantic
twice. But no English ship might put into Gambia
waters for another six months. He made his
arrangements with the slaver-captain.
On the 17th day of June, 1797, he leaned over
the rails of the Charlestown and watched the town of
Kayee fade back into the green glare of the man¬
grove swamps, with Laidley and the Ainslies
waving goodbye from the shore. It was hot moist
weather and the river raised up a mist that speedily
blinded from his eyes sight of that shore he had
hailed so eagerly, in spite of his cool exterior—that
shore that led to the hinterlands where he had
adventured so terribly and ludicrously in search of
the Niger’s waters.
245
Q H But he had not yet finished with Africa. As
<3 • the Charlestown swished its slow way down
the sluggish Gambia flow, the weather grew still
warmer. Dense clouds of mosquitoes assailed the
ship ; under the hatches the slaves lay in sweat-
baths of stench. They lay on their sides, fitted one
into the other in the fashion of spoons in a box,
and vomited and wailed ungladly as the ship began
to heave in the rollers of the Atlantic.
Meantime several sailors were down with fever.
Soon the ship surgeon succumbed. Mungo became
aware of the fact that he had taken passage on a
ship that was no more than a hulk with sails and
a leaking hulk at that. Africa slumbered malig¬
nantly westward, watching their passage up the
coast. The sailors and slaves lay in the stupors of
malaria or groaned in delirium through the long
hours of the hot days and the longer hours of the
stifling nights.
Goree at last. The surgeon was dead, four of the
seamen and three of the slaves. Thirty fresh
slaves were shipped ; and Mungo waited for the
Charlestown to turn about and broach the creaming
surf of the Atlantic.
But Goree was short of provisions, had no pro¬
visions to equip the slave-ship for its passage to
America. The heat increased. July came, August,
246
September, and still the Charlestown swung and
baked with fraying ropes and rotting sails in the
harbour of Goree. Mungo watched the months
fade with an exasperation that presently gave way
to a dull indifference. He had re-assumed his
armour, except when he descended between decks
at night to tend the ailing negroes. Two at least
of these had seen him as he passed through Bondou
in his wanderings long months before ; most were
prisoners from that series of wars into which he
had ventured his unwelcome presence in his search
for the Great River. He had volunteered to act as
surgeon, and he found the task arduous enough,
what of the sick and dispirited cargo the Charles¬
town had gathered to itself. By the end of Septem¬
ber eleven more of the slaves were dead. Another
month at Goree—
Goree at last had the requisite supplies of provi¬
sions. Early in October the Charlestown faced out
on its passage, and lurched and swayed away from
the bright glimmer of the African coast into long
weeks of sun-glister and sickness. Leaks were sprung
and stoppered. The winds failed and left them long
days becalmed on a glassy ocean, tideless, unmoving,
the stench from the hold a miasma upon the hot
waters. What with the number already dead, the
crew was weak, and the slaves were kept rigorously
chained until the third week at sea. Then the
Charlestown sprung such a leak that the crew could
not keep pace with the work at the pumps. Harris
descended to the hold and had the chains struck
247
off the legs and necks of the more muscular blacks.
Driven to the deck, these were set to work at the
unfamiliar pumps under the lash. The leak
increased ; Mungo, stumbling around below on his
surgeon’s duties, heard the whistle of the whips
overhead mingling with the unending creak of the
pumps.
Throughout the next ten days the leak gained
steadily : the slaver was little more than an
antique sieve. The crew began to murmur that it
was suicide to attempt an American port. They
must turn the Charlestown towards the West Indies.
Harris objected—probably violently and blas¬
phemously though that part of the record thins
down in Mungo’s phrase to the statement that the
captain made 4 some objections ’. But at last even
Harris saw the folly of attempting to make an
American port. The ship’s course was directed to
Antigua.
The island was sighted on the 5th of November.
Ludicrously, disaster had not yet finished with it.
The ship struck a rock, the Diamond Rock, and
with difficulty disentangled itself and squattered
into St. John’s harbour like a wounded duck.
Mungo made haste to disembark and found a
welcome lodging at the house of the Governor.
Thereafter, except for noting the fact that the
vessel was condemned as unfit for sea, the Charles¬
town disappears from his record and his life.
Antigua had no regular sailing times, and Mungo
might have to wait more weary months but for the
248
fact that a ship from the Leeward Islands, bound
for England, touched at Antigua for mails on the
24th of November. Mungo immediately booked
a passage.
A month later, the 22nd of December, 1797, he
arrived in England after an absence of two years
and seven months. As he told to an intimate later,
when he saw the English shore he laid his head on
his hands and wept with gratitude that God had so
cared for him and guided him as to bring him back
to land that had seemed no more than a mirage
in the dark tents of Bubaker.
249
O QThe ship had put in at Falmouth. Mungo
'-'collected his scanty luggage and the coiled
masses of notes that had once reposed in the crown
of the beaver tile, and went ashore into the chilly
blow of December England. About him rose the
houses, the sea, and the green lands he had longed
for. He stared at them in that passionate delight
no traveller knows to such full ecstasy as the
Englishman returned from far wanderings. Fal¬
mouth slept under the brisk morning wind and knew
nothing of Mungo or his history : tall young men
with black-brown faces were common enough
phenomena in its streets.
He set out for London by coach, through mired
roads where the winter halted, where the villages
lay deep in the wet December mists and the sea
curled ashen to the south. Those winds blowing
through the coachwork stirred uneasy qualms in
Mungo ; the food he ate brought twinges of
dyspepsia. He shivered and wrapped his coat
about him, watching that cold grey landscape
slide past to the clop of the horses’ hooves. He had
returned : it was no dream, he was safe and free
from all that long tale of travail memorised in his
notes : he roused to a drowsy resolve. There were
details in those notes—details of indignities and
torments and random consolations he must delete
250
ere they reached the eyes of even a restricted
public.
For two days the coaches changed and exchanged.
It was early on Christmas morning when he came
to a sleeping London. Dismounting from the
coach, he stared at the shuttered houses and knew
that the Dicksons would not yet be awake. He
drew his cloak about him and wandered off into the
pallor of the London streets. Presently the dark¬
ness began to lift, and Mungo stopped and looked
at that cold coming of the dawn. Then he saw that
his feet had brought him to the entrance of the
gardens of the British Museum, and that, even thus
early, the gates stood open. He walked in and
strolled about the deserted grounds, where the
flower-beds were heaped with manure from the
winter chill and the artificial pools gleamed under
a scum of ice. So it was that Dickson found him.
He was in charge of the gardens then and had
risen early that morning, minding some detail
of commission or omission that took him out,
hasting, to get finished with the business and back
for the Christmas-day jollities. He came hurrying
into the gardens and saw in the grey light of the
dawn a tall figure strolling to and fro in the bitter
wind. Some restless fool, he thought testily, and
glanced at him again as he passed. The tall figure
had something queer and familiar about it. Then
his heart almost failed, for it was a face of one
long-dead that he looked on, the face of his brother-
in-law, Mungo Park.
251
‘ It’s me, Jamie,’ the apparition said, and for a
minute thereafter they both mislaid their masks,
hugging each other in the deserted garden. And
James Dickson leads him from there and from our
sight.
252
Q Q Sometimes he would wake in the dark, in the
d y agonies of the dyspepsia that now haunted
his life, and hear the hiss of rain on the roof and the
beat of the wind in a loosened shutter of the Dickson
house. And thereafter for long hours he could not
sleep, and his mind would turn and peer back into
those years already growing dim. How did the
Niger turn beyond Jenne ? Did it really lose
itself in the sands, as Rennell supposed, or some¬
where find an outlet to the sea ?
He would doze off again, in the beating of the
rain, and hear it in sleep and know it the singing
of the sand pellets smiting the tents in Bubaker.
Then the door would open and All’s slaves would
thrust in the pig to torment him, and he would sit
with the servile smile on his face while they jeered
at him and spat on him, and the grunting pig was
teased by the naked boys, and the sweat poured
down his back from the blaze of the day without.
. . . Sweating, he would struggle awake and
see the London morning coming through the
shutters.
It was spring. He had been three months in
London, three months when London, with the
African Association as publicity agent, had offered
to fete and entertain the tall cold-eyed young Scot
as lavishly as it knew how. But it had found him a
253
difficult subject. c He has the manners and
dignities of one of his Niger kings,5 wrote one
aggrieved lady, not unjustifiably, for his height com¬
bined with his mask chilled hero-worship. Under¬
neath that mask the boy of Fowlshiels struggled, torn
betwixt shyness and an uncertain triumph. He
had put his schoolboy dreams into action, which
few men do. Now he could have the tale of it
written and be finished with the thing forever.
But his was a slow and unskilled hand with a
pen : the learned journals and the unlearned idlers
of the London coffee-rooms, moving their attention
a moment from the atrocities of murder and mis-
government so upsetting for the genteel to gaze
upon across the Channel, clamoured for an account
of Mungo’s travels. Had he really discovered
golden Timbuctoo ? Had he married Queen
Fatima, the beautiful girl who ruled a lost king¬
dom ? Had he— ?
Bryan Edwards, a retired West Indian planter
with a facile pen, a passion for politics, and a great
belief in slavery, undertook to draw up from
Mungo’s notes an abstract of his travels. Mungo
helped and superintended, strolling up and down
the room as he spoke of Benowm. Rennel drew
the maps, and the work progressed, mere abstract
though it was, slowly and toilsomely as June drew
on. Mungo took to staring northwards at night,
taking his thoughts beyond these miles of road and
field to that Scotland which, like the good Scot of
his age, he was so shy in acknowledging.
254
But as the warmth of June came in he could
abide London no longer. Like many another who
had lived in a tropical land, he found the English
summer of overwhelming heat and distress. The
Yarrow, turbulent with waters, haunted him like a
passion—the first of the two rivers that haunted his
life. In June he hastily packed his belongings, and
set out for Scotland.
So, after long wanderings, he came down the
Selkirk road to Fowlshiels when the hills were green
and glowing, and the Yarrow banks bright with
heather. And along the road glimmered the
whinstone walls of Fowlshiels, with his mother and
a brother awaiting him.
The elder Mungo was dead, the rest of the family
scattered. His mother greeted him with sardonic
affection—that eternal refuge of the sentimental
Scot. He sat a long first evening with her, mostly
in silence, says one chronicler, his hand on a Bible,
the other on her knee. As the day waned and drew
the splendours of summer from the Scots earth and
flung them, palely colourful, into a Scots sky, he
found perhaps the first true peace from himself in a
stretch of twenty years.
255
A rv Somewhere in the following days he paid his
^i1 v/ first visit to the home of Anderson, that polite
and jovial practitioner, who received him much in
the old manner, without hero-worship. And here
was Ailie, tall almost as himself, handsome, amused,
but impressed, with dark eyes quieting their fun as
she looked at him. It was no longer the raw boy
who had sailed for Bencoolen, but a young man
with grave eyes very sincere in their admiration.
A change came on Ailie with Mungo’s visits
light-hearted Ailie whose father adored her, a born
flirt and pleasure-seeker. So she could still be,
laughing at Mungo, teasing him, but putting that
mood aside for a still deep gravity that had not
seemed in her nature. And soon, in the months
that followed, that starved side of Mungo responded.
Perhaps he never loved her at all as a woman should
be loved—as a lover. The mother-complex of Fowl-
shiels was too deep in him, body and mind, for that.
Perhaps it was the aura of Ailie in those months that
led him to look back with such a quiet glow of grati¬
tude on the African women he had encountered :—
c In all my wanderings and wretchedness, I
found them uniformly kind and compassionate ;
and I can truly say, as my predecessor Mr. Ledyard
has eloquently said before me :—To a woman I
never addressed myself in the language of decency
256
and friendship, without receiving a decent and
friendly answer. If I was hungry or thirsty, wet or
sick, they did not hesitate, like the men, to perform
a generous action. In so free and so kind a manner
did they contribute to my relief, that if I was dry I
drank the sweetest draught, and if hungry I ate the
coarsest morsel with a double relish.’
For he had taken up the writing of his Travels in
earnest now. Rising early in the morning, he sat
and moiled in the little-anticipated agonies of
authorship. Unlike those facile letters invoking
the Almighty to genteel miracle, which in his early
youth he had found a positive pleasure in compiling,
the account of route and road, king and camel, came
slowly and haltingly from his pen. He would lift
his eyes from the scrawled sheet and stare through
his cold composed mask at the summer waning
from Fowlshiels, then shake himself impatiently,
and bend to his allotted task again till Mistress
Park would open the door and call him through
to a meal in the kitchen. A braw son, hers, though
he wasted his time with his writings and rubbish.
After dinner he bent to the Travels again ; but
evenings brought escape either to Ailie or long
solitary strolls down Yarrow or up into the fast¬
nesses of the hills, where only the peewits cried and
now in the autumn the purple of the heather
shimmered to its queer beauty of blue in the half¬
twilight. Here, with a book of ballads, the stuff
that had made and amazed his youth, he could
find peace and great delight till the dark came down.
257 *
a.N.
Once or twice he vanished for several days from
Fowlshiels, the atmosphere stifling, the quiet, the
attentions of his mother, the soft glow and gurgle
of Yarrow maddening. Then what did he want,
where could he go ? And more and more as that
year wore to its close the answer was Ailie .
Sometime in that year he asked her to marry
him, and Ailie ceased to tease, and was grave, and
returned his grave cold kiss. Then he went back
to his unfinished Tvavels and the correspondence
he carried on with Bryan Edwards.
He had written to Edwards and asked him to
help with the complete Travels as with the earlier
abstract. This had now been issued to subscribers
to the African Association, and readers, in the
phrase of a novelist still unquoted, asked for more.
Mungo had now decided that that more he alone
was incapable of supplying with any grace or
intelligibility. He wrote later that not being in
the habit of literary composition, he was obliged
to employ someone to put his manuscript into a
form fit for the public eye ; but that every sheet of
the publication had undergone his strict revision,
and that not only every fact but every sentiment was
his own.5 It was this sentiment which was to
occasion the Abolitionist outcry.
Bryan Edwards was a notorious anti-Abolitionist.
He approved of slavery. How otherwise would the
West Indian plantations be worked ? And his efforts
at combating the propaganda for freeing the slaves
ceaseless : he conceived it as his special
258
were
mission. And to him with a mass of materials
regarding the country whence issued the raw
material of slavery came young Mungo Park,
seeking a literary guide.
Bryan Edwards supplied his not solely altruistic
aid. So the Travels were prepared without a word
in condemnation of the institution of slavery.
Down in London again in December of that year
and January of the next, Mungo and Edwards
repolished and straightened up the narrative to its
final form. The book was published in the early
spring of 1799.
Mungo had kept his public waiting long, but not
too long. His Travels reached a third edition in as
many months. People who had never heard of him
before, heard of the book, bought it, read it,
marvelled upon it, hated it, admired it. The flat
genteel writing was to the taste of his period, as was
his fondness for recording his invoking of the Deity
and his pious reflections on life and death and the
advantages of European civilization and the Chris¬
tian gods. London and the provinces devoured
the book ; the critics expended their pages mostly
in quotations from it. There was a general
applause, except from the Abolitionists.
They raised the cry that Park had written little
of the Travels. It was the work of the notorious
Edwards. And if not, Park was of the same calibre
as his colleague. Did he denounce slavery or the
system guilty of the horrors he had observed ?
Were not all his sympathies indeed pro-slaver ?
259
It is a controversy now long smothered over in the
dust of years. Biographers of Mungo were to find
many excuses for him, holding that he had refrained
from condemning slavery and left the evidence to
speak for itself; holding that but for his friendship
with the slaver Karfa he would have made a
whole-hearted denunciation of it ; holding many
opinions that now seem quite unwarrantable to the
unprejudiced eye. They attempt to make of
Mungo what he most certainly never was, a
humanitarian or even a sociologist. There can be
little doubt but that he accepted slavery as a divine
institution. Such was the temper and twist of his
mind, so commonplace but for his one over-riding
passion, that had he himself been perpetually
enslaved he might have pitied himself (as he pities
others), hated his master, attempted to escape, but
never would have hated the system and led a slave-
revolt. His was perhaps the stuff of an Msop ;
certainly never of a Spartacus.
The Government had twice offered to employ
Mungo in a survey of New South Wales. Twice he
refused the offer, resolute of a far more definite
reward forthcoming. He had lost something of his
cold simplicity the dyspepsia that gnawed at him,
haunting memory of horrific meals by many an
African stream and under many a bentang tree,
had given him a cold arrogance of demeanour.
He haughtily awaited honours which never came.
For, though the sales mounted and the African
Association made him a generous gratuity in return
260
for his services, the ninety days’ wonder—as it was
in those unhasting times—of Mungo and his
adventures began to die down. Suddenly he
remembered his Ailie. He gathered up his goods
and departed for Selkirk, summer, Ailie, and the
Yarrow.
They were married two months after his return.
He took her to Fowlshiels, and his mother gave
them the parlour to bide in, and there with the
sound of Yarrow in his ears tall young Mungo lost
perhaps all the masks he had accumulated as he
looked into Ailie’s eyes and the dark came down.
261
A “I He lived with her in complete and unbroken
J- happiness for five long years. However she
impressed others of that time and region, sober
folk, un-gay, with heavy souls, as little fit to com¬
panion the explorer in his exploration of the
mysteries of life, she remained for Mungo the
shelter and salvation final and complete. There
was seldom he could not find ease and peace under
the touch of her hands. She loved him and
cherished him and bore him children in great
gladness and listened to him uncomprehendingly
through those five years.
But they were long years. Fowlshiels had soon
begun to pall upon him : and as that first year
waned Ailie was with child. The little whinstone
house could not much longer contain them.
Mungo, who had rejected the Government twice,
now wrote and asked for employment in New South
Wales. The reply was curt. The employment had
been given elsewhere.
Brother Archibald was a tenant farmer in
Buccleugh. He came on a visit to Fowlshiels, a
giant of a man, tall as Mungo, but red-cheeked and
powerful, reeking of strength and rude health.
He reeked of advice as well. New South Wales ?
Let Mungo start farming at home. There was some
262
fine land he knew of that Mungo could tenant well.
Let his brother say the word—
Mungo said the word and Archibald went off
on his mission. He found it more difficult than he
had anticipated. The ( fine land 5 was not to be
vacated after all. It was as well. Mungo had
sickened of the thought of farming very quickly.
He sickened of the thought of most things quickly
those days, racked with pains that would send him
raving across his bed or across a chair, biting
twisted lips Till his 4 lovely Ailie 5 would
come running to his help and the twist would turn
to a smile—for a little, for her.
So his first child was born, after all, at Fowlshiels,
and Ailie came through that safely while Mungo
still fretted over his future life and kept writing
his London friends those stilted obsequious letters
that guised his soul in epistolary matters as the cold
voice did in oral communication. Goree had been
captured from the French : it was a splendid
chance for making it a base of future operations
into the African hinterlands. Sir Joseph Banks
wrote back consolingly : he would do what he
could to lay Mungo’s views in front of the
Government.
The Government was busy and unimpressed. It
scratched its head and attempted to remember this
Mungo Park.
Mungo in the little rooms of Fowlshiels faced up
to his destiny. He had had his chance—more than
most men ever had—to adventure greatly in a land
263
of youth’s dream. And that chance was past, and
the thing was finished.
With sudden energy he mounted his horse and
toured the countryside. In September he came
back to his Ailie with a definite plan. He was to
settle in Peebles and set up a practice there.
To Peebles they moved in October of 1801.
Peebles was a small town wrapped in sleep, as
indifferent to the coming of the new century as it
was to the coming of Mungo. He purchased
another horse to ride the rounds of what patients
the gods of ill-health would send, and settled down
in a house at the head of the Northgate, one of the
large and expensive houses of Peebles, with pillars
at the door and a real carpet in the living-room.
One wanders through it in this later day with a
feeling of pity for Mungo in the stifling constriction
of its mean little rooms. But Mungo was probably
very happy there for a while, with his Ailie and his
growing family.
So 1801 went out and the next year came, and
Dr. Park became a notable and trustworthy citizen
of Peebles. His practice ranged far and wide over
that hilly and poverty-stricken countryside. He
would ride out at the dead of night to some cottar’s
house miles away through sodden tracks, and
labour to help in bringing yet another hungry Scot
into the hungry world in the reek of a one-roomed
cabin. Then he would sit and refresh himself with
a bowl of oatmeal brose and ride home again, with
dyspepsia gnawing at his entrails. He remained
264
to the end careless in his meals, convinced there was
no cure for his complaint. Or he dosed old women
for aches like his own or loaned his comfort to cases
beyond his cure. And now and then, with someone
mangled by a plough or the wheel of a cart, he had
the business of sawing bones and patching torn
arteries in the doubt as to whether he would ever
collect c enough to pay even the bill for the splints \
Presently, what with increasing practice and
increase of family, he was forced to open a surgery
in Peebles High Street. It was little more than a
shed. The winter winds blew coldly through the
cracks as he sat and pounded medicines or wrote
off to Edinburgh for supplies through the unchancy
conveyance of the local carters. Only with the
move to the surgery in High Street does a full and
complete distaste for his life and profession seem to
have come on him—though that move was mark of
an increasing prosperity. He sat long hours by
himself in that little shed and knew himself one not
only beaten by life, but idiotically unable to accept
the defeat.
Archibald had introduced him at Fowlshiels to
Mr. Walter Scott, the poet and Sheriff, and in the
company of the latter he could find some ease in the
kingdoms of imagination and memory that Ailie
might not enter. They had minds of a singular
similarity in many ways : both in most matters
were rigid conservatives and conventionalists ; they
had the same barrenness of creative talent, the same
admiration for the second-hand and shoddy in
265
literature and art. And both could stir like
antique border raiders to the trumpet cry of that
fine essence of life which they called Romance.
They rode the Peebles hills together, and talked
with great affection in the stilted jargon of their
times. Mungo seems to have done most of the
talking—talk that returned again and again to his
quest of the Niger.
His hunger for those days shone through his
speech even while he would tell of the horrors of
Bubaker or Benowm, of curious experiences,
ludicrous, frightful, obscene, that he never confided
to the pages of his Travels lest he be mistaken for
another Munchausen. Scott once interrupted such
a recital to ask, c And you want to go back there
again ? 5 and Mungo’s mask went down for a
moment. He would rather brave Africa and all
its horrors than spend his life in long toilsome rides
amidst the hills, c for which the remuneration is
hardly enough to keep body and soul together ’.
There was little society in Peebles to suit Mungo’s
taste. But near at hand lived an old soldier,
Colonel John Murray of Cringletie, with whom he
struck up a friendship. They would sit at table
in Murray’s house arranging battles in African
fashion, and facing up imaginary European levies
against Ali’s wild tribesmen of Ludamar. It must
have been a consoling pastime, this routing of Ali
in imagination.
Another year, and yet another, recordless but for
little notes of the day-to-day life in slumbering
266
Peebles. In October of the year he settled in his
practice, Banks had written from London that in
consequence of the signing of the Peace with France,
the African Association was preparing to revive,
in conjunction with the Government, the project
of another mission to the basin of the Niger. The
command would certainly go to the former
explorer. For a week or so this news had buoyed
up Mungo, but as the long months went past he
had mislaid it from his memory. It was merely
another will o’ the wisp to torment the drabness
of his Peebles days.
But he was mistaken. Suddenly, in the autumn
of 1803, a letter was delivered into his hands from
London. It was from the Colonial Secretary of
State, desiring his immediate presence in London.
It was the second chance in life that he had
thought would never come again.
267
/f O Lord Hobart was Colonial Secretary of the
•^^day. Arrived in London, Mungo went
immediately to his office and heard outlined the
proposal of the Government. It was to equip
an expedition to penetrate and navigate the Niger.
A guard of soldiers was to be raised from the
English garrison at Gore'e, and Mungo given the
command and a brevet rank of captain. Would
he accept the commission ?
Strangely, he hesitated for a little while, the tall
young man, a little over thirty, a cold formal
demeanour masking his excitement. He must first
return to Scotland and consult on the matter.
Hobart consented genially.
Back to Scotland and his Ailie. It was memory
of her had made him hesitate to grasp at the
opportunity he had prayed for and dreamt of
through five long years. But now he saw her left
desolate, without her £ tall loon ’ to comfort—she
found such comfort in comforting him !—and with
the four children on her hands. He couldn’t leave
Ailie.
Yet, riding north, he knew that he could, that
he would even if Ailie begged him not to. So, a
man torn between the two great loves of his life,
he came to Peebles.
And there Ailie did not fail him—bright-eyed
268
Ailie of the ready laugh and still with the gay
smile. She knew him too well to seek to deny him
that which had haunted many a long sleepless hour
of his nights. Mungo rode back to London and
threw himself into preparations for departure.
His brother-in-law, Alexander Anderson, wrote
him : he had heard from Ailie of the expedition.
Should he join it ? Mungo does not seem to have
hesitated in sending him a welcome, though
Alexander’s constitution was in no way equal to his
own in facing such trial as an African march. Here,
in London, he met another old acquaintance, one
George Scott whom he had known in Peebles, and
now a Government draughtsman. Scott also was
eager to join the expedition, and Mungo had him
enrolled.
For his brother-in-law he secured the brevet rank
of lieutenant as surgeon to the expedition, and
fought out other matters in wearying detail between
the offices of the African Association and the
Colonial Secretary. At length, in spite of delays,
all the plans of the expedition had been counter¬
signed by the Secretary.
Mungo wrote off a joyous letter to his c lovely
Ailie ’ : c When that is accomplished I shall not lose
one moment in returning to you. My darling, when
we meet I shall be the happiest man on earth.
Write soon, for I count the days till I hear from
you, my lovely Ailie.’
It was February, 1804. The ship was ready at
Portsmouth and letters of credit in hand from
269
Hobart when a change in the government wiped
out Mungo’s plans from immediate practicability.
The immediate sailing was countermanded, and
the question whether the expedition would set out
at all left to the new Secretary, Lord Camden.
Mungo lost his temper and bearded the new
Secretary in the Colonial Office. Was the expedi¬
tion to go, or was it not ? The Secretary temporised.
When he had looked into all the details—Mean¬
time, he understood from his officials that Mungo
was by no means proficient in Arabic and had
suffered considerable inconveniences in consequence
on his previous exploration. Had he not better
remedy this by tuition during the next few months ?
Fuming, Mungo sought round London for an
Arabic tutor. Presently he laid hands on him in
the person of a stray Moor, one Sidi Ambak Bubi,
a pallid man shivering in the sharp blow of London
March. He was to shiver with considerable more
intensity in a week or so. With Mungo he journeyed
up to Peebles, where his advent woke that somnolent
borough to interest for the first time in its recorded
history. Peebles ran and gaped and stared much as
the African villages had done at sight of Mungo.
The Sidi’s opinions of his reception are not recorded.
One hopes he later returned to Barbary and wrote
an account of his Travels in the Interior of Scotland.
Mungo gradually allowed his practice to collapse
while he toiled in the mazes of the Arab script or
kept up dinner-time converse with the Sidi in the
unauthentic Arabic of the Barbary coast. It was,
270
however, authentic enough for Mungo s purpose
of meeting the South Saharan Moors in terms of
intelligibility. At the end of three months, with
news from London that the new Secretary was at
last beginning to move in the matter of the expedi¬
tion, Mungo closed down his house at Peebles and
removed his goods, his Ailie and his four children
back to Fowlshiels and the welcome of the greying
Mistress Park.
Here, in those solitudes which had seen the
earliest strayings of his feet, he wandered much
through that autumn, his Arabic grammar in his
hand ; or at home, in the parlour of Fowlshiels,
brooded over those matters of sextant and astronom¬
ical calculation on which he had previously been
so ignorant. Ailie watched him with unswerving
affection, bright and clear always. Now and then he
took to wanderings across the hills on horseback, and
found at the end of a long day the dyspepsia that
had haunted him passing away. The mere thought
of the terrors of Africa braced him as nothing else.
He took to living on the plainest of food in
preparation for the journey, and to remembering
old ways of conserving his life from the dangers of
stream and torrent. Scott one day rode over to the
whinstone cottage and asked for Mungo, and was
told he had gone for a stroll along the Yarrow.
The Sheriff followed him along the rocky path and
presently sighted Mungo, seated, by the edge of the
river, the greying grasses of autumn about him,
dropping large stones into the rush of the Yarrow
271
below him, and peering anxiously at the bubbles
as they rose. In some amusement Scott asked the
purpose of this singular ploy, and was told by Mungo
that in this fashion he had been wont to ascertain
the depths of an African river before venturing to
cross it. He told this light-heartedly and with a
smile, seeing ahead in vision many a river to cross.
At last there came news from London. The
expedition was authorised, and Mungo was to go
south and take charge, preparatory to immediate
sailing from Portsmouth. Something tugged at
Mungo’s heart when he saw Ailie’s face as she
heard the news. c Ailie, say the word and I’ll
stay,’ he cried. But Ailie shook her head. She
knew her Mungo well, and with him busied the last
few days in leave-taking with friends. Word was
sent to her brother Alexander, summoning him to
join Mungo. Mungo himself, the last day but one,
rode over alone to Ashiestiel to bid goodbye to the
Sheriff.
Scott pressed him to stay the night, and they sat
and talked on Mungo’s new venture far into the
morning hours. That morning came in heavy
mist, and Scott was unaccountably depressed. He
mounted his horse and rode with Mungo up through
the hills that divide Tweed from Yarrow. No sun
came, but only a low smoulder through the mists.
When they gained the Williamhope ridge they
looked down on those mists, sailing and indeter¬
minate, and Scott’s ready imagination was troubled,
romantically and easily, as always it could be
272
troubled. Was not his friend about to set out on a
journey through a land of mist ?
While their horses stood deep-breathing, Scott
tried again to dissuade Mungo from the venture.
The two score troops the Government proposed to
raise for defence of Mungo’s expedition at Goree
were entirely inadequate for defence. They were
more likely to enrage the negro kings than overawe
them. Mungo, who had ridden as silent as his
friend till then, awoke to interest. Just the reverse
was likely to happen. The little kingdoms were
yearly traversed by small caravans of aliens. So long
as these paid customs they were seldom molested.
A single European traveller would be in danger :
a white regiment would raise up the black levies to
war. But his two score from Goree would be
neither attacked nor regarded with suspicion.
They had shaken their horses into a trot again by
then, and Scott, seeing that his friend would not be
dissuaded, gave up the argument. They are a
curious pair to our eyes on that last ride together.
They had talked over their favourite Border ballads
on the night before, in between stretches of the talk
on Africa ; and, when now they came to the road
in the moorland where Scott was to turn back, an
incident stirred all those slumbering memories of
tenebrous superstition that the ballads bore. Mungo
cantered his horse across the ditch to the road, but
the beast was clumsy, catching its hoof in the ditch
and nearly falling. Scott watched Mungo pull it
up.
G.N.
273
S
‘ I’m afraid, Mungo, that that’s a bad omen.’
Mungo smiled at him over his shoulder, the last
look on his face Scott minded : ‘ Freits follow those
that look to them,’ he said.
Then he waved his hand, struck spurs into his
horse, and cantered away. Scott never saw him
again.
274
/J O At the end he could not bear any formal
^ farewell with Ailie and the children. He
went off to Edinburgh and wrote from there,
telling them he was leaving for London, and so for
the Gambia. He would not put to test again
Ailie’s understanding : at the last it might fail, or
his own resolution, as he wrote. There was a kind
of premonition in that writing.
But the mood cleared as he neared London and
vanished in London itself. The delay was short
enough. On the 28th of January he and Alexander
Anderson and George Scott travelled down to
Portsmouth, where the Crescent transport was
waiting to embark them. As well as Mungo’s two
friends, five artificers from the Portsmouth dock¬
yards, whose task it would be to build the boats
that were to sail the Niger, clambered aboard the
Crescent and found berths for the weary days of
voyaging that ensued. Mungo was in high spirits.
He sent a last letter to Ailie, telling her he was
convinced of a speedy success and return. Then
the Crescent unreefed her great sails and slowly
lurched out through the darkling waters of the
morning of the 30th of January, 1805.
Their destination was the Cape Verde islands
where Mungo had authorisation to purchase such
275
transport animals and provisions as he thought
needful. It was a short two weeks’ sail in normal
weather, but even at the outset the second expedi¬
tion was faced with ill-luck. The Bay of Biscay was
at its worst ; it drove back the Crescent again and
again into the shelters of the French coast. Febru¬
ary dragged past, a month of pelting rain and
lashing tides, in Mungo’s ears the whistle of cordage
and in his face the salt of blown spray while
he tramped the quivering deck in quivering
impatience. Towards the beginning of March the
winds began to abate, and the Crescent slipped
south in a week of calm. On the 8th of March they
reached St. lago of Cape Verde.
Mungo and Alexander went ashore with George
Scott and the three began to buy asses. The more
of them he saw the better Mungo liked the beasts :
he and his two friends ranged the town in search
of hardy and spirited donkeys. In two weeks they
had purchased forty-four, and a large supply of
corn and hay. The captain of the Crescent drew the
line at more, seeing the likelihood of his vessel
foundering in the Atlantic under the weight of an
overshipment of donkeys. They sailed for Goree
on the 21 st.
Early on the 25th of March the coast of Africa
came blue and gold up out of the forward horizon
on Mungo’s gaze—that coast he had seen sink
behind him eight years before as the slave-ship
Charlestown groaned her way westwards. Alexander
and Scott came to his side and watched that thin
276
defilement of the ocean’s floor change and enlarge
till it dominated all the forward sky.
Three days coasting brought them into the roads
of Goree. Mungo landed and presented his
credentials to the commander, one Major Lloyd.
His commission was to enlist for the journey such
of the garrison as would volunteer, Mungo to offer
such inducement as he might think fit. His arrival
stirred all the garrison from the sloth and boredom
of African service, and Mungo and the officers came
to an agreement that the most tempting bait to
offer the rank and file would be double pay and
discharge from the Army at the end of the expedition.
A garrison order was posted accordingly.
Goree gave a shout and flocked to volunteer,
Englishmen sick of the unending heat and monotony
of garrison life in a time and an age without sport
or entertainment or elementary sanitation. Mungo
was overwhelmed with volunteers, but he chose as
discreetly as the circumstances permitted a total
of thirty-five privates. An artillery officer, one
Lieutenant Martyn, a vivacious and unstable
individual, so pressed his services that Mungo,
willing to have an officer in his company who was
acquainted with the soldiers, engaged him as well.
In Goree roads lay the Squirrel frigate, and its
captain allowed two of the sailors to volunteer to
accompany Captain Mungo Park to the Niger to
assist in sailing his boats.
Mungo, as he wrote to the Under-Secretary of
State for the Colonies, had the four carpenters
277
from England attested (it seems somewhat against
their will), that they might come under the same
discipline as the others. All this was accomplished
in the space of nine days, and if the blank refusal
of every likely black in Goree to volunteer service
in company with the whites was disappointing,
Mungo shrugged the matter aside as a triviality.
Some breath of dislike or distrust of the fellow-blacks
of the interior He gave orders for the
soldiers to embark.
It was the 6th of April. The guns of Goree
thundered and the soldiers cheered and cheered
again in excitement as the Crescent drew out in the
roads and turned south for the Gambia.
Three days later they came to Jillifree. Ten years
before Mungo had strolled round its bazaars, a lone
young alien, and diligently noted its products, its
morals, and its appearance. He had more arduous
duties now. From here he wrote out for the Govern¬
ment a neat report of his activities so far ; then
had the Crescent sail up the sluggish Gambia to
Kayee.
From the deck he saw the mangroves riding
again the oily brown tides ; the vessel slipped and
jarred into the backward country with already a
breath of that dank warmth raising the sweat on
the unaccustomed faces of the white newcomers.
But all the soldiers were in excellent spirits, lolling
the deck or starting up to stare at the wonders of
the river, bragging of their intention of sacking
Timbuctoo, and looking forward to the entire
278
venture as a glorified spree. Lieutenant Martyn
alone kept ominously sane and normal.
At Kayee the expedition disembarked, and the
Crescent turned about and departed. Mungo set to
work in search of an efficient guide. Finally, he
alighted on the person of one Isaaco, a Mandingo
c priest5 who was also a travelling merchant and
professed to have made many long journeys into
the interior. It is probable that he told the truth ;
but the exact degree of his truth-telling in relation
to the fortunes of the second expedition will always
remain uncertain. Mungo trusted him implicitly.
It was the 26th of April. Next day he determined
to set out on his march into the interior. He sat
down and wrote letters, official and unofficial,
including one to his Ailie in far Fowlshiels :
‘ Kayee, River Gambia,
April 26, 1805.
‘ I have been busy these three days in making prepara¬
tions for our journey, and I feel rather uneasy when I think
that I can receive no letters from you till I return to
England ; but you may depend on this, that I will avail
myself of every opportunity of writing to you, though from
the very nature of the undertaking, these opportunities
will be but few. We set off for the interior to-morrow
morning, and I assure you, that whatever the issue of the
present journey may be, everything looks favourable. We
have been successful thus far, beyond my highest expecta¬
tions.
‘ The natives, instead of being frightened at us, look on
us as their best friends, and the kings have not only
granted us protection, but sent people to go before us.
279
The soldiers are in the highest spirits ; and as many of
them (like me) have left a wife and family in England,
they are happy to embrace this opportunity of returning.
They never think about difficulties ; and I am confident,
if there was occasion for it, that they would defeat any
number of Negroes that might come against us ; but of
this we have not the most distant expectation. The king
of Kataba (the most powerful king in Gambia) visited us
on board the Crescent on the 20th and 21st; he has
furnished us with a messenger to conduct us safely to the
king of Woolli.
‘ I expect to have an opportunity of writing to you from
Konkodoo or Bammakoo by some of the slave traders;
but as they travel very slowly, I may probably have re¬
turned to the coast before any of my letters have reached
Goree ; at any rate, you need not be surprised if you
should not hear from me for some months ; nay, so un¬
certain is the communication between Africa and England,
that perhaps the next news you may hear may be my
arrival in the latter, which I still think will be in the
month of December. If we have to go round by the West
Indies, it will take us two months more ; but as Govern¬
ment has given me an unlimited credit, if a vessel is coming
direct, I shall of course take a passage in her. I have
enjoyed excellent health, and have great hopes to bring
this expedition to a happy conclusion. In five weeks from
the date of this letter the worst part of the journey will be
over. Kiss all my dear children for me, and let them know
that their father loves them.5
280
A A Either a kind of blindness to the situation
rt1 came upon him, or he deliberately closed his
eyes to the probable mischances that awaited the
caravan. He was seriously behind time with his
programme. A month before he should have left
Kayee. But the long delay in reaching the Cape
Verde Islands and in finding a guide in Gambia
had pushed the march of the expedition close to
the times when the rain would come in the interior.
He had met those rains in all their horror in his
previous venture, and one can only suppose that
his plunge into the interior was taken in deliberate
disregard of the known risks. His buoyant letters
to England probably concealed a dark enough
shadow in his heart.
Captain Park issued instructions for the first
stage of the march. That was to Pisania, where
ten years before he had received shelter and comfort
from the hospitable slavers, Laidley and the Ainslies.
Now Laidley was dead and the Ainslies gone.
Mungo turned from the thought of them to reorgan¬
ising his caravan. Even in the space of the short
march from Kayee it had become obvious that more
asses were required. These were not purchased
until six days had been spent in the wranglings of
native negotiation.
He planned to reach the Niger by much the same
281
route as he had taken in returning from it. The
next wide stretch of his march was to Medina, the
capital of Woolli. A long and colourful procession,
the soldiers with their muskets slung, in their
stifling red coats, marching or riding on laden
donkeys, strung through the forests from Pisania,
seeking the cool shade of the giant trees as they
marched, and at night the shelter of the village
huts. In the dark the Goree soldiers would listen
with a catch of breath to the cough and growl of
prowling lions, and loosen their soaking uniforms
from about their heat-perspired bodies, gasping
for a draught of fresh air, hoping for another long
halt.
But Mungo was now insatiable of speed. The
heat did not affect him, nor Alexander Anderson
nor Scott at first, though their food and gear were
much of the quality of the soldiers’. Mungo’s
dyspepsia had shown no sign of returning. He was
cold and yet on fire with resolution, rousing the
heat-hazed laggards each morning to take the trail
through the wilting grasses of the wilderness.
It grew more and more hot and the air more
stifling as they marched into the interior and the
rainy season. They would loosen their tunics and
kneel by pools in the forest, drinking the stagnant
water, the soldiers. Mungo himself knew nothing
to forbid the practice. Presently two of the men fell
ill of dysentery, and staggered in great pain m the
rear of the caravan. Mungo came to a swift
decision. On the 8th of May he abandoned them
282
to the care of a village through which the caravan
was passing.
Three days later he came to Medina and halted
there hardly at all, paying his customs dues in
haste, and marching out the now silent bodyguard
through staring crowds of blacks. His brother-in-
law Alexander seconded him in everything. Mungo
came to depend on him at the rear of the caravan,
as he himself headed the van. Martyn had already
proved useless : it seems probable, looking back
from this distance in time and space, that Martyn
was out of his mind. He had probably suffered
from sunstroke.
From Badoo on the 29th of May Mungo
despatched two letters to England, one to Ailie and
one to Sir Joseph Banks. Both letters contain lies,
telling of the complete health and happiness of the
expedition. This, when already the soldiers dragged
their feet and shivered in recurrent fevers ! But
Mungo closed his eyes to these facts as he did to the
wet season they now approached. To Ailie he
wrote c we are half through our journey without
the smallest accident or unpleasant circumstance \
. . . . Three days before his caravan had been
assailed and scattered by a swarm of bees. Six of
the asses had been lost. A fire had broken out in
the camp as a result of the confusion and a large
portion of the baggage had been destroyed 
But though he might commit such facts to his
diary, he committed to Ailie a picture of carefree
success :
283
‘ We carry our own victuals with us, and live
very well ; in fact we have only had a pleasant
journey, and yet this is what we thought would be
the worst part of it ! .... I will indulge the hope
that my wife, children, and all friends are well. I
am in great hopes of finishing this journey with
credit in a few months ; and then with what joy
shall I turn my face towards home ! ’
He expected to reach the Niger in a month.
Instead, it was to take him almost four—one of the
most remarkable and ruthless marches in the
history of exploration.
284
A C The tornadoes that heralded the great rains
^ now swept the land, bending the boughs of
the forest trees and whistling through the crevices
in the walls of reed huts. The soldiers staggered
in the hot dank blow of those winds, pressing down
the jungle paths in the track of Captain Park.
Presently all the eastwards sky was a fiery lowe that
darkened into cobalt, as though the sky were afloat
with the brown detritus of the forest. Then, on
the 10th of June, the first of the rains smote the
caravan.
Dysentery and fever increased. Soldiers began to
fall out. Mungo had them left at this village and
that, and pressed on ruthlessly. At night, in some
leaking hut, while his companions turned in uneasy
sleep, he sat down, cool and composed, to write
up his journal. At Shrondo in Dentila he halted to
make inspection of the gold mines there, and
compiled a monograph on the subject—a model
piece of writing. Then he mustered the depleted
levies of Goree to the track again—track that now
wound through the wild and picturesque mountains
of Dindikoo. June pursued them with rains
through the passes and beside the gulfing precipices.
Each night they halted soaked, attempting to dry
their clothes by fires that sputtered smokily in the
285
downpour. The forests shook upon them great
gatherings of moisture as they plodded east in the
morning.
They waded through steaming rivers as they came
again to the low country, making a northwards
detour to avoid the Jallonka wilderness. In one of
these rivers the enigmatic Isaaco, that Mandingo
‘priest’, was chased by a crocodile and severely
bitten. He was dragged out bleeding and groaning.
Mungo halted the caravan and patched his wounds,
for he could not lose his guide. At the halt more
soldiers fell ill. When the march was resumed they
straggled out behind the caravan in the course of
each day. Sometimes they overtook it at night.
Sometimes they never appeared again, perishing of
thirst or hunger or devoured by the prowling
carnivores of the woods.
Inspired by his daemon, Mungo fought on
south-eastwards through July. Then, as August
came, more misfortunes came. He found his trade
goods greatly spoiled by the ceaseless rains and the
depredations of the porters. Coming to a stream,
the Ba Woolli, on the gth of August, he entered into
long and complicated negotiations with the duti of a
neighbouring town for the transport of his luggage.
The sick soldiers lay down in the canoes and were
paddled across ; the asses were dragged over by
the aid of ropes. In the strong current the animals
were almost swept away. Mungo was everywhere,
directing, controlling under the relentless downpour
of the rain. One soldier had died in the night ,
286
Mungo, impatiently, had him buried. They were
on the borders of Bambarra at last.
Next morning, crossing the frontier, a soldier,
Ashton, declared himself unable to walk. Mungo
advised him, coldly, to make an exertion and come
on. Scott was staggering with fever, and Alexander
Anderson also seemed weak. Mungo had no time
to bother on the ailments of private soldiers.
Ashton was left behind, and the caravan dis¬
appeared into the forest.
Mungo plodded in the rear, driving the last ass.
At four o’clock he came to the bank of a westwards-
flowing stream, and found several of the soldiers
lying there exhausted, unable to cross. More
serious still, his brother-in-law lay under a bush,
apparently dying. Mungo surveyed the scene
coolly, picked up Alexander on his back, carried
him across the stream, returned for Alexander’s
horse, for his own ass, and for various other articles
he could not spare. Then, leaving the soldiers to
their fate, and feeling c somewhat fatigued ’ after
crossing and recrossing the stream sixteen times,
he trudged on to the village of Dabadoo where the
head of the caravan had already found sanctuary.
Alexander was in great pain.
Next day he was much worse, unable either to
walk or sit upright, and Mungo halted for a whole
twenty-four hours to help him recover. Various
soldiers straggled in from the westwards track.
Martyn still kept his health and Scott had a little
recovered. Mungo himself was in splendid con-
287
dition—it was as though, from the ebbing vitality
of his companions, he drew fresh reserves of ruthless
strength. He resolved to march again on the
morrow. _ . . ,
That morning dawned in ram, but clearea
towards eleven o’clock. Mungo helped Alexander
into the saddle, and walked beside him, holding
him there. Isaaco, invaluable Isaaco, saw to the
baggage asses. A sick soldier was mounted on
Mungo’s horse. A little way into the forest Mungo
came on a soldier who was in charge of an ass
carrying a load of gunpowder. The soldier had
fallen down, unable to proceed. Mungo drove on
the ass ; the soldier he never saw again.
All that day, till early afternoon, the caravan
straggled through the slushy forest tracks, a
caravan of men dying and doomed, dropping y
the way members who perished alone and far from
either attendance or comfort. At half-past two
Anderson’s strength failed him. Mungo dismounted
him from the horse, and sat down, waiting for him
to die. He could not abandon Ailie’s brother.
But Alexander did not die that day. In late
afternoon a breeze came sighing through the trees,
reviving him. Mungo helped him up on the horse
again, and then urged forward that animal at a
spanking pace. They had not gone very far being
by themselves and the rest of the caravan nowhere m
sight, when Mungo heard a noise like the barking of
a great dog, c but ending in a hiss like the fuf of a
cat ’ He thought it the noise of a monkey, and joked
288
on the subject with the pain-racked Alexander.
But the barking came nearer, accompanied now
by growls. Suddenly, through an opening in the
bushes, Mungo saw three lions coming towards him.
He was beyond the starts and fears of that far-off
first expedition ten years before. He halted
Alexander’s horse, cocked his musket, and walked
forward towards the beasts. Within shot of them,
he fired at the centre one. The lions, unhurt,
looked one at the other, then at Mungo, and finally
turned tail, hesitatingly. As they disappeared into
the undergrowth Mungo reloaded his piece and
rejoined Alexander. Then they resumed their way.
The lions kept pace with them to the right for a
while, summoning up courage to charge. They were
evidently very hungry, and a twinge of uneasiness
came on Mungo that they might follow him until
dark fell, and then spring on him or his brother-
in-law when he could no longer see to fire. But he
shrugged aside the possibility and presently heard
no more of the lions. Doubtlessly they ranged back
into the evening and sated their hunger on the flesh
of some dying soldier from Goree.
Half the caravan that night failed to reach the
village they had planned, but wandered or slept
m the gullies of a range of hills. Mungo, himself
lost, lighted a fire and wrapped Alexander in his
cloak and laid him beside it. All night he watched
unsleeping, hearing the howls of the feasting lions
in the distance. Presently the dark began to
break, and he was aware of another morning come
G.X. 289
T
With sleep-heavy eyes he roused Alexander to
horseback again.
They came to a village, Koomikoomi. Watkins,
one of the sick who had managed to straggle in,
died here. The rain had cleared i it always
cleared at this season for a space of eleven days,
the blacks told Mungo. The sun shone on a
fragrant earth. As the caravan resumed its way,
they were almost c blinded with the pollen of the
male flowers It was the 15th of August.
Presently the weather broke and the rain again
descended, despite the confident assertions of the
weather-prophets in Koomikoomi. Alexander was
now carried in a hammock by four negroes whom
Mungo had hired for the purpose. The shrivelled-
faced ailing soldiers who survived, straggled far up
and down "the trail, but none perished that day, all
attaining by evening, except Scott, the town of
Doombila. For a little Mungo mislaid worry over
his non-appearance in greeting a negro who came
forward with a grin on his face. It was impossible :
but it was no other than Karfa Taura, the slave
merchant who had rescued him at Kamalia in the
first expedition and taken him down to the coast.
He had met many old acquaintances in his journey
up from the Gambia, but the meeting with Karfa
seemed to wipe away the years as nothing else.
The slaver offered to help him forward to Sego,
and Mungo gratefully accepted the offer.
Night fell, but there was still no sign of Scott.
Mungo sent back messengers to look for him, and
290
these penetrated as far as Koomikoomi without
setting eyes on the unfortunate draughtsman from
Buccleugh. Mungo halted all the next day at
Doombila, and then, giving up Scott, again put his
caravan into motion. The roads were steep and
hard to travel, though Mungo notes that they
halted at a village en route where there was good
beer on sale. Rain kept off throughout the day,
but began again with the fall of darkness. Soon the
tents were sopping wet and the soldiers sought the
shelter of a nearby village. Again Mungo found no
sleep, trudging about in the dark downpour to keep
the asses from breaking loose and eating the corn
of the villagers. With the coming of the morning
light he sat down and made some interesting notes
on African law in the matter of ass-trespass.
Next day was the 19th of August, a memorable
day. Alexander was loaded into his hammock,
and the caravan climbed through mountains until
three o’clock. There, at the summit of a ridge,
Mungo 4 once more saw the Niger rolling its
immense stream along the plain ’ !
His heart rose high at the sight. Three-fourths of
the soldiers were dead (before he reached the town
of Bambakoo that evening three more of them had
fallen out and been left to perish by the wayside) ;
the carpenters from England were dead or dying
in remote villages back in the west; much of his
trade goods had been lost or destroyed : but there,
after the space of ten years of hunger for the sight
of it, was the Niger again !
G.N. SQI
A /T His company now consisted of himself, his
^brother-in-law, Lieutenant Martyn, six
soldiers and one carpenter, besides Isaaco and other
blacks. Late in the evening, in view of the swollen
Niger, they descended the hills to Bambakoo and
pitched their tents under a tree near the town. It
was a land of large and ferocious wolves. The
survivors heard during the night the howling of
these animals close at hand, and in the morning
discovered they had gnawed the coverings off two
bundles of trade goods, and then, balking at a diet
of beads, abandoned them.
Mungo halted his caravan for two days and
surveyed his losses. The wolves prowled close
as the darkness came, tearing the bowels from a
bullock purchased to feed the caravan. Mungo
set about hiring canoes to transport them down to
the town of Marraboo. Even with the greatest
exertion, it was found impossible to engage sufficient
to take the soldiers and asses. Mungo embarked
himself and Alexander, together with the baggage,
and directed the scowling Martyn to mount the
soldiers on the asses and march down to Marraboo
by land. Then the swift current swept the canoes
out into the Niger.
All that afternoon Anderson and Mungo lay
flat in the canoes, in a blessed ease, while they
292
floated down with the river, over low rapids and
past low islands. On one of these islands Mungo
saw a large elephant, c of a red clay colour, with
black legs ’, and records that he would certainly
have had a shot at this pantomime beast but that
he was too unwell with dysentery to sit up. The
rain kept off and the heat of the day was tempered
by the coolness of the water. Near sunset one of the
canoemen speared a large turtle, and they paddled
to the bank, cooked the reptile, and ate it. But
before this tit-bit was half-dressed the rains began.
They pelted down all night on the suffering
Anderson and the shivering crews. Mungo sat in
the darkness and stared at the dark flow of the river,
hearing its wisp-wisp ceaseless against the banks
as it flowed swift and strong on into the night—
whither ? Into the far sands ? Into the Congo ?
In—by some unguessable route—to the Atlantic ?
Morning found them all soaked and sleepy.
But, early in the forenoon, they came to Marraboo
and found shelter and rest there. Martyn arrived
in the evening with five of the soldiers : the
carpenter and the last soldier came up later.
Mungo resolved to halt at Marraboo while he sent
forward an embassy to Mansong, the king.
Meantime his own attack of dysentery increased
to such an extent that he knew it likely to prove
fatal unless he took desperate remedies. He did—
devouring such a quantity of calomel that for six
days he could neither sleep nor speak. The remedy
proved efficacious : with a supreme selfishness or
293
indifference, he had never thought of applying it to
the soldiers who perished of dysentery in such
numbers on the march. But perhaps he had
recognised the probability that not one of them
would survive administration of the cure.
Isaaco had been sent down the river with presents
for Mansong. He failed to return. Instead, there
came a cloud of rumours. He had deserted the
expedition. Mansong had killed him with his own
hands. Mungo, cool and composed, looked round
the neighbouring countryside for suitable wood for
canoe-building and exchanged a large part of his
money into Bambarran cowries. August went out
in these pursuits, and September came in. The
soldiers were still weak, shaking in recurrent
spasms of fever. One, Thomas Dyer, died on the
6th, and Mungo had to pay a thousand cowries
for the privilege of having him buried.
But on the 8th, Bookari, Mansong’s poet laureate,
arrived at Marraboo with six canoes and an invita¬
tion from Mansong for Mungo and his company
to descend to Sego. Mansong was in a genial
mood. He had liked Mungo’s presents : he felt
that all white men were admirable creatures, and
sent expansive offers of hospitality. Instead of
embarking the whites immediately, however,
Bookari insisted on displaying a sadly unpoetic
outlook on worldly matters, feasting and beer¬
drinking at Marraboo for another four days. But
at last he tore himself away from these flesh pots,
embarked the white men, and for four days paddled
294
them down the river—days of such ease and peace
as they had not known since they left the Gambia,
and, indeed, were never to know again.
In a maze of little riverside halting-places and
villages, Mungo talked and debated with repre¬
sentatives of Mansong while September slipped to
its end. For he still refused to see them, though he
sent a friendly soul, Modibinne, his prime minister,
who accepted Mungo’s presents and lectured him
on the Good Life. He had met his match. Mungo
lectured him in return : they lectured each other
for hours, finding great satisfaction and soul-
comfort in the exercise. Then Mungo turned to
the commercial advantages which would accrue to
Bambarra with the establishment of a permanent
trade-route to the coast, undominated by the Moors.
Impressed, Modibinne returned to his master.
The expedition had halted at Samee. While they
awaited the return of Modibinne with Mansong’s
answer, two of the soldiers died, one of fever, the
other of dysentery. Mungo had now only four
soldiers, a carpenter, Martyn and Alexander, left
of that brave show which had wound out through
the woods from Pisania so long before. Imper¬
turbable, he ordered the two soldiers to be buried.
Then he turned to tend the ailing Alexander. The
latter showed no sign of recovery, lingering like a
pale ghost by Mungo’s side.
Not till September’s end did Mansong send
permission for Mungo to proceed down river to
Sansanding and there await a gift of canoes.
295
Mungo loaded his goods and his invalid expedition,
and launched out on the Niger again. Protected
now under Mansong’s name, he came to Sansanding
and met his old friend, the duti of that town, who
had brought him raw eggs to eat ten years before.
He extended an official welcome to Mungo and
provided him with two huts for himself and his
party. Mungo resolved to set up shop and dispose
of his trade goods for the cowrie currency of the
country.
While he made preparations, two more of the
soldiers died. It was October the 2nd. In the
night the wolves came and carried away the corpse
of Garland, one of the soldiers. This was in the
heart of Sansanding, not the wilds of the country.
Mungo noted the event in his diary, and went on
with his preparations to turn himself into a shop¬
keeper.
His mood induced an unusually flippant style.
He records that he opened shop, and c had of
course a great run ’. Sansanding flocked to buy
the cloth and beads and leather goods lugged from
the coast on the backs of sweating porters and
sweating asses. Mungo proved an ideal salesman—
polite, exorbitant, servile and imperturbable. The
Moorish traders of the town were beating up an
agitation against him : he disregarded them coolly,
sweeping up the loads of cowries which customers
brought. With these and canoes 
The waters were sinking. It was time to be gone.
Still the promised canoes failed to arrive from
296
Mansong. Alexander Anderson grew steadily
worse. Waiting, Mungo heard definite news from
Koomikoomi that George Scott was dead—had
died in unknown circumstances back on the trail
where he was deserted. He received the news with
his usually icy indifference, turning to peer up the
Niger again for the promised canoes.
At length they arrived—two rotten and heat-
frayed hulks. Mungo protested ; but there was no
help for it but repair them. He resolved to trans¬
form the two canoes into one, and with the help
of one Private Bolton, the only soldier who could
keep his legs, set to work in the glare of the sun at
this unforeseen shipwright’s task. October slipped
away while they toiled, sweating, under the curious
gaze of the negro loiterers on Sansanding’s water¬
front. Inside the hut Alexander Anderson now
sank very low. Mungo would go in to tend him now
and again, then return to hammer and saw upon the
canoes in the glare of the light from the sky, and the
glare from the Niger nearby. The waters sank
steadily.
On the morning of October the 28th Alexander
Anderson died. Mungo stood dry-eyed beside the
dead body, but his heart was wrung painfully—the
cold ruthless heart untouched by the deaths of the
thirty soldiers far back in the westward trails.
Since the landing at Gambia he had marched
unheeding death and pain in a kind of moral
myosis. But with Ailie’s brother dead, something
of the old Mungo stirred to horror and regret for a
297
moment. Then the curtain cutting off that
antique self closed down. His journal has as
cold-blooded an entry as he might well have
penned :
4 I shall only observe that no event which took
place during the journey ever threw the smallest
gloom over my mind till I laid Mr. Anderson in the
grave. I then felt myself as if left a second time,
lonely and friendless, amidst the wilds of Africa.’
298
All was ready. The canoe, transformed into
^ • a ‘ schooner ’ forty feet long and six feet
broad, was of ample size to hold a hundred men.
Mungo and Bolton had patched its rents and
stocked it with provisions. Two soldiers and a
carpenter still survived. But the latter was out
of his mind, and useless either in helping to keep
the schooner Joliba afloat, or in helping to sail it.
Martyn, in excellent health, was indifferent and
insubordinate. The impartial historian has his
sympathies with Martyn, who had looked on the
ruthlessness of Mungo all the way from the coast, but
himself refused immolation. As Isaaco was returning
to the coast, Mungo engaged another guide, one
Amadi Fatoumi, to journey with them as far as
Houssaland, beyond Timbuctoo. Then he pur¬
chased two slaves to help with the Joliba and sat
down to write his last letters to England.
He sent his Journal back with Isaaco for trans¬
mission to the Colonial Office. He wrote a short
cold note to Anderson in Selkirk, and one equally
stilted to Banks in London. His was no condition
or mood for superlatives or excuses. Only in
Ailie’s letter did the mood soften a little :
‘ Sansanding, igth November, 1805.
1 It grieves me to the heart to write anything that may
give you uneasiness ; but such is the will of Him who
doeth all things well! Your brother Alexander, my dear
299
friend, is no more ! He died of fever at Sansanding on the
morning of the 28th of October ; for particulars I must
refer you to your father.
‘ I am afraid that, impressed with a woman’s fears and
the anxieties of a wife, you may be led to consider my
situation as a great deal worse than it really is. It is true,
my dear Friends Mr. Anderson and George Scott have
both bid adieu to the things of this world, and the greater
part of the soldiers have died on the march during the
rainy season ; but you may believe me, I am in good
health. The rains are completely over, and the healthy
season has commenced, so that there is no danger of sick¬
ness, and I have still a sufficient force to protect me from
any insult in sailing down the river to the sea.
‘ We have already embarked all our things, and shall
sail the moment I have finished this letter. I do not intend
to stop nor land anywhere, till we reach the coast, which
I suppose will be some time in the end of January. We
shall then embark in the first vessel for England. If we
have to go round by the West Indies, the voyage will
occupy three months longer, so that we expect to be in
England on the 1st of May. The reason of our delay since
we left the coast was the rainy season, which came on us
during the journey ; and almost all the soldiers became
affected with the fever.
T think it not unlikely but I shall be in England before
you receive this. You may be sure that I feel happy at
turning my face towards home. We, this morning, have
done with all intercourse with the natives ; and the sails
are now hoisting for our departure for the coast.’
His letter to Lord Camden, with its admixture of
truth and falsehood, genteel bombast and unselfish
single-heartedness, was Mungo in epitome :
300
£ On Board of H.M. Schooner Joliba,
At Anchor off Sansanding,
November //, 1805.
‘ My Lord,
I have herewith sent you an account of each
day’s proceedings since we left Kayee. Many of the
incidents related are in themselves extremely trifling, but
are intended to recall to my recollection (if it pleases God
to restore me again to my dear native land) other parti¬
culars illustrative of the manners and customs of the
natives, which would have swelled this bulky communi¬
cation to a most unreasonable size.
‘ Your Lordship will recollect that I always spoke of
the rainy season with horror, as being extremely fatal to
Europeans ; and our journey from the Gambia to the
Niger will furnish a melancholy proof of it.
‘ We had no contest whatever with the natives, nor was
any one of us killed by wild animals or any other accidents;
and yet I am sorry to say that of forty-four Europeans who
left the Gambia in perfect health, five only are at present
alive—viz., three soldiers (one deranged in his mind),
Lieutenant Martyn and myself.
c From this account I am afraid that your Lordship will
be apt to consider matters as in a very hopeless state ; but
I assure you I am far from desponding. With the assist¬
ance of one of the soldiers I have changed a large canoe
into a tolerably good schooner, on board of which I this
day hoisted the British flag, and shall set sail to the east
with the fixed resolution to discover the termination of the
Niger or perish in the attempt. I have heard nothing that
I can depend on respecting the remote course of this
mighty stream, but I am more and more inclined to think
that it can end nowhere but in the sea.
‘ My dear friend Mr. Anderson, and likewise Mr. Scott,
are both dead ; but though all the Europeans who are
301
with me should die, and though I were myself half¬
dead, I would still persevere ; and if I could not succeed
in the object of my journey, I would at last die on the
Niger.’
3°2
A OThe Joliba was launched out on the Niger’s
'-'waters on the 19th of November, 1805.
Though the river had sunk below the flood-level of
the rains, it flowed deep and smooth and rapid, and
soon Sansanding was left behind. Mungo resolved
to land at no spot on the banks as long as his
provisions lasted.
The canoe went on through the day and all
through the night, the slaves and Mungo and the
guide Amadi taking turns in steering. In the clear
bright night air Mungo steered by the stars and the
sound of the waters, with the ghostly banks slipping
away to right and left. With dawn they were
beyond the borders of Bambarra, in the country of
the Moors.
They made no halt for forty-eight hours, till they
came to the village of Silla. Here Mungo, without
landing, purchased an extra slave, and pushed out
again into the river. Thereafter, for day on day,
the current swept them deeper into the interior ;
and we see Mungo as in a glass darkly, through
that recorded clamour of attack and repulse
which the guide Amadi was to give to the world
seven years afterwards. Armed canoes came out
against them at the village of Dibbie : Mungo had
them beaten off by a volley of musket-shots. So at
Kabra ; so at the port of Timbuctoo. At Tim-
303
buctoo the slaughter of the hostile canoemen was
outrageous. The day when Mungo desired to
land in amity among the natives and explore that
city of legend was long past. His one aim now was
to attain the outlet of the Niger—into the waste
sands of the interior, or into the Altantic.
The glare of the sun grew stronger. The news of
the coming of the canoe ran along the banks like
fire, and stirred the tribes to oppose it. Sixty
canoes paddled out from the banks at one place
to dispute their passage. Mungo and Martyn
directed volley after volley upon them, till the
guide Amadi was sickened at the slaughter. He
made a protest to Martyn—in unfortunately
familiar terms. Thereat Martyn turned in the
canoe with a threatening gesture, and a quarrel
would have broken out with disastrous consequences
to the Joliba had not Mungo himself intervened.
The river swept them on.
Rocks appeared. The Joliba struck on one, and
while they laboured to push her off a curious
hippopotamus rose near at hand and approached
to investigate. Muskets were used against it, as
against the natives. The hippopotamus retired
and the canoe was edged off the rock.
That evening they came to an island in mid¬
stream, thick with hippopotami which rushed into
the water and nearly upset the Joliba. They
coasted on past the island in the darkness, and in
the morning light saw three canoes in pursuit.
Again Martyn, Mungo, and the two soldiers lay and
304
fired into the brown of the natives, beating them
off. One of the soldiers had died of fever and had
been dropped overboard.
Day after day the Joliba swept down the Niger,
halting only when it must, for food and water,
making small presents to this chief and that,
Mungo himself never abandoning the canoe.
Sometimes they seemed to be sailing a deserted
river, through the waste scrubland of a world
deserted but for themselves. Nothing moved or
cried on empty shores. And then the jungles would
rise in the south—for now they had turned south¬
east—and mantle all the southern horizon and
presently the banks on either side. The Niger was
passing through the Houssa lands.
It had been agreed between Mungo and Amadi
that the latter should come no further than the
Houssa country. So Mungo had the Joliba
anchored in midstream for two whole days, the
while he sweated to memorise the names of food
and peace and water in the multitude of tongues
spoken down the further course of the Niger or as
far as Amadi’s linguistics reached. But beyond
certain limits Amadi’s knowledge grew dim. It
was unknown land down there.
It was resolved to land Amadi at Yaour, a little
further down the river. From there he might work
his way back, by slow stages, to his home in San-
sanding. Anchoring opposite Yaour, Mungo sent
ashore his guide with a present for the resident
headman. The king ’ himself had his residence
305
a little inland. Unaware of this fact, Mungo sent
no present for that greater dignitary, and Amadi,
through deliberate treachery or forgetfulness, left
him ignorant of his omission. The headman took
the gifts and asked if the white man would return
that way again. Amadi answered c No,’ and in so
doing sealed Mungo’s fate.
The little plot gathered to fruition in the course
of a night and day. Mungo sailed from Yaour,
bidding farewell to Amadi, confident that the
worst of his travail was now over, that the country
of the negroes, not the fanatical Arabs, was at hand,
people who had always liked him as he them. He
knew nothing yet of the cannibals of Benin who
clustered their strange towns about the lower
Niger : nor was he ever to know.
For, while the Joliba swung with slow and
hesitating currents south-eastwards, the king of
Yaour received a message from the headman of the
port that the whites had passed without paying
tribute or leaving a present. Instantly the king
raised an armed body and despatched it across
country to await the coming of the Joliba by the
river-bank, at a spot where ‘ there is a rock across
the whole breadth of the river. One part of the
rock is very high ; there is large opening in that
rock in the form of a door, which is the only
passage for the water to pass through ; the tide
current is here very strong.’ Here the Yaour army
prepared to ambush the Joliba.
There is no such rock in the whole stretch of
306
the Boussa rapids. So it was that Mungo met his
in a place of fantasy in a land of myth. He and
the others must have seen from the Joliba the
banners and spears of the army gathered about the
opening in the impossible rock. But there was no
turning back, nor any attempt to do so. Mungo
steered the canoe for the narrow c door 5 where the
tide current foamed.
At the approach to that door, the battle opened,
the Yaour tribesmen hurling lances, arrows,
and stones upon the Joliba. Mungo and his
companions fired and fired again, but the aim was
uncertain as the Joliba rose and fell and twisted in
the currents. Perhaps the canoe grounded and
smashed. Under the hail of the arrows, and seeing
that he might not save the canoe, Mungo conferred
with Martyn. Suddenly Martyn seems as cool and
heroic as himself. They each seized a soldier—
the two remaining soldiers could not swim—in
their arms and jumped into the water.
The tribesmen leant from the rocks, shooting at
the bobbing heads and thrusting with their spears.
Presently the white men failed to reappear. The
breathless natives turned their attention upon the
canoe, where a lone slave still wailed unkilled.
The noise of the fighting died down far off by
Boussa. The waters gurgled and spun past Wuru
with the coming of the evening. Under the stars
they swung by Jebba, east again, long flowing
through dense lands where great trees gathered,
mirrored in plumage, where lights danced and spun
307
as the singers sang the harvesting songs of Rabba
and Egbom. Morning found the waters whirling
around the points of templed Bafo, south, tribu¬
tary-laden, from the unceasing jungle, till near
Lokoja, through the forest stretches, the river
sighted such another as itself, on as ardent a mission,
pouring south. They joined and greeted with a
rush of waters, Kwara and Benue, then poured in a
broadening and quickening stream by the moun¬
tains of Dekina, tall and barren, their sandy slopes
gleaming in the hot sun-glare. Ida saw them pass
as the afternoon came ; from Asaba that night the
wood-carvers looked from the faces of their imaged
devils and saw the Great River’s water gleam under
a moonless sky, down the forest tracks to Ndoni.
But morning found the traveller in a low dank
land ; reeds whistled in the strange salt wind that
came from the place the sunrise had not yet touched.
The waters flowed slow with silt, and broke and
spun in long slow eddies through the hot mist.
As the day rose they split in a dozen streams and
quested west, the Nun, the Brass, New Calibar,
Bonny, Opobo and Wari. Mangroves clawed at
them with dripping roots. The day-heat rose and
passed over the uncertain flow, till remote in the
sunset, by a dozen mouths, the waters that rose in
the far-off mountains of Liberia passed out to the
open sea.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY ROBERT MACLEHOSE AND CO. LTD.
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, GLASGOW
Secondjourney
^KK)OF0a^^.
D**^'5**
3TT0rtdC Kjoirakoorru <j q
JiibcoSB
MOUNTAINS OF KONG
