"TJV'o
National Library of Scotland
*6000393387*
SPARTACUS
Mr. J. LESLIE MITCHELL
has written the following
Historical Novel
SPARTACUS
Novels
IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION
THE THIRTEENTH DISCIPLE
STAINED RADIANCE
Imaginative Romances
PERSIAN DAWNS, EGYPTIAN NIGHTS
THREE GO BACK
THE LOST TRUMPET
THE CALENDS OF CAIRO
And General and Historical W'orks
THE CONQUEST OF THE MAYA
ANCIENT AMERICA
HANNO, OR THE FUTURE OF EXPLORATION
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
SPARTACUS
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
Limited 34 Paternoster Row E.C.^
First published in Great Britain, August 1933
PRINTED IN
GREAT BRITAIN,
AT THE ANCHOR
PRESS, TIPTREE,
:: essex ::
FOR
DOROTHY E.
TWEED
CONTENTS
I. INSURRECTION :
PAGF
The Gathering of the Slaves I5
The Gladiators 36
The War Begins 55
South to Lucania ^9
II. LEGIO LIBERA :
War in the Mountains
The Pits of Death 100
III. REX SERVORUM
The Conqueror I25
Winter in Nola I35
Crixus in Apulia I42
Torment I54
IV. ROME !
The Defiles of Mutina
The Falling Star
Mummius 2°3
V. IN RHEGIUM :
The Pirates of Sicily 221
Snow in Rhegium 233
VI. THE MASTERS :
Breaking-Point 247
The Mountains of Petelia 262
The Stallion 272
The Appian Way 284
I. INSURRECTION
The Gathering of the Slaves
It was Springtime in Italy, a hundred years before
the crucifixion of Christ
0
VWHEN Kleon heard the news from Capua he
v rose early one morning, being a literatus
and unchained, crept to the room of his Master,
stabbed him in the throat, mutilated that Master’s
body even as his own had been mutilated : and so
fled from Rome with a stained dagger in his sleeve
and a copy of The Republic of Plato hidden in his
breast.
He took the southwards track, not the Way, but
the via terrena, hiding by day and walking swiftly by
night. His face was pallid, his eyes green and weary.
He had no faith in the Gods and could know no
pleasure in women. Under his chin was tattooed
in blue the casqued head of Athena, for he was of
Athenian descent, though sold by his father in the
slave-market of Corinth in time of famine.
Purchased thence, he had been for twelve years
the lover of a rich merchant in Alexandria. The
merchant was brown and stout and paunched, holding
faith in forgotten Canaanite Gods, for he had been
born in Tyre. Kleon he had taught to read and
write, to compute, to play upon the lyre and to dance
in obscene measures with the women of the household.
Frequently, under the surveillance of the merchant,
he was stripped naked and beaten with a fine wire
whip, till the white flesh of his young body quivered
under a thin criss-cross of fine blue weals. Watching,
the merchant would quiver ecstatically in harmony,
and then order the boy to be bathed and scented and
15
16 SPARTACUS
fairly clad. Then, at nightfall, under the golden haze
of the Alexandrine stars, he would come to Kleon.
And Kleon forgot the starings of childish wonder,
and his mother’s face, in tears, and the ways of little
beasts and birds on the blue hills of Corinth.
In the afternoons, in the courtyard of the mer¬
chant’s house, Kleon would sit at the feet of his Master
and read aloud to him, unwinding and rewinding the
scrolls in the manner he had been taught. He read
in Greek, in Latin, and in Syriac ; and for his Master’s
delectation he sought assiduously in the bookshops
for those tales that the merchant loved : Tales of
the Baalim, of Ashtaroth and the obscene fecundities
of the Mother Gods; the Nine Ratings of the Greek
Ataretos; nameless works by nameless men, trans¬
lations and retranslations of all the dark and secret
and ecstatic imaginings of men who pondered on
women. Arab and Indian tales he read, though their
origins were long lost, tales from the Utmost Lands,
from China and beyond. The merchant would nod
and groan in pleasure, and drink from a bowl a mixture
of honey and water, flavoured with aniseed, for he
was an abstemious man.
And Kleon had forgotten love, but he had not
forgotten hate. Yet that in time went by as well,
even while he knelt and the wire-whip sang. For he
read other books than the women-tales and saw that
hatred was foolish. Great men had enquired in the
meaning of Life, the nature of Fate and the loves of
the Gods, the why of pain and terror and death, men
slaves to lust and men slaves to men. And these things
they had discovered were part of a divine plan.
For a while thereafter, conceiving Serapis, the
Supreme Deity, to be insane, Kleon believed in
him.
But at the age of twenty-one he and a Negro named
INSURRECTION 17
Okkulos, too old to give pleasure to the merchant,
were sold to a circus-trainer from Rome. In the course
of the voyage Okkulos succeeded in breaking his
manacles and freeing Kleon. Together they strangled
the captain of the ship and threw overboard the circus-
trainer from Rome. They were joined in revolt by
the crew, and sailed to the White Islands, joining the
pirate fleet of an Iberian named Thoritos, a tall man
lacking a hand. He was said to worship in a cave a
pointed stone fallen from heaven, and had gained
great treasure in the Social Wars.
Thoritos had many wives, captured in his raids.
Two of these, of whom he was weary, he presented
to Kleon, for he grew to love the wit and learning
of the Greek. And Kleon looked on the women and
shook, and the pirates shouted with laughter. And
Kleon took the women to his bed, in hate and a white,
cold lust: and they kissed him, apt in love, to tears,
and the wall of ice broke round his heart.
Now ten years passed on the great White Islands
and the secret sailings from their windy coasts.
Thoritos levied tribute across many routes, and his
riches grew, and Kleon became his first captain.
Yet he had no love of ships, though the sea he loved,
sight and sound and smell of it in the long, amethystine
noons, when his bed was set on a westward terrace
and the world of the Islands grew still.- Crouched
at his feet one of Thoritos’ women would sing and
brush the flies from his face, and bring him cool wine
to drink when he woke from his daytime dreams.
And Kleon would drink and doze again, though he
slept but little, lying still instead, companioned with
thought. And the women would hear him groan as
he lay, and think that a God was with him in dreams.
But he thought instead, till his thoughts were as
knives: Why did men live and endure at all ? For
B
i8 SPARTACUS
to-morrow came up with the self-same sun, the
night went down with the self-same stars, there were
neither Gods nor beginnings nor ends, plan in the
blood and pain of birth, plan in the blood and pain
of death, only an oft-told tale that went on and knew
neither reason nor rhythm nor right, men as beasts
that the herdsman goads, the Herdsman himself but
a slavering lout. And he thought of his captured
stores of books, and the dream the great Athenian
dreamt, of Herdsmen wise in the perfect state ; and
he knew it only an idle dream, yet he loved it and
turned to it for ease ; or woke and pulled the woman
in his bed and buried his face in the peace of her
breasts.
And the years went by like a fading breath, till he
woke one dawn and found himself, in company with
a score of others, redeemed the cross because of their
strength, standing with white-painted feet in the
ergastulum of the Roman slave-market. They had
been captured by a disguised galley in an attempted
raid on the Alexandrian wheat-route.
The overseer of Lucius Julius Pacianus bought him
and three others and took them to the villa on the
Palatine. Pacianus himself came out to inspect them.
He had dull eyes and a grave mien and believed that
he should have been made a consul. Standing in
the sunlight, his green tunic edged with silver, his
beard combed and oiled, he pointed first at Kleon and
then at another.
‘That one and that. They will be safer so.’
Not until two grinning Libyans approached, and
seized him and threw him on his back, did Kleon
understand. Then he saw that they had brought an
iron bowl where water steamed, and with it two
small knives.
And suddenly, vividly, with an intensity that
INSURRECTION
19
wrung his heart, he remembered the smell of the sea,
and the smell of women, and never again so re¬
membered them.
(ii)
Three mornings after setting out on the road to
Capua he awoke on the edge of the dark and found
two men bending over him. One held a pliant cord
in his hands, and stooped with drooling lips. The
young sunlight dappled Kleon’s face and he smelt the
dew-wet vines. He laughed and stretched himself
and bared his throat.
T am ready,’ he said.
They drew back, startled, threatening. Thereon
Kleon suddenly leapt to his feet and struck at the
nearest with his dagger. The man swore and jumped
aside. Kleon laughed again. The roll of The Republic
fell from his breast.
cSlit throats are to the swift, you swine.’
Then he stood and considered them. They were
shepherds, clad in grey felt tunics, with bare feet and
legs and conical hats. One was tall, red-haired, an
obvious Gaul, with sleepy eyes and curling lips. The
other was of lesser stature and different breed, and he
it was held the rope. His forehead and chin sloped
steeply away from the line of his straight, keen nose.
And, looking in his eyes, Kleon was aware that they
were the eyes of one aberrant to the point of madness.
‘Why the stranglers’ rope ?’ the literatus asked.
‘Why not ?’ said the sleepy-eyed shepherd, looking
at his companion. The short man bared his teeth.
‘It’s fit end for a Roman slave.’
‘Aren’t you also slaves ?’
‘We were—yesterday.’
‘Then you’ve heard of Capua ?’
20
SPARTACUS
At that the eyes of the sleepy Gaul lit up. ‘We
are making Capua,’ he said; and added, with
simplicity. ‘So we were to strangle you, to prove
ourselves freemen and worthy to kill.’
Kleon picked up his copy of The Republic. ‘I also
was a slave. I am going to Capua. Come with me.
We’ll be crucified near one another.’
They scowled at him and stood fast. The short
man’s lips parted again, shewing decayed teeth.
‘You’re mad, a fool, or an ill augur. Pity you woke
so soon. I was to open your chest and offer your heart
to Kokolkh—though Brennus, being but a Gaul, was
against that.’
‘A sacrifice ?’ Kleon was coldly amused. ‘I hadn’t
heard of your God. Tell me of him as we go. This is
a poor place to hide, and we must make the hills.’
He added, as an afterthought, coldly, ‘I carry a charm
that twists in agony the entrails of any who seek my
life.’
High up on a hill-ridge they found a grassy dip
and squatted there throughout the hours of the
day. Below them the country lay blue in the Spring¬
time warmth. To the north a ribbon of river glinted.
Once a kid strayed near them and the short man
leapt out upon it, strangled it with his hands, and
brought it back to their hiding-place. They drank
its blood, but their throats were too parched to
swallow the raw flesh. The short man speared the
kid’s heart on a flake of stone and held it towards the
sun, ceremonially. Brennus grinned. Kleon squatted
cross-wise and regarded the proceeding with passion¬
less gaze.
‘Who is Kokolkh ?’ he asked.
‘I come from the northern seacoast of Iberia,’
the short man said, ‘but I am no Iberian. My name
is Titul and my people are the last of a race that lived
21
INSURRECTION
on the world’s edge, far in the Western Sea. This
people was a great people : but they neglected to
sacrifice to the God Kokolkh. So he whelmed their
country in mud and sand; and the seas rose against
it and devoured it.’ He paused ceremonially, being
mad, and chanting an oft-told tale. ‘But my fathers
fled in boats and them Kokolkh allowed to escape.
They saw him, the God visible, in the lightning
fires that smote the islands. He was bearded with
serpents and on his head were the feather-plumes of
the sun.’
Kleon nodded, as the slurred chant ended. ‘It
was the island of Atlantis, for so Plato tells. Of him
you’ve never heard. And why worship this ill God ?’
‘He is Pain and Life,’ said Titul, and ate the heart
ceremonially, watched by Brennus the agnostic and
Kleon the atheist. The sun wheeled westward.
Brennus clasped his hands round his knees, and sang
a song in the broken Latin of the vulgares slaves :
‘These are the things I desire :
The city of stakes
And the darkened rooms
Of my home,
And the curling smoke,
And the moon ;
Wild cattle low in the woods:
Shall I not return ?’
‘He’s a poet,’ said Titul; and fell to his drone.
‘Mighty were the poets of old in the vanished Western
Isle.’
Brennus yawned. ‘They were fools. For they were
drowned. Let’s sleep.’ He yawned again, and shaded
his eyes and looked south. ‘There’s a big farm across
that stream.’
22
SP ART ACU S
Kleon nodded. ‘We’ll try to get near at dusk, and
free the slaves. If we form a large enough company,
we can march openly to join the Games men.’
Titul licked his thick lips and also peered through
the haze. ‘There may be women there—women of the
Masters.’
Stretched full-length on the sun-warmed grass,
Brennus purred drowsily. ‘No women are like the
Gaul women. Oh, Gods, Gods, none at all! And
I haven’t had one since they brought me south four
years ago this Spring. Deep-breasted and with wide
full hips; and we used to raid them. Gods ! for a
strong, warm woman to weep under your hands!’
‘In the Western Isle,’ said Titul, ‘there were
mighty women.’
(hi)
A day later Kleon halted his band by a river ford.
With him were forty men and three women. More
than half of the men were Gauls, tall, thin, and
black-burned by the sun. Shepherds, they were
matted still with the filth of their night-time kennels
where every sunset they were led and chained when
the horns of the horreum sounded. They had ceased
to weep and sing and stare, and challenge one another
to racings and wrestlings. Now, wearied, Brennus
elected their leader, they lay down at halts and cast
lots for the use of the three women captives.
Since daybreak they had marched through a
country deserted. Like droppings of blood long shed,
the grapes hung heavy in abandoned vineyards.
Flocks strayed without shepherds and the horrea were
found fast-locked and barred. These buildings the
Gauls fired and looted, gathering bundles of grass
and piling them under the wooden eaves. In stone-
INSURRECTION 23
built houses which would not burn they defiled the
atria with excrement, and smeared it upon the faces
of the statues in the peristyles. Far across the country¬
side as the day waned other fires broke forth at
intervals.
The Gauls had been shepherds and labourers,
but the others vulgares of the household, ostiarii,
pistores, coqui, bed-chamber slaves and slaves of the
bath. Nine of these were Greeks, slaves from slave
mothers, pale men with black hair and keen eyes and
a high, shrill laughter : as though they knew this
freedom a dream that would not endure, and shivered
in the winds of the open lands. Their backs were
scored with cicatrices, for their mistress had been
Petronia, wife of C. Gaius Petronius, strong in belief
that a well-flogged slave was a willing slave. Now,
clad in a single linen shift, dust-covered, blinded, she
was dragged forward by the hair grasped in the hand
of a giant Gaul. He had cut a switch from a thorn-
brake and at intervals raised the shift and smote the
woman with the full strength of his arm. Her two
daughters, with faces engrimed and staring eyes, ran
by the side of their mother. Them the Gaul did not
beat, for he desired them.
Five of the men were Negroes, cooks and men of
the bedchamber, who slobbered a strange, half-
intelligible Latin and stared appalled on the spaces
of a countryside they had seen but seldom in their
days of toil. One had been the household executioner.
In the sleeves of his girt-up robe he carried two
swords, and marched and smiled with a vacant
intensity.
But the women slaves of the household had been
left behind, at the order of the literatus Kleon. For
they would delay the march. They had wept and
followed the company many miles, some carrying
24 SP ART ACU S
children, some loot from the rooms of Petronius.
Then they were lost behind in a stretch of marshland.
Now it drew towards nightfall again, and at the
halt by the ford Kleon gestured Brennus and Titul
to his side. Since they freed the slaves of Petronius,
these slaves had elected them leaders without demur,
the lonians Kleon and the Negroes Titul. Some
already had heard of the Gladiators’ revolt, others
believed it only a tale, and the cross the end of the
day’s revolt. These it was who wrecked their fury on
the countryside and the body of their stumbling
mistress.
Brennus came sleepy-eyed from the midst of his
Gauls. He wore the sandals of Petronia, strained
and split on his shambling feet, and about him had
girt the green robe she once wore, for he had been the
first to reach her room. In his belt he carried a dagger,
a sling, and over his shoulder a pouch of clay pellets.
‘Look there,’ said Kleon.
They shaded their eyes with their hands and looked
into the sunset quietude of Italy. Against it was a
glitter of metal. A band of soldiers was riding towards
the ford.
‘The Masters,’ said Brennus, his hands trembling.
Kleon looked at him with a cold contempt, unstirred
by either fear or hope, and Brennus caught that look,
and ceased to tremble. ‘Well, here’s an end to women
and freedom.’
‘We’ll cut the throats of the women,’ said Titul,
licking his lips. ‘But first we’ll fight.’
At the order of the three leaders the company
climbed a knoll that overlooked the ford. Upon its
summit were great stones, ruins of a temple builded
by ancient men. With these stones the slaves set to
building a wall. Flinging back the long hair from their
faces, the sun-blackened Gauls lost their fear, and
INSURRECTION 25
toiled with obscene jests and panting breath. Then
they unwound their shepherds’ slings, and laid in
each leathern thong a round clay pellet, such as
were used against flock-raiding wolves. The Negro
executioner drew out his swords and laughed with a
vacant fury towards the ford. But the lonians were
silent, toiling to erect the stone wall. Then one, the
youngest, said to the others:
‘I’d thought to see the ships in Delos harbour of
which our mothers told.’ And he smiled upon them a
strange, frightened smile. And the older men muttered
and turned away their faces, to hide the ready Greek
tears.
The three women crouched in the hollow on the
summit of the knoll. Petronia knelt and stared with
half blind eyes. A Negro flung filth in her face and
promised her jackals instead of men to share her bed
by the morrow. Kleon smiled coldly and looked down
on the ford.
Now the horsemen rode near. They numbered
half a century, and were heavy cavalry, armed and
armoured in the new fashion borrowed from the
Greeks, with iron leggings and breastplates and
crested helmets. Two officers rode at the head of the
company, men of high rank, middle-aged and grave.
The sunset was in Kleon’s eyes, but his company and
the hasty defences were plain to the eyes of the soldiers.
A shout arose.
‘Slaves!’
With this came a roar of laughter. The horsemen
splashed through the ford. Then, at a word, they
wheeled and halted below the knoll. One of the
officers held up his hand, stilling his soldiers, and
addressing Kleon.
‘Excrement: a hundred lashes and the mines for
those of your following who surrender. For such
26 SP ART ACU S
of the others as escape our swords—the cross. Choose.
Quickly/
Behind Kleon the giant Gaul who had beaten
Petronia throughout the march laid aside his switch
and wrenched a great stone from the ground. Before
the officer had ceased to speak the Gaul swung the
stone twice and thrice till he reeled in the momentum.
Then he hurled it from him. It soared through the
air, struck a soldier from his horse, and broke the
back of the animal, which neighed a shrill scream.
Wild laughter broke from the slaves. All seized stones
and hurled them upon the horsemen, Kleon alone
standing inactive, watching the horsemen scatter.
As they did so, slaves and soldiers alike were startled
by a woman’s scream.
‘Father ! Petronius! My father !’
One of the daughters of Petronia attempted to
climb the wall at the summit of the knoll. Titul
seized her hair and held her. Weeping, she knelt and
flung out her arms. Titul licked his thick lips.
‘It’s Petronius himself.’ He laughed, and snatched
one of the swords from the Negro executioner. Then,
twisting the girl to silence, he rent her robe from her
shoulders and bent her back over his knee. In the half¬
dusk her body shone white, and the sword, a moment
ceremonially poised in the sun’s last rays, descended
to sever her breasts. But Kleon leant forward and
held Titul’s arm.
Then he called to Petronius: ‘We hold your wife
and daughters. Come nearer and we’ll cut their
throats.’
Petronius, the officer who had threatened them
with the mines or the cross, gave a cry and fell forward
in his saddle. Two soldiers went to assist him. He was
an old man, in the Social War notorious for his
cruelties. From the knoll Kleon watched him recover
INSURRECTION 27
and again sit erect in his stirrups. His face was
now indistinct, as were the faces of all the soldiers,
but his voice carried clearly uphill in the evening
quiet:
‘If you’ll surrender the women you can go.’
A howl of laughter rose from the slaves. Titul,
with mad, drowsing eyes, again swung up the sword.
But again Kleon the literatus held him.
‘And what’s our surety that you won’t follow ?’
The soldiers debated. ‘The surety that a body
of slaves, too strong for us to assail, is camped three
miles beyond the ford.’
Kleon looked into the darkness where the sunset
had been. The Romans spoke the truth, for he saw
the glint of watchfires. He decided quickly, with a
cold amusement that he ordered the Masters.
‘Withdraw your soldiers, Petronius, and we’ll
send down your daughters. Beyond the ford only
we’ll release Petronia.’
The body of horsemen manoeuvred dimly. A
segment of it trotted away, with rhythmic hoof-beats,
into the darkness. Kleon freed the girl from Titul’s
clutch. Half-swooning, she staggered down the
hill. Then the eunuch literatus became aware that
the Gauls, laughing, had surrounded Brennus and
the other girl. In a sudden, sick distaste he thrust
through the group. At the girl he did not look.
‘Run !’
She sped down the hill towards the ten horsemen
who still waited. Singing and laughing, the slaves
descended the hill in her rear and splashed through
the ford. Petronia, fast-gripped by the giant Gaul,
was dragged in their midst. They had gained the
further side when a rhythmic beating of hooves
again arose to their ears. Then, out of the darkness
on either side, burst the horsemen who had ridden
28
SP ART ACU S
away. At the same time Petronius and his ten charged
through the ford.
Too late Kleon realized his own simplicity. He
screamed :
‘Scatter ! Westward is the slave camp.’
Then the horsemen were on them. With shrill
screams the Negroes fled, all except the executioner,
who swung his swords and disembowelled a horse.
A moment later, clawing at a pilum buried in his
stomach, he fell into the water and was carried away.
Maddened, the sun-blackened Gauls stood fast and
fought, or, running to a little distance, swung their
slings and poured a volley of clay pellets into the
mellay. Each pellet was of the hardness of stone and
fashioned to ensure straight flight. Several horsemen
fell from the saddles, and an Iberian and a Greek,
struck by these projectiles of their fellow-slaves, were
killed instantly. Then the horsemen wheeled and
charged again, and the Gauls, drawing their short
knives, attempted to hamstring the horses. A sickening
smell arose from the slicing of warm flesh. Then com¬
plete darkness descended.
(iv)
In the darkness a half-mile beyond the ford Kleon
stumbled upon the lonians. One of them limped
and another was attempting to staunch the flow of
blood from his neck. Him Kleon bandaged with
strips torn from his tunic. Then they listened, but
now the night was void of sound.
Yet presently there neared the noise of a galloping
horse.
‘The Masters!’
Kleon listened, panting, having fought at the ford,
INSURRECTION 29
not only run from it. ‘There is only one. I’ll stab the
beast in the belly.’
With his short dagger in his hand, he crouched by
the side of the track. The horse shied in alarm from
his leaping figure. Then Kleon saw it was no Master,
but Titul. The Iberian grinned with gleaming teeth.
‘I dragged down a soldier and dashed out his
brains with a stone,’ he said. ‘His helmet cracked like
a shell. Then I stole his horse.’
‘Brennus ?’
‘Brennus is dead,’ said Titul. ‘For I saw him killed.
As for the other Gauls, they’re also dead and doubt¬
lessly in hell, being men without gods.’
‘They were heroes,’ said one of the lonians, a
clerk, a thin man who had run with rapidity. ‘Such
men they bred once in Greece.’
‘Mighty in valour were those of the vanished
Western Isle,’ said Titul, being mad.
Kleon clung to the horse’s mane. The lonians
trotted behind. The darkness began to clear and
soften till, brilliant and white, the stars came out.
Up the hill-side a wolf howled long and piercingly.
‘The wolves are late about,’ said Titul, ‘for the
flocks are unguarded.’
Again the long howl, wild and cold and cruel,
arose. It was a lone wolf. None of its kind answered it.
‘It may be the Wolf of the Masters herself,’ said
Kleon, ‘come down from Rome to bay.’
The Greeks shivered, believing it a werewolf.
Remote in the distance, they heard a last howl, then
the beast left them.
Suddenly one of the Greeks, a young man,
stumbled and fell. Titul halted his horse and Kleon
went back and bent over the man.
‘What ails you ?’ he asked.
Then he saw it was the young man who on the
3o SP ART ACU S
hill-top had spoken of Delos harbour. Now between
his lips his breath blew out in a bloody spume. The
eunuch squatted beside him and wiped his mouth.
‘I’m wounded in the breast. But I said nothing.
Lest you leave me behind to die. Alone. In the dark.
Like a slave.’
He coughed and murmured. Broken Greek came
to his lips, though he had never seen Greece.. The
spume grew to a warm stream. Suddenly he gripped
Kleon’s arm.
‘Oh, the sea !’
Then Kleon knew that he was dead, and a sad and
terrible anger stirred in his frozen heart. But there
were no tears in the body that had lost its manhood.
(V)
It was near to dawn and the morning cold with a
drizzling rain before Kleon, Titul, and the four
lonians came to the slave camp. They had twice lost
their way, wandering up stark ravines or into cane-
brakes. By accident they stumbled upon the camp,
nor did they know it the camp at first, for the fires
were long dead, no sentries placed, no trench had been
dug or stake-fence erected. The slaves were men from
the Eastern world, and they slept under dripping
sycamore trees, shivering, numbed in their dreams.
But one was awake and he challenged them on the
verge of the camp, in a whining, sibilant Latin.
‘We’re slaves,’ said Kleon, peering at him in
the dawn-gloom, ‘seeking freedom and empty bellies,
not to mention a band of Gladiators.’
The man held an axe in his hand. Now he came
from under the dripping fronds and looked at Kleon
with a frowning face. The Greek saw before him one
INSURRECTION 31
stout and black-haired, with a curling beard and a
curling nose, bright, scowling eyes as black as his
hair. He was clad in an ill-fitting toga, edged with a
senator’s fringe.
‘If you seek empty bellies you’ve been misdirected,
for these hogs are filled with the wine we looted. As
for the Gladiators of Capua, they’ve surrendered
at last, or so it’s said, betrayed by a Thracian who
led them.’
The eunuch shrugged. ‘Then we don’t seek the
Gladiators. Couldn’t the fools find a leader other than
a Thracian savage ? And who is your leader here ?’
The bearded man scowled upon the morning. ‘I
am the leader—may Jehovah give me wit. Half of
these’—he waved an arm at the dim groups huddled
under the trees—‘are Bithynians, newly-come from
Brindisium and speaking no Latin. I and twenty
household slaves of Crassus the Lean freed them,
for we surprised their guards on the marsh and strangled
them.’
‘That was well. I am Kleon of Corinth, a Greek.’
‘That’s ill, for Pve no love of Greeks. I am Gershom
of Kadesh, a Pharisee and a Jew.’
In revolt against Jannaeus and his Hellenistic
priests, Gershom ben Sanballat had twice raised the
standards of the Hasidim, and twice had been defeated.
But so dourly had he held his own in the mountains
around Kadesh, that the King had been forced to
grant him a pardon, and thereafter left him in peace.
Gershom had retired to cultivating his farms and
engrossing himself in the Ochian mysteries of the
synagogue. These practices lost him his following.
In two years’ time Jannaeus died and his widow
Salome Alexandra reigned in Jerusalem. Among the
first to fall was Gershom, secretly seized and sold
into slavery in Syria, from there re-sold to Rome,
32 SPARTACUS
from there re-sold to the household of Marcus
Licinius Crassus. For less than a year a slave, his
iron spirit was but faintly bent when he heard the news
of the Gladiators’ revolt, and stirred his fellows to
emulation. Now he fronted Kleon, unclean, a Greek,
the old, strong Gentile hate in his face, that hate
forgotten while he was a slave, stirring now to a flame
from old embers.
But also, the Greek had a strange attraction. The
flame died down. Scowling, Gershom raised a hand to
head and heart. Kleon responded, and they then
touched hands, watched by Titul and the lonians.
But Gershom secretly cleansed his palm against his
tunic, remembering that the touch of a Gentile was
defilement.
‘This is an Iberian,’ said Kleon, pointing to his
company, ‘and these are lonians.’
‘There’s Greek wine under these cloths,’ said the
Jew. ‘And unclean meat. Eat, if you’re hungry.’
Titul and the lonians squatted on the ground,
and drank, and were warmed with the strong Greek
wine, choking and gulping on the mouthfuls at first,
being slaves unaccustomed to wine. Famished, they
tore with their fingers at the roasted meat, Kleon
eating but sparingly, hungered though he was. For
even hunger in his mutilated body was only a faint
ghost of the lusts he had known. Slave or free, that
would alter never, and a moment that thought came
twisting his mouth. Then he filled a silver cup with
wine and went to Gershom, who had drawn away.
‘This is a fine cup of good workmanship,’ he said.
‘I stole it from the pantry of Crassus the Lean,’
said Gershom, moodily. ‘He will crucify his overseer
because of its loss: unless the man has fled. Which is
unlikely : for he was a fool.’
‘Why is he named the Lean ?’
INSURRECTION 33
‘His soul is lean,’ said Gershom. ‘May it howl
for ever in the wastes of Sheol. Which is hell.’
A taciturn and calculating man, the attraction
of the Greek was growing upon him. Looking at
Kleon, he combed his curled beard with long, brown
fingers, and sighed, remembering Kadesh, though
memory and heart and soul alike were encased in an
armour of iron. Kleon drank the wine in a cold
amusement, and answered with sardonic politeness.
‘I hadn’t heard of your hell. Also, but a little
while back you spoke of an unknown God. Who is
he ?’
“Jehovah, the One God. Your Greek and Roman
Gods are but idols of demons. No idols are reared to
the One True God—’Unless by Salome’s Hellene rats.’
‘There are no Gods,’ said Kleon, ‘but Time
and Fate. I worship neither, which doubtlessly
vexes them. This Iberian also has a new God—with
a name like a cough and a serpent’s head and its home,
I gather, the sea.’
‘Doubtlessly it is Behemoth, the Beast of the
Waters,’ said Gershom, looking at Titul con¬
temptuously. ‘For he is a Gentile.’
‘He is also mad,’ said the eunuch, indifferently, and
looked about him. ‘Your Bithynians are awakening.’
The rain and the morning gloom had passed away.
Above the ridged Italian hills uprose the sun, trailing
a translucent veil that shivered and faded like a bubble-
wall. In the air was the smell of green life rain-
drenched. From under the trees the slaves thronged
forth to stand by Gershom and peer into the East.
As the sun rose full and rested upon the brow of
the hill, round, splendid and scintillant as a new gold
coin, the shivering Bithynians droned an Ormuzdic
hymn, their arms upraised in adoration, their mouths
engaged in singing and yawning. Titul, the Iberian,
c
SPARTACUS
34
prostrated himself, howling at the sun like a dog.
But Kleon, Gershom, and the lonians did not worship,
knowing the sun to be but a ball of fire three leagues
away.
One slave still lay asleep under a sycamore. Yet
presently he awoke and looked at the worshippers,
companioned by those who did not worship. One of
these attracted his attention. He crawled to his feet
and came softly behind Titul.
‘As big a fool as ever, Iberian. Your God’s a
slave like yourself, and cannot keep his bed.’
His sleepy bass laugh boomed out, disturbing the
hymn. Then he turned his face towards Kleon the
eunuch, who saw that it was Brennus.
His tale was short:
‘At the ford I broke the knees of a horse. Horse and
rider fell on me. I took the man by the throat and lay
with him under the horse, strangling him. I held his
throat till he ceased to move and his skin grew cold in
my hands. Then the Masters came slicing their swords
in the dead and cutting the throats of the wounded.
So I feigned death, but looked out a little, the shine
of the moon was on us by then. Petronius and his
wife stood by the ford and near them stood two others.
Petronia wept like a bleating sheep, and knelt, and
wrung her hands. The two other Masters cried out
at Petronius, and pleaded with him, but he grunted
and spat. Then he put his arm round Petronia and
drove his dagger in her heart. I hid behind the dead
horse and saw no more. She was strong in love, as I
found that night I took her in bed. But a bitch.’
He ruminated a little, vexed with some memory.
T didn’t mean to hurt her then—overmuch. Pity
that that fool should kill a good bedmate. He’ll not
spare the daughter either, if she tells—Gods, she was
ripe and fair!’
INSURRECTION
35
‘Fair from the womb were the children of women
in the vanished Western Isle,’ said Titul, being mad.
(vi)
At noon Gershom ben Sanballat marshalled his
Bithynians. One man who was quarrelsome he slew
with his own hands. Then he marched southwards,
resolved to seek some stronghold, and from there
escape to the sea.
With him went Kleon and Titul and Brennus.
They marched until sunset, and then, hard by a marsh,
came on the rout of a battle. Horses, riderless and
ridden, streamed north in drumming flight. Already
wolves howled on the verge of the dark. Seeing the
fugitives soldiers of the Masters, the Jew flung his
company upon them, slaying many and possessing
themselves of armour and swords.
Only then they learnt that this rout from the
Battle of the Lake had been wrought by the Gladiators,
still undefeated. Their leader had fallen on Clodius
the praetor, taking him unawares and scattering the
half-legion he had brought from Rome.
Gershom halted his company and waited till dawn.
But from east and west and south, all that night, the
slaves gathered by rumour and an insane hope, marched
into the camp of the Gladiators.
The Gladiators
©
A YEAR before the Battle of the Lake there had
arrived in the Indus of Satiates at Capua a Threce
called Spartacus, condemned to death ad ludam as
a bandit. One side of his head was split with a great
sword-wound, and he sat long hours on the benches,
saying nothing, staring at the clang and wheel of the
training Games-men. He was young and bearded,
heavy-chinned, with a brow that rose straightly to
thick-curled hair. The thick-lipped mouth was set
evenly, his eyes were clear and grey. Batiates stared
at him move and saw the hunter’s stride. No story
came with the slave from the barbarous land where
he had been a bandit. Then presently, in the idle
gossip of the Indus, the story spread that the bandit
himself remembered nothing, the sword-wound had
destroyed his memory.
Presently the wound healed. He was quick and
strong, his grey eyes cool and patient, his hands learned
readily the grip of the gladius, the shameful, curved
sword of the Games-men. Batiates matched him with
mirmillones, then with a retiarius, both times in test.
But a madness came on the Threce, caught in the
retiarius’ net. He dropped his wooden sword and
caught his opponent and strangled him to death ere
the lanistae could save him. Panting, he flung the
body on the ground while all the school gaped and
Batiates smiled. With a thorough training this slave
would earn a good price for the Circus at Rome.
It was a time of hardship and heavy taxes. Batiates
cut down the supply of meat to the men in the ludus.
Accustomed to flesh, not corn, the Gladiators grumbled
and dozed in the sun, unheeding the shouts of the
lanistae. Batiates had these armed with great wire
36
INSURRECTION
37
whips, and the Gladiators driven again to their
exercises. Watching them, Batiates would calculate
on each the profit, and retire at night, satisfied, to the
arms of Elpinice.
She was sixteen years of age, a Greek slave, and
four years the mistress of Batiates. She was Athenian
born, the slave-master had affirmed, as she stood naked,
with white-painted feet on the platform of the
ergastulum. Batiates, in need of a mistress, had kindled,
grunting, but demanded if she were yet a virgin.
Reassured, he had bought her and taken her to his
bed. His slaves heard that night sounds that rang
through the ludus. But by morning she had learned
the place of a bed-slave. In the months that followed
she was quiet and demure, with ivory skin and deep
red hair, and dark brows meeting intently, Greekwise,
across her nose. Hated by the rest of the slaves, she
kept Batiates’ bed and his favour. Wakeful in the
middle of a night, she would hear the drone from the
sheds of the Gladiators, and a God of horror havoc
in her heart as she looked on the sleeping Batiates.
Winter went by. The food grew worse. Now,
roused, the Gladiators were like half-tamed beasts
snarling at the sight of Batiates. But he kept them
patiently, awaiting the sales of Spring. Elpinice fed
the Gladiators with scraps from the kitchen; and
stumbling through the sheds in the dark found herself
by the chained Thracian.
He spoke to her in halting Latin. ‘What is your
name ?’
‘Elpinice. And yours is Spartacus.’
She put a hand on his head. He put up a chained
hand on her arm. She shivered in his sudden, wild
SriP‘
Lovers, she found in his bed delight, not agony.
He found with her something that cleansed the dark
38 SP ART ACU S
gloom from his eyes. Lying together, they planned
the revolt, with the restive mutter of the Gladiators
around them.
Elpinice brought the keys in the dead of one night,
and unlocked the chains. Shouting, the Gladiators
poured into the kitchens and fed their starving stomachs
with meat and filled their hands with spits for weapons.
Roused, Satiates called out the lanistae, and a desperate
fight broke out in the half-dawn, the Thracian leading
the Gladiators, Elpinice crouching in the sheds and
watching. Presently the lanistae broke and fled and
the Gladiators threw aside the spits and armed them¬
selves with the abandoned weapons. Gannicus, a
German retiarius with palms sent down to the Indus
for re-training, would have made himself leader, but
the Gladiators shouted for the Threce Spartacus, and
placed themselves under his command.
Ere Satiates could rouse Capua, the Gladiators
marched from the city in a compact body, armed with
the weapons of the lanistae, led by the Thracian
bandit, the woman Elpinice in their midst.
(u)
Waking the morning after the Battle of the Lake,
she crouched by Spartacus and remembered these
things. They seemed part of a far tale now. Between
them and now lay the first wild days in the crater of
Vesuvius, unsheltered, when a troop of velites was sent
against them, and routed, and five centuries of legion¬
aries routed as well: between them and now lay the
days of starvation when Spartacus had fought, possessed
by a God or a demon, to keep his fellows from
surrender : between them and now lay the perilous
descent of the lava crags, at night, by ropes, to a
INSURRECTION 39
sleeping countryside and food for the seizing : between
them and now lay the days when the slaves round
Capua revolted and joined them, and decimated the
half-legion that Clodius had led.
The camp was silent in the hush of the dawn.
Elpinice knelt and stared at the face of the Gladiator,
he had turned uneasily in the night, throwing the
cloths from his face. Now the great wound was no
more than a faint, dark limning on the dark-bronzed
skin, on head and chin and breast the hair curled
blue-black and metallic, the face had a terrifying
simplicity in sleep, so that Elpinice remembered the
great stone faces she had seen in her childhood in
Athens. She shivered and drew the cloths about her,
and watched through the tent-opening the coming of
the dawn.
It had been Clodius’ tent, captured with much
other gear in the Battle of the Lake. All night it had
sheltered a Threce Gladiator and an Attic slave-
woman, the leaders of the servile host. For the rest,
the slaves had flung up shelters of earth and grass, and
slept in these, or rolled themselves in the garments
stripped from the Roman dead, and lain in the lee of
the waving clumps of rushes. But Gannicus, the
German retiarius with palms, elected strategos under
Spartacus, had erected a skin tent in imitation of the
Thracian. The third strategos, Castus the Gaul, had
patrolled the camp.
Hating the Roman titles and ranks, the Gladiators
had named their leaders strategoi, as in the armies of
Greece, and elected each from day to day. The girl,
looking into the morning and the future, saw trouble
awaiting that order of things: till the Masters marched
down their legions and crowned the revolt with the
cross.
For that was the certain end. No armies yet had
40 SPARTACUS
withstood the legions, despite the chance defeat of
Clodius. He or another would return, and unless the
servile host dispersed, seeking the mountains or the
sea 
Elpinice turned. Suddenly, through the stir of
the slave-camp outside, a bucina roared. Then the
pad of hurrying feet came near.
‘Strategos!’
(iii)
Spartacus, buckling on his Threce armour, gained
the middle of the camp within a minute of the bucina
sounding. Running to him came Castus and Gannicus.
The German grinned like a wolf.
‘Nearly two thousand of them, so a shepherd says.
There—you can see the gleam of the standards. The
ravine still hides the main body.’
The Thracian bandit looked and saw the morning
dazzle on weapons. It was an ill place to be taken in
battle, with the marsh behind them. Then he smiled.
There would be no battle. He turned his dark, staring
eyes on Gannicus.
‘We’ll not fight.’
The retiarius, a Teutone, with grey eyes and red
hair, heavy of jaw and bearded again since his escape
from Batiates, swore, the blood running red across his
forehead.
‘By the fat-bellied Gods of the Baltic, are you
afraid ? You’ll surrender ?’
‘Not even by those Gods. Look, it’s a party of
slaves, with stolen armour.’
All looked again. So it was. The party marched
undisciplined, shield-flourishing. The red did not
recede from the brow of the Teutone. But Castus
laughed.
INSURRECTION 41
‘We still dream we’re in the arena. All but the
Strategos.’
Gannicus’ temper went again. ‘ “The Strategos ?”
Aren’t we also strategoi ?’
Castus was cool. ‘We are. Also, we’re fools.
Had you or I acted as Strategos, Gannicus, we’d by
this time have fallen on those two thousand slaves—
who seem to number about three hundred.’
‘More Eastern rats,’ growled Gannicus, standing
arms akimbo and surveying them contemptuously.
For he had little faith in Eastern men.
The company of Gershom ben Sanballat entered
the camp and looked around. For a little there was
silence, the Gladiators and their allies leaning on their
weapons, the Bithynians doubtful, half eager, half
hesitant. One man of the company rode on horseback.
It was Titul, the Iberian. He pointed towards the
three strategoi.
‘The middle man with the gladius. He is the
Captain. Mighty ’
‘ “Were the Captains of hosts in the vanished
Western Isle”,’ said Kleon, hastily. ‘Even so. But they
neglected to sacrifice to Jehovah. Or was it Kokolkh ?’
To Gershom : T think these Gladiators are more likely
to welcome us as slaves than as allies.’
Grinning, the Gladiators and those who had
recruited their revolt before the Battle of the Lake,
surrounded the Bithynians. Said one, a Gaul, ‘These
are small men, but valorous. This one was a cook.
He’ll slay the Masters and pot them.’ A Thracian,
with the hair on his chest matted in filth, glared and
spat, for he had been a retiarius in the arena, and
had conquered many with this glare. ‘Monkeys from
the Circus. Hell! Are the apes also in revolt ?’
A grinning Gaul wandered round the band,
surveying it jeeringly. But suddenly he cried out in
42 SP ART ACU S
Gaulish, forgetting his Latin, and seized on one of the
strangers, a tall man with large feet and a flaming head
of hair, clad in a stained woman’s robe. At this on¬
slaught on Brennus Titul snarled and leapt from his
horse with drawn knife. Then he stood aside, and a
mutter of astonishment rose.
For Brennus and the Gaul were embracing, breast
to breast, and weeping and laughing. Brothers and
twins, they had slept in the same stockade of northern
Gaul, had been captured and enslaved in the same
raid, had together heard the aurochsen low that
last time they were marched south on the road to
Rome.
At sight of the brothers’ meeting, the enmity of
the Gladiators vanished. With laughter and horseplay,
they embraced the Bithynians, rolling them on the
ground, or weeping large, mock tears of rejoicing.
The Bithynians grinned and submitted, chattering
unintelligibly. Titul replaced his knife. Gershom
ben Sanballat, tugging at his beard, pushed his way
through the tumult, and stood at the foot of the
central mound and looked up in the faces of the three
Gentile strategoi.
He looked on the face of Castus, the Gaul, an
ordinarius of the arena, the reputed lover of Spartacus
—a young face, uncruel and uncertain. And the
Jew thought, ‘No leader.’ Then he looked at Gannicus :
‘A bull, and brave as one. Pity he isn’t in Jerusalem.
Salome dotes on bulls.’ And he scowled, for he did
not share the doting.
The two strategoi of the Gladiators returned his
gaze watchfully, as men prepared for treachery. Only
the third stared over his head, with dark, blank eyes
—dreaming, drunk, or was the slave mad ? A queer
conviction came on the Jew guerilla that he had seen
that face before, and with the conviction a faint hope
INSURRECTION 43
kindled as well. Disregarding the other two, he
saluted the Strategos in the middle.
‘I am Gershom ben Sanballat, a Jew. I was a
slave of Crassus the Lean. I’ve brought these slaves
to join you, if you’ll have them.’ He scowled irritably.
‘Which Jehovah knows will be a favour, for without
you the first band of horse will cut us to pieces.’
‘You are welcome, Gershom. I’m Spartacus, a
bandit. These are Generals of the Gladiators, Castus
and Gannicus.’
Gershom combed his curled beard with thin brown
fingers. ‘They may be Generals of the army of hell,
if it please them. I surrender my leadership of these
Bithynians to you, not to those : who are doubtlessly
very worthy men.’
Anger flamed afresh across the face of Gannicus.
But Castus laughed. ‘Thereby you show your sense.
We two mistook your band for the soldiers of the
Masters, and would have fallen on it, but that Spartacus
held us back. You already owe him your life,
Bithynian.’
‘I am no Bithynian,’ said Gershom ben Sanballat,
‘but a Jew.’
Castus was indifferent. ‘A Greek folk ?’
The face of the Jew aristocrat flushed with the old
Hasidim rage. ‘My fathers were worshipping the One
True God ere the Greeks came wallowing from the
slime of their origin.’
The giant Thracian stared the simplicity of a half-
awakened child, Castus shrugged, Gannicus sneered
clumsily. ‘I’ve heard of your folk in Rome. They
worship trade and usury, and an ass’s head for a
God.’
The Thracian began to speak :
‘We have little food, and by this marsh we’re
likely to be trapped. Elpinice thinks that another
44 SP ART ACU S
praetor may be marching against us. Camp your
Bithynians, Gershom, but be ready to move.’
‘First I’ll deal with this Gentile swine ’
Spartacus stared at him with blank, dark eyes.
‘Camp your Bithynians.’
For a moment the Jew returned that gaze. Then
he saluted again, and turned to obey.
(iv)
Gannicus, the Strategos for the day, set sentries
on the neighbouring hills. Then the bucina blew
again, summoning the slaves to a council. Meantime
they had eaten, and new bands of slaves, herdsmen
and hunters, had entered the camp. The most of
them were Germans or Gauls, and drifted into the
sub-camps of Castus and Gannicus. Looking on this
gathering the eunuch Kleon spoke to Gershom.
‘Most of these are northern barbarians, with little
desire to return to their own lands. They’ll mingle ill
with your Bithynians.’
‘Or with your Greeks,’ said the Pharisee Jew.
‘But that’s a small matter. This army is a gathering
of fools, as I’ll say aloud in this council. Now the
Masters have twice suffered defeat they’ll move more
slowly. In that space this army should split into
fragments, and each band escape to the sea. There’s
no hope else.’
Kleon smiled coldly, indifferently. ‘There’s little
hope even so. To kill as many of the Masters as we
may, and ourselves in the end be killed. . . . What of
the leaders of the Gladiators ?’
‘Two are wise fools: and the third—I don’t know.’
‘That third—the dark barbarian ? Who is he ?’
‘Spartacus, a Thracian.’
INSURRECTION
45
Kleon, being Greek, looked contemptuously on
Thracians. ‘They are savages, eating horses and
worshipping their dead.’
‘They may eat their dead and worship horses, if it
please them,’ said Gershom. ‘If this leader Spartacus
will show good sense in his leading. I : I am for the
sea.’
‘And I : I am for nothing.’
In great circles, squatting on the grass, the slaves
gathered to listen. Some gaped astonishment at the
number of their fellows ; some sat and rubbed at their
eyes and broke into strange peals of laughter ; some sat
scowling, gripping their weapons, with twitching
faces and eyes on the hills; some lolled half asleep in
the sunlight, their scarred limbs showing through
the rags of their clothing, resting and resting in blessed
ease from toil and the whine of the lash. Half at least
were slaves born in slavery, men of the fields and plan¬
tations and households, with uncertain Gods and
rules and beliefs, fear for an urge by day, exhaustion
their urge by night, uncertain their fathers, but
glimpsing their mothers, mating a matter of stealth and
chance unless they came from the great stud-farms,
where children were bred with the care of cattle and
sheep. Yet even so, alien to their own lost lands, they
remembered dimly their rules and creeds, in which
women were lesser beings than men, without reason,
and voiceless in public places. So now they stared
their astonishment at the centre of the circles where,
on a pile of Roman loot, the Strategos Spartacus sat.
For a woman, a girl in a Gladiator’s tunic, had
come threading the lines of squatting slaves, and now
sat by the side of Spartacus. A murmur arose from the
Gauls and the Eastern men, and all, save the Gladiators,
looked on her in surprise and anger, or greedily and
with desire.
46
SP ART ACU S
The woman paid them no heed. She sat in the
sunlight, by the side of the Thracian, her small face
cool and composed under the dark line of brows.
Presently the slaves saw a Gaul rise up. It was
Brennus.
‘A woman for the brothel or a woman for the hut—
yes. But a woman sitting in a council of war—no.’
With this, winking his sleepy eyes, he sat down.
Growls of approval arose from the shepherds, mingled
with the thin, tenor laughter of the Bithynians. Then
a Gladiator spoke :
‘I’m of the men who came from Capua,’ he said.
‘We defeated two armies and camped by a marsh. And
in the aftermath certain herds of asses wandered into
our camp, braying “We have come with our valorous
aid. But of this one and that of your band we do not
approve.” Now of asses I know little, except that their
smell is bad. But of Elpinice I and the other Gladiators
know much.’ He looked towards the motionless
figure by the side of the Thracian. ‘Who unlocked
our chains in the Indus of Batiates ? Who twisted the
vine-ropes for our descent of the crater ? I do not
mind it was this Gaul. No doubt he was overbusied
in hut or brothel.’
At this the jeers and bull-laughter of the Gladiators
broke out, and the others were silent. Still neither
the Thracian nor the woman spoke, though Gannicus
laughed aloud and looked on Elpinice sneeringly.
Castus the Gaul, who cared nothing for women,
sat with his arm flung round the shoulders of Spartacus
and his head bared in the sunlight. For a little, in
the silence that was on the slave gathering, they could
hear across the marsh the bleating of strayed and
untended herds. Then Gershom ben Sanballat stood
up, irritably tugging at his beard. For a moment his
anger was quelled in scorn, looking at the slack slave
INSURRECTION 47
mouths and leering eyes. What could these scum ever
achieve ? Then his anger was finding his lips.
‘By my God, are we here to quarrel over women
and asses ? There are too many of both in the world.
Strategos’—he addressed the Thracian Gladiator
directly. ‘What is your plan ? Where will you
lead us ?’
Elpinice bent towards Spartacus and whispered.
He nodded. ‘That is for this gathering to decide,’
he answered the Jew in that remote, brooding voice
that came so strangely from the lips of the bloody
leader who had held the passes of Vesuvius single-
handed while his followers retreated, who had com¬
manded the Gladiators with courage and skill at the
Battle of the Lake. Gannicus spoke next.
‘The Masters won’t leave us unmolested long.
Let’s march to the nearest town and take it by stealth
or assault. There are women and plunder in plenty
in this land you’ve helped to till.’
Murmurs of approbation rose from the squatting,
scratching, ill-weaponed slaves. For all desired women
and plunder, save the eunuch Kleon, who had use for
neither, and the Gaul Castus, who loved Spartacus,
and Gershom ben Sanballat, who loathed the thought
of a Gentile woman as he loathed the thought of a
Gentile Master. Then Titul spoke.
‘We’ll keep the women, but the men we can
sacrifice to our Gods, and so ensure victory in the
future. Gladdened is the heart of Kokolkh by a
sacrifice of blood.’
And to many who listened this seemed a good plan,
remembering dimly their ancient Gods and the cold
still faces in the peristyles of the enemy Gods that the
Masters followed. Now out of nights and days made
free of toil, strange, lost Gods arose to memory again,
giving new fears to the dark of the slave shelters,
48 SPARTACUS
new fierceness with the mutter of half-remembered
chants. Then they turned their eyes as the Jew rose
again, and a murmur of his name spread round the
circles, the Eastern slaves had heard of the Jews with
a name through Asia for pride and ferocity, cunning
and greed.
‘Let us split into many small bands and escape to
the sea. There we may seize ships and so escape
Italy.’
But at this the Gauls and Germans cried that they
were being deserted, and broke into an angry clamour
which Gannicus made no attempt to still. The
Gladiator who had spoken in defence of Elpinice pulled
at the Gladiator’s tunic she wore.
‘Shall we Games-men quieten these shearers of
sheep ?’
Spartacus was standing up. Silence fell at his
first word, for most had already seen him and all
knew of him.
‘I remember hunting wolves,’ he put up his hand
to his head, ‘long ago. When the packs were about
us in the winter-time I and the others kept in a band
and reached home in safety. We neither stayed among
the wolves nor scattered and ran ’
He stopped, staring, a troubling, tremendous
figure to the eyes of the slaves; and then sat down.
Elpinice stood up, her woman’s voice strange and
mild in the bass rumblings of the ragged horde.
‘The Wolf is Rome. Spartacus will lead us from
Italy, but only as a united army. Let us march and
meet the next army of the praetor’s.’
‘What will that help ?’ asked Gershom ben
Sanballat, and he voiced the slave-army.
‘If we defeat the Masters we can arm ourselves and
be strong enough to fight a way through Italy.’
Hearing this, the slaves were again divided, some
INSURRECTION 49
favouring the boldness of the woman, others crying
that she was mad. In the warmth of the increasing
day, a dull stench arose from the squatting circles.
Hunger came on the slaves and certain of them drew
away, lighting cooking-fires. The hum of argument
rose and fell, with occasional wild bursts of laughter
from a group of demented slaves who had escaped the
mines. The literatus Kleon had stood on the verge of
the gathering, listening in a cold amusement. Now
he made his way through the circles to the side of
Gershom the Jew.
Hating all Greeks and loathing eunuchs, the
haughty Pharisee shivered with a secret repulsion
whenever Kleon approached. Yet also, himself dazed
in the discovery, he would look on the Greek with an
angry, wondering compassion doubtlessly planted in
his brain by some wandering Italian devil. Kleon
looked in the Jew’s heart, cold and amused, passionless
but for the ice of his hate to the Masters, yet sometimes
teasing the haughty solemnity of the slave-aristocrat
as a wasp a tail-switching leopard. He did so now.
‘I thought you found this Spartacus a possible
leader ? He’s no more than a savage, uxorious at
that.’
The hill-leopard struck back. cThe last at least
is denied you, Greek.’
Kleon’s pale face barely twitched. Gershom’s
swarthy face flushed. He spoke again, angrily at
unease, as the other said nothing.
£I have spoken with these Gladiators. This woman
is favoured by a God, some devil of these heathen
lands. In my country she would be stoned till her
shameful body was hidden from the sight of men.’
‘A meek and gentle people, your countrymen,’
agreed Kleon. ‘How came the woman to join the
revolt ?’
D
5o
SPARTACUS
‘Of that there’s that tale and this, each of these
Gladiators being a bigger liar than his neighbour.
Some say she was a concubine of that Batiates whom
they’ve escaped ; others that Spartacus was her lover
for years, and they bandited together in Thrace.
While this new-come scum maunder as slaves will,
being fools.’
‘You yourself are a slave, Jew.’
T am a noble of the Maccabees.’
‘Who sold you from Bithynia to the Roman slave-
market !’
‘Some day I’ll redress that, with a forest of spears
against the Bitch in Jerusalem.’
Kleon squatted on the ground and drew forth the
roll of The Republic. ‘Then you’re in need of advice
on how to model the perfect state. I’ll read to you
now from Plato the divine.’
‘No, no.’ The wasp had stung again. ‘He was
doubtlessly a very worthy Greek, but I’ve no taste for
his counsel. Some other time, when we are out of
Italy. Here comes a sentry with two more recruits.
Gauls both, by their look. Which is no great
accession.’
For Gershom ben Sanballat had little faith in
Northern men.
(V)
A German posted on the outlying hills by Gannicus,
the sentry came striding through the squatting slaves.
With him came two men, small men and dark in the
Celtic way, clad in short linen tunics. They were
clad in the armour of mirmillones, with images of
fish on their iron helmets, and decorated leg-sheaths
shielding their knees. Those of the slave-host who
had escaped the school of Batiates stared at the
INSURRECTION 51
newcomers and their shameful armour. For since the
route of Clodius all the Gladiators had flung away
their arena weapons and re-armed themselves as
legionaries.
Spartacus sat staring blindly, intently south, seeing
nothing of the approach of the sentry. A German
and a mines-slave, the latter halted in front of the
seated Strategoi and addressed only Gannicus.
‘These Gauls say they’ve come from Capua and
that they have been Gladiators.’ He sneered. ‘My¬
self, I believe they’ve been bed-men.’
Gannicus laughed, surveying the small men without
pleasure, for his humour was evil. ‘Where did you
steal the arena gear ?’ he asked, jeeringly.
The younger of the two Celts, slight and dark and
mild of face, had long lashes drooping like a woman’s
over mild eyes. He looked through those lashes at
Gannicus and stroked his chin.
‘Where Gannicus won his palms—when his adversary
stumbled. In the arena. I’ve watched you there at
Rome with net and trident, and wished for you as
opponent. For I’m a timid man who desires to live
long.’
‘You Gaulish swine ’
The little Gladiator held up a mocking hand. ‘Now
you’re angry. Yet this sentry tells me you’re a
strategos, a word for a captain, I believe. An ill
choice, for I see you’re a man of little wisdom.’ His
eyes strayed to the silent Spartacus. He suddenly
saluted. ‘Thracian, we heard of you and came to
join you.’ The banter came into his voice again.
‘And for reward we seem like to be killed and,
for all I know, roasted and eaten by a red-headed
Teutone.’
A smile came seldom enough on the thick lips of
Spartacus. It came now. Crixus watched it come,
52 SPARTACUS
and relaxed that watchful tension his banter had barely
concealed.
‘We were mirmillones, Crixus and Oenomaus.’
‘You are welcome. I was a Threce, Spartacusd
‘Now I know we are really free, Oenomaus. All the
way in the ditches and thickets that line the road from
Capua I’ve sworn it a dream ; once I frightened a
flock of goats half-way over Campania when I pricked
myself with my gladius in order that I might wake.’
He explained to the blank stare of Spartacus. ‘We
were at Rome and heard nothing till we were brought
back to Capua and the school of Satiates. There they
told us the news and how it was now impossible to
escape, such precautions were taken. So Oenomaus
and I, one misty morning, gained by stealth the rooms
of Satiates himself, and forced him at the dagger-
point to lead us out by a private gate. Or at least
Oenomaus forced him, for I hung back, fearing strong
men with beards. Then we hid in a wine-cart that
was making out from Capua, and so escaped the city.
For the rest, we’ve wandered and hid and fared ill
till this morning when we came on three scouts of
Furius, the legate of Varinus. Two of those scouts
we slew by stealth ; the third we put to the question.
From him we heard of Clodius’ rout, and that Publius
Varinus, the new praetor, has been sent south by the
Senate, with a legion and a half, to eat up and excrete
all the rebel slaves in Italy. So we tied this third
scout to a tree and came away. Then we fell in with
this German and prevailed on him not to eat us, though
as yet we’re untried men and he a veteran.’
But Castus was on his feet. ‘Masters ? How far
away is this legion and a half ?’
‘Four leagues, I’d say, or less.’
INSURRECTION
53
(vi)
The clamour of the roused camp around them,
Elpinice sat in the tent with the head of the giant
Thracian in her arms. He had ceased to groan and
claw at his head in that madness that had come in him
as he stumbled into the tent from the sunlight. But
now a torrent of broken Latin poured from his lips.
cBut I can’t understand ! Who am I ? I can’t
remember! Darkness . . . and the forests, and
waking. Night killing of men. Why should I kill
them ? I want only to hunt, to swim in the rivers,
and lie in the hunt. I cannot kill them. Why should
1 kiU
She had heard this raving before, though never in
such frantic tones; she had soothed him from it
before, the strange alien barbarian who, with his
sword broken, had broken men with his bared hands
and torn at their throats with his teeth; and who,
outside the blindness of fighting, shuddered from the
thought of killing like the frightened girl she herself
had long ceased to be. Who was he, what origins
had been his in that wild Thrace where he was
captured ?
And sometimes a terror would come on her, bright
and dreadful, yet with joy in it also, as the great,
glazed eyes turned to her for help, and the great
hands held her, in appeal, in the lazy play of a drowsing
beast that sheathed its claws and played in the sun,
in the urgent hot hours of desire when she quivered
alive as never before in the hands that had held her
throughout four years. Dim and remote her own
beginnings, she yet remembered again and again those
faces in stone in the Violet City, and would sometimes
shudder and stare at the Thracian. What God had
54 SP ART ACU S
stolen his reason and set there the strength of a lion
when roused at last, the cunning and speed of a
striking serpent—these, companioned with the dread
of a child ?
So she soothed him now, as before, and he sighed,
holding the hands that held him. Then he raised his
head and smiled, suddenly, as on Crixus.
‘Better now. Elpinice, there are forests where
I’ll take you and we’ll go alone, only the bears and the
deer are there ; and caves; and the moon coming
at night.’ pfis face crinkled in sudden anger. ‘After.
There are the Masters who would stop us.’
She helped him with his armour, and armed herself ;
and as always, he plotted a plan in his mind, and
traced it aloud, a hunter’s plan, one who had hunted
and waylaid beasts. She whispered beside him,
agreeing, amending; till a bucina captured from the
Roman rout roared outside the rallying signal of the
horde.
And Elpinice, once mistress of the lanista Batiates,
raised up her small head, her young eyes old. And she
knew that bucina ended a phase : the revolt was over,
it was war that began.
The War Begins
(i)
^JpHE Senate had despatched Publius Varinus, with
^ nine thousand men, to retrieve the shameful defeat
of the Battle of the Lake and free the land from the
threat of another servile war. Varinus, a tall, melan¬
choly man weighted down with debts and the caprices
of a young and unvirtuous wife, went forth slowly
and reluctantly, and took the southwards road.
Presently he was in a land that another army
seemed to have devastated. Houses stood looted and
roofless, with the smoke still curling from the charred
beams and starving dogs snuffling amid the ruins;
farms were deserted, the storehouses sacked, gates
open and herds straying untended. For the slaves,
deserting to join the Gladiator revolt, had maimed or
mutilated that which they could not carry away.
Cattle, slashed and hamstrung, lowed amidst the hills;
mill-dams had been raised and vineyards flooded;
the statues of the Gods overturned or defaced with
filth. And, seeing these things, the heart of Varinus
kindled to a slow anger, and he forgot his debts and the
lovers of his wife.
With him, as his legate, rode Furius, a young man
who had lately served in Iberia with Pompeius, and
before that had wandered many years in Greek lands,
and more eastwards still, through Asia to the Persian
kingdom. His slim figure was enclosed in a breastplate
of silver, sewn on a leather coat. Ocrea of the same
metal were bound on his legs. He wore a Greek helmet
with a horsehair crest, and rode carelessly a great
stallion from Cisalpine Gaul, white, with a bristling
mane and red-rimmed eyes and over-ready hooves,
as the legionaries knew.
Beside him, dropping vindictively, rode Varinus
55
56 SPARTACUS
unadorned and in plain armour. Behind, rank on rank,
marched the legionaries, short brown men bearing
the Samnite shield and the Spanish sword, adopted by
the Republic after Cannae’s rout. On each legionary’s
back five stakes were strapped to erect on the palisades
of the nightly camps.
It was bright weather. The great southwards
track that left the Appian Way grew thick in dust,
so that Furius, cursing, maintained he would rather
march with a company of scavengers. He had little
respect for Varinus, who was no soldier.
‘Scavengers we are,’ said Varinus, looking at him
sourly, ‘and on no holiday jaunt. If you cared so
much for soldiering you’d have done better to stay in
Iberia.’
But Furius yawned. ‘The Gods—the dear, old
smutty Gods!—forbid. I’m no more a goat than a
scavenger. Clambering Iberian mountains in pursuit
of the unscrubbed savage wearies me. Given flat
country, the chasing of runaway slaves should yield
twice the sport.’
‘It was the slaves who did the chasing at the Battle
of the Lake.’
‘So Clodius said. For a fat man, how he must have
run ! He was puffing even when he arrived in Rome,
thirty pace miles from the battlefield. If it can be
called a field. They say he is still hiding in the baths,
afraid to return to his wife, though freely forgiven
by the Senate. The man is no more than a slave
himself.’
But Varinus answered nothing, himself knowing the
affliction of a lawless wife. Furius glanced at him
contemptuously and then rode on singing, for his was a
gay heart. On the road they came on a party of women
slaves deserted in the flight of their menfolk to join
the Gladiators. One of these women Furius singled
INSURRECTION 57
out and ordered to be carried along for himself. The
rest, with a great roar of laughter, were caught and
distributed among the marching troops. Varinus
rode frowning.
So in this way they marched south for the space of
three days. On the morning of the third they were
stayed by the velites falling back. Light-armed
Iberians, these soldiers had been scouting in advance.
Several had pushed forward many leagues and now
brought the news that the Gladiators, reinforced by
many slaves from the farms, were still encamped near
the Lake where Clodius was routed. Learning of the
nature of the ground, Varinus made his plan, and
Furius agreed to it, contemptuously and indifferently.
Taking the half-legion the legate would make a
detour and come up behind the slave horde. Yet he
was not to attack immediately: rather, rigorously to
avoid an open engagement. Meanwhile, the praetor
would delay for a day and then advance with his legion
and offer battle. The legate’s half-legion could then
cut off the fleeing slaves at the hither side of the
marsh.
So they agreed, and Furius rode off gaily at the
head of his three thousand, the while Varinus encamped
for that night, for now he believed he held the Gladi¬
ators in a cleft stick. With Furius went the female
slave, a Gaul, whom he had allotted to himself. He
carried her across his saddle and sang for her Eastern
songs. Small and lithe, she lay rigid and listened,
being afraid. But when the legate kissed her, she
returned his kisses.
Seeing these things, the tribune and centurions,
grey, scarred men, shook their heads. Things were
differently managed in the great campaigns : the
women captives, when they’d given their pleasure,
had their throats cut or were sold as slaves. For
SPARTACUS
58
Furius to carry a woman on his saddle shocked and
angered the half-legion.
So Furius guessed, and cared nothing. For he
came of a great family and the Senate was friendly to
him. Moreover, he believed that he himself could
defeat the Gladiators and their allies, and so win
credit from Varinus.
With this thought, he marched throughout the
night, spite the grumbling of the heavy-laden legion¬
aries. Once or twice in the night-march he meditated
ridding himself of the girl, then relented, for she was
desirable. At dawn he halted under the spurs of a
mountain, and three of his scouts fell back to report :
The Gladiators still held their camp, they were less
than a league away.
Three of the scouts had not returned : but Furius
was carelessly unanxious. Summoning his officers,
he told them to halt the legionaries and feed them.
In an hour they would march on the Gladiators’
camp.
One centurion, a young, coarse-featured Lucanian,
protested against the short time of halt. But as he
spoke a curious thing happened. His eyes and mouth
opened very widely, as though stricken with a wild
surprise. Then he swayed and gurgled blood while
the others stared. There was an arrow in his throat.
The bucinae blew. Furius looked about him,
coolly. Nothing. No one. The mountain reared
in wild crags above them, deserted, sun-glimmering.
Cattle lowed. A lark was singing high in the white
heat. The bowman was nowhere to be seen.
Then, from a distant ledge, the legate saw an
unhelmeted head cautiously projected. At the same
moment a shower of arrows whistled down on the
half-legion. Some stuck quivering in the ground;
some rang on iron helmets like hail; each pierced
INSURRECTION 59
through the eye by chance missiles, the screams of two
legionaries came to Furius. But the majority of the
legionaries, accustomed to barbarian warfare, unslung
the great Samnite shields and held them ready for
another volley, and jested on the death-screams of
their fellows.
Furius called up from the rear two centuries of
Iberians. It was his intention to set them storming
the mountain spurs and so drive out the archers. But
before this could be executed, there came from round
the mountain base the noise of a thunderous trampling ;
it grew to a rhythmic beat that shook the earth. Then
a herd of maddened cattle, propelled with shouts and
spear-thrusts, and leaping from ledge to ledge of the
mountain-base, poured like an avalanche on the halted
legion.
The legionaries stared and howled and beat their
shields; too late : in an instant, with curses and
laughter, they broke and scattered before the lowing,
maddened charge. Like rushing water either side of a
rock the herd split before the neighing stallion of
Furius, which wheeled and lashed at the beasts with
iron hooves. Quieting his mount, the legate suddenly
grew tense and shouted unheeded orders.
For, low-bent, half-concealed in the dust, in and
out among the leaping beasts raced companies of half-
naked slaves. Howling like wolves they raced, and in a
moment, wielding clubs and axes, fell on the legionaries.
Two of them sprang on the legate, one a great Thracian,
one a starved Bithynian.
It was too late for Furius to draw his sword : he
thrust his dagger into the Thracian and the man
rolled under the stallion’s feet which pranced him to a
bloody pulp. But the Bithynian, foot on stirrup,
clung to the legate’s left side and struck at him again
and again with a sliver of sharpened stone. Each
6o
SP ART ACU S
blow dented the legate’s armour, and, try how he
would, he could not come at the man because of the
burden of the Gaulish girl. Then one of the centurions,
leaping amidst the cattle, came to the rescue and slew
the Bithynian with a blow that tore open the thin
brown throat, and drenched the girl in blood.
Then Furius looked about him.
The herd had passed in dust and noise, though here
and there a hamstrung beast strove to rise from the
ground. The legionaries, scattered and taken by
surprise, were falling back before the desperate attack
of the slaves. Loud above the din rose the wailing
‘Hui! Hui!’ of the Thracians. Then the tribune
caused a bucina to blow, and the soldiers, cursing and
fighting, fell into rank.
Furius spurred the white stallion back, broke
bloodily through the onset of the slaves, and in a
moment was again at the head of his men. He tossed
the girl to the ground, drew his sword, and slung his
shield on his left arm. In front of him a man, drawing
back, whirled a great sling in his arm. Something
sang through the air and Furius reeled as the stone
glanced from his silver helmet. But behind him an
Iberian, bending his bow, pierced the slinger through
the throat.
Over a hundred of the Romans were down. The
slave attack seemed to falter a moment, and then was
pressed with redoubled fury. Half-armed men flung
themselves on to the Roman swords. Transfixed, a
slave would seize his assailant by the throat and seek to
strangle him. Others charged yelling, and then,
at the final moment, hurled themselves to the
ground and grasped the feet of the soldiers. By
this means many legionaries were dragged down and
despatched by the blows of knives driven through
their armour.
INSURRECTION 61
Cursing, Furius thrust and thrust, but con¬
temptuously, for the slave-reek offended him. Half
clad, half armed, it was evident that the slaves could
not long keep the field. Jesting, the legionaries smote
and smote with pilum and sword till their assailants
reeled back in the beginning of rout.
Abruptly, from the mountains a horn blew wildly.
At that sound panic seemed to fall on the slaves. With
yells they turned and fled, and after them, Furius on
his stallion in the van of the pursuit, swept the
legionaries. The stream of flight swung round the
mountain-base a full hundred yards; and then, for
the second time, the horn blew. Furius found the
tribune clinging to his stirrup.
‘Back, back, Legate ! Look to your right!’
Looked Furius, and strove to rein in the stallion;
looked the other Romans, and strove to wheel to the
right in ranks. But it was too late, and the order too
scattered in the pursuit. The body of three hundred
Gladiators, fully armoured, and armed with the long
Etruscan hastae, smote through the disordered Roman
line like the blow of a gigantic fist, then turned and
smote again. At that even the veterans among the
legionaries knew themselves lost, and, smiting their
way out of the press of battle, fled northwards.
Furius was hurled from his stallion and killed by a
giant Gladiator wielding an axe: he grasped the
stallion by the nostrils and clove down Furius in one
blow; the Gladiators roared at the sight. The
tribune was down, and within five minutes rout as
complete as that which had overtaken Clodius at the
Battle of the Lake fell on the half-legion of Furius.
The aquila of the three thousand was captured and
torn from its pole and smashed in the mud. Then
the din and the dust died off as the sun stood at
noon.
62
SP ART ACU S
(ii)
Gershom ben Sanballat had charged in the shelter
of the cattle with his Bithynians, and was the first
of the slave commanders to beat his men away from
plunder and the killing of the wounded to make account
of their losses. Wielding a great whip, as long before
in the guerilla wars of the Hasidim, the Jew commander
marshalled his panting, ragged horde into straggling
lines. There he found that over a hundred of the
company he had led from the north were dead; over
a score had wounds of such nature that recovery was
impossible. Himself half-naked, bleeding from a
wound in his shoulder, his curled beard torn and
dusty, the Jew walked up and down the ranks and
tugged at his beard with an irritable hand. Then he
gave an order, and turned the cold back of a Pharisee
on the ranks while it was executed ; for this order was
against the Law, and a Gentile abomination.
The Bithynians surrounded their wounded com¬
rades, chattering, weeping, and kissed them, and made
pretence to serve them. But the wounded had heard
the order, and panting, bared their throats to the
knives. So they were slain that the slaves might march
unencumbered.
On that sight Kleon of Corinth came to look with
cold, amused eyes. The Jew turned and saw him and
scowled, for the Greek had neither armour nor sword,
and still carried no more than his knife. He bore as
little sign of battle as that morning he had entered
the camp of the Bithynians.
CI see you sacrifice to Jehovah, Jew—or is it to
Kokolkh ?’
But Gershom did not look towards his company.
‘Sacrifice ? I am no baal-worshipper. What could I
INSURRECTION 63
do ? These men were unfit to march. Would you
leave them for Varinus to be tender with ?’
‘Oh, it’s a good killing. All killings are in this
country. I think the God of its land drinks blood. A
bloody people and bloody Gods. But what do you
think they’ve profited, those slaves you liberated five
days ago ?’
The Jew forgot his anger in weariness. Suddenly,
in the blood and din of a thousand little fights, he saw,
hopeless, the road to Kadesh. ‘What profit is there
under the sun ? wrote a King of ours. What truth
is there in a Greek ?’ His heavy lips curled. ‘Or
valour ?’
The eunuch’s cold look of amusement did not
change. ‘With his manhood, no doubt. I’m classed
with the women, Jew. What would one of the
Mutilated do in a battle ?’
Gershom ben Sanballat flushed with rage. ‘Now,
by God, did those Gladiators refuse you a sword ?
I’ll teach the slaves courtesy with the edge of mine.’
Kleon’s laughter was the shrill, high laughter of
the Mutilated ere he bit it to silence on his lips.
‘Keep your sword for the throats of your wounded,
Jew. I need neither your help nor your pity.’
He turned away with twitching face, and Gershom
stared after him angrily—•angrily at the pity that
twisted his own heart. Were he himself so defiled would
he keep a quiet temper ? And he shuddered at that
thought, and passionately, a moment blinded his eyej
in prayer that whatever end awaited him in this revolt,
the cross, the stake, or the mines, it might not be that
mutilation which would cut him from the kingdom of
the Elohim, alone and lost and defiled in this heathen
land.
And it was then that he swore to himself that
wherever a Jew slavewoman should join them, he would
64 SPARTACUS
take that woman to his bed, be she Samaritan or
Sadducee, that the seed of his loins might not be lost
and the eyes of a son remember him.
(m)
In an orgy of hate, the slaves flung themselves on
the legionaries, captured and wounded. A Roman,
a centurion, who resisted was surrounded and torn
piecemeal by a pack of Germans, with a wrenching
of tearing flesh and a crackle of breaking bones. Covet¬
ing a helmet, Brennus the Gaul seized a prisoner and
drew him aside, and attempted to rive the stout
leathern bands from under the captive’s chin. They
were clumsy to move and he drew his knife, sawing at
them. The legionary screamed and writhed. The
Gaul held with a vacant grin, still sawing with his
knife while the screams went on. Then the other
slaves saw that the Gaul was hacking off the captive’s
head with his helmet, and screams of laughter arose.
Pallid and filthy, denied the sun, denied the remem¬
brance of wine or warmth, the slaves of the mines went
mad in a lust of revenge, delighting in torments,
bathing their arms to the shoulders in blood, tearing
the entrails from still-living bodies. A pandemonium
of bowlings arose afresh from the battlefield a moment
quieted. Then a murmur spread and Spartacus
appeared.
He it was who had led the Gladiator charge and
smitten Furius from the saddle. Now, he shouted
aloud. The slaves stared their incomprehension and
then, as he sprang among them, desisted from their
torment of the legionaries, seeing that a God of mad¬
ness had seized the Strategos. For all had sought
or taken vengeance, and the strange Thracian Gladiator
INSURRECTION 65
looked round about him at circlings of faces still fired
in the heat of cruelty, saw Crixus himself unbend
from thrusting a dagger in the heart of a legionary,
saw Gannicus strapping bloodstained ocrea to his
legs, sawElpinice, who had charged with the Gladiators,
cleaning her knife in the sand. She had cut the throat
of the wounded tribune.
It was as though a dark cloud fell over the sun of
their victory. All stared, Spartacus now silent, with
strange, glazed look and heaving breast. Then they
turned their gaze to the giant stallion which stood
shivering beside him. Its nostrils were still in the
grasp of his great fingers, and as the general of the
slave-host groaned, his knuckles whitened and the
stallion groaned beside him. And, because of that
terrifying sound and sight, the slaves drew away from
their prey, staring at man and stallion. Slowly his
grasp relaxed and the Gladiator looked up in the eyes
of the great beast he had held. Those near at hand
cried out to Spartacus to beware, but he did not move,
staring at the stallion. It heaved its head and snorted,
and snorted with quivering nostrils between its knees
till its white knees were spattered with a bloody foam.
Then it raised its head and slowly, hesitatingly, made
a step towards the Gladiator.
The leader of the slave-horde had found a mount.
(iv)
By mid-afternoon the slaves had marched away,
all marching in ordered companies in imitation of the
iron-clad Gladiators. Laden with weapons and
armour, they marched with great carrion-birds already
a cloud overhead. The Roman dead were left unburied,
the Roman wounded that survived unharmed. But
E
66 S P ART ACU S
the dead of the slaves Spartacus buried in a great
mound ; thereon was heaped a pile of stones and at the
foot the fragments of the broken aquila strewn for a
memory. Into far years that cairn survived, long after
the name of the battle was lost, and all that they did
and suffered there.
At nightfall Varinus’ legion came up and heard the
news from such of the wounded as still lived. Thereat
Varinus cursed coldly his dead legate, Furius, with
regret that he had not lived to meet torment in the
hands of the Gladiators or the mines-slaves. Then
he desecrated the mound of the slaves, left his wounded
to care for themselves, and pressed on all that evening
in pursuit of Spartacus.
But he was too late to come up with the horde that
had routed Furius. By the falling of dusk, in sight
of the marsh, he was aware of lines of entrenchments
and the burning of watch fires. The slave-leader had
left behind him the Gauls to entrench the camp while
he fell on Furius.
Cursing, Varinus gave orders to camp for the
night. The legionaries dug hasty earthworks against
a surprise attack, then lay down and slept in weariness
under the deepening frosts of Spring.
And at length it drew near to dawn.
(v)
A figure muffled in a grey abolla came hastening
through the dimness, passed a watch-fire and stood
by the side of Kleon. The eunuch leaned on his pilum
and looked towards the Roman camp. As the muffled
figure approached he turned round indifferently.
‘Time ?’
‘The horses are waiting. Come.’
INSURRECTION 67
They passed through the camp together, skirted
the edge of the marsh, crossed the last line of entrench¬
ments, and came to a thicket. Here three great horses
were tethered, Roman horses from the rout of Furius’
half-legion. They stood with bent heads in the dark¬
ness. Kleon groped to an unaccustomed saddle.
The muffled figure, hand on the saddle of another
horse, made a gesture.
£Not yet. He’s waiting the light.’
The eunuch looked up at the sky. His head ached
under the weight of his helmet and the effect of the
stifling marsh air. But now, faint, a ghostly whisper,
he was aware of a little wind that arose. The reeds
sighed underbreath, moved by the God, and the
thicket shook beside the horses. In the east a dull
pallor overmantled the sky.
The night was lightening ; and with a feebler glare
burned the fires. Kleon and the other looked back
on the slave encampment.
It was completely deserted.
Yet not quite. As they looked they could hear the
ringing tread of one who wore greaves and carried
armour. Then, against the Roman camp and the
reflection of the dawn on the dark western horizon,
across the deserted lines of the slave-horde, they saw
a great figure pass and vanish into shadows. Kleon
shivered, for the cold bit into his bones. Why ever
had he volunteered this wearying watch ?
Then he felt against his breast the crinkle of the
roll of The Republic, and smiled with a chill amusement
for his plan.
Beyond the thicket rose a sleepy cheeping of birds.
The footsteps of the giant figure drew near. Now
he himself was at hand and the horses pricked startled
heads. Kleon soothed them and was aware of a giant
pair of hands reaching for a bridle.
68
SP ART ACU S
‘Don’t mount yet. Walk the horses softly.’
Hand beside the moist mouth of his beast, Kleon
led the way. Each crunched twig underhoof seemed
to him thunder-loud. The dead reeds swished as
they passed. Far off in the east a wolf howled.
They held along the south border of the marsh,
till the darkened water lay entirely between them and
the Roman camp. Then the giant spoke:
‘It will soon be light. Ride.’
Now the eastern sky was stippled in crimson.
Mounting, the three looked back. The watch-fires
of the slave-camp had died to a smouldering glow
where all night the three had paced to give the illusion
of an army still camped there.
Kleon yawned.
‘Vale, Varinus !’
Then the three of them rode south.
South to Lucania
(i)
A LL that morning they rode, while the light paled
■^and grew and was touched with gold; and the
sun, unseen, crept up behind the bastion of the eastern
mountains. They passed down wild and deserted
valleys, skirted long necks of swamp, rode soft with
muffled bridles by villages and great farms. Ever the
sky brightened and presently the sun was on them,
and the white hoar under-hoof began to thaw. A thin
mist rolled over the Campanian land. The eunuch
hung wearied in his saddle, but the other two pressed
on untiring.
Still holding south, they held by the banks of a
river for many pace miles, on a ragged via terrena
fringed with rushes. Once or twice they sighted
boats: once, in a forest clearing a gang of slaves at
work. Still they rode undetected.
Sleep came and went before the eyes of Kleon.
Now and again he would jerk to a vague wakefulness:
once dreamt himself again at sea with the pirate
ships of Thoritos. In a clear moment he spoke to the
others.
‘We’ve surely missed the track. They cannot have
passed this way.’
The giant eased the pace of his horse, a great white
stallion. He turned his face. It was the Gladiator
Spartacus.
‘They passed this way.’ He rode for a little looking
at the track they followed. ‘See.’
Kleon for a moment saw something in the path
ere his horse was beyond it. Then weariness
fogged his eyes, sick of the jest and the plan he had
planned.
‘What was it ?’
69
70
SP ART ACU S
The third rider, still muffled in abolla, answered
him:
^ ‘A slinger’s pellet.’
The speaker pushed back the hood of the abolla
then, for the day promised heat. It showed the
young-old face of Elpinice, weariness-pinched, her
gaze on the riding Gladiator.
The three rode south.
The slave-horde had passed that way. But at
legionary’s pace they must have passed, for there was
no sign of them. They had set out silently as soon as
night fell, under the leadership of Castus and Cannicus
and Crixus, with the little company of Eastern men
commanded by the Jew ben Sanballat. The three
had remained behind to patrol the watch-fires and
deceive the watching Romans.
Few of the slaves, stealing away in the darkness in
long files, realized that they left the Strategos himself
behind. Several of the leaders even did not know.
Some said two Italian shepherds, men well acquainted
with the country, remained. But Elpinice was the
second, and Kleon, moved by the plan of his humour,
the third. Riding now, he cursed that impulse.
Would they never halt ?
Yet this at last they did, at an open and deserted
horreum, away from the river track and with the
Lucanian mountains looming in view. Beyond the
horreum itself, through a fence of osiers, the steadings
of a farm loomed. Though no smoke arose and it
also seemed deserted, they did not approach. Instead,
Spartacus hobbled the horses in the shelter of the
overhanging eaves of the building; Elpinice dis¬
appeared. Kleon staggered inside.
The floor was thick with the chaff-winnowings of
many a harvest. In one corner mouldered a heap of
straw. To the Greek eunuch it seemed he would never
INSURRECTION
7i
reach that straw. Lying on it, it seemed he had slept
but a moment when a hand shook him.
‘Time to ride south again.’
(ii)
He rose and followed the Gladiator out of doors.
The sun was again low in the sky. The great white
stallion stood tail-switching, snuffling at the necks of
the other horses. Elpinice squatted near. In front
of her was a heap of olives and a goatmilk cheese, at
which she hacked with the dagger that had cut the
tribune’s throat. She pushed a handful of olives
towards the eunuch.
‘Where did you get the food ?’ he asked.
‘At the farm while you slept. It is deserted, so I
stole the cheese and olives.’
Kleon looked at her in cold puzzlement. ‘Didn’t
you also sleep ?’
‘Like the dead—after Spartacus awoke.’
The Gladiator stood unhelmeted by the open door,
staring into the sunset peace with his dark, blank
eyes. The wind moved the strands of hisjgreat beard.
The stallion ceased to snuffle at the necks^of the pother
horses and thrust its muzzle into the hand of its new
master. Spartacus did not move. And to the woman
who looked at him there came back again a memory
of those faces in stone on the terraces of the Violet
City. She ceased to eat, sitting still and clasping
her knees.
The eunuch glanced from one to the other—the
slave bedwoman of a lanista and the taciturn Thracian
savage. And for a moment a cold wonder held him.
How had these two come to free and lead the Gladiators,
to gather about them the beginnings of the slave-
SPARTACUS
72
revolt ? How came this savage to show the general¬
ship he had done in two battles ? And he remembered
the saying of the Jew ben Sanballat that the ordering
of these battles was the ordering of a hunter planning
a battle, their success the success of surprise against
known tactics in marshalling a battle. How long
would these successes continue with the half-armed
rout that already called itself Legio Libera—the Free
Legion ?
And he knew it likely that another month would see
that legion dispersed or enslaved afresh. The Republic
as yet had hardly moved. Now, with the rout of
Furius, the Wolf would howl her packs to the hunt
and the slaying. But ere they gathered . . .
That would be a good play to play. And the
Greek eunuch thought with a twisted mouth how the
divine Plato would have stared in amaze had he
heard it proposed that a Thracian savage, a slave
eunuch and a courtesan hardly more than a girl should
set to organizing the Republic which he had planned !
Yet, ere the Romans gathered and ended the revolt
for ever, the Gods might laugh at that jest—if he could
prevail on the Thracian to play it.
‘Strategos.’
Spartacus turned round slowly, the stallion still
nuzzling his hand. For a moment Kleon felt a strange
pity for this black-staring barbarian with whose heart
and head he planned to play. Then he saw, as Elpinice
herself had seen, that the Thracian was altering.
He had altered in the space of a day, it seemed, the
blankness was fading from the deep, dark eyes, there
was a wakening purpose there, a fresh set to the giant
head, the bearded mouth grown stern. Elpinice gave
a cry, staring. Her child-savage possessed by a name¬
less God : he was changing and transmuting before
her eyes.
INSURRECTION 73
Kleon said: ‘When we reach Lucania—what
then ?’
‘We’ll march to the sea and seize a town. Then
we’ll seize ships, and each return to his own country.’
Elpinice recognized phrases of her own, whispered
in the kennels of Batiates. But now they were said
with a purpose and deliberation that made them
Spartacus’s own. Kleon laughed his shrill, high laugh,
squatting and eating the olives.
‘Each his own country ! And aren’t the Masters
waiting in each country ? The Wolf has conquered
the world. There’s a Roman Army in Thrace, I’ve
heard. What better will you be ?’
The girl’s young-old eyes turned on him under her
straight line of brows. ‘At least we’ll be out of Italy.’
‘And still: What better will you be ? Listen to
me, Strategos. I’m a eunuch and no-man, from whom
men and Gods turn their faces. But I’m a literatus
as well—one who has read and pondered the thoughts
and plans of many men. Slaves have risen before
against the Masters, in Italy and in Greece. For a
little while they’ve held their own, but never for
longer than a little while. They’ve wasted the early
days of revolt either in looting and rape or in seeking
escape to that land that lies neither in Thrace nor under
the Nile Cataracts: but elsewhere.’
‘Where ?’ Elpinice asked, for the Gladiator stared
in silence.
Kleon pointed west, where the sun already rested
on the hills.
‘The dead go there, they used to tell. Beyond
drowned Atlantis, the Islands of the Blest. Nowhere,
in fact.’
Then the girl with old eyes, the slave bedwoman of
a Gladiator-farmer, said a thing as unexpected by the
Greek as a blasphemy on the lips of a woman.
74
SP ART ACU S
‘I think it’s neither in Thrace nor your Islands,
this land you mock. It lives in our dreams and our
hopes, and maybe we’ll never attain it. But—we
broke out of Batiates’ ludus to try.''
‘Then let us try here—in Italy. Given a leader
strong and skilful, given men who will follow him
without question—the land we dream is Italy, zve
its Masters, not its slaves.’
Still Spartacus said nothing. Kleon stirred a
little, even he uneasy under that uncanny stare of a
wakening child or a wakening beast. Again it was
Elpinice who spoke.
‘And this leader and his men ?’
Kleon had finished his olives. He wiped his fingers
on his thighs, and rose up slowly, his twisted smile
on the Gladiator with the giant stallion behind him.
‘There is your leader. He might change the order
in Italy as no man before, casting down the Masters
and raising the slaves, for the Republic is weak and its
armies scattered, he could seize and hold all Southern
Italy, and carve it out the state that Plato dreamt.’
Elpinice would have spoken again, but Spartacus
motioned her to silence, his eyes on Kleon.
‘Of this matter we’ll speak while we ride. Now
we’ll ride.’
Elpinice looked at him wide-eyed. And it seemed
to her in that moment, being wearied, that the God,
nameless, terrible, endearing, had left him at last and
for ever. In his place rose sure and sane and strong-
alien and strange, the King of the Slaves.
(iii)
A mist and a light, warm rain came down with
that sunset. In a little at a trot, the three slaves had
INSURRECTION 75
left the horreum behind, and went south with the
shadows in pursuit till those shadows overtook and
devoured them. And presently Elpinice, riding
behind, heard the high shrill voice of the eunuch
raised eagerly in explanation.
All that night he talked, as they still rode south,
into the mountains of Lucania. Then, in the morning,
they learned from a shepherd that they had missed the
track of the army, for the slave-horde had swung
east. So eastwards turned the three, and Elpinice,
in weariness, heard still the shrill of Kleon’s voice,
and unceasing throughout the hour, the Thracian
question him.
So, in a night and a day, he crossed a great measure
of country.
And at last, late in the afternoon, they rode into
the camp that Crixus had entrenched under the spurs
of Mount Papa.
(iv)
The slave-army had marched from Campania
without a casualty; but the most of the slaves were
in rags, their feet torn and bloody from the wear of
the rough tracks crossed, their throats and voices
choked with dust. Even the Gladiators grumbled,
and unending in the baking heat of the march the
dreamings went on in each man’s head; dreamings
in German heads of the sound of the Rhine and its
steel-blue splash, the easeful scrunch of pine cones and
mists that hid off the sun ; dreamings in the heads of
Eastern slaves of the yielding sands and a bright,
white glare ; black men’s dreamings of blue-shadowed
forests and the rich mould lands that slope by Nile.
Only the Gauls and Thracians and Iberians were
unvexed by the mountains, and hailed them with
76 SP ART ACU S
cries, some thinking them the veritable mountains
of home.
In their three days’ march into Lucania the country
had cleared before them as dust clears before a broom.
Twice they had come on deserted villages, tenantless
and foodless, waterless even, the wells filled up to
hinder the slaves. One of these villages the Gladiators
fired, hearing that it belonged to Licinius Crassus.
Gershom ben Sanballat had looked on, keeping his
Bithynians under sharp surveillance, his black beard
curling in haughty contempt for this childish display
of servile spite.
Though meat was plentiful enough, for they drove
a great herd in the van of their march, the slaves
grumbled continuously for lack of clothes, for tents
such as strategoi and Gladiators used, for the comforts
that most of them had known but seldom in all the
years of their slavery. They had tasted freedom and
raved to devour it, starved men set down at a giant
dish. Rumours and scandal spread through the host.
Were they being led into Lucania to perish ? Why had
they not scoured the land in their march, for clothes
and gear and the Masters’ women ? Where was the
Strategos Spartacus ?
And concerning him tales grew and grew, some
saying he had returned to the Masters, others that the
Gauls had killed him—the Germans—the Iberians—
the Thracians, each and all blamed by return of rote
by the others whom scandal accused of the crime.
The Germans under Gannicus clamoured to be led
north again.
Castus rode brooding and absorbed, with his Gauls.
Crixus made friendly overtures to him, but met with
little response to these—instead, a stare of suspicion
and dislike. Where was Spartacus ? Was not Crixus
the last to see him ?
INSURRECTION 77
Crixus had shrugged and gone off with a smile.
Yet, the evening of their halt under Papa’s spurs,
when Gannicus secretly approached him with a
project, Crixus refused to listen.
‘Wait for Spartacus,’ he advised. ‘Deserting him,
we’re lost.’
Gannicus, bulky, Roman-armoured, a splendid
figure, sneered, and played with his tribune’s
gladius.
‘He’s well enough, the Thracian, but that he’s mad
and a woman’s man. How do we know he’ll ever
reach us here ? We’ve left no easy track. I think
he may have been slain by Varinus, him and the
woman and the Greek.’
For it was now known that Kleon and Elpinice had
stayed to patrol the camp with Spartacus. Crixus’s
jesting face grew rigid.
‘Gannicus, if that’s as you dream, I’ll gather what
men I can myself and hunt down Varinus like a dog
a deer.’
‘You’ll not gather the Germans for the hunt,’
said Gannicus, and turned away.
So, on the afternoon when Spartacus and his two
companions rode into camp, they saw a diminished
force; and were greeted with the news that on the
previous afternoon the Germans and Thracians were
found to have deserted the camp. But news of them
was not uncertain. They had marched south with
intent to fall upon Metapontum, taking it by surprise.
Gannicus led them ; and with him, strangely enough,
had gone Oenomaus.
‘Of this intent I knew nothing,’ said Crixus to the
Strategos, ‘else I’d have strangled Gannicus with his
own beard.’
‘For a little man,’ growled the Jew ben Sanballat,
standing by, ‘your heart is high.’
78
SP ART ACU S
‘My father was a butcher,’ said Crixus, modestly,
‘and I am accustomed to killing cattle.’
Beside Spartacus was the pale-faced eunuch Greek.
‘If this Teutone fool takes Metapontum we can expect
no Italiot allies!’
‘Italiot allies ?’ said Crixus. ‘Who seeks them ?’
and he looked at the giant Gladiator. Spartacus
smiled his dark smile.
‘We seek them, the Legio Libera. Varinus is
following us without any doubt, and if we destroy
Metapontum we’ll be in a land of enemies. Gannicus
has done ill.’
‘Shall I follow him and cut his throat ?’ asked
Brennus the Gaul, who stood near.
The Gladiator looked at him with undreaming
eyes. ‘You’ll slay when I bid you slay, Gaul.’ Then
he turned away to his tent. All stared. Some strange
thing had come on the Strategos.
Irritable, Gershom ben Sanballat stared after
him. What had wrought this change in the Gentile
barbarian ? He accosted Kleon with the question,
and met the usual cold, twisted smile.
‘Not what, but who. I.’
‘You ?’
The eunuch nodded. ‘This barbarian Spartacus
is more than a mere brute beast of the ludus, or a
lion that plans a killing. So I’m teaching him and
finding him apt. It was just such material that Plato
looked for to build up the New Republic.’
‘I remember now that I’ve heard of him,’ the
Pharisee mused. ‘He believed in enslaving all men.
Slavery’s well for the rabble : / am a noble of Judaea.’
‘You’re an escaped Roman slave, one of the rabble
yourself. And unless it ceases to be a rabble ’
The Jew laughed, angrily. ‘Are these the words
you spoke in the camp by the Lake ?’
INSURRECTION 79
‘I’d not thought of amusing myself with this little
game then. What does it matter one way or the other,
when all we do or dream are but blowings of dust ?’
The guerilla leader of the Hasidim knew otherwise.
‘There’s the Law—of which you know nothing, being
a Gentile. We nobles of Judsea worship no planless
God, but one terrible in Will, with the Jews his people.’
Kleon smiled politely. ‘A peculiar God.’
(V)
In his tent Spartacus ate and drank, Elpinice
serving him. Then he sat for a while with his head
in his hands, deep in thought; and looked up at her with
that sharpened gaze of the last two days. Far leagues
from the gaze of the giant child who had held her
in love in the sheds of Batiates.
Yet she regretted nothing, loving him still, perhaps
now with a deeper passion that he stirred and moved
from her side, he whom she had comforted, herself
uncomprehending, from his horror of blood and war.
And, whatever this wakening had brought to him,
he desired her still, and hungered for her breast and
body, if no longer her hands in pity. But a strange
thing she noted even while he held her in passion,
a changed passion and possession that minded her
with a stab of hate of nights in the hands of Batiates.
It was the lust of a man who sought lust for a food,
not the dream passion of the slave God-possessed.
‘Send for Crixus the Gaul,’ he said.
So Elpinice sent that message, and Crixus came,
and saluted the Strategos, cheerful and fat and short
of build, with a heart in which sat, so alien to the land
and time, a humour simple and kindly. Spartacus
looked up at him.
8o
S P ART ACU S
‘I intend to make you tribune of the Free Legion,
if you’ll take my commands as its strategos. We cannot
longer remain a rabble, leaderless and planless, or with
leaders rising in a night and marching off half the slave-
host in an hour. I in future command without
question. Will you be my tribune ?’
The little Gaul pulled at his lip with a troubled
finger. Tm no general. But I’ll be your tribune—if
it’s in your power to make me so.’
‘I have the power.’
Thereat Crixus swore to take his commands as
strategos of the Legio Libera, swearing mistily by the
names of two Gods, one of Gaul and one of whom
he had heard in the sheds of the Roman arena. Then
Castus was brought and swore the same obedience, a
fellow-tribune to Crixus. Kleon the eunuch stood in
the background, listening and watching with a cool
amusement this play of slaves who played to be
Masters. Yet—they might succeed. And the game
had its humour.
‘It would be as well to swear also Gershom the
Jew,’ he said, ‘who was a noble in his own country,
and a commander of barbaric armies.’
So Gershom was brought from outside the camp,
where, under the frown of the Papa spurs, he had set
to training his Bithynian company. They were
armed now with long hastae, round shields and short
breastplates, and the one-time leader of the Hasidim
planned to use them as the Greeks their peltasts—
scouts or legionaries, as the need arose. Chattering
and docile, the Bithynians obeyed his commands,
wheeling and charging in running columns, forming
and kneeling in solid ranks to meet the charge of
imaginary horse, breaking and flying in feigned
retreat. Cursing the laggard and urging the eager,
Gershom pulled irritably at his curled beard when
8i
INSURRECTION
the message from the Strategos interrupted his training.
Nevertheless, he went with the messenger, through
the lounging lines of the other slaves, who attempted no
training but slept in the sun.
The Pharisee listened with a haughty scowl as
the Thracian spoke, and looked round the tent at
the listening Gauls, the Greek, and the woman.
‘To make of the slaves an army at all is foolish¬
ness, as I’ve always said. And I’ve no great wish
to tribune the fools. Even so, who are you to swear by,
Gladiator ? If I swear by Spartacus do I swear by the
slaves ?’
‘You swear by the best of them, at the least,’ said
Crixus. ‘Swear by Spartacus.’
‘Spartacus and the slaves are one,’ said Kleon.
‘For the Leader is the People.’
Then Elpinice spoke, strangely, as once before in
Kleon’s presence.
‘Yet I think a time will come when men will swear
by the people alone.’
Gershom ben Sanballat looked at her, with veiled
eyes, for she was a woman. ‘That is your counsel, then ?
I should swear by the slaves, as their tribune, and not
by your lover, as their Strategos ?’
‘That’s for you to decide. Yet in your case I’d
not swear myself the Strategos’s man.’
The Jew shrugged. ‘This may be good sense orji
lovers’ quarrel. I have nothing to do with the squabbles
of the bed. But I take the sense of it, agreeing with
mine. This is where I stand, Spartacus: A section
of the slaves has made me their leader : all the slaves
have made you their strategos. Good. So long as you
remain that strategos, I’ll take your orders, whatever
the grace. But I’ll lend no aid to setting up this
Gentile kingship of slaves.’
Gershom laughed, his eyes on the Thracian.
F
82
SPARTACUS
Kleon’s lip curled. Castus, hand on his dagger, half
rose.
‘I think, Bithynian, you’re tired of the sun.’
The Jew laughed contemptuously. 41 am tired of
many things, Castus. Most I am wearied of fools.’
With a sudden motion he held the arm of Castus and
those watching saw the veins stand black on his
forehead. ‘Do you think I’ve marched from Campania
in order to die with the dagger of a savage in my throat ?
If you’re the type of Companion our new Alexander
swears to his side, it’ll be long before the Republic
trembles.’
With that he flung Castus aside and left the tent.
Crixus’ eyes followed him admiringly.
‘There goes a true man, Spartacus, and one that’ll
stand by you when I and this Greek run as fast as deer.
You did ill to threaten him, Castus.’
‘Do you lead here, or does the Strategos ?’ The
blood of anger, unusual enough, mantled the face of
Castus. Then Elpinice spoke.
‘Neither, it seems. There’s fear and hate and
suspicion to lead, since we swear by leaders and not
by a plan. I didn’t climb the ledges of Vesuvius for
this. Who did ?’ She looked at Kleon and he saw
the eyes of the woman who had cut the tribune’s
throat. ‘It was a pity they didn’t put a knife in your
neck when you came to our camp by the Lake that
day.’
Spartacus, not looking, put a hand on her shoulder.
He had heard the debate with a shining calm that
reminded Kleon of a waiting snake. Now the snake
had moved. Elpinice shivered.
‘/ am the Leader. Kleon, watch Gershom. If his
words mean deeds, kill him at once.’ He looked
at Elpinice with bright snake’s eyes, and she saw the
horror of the threat that was there, no hate or anger,
INSURRECTION 83
but a bright, cold purpose. A mist of sweat came out
on her forehead. Spartacus dropped his hand from
her shoulder.
‘Sound the bucinae. We march after Gannicus.’
(vi)
Spartacus marched on Metapontum, intent on
seizing it before Gannicus and the slow-moving
Germans should make their surprise.
But swiftly though the Strategos marched his
Gauls and Eastern men the retiarius Gannicus at length
had moved. In the early hours of a misty dawn he fell
upon Metapontum. It was feebly garrisoned and
unsuspecting, for, though the news of the slave
exodus from Campania into Lucania had spread over
the countryside, the Gladiators were believed to be
encamped near Papa. The citadel was stormed and
fired; then the Germans turned their weapons on the
town. By full day Metapontum was blazing murkily,
and Gannicus, his army laden with spoil and women-
captives, withdrew again to the hills.
Leaving the smoking wilderness of Metapontum
on the horizon, the Thracian marched rapidly after
the German retreat. Late in the afternoon the
entrenched camp of Gannicus was sighted, and the
German, awed by the superior numbers of the slaves
who followed Spartacus, came out and greeted him.
The Gauls clamoured for their share of the women.
What passed in the tent of the leaders none knew,
but Gannicus marched back his host to Mount Papa
under the leadership of the Thracian. Spartacus
had suppressed the first revolt, and not for the space
of a score of battles while Italy reeled under their
marching feet, was any to dispute his leadership.
84
S P ART ACU S
Kleon had a metal-smith beat out insignia for the
slave army, standards to be raised against the Wolf
and the Eagle of the Republic.
And the sign of the slaves was a Snake.
II. LEGIO LIBERA
War in the Mountains
0)
X-TOT-FOOT on the track of Varinus, Cossinus
■"■■was sent up from Rome with a further half¬
legion to reinforce the praetor. The latter he found
encamped over against the mountain-range which hid
the dark countryside dominated by the slaves. From
out that tract amidst the mountains came rumours
and refugees without end.
Both bore tales of horror. In their camp the
Gladiators had elected as their leader a savage Thracian,
who tortured his captives and had virgins brought to
his tent in order that he might violate them publicly.
Also, he ate horses. Metapontum had been looted
and fired at his orders; and he designed to increase
the slave-host until he might make his way to the coast,
seize on a fleet of ships, and so cross into Greece and
conquer it.
Woven of such fabric grew the legend of Spartacus.
Up and down the lands of the great Republic of the
Masters the tale of the rebellion rode the winds.
And to some it was a tale of horror and to some a tale
of hope. From towns and farms, mines and plantations
the slaves slipped away by twos and threes and made
their way southwards to join the host of the horse¬
eating Thracian whose standards bore the insignia of
a Snake.
Burning homesteads and looted orchards marked
the passage of such bands. Even the companies of
brigands who preyed on the roads and had done so
from time immemorial abandoned their routes and
marched to join the slaves with the hope of greater
plunder. Meantime the light troops of Varinus,
scouting beyond the mountains, brought back strange
and contradictory reports. One day it appeared that
88
SP ART ACU S
the camp under Mount Papa had grown into a great
town, strongly entrenched and provisioned, where the
slaves and their savage leader designed to await attack.
Another, and it was certain that the entire slave army
had marched away, to the east, designing to cross the
great Way and lay waste the lands of Calabria.
Soured, irritated, but determined, Varinus
organized his forces. Meantime, he succeeded in
intercepting and capturing stray bands of the slave
reinforcements which straggled towards the camp of
the Gladiators. He spared none. For this the Senate
reprimanded him, pointing out that the supply of
slaves was small and that the lash or torture, not
death, was sufficient to break their spirit. Finally,
because of the clamour of the town-dwelling property-
owners, the full cost of a thousand vulgares was charged
against his private estate.
Hearing this, Varinus, with thought of his wife’s
extravagances which had already impoverished him,
cursed the Senate and crucified outside his tent a
dozen of new-come captives. Then he took the
legions under his personal command and marched into
the mountains of Lucania, determined to come to
battle with the Gladiators.
Cossinus he left behind, to the satisfaction of both
Cossinus and his troops. Their orders were to forestall
any retreat of the slaves northwards into Campania
again. Encamped at Salenae, with the sea-water near
at hand, the men of Cossinus doffed their armour and
swam, or lay on the sands and made obscene jests on
the ventures of his wife while Varinus slave-hunted.
Cossinus himself had a great pavilion erected, and
sent for his bath-attendants at Rome. Then he
prepared to rest and recuperate, thus combining his
usual autumnal health treatment with the rigours
of war.
LEGIO LIBERA 89
A man learned in the Greek tongue, he treated his
slaves and soldiers with great kindness. His friend,
Kharmides, was a freedman, and this friend he brought
to Salenae. Together, sitting in the pavilion, they
read Aeschylus and laughed over the freakish ancient
world portrayed by Aristophanes; they read and
debated in Hesiod and Ovid the Golden Age of
Justice and Kindness that had once existed, a well-
known fact, ere Jupiter in Egypt rose against the good
King Saturn. Kharmides had recently met in Rome
the Greek noble Hiketas, renowned alike for his
wanderings in distant lands, his blasphemies against
the Gods, and the fact that he lived in incest with his
sister. This Hiketas was newly returned from a long
year’s voyaging up a great river from the Euxine.
Beyond the land of the Scythians, in a land of eternal
forests, the Greek noble told that the Golden Age
still reigned: he himself had lived with a forest
people who knew nothing of war or government,
cities or arms, masters or slaves. Many in Rome
believed this tale a lie, and Cossinus himself was
doubtful.
‘Even were it true it is a tale of barbaric folk,
living far from the lands of the Republic. How can
it help or hinder us in Rome ?’
Kharmides agreed that it helped nothing; then
told (the jest of the Roman baths) the further tale
that Hiketas had spread : that the Thracian savage
who led the slaves was himself no Thracian, but a
tribesman of remoter people, strayed southwards
and captured from the Golden Age. This accounted
for his strange conduct in the Indus of Batiates and
the fashion in which he had spared the Roman wounded
at the Battle of the Mountain.
Cossinus laughed : ‘Then the Iron Age has engulfed
him rapidly.’ And thought. ‘As in Hesiod it tells that
90 S P ART ACU S
that Age did to our own ancestors long ago, letting
loose on the world a cruelty and rapine unknown to
the Simple Men. If Hiketas tells true this Spartacus
is all men in one, with the Golden Age lost.’
Meantime his soldiers, grown lax, slept on their
rounds at night and the winter drew on. Kharmides
was sent back to Rome to bring warm robes and skins
from the villa on the Palatine ; also, Cossinus gave
orders that if the roads were not impassable his
mistress, Lavinia, should join him.
The autumn seemed to pass reluctantly. Days of
warm weather intervened and in these Cossinus,
a strong swimmer, would hold far out into the bay
and then return to lie on the sands and think of his
mistress. And thinking of her, his desire would
mount, bitter and sweet, and his hands grow unsteady.
She had been his mistress a bare three months, having
abandoned Fulvius when that merchant was broken
by the failure of his wheat-ships to escape the galleys
of Thoritos.
CI shall send him a talent for that service,’ Cossinus
thought. ‘Even though it seems my Lavinia brings
death wherever she bides, like Helen of old. But that
was no fault of hers—Fulvius and his gushing veins.
Soon Kharmides will bring her, this slave-hunt end,
and I’ll buy the Thracian Spartacus, make him my
body-slave and debate the life of the Golden Age while
he rubs me in my bath. And I’ll take him and Lavinia
to Sicily, and leave Rome for ever and forget it. I’m
weary of the false faces that sneer at one in the Forum,
the base faces of the plebs, the thin-faced slaves,
the cruel dull faces of my kin who rule. Out on them
all! I’ll till the olives of Sicily and watch my slaves
at the wine-press and swim in the blue Sicilian seas.
And all will be well with me at last.’
And he closed his eyes, dreaming of Lavinia.
LEGIO LIBERA
9i
From that dream he awoke to the roar of the bucina,
and his tribune, a veteran from Syria, shouting in
his ears.
‘Cossinus ! The camp is attacked !’
(ii)
But it was already too late. In the evening haze,
over the palisades stormed the attacking bands of
slaves, men miners or shepherds or porters a month
before, now ragged, well fed, and a storming fury.
The sunlight was ruddy upon them, and Cossinus,
no man of action, stood staring aghast a long moment.
Again the bucina roared under the standard and
the soldiers, snatching armour and swords, ran for
the palisades. Reformed within the palisades they had
crossed, the slaves greeted the legionaries with a shower
of javelins and stones: then charged. They were bands
of Gauls, armed with great swords forged in the
wilds of Lucania. Swinging these with both hands,
their charge was irresistible.
In their van raced a giant, dark-faced, dark-haired,
swinging a giant axe, clad in the armour of a Roman
tribune. He clove down the centurion who guarded
the standard, hewed down the standard pole with
one sweep, then smote in through the hesitant Roman
ranks. Cossinus heard armour crackle under that
axe : a slave-titan, that, and a general to boot.
And, being a valorous man, for all that he knew
nothing of war or leadership, he took his sword and
helmet from the pavilion and ran swiftly towards the
battle. But by then it was no battle. Here and
there, in groups, the legionaries still fought, but already
the slaves swarmed over the camp, killing stragglers
and the wounded. Beside Cossinus ran a centurion :
92 SP ART ACU S
towards them leapt two of the attackers. One of
them was a tall man, with large feet and hands and
braided red hair. A Gaul, he swung the sword of his
tribes. The centurion thrust at him, missed, and rolled
headless from the stroke of the sword. The other was
a lesser man, and as he came at him Cossinus noted
the peaked, chinless face and the stare of demoniac
eyes. Twice Cossinus thrust at the man, and twice
the man leapt back with reddened tunic.
He was armed with great wooden club, set with
gleaming blades of flint. Snarling, he halted and
swung this club till the glassy blades shimmered and
it gathered momentum. Then he hurled it at the
Roman general. Right athwart the body of Cossinus
it came : staggering in amaze, he looked down at the
entrails spurting from his own body. Then a light
flashed and flashed and he thought, ‘Sicily’, and fell
and was trampled as the last of the scattered fighting
ebbed and rolled down to the beach.
So died Cossinus at Salenae. Spartacus, bloody
to the elbows, unwounded, unwearied, though his
axe was twisted upon its haft, had his horn-bearer
sound. Slowly the Gauls, burdened with spoil,
collected from the four corners of the camp. So
rapid had been the attack that few of the slaves had
died at the palisades—even within their casualties
had been few enough. Since morning they had lain
hidden, at the orders of the Strategos, in the brush
that overlooked the Roman camp, waiting for the
Roman hour of siesta and slackening. Few had slept
in that waiting time, excepting the Strategos himself,
watched over by Castus. Now Castus, also unwounded
but with a broken shield and reddened hands, came
panting to Spartacus.
‘Shall we burn the camp ?’
The Thracian shook his head. ‘That would warn
LEGIO LIBERA 93
the scouts of Varinus, unless he still follows Crixus
and our main army. Are there any prisoners V
There were three. They were brought in front of
Spartacus. One was a centurion, the others Balearic
legionaries. The centurion faced him fearlessly, for
he was a Roman : but the legionaries stared at him
with the fear of death and torture in their eyes.
‘Bring Cossinus’ head,’ said the Strategos.
Titul the Iberian hewed it from the trunk which
his club had mangled, and brought it dripping.
Carrying it, he sang the sacrificial song to Kokolkh,
being mad. Spartacus looked at it, the drooping
eyelids and the bloody grin; and suddenly shivered
and a moment hid his face in his hands. Then he
remembered the words of Kleon and the taste of power
already strong in his mouth.
‘The legionaries will carry this to Rome, a gift to
the Senate from the Legio Libera.’
The centurion and the two Balearic legionaries
took the northwards road. In a package they carried
the head of Cossinus. The raiding slaves vanished
into the mountains, leaving Salenae despoiled.
(lii)
Unaware of the end of Cossinus, the praetor
Varinus marched ever deeper into the wilds of Lucania.
For three weeks he wandered there, and, despite his
velites, found himself unable to come up with the
Gladiators and their allies, or force them to battle.
Under the brow of Mount Papa he found their camp
deserted. Marching northwards again, in the trail
of the elusive slave-bands, he forded the river at
Paestum only in time to see the leaping flames from the
houses. Pushing on quickly, he overtook at dusk a
94 SP ART ACU S
considerable body of men, and these turned to give
him battle, holding his legion in a cleft of the hills
till darkness fell. Then they melted away with singing
and mocking laughter.
Only then did he learn that Paestum had been
occupied, looted, and fired by a small body of Eastern
slaves, numbering less than three hundred : and that
they had deliberately led him on for two long days,
the while the main body of the insurgents still eluded
him.
He camped a night in Paestum, and from Lucerius
Piso, an aged patrician almost blind—as he had been
for many years—from a loathsome disease, he learned
of the advent of the Eastern slaves. They had captured
Paestum without a blow being struck. Their leader
had been a tall, black-bearded slave, evidently of
different race from his followers. These he had
held well in hand, only one of the inhabitants of the
town being killed : and he because he threatened the
slaves from afar. Thereat the black-bearded slave
leader had snatched a bow from his back with in¬
credible swiftness, and, bending it, pierced the breast
of the mocker with an iron arrow.
Then, summoning the chief men, of whom Piso
was one, he had demanded a small store of corn, all
the money and jewels in Paestum, and the liberation
of the slaves.
All his demands except the liberation of the slaves
had been agreed to when the troops of Varinus were
seen approaching. Thereat the black-bearded slave
had marched his company away, he himself riding in
the rear. An arrow fired after him, though striking
between his shoulders, had fallen blunted to the
ground. He was evidently protected by some alien
God.
‘Or by armour beneath his tunic,’ said Varinus,
L, E G I 0 LIBERA
sourly. ‘Couldn’t you have closed the gates and held
three hundred men ?’
Piso blinked with lashless eyelids. ‘No, for few of
the plebs have arms.’
‘You are fools,’ said Varinus.
‘So the bearded slave said,’ remarked Piso
reminiscently. ‘He was a short-tempered man, like
yourself, Varinus, and swore by a God called lave.’
He chuckled. ‘I’d no mind to risk a slit throat for the
sake of the Senate or a few slaves. How fares your
wife, Varinus ?’
But the praetor had turned on his heel and left
him. Next morning, dour and unshaken, he turned
southwards again. As he marched news was brought
to him by a Gaul, a slave who had deserted the
insurrection, that the Thracian Gladiator, whose name
was Spartacus, had detached a party from the main
slave horde and was marching swiftly towards the sea
in order to engage Cossinus. Hearing this news
Varinus altered his line of march, left the Gaul hanging
crucified on a nearby tree, and pressed westwards
towards the coast.
But at midday, in a marshy plain amidst low
foothills, he found a considerable body of men waiting
to give him battle. For the first time in a month his
face lighted up. He saw that the campaign would
end here, now that the rebels had come into the
open.
His cavalry, a small body of four hundred horse,
the Roman commander divided and placed on either
wing of his main battle. They were heavily armed and
armoured and well mounted. In the centre he mar¬
shalled the Tenth Legion, with gladii, breastplates,
and bearing the short pilum: these men were the
stay of the Republic, short in stature, brown-skinned
disciplined as no other troops in the lands that fringed
96 SP ART ACU S
the Middle Sea. They halted motionless, in taciturn
silence, in contrast to the light-armed troops from
Cisalpine Gaul, who clamoured with the usual din
of velites. Beside these Gallic troops Varinus placed
a body of slingers on the flanks. Then he took heed of
the ordering of the slave-army that opposed him.
A small man, evidently a Gaul, and mounted on a
small and shaggy horse, marshalled the slaves. It was
Crixus, helmeted and in Roman armour. In the centre,
opposing the Tenth Legion, and grouped around the
Snake standard of the slaves, he set the Gauls and
Germans, the first under Oenomaus, the second
under the scowling half-mutiny of Gannicus. For
the German, believing that the command should have
been deputed to himself by Spartacus, had marched
sulkily since sunrise. His Germans also considered
that their leader had been slighted and so drew away
from the Gauls.
Seeing that his centre was likely to split even
before it was attacked, Crixus sent a Thracian, lalo,
to watch by the German leader, and, at the first sight
of treachery or cowardice, to drive a knife in his throat.
Suspecting the intent of lalo, Gannicus, albeit still
sulkily, held the Teutones in check. Further, he hated
the Masters more than he hated either Crixus or
Spartacus, and the blood of his unquestioned bravery
began to beat across his forehead.
In their ranks the marshalled slaves fidgeted, with
twitching faces. For it was the first time, unshielded
by rme or hill or lake, they had faced that dread of
the Middle Seas, the legionaries of the Masters. At
first there was almost panic in the ranks, as those men
from the vineyards and mines and warehouses gaped
open-mouthed at the enemy they fronted, and
remembered the sting of the lash on their backs,
and the averted head of a slave in the presence of a
LEGIO LIBERA 97
Master. And then, in a kind of glad despair, they
realized they must stand and fight, there was no
escape.
With that realization there came on the slaves
hate with remembrance—hate built on memories
dreadful and unforgivable, memories of long treks in
the slave-gangs from their native lands, memories of
the naked sale, with painted feet, from the steps of
windy ergastula, memories of cruelties cold-hearted
and bloody, of women raped or fed to fish to amuse
the Masters from their lethargy, of children sold as
they came from the womb, of the breeding-kens of
the north, where the slaves were mated like cattle,
with the Masters standing by. And a low, fierce growl
of hate rippled up from the marshalled slaves, the
hiss and rattle of the Snake that faced the Wolf.
For a little, out of sling and arrow-shot, the two
armies halted motionless. Then said Crixus: ‘We’ve
come to the feast, but the meat is still uncooked.’
Thereat he took a javelin in his hand, rode forward,
stood high in his stirrups, and hurled the javelin
whistling through the air. It buried itself in the breast
of a front-rank legionary and slew him instantly. On
an eminence to the rear of the Roman force, Varinus
saw this play and smiled with a sour contempt. He
had already gauged the quality of the slave leadership,
and ordered his horse to feign a frontal attack.
Out from either flank they swept and poured
across the dusty turf upon the slave front. The sods
dashed high from the racing hooves, and the soldiers
rode with levelled hastae, low-bent in their saddles,
silent. They brushed through a curtain of arrows,
scraped the Gaulish front, and fell on the men of
Gannicus. With a roar the Germans leapt forward to
meet them.
Crixus rode like the wind till he stood beside the
G
9S SPARTACUS
standards of Gannicus. ‘Keep fast in your ranks,
retiarius. It is only a ruse.’
Circling like swallows, the horsemen drew off,
leaving here and there a hamstrung horse or a slain
rider. But Gannicus’s ranks were broken, and, looking
up at the words of Crixus, the German slaves beheld
an unexpected sight.
Shielded under the cavalry ruse, Varinus had set
the legion in motion. Rank on rank, steadily, Samnite
shields poised to guard the right breast, and elbows
crooked behind pila for the thrust, they advanced
at a pace that grew ever swifter. Swallows skimmed the
near-by hills, there was a drowsy hum of bees in a
tree, a slave coughed and coughed, with dust in his
throat. The Germans gazed appalled.
In a moment the crash of the Roman attack
echoed up through the valley like the noise of a comber
on a shaking rock. Now the inferiority of the newly
forged long swords of the slaves became plain. Hacking
and hewing, the slaves fell back before the deadly in¬
thrust of the pilum. Cleft through the breast in
the moment of swing or recovery,^ they fell like
butchered cattle. Round on the left wing of the slaves
rode the Roman cavalry again, and the defeat turned
to rout. Screaming, the Germans fled from the terror
of the Masters’ attack.
Crixus sat his horse behind his Gauls and ate
pensively at a handful of plums he had stolen from
an orchard.
‘Were Kleon the Greek here he would tell me that
the battle is lost. But I am no General. Therefore I
think it is won.’
Too late Varinus perceived the same. Like an
avalanche the Gauls, wheeling at the roar of their
horns, fell on the flank of the pursuing Romans, for
Crixus, seeing the lie of the land, had placed them a
LEGIO LIBERA 99
little in advance of the Germans, though this fact was
inapparent from the Roman stance. The slave horse,
negligible in number, but composed of great-limbed
Thracians, miners and lumbermen, met the circling
Roman cavalry, and, armed with clubs, splintered the
levelled hastae and smote down the riders. In a
moment the fortune of the battle changed. The
Germans turned and the legionaries, caught between
two enemies, struggled to reform in double lines.
But this, in that marshy ground encumbered with
dead, they could by no means achieve.
Varinus rode from the field with a hundred horses
and took the northward road. Ten stadia away he
halted and at nightfall the survivors of his force began
to straggle back. A legionary of no rank, a Gaul, saved
almost a third of the infantry, fought a way out of
the slave-press, and escaped to Varinus in the dusk
Overbusied in looting the dead and killing the
wounded, the slaves did not pursue. Further, Crixus,
having obeyed his orders to hold Varinus, made no
attempt to pursue him. Instead, he encamped on the
battlefield, sending messengers to Kleon in the Papa
camp, and to Spartacus, hurrying from the slaying of
Cossinus.
Varinus and his rout laboured half the night at
the erection of a trench and stockade. Hourly they
expected the slaves to attack, but the night about them
remained void and voiceless. Waiting, Varinus sat
down to his tablets and penned to the Senate the news
that the band of escaped slaves had grown to an army,
strong, ferocious, and well led. He made no mention
of his defeat, but only that he had drawn back and
awaited reinforcements. These he urged should be
sent at once.
Next morning his scouts reported that the slave
army had vanished again into the Lucanian hills.
The Pits of Death
(!)
^pWO men, helmetless, but with long swords girded
-L to their shoulders, lay in a cane-brake near the camp
of Varinus. All day they had lain there, and all the
previous night, suffering the dews and the mists of
morning with a hardy indifference, for they were
slaves and Gauls. One, red-haired, large of feet and
hands, had snored so stertorously in the hours of the
night that his companion, wakeful, had frequently
kicked him also awake. Lest the Romans hear.
This companion was a smaller man whose left
cheek had been branded with a slave iron, and so
twisted his face in a humourless smile. He ate olives
endlessly and threw the seeds at the birds which
hopped and chirped near the brake with bright,
curious eyes. Already the earth was thick with stained
leaves and the browns of autumn were on all the land.
Through the shielding walls of the cane-brake
came the sounds of Varinus’ encampment, and sight
of a high stockade over-topped by the eagle signum.
Brennus yawned. ‘Gods, but I’m wearied. When
next we come to a farm, I’ll drink hot milk from a
horn and share the bed of a woman. If there are any
women left.’ He yawned again. T’d give my life to
lie with a girl in a withy stockade and hear an aurochs
low.”
His brother, grimy with leaves-stain, frowned
grotesquely. T’m not minded to die till I’ve cut more
Roman throats.’
‘They should be cut in the interest of peaceable
men sleeping,’ said Brennus, listening with closed eyes
to the mechanical shoutings of the centurions from
Varinus’s drill-ground. ‘Is this Master never to move
after the Free Legion ?’
IOO
LEGIO LIBERA
ioi
‘He’ll move when the new men come from Rome.
Till then we stay here, as Crixus bade us.’
‘Gods, don’t I know it ? Wake me if they ever
come, or if another wearied man strolls out to rest
near our shelter.’ He looked back at a dark, shapeless
heap behind him, already smothered in drifting leaves.
‘You had all the sport last time.’
When next he awoke it was with the urgent hand
of his brother upon his arm. Noon had passed. From
Varinus’s camp came the same ceaseless hum except
that it seemed to have increased in volume.
‘The legionaries have come from Rome. The
Seventeenth Legion, I think. Sh !’
Suddenly the brother slid from his crouching
position and lay flat. Brennus followed his example,
and then peered through the interstices of the cane-
brake.
Two men, both carrying swords, but without
armour or helmets, walked side by side. They were
deep in converse, and Brennus, recognizing the nearer
manj strained his ears. It was the commander of the
Romans, Varinus.
Closer they came, then passed. Then wheeled and
passed again. Brennus’s hand stole to the hilt of the
long sword that rested across his shoulder. At the
movement his brother gripped him again.
‘O son of foolishness and a forest bitch, is this
the time to play with a sword ? Didn’t you hear ?’
T heard, O brother of the son of a forest bitch.
Now I’d end their planning and make south to Crixus.’
‘And won’t the legions remain and new leaders
be found ? Any fool may lead an army. Now of
these leaders we know the plans. Of the plans of their
successors you’d know nothing, being by then poison
in the stomach of some Lucanian wolf.’
Brennus growled, but withdrew his hand from his
102
SPARTACUS
sword. They watched the slow stride of Varinus and
his companion back to camp. Then Brennus glanced
at his brother.
The latter nodded and rose cautiously to his feet.
He spoke one word.
‘South.’
Brothers, and rivals since infancy in the games of
childhood and barbaric youth, they made south, each
at his uttermost speed, running shoulder to shoulder,
in the huntsman’s long lope. Finding that their new
swords encumbered them, they threw them away,
retaining only their knives. Hours passed, but they did
not ease their pace, encouraging each other with
taunts and jests. With the fall of darkness they were
many miles south of Varinus’s encampment, and came
to a deserted village in the hills.
There they found a stray goat, milked it, drank
its milk, slew it, broiled and ate its flesh : then lay
down to sleep. At moonrise the indefatigable brother
roused Brennus, and they set out again.
They slept once more, in a sheltered ravine, just
as the dawn tipped the eastward mountains. Awaking,
Brennus pointed to a far summit that rose like a copper
dagger against the blue bowl of the dawn.
‘Papa.’
(ii)
Crixus had entrenched the camp of the Free Legion
in Gaulish fashion, dyking it with sloping sides and
setting thorns in place of a stockade. So strong was
it now that many of the slaves believed it would
repel even the attack of a legion. Within its bounds
all the warring and raiding parties had reassembled
in the last few days, Crixus from his defeat of the
Masters in the Battle of the Gauls, Gershom ben
LEGIO LIBERA 103
Sanballat from his systematic raiding and looting in the
foothills, Oenomaus from a sudden descent on Thurii.
Amazed, the slaves awoke to the sudden plenty in
their camp, food, weapons and clothes, and stared at
these things, stuttering, and turning shamed, hesitant
faces from unaccustomed garments and unaccustomed
comforts. Then they would remember the Battle of
the Gauls, where they had faced a legion in the open
and defeated it: and in all the slave horde a strange
new spirit stirred, with no longer the bravery of
desperation, but instead a pride and a wild hope.
Walking the bounds of the camp that morning,
Crixus the Gaul hailed Gershom ben Sanballat, the
commander of the Bithynians, who was stalking past
him in silence, his fierce eyes fixed on the ground.
‘You are early abroad, Bithynian.’
‘As you are, German.’
Crixus laughed. ‘German ? I am a Gaul.’
‘And I am no Bithynian. I am a Jew.’
Crixus nodded. T’d forgotten. A very worthy
people, though they eat horses. Or am I thinking of the
Thracians ?’
‘My people were eating of the bread of God when
yours were starving in their northern stenches.’
‘A very desirable and praiseworthy God,’ said
Crixus, politely. He cared nothing for Gods. ‘Could
you not make him a sacrifice and bring him over the
seas to help us now ?’
Gershom ben Sanballat looked at the heathen with
the old Pharisee arrogance.
‘He is the God of Israel alone.’
Crixus sighed. ‘That’s a pity, since He specializes
in bread. He might have helped in the feeding of this
gaping camp. The country is as bare as a desert for
a score of pace miles around.’
Gershom nodded : ‘Then let us move.’
io4
SPARTACUS
‘Where ?’
‘To the sea and disperse.’
The Gaul shook his head. ‘That we can’t do,
unless Spartacus orders it. We’ve sworn to abide by
the orders of the Strategos alone.’
‘/ have sworn no such oath.’ The Jew combed his
black, curled beard with irritable fingers. ‘This
Thracian is our leader for as long as we please, not a
King whom we cannot depose.’
‘Yet I heard of a tribune of the Free Legion who
beat one of his men—a Bithynian, I think—who had
spread the rumour that Spartacus intended betraying
the slaves to the Republic.’
Gershom shrugged impatiently, but made no
answer, tall, black-haired, black-bearded, incongruous
in his Roman armour and silvered Greek helmet.
Crixus looked westward and spoke almost to himself.
‘Yet we can’t stay here long, as Spartacus knows.
He must return within a few days, he and the Greek.’
Gershom was blunt. ‘What is this Greek eunuch to
the Strategos ? His lover ?’
Crixus laughed again. ‘Many men love Spartacus.
Even you, I think, Jew.’
‘Many men love a maid : but she beds with but
one. This Kleon is with the Strategos night and day.
He came back from the killing of Cossinus and I saw the
Greek meet him. They talked together, then summoned
you to their tent. Then I heard the sound of a
company leaving, and saw the Strategos and the
women Elpinice, together with the Greek and a
score of Thracians, setting out southwards. How do
we know they haven’t fled to the sea ?’
‘Spartacus or Elpinice desert us ? Ask the Gladiators
who were with them in Vesuvius. You know little of
either, Jew.’
‘I know little, else I’d be neither a fool nor a
LEGIO LIBERA
105
slave—nor a so-called tribune in an Unfree Legion
commanded by a barbarian who withdraws from the
camp when he chooses, and where.’
‘He has not withdrawn far. Listen : but don’t
spread the news about. They have crossed the hills to
the great Stone Way to lie in wait for a tribute-train
coming from the East through Brindisium. The Greek
learned of this train’s arrival, and laid the plan for its
capture. With its treasure Spartacus is to buy the
help of the Italiot cities and make payment to each
slave as a Free Legion soldier.’
Then the Jew saw clearly. ‘So will it cease to be
the Free Legion. We’ll wander this land, fighting small
battles and storming small towns, seeking alliances
that never mature, seeking never to escape from Italy.
Till the Republic awakes and crushes us as a man
walking through grass crushes an adder.’
Crixus cared nothing for the morrow. ‘So be it.
Any death is a good one if it isn’t the Cross. And I’d
rather any day go into the dark with a gladius in my
ribs than escape to Gaul and grow old, and die of old
age and hunger in some forsaken hut. Especially if
the dark, ill Gods of whom they speak lie waiting one
at the thither side.’
He fell silent a moment, straining his ears, listening;
then looked at Gershom with bright, mocking eyes.
‘But Spartacus and the Greek have other plans. They
talk of upbuilding another Republic in opposition to
that at Rome—a Republic here in south Italy to which
the Italiots will cleave.’
‘A Republic in the skies,’ said Gershom. ‘Are
these fellow slaves of ours allies that the Italiot cities
will welcome ? Especially after Metapontum—not to
mention Paestum. Were I a free man I’d rather seek
allegiance with a herd of swine.’
For even yet there were moments when the sight
io6
SPARTACUS
and smell of a fellow-slave disgusted the one-time
aristocrat of Kadesh—disgusted him both as ruler and
Pharisee, he who had twice defeated the Hellenizing
Jannaeus, and then turned and ground under-heel
the revolting serfs of Kadesh. He was amongst them,
but not of them, himself seeking only escape, return
to Judaea and a secret passing to his mountain folk,
there to raise again the standard of the Hasidim
against the unclean Salome. Marching his Bithynians
through Lucanian towns, he had freed the slaves, as
his own men clamoured, but coldly, contemptuous of
those he freed. Half at least that he freed had been
slaves from birth ; slavery he thought their apportioned
lot.
Yet also (and this startled his haughty heart when
he thought of it), there were long stretches of days
and hours, when he sank himself in the mood of the
slaves, moved with their anger against the Masters,
with their compassion for the fellow-enslaved.
Gannicus the Teutone had now a fine tent, and
two Roman captives who served him at meat: for that
he was hated throughout the camp, perversely, the
slave-horde pitying the Romans. Gershom joined in
the hate like a slave ; looking now towards the quarters
of the German slaves a thought, unbidden, came sharp
on his lips.
‘If the Strategos were wise he’d have his German
tribune impaled on a stake ere he started the campaign.’
Crixus laughed. ‘What, in the Free Legion ?
Gannicus had done better to die as a slave.’
‘He has the heart of a slave. As have too many
of the Legion. See to it, Gaul: no man may ever be
a slave but he bears the stigma until he is dead. And
that stigma is on his soul. We are no free men. We
are rebel slaves.’
For a moment it seemed to Crixus that he was aware
LEGIO LIBERA 107
of a bitter truth. Then the sharpness of it faded from
his mind. He laughed again.
‘I am no slave : I have no slave-stigma on my soul.
I hate the Romans as I hate an enemy, not as a slave
his Master.’
‘Then you are a fool,’ said Gershom, and turned
away. Then halted. ‘Here come your two spies.’
‘Brennus and his brother ? Where ?’
Gershom pointed across the entrenchments to two
far figures that neared the camp with speed. The Gaul
nodded.
‘You have keen eyes, Jew.’
‘Though a dull heart, Gaul. Heed to me, Crixus.
If you and I led this Free Legion, were there in it no
Gannicus, no dreaming Spartacus or Kleon, we might
save it yet.’
Crixus shook his head. ‘I’ve sworn an oath to the
Strategos ; which is nothing. But I love Spartacus ;
which is much.’
Then he went forward to meet his panting spies.
(iii)
Early that same morning a band of twenty, on
horseback, forded a river and rode north-westwards
into Lucania. They drove a long train of laden ponies.
All of the band was mounted, mostly on small horses,
long-maned and long-tailed, Calabrian bred and hardy.
Each rider carried a shield and javelins. Some were
in armour, some not. Some rode half naked, their
garments torn. Some had their bodies bound with
bloody cloths. One rolled in his saddle, held there by
a fellow-rider. It was the slave-band of Thracians,
returning from its raid on the great Stone Way.
At the head rode their solitary scout, a small
io8
SP ART ACU S
man with retreating chin and forehead. It was Titul,
the Iberian. In the rear rode three who every now and
again looked over their shoulders at the plains retreating
and fading in the haze of the brightening sun. The
tallest rode in the middle, a giant, mounted on a
giant stallion, unwounded, unwearied, his great body
cased in gilded armour. A magnificent figure, the
Strategos Spartacus, commander of the Free Legion,
once a slave in the ludus of Batiates.
So Kleon thought, riding on the Thracian’s right
side. But more than merely magnificent, the Thracian.
In the space of three months he had changed from a
wild, brooding slave who sought no better future than
freedom in Thracian forest to a General, a statesman,
archon with strategos, to the seeming, inward and
outward, of that Prince whom Plato the divine had
sought in sun-washed Syracuse. A feat for a eunuch
to perform, this, while the Seeker slept with the
shades!
Elpinice rode on the Gladiator’s left. Since dawn
she had ridden in agony, cloths wound tightly round
her body, her armour long since thrown away. With
lips compressed, she had felt the pain surge over her
and set her teeth, and said nothing. For they could
not stop in the plains, and she knew that the pains
were but early ones, and her body would tell her in
a keener agony when her ultimate hour had come.
At the first, in the marching and riding from
Papa, when that knowledge had come on her in a night
that she bore in her womb the seed of Spartacus,
fear and anger had come with the knowledge. By
means that were known to many women, in Rome
and Capua and the white-walled houses that rose in
all the cities of men that girded the Middle Sea, she
had taken heed in her nights of old that she should give
no children to Batiates. Then in her madness for the
L E G10 LIBERA 109
Thracian Gladiator, in the wild rides and hidings that
followed Capua, when the world gaped to engulf
their revolt, there had seemed no purpose to guard
herself afresh. The daps and the nights of the
Thracian’s love would endure but a shining space
ere the dark came down.
But the dark had not come. In Lucania the
Masters still failed to subdue the slave-horde. It
waxed daily in size and strength. And with it waxed
the fruit of that first strange night when the Gladiator
took her in the kennels of Batiates.
So she had sought to kill the thing, riding as a
centurion in the company of Castus, engaging in the
sprawling guerilla warfare that Spartacus and Kleon
waged on the Masters the while they tried to rouse the
Italiot cities against the Republic. But it would not
die, though she slept unshielded at night, though she
lay in the ice-cold water of pools, though twice, dis¬
mounting, she had fought in the slave-ranks. Then a
calmness had come on her, albeit fear also; and with
widened eyes she watched her body change and grow
strange. In the dark of the night, by the side of
Spartacus, sometimes a wild, dark anger held her,
breaking the calmness; sometimes, strangely, tearing
her heart, a nameless thing that might once have been
Pity-.
Pity for herself, for the giant head of the Gladiator,
fast and secure in sleep, for the sleeping horde about
the tents, for all life sleeping and waiting the day.
In those dark, lost hours she groped back again through
the curtains of years to the tears and touch of a
woman half remembered, long before, in Athens:
through the curtaining times that had set in her eyes,
frozen, the stalactites of hate ; that had put in her
heart that cold delight that had urged her to cutting
the tribune’s throat, that had urged her in company of
no
SPARTACUS
other slaves to nameless tortures on captured Romans,
till the blood and the sweat stood out as a rain on
their skins, tormented, and they groaned and died.
And beyond those curtains she seemed to find, white¬
faced, a self that wept and, weeping, brought down
its hands from a hidden face and laughed with the
joy of careless child.
And with that lost self to companion her, she had
ceased her ridings from Papa camp, abiding there
while the Gladiator rode, hither and there, on missions
and raids with the eunuch Kleon his companion-
literatus. And the eyes that looked on Elpinice when
the Thracian returned from those journeyings she
saw awakened to a lover’s eyes, not with the lust of
the mad, strange child : he would lie and speak, with
his head in her lap, of the world of the cities that
awaited their coming, of the State that he and the
slaves were to build; and she saw in him Power, like
a quiescent Snake, and wondered over him while he
slept; while the Masters armed and prepared in the
north; while his seed would stir and turn in her
womb.
He went unaware of her unborn child, as the slave-
host did, with no eyes to see, death and the chances
of War in their eyes; except for the eunuch Kleon,
she thought, reading in the cold, amused eyes of the
Greek a hint of the knowledge he shared with her.
Yet even when they mooted the plan to raid the
great Stone Way for the treasure-loads, and she had
said she would ride on the raid, Kleon had said nothing,
his eyes had not changed. She had thought it likely
she rode her last raid : she had not known that her
time was so nigh.
So Elpinice had crossed the mountains, into the
green Calabrian land, hiding by daytime as did the
others, marching and riding swiftly at night, going
LEGIO LIBERA m
without food and long without drink, lying a fugitive
in the rains. Behind : the slave-host was perhaps
dispersed, perhaps they alone survived the revolt.
But Spartacus and Kleon had taken the chance, knowing
that Crixus was cautious and skilful, and Varinus still
unreinforced. So they kept by the Way and fell on the
train, taking it after a scattered fight. Now for two
days they had been making their way back to the
slave-camp under Mount Papa.
In the afternoon they were forced to turn north
to avoid a band of Roman velites whom Titul had spied
ere they spied him. Till sunset they made a wide
detour, and were presently riding through the
mountain-country grown familiar enough to the slaves
since the Spring-time exodus from Campania. Here
they decried a runner approaching, a solitary figure
in a short grey tunic and carrying only a knife in his
belt. It was a Gaul and he brought to the Strategos
a message from Crixus under Mount Papa.
‘Haste and return. Varinus has been reinforced at
last, and we have news of his secret plan.’
But Kleon pointed to Elpinice.
‘The woman can go no further.’
She was reeling with weakness. But she read in the
cold Greek’s eyes his plan. It was to have Spartacus
abandon her.
Spartacus seemed to awaken, looking at Elpinice
in frowning wonder, his ears still filled with Crixus’
message. Then he and all who had ridden with her
became aware of the thing of a sudden. They had
ridden with her unnoticing for days, thinking of her
as Elpinice, a Gladiator almost, no woman at all.
Now they stared open-mouthed at a woman pregnant,
and near to her time of travail at that. Around stood
the halted pack-train. The sun was low, in the air
a chill. The horses stood drooping-headed. Somewhere
ii2 SP ART ACU S
at hand a waterfall splashed ceaselessly over hidden
rocks. Through a mist of pain Elpinice heard the Gaul
messenger speaking.
‘There is a house back there in the hills.’
She became aware of the horses in motion, of an
arm thrown about her, iron and sure. Winding down
through a pit in the hills, they came to the deserted
villa. It had been the country-house of some rich
Lucanian of Thurii or Metapontum, now fled the
slave-occupation. The door of the fauces hung
ajar and from the kitchen on the right arose no smoke
or the sound of slaves at their toil. The Gladiator
kicked wide the doors and went in, carrying the
bed-woman of Batiates. For a moment he stood
in the gloom of the atrium, ^looking round him in
wonder, for he had never before entered such a
dwelling.
The gloom sparkled with light. The last rays of
sunshine in the watersplash re-rayed on the marble
ceiling, and back from there to the mosaic d floor,
flung wandering beams down the corridors on the
painted bodies of the statues that stood pedestal’d
in the peristyle. One, a Hermaphroditus of Silanion,
showed the body of the son of Hermes united with
that of the river nymph in an obscene ecstasy. A
Symplegma of the school of Cephissodorus stared up
in a blank, cloacal anguish at the stare of the giant
barbarian.
And a sudden, wild anger seized on Spartacus.
His shout brought in the Thracians. Loosening his
arms from about Elpinice, he pointed to the shining
figures in stone.
Then, to the crash of the breaking statues, he
carried the bedwoman of Batiates to a sleeping-room.
LEGIO LIBERA
ii3
(iv)
Up and down the atrium paced the Greek eunuch,
and presently heard the screams die to a faint moaning.
They moved him only to an impatient frown. How
long would this delay their march ? How long the
Thracian waste the hours at the unclean bed of a
woman in childbirth ?
Knowing Elpinice an enemy of his plans, Kleon
had hoped to see her die in the raid on the great Stone
Way. Even when she had survived that raid, and they
rode back into Lucania again, the conviction had been
firm upon him that the Strategos, finding her pregnant,
would abandon her by the way. What need had the
slave commander to burden himself with an ailing
woman when he might have women as he chose from
the captives, from the hundreds of women slaves who
now filled the camp under Mount Papa ? But instead
he had halted the march like a midwife—he who had
shaped so sure in the seeming, cold and passionless, of
Plato’s Prince !
Going outside, the eunuch found the darkness
now close at hand. He set to garrisoning the house in
the pit, the hills around sloped up to the oncoming
dark, the cry of the rivulet was here unceasing. Kleon
stood in the dimness and looked at a star that came out
and twinkled over far Papa. It was the star of the
Sea-born herself.
And, for the first time since that day when the
Libyans of Pacianus had robbed him of his manhood,
a sick desolation came on him. Always to be alone'
never to know kind hands or the lips of love ! Never
to see the seed of his body borne to fruit, or to hear
the voice of a child. And for a moment, dreadfully,
the eunuch wept. What availed him his plans or the
H
ii4 SPARTACUS
game he played with an ancient dream from the
antique times ? What to him though the slaves should
gain or lose, what to him life or death, already half
dead, with a body mutilated to shame ?
But that night Elpinice gave birth to a son, and
drank warmed wine and water, and slept awhile; and
woke with the coming of the morning and urged the
Strategos to leave her. And this at last, though
reluctantly, he did, a dreaming slave with power
forgotten, and the dream that he captained a legion
of men. Titul and half his company he left to guard
the house, and embraced Elpinice, and saw her eyes
strange, so that he remembered that night long
before in the kennels of the Indus in far Capua.
Then he rode through the dawnlight to Crixus’
camp.
W
Thoranius the quaestor had marched from Rome
with the Seventeenth Legion to reinforce Varinus.
He was a wily man whose father had been a freedman.
Gross and uncultured, half a barbarian, he seemed to
Varinus at first a worse lieutenant than either Furius
or Cossinus. He bellowed like a bull about the camp,
and would slap his thigh with a freckled hand, stirred
to mirth by his own crude wit. In appearance like a
merchant and wearing his armour with plebeian
clumsiness, he at first gave little evidence of the fact
that he was a consummate tactician, a man whose
lowly birth alone had retarded a speedy promotion.
Then, twelve hours after his arrival in Varinus’
camp, he led the praetor out by the cane-brake that
fringed the camp, and propounded a campaign plan
plotted to the minutest detail.
At first Varinus listened to it coldly, then disagreed,
LEGIO LIBERA 115
then argued, then finally accepted it, though its
boldness and unconventionality left him in uneasy
doubt. Following his agreement, the camp hummed
with activity through three long days. On the fourth
morning Varinus marched out his veterans and went
south into the land of ravines that led towards the
sea-coast. Thereafter there departed from the camp,
in bands of three hundred, eight hundred, nine
hundred, and a thousand, with the space of an hour
betwixt each departure, a full half of the Seventeenth
Legion new-brought from Rome by Thoranius.
The surrounding country had been scoured for spies
or fugitives, and no eyes other than those of hawks
watched Thoranius’ men depart by four different
routes that yet all led south.
From the slave-camp under Papa that same dawn
Spartacus, newly arrived from the east, remounted
his tireless stallion, and rode out at the head of two
thousand slaves, Germans and Thracian, light-armed
troops, Gannicus their quaestor, and marched swiftly
west. Following this, ere the dust of the Strategos’s
departure had settled, Oenomaus took six hundred
men, Greeks and Gauls, out of the camp, and marched
north. After him a company of Gauls and Iberians,
men capable of a pace unknown to either the Romans
or the rest of the Free Legion, ran swiftly forth from
the Papa entrenchments, and vanished north¬
westwards into the mountains. They were led by
Castus. Crixus, Gershom and Kleon the eunuch were
left in the camp, in command of the Gauls and the
Eastern slaves, guarding not only the camp, but the
companies of Roman prisoners taken in the battle
near Paestum.
All night a fierce frost had held the ground, but
now, under the sunlight, and with the departure of
the last of the raiding companies, a mist arose and
n6 SP ART ACU S
rolled over the plain. Papa stood crowned in cloud.
The Roman prisoners, digging in relays all through the
previous day and night, toiled anew under the
direction of Kleon.
The time was short.
Gershom ben Sanballat was uneasy, and left his
Bithynians, also engaged in hasting excavation, to
walk down the lines of reed huts and shelters till he
stood by the side of the Greek. For a little they said
nothing, watching the Romans. These prisoners,
though scantily clad and ill fed on rotten corn, yet
toiled under no lash, a fact which awakened more
resentment in the Free Legion than any other order of
the Thracian Strategos.
‘They dig ill,’ said Kleon. T think they suspect
that these are Roman graves.’
The Jew combed his curled beard with his fingers,
and cast quick, bright eyes over the mist-wreathed
countryside. ‘I would that the corpses were safe in
them.’
‘They’ll come.’
‘Doubtlessly.’ The Jew’s eyes lit on him in sardonic
appraisal. ‘It seems to me I once heard you say you
cared nothing where we went or how we might fare,
life being the smallest of matters to you. Yet I find
you under a tribune’s helmet, and in the secret counsel
of the Strategos. Surely, whatever the game he
plays, it’s an ill thing for a Greek to serve a barbarian
who eats horses and worships his dead ?’
Kleon smiled, coldly indifferent. ‘If he eats
horses I have seen him perform greater feats. I’ve
seen him make captains of companies eat their oaths
and their pride at one meal.’
‘As Jehovah is God, that’s true.’ Gershom ben
Sanballat was pensive. ‘Yet why in the Free Legion
I march under the orders of an unclean Gentile, who
L E G I 0 LIBERA 117
seeks to build a tyranny on the dreams of a Corinthian
eunuch, puzzles me much.’
Kleon’s face flushed in a vivid anger. Then he
said, in a strangled voice: ‘That is an ill taunt,
Jew.’
So Gershom himself knew, yet he knew no way of
confessing it. The blood had stained his own face ere
the words had left his lips; his Angers faltered in the
glossiness of his beard. Bending forward, he cursed
the Romans, and at his words they toiled with a renewed
activity. Then the Hasidim guerilla turned to the
white-faced Greek.
# ‘It was ill. You’re twice the man, I sometimes
think, in that you are less the bull. But I grow
impatient with this plotting and planning, as though
we were statesmen, not skulking slaves, this building
of sky-republics, these secret raids and hopes. You
and your Thracian build a house in sand.’
‘Sand or rock, their end is the same, a dream of
order on a planless earth, of endurance where all
things meet and melt.’
The Jew was again the cold Pharisee. ‘So speak
the Hellenes, blaspheming God, as the bedmen of
the Whore in Jerusalem.’ His thoughts went far
with his gaze. ‘But she’ll find that both God and I
still live—if I ever win back to Kadesh.’
‘Your queen ?’ Kleon was again indifferent.
Then : ‘Your Bithynians will have set half the camp
with traps if you do not heed to their digging soon.
They work with more heart than my Romans.’
The Jew went back to his company. Meantime
the Gauls, all but a party that kept the entrenchments
and several who loitered outside the dyke, lay stretched
at ease, or mended their armour and tunics. From
near the camp entrance the long dyke being dug by
the captives and Bithynians drove straight through
n8 SPARTACUS
the lines of hutments to the far wall of the original
enclosure. Towards noon the excavators abandoned
the digging, and, under the vigorous direction of Kleon,
set to carrying away the excavated mould. By
mid-afternoon the great gape of the dyke had vanished.
Roofed over with branches and turf, it seemed now a
lane of solid ground splitting the camp in twain. A
smell of fresh mould hung over the lines. Quietness
settled on the camp.
An hour passed, and Crixus, who all day had sat
on the northwards wall, descended and ran swiftly
to the great camp-gate. His Gauls seemed hardly
to mark his passage, unless it was that their singing
and laughter grew louder as they loosened the long
swords slung from their shoulders. At the gate a
few Free Legionaries were already crowding, indiffer¬
ently, staring upon the band that approached.
It was a straggling band of eight hundred men,
escaped slaves (they shouted) who had fought their
way from Apulia to join the Free Legion. They were
casually welcomed by Crixus and the sentries, and
entered the camp, three abreast, a disorderly throng,
laughing and rejoicing.
Inside the gateway they found an abutting wall.
Betwixt it and the main camp palisade was a narrow
corridor that curved unexpectedly. For a moment
the foremost of the new arrivals hesitated, but the
pressure behind was too great to resist. The company
passed in. The sentries closed in a compact body and
marched in with it. Crixus, at the gate, blinked his
eyes and looked northwards again.
Then, behind him, across the inner wall, arose a
screaming tumult and the crackling of boughs, the hiss
of arrows and the scrape of weapons. For a time the
noise was deafening. Then it slowly died away.
Crixus paid no heed, standing with his hand on his
L E G 10 LIBERA 119
hip, his helmet pushed back from his forehead, his
eyes blinking in the winter sun-dazzle.
Just before sunset another band of sturdy, well-fed
slaves arrived at the camp under Papa. They also
passed through the hospitable gate ; and again, in a
little, arose the terrible tumult.
The Strategos himself returned at nightfall, bloody
but unwounded, with the remnant of his companies
reeling behind him in weariness. Crixus went out and
saluted him in the glare of the torches, the giant
slave on the giant stallion who told him the unslave¬
like news.
> ‘We ambushed Varinus at Carrae, among the rocks.
His Legion is destroyed. What happened here ?’
Crixus laughed. £As we planned. Though I
haven’t been to see.’
Together^ they stood inside the camp and looked
at the trap into which the companies of Thoranius
had walked. Shepherded by guides, they had marched
in the pits dug that morning and covered with turves.
As the turves gave way beneath the feet of the osten¬
sible slaves, the Gauls had assailed them with arrows
and then with the sword. Twice this had happened,
and now the dyke was heaped with Roman dead.
Some had died of suffocation, some from the arrows
and stones rained upon them. Some were perhaps
as yet undead. But they would not outlive the night.
Already from that dreadful pit, arose a fetid stench.
The Gladiator turned away, the strange barbarian
moulded from a wayward slave to an archon-tyrant
under the hands of a dreaming eunuch. But that
ancient self that amazed his world lived in him still
if with voice less wild.
‘This was your plan, Kleon. It has saved the camp.
But I swear that never again we’ll trap even Romans
like this,’
120
SPARTACUS
Kleon laughed thinly, his face pallid with the
stench from the pits. ‘Had the Romans held this
camp and slaves marched in disguised—would their
deaths have come as easily as death to these ? They’d
have been torn again from the pits to the cross and
the torturing-iron.’
‘The Roman is a wild beast,’ said Gershom ben
Sanballat. ‘They have died fitly.’
Crixus laughed. Then shivered. ‘May I not die
so.’
Before midnight Castus and Oenomaus had returned
with their depleted companies. Yet everywhere that
day the slave armies had triumphed, the two Gauls
separately destroying two of the bands of legionaries
despatched by the wily Thoranius in his plan to fill
the slave-camp with disguised Romans. Then the
two Gaul leaders had combined their forces and fallen
on the Roman camp. Thoranius himself had been
killed, fighting desperately, and the rest of his legion
dispersed.
Meantime, through the night, northwards, Varinus
fled with a small band of horse and halted not until he
gained the gates of Capua.
(vi)
Spartacus halted his stallion and stared. Behind
him the troop of Gladiators also came to a stop, staring
at that thing that lay athwart the track. In the air
was the shrill of a waterfall. The hills shelved down
in a pit to the hidden Roman house.
They had ridden since daybreak to come to the
house where Elpinice lay. Now, near it at last, they
looked at the thing that had halted their progress.
Mid-way the track lay a slave, the flies thick upon him.
121
LEGIO LIBERA
his tunic half-ripped from his back. No need to ask
why he lay there. In his back was a hole big enough
to have let out a dozen lives.
The hole had been made by a Roman pilum.
The horses shied away. Spartacus dismounted
and turned over the slave. He did not know him,
but the Thracian, lalo, did.
‘This is one of the men who rode with you to the
raid of the great Stone Way.’
They mounted and went on. The shrill of the
waterfall drew nearer. The track shelved downwards
steeply. The hills drew back. Then they halted
a second time, sitting very still in their saddles.
lalo was long to remember that moment, the strange
winter heat and clarity, the singing of the larks over¬
head, and the smoke slowly upwinding from all that
remained of the Roman house.
It had been burned with a thoroughness that
argued practice. Its streaked walls—for there had
been a fall of rain in the night—were as bare of their
painted woodwork as a skeleton of flesh.
lalo was startled by the Strategos suddenly laughing.
‘Yesterday we trapped the Masters in a pit,’ he said,
and laughed again, terribly, looking about him in the
great hill-pit that shielded the smoke-hung house.
Then he dismounted, the Gladiators behind him.
They clambered up through what had been the
atrium. No dead lay near. Spartacus took a great
charred stake and began to lever aside the debris.
Silently, the Gladiators also seized stakes and toiled
beside him, seeking to uncover the passage that led
to the room where Elpinice had lain.
That passage at length they uncovered. The room
itself, after long toil in the cool winter sunlight, they
uncovered. Then lalo and the Gladiators stood off,
and Spartacus remained there alone.
122
SP ART ACU S
All that afternoon they waited, watching from afar.
It was evening before he called to them and they came
and broke down the room about the two calcined bodies.
In the peristyle lay the body of a faceless slave, who had
died defending these two. lalo secretly dragged the
body in beside that of Elpinice and her child, that he
might guard them for ever in the Land of Mist.
They heard a strange singing in the hills, and found
Titul the Iberian hiding behind a bush. He had
crawled there, hacked and bleeding, the only survivor
of Elpinice’s guard. His tale was short.
‘They came on us at noon, half a century of cavalry
that had followed the raid we made on the great Stone
Way. We fought, hurling great stones and javelins.
But they slew us, for we had no arrows. Before they
fired the house they took the woman in her bed.
Many of them. She cried on the Strategos.’ He
paused to lick his wounds, being mad. ‘As was proper.
Great was the lust of men in the vanished Western
Isle.’
III. REX SERVORUM
The Conqueror
(i)
*\JOW the whole of Southern Italy lay undefended
^ at the feet of the Thracian Gladiator.
(ii)
A self-deputed scout, Kleon the literatus pushed
northwards with a hundred Gauls through the winter-
touched land. If he engaged himself more in mapping
than sacking, that was a small matter to the Gauls,
who sacked and looted as the mood came on them.
Once, in forced marches from Papa camp, out on
some mysterious mission to the north-east, Gershom
ben Sanballat, the tribune of the Bithynians, overtoook
the Greek and his scouts. With the Jew was a full
three thousand men, his original company of Bithynians
now swollen with recruitments of Syrians, Egyptians,
Negroes and Greeks. But they called it still the
Bithynian legion. The Pharisee guerilla grinned
sardonically as he pointed to a burning villa.
‘Is this the beginning of your New Republic V
Kleon was coldly unmoved. ‘We must destroy
before we build.’
‘As the divine Plato doubtlessly said,’ growled
Gershom. And then: ‘Where are we to winter,
Greek ?’
‘In Kadesh, perhaps.’
The Jew cursed him and marched away his legion.
By evening that day they were beyond the furthest
tradings of Kleon’s scouts. Then the latter turned
westward, combing the roads that ran parallel with the
sea. It was the design of the slaves to intercept all
travellers from the North.
These were few enough. Merchants had fled the
125
126
SPARTACUS
roads, seeking Greece and Africa by sea. But that
evening Kleon, sleeping in his camp, was awakened
by the noise of much drunken mirth. Rousing, he
rose and went into the flare of torches and found a
half-score of his Gauls, much laden with wine-skins
and incongruous finery, surrounding a band of travellers
scooped from the northern road.
They huddled together, these travellers, or rather
huddled about one figure. Coming forward, Kleon
surveyed that figure with cold, amused eyes.
She was a woman of that beauty that was singularly
Roman, however she had departed from the antique
codes of the Masters. Tall and full-breasted, with
level brow and widely spaced eyes, she stood calm in
the tumult, with a calmness that angered her captors.
Kleon thrust through them and took the woman by
the jaw, turning her face into the full light. She did
not struggle, only looked at him with eyes into which
flashed a sudden disgust and fear. Kleon knew that
look—the look of a woman for the Mutilated.
‘What is your name ?’ he asked.
‘Lavinia.’
She had been the mistress of Cossinus, brought down
from Rome under the protection of that Kharmides
who now lay out on the great North way with his
throat cut from ear to ear by a Gaulish miner. Kleon
stood and regarded her with cold, clear eyes. Should
he hand the woman over to the Gauls ? Or was
there any other purpose she could serve ?
As the mistress of Cossinus she must be aware of
secret matters in Rome—how the Senate had taken
the defeat of Varinus and planned the new campaign
against the slaves. But he himself had no leisure to
question her; and, even as women sickened in his
presence, so he felt for them an unquenchable loathing.
With all—as all with him. Excepting . . .
REX SERV ORU M
127
He turned from that thought in a strange pain.
‘I will send you to the Strategos,’ he said.
Her eyes widened with fear. ‘Spartacus, the
Thracian ?’
The Greek grinned coldly. ‘Even so. But he
seldom eats women.’ His eyes were cruel. ‘As for
anything else he may do—that will be nothing unusual
in your experience, will it ?’
Next morning he watched her go south under the
guard of ten of the most trustworthy Gauls. And for
some reason he remembered Elpinice again, whom
he had hated ; and stood and stared after that train
that carried the Roman woman to Spartacus.
(iii)
Meanwhile, marching mostly by night on their
mysterious venture, Gershom ben Sanballat and his
legion faded into the east. The Pharisee, forced for
long periods to eat of unclean meat, contented himself
with little but fruit and looted corn. At night he
slept on his shield. No watch-fires were lighted when
the slave-legion made camp, for it might be that strong
bodies of Romans were still abroad, remnants from the
rout of Varinus. These the Jew had no desire to
engage.
The city of Nuceria prepared for winter. It was
defended by an ancient wall and ten centuries of
soldiers under the command of a Greek named Glaucon.
A good general and a stern disciplinarian, he had had
the ancient walls strengthened as the country around
began to seethe with the slave revolt. From those
walls he would watch undisturbed the smoke of burn¬
ing homesteads rise in the air. Nuceria they might
not attempt.
128
SP ART ACUS
Glaucon had half a dozen warnings nailed on its
walls. These were the crucified bodies of slaves
captured in their attempt to slip away and join the
army of the Gladiators.
He had campaigned in many countries, Glaucon,
and amongst his slaves had a Jewish woman, Judith.
A child of the Egyptian Diaspora, she was a tall, dark
woman of whom Glaucon had soon wearied as bed-
woman ; for even in his bed she shuddered as at an
unclean touch. Amused, Glaucon had made her his
cook, for she was deft in the preparation of the spiced
dishes he had grown to love in the East. Also, placed
on oath in the name of her God, he knew she was
incapable of poisoning him.
With the passing of the years he allowed her
considerable freedom and bore with her occasional
Jewish insolence. Daily she went to a farm beyond
the walls, bringing back fresh eggs and milk and herbs
to savour her dishes.
On a day in early winter she found the farm very
quiet. Coming to the rear door she entered. As
she did so an arm encircled her throat and she found
herself held by an armed man. He gagged her with
care, and hesitated a moment in the darkness of the
passage, hungering, half-minded to rape her.. Then
he chattered something in unintelligible Latin, and
dragged her into the kitchen of the farm.
Several score of armed men—or so it seemed to her
—lay on the floor, the tables, the shelves, lay everywhere,
fast asleep. Only one man other than her captor did
not sleep, and he looked a frowning question ; a tall,
black-haired man who combed at his curled beard.
‘Release her,’ he commanded.
Released, Judith stood and looked at him. And
suddenly they both smiled ; and the Bithynians woke
to hear greetings exchanged in a strange tongue, and
REX SERV ORU M 129
saw the woman kiss the hand of the leader of the Hasi-
dim. She had heard of him often in Alexandria, in
the days when he stayed the Hellenizing Jannaens;
who of the Diaspora had not heard of Gershom of
Kadesh ?
So it was that, their commander and his advance-
guard secretly admitted to the city through the wall-
gate of Glaucon himself, Nuceria next morning awoke
to find itself in the hands of the Spartacists.
Assured of their northern frontier, the slaves pre¬
pared to evacuate the camp under Mount Papa.
(iv)
Preparing, the slaves were conscious of a change in
the quality of their leadership.
No longer was each band left to its own devices, to
squat by the fires and drowse on memories of the
kennels and mines. Instead, centuries and exact
legions were instituted, each legion composed of four
thousand men, armed thus and so; and if possible
composed of a definite tribe. Feuds were forbidden,
or the robbery of the merchants who now swarmed
round the camp to sell their wares in exchange for
the loot of Metapontum and the treasure-train from
Brindisium. Standards were given to each legion of
slaves, insignia and tribunes bearing badges of rank.
Daily the slaves were marched out to skirmish and drill,
leaving their women in staring bands on the parapets
of the Papa entrenchments. Those who were smiths
or armourers erected crude smithies and set to the
forging of iron weapons.
At this breath of Roman-like discipline, the slaves,
in their hatred of the Masters, were delighted. Prac¬
tising ecstatically, they imagined themselves both
I
130 SP ART ACU S
Masters and conquerors of the Masters. They
obeyed their centurions without question, and,
sweating, would leap and wrestle, naked, in the
lines of long, open-air gymnasia. Even the Gauls and
the Eastern men lost their shame in appearing unclad ;
and with bodies shining with oil would hurl the discus
or practise as slingsmen.
Shouts of adulation would greet the Thracian
Gladiator as he passed through the sweating com¬
panies. Crixus the Gaul alone appeared unchanged,
and confessed a complete inability either to drill or
manoeuvre his legion. ‘I am a Gladiator, no soldier.
As once you yourself were,’ he said to the Strategos.
The heavy Thracian burr of the Latin did nothing
to guise the passionless ferocity of the words. ‘Once
I was also a child, Crixus. But I’ve stopped drinking
milk. You’ll drill your legion, or I’ll appoint another
to drill it for you.’
The Gaul stared. It was indeed a new Spartacus,
this. Then Crixus went to drill his men.
That night a message was brought to the Strategos
that a woman and three men captives, taken by Kleon
on the northwards road, had arrived in the camp under
a guard of Gauls. lalo the Thracian brought him the
message. He had now made himself the Gladiator’s
intimate attendant, and stood in the dark of the hut
looking questioningly at Spartacus seated on a little
stool. So every evening he sat in darkness, unless a
tribune came seeking his counsel, or Kleon the eunuch
were in the camp. Then torches would be brought
and the two sit poring at a table over the plans that
the Greek would sketch on his tablets or sometimes
with drops of spilt wine. The Gladiator looked up.
‘Bring in the four of them.’
So they were brought before him, and Lavinia, in
the light of a single torch, looked at the conqueror of
REX SERV ORU M 131
southern Italy, who had shaken the Republic as no other
since the days of Hannibal. All Rome was a-rumour
with his name and intentions, one rumour preponder¬
ating over all others. It was said that the Thracian
savage was mad, mad not with the brutality that might
have been expected, but insane, being clement, one
who neither tortured his captives nor looted unneces¬
sarily. And Rome had listened open-mouthed, and
laughed, knowing that only the feeble-minded could
antic in such a fashion ; and stilled its fears, knowing
the successes of the rebellion accidental after all, to
be speedily nullified when the consuls took the field
at the end of the winter.
So Lavinia remembered, standing dishevelled and
dusty, but still with beauty upon her, in the presence
of the slave who had shaken Rome. Behind him
stood lalo; the Gauls lounged at the door, slaves in
authority. If the story of his reputed clemency were
a lie, she shivered at the thought of what would next
happen to her—had he no use for her himself. She
herself had experimented with slaves in moments of
idle curiosity as to how a mutilated man behaved and
cried.
Then Spartacus raised his head and looked at
her.
At first there was fear with her, then, as always
when she met the gaze of his kind, a shuddering disgust
of the slave who dared look at her with unshielded
eyes, a feeling of a foul contamination. But she saw
strange eyes, glowing yet dull, and minded that thing
that he carried on his standards, the slave-army insignia
of a Snake. Now she knew at last where they got that
sign, and shivered while those dark eyes grew suddenly
gold. Spartacus stood up.
In the tent were cloths Elpinice had used, a bronze
mirror, for all she wore Gladiator’s armour, a spatula
132 sp art acu s
and a horn cup. In the dark of the evenings under
Papa lalo had been wont to find the slave-leader staring
at these, strangely and terribly. Now he gestured
towards them.
‘Take these away. What is your name, woman ?’
‘I am Lavinia,’ she said, in a white whisper.
‘A Roman ?’
She found his thick Latin barely intelligible. But
she understood. She nodded.
And that night, when at length he slept and she
drew shudderingly back from his arms, far off and
ringingly she heard a wolf howl; and, harlot though
she was, listened with quivering nostrils.
W
All the next day and all the next night the smithy
fires flared in the guarded camp of the slaves under
Papa. Twice forced to evacuate it in the campaign
waged with Varinus, it had yet grown homely to many
of them, they had garlanded its huts and shelters
with boughs; and the women in autumn days had
strewn flowers in its shelters, and daubed its posts
with images of the gods, while] the mountain soared
guardian through the passing days. Now, in the flare
of the watch-fires, Mount Papa watched their last
night.
There was a calling of orders, a crying of names,
mustering of companies rising shrill above the noise of
the beaten anvils. Slaves knelt by the fires and
hammered their shield-rims or sharpened their swords ;
a wail of unsleeping children rose all around. The
legion of Thracians, appointed to march under
Spartacus himself, wrought through sweating hours
to forge the javelins with which he desired them to arm.
REX SERV ORU M
133
As with Gershom’s legion he planned to possess a
body of soldiers neither legionaries nor hoplitai, but
modelled on the peltasts of whom Kleon had told.
Greek literati sat everywhere, copying-slaves who
had joined the revolt, making notes of provisions and
armour, numbers and companies. Four men, three
Gauls and a Greek, appointed spies by Kleon the eunuch,
wandered from legion to legion, learning the secret
opinions and complainings of the slaves. None knew
what was towards in the northern march, but the
wildest rumours were spread about—that Spartacus
the unconquered would seize the land, and make
himself king with them as his guard, and defy the power
of the Masters for ever. And a growing murmur
swelled to a shout, a shout that echoed through the
listening hills:
‘AVE, SPARTACUS ! AVE, REX SERVORUM !’
Crixus, alone undisturbed, slept in his tent, dream¬
ing of that unhomely Gaul he had little desire to
regain. Elpinice came once and troubled his dreams ;
but in a little while his God arose and drove her back
into the land of shades.
And in the early dawn the Free Legions were on
the march, northward, up through the tracks they had
descended early that year. But now the ground was
white with hoar-frost, and a chill wind blew from
Lucania. Great baggage-waggons rumbled up the
track, the oxen labouring deep-breathing, dragging
northwards the spoil of South Italy. Above, Papa
was wreathed in mist, but the slaves knew little of
augurs, for their Gods were but ill remembered.
The Gauls had wreathed their hair with chaplets
of brown leaves and marched out with their helmets
slung on their backs, the great Gaul swords slung
with them, their spears upended as staves. Once
slaves of the mine, the portico, the plantation, they
134 SP ART ACU S
led the legions north, and, singing, vanished into the
morning dimness.
The German bands of Gannicus tramped heavily
after. Lastly, the Thracians, three thousand strong,
with new-welded javelins in their belts and Spartacus
riding his stallion in their midst, marched northwards
just as the wintry sunshine lifted the cloudy streamers
from Mount Papa’s crest.
Crixus, who commanded the rearguard, laden with
baggage, knew nothing of this departure. He slept
in the almost deserted camp till roused by a slave who
desired to dismantle his hut. Thereat, yawning, he
arose and went out to look at Papa for the last time.
Then he looked from that to the track that led north.
‘Our Gods have a Fortune awaiting us there.’
Winter in Nola
(i)
"^TOLA was stormed by the Gaulish advance-guard of
^the Free Legions. Castus hurled wave after wave
of attackers upon it, and took it after great slaughter.
But with its seizure the southern half of the peninsula,
which Kleon and the Thracian designed to make a
great slave state, was now defended by two strong
towns. Nuceria was strongly garrisoned, but the
body of the slave-horde quartered in Nola.
It was a bitter winter. None but velites and such
light troops might move while it lasted, and throughout
the months of inaction the slaves might have sunk in a
placid torpor, but for the ceaseless urging of Spartacus
and the eunuch Greek. These knew that unless the
horde was welded into an army, the consuls would
destroy them in the Spring. For now, and at last, the
Republic was aroused. The Wolf had wakened on
her hills, and was crying her packs to defence. It was
even told that a great shipment of timber had been sent
for to the Sardinian forests : to make crosses for the
captured slaves.
So drilling and training in weapon-play went on
unceasingly under the walls, despite the bitter winds
from the north. The furnaces glowed unceasingly,
while hastae and pila were hammered and sharpened
in preparation for the Spring. Kleon even conceived
the idea of the construction of rams and catapults
for the taking of the southern cities still unmolested
by the slaves. That idea might never have passed to
fulfilment, but that the slave-horde was joined in
Nola by a Greek named Hiketas, neither slave nor
freedman, but an Argive noble. He brought with him
his sister, Eradne, with whom he lived in incest.
135
136 SP ART ACU S
Traversing the roads from Rome, he offered his
services to the staring eunuch.
‘This is the slave-army,’ Kleon said, with a cold
distrust. ‘You are of the Masters.’
The young Greek laughed ; and yawned daintily,
eating a comfit from a silver box. ‘I am tired of this
life of Masters and slaves. Your slave-bands offer
diversion. So I and Eradne would join them.’ He
waved a negligent hand at the tall, slight figure clad
as a man, who had ridden with him to the Nola guard¬
house. Kleon said : ‘She is your woman ?’
‘She is my sister, and we live in incest.’ The
young Greek ate another comfit, and dusted his hands.
‘But we’ve no ambition to live in this guardhouse,
unless your Strategos rejects our help. In that case
we’ve another plan to follow.’
‘What is that ?’ Kleon asked.
‘To charter a boat in Sicily and sail west through
the Pillars to the Outer Seas. I’d put to the test this
tale of old Plato’s that the Western Isle was really
sunk.’
Kleon thought of Titul and smiled on him bleakly.
And then thought: ‘You may join the Free Legions
if you will. But I’ll set a guard to watch you and your
woman.’
Hiketas raised plucked eyebrows in his painted
face. ‘Set a legion, if you’ll sleep better of nights.’
And then, as he was led through Nola, broke from his
half-captivity to gesture at the single ram in the
market-place. ‘And you hope to assail the cities with
that ?’ He had lost his languor. ‘Give me men,
materials, and time until Spring. . . .’
Kleon had given him all three. And now to the
other sounds of preparation the forum of Nola rang
with the sound of the mallets wielded under the orders
of the renegade Master, upbuilding two great hele-
REX SERV ORU M 137
polites for the siege of such cities as might resist the
slaves, giant towers of wood that were scaled with
brass. In addition to these, the Argive noble set to
the construction of five tormenta, great catapults for
hurling rocks on the roofs and walls of cities they
might assail. Kleon withdrew his guard upon Hiketas,
in time the slaves ceased to stare as he passed, and he
and the woman Eradne found quarters near the Nola
Forum, close to their labours. When the Springtime
came . . .
(ii)
Spartacus summoned Kleon to his quarters. It was
late afternoon as the eunuch crossed the city, and the
cold bit deep, for his blood was thin. Coming to
the quarters of the Thracian, he passed the guard of
lalo. Spartacus sat, as of old, on a little stool, without
his armour, his head in his hands.
‘When will the consular armies move ?’
Kleon had already debated this with him, and
looked at the brooding figure in surprise. ‘Not for
a month yet, I think.’
‘Then we must move before them. If we wait
till they are defeated, the south will stir against us.
It is stirring already.’
Kleon said coldly, ‘With you to order the
battle, no army of the Masters can stand against us.’
And thought: ‘Until they bring Pompeius from
Iberia.’
The Thracian nodded. ‘Until they bring Pompeius.
When that day comes, we can meet that day. Mean¬
while, we do not risk what we’ve taken already.
Southern Italy we can hold if we choose—yet only if
we choose. I’ll send Castus into Apulia to put down
the country and hold the great Stone Way.’
‘Now I would
138 SP ART ACU S
‘Castus ?’ Kleon shook his head,
not send him.’
‘Why not ?’
‘He’s a lover of yours, they say.’ The brooding
figure did not move. ‘And at least too unready to
hold a separate command for long, with you not by
him. There’s only one tribune you can send.’
The Strategos knew it also; but he seemed to
avoid the knowledge.
‘The Jew ?’
Kleon smiled acidly and shook his head. ‘He
would rend out his beard by the roots and suspect
he was being sent out of the way while I prepared to
anoint you king—that cry of REX SERVORUM has
haunted him since Papa. Though he is faithful
enough. Nor can you send Oenomaus, for the same
reason that Castus cannot be sent. Nor Gannicus,
for, with a separate command, he would loot and
murder to his heart’s content. There’s only one fit
commander.’
It was snowing, gustily, in a bitter wind. The two
slave leaders sat at a window and looked out through
the slats at the white, waving curtain, with beyond
it the walls of Nola and the mountains into which they
proposed to despatch an army. In the coming dark,
despite the storm, the city shone lighted and secure,
warming a little the Greek heart of Kleon, hating
the wastes of the countryside. He sat in silence and
watched the Thracian, marvelling a little that there
should endure in him such love for a fellow-slave of
the arena.
When even the memory of Elpinice was dead.
And thought of Elpinice came on Kleon again.
She often disturbed his thoughts, reasonlessly, seeing
she was dead, and if not nothingness only a pale
shadow in a world of dreams—the Land of Mist, as
REX SERV ORU M 139
the Thracians called it. She had stood between him
and Spartacus, and though he had no fear that this
other love of the Strategos would so stand, it was the
one defect he saw in that passionless statesman he was
moulding from the fluid clap of the Gladiator of
Capua.
Then Spartacus stood up and called his attendant,
the same Thracian lalo as had ridden with him to
the Roman house in the pit of the hills.
‘Bid Crixus come to me.’
Then he turned round and met the nod of the Greek.
Til send him into Apulia.’
(lii)
The quarters of Gershom ben Sanballat were above
the wall-gate of Nola itself. From there the Pharisee
hater of Gentiles saw to the guarding of the slave-host
in Nola. Captain of the town’s defences, his was the
appointing of guards and sentinels, the periodical
inspection of all the wall’s circuit, the questioning of
arrivals and departures of merchants. Accustomed to
the bleak winds of the hills of Judaea, the winter
weather had but little effect on him. Clad in a long
mantle and a leather helmet, he would stride from
guard-room to guard-room, followed bp two Bithynians,
shivering, and keeping a slight trot in order to maintain
pace with their Jewish General.
Coming from his council with Spartacus, Kleon
the Greek made his wap to the house above the
Northern Gate. Darkness had come, and all the house
was in shadow but for the glow from the charcoal
brazier in the room where Gershom sat. Gershom
he found not seated alone. Beside him was a woman
who, at the appearance of the Greek, rose to her feet
SPARTACUS
140
and walked out of the room by another door. Kleon
stopped and stared after her sardonically.
‘A priestess of Jehovah, doubtlessly ?’
The ex-leader of the Hasidim combed his beard.
‘It is Judith, the woman who opened the gates of
Nyceria for us. She is a very good cook.’
The Greek shrugged mockingly. ‘And no doubt a
passable bed-woman. Hear the word of the Strategos,
tribune: You’ll relieve all Germans from guard
duties immediately, and send them armed to their
own quarter.’
The Jew stood up and reached for his helmet.
‘What foolishness is now afoot ? Where are the
Germans going ?’
‘Crixus is taking them into Apulia. The Strategos
proposed you, but I told him you were over-busied.’
He glanced at the door through which Judith had
gone. ‘As apparently you are.’
The Jew’s brows drew into a scowling line, for a
moment again the noble addressing the eunuch slave.
‘Such business as I have is my own. Heed you to
yours.’ And added irrelevantly : ‘Has not Spartacus
his Lavinia ?’ i.;,;
Kleon sat down. He nodded moodily. A‘Yes,
that was my mistake. I should have cut her throat on
the Northern Road or else handed her over to the
Gauls.’
It was Gershom’s turn to sneer. ‘Has she no
faith in the New Republic, then ?’
But Kleon was not listening. For long after
Gershom had gone, to the walls and relieving the
Germans, he sat in that room by the Northern Gate
and stared in the brazier’s glow. The Jew with his
Judith, Spartacus with Lavinia—every slave who could
find or steal or win a woman this night might sit by
his fire in comfort and drowsing content. Or rouse
REX SERVORUM 141
into warmth and tenderness, the stinging bliss of lust.
Except himself.
And that bitter hatred he had of the Masters
pierced him like keen knives, till he laughed a little at
himself, shakenly, and it passed. Then he went out,
through the darkness and noise of Nola. The snow
had cleared and far up, cold and clear, shone the stars.
He stood and looked at them for a little, and with
a nameless comfort.
(iv)
Next morning half the German legion was detached
from the command of Gannicus, and marched out by
Crixus on the road to Apulia. And Crixus and the
Strategos kissed ; and the Snake standards shone above
the marching slaves. And long, from the walls of
Nola, Spartacus watched that departure.
Crixus in Apulia
©
/TiHAT year Gellius and Quintus Arrius were elected
consuls at Rome, and waited for an unusually bitter
winter to pass before setting out with the legions on
the principal object of their election.
That object the Senate, at length aroused, had
stressed as the suppression of the slave rebellion. Both
consuls, having suffered in their southern properties
from the ravagings of the Free Legions, were in com¬
plete agreement for once with the policy of the Senate.
All the forces available in Central Italy were to
be taken against the Spartacists. They amounted to
three legions, eighteen thousand foot and horse,
besides auxiliaries brought from Cisalpine Gaul. The
slave-horde under Spartacus was believed to number
at least twenty thousand men. But it was composed
of slaves, and the odds therefore negligible.
Yet both consuls were discreet and cautious,
patricians, cold men, viewing the slave revolt with
neither fear nor contempt. They did not underrate
the Bandit or his power and generalship. This was a
thing to be stamped upon, the slaves killed or re¬
captured, themselves to win credit and a triumph
through Rome. So the winter passed but slowly for
them.
Pass it did, however, and in the early days of
Spring they took the army south, cautiously, towards
Lucania. A host of spies in that country sent them
constant word of the movements of the slaves. The
Thracian still lingered at Nola with the majority of
his following. But they learned it was his intention
to attack Capua itself, with great machines built him
by a renegade patrician, Hiketas. The consuls hastened
their march, for Spring was quick in the land.
143
REX SERV ORU M 143
They came through a country as yet undesolated
by the slave armies : for desertions to the Gladiators
had almost ceased. All believed that the Free Legions
would be crushed before summer ; and, watching the
passing, horse and foot, of the army of the consuls,
this opinion found additional weight among the slave
populace. Men and women, they would speak in their
sheds over-night of the scenes to follow the suppression
of the Bandit. Thinking of that returning passage
of the army of the Masters they had seen press south,
they would lick dry lips, the slaves, full of a sickened
curiosity, seeing their endless days of toil and the
whipping-block as upholding lives pleasant and safe
in comparison with those who had joined the Criminals
of Capua.
But at Nola Spring was also finding the Free
Legions active. Bands of slaves scoured the sur¬
rounding country, for provisions and iron were running
low in Nola. With knowledge of that fact Kleon the
eunuch was determined to put into operation his plan
of pacifying the Italiot cities and gaining them as
willing allies. Gershom ben Sanballat, who had
captured Nuceria, was accordingly sent to pacify that
city, to relieve it from the rule of a brutal Syrian,
who had been acting in a fashion semi-independent of
the slaves in Nola. The Jew’s instructions were to call
together the principal men, propose or force an alliance
upon them ; and demand a monthly tribute of corn
and wine. Then he was to hold south into Lucania
to every town and city on the way to Metapontum,
and consolidate the country into a slave province,5
yielding provisions and tribute.
But his legion could not be spared to accompany
him. Beard-combing and sardonic, the Jew set out,
taking with him fifty Bithynians and his cook, the
woman Judith. Kleon watched them go, and had a
i44 SPARTACUS
cold twinge of regret. For it was a mission altogether
desperate, this of Gershom ben Sanballat’s. If the
Syrian in Nuceria refused to be moved the Jew might
well have to set to the re-conquest of Lucania and
South Campania with no greater force than his fifty
Bithynians. Doubtlessly his cook would prove of aid.
Meantime, to the east of the Matese mountains,
the consuls learned from a captured and tortured slave-
rebel that Spartacus at the head of a considerable
force had broken out from Nola a month before and
crossed into Apulia. Seeing no reason to doubt the
news, Gellius and Arrius, having finished with the
slave (who grinned and died, being a wild-humoured
Thracian), turned east, left Capua to what fate might
come on it, crossed the mountains, forded the Fortore
into Apulia ; and were presently apprised of irregularly
armed bands of scouts falling back in front of their
march.
(ii)
That hot Spring day when the consuls forded
Fortore, the tribune Crixus sat on a rock under the
shadow of Mount Garganus and stared across that sea
which was yet to become the Adriatic. Below his
feet was the camp of his Germans; and looking down
at that camp, he yawned.
‘This business of commanding Germans is like
milking aurochsen,5 he said to the man by his side.
Brennus, lying flat on his belly, grinned. He was
very content and filled with food, and blinked in the
light, like a lizard. But the little tribune was wearied.
‘I wish Kleon would commence the march on Capua
and send us word to join him. This business of chasing
Apulian sheep for fresh mutton is as tame as a day in
the old arena in company with a fat instructor.’
REX SERVORUM 145
Brennus reflected. ‘When we capture Capua I’ll
ask Kleon for his share of the women we take. For
he’ll have no need of them.’
‘Nor Spartacus of you. He has little patience
with bulls—even wild ones from the forests of Gaul.’
‘Gods!’ said Brennus, ‘to hear it again—a wild
aurochs herd bellow on the evening’s edge !’
But Crixus had ceased to listen. He was shading
his eyes in the sun. ‘A messenger.’
The man came scrambling up to their ledge, and
halted, panting, and told his news. A minute there¬
after and Crixus and Brennus had gained the camp,
where already the Germans were arming in confusion.
Pushing through them, Crixus reached his tent and
commanded a bucina to blow and assemble the
centurions. The wearied light had vanished from the
eyes of the little tribune. He addressed the assembled
Germans as a boy who planned to snare a fox.
‘Unless the Masters know these lands well, they’re
already in our hands.’
‘How ?’ asked a follower of Gannicus.
‘They can attack us only from the north, and think
they have trapped us here. But we have the narrow
pass into the mountains to the west. That they don’t
know, and will pay little heed to their rear. Now,
we’ll await them here, but send a messenger back through
the pass, to ride to Nola and summon reinforcements.
Then the Strategos will bring his legions and fall on
the Masters from behind.’
In an hour a messenger was riding for Nola. All
that evening he rode, making a wide detour to the
south to avoid the Romans. He was a Gaul, one of
Brennus’ scouts, and spared neither himself nor his
long-tailed mount. By midnight they heard him
shouting outside the walls of Nola, and the Northern
Gate was opened for him by Gershom’s Bithynians.
K
146
SP ART ACU S
One recognized him. ‘What news from Crixus ?’
‘Good news,’ the Gaul called, and rode into the
winding alleys of the town.
At the house where the Strategos lodged a sleepy
Thracian would have barred the way for the Gaul.
‘Spartacus sleeps.’
The Gaul showed his teeth. ‘We don’t sleep in
Apulia. Out of my way, horse-eater, or I’ll damage
the wall by beating your head against it.’
‘Of that we’ll make test,’ said lalo, helpfully, and
now fully waked. But as they glared at each other an
inner door opened.
‘What is it ?”
It was a woman, wrapped in a dark night-mantle,
her hair a great shining cloak. Lavinia, the woman
of Spartacus. lalo glowered.
‘This pestiferous Gaul wants to awaken the Strate¬
gos. He says he comes from Apulia.’
Lavinia considered the splashed messenger. Then,
disregarding the Thracian’s grumbles, beckoned him
into the inner room and closed the door. Unabashed,
lalo leant his head against a crack and listened. Beyond
that inner room the Strategos slept in a closet.
lalo heard the messenger speak the message of
Crixus, hurriedly, for he thirsted for action, being
young, and was in no mind to miss the coming battle
below Garganus. He heard the woman promise to
awaken Spartacus and deliver that message. He
heard the hurried steps of the Gaul returning towards
the door, and so hearing, himself hastily retreated to
his seat and spear, and appeared to doze.
The Gaul was riding out of Nola just as the dawn
came into the sky, bright, tremulous, tremendous, a
shining dawn into which he rode. By early afternoon
he had crossed the great Stone Way, and in a little
was amongst the mountains. He might have reached
REX SERVORUM 147
Garganus by nightfall but for the fact that in a narrow
defile he came suddenly on a band of Roman velites.
At that sight he laughed, then unslung his axe and
spurred forward his horse.
(iii)
An hour later Crixus heard of the nearing of the
Roman scouts and that the main army of the consuls
was rounding the far shoulder of Garganus. This
he had anticipated, seeing its purpose to drive him
back against the mountain-wall. To delay its advance,
he sent two hundred slaves through the narrow corridor
in the hills. These went under the command of
Brennus and had orders to vex the Roman rear, but
to make no disclosure of how they had gained an exit
from the slaves’ apparent trap.
Gellius and Arrius, cautious commanders, camped
for the night and were setting up the usual entrench¬
ments when they heard the slave chant come out of
the darkness to their rear. A moment later a shower
of arrows skimmed over the half-erected palisades,
and, with the blowing of horns and the waving of long
swords, a band of barbarian slaves attempted to storm
the southwards dyke.
The legionaries, hastily dropping their picks,
repelled the attack with ease. The slaves faded off
into the darkness, still chanting. But they did not go
far. Every now and then an arrow would wing out
of the darkness around the camp, quivering in the
beams of the consuls’ tents, or striking down a legionary
through some unguarded joint. This endured until
Gellius, irritated, despatched a century of horse which
routed the slaves from their position.
Unfortunately, it was impossible to pursue and
SPARTACUS
148
exterminate them in the moonless night. The horse¬
men contented themselves with a wide patrol of the
camp.
‘Where did this band come from ?’ wondered
Arrius.
‘No doubt from stray raiding or foraging,’ said
Gellius. ‘We’ll have many such bands to deal with
after the killing of the Thracian to-morrow.’
And on that, in full armour, they lay down to rest
till an hour before sunrise.
(iv)
All that night the armed Germans slept on edge
under the shelter of Garganus. But Crixus did not
sleep. He walked to and fro, hour after hour, awaiting
news from the detachment of Brennus beyond the
corridor. For he had arranged that Brennus, after
an abortive attack on the Roman camp, should set
out westwards, meet the slave reinforcements under
Spartacus, and then return to bring the Germans news
of these reinforcements.
But no Brennus came, and Crixus, despite his
light heart, began to know anxiety. Once he went
and watched the sea, and another time himself
walked far up the corridor into the hills. But it was
unwise to leave his Germans for long, and he speedily
returned.
To ease his mind of the constant conflict of hope
and surmise, he sat down in the deeper darkness that
heralded the morning and began to whet his sword
and polish the Greek helmet he wore. And in that hour,
a great loneliness coming upon him, he sat with his
head in his hands, thinking of the morrow.
f His Gods were dim and he had no faith, nor even
REX SERV ORU M 149
now realized the need of either. Only a wondering
came on him that the blood should be so warm in his
body and his fingers so swift and sure as they plied the
whetstone. And to-morrow . . .
And for some reason he thought of the woman
Elpinice, and, though with dim Gods, shivered in the
early mist that rose round the sleeping camp. For
perhaps her spirit was still in this ill land of Italy,
following in the wake of the Free Legions still. What
though it did ? It would never harm him, as he never
it. And so strong upon him did this imagining grow
that he turned his head with a jerk in order that he
might look in her face. Then he laughed, and wiped
his forehead, and stood up ; and below him, in dark¬
ness, heard the far sighing of the sea.
An hour before sunrise, while the earth was yet
grey, and the soaring heights of Mount Garganus
grey turning to gold, and so slowly to the hue of blood,
Brennus came back through the pass alone.
‘There is no sign of Spartacus or the other legions.’
And panted. ‘The Masters have broken camp. I
ran all the way through the pass. They cannot be
far off now.’
Then on Crixus there came a fine gaiety. And
suddenly it seemed to him that the air was sweet and
good; though he had never noticed such things
before. And in that early-morning light there clung
to his eyelids a fine web from the night-time mist;
and the wonder of that on his eyelids was strange
on his spirit for a moment. Then he called to the
bucinator to sound.
The hoarse howl of the horn was answered by the
shouts of the awakened Germans. From caverns and
crannies, pits and lean-to’s, they swarmed out, the
slaves from the North, yellow-haired, most of them,
though some were barbarians from a further land,
SP ART ACU S
150
furth of the great East rivers, sallow of skin, dark¬
haired, dark-skinned. They marshalled in hasty ranks,
and Crixns mounted his horse and rode to and fro,
from group to group, jesting, as was his manner.
And the Germans, beating their shields, sang the
great bass war-songs of their tribes.
Soon arrows began to fall in their midst, and many
lay down, while those with bows or slings endeavoured
to return that arrow-hail. Then the Romans, advanc¬
ing evenly across open ground, opened to allow their
horse to charge.
Remembering the inadequacy of the German long
sword to face charging cavalry, Crixus sent the order
from rank to rank that they thrust not at the riders
but at the legs and bellies of the horses. But at the
first sight of the Roman charge the tribes had instinct¬
ively prepared for this. The front rank of the Germans
knelt on one knee, swords swinging low, the second
stood crouching, whirling their blades; and these
gleamed in the early light like the wheels of chariots
driven through a ford. Then, with wild yells, they
received the Roman charge.
It broke and fell back and came on again. At first
the slaves had taken it with the bitten lips and uncertain
hearts of slaves who fronted the attack of the Masters.
But now the slow German blood began to stir, and they
fought with a wild ferocity. Unavailing, leaving a heap
of writhing horses, the cavalry drew off and Gellius
advanced his legions.
As he did so he turned to Arrius and commented
with amazement on the small number of slaves opposing
them. There could not be more than three thousand
—a full half-legion—at the utmost. And he gave
orders that Spartacus, when discovered, was to be
taken alive.
Then he shaded his eyes under his helmet-rim.
REX SERV ORU M 151
‘Though I see none who looks like the Thracian him¬
self. Who is the little slave on the long-tailed
horse ?’
Then news was brought to him that the little man
who rode the horse and shouted taunts and jests to
the labouring advance of the Roman foot was Crixus,
another Gladiator, and one of Spartacus’s tribunes.
Spartacus himself was said to be still in Nola.
At that both consuls knew they had been tricked
by the Thracian slave they had put to torment; and
the sweat pringled on the skin of Arrius at the thought
of the machinations that might well take place in the
Senate, to bring him to ruin because of this business:
accusing him of leaving the road to Capua unguarded.
And he gave orders for the immediate dispersal of
the slaves in front of him.
But now they fought like wild beasts in a pit. So
they were, and so they realized. Yet presently on
them also, the slaves of stews and plantation and
warehouse, there came something of nobility under the
alien crags of Mount Garganus. Their ranks long
since broken, they formed into the great fighting
schiltrouns of the forests, the heroes’ rings the defeated
formed in the German tribal wars: and inside and
without these fell in scores, butchered by the arrows
of the sagittarii or the thrusts of the reeking short
swords. Crixus and Brennus rode from group _ to
group, hewing paths through a living wall, steadying
the reeling circles of slaves, Brennus with his left
hand and shield shorn away, and the stump bound up
in a hasty twist of cloth and a wooden splint. He
rode swaying and bloodless, but Crixus beside him
sang and fought on unwounded.
Then the Romans drew off and reformed. And
Crixus caused those that survived of the slaves, six
hundred in all, to retreat up a slope, with rocky
152 SPARTACUS
ground that would hamper the legions. So might
they stand with but a frontal enemy to fight. Bleeding,
fatigued, they fell back and climbed this slope, with
the roars of the Roman bucinae and the methodical
shoutings of the Roman centurions in their ears.
Crixus himself rode last up the slope. Then he
dismounted in front of the slaves, and drew his sword
and pulled his horse’s mane, and laughed at the
beast; and then stabbed it swiftly through the heart
so that it gave a groan like a slain man, and fell at
his feet. And the tribune turned to the wondering
Germans.
‘Comrades, there’s no retreat. We die here or
fight until Spartacus comes.’
And to Brennus, remonstrating and swaying in his
saddle, he spoke strange words, albeit he laughed when
he spoke them.
‘Retreat through the pass ? A General the Free
Legions need ? I am no General. Only a slave. Yet
soon I’ll be more than either slave or General—if the
dark Gods leave me sleep sound. And I don’t think,
dying here, we’ll do ill to that cause of Kleon’s.’
Then he mused for a little, and beckoned ten
Germans and pointed to Brennus.
‘Take the centurion Brennus back through the
pass, steal horses, and ride till you come up with Spar¬
tacus—or beyond that, till you come to Nola. For
we cannot say if our messenger reached it. But tell
them how we stood here and fought, and bid Spartacus
ave from me !’
And when they had heard this message, the
Germans seized the weeping and cursing Brennus,
and bore him away from the tribune who cried
his last ave. Then Crixus laid aside his armour till
he stood in his tunic only, bareheaded, for so, he
said, he would fight the lighter. And the Germans
REX SERV ORU M 153
kissed in their ranks as the hail of the arrows began
again.
Then the Romans stormed up the slopes; and
Crixus saw that the light was dying, far away to the
east, from the face of the sea.
1 orment
(i)
TN the evening of the next day they saw from the walls
■^of Nola the nearing of fatigued and mud-splashed
horses. At that sight on the little-traversed tracks
the walls became thronged with slaves peering into
the east. Then the nearing band was descried as half
a score of men, ill-mounted and beating their beasts;
and presently a shout of wonder arose.
£They are Germans!’
The slaves looked at one another in speechless
surmise, then crowded down to the Eastern Gate.
Midmost of the riders was a man who was bound in
his saddle—a man who lacked a hand. Opening
the great gate Gershom ben Sanballat ran and caught
at the bridle of this man’s horse.
‘Brennus, what news from Apulia ?’
The Gaul half started awake, and stared about him
with bloodshot eyes.
‘The Masters caught us like beasts in a trap because
the Strategos did not come. All the Germans are
dead. Spartacus. I have a message for Spartacus.’
‘And Crixus ?’
‘I saw him kill his horse.’
At that news a groan of horror and anger went up
from the assembled slaves. Such townspeople as had
pressed near in curiosity retreated hastily within their
houses. But Brennus fell forward again in his saddle ;
and one of the Germans who rode with him cursed.
‘Spartacus—Crixus sent us with a message for
Spartacus.’
So the way was cleared and they rode through
the narrow streets till they came to the great Forum
of Nola. There, in the bright evening weather, the
air was alive with the beating of mallets and the
154
REX SERVORUM 155
smell of fresh-sawn wood, pungent and resinous;
and the blue smoke of the smithies rose in long lines
into the windless sky. For Kleon’s dream was being
fulfilled with the aid of the renegade Master, Hiketas.
With iron and timber commandeered at will, they
were building the great helepolites and catapults
with which to assault the walls of Capua. High into
the air towered the great machines, ready for testing
and then dismemberment, for loading in the great
ox-wagons of the Gauls when the Free Legions took
the field again. Amidst the din of the smiths and the
hammering of the joiners Kleon, Hiketas and Spartacus
stood in a little group, the Thracian silent, the two
Greeks in dispute over the weight of the tormenta.
Then they heard a voice call.
‘Strategos!’
They turned and saw the company of Germans,
with the rider who swayed and stared in their midst.
Kleon’s lips grew white.
‘It is Brennus, one of Crixus’ men.’
(i>)
And when Spartacus heard that message he wept,
to the wonder and terror of those who stood round.
For a little there was none who might speak, and then
the Thracian broke from their midst, leaving the
questioning, whispering groups of slaves to debate
the news from Apulia. The consuls were in the
field, the Germans dead or scattered : in a little while
the Masters themselves would be before Nola. And
at that thought a shudder of dread ran through the
slave-horde. For they had come to believe themselves
invincible and that Crixus no more than Spartacus
could ever be defeated.
SPARTACUS
156
But Spartacus gave little time for debate. In an
hour’s time the citizens heard the horns blow up, and
saw the slaves pouring to muster in the market-place.
While yet they pondered the meaning of that muster,
the first century of the Free Legions was marching
furth of the gates; and after it, company on company,
they saw the slaves depart. Over that road where
Spartacus had watched the Germans disappear two
months before wound the long lines of the slave army
at a speed that presently left Nola far behind.
The women and baggage followed more slowly,
with half a thousand cavalry to guard them. In the
town itself there remained but Kleon and Hiketas
and Gershom ben Sanballat freshly returned from the
subjugation of Nuceria. With bitter faces Kleon and
Hiketas, who had begged and expostulated a terrible
hour with the Thracian Strategos, superintended
the destruction of the great machines by Gershom’s
Bithynians.
They were piled in a great heap in the Forum of
Nola, saturated with oil, and fired, the great towers
and catapults that Hiketas had dreamt would batter
down the walls of Capua. Looking back, the slaves
could see the pillar of their burning lighting all the
western sky.
Then Gershom took his men and the two Greeks
out of the city and followed the trail of Spartacus,
marching hot-foot to meet the consuls.
(Hi)
He met them in an unknown plain somewhere on
the hither side of Garganus—the two armies sighting
each other from afar, and pressing to join battle with
an eagerness seldom known in history. Then Arrius
REX SERVORUM 157
and Gellius, cautious commanders, halted their troops
in a place of vantage, and saw with misgivings the
size of the Spartacist force.
Nor were these misgivings unwarranted, nor the
fate of the battle for a moment in doubt. Attacking
in his customary cuneus formation, an iron wedge at
the Roman centre, Spartacus himself led the first
charge, enormous, on horseback, at the head of his
Thracians. They broke the lines of the legions, and
once within those lines slaughtered almost at pleasure,
while the Gauls fell on the Roman flank, and (with
the impetus of a short slope) piled one wing in con¬
fusion upon the broken centre eddying round the
carnage of the Thracians’ drive. Then Gannicus and
Gershom ben Sanballat brought up the main slave
army, and soon the Romans were streaming from the
field in the wake of the consuls—the first of their
rank to meet and suffer defeat in the field for over
a hundred years.
The battle was bloody and swift, but the carnage
stayed when the Romans, at length terrified in the
belief that the Republic was now overthrown, flung
down their arms and surrendered in scores. They
were disarmed and stripped, bound in long gangs,
and whipped through the passes of Apulia till they
came to the camp which Spartacus had built for the
funeral games of Crixus.
(iv)
His body, flayed and crucified, had been recovered
from an Apulian village near the foot of Mount
Garganus. Castus had made that recovery and,
though he bore the dead Crixus no great love, had
burned the village in a madness of wrath.
i58 SP ART ACU S
When Spartacus heard of this he smiled.
‘Did you burn the villagers also ?’
‘They escaped into the mountains.’
‘Then you did ill to let them go.’ And the Thracian
turned away, colder than ever towards the man
who had hoped to take the place of the dead Crixus.
In that camp, with the Spring very green on the
Apulian hills, they prepared the funeral games. Crixus,
as a Gaul, was to be burned ; and now swathed in
purple, his mutilated head crowned with bay, he lay
in a tent, drenched with aromatic perfumes and
guarded by Gauls and Germans. Outside, on a level
stretch of sward, the funeral pyre was prepared.
The Roman prisoners, chained in a corner of the
camp, ragged and filthy, talked among themselves
and jeered at the leadership and discipline of the
slaves. A centurion who lay by the side of a young
third tribune laughed at the fears of the latter.
‘This Spartacus always spares his prisoners. He
will march us around the pyre of Crixus, I suppose,
and then dismiss us, disarmed. He’s only a slave, with
the heart of a slave ; and though he can lead his Free
Legions in battle well enough, he knows nothing of
campaigns or the planning of a war. Had he followed
up our rout by a march on Rome he might have been
feasting in the Capitol to-night.’
‘He is a Greek ?’
‘A Thracian. It’s said that this Crixus was his
best lieutenant, as a eunuch, Kleon, is the brain of
the business. Certainly Crixus fought well.’
‘You were at Mount Garganus ?’
‘Not I, but with Varinus in Lucania. We ran like
hares. Crixus defeated us there : a little man on a
little horse who sat eating a handful of plums and
jesting while we charged.’
The young third tribune groaned in his bonds.
REX SERV ORU M i59
Moreover, his back ached from the stripes the slaves
had inflicted in the march. ‘When is the burning of
this Gaulish slave to take place ?’
‘At noon to-morrow, the/ say. Then we’ll be
dismissed.’ The centurion looked round with a
savage contempt. ‘Wait till Rome really moves in the
field. Then she’ll burn them alive, these scum.’
(v)
Meantime the tribunes of the slaves had gathered
in the tent of Spartacus. Spartacus himself awaited
them. As they gave him greeting and squatted in a
circle, it seemed to more than one of them that the
Gladiator in his grief was near to insanity. His armour
was still stained and bloody from the battle, and that
cold control that had marked his bearing since the
Pits of the South had vanished away. His head turning
from side to side, he walked to and fro, his strange
eyes bloodshot. This the Strategos!
And, appalled, they lowered their eyes.
Kleon was the last to enter the tent, though he
was no tribune and his rank undefined. Then a
Gladiator mounted guard at the door, and Spartacus
turned and called :
‘Bring in the woman.’
A portion of the rear of the tent was pulled aside,
lalo and another, a Thracian, entered, dragging
between them a woman who groaned at every step.
She had been put to the torment for several hours,
and through the rents of her himation, worn Greek
fashion, shone the bloody scars and rowellings of the
instruments. The slave tribunes regarded her in
amazement, for it was the Roman Lavinia.
She stared around wildly, then fell, mouthing, at
i6o SPARTACUS
the feet of Spartacus. He drew away quickly, and
turned to the others.
‘This is the woman who betrayed the Germans
and Crixus. Speak, lalo.’
Then the slave told of the coming of the messenger
to Nola, and how he had listened to that message
being delivered : how the woman Lavinia had promised
to give it to the sleeping Strategos: how he himself
had thought no more of the matter, believing a slave
legion secretly despatched to the aid of Crixus. Only
with the coming of the news of Crixus’ death had he
thought it necessary to speak to the Strategos.
Now, tortured, the woman had confessed she had
held back the message deliberately in order that the
slaves under Crixus might be defeated and the consuls
succeed in capturing Nola and putting down the Free
Legions.
The slave-tribunes listened in silence. Then
Castus said : ‘Seeing the woman has confessed, it is
necessary only that she be put to death.’
Spartacus nodded. ‘And the manner of that
death ?’
Castus stared, his mild face troubled. ‘She might
be dragged to pieces between oxen. So malefactors
are executed in Gaul.’
Kleon the eunuch literatus spoke, coldly as ever.
‘Why waste time and oxen ? She can die more
quickly.’
‘How ?’ asked the Thracian.
Kleon shrugged. ‘A sword-thrust. Garotte. What
does it matter V
Gershom ben Sanballat combed irritably at his
beard. ‘Let her be stoned to death.’
Gannicus laughed his great bull-like laugh. ‘Crucify
the bitch by the little Gaul’s pyre.’
Oenomaus moved from his customary silence.
REX SERV ORU M 161
‘Why not hand her over to the legion—to the Gauls
or the Germans, and let them dispose of her.’
And to all this seemed a good plan, moved with a
twisted lust as they looked on the woman. For her
beauty still lingered. Even with her tortured body in
evidence, some of them still desired her : for those
wounds added a strange and loathsome fascination.
Spartacus had sat on his little stool, listening. Now
he raised his head.
‘Each a fine end, but I have a better.’ He looked
across to lalo. ‘Listen. Find a litter for this woman.
Take her across the hills to the Appian Way. Take
fifty of the Thracians as a guard, and leave her only
when she is safe with some convoy for Rome.’
Then he looked at the grovelling woman for the
last time. ‘You’ll carry my sign-manual to Rome,
my message to it and to you : Ave atque vale.’
Kleon looked on him with a cold amazement.
‘You’ve tormented the woman, and now you spare
her. Both courses are bad and unstatesmanlike.’
Then he saw that Spartacus was smiling, terribly.
‘I have ceased to be a statesman.’
(vi)
All that night the Roman prisoners heard a constant
hammering and shouting outside the camp, by the
stream that led past the pyre of Crixus. Lights shone
there from great fires, but the Romans could make
nothing of the commotion. Nor, but that it interfered
with their sleep, did it greatly interest them.
Other things occupied their hours, for it was cold
weather, and they were half naked, and mostly unfed
since their capture. The centurion and the young
third tribune, bound so that they might not lie at
L
162 SP ART ACU S
their ease, leaned against each other and dozed, glad
to be freed from the daytime crowds of jeering and
mocking slaves. Towards dawn the young third tribune
became wide awake and watched morning coming
over the Apulian mountains as Crixus had watched it
come out of the sea. In the air was the smell of the
morning’s green coming, and somehow, despite his
bonds, he felt a strange gladness upon him.
The slave army began to awake around the
enclosure. The yawning Romans set to chafing cold
limbs and beating the blood back into chilled bodies.
Presently there arose a clamour of horns and a band
of Gaulish slaves entered the enclosure. They bore
food—steaming corn in great pots, and dishes of stewed
lentils. Amazed at this bounty, the Romans ate
ravenously; and, staring at them while they fed, the
slaves laughed.
Hardly had they gone, bearing the empty pots,
when another band entered the enclosure. They
filed in to the number of four hundred or so, and the
heart of the centurion, despite his strong spirit,
momentarily failed him. For this new band was the
Gladiator bodyguard of Spartacus, well known to the
Romans by their gilded armour and war-hardened
bodies. They bore great whips in their hands, and
the centurion groaned.
‘What will they do ?’ whispered the young third
tribune.
‘More flogging.’ The centurion had taken part
in Rome in an Eastern triumph. He knew what
portended. ‘They will march us round the pyre of
Crixus, half-flayed.’
But it seemed that he was mistaken. The Gladiators
proceeded to release the prisoners, till three hundred
of them had been so set free. Then, motioning
towards the gates of the enclosure, the slaves cracked
REX SERV ORU M 163
their whips. The Romans surged forward through the
gates.
The knee of the young third tribune pained him,
and he limped in the rear, till it seemed as if a red hot
iron had been applied to his back. Withdrawing his
whip for another blow, the great Gladiator behind him
laughed.
Beyond the camp, they stood and swayed to and
fro for a little like a herd of doubtful cattle.
Beside the pyre, flanked on one side by a river,
on the other by scaffoldings of timber, an arena
had sprung up in the night. Around it was thronged
the slave army. Leading towards it was a living
corridor of slaves, and down this corridor the Romans
were driven.
At the entrance to it, each of them was handed a
Gaulish sword.
Inside the arena they were separated into two
parties. It was clear, pale weather, and the centurion
saw the white apple-blossom on the orchards beyond
the encampment. Then the terms of the combat were
made known to them. They were not to fight as
individuals, but as two parties. The conquering
party would be granted the mercy of joining the
Free Legions.
At first the Romans hung back in horror, and the
crack of the Gladiators’ whips rose in the air. Then
they began to surge forward, wielding the clumsy
and unaccustomed swords amidst the shouted laughter
of the slaves. Presently the centurion engaged with a
man he knew, and, as they hewed at each other,
each warmed a little to the ring of the weapons.
In a moment, from the stamp and bloody struggle
of the fight that wavered to and fro in the arena,
bodies were falling with gaping wounds, sacrifices to
the manes of dead Crixus. A warm, dreadful stench
SPARTACUS
164
arose; and, drawn by the shoutings of the slaves,
great flocks of carrion-birds came from the hills.
(vii)
Two hundred and eighty of the Romans perished
at the funeral games of Crixus. Of the remaining
score, half were so wounded that they were despatched
by the whips of the Gladiators. Then, with the pyre
a little hill of ash, the slaves broke camp, marching
northwards with determination to break out of Italy
and escape to their own lands.
IV. ROME
The Defiles of Mutina
(*)
^HEY had passed up through Italy, crossed the
mountains, and entered Gallia Cisalpina through
autumn-flooded lands. At one place where swamps
extended for miles it seemed that they must turn
aside and make a wide detour. But Hiketas had
great drag-sledges made, and on these the Free Legions
crossed safely. All the hills were in bloom with
flowers, and it was near the reaping-time of the
corn.
As they marched the slaves filled their helmets
and the breasts of their tunics with corn-heads. The
hungry rearguards strayed far to right and left of the
march, beating off the straggling attacks of Roman
velites and seeking unlooted villages. Spartacus rode
in the centre, Castus with the Gauls in the van.
Kleon the Greek had taken to himself a roaming
commission that ranged from the van to the rear¬
guard.
Rain in drenching torrents met them beyond the
borders of Gallia Cisalpina. In the late afternoon
Kleon, abandoning the draggled and plodding rear
to the care of Hiketas, rode up the toiling lines of the
slave army till he came to the Bithynian legion. It
was still so-called, though the Bithynians had dwindled
to a scarce century, and most of the slaves in that
legion either Greeks or Negroes or Iberians. They
marched as a disciplined cohort still, but wearily.
All the slave-army was weary and dispirited.
They had met but little opposition in their north¬
wards trek. All the country lay fear-stricken. Women
had been hidden away in the hills. One town they
entered was empty but for a single man, dying of
plague. Rome lay silent in their rear. It was like
i68
SPARTACUS
marching in soft-raining, thundery weather, waiting
for a sky-tumult that refused to burst.
Kleon shivered under his drenched abolla, and,
raising his eyes, looked north. Fading into the
evening light went the long slave lines, an army of
forty thousand men. He saw the stallion of Spartacus
white amidst the general dunness, considered that for
a moment, passed beyond the moving blurs of no¬
colour that made up the Gauls and Germans: and
met the horizon. What lay awaiting them there ?
An Iberian, with a great package strapped on his
back, stumbled out of the way of the Greek’s weary
horse. He raised his eyes. It was Titul.
cWhere is your horse ?’ asked Kleon.
£I ate it at the last halt,’ the Iberian explained.
‘Now I carry my treasure till we fight the Masters
again. Then I will steal another.’
‘You won’t have long to wait, I think.’ Kleon
smiled at him grimly. ‘And beyond that come the
mountains and the cannibals. We are certainly a
crafty army.’
‘Cunning in warfare were the men of the vanished
Western Isle,’ said Titul, being mad.
Kleon smiled wryly and rode on. The Iberian
was beyond irony. Had there ever been a Western
Isle ? He dismissed the matter, seeing in front of
him a swaying litter borne between two shaggy ponies.
Beside them, amidst a clump of his devoted spear¬
men, marched Gershom ben Sanballat, rain streaming
from his beard and helmet, his tunic ragged and
faded. The Greek grinned at him.
‘This is a sad plight for a victorious tribune. You
have lost a boot, Jew.’
‘And you a Republic.’
Kleon mocked him. ‘It is still—there.’
He pointed to the rain-darkened sky. Gershom
ROME!
169
grunted. He was irritable and discontented, even
though it seemed that the Strategos harkened now
to his counsel. But they should have dispersed and
sought the sea. Into what wild mountains were they
being led ?
‘You’ll need the aid of Hiketas before you reach
it.’
‘We’ll need his aid yet,’ said Kleon, cryptically,
and rode on, not turning his glance on the inside of
the litter. The Jew had married his cook, seeking an
heir to make sacrifice to his manes when he was dead.
And that might well be soon enough.
Judith looked after the Greek, leaning from her
litter. She was heavy with child. Then she sought
the eyes of Gershom. He plodded through the mud
to her side, avoiding the slipping hooves of the
ponies.
‘What did the Greek Mutilated propose ?’
‘Jehovah knows. He would stop this march if
he could, and turn us back on the Masters again.’
He spoke testily. ‘What ails you now ?’
She was looking in horror at his bare right foot.
‘Your boot ?’
T left it in the marsh. Let be, let be. If the
eunuch has his way, I’ll find it on the return march.’
His leg was already twinging with rheumatism. He
regarded the cloudy sky with louring gaze. ‘And
he’d find no great enemy to me in his planning, I
sometimes think.’
For it was one thing to escape from Italy and the
power of the Masters, and another to seek the land of
the Hyperboreans and live there in unending twilight,
hearing the howling of Behemoth as he hungered under
the Northern night.
And Gershom cursed his ragged guard and plodded
forward, the rain swift in his face.
170
SP ART ACU S
(ii)
Day died, and the main army of the slaves made
camp half-way up the La Fata pass. Here the
mountains filled all the northward skyline in tenebrous
outline, white and cloud-piercing ; and far in their
slopes water gleamed as the day waned fast. The
Gauls looked on these mountains and remembered
their passes as they were beaten southwards, slaves
into Italy. And the sight moved them to tears, as
was the easy wont of their race. But the Germans
regarded them without love or fear, with impatience,
seeking beyond them their forested homes.
The Negroes shivered that night, as did the men
of Asia. The Greeks with patient, cold faces looked
at the ragged horizon, and knew it madness to attempt
this passage into a land of barbarians. How might
a man live without a city ? For the City was life.
And the cold of Gallia Cisalpina soaked into all bones
but those well-shielded in the looted fabrics of the
villages fired in the northwards march.
But near midnight the rain ceased and Kleon,
prowling wakeful the limits of the camp, found the
sentry posted highest up the Pass fast asleep in the lee
of a rock. Kleon stirred him to wakefulness with his
foot, and found him the brother of Brennus. The
Gaul grinned, unabashed.
‘There’ll be less of haughty footwork, Greek,
when we pass these mountains.’
Kleon was unperturbed. The tribunes of the
slave horde were accustomed to the insolence of their
legionaries.
‘You may soon be lacking a throat, far less feet,
if you keep as poor watch as this.’
They listened. But there was only the sound of
ROME! 171
the rain and its thin seep on the sleeping land. And
it came on the eunuch, as so often, how strange it was
that men should toil and moil on this little earth that
knew them not—that knew only its winds and rains
and the suns that ripened the crops, and the light and
glow of the imaged sun, never the seedsmen or reapers.
It was the Fear of the Fates and the Gods that drove
men, shadows they made in their own dark hearts.
He turned about and made his way back through
the litter of the slave-encampment, coming at last
to the tent of the Strategos, where Spartacus slept
guarded by his Gladiators. As he came to it he heard
a stirring there, and a torch showed damply through
the mirk. Kleon saw it was the Strategos himself,
and Spartacus recognized him.
‘I’m uneasy to-night, Kleon. This mist on the
Pass, I think. I’m going to ride up and see what
lies beyond it.’
‘But there is no seeing at all in this darkness.’
‘We’ll see as much or as little as the Masters.’
Kleon shrugged irritably. ‘Then I’ll come.’
So he did. They rode past the post of the now
roused Gaul, and went up the tortuous track of the
Pass. Above them its walls towered blackly. Under¬
foot the road was warm with a slime, and the horses
slipped and plunged continually. It might have been
near the third division of the night, but the darkness
had not lightened at all. Spartacus said : ‘I had a
dream.’
‘What dream ?’
‘One without much gladness. That I was no
longer either the Strategos of the Free Legions or a
hunter in Thrace, but dead and quiet, down there in
the South.’
‘So you’ll still hold North ?’
But the Thracian was not listening. He had
172 SP ART ACU S
halted the great white stallion. He motioned Kleon
to silence. They listened. Nothing but the soft
sound of the rain. Yet presently another sound,
remote and distant.
The distant sound of marching men.
Now they were upon the Peak of the Pass. But
all around was the shroud of the mist, thick as carded
wool, and soft. The sound of the tramping grew in
their ears.
Spartacus whispered from his saddle. ‘Back.
Walk your horse and then rouse the camp. Softly.
Bring up the Thracians first.’
‘But you ’
The Strategos was loosening the great axe from
his saddle. ‘I’ll wait.’
For a moment the Greek looked at him in a cool
deliberation. He saw in a flash the possibilities and
chances. The Strategos killed in a squabble with
scouts: the Free Legions leaderless: himself the
Voice : the Free Legions wheeled round to the South
and the Cities 
Spartacus heard the clop of the hooves of his horse
fade southwards down the Pass.
Still he waited ; but that muffled sound of march¬
ing men seemed to have ceased. He got from the
stallion’s saddle and knelt on the track, his ear to the
ground. For a little while he heard nothing, except
for the seep of the rain, the weeping countryside all
about. The marchers had halted. Or had he and
Kleon imagined them ?
He mounted and waited. The stallion pawed
restlessly at the ground and then swung its slavered
head against his knee. He leaned forward and patted
it, staring into the mist.
Mist. This, he thought grimly, was his future, a
winding fog into which one peered, and it changed
ROME! i73
without form, taking to itself the shadowy likeness of
faces and desires created in one’s own heart. And
queerly, like a ghost remembering life and the pain of
death, he suddenly remembered Elpinice, and the
slopes of Vesuvius, and the mists from the crater.
And then that went by. Her memory troubled
him but little now, taking his women as he needed
them, the touch of their breasts and their warmth
agaimt him, the strange, wild cries that they gave in
his arms, held in his hands—finding such surcease
from the flare of the days as he might in these moments
that preluded sleep. But he knew as he waited in
this silent hour and stared with dark eyes at the mist-
hung Pass he would never again partake in such passion
of pain and appeasement as he had partaken with Crixus
or Elpinice.
So pain in their memory had gone as well. Some
cord had seemed to snap in his brain as he watched the
funeral games of the Gaul. He had wakened to that
as they fought and plodded up from Italy to the
raining North. And still he could foresee and plan
the way, and set the array of battle-lines, cold, yet
with a new, strange warmth upon him, a warmth of
care and pity new in his heart. And that care and
pity the slave legions that followed his command.
For he found himself entering their hearts and
thoughts, with a new and bitter impatience upon him
—often ; yet also a comprehension, an understanding,
as though somehow he himself were these men, these
women, these lost stragglers of rebellion against the
Masters and their terrible Gods; as though the life
in their bodies was a part of his, he the Giver of Life
to this multitude that had risen about him in the
storm of days and shaken the Republic to its founda¬
tions. As though he were all of the hungered dis¬
possessed of all time : as though at moments he ceased
I74 SP ART ACU S
to live, merging his spirit in that of the horde, his
body in that of a thousand bodies, bone of their bone,
flesh of their flesh.
And sometimes he would think himself fey as he
sat the great stallion by some rutted track and watched
the northward march of the slaves ; or bent his head
from the saddle to see himself in a wayside pool, armed
and armoured in his general’s gear, with the gleaming
helmet with the horsehair plumes and the lorica
polished by lalo, his guard. So long he had thought
of himself as the Strategos, as the Statesman that
Kleon the eunuch would have, that it was with a
wrench as with bodily pain that he knew himself less
and more and beyond : the crawling dirt-slaves of the
baggage wains, those scrofulous, envermined, eyeless
things that had once been Romans and followed the
slaves because they had no other thing to follow—
knew himself all these and all the slave host, bound in
a mystic kinship of blood.
And the little Sicel slave Mella, freed from a farm
in Umbria—once such a maid he’d have taken in haste,
indifferently, after Elpinice’s death; with abrupt
impatience, bringing his lust to her body as hunger
to a dish, after the death of Crixus. But that evening
she was brought to his tent she was young, a girl on
the verge of budding-time, and some strange com¬
passion, as when gazing on the marching hosts, seized
the bowels of the Strategos. He had said to her,
‘You need have no fear. I don’t need you for my
bed, for my service alone.’
At his smile her shivering had slackened a little,
she had known much of rape and wild crying in the
night on that farm from which the slave-army had
freed her, her overseer had found a grave goodness
in the girls that were not yet beyond their ninth year,
she had lain in the stifling stench of the sheds and
ROME! i75
expected no better in the tent of the Thracian who ate
his dead and worshipped a horse.
So Spartacus had guessed ; and lalo had set her
her tasks, to sweep the tent and bring wine, to sleep
in a corner and tend him. And sometimes even now,
his heart emptied of all desire, as it seemed, and filled
with a burning question of the Gods and men, Spartacus
would yet look at her with an ancient kindling of fire
in his blood. But that had been seldom enough as the
north drew near, as they piloted the dripping heights
of La Fata Pass with beyond it the township of Mutina,
no legions brought to oppose them, all Cisalpine Gaul
lying strangely silent.
Were they to be allowed to pass on unmolested ?
And then the Gladiator knew that they were not.
He swung the stallion forward, and hefted his axe,
and waited. The marching feet were the feet of
heavy-armed legionaries.
(iii)
Gains Cassius, the Governor of Cisalpine Gaul, had
received early warning of the march of the Spartacists
up through Umbria. He had groaned when he heard
that his own richest farmstead, that of the Luda, had
been looted by the horde, the wine drunk, and the
slaves set free. For this meant that his usual supply
of bedwomen would be denied him this year ; and the
large slave-farm in Umbria had been his passion for
nearly fifty years.
There slaves had been bred in great numbers for
Rome and Sicily : vulgares, broad-bodied, of German
or Negro descent, specially and carefully mated in
the manner laid down by experts, giving that combina¬
tion of strength and docility ideal in the ordinary
i76 SP ART ACU S
slave. He liad also bred great men of Iberian blood
to be sold as ostiarii, the porters of the markets,
ennnchs and cubicularii, castrated or with. artificially
deformed genital organs. These . curiosities were
greatly in demand among the patricians in the Baths.
There also he had bred slaves to be sold as runners
for the fugitivarii, the capturers of Runaways.
But of his best breedings were the women-children
destined for sale into prostitution at the age of ten.
Of these the flower were culled and sent, to him ;
and his overseers, freedmen, intent on enriching them¬
selves, regarded this with a constant vexation. Early
infected with the venereal diseases common to North
Africa, where he had served, it was but rarely that the
discarded of his bed were returned to the slave-farm
in fit condition for sale in the open market, naked,
with whitewashed feet. In his years of debauchery
he had also become infected with leprosy; and,
inflamed in the colds of the northern province, this
disease had vexed him to the edge of insanity again
and again, finding its only relief in heated baths and
the ministrations, night upon night, of great numbers
of girls from the stud-farm. A patrician, .Gams
Cassius was a man of culture, and knew, that without
the strong hand of Law men would live in misery and
fear. And, groaning in pleasure, he would fondle the
horrified children.
Now, in his sixty-fifth year, he heard of the coming
of the great slave horde, led by a Thracian Gladiator.
Together with Gnaeus Manlius, the praetor, whom he
hated, he consulted on means of defence. Manlius
had long since ceased to feel interest in the province,
or indeed, in most other things of the life to which he
had been assigned : he hungered for Rome. Large,
dark and strong, like one of the ostiarii bred on Cassius
farm, he sat in the council chamber through those
ROME! iyy
raining days, receiving the messengers who had circled
around the slave march, and brought the instructions
of the Senate. The Spartacists must be met and
destroyed ere they left Italy.
‘That’s easier to order than to execute,’ he would
affirm to Cassius, squatted in a padded sedile, scratch¬
ing at his ulcerated skin and drinking draughts of
warmed wine brought him at innumerable intervals
throughout the day. And Cassius would groan,
thinking of his ruined farm in Umbria.
In the Province at the moment were three full
legions, the Second, the Fourth, and the Ninth, each
of six thousand men, fully armed and equipped in
the new model. Besides these were the cavalry and
several thousand irregular troops. Cassius made over
complete command to Manlius. The latter summoned
the legions to Mutina, leaving the irregulars for police-
work, and received news of the nearing approach of
the slave army, forty thousand strong, but at least a
third non-combatant, disorganized, wearied with rain
and mud, hasting to escape from Italy.
And the rain fell, fell and fell continuously, as at
last Gnaeus Manlius moved.
When he moved from Mutina that night his plans
were still misty in his mind. But then he heard the
slaves were encamped half-way up the thither side of
La Fata Pass. Sending one legion on a detour of
thirteen pace miles, through the shallow estuaries
haunted by the sea-birds, he took the Fourth and
the Ninth Legions, and with them climbed the Pass.
His intent was to reach and seize the peak ere the
morning came, and so trap the slave rabble betwixt
himself and the tribune of the Second when the day
broke.
In that upward climb, climbing west, he felt the
day coming behind him, rather than saw, though he
M
SP ART ACU S
178
frequently looked back. He himself rode with the
horse, the sound of their hooves muffled in the
blanketings of fog. Winter was near and in places
they splashed through freezing pools. Once they
heard the howling of wolves in a little wood, and the
forward velites jested among themselves, saying that
these were undoubtedly Spartacists, you could tell
them by their smell.
The praetor had flung out a light line of Balearic
fundatores, they trotted away, short men, into the
mist, their pouches swinging on their hips, climbing
the Pass. At their heels toiled the legions, heavily
armed, with the shorter pilum that was used in this
mountain country. With the cavalry the praetor
brought up the march, as swiftly as they might in that
dim-veiled track.
Now, it neared the third division of the morning
and from his spies the praetor knew he was near the
ridge of the Pass when he heard in front a sudden
shouting break out. He cursed and halted the cavalry,
sending an order forward to halt the legions as well.
The shouting continued, and two centuries of the
Fourth climbed swiftly up to see what had caused this
outbreak from the fundatores.
Then it was that the mist suddenly cleared, it went
in a great waft of air from the far mountains, suddenly
the rain ceased and the world sparkled frost-keen
about them, on the edge of winter, and the Roman
legions looked up, the praetor, dark and tall, shaded his
eyes and looked at that scene in the early light.
The fundatores had fallen back after that first
attack, for now the slaves had reached the peak, and
the air was filled with the hiss of the light-feathered
arrows. But of these things, other than shifting
specks, neither Gnaeus Manlius nor his legions saw
much. What they did see remained in the mind of
ROME!
179
Manlius for long, he remembered it that year he rode
up the Appian Way, lined with its dripping fruit,
he remembered it under the torture of Catiline, he
remembered it when he and Brutus watched the
sardonic smile on the face of a bowed patrician in the
Senate on an Ides of March.
For, crowning the ridge, was a still, watchful
figure on horseback, helmeted in gold, armoured,
immense in the spreading glow of the mist, the sun
suddenly upon him. So he gleamed like a God,
gigantic, and the legions stared and murmured as they
looked at the terrible figure. For there was terror
in it. In those mountain changes of the air they
could see his face, immense and near, bearded and
calm, high-browed under the helmet-rim, his eyes
cold and staring upon them, yet filled with a glow like
the eyes of a snake. And to the praetor Manlius, it
seemed he saw more than the Strategos Spartacus,
he saw The Slave himself.
Then that fancy passed, the last wisps of mist went
quickly, the figure faded : and Manlius was aware of
the slave army already in possession of the peaks of
the Pass.
(iv)
All that morning and afternoon the Spartacists
fought a rearguard defence and a van attack across
La Fata Pass, Gnaeus Manlius retreating as the day
rose, the Fourth and the Ninth legions fighting stub¬
bornly, pressed by the Thracian van of the slave army.
Behind, the Jew Gershom ben Sanballat and his
Bithynians engaged the Second legion, which had
marched around the mountain and come up through
the mist expecting to find the Spartacists assailed by
Manlius from the peak of the Pass.
180 SP ART ACU S
Gershom rode to and fro as the sun wheeled to the
third division of the day, directing the defence of the
slave rear. The mist had passed completely and
from this height the one-time leader of the Hasidim
could see for long miles around the shine of the wintry
Italian landscape. The shivering Bithynians fought
with a fury more of cold than of valour, a bare score
of the original Bithynians surviving. Some had died
in Lucania, some under Papa, one withered nailed to a
tree in Apulia, one at the moment lay recaptured in
the slave-pits of Rome. Gershom had made a stout
bodyguard of the survivors, and these gave their name
.to the legion that kept the peak while the main body
of the slaves plodded and fought down across La Fata
Pass to the plain beyond, and Mutina, shining white-
walled in the afternoon.
Rain came after noon and pelted the retreating
armies in flying showers, the Fourth and Ninth bore
it with indifference, as did their pursuers, the
Thracians. But at least a third of the slaves had not
been vulgares, men of the fields and open, but slaves
from the kitchens and bakehouses, the vats and baths
and cubicles: and in these heights and rains they
shivered in a uselessness which drove Kleon to a
bitter scorn. He rode beside Spartacus and watched
the shivering drift that passed, into the evening lour
of the battle by Mutina ; and suddenly proposed that
the Germans drive these weaklings down on the Roman
pila.
Spartacus was riding wrapt in his thoughts, lalo
behind him, the maid Mella somewhere in the centre
with the women. He shook his head.
‘These folk are unaccustomed to such weathers.
They’ll fight better on the plain.’
‘They’ll fight not at all beyond the Alps, in the
wild lands of the North.’
ROME!
181
Spartacus nodded; that was true. And again, as
the night before, he knew, looking at the winding
drift of the slaves, that angry possession upon him—•
all the slaves himself, feeling the stinging pain in the
torn feet of a Gaul who limped past, in the worn womb
and the heavy breasts of a woman near to childbirth,
straggling from the baggage centre, in the humped
determination of his Thracians, marching with sloping
spears in the glister of the rain. All that, but more.
For he saw the glister of the unending weapons with
a keen, wild pride, not in that he owned or commanded
them, but that he was of the horde, among them,
going armed to meet the Masters. He rose in his
stirrups and looked back, and backwards, as frontwards,
loomed an unceasing human drift. He turned to
Kleon.
‘Another might lose himself. Ride back and bring
me news of the Jew.’
It took Kleon almost an hour to come to the
Bithynian legion, still at the peak of the Pass, under a
hail of darts and arrows from the fundatores of the
Second. As he dismounted a slinger’s pellet rattled
on the helmet of Gershom ben Sanballat. The Jew
smiled sourly, combing his curled beard.
‘Easier work than I wish, fighting these light¬
armed scum. In a little while it’ll be less easy—when
the legionaries themselves have gained the peak and
we are retreating below.’
‘They’ll have you at their mercy, then,’ said
Kleon.
The guerilla Pharisee was sardonic. ‘This comes
of reading Plato.’
But Kleon saw the situation with a sudden sharp
clarity. ‘Bithynian, you must detach a fourth of your
legion to hold the peak—hold it and die in the task.
And you march down the Pass to aid the Strategos.’
182
SP ART ACU S
‘And who’ll command this fourth to be sacrificed ?’
Kleon looked through the rain at the far mountain-
tops, those hills across which the Strategos planned to
lead the slave army—into the wild, uncitied north,
into a waste of barbaric fields, of forests bent at night
under snow, wild oxen calling, not the criers of news,
mist and beer, not sun and wine, men vulgares from
kings to commons, not a single literatus to be met
though you lived till Gershom’s Behemoth came down
and devoured the world. So he knew his answer.
‘I will.’
The Jew stared at him angrily, haughtily. ‘You ?
Is this a jest from your Plato, Thracian ?’
‘Nor one from the codes of Jehovah, Bithynian.
Hasten your division—unless you fear to march down
to the pila of the Masters below.’
‘By my God, but I won’t. You’ll die here.’
‘If I don’t, I’ll die elsewhere. And I’ve no fancy
to die in that barbarian North. Hasten, Gershom.’
And at length, seeing that he would not be moved,
and that so things might come to a better pass, ben
Sanballat gave his orders and marched away three
fourths of his legion ; and he came to Kleon and
kissed him, and that the Greek suffered, with a sudden
twist of his bowels, the tears that might have come to
one unmutilated. And he saw, terrible in Gershom’s
eyes, a picturing of that fate that Gershom knew to be
his. Then the Jew turned, cursing his Bithynians,
pulling angrily at his beard, and marched down the
Pass.
Kleon found no orders to give, they awaited the
nearing attack of the legionaries, for the Roman velites
had now drawn back. Then Kleon turned and found
Hiketas by his side, and stared at him in surprise.
‘You here ? Your place is with the Strategos.’
Hiketas yawned, delicately. ‘Over-late to order
ROME! 183
that now. I’m here with my Amazon, and here I
stay.’
They stood with arms entwined, like lovers on an
Attic vase, the woman had her hair braided under her
helmet, brother and sister, lover and mistress, they
smiled in each other’s eyes, and then in the cold,
bitter eyes of Kleon. Then Hiketas said :
‘Like yourself we’ve no mind to adventure among
the barbarians. We’ve known them before. We
fight against the Cities, if at all.’
So they waited. Below them, the Second legion
mustered. Beyond, far to the north, the Germans
and Thracians were debouching on the plain before
Mutina and engaging the legions of Gnaeus Manlius.
W
Spartacus drew out on the plain, the Bithynian
rearguard at his heels, and engaged the Fourth and
Ninth legions before the praetor had time to well order
their battle. Night was falling, there was no hope in
retreat on Mutina, though its lights shone whitely
through the rain, the great flares by its watch-gates
where the shivering sentinels peered through the
drizzle at the manoeuvring phalanges of the slaves.
Wolves had come howling from the hills. In Mutina
they could guess the reason.
Then towards the city came a stream of fugitives,
the fundatores and the sagittarii pursued by the slave
cavalry. One man, a Balearic slinger, was the first to
reach the gates. Him Mutina saved. But thereafter
so close and hot was the pursuit of the slaves, at the
heels of broken bands of legionaries, not merely light
troops, that Mutina refused to open and watched the
slaughter under its walls. The rescued slinger told
184 SP ART ACU S
of a type of battle familiar enough to Italy of late :
the Gladiator breaking the legions’ formation with the
impact of his iron cuneus wedge, and his cavalry
slaughtering through the breach.
Gnaeus Manlius fled from the field. Gaius Cassius
groaned when the news was brought to him in Mutina,
scratching in his bath, winking and fluttering his eyes.
The road to the North was open to the slaves. They
could pass unpunished, with the flower of the enslaved
of Italy in their ranks, to seize new provinces and stir
the vulgares to nameless crimes. And, scratching and
calling for a young maid to bring life in his rotting
bones, Cassius groaned again, for this meant the end
of all beauty and culture.
But Spartacus, watching the Fourth legion break,
heard at last from Gershom ben Sanballat of how the
rearguard came to be in action, of its fourth that was
left at the peak under Kleon, to die there, as the
eunuch preferred, rather than face life in the North.
The Strategos clenched his hands.
‘Kleon ? How long can he keep the peak ?’
Gershom of Kadesh looked at the sinking sun,
poised on the rim of the horizon.
‘Until that goes down.’
‘Then we may save him yet. Call Castus.’
So Castus was called and a moment thereafter the
slave horse drew off from pursuit of the flying legions
of Manlius, and vanished round the bend of the hills,
across the estuaries where the sea-birds nested, follow¬
ing the track the Second legion had taken a day before.
Spartacus camped his men under Mutina. Then
he summoned the city to surrender, but it refused,
strongly walled, albeit it refused with caution and
offered a gift of corn.
The winter night came down with a speed unknown
to the slaves from the south. At its fall Spartacus
ROME!
185
sent for lalo and with him left the camp, they passed
through long lines of little fires, where the rain fell
hissing in cooking-jars and hissing on the slaves’ wet
hair and arms. The southern men shivered and
sought to bind their wounds. A child wailed, lost,
in the rain. Red eyes gleamed on the camp’s out¬
skirts.
Then, in the midst of the Bithynians, they passed a
bough-shelter with a tribune’s pole and heard there
the wail of a new-born child. Spartacus half halted
at the sound. It came again and he smiled, and walked
on.
The rain cleared. Beyond the camp they came
to the verge of the Pass where Gnaeus Manlius had
sought to reform his legions and stay the slave-army.
Here the Romans, dead and wounded, lay in serried
ranks, with piercing them the cuneus dead of the slave
attack. Already robbers from the slave-army were
at work. lalo plucked at the Strategos’s cloak.
“There’s no profit in coming here. We can spoil
them to-morrow.’
‘To-morrow we march at dawn.’
And then lalo saw a dreadful thing, that the
Strategos wept. He walked with unshielded face,
weeping—suddenly weeping his dead, the lost and
forlorn, the rejected, those born to stripes, his people
who had died here so bravely, so aimlessly, for they
hardly knew what, for a hope and belief so dim, yet
in which they had followed him blindly. So Spartacus
wept for his dead, the first and last time, with an anger
and passion that frightened the slave who companioned
him. And then it was there came that resolve that
altered the face of history—a resolve newborn from
sight of those heapings of torn men who lay so quiet
under the coming of the stars.
They came in frost. As they walked back to the
i86
SP ART ACU S
camp the Thracian Gladiator raised his head and saw
in the north, shining, straining in their traces, the
Seven Ploughing Oxen, following the Pole-star home.
For a moment he looked at these, and then went into
his tent, sitting there long with his head in his hands,
none disturbing him, though lalo and the Sicel maid
kept watch.
But at midnight the camp sprang to life with the
coming of a fresh host down the Pass. Castus and his
spent cavalry had returned, bringing with them the
remnants of that quarter legion of Bithynians left to
guard the peak. Castus had dispersed the Second
legion, taking no prisoners. He stood blood-
splashed and exhausted in Spartacus’s tent, his young
face weary, yet still eager-eyed for a word or a look
from the Strategos.
‘Kleon ?’
cThe eunuch has a wounded leg, but he lives.’
The Greek lay in his tent when Spartacus went to
see him, following Castus, lalo carrying a torch to
light the way through the dark slave-lines. He lay
and bit at his arm, for pain he could not endure.
He turned a cold, bright glance on the Strategos and
Castus.
‘The way’s open now then, Spartacus. And I—
I’m saved for the cannibal pots.’
‘You’ve been saved for the sack of Rome.’
They stared at the Thracian. Then Kleon knew.
‘Rome ? Then you’re to turn back ?’
‘We go back to conquer Italy. It’s ours—our
Legions made it. And we’ll march against the City
itself.’
The Falling Star
M
>TiHEY turned south, the winter at their heels.
And turning, it seemed that new strength flowed up
through their bodies from the touch of that south¬
lands earth, even with the Gauls and Germans who at
first had complained so bitterly. They crossed La
Fata Pass again, down through Gallia Cisalpina and
halted in Umbria, capturing a nameless city. There,
in a fever of preparation, Spartacus set his tribunes
to organize for that conquest of Rome that had come
on him as an ultimate necessity the night he stumbled
over the dead slaves on the battlefield of Mutina.
But now he saw himself neither as king nor dictator,
a God drove him on, a God crowned with the know¬
ledge that unless the Beast that squatted in the Seven
Hills were killed, there would be no possible life ever
again for men while the world endured. And, knowing
he might fail, the Thracian knew also that he might
not dare refuse that attempt with all the strength and
all the force and all the cruelty the task might demand.
And it seemed to him each morning of those hasting
preparations that the slave-horde awoke in him, moved
with his body, looked with his eyes, hungered with
his hunger, tired with his tiredness, were shadowed
with the hate of that same Shadow—the Wolf that
looked north from the Tiber mouth.
Beating outbolts and grinding their swords, build¬
ing great machines under Hiketas’ direction, the slave
legions toiled like men possessed through that month
of the hastening Spring. The Strategos had made
over to Gannicus and Gershom the administration of
the legion laws and requisition of food and supplies.
And Kleon the eunuch drew up a great Law, the Lex
Servorum, to use in the time when the leaders of the
187
i88
SPARTACUS
slave-legions sat in the Senate. It dreamt, this Law,
of a land of little farmsteads sleeping secure, of quiet
towns with literati in the porticoes and freemen in
the mills and booths, of the sea and the wind in the
hair of Plato’s dream. Kleon read clauses from it
in the night-watches to Hiketas and his sister, Gershom
ben Sanballat sitting by, sardonic, combing at his
curled beard.
‘In that time there’ll be no need of laws, far less
of this cumbrous Lex,’ Hiketas affirmed. ‘If it were
for this only that we march on Rome, do you think
I’d have joined the Free Legions or would sweat now
upon my catapults ?’
‘Only by Law may the perfect State and citizen
be created,’ Kleon affirmed.
‘Only by the will of Jehovah may such be done,’
said the Pharisee Jew. ‘And He makes no dispensation
for Gentiles.’
‘Only by perfect freedom may life be perfect
again,’ said Hiketas. ‘As once it was in the Golden
Age, when there were neither Laws nor swords, Masters
nor slaves ’
‘Nor talkers, eunuchs, or geometricians,’ growled
Gershom ben Sanballat. ‘When do we march ?’
‘In six days’ time,’ said Kleon. ‘If the war-
machines of Hiketas are ready by then.’
‘They’ll be ready,’ affirmed Hiketas. ‘And with
your Lex and my ballistics—vho shall resist us ?’
He went smiling away with the woman who loved
him, his sister and mistress; and even Kleon, cold and
indifferent in such matters, believed their love evil,
though there were no Gods, no Laws but those men
made themselves. Gershom ben Sanballat looked
on the thing with the aversion of one who had looked
overmuch on Gentile abominations to be vexed from
aversion to hate. To Castus it was a matter of
ROME!
189
indifference—he hungered for a love that was still
denied him, that of the Strategos himself. To
Gannicus it was a matter of staring amaze and jesting
filth.
Spartacus slept that last night in Umbria with a
soundness of sleep he had little known for months.
It was a fresh Spring night, blowing from the hills
the smell of the wakened earth. lalo slept by the door
of his room, and near dawn stirred at a sound. The
Sicel maid Mella had entered the room and crept to
where the Strategos lay. lalo got softly to his feet
and drew his gladius and came behind the girl. So
he waited for her to raise her arm to stab.
But she made no effort to strike, and when the
Thracian saw the look on her face he lowered the
gladius, staring at her puzzled. Then he slipped back
and made pretence to sleep again; and Mella went
out and the dawn came in, and Spartacus awoke.
They brought him warmed wine and he sat and
drank it in the chill of the morning. Then abruptly,
and all around, the air was rent with the hoarse blow¬
ings of the bucinators, for the march was placed early
in the dawn. The Bithynians were first to muster,
the heroes of La Fata Pass, and march out southwards
with Gershom of Kadesh at their head. Spartacus
mounted on his great white stallion sat by the gate
with Kleon and watched them march. In the baggage
section of Gershom’s legion went a litter with Judith
and the child born on the night of the battle of Mutina.
The Strategos smiled at the Jew as he saluted.
‘We’ll find this child a palace to sleep in at Rome.’
Gershom scowled. ‘It were better if we find a
cow unquartered on the march. The mother’s milk
has failed.’
Then the long Bithynian lines, the eastern and
southern slaves, the Negro vulgares of the quarries
igo SP ART ACU S
had found great bales of red-dyed cotton and marched
with their bodies swathed in the uncut web, their
sword-hilts protruding from the folds, their thin¬
legged march raising a cloud of dust. So they went
by, and then came the Gauls under Castus, with slung
shields and heavy tramp, they marched because march
they must. And Spartacus knew well that unless
Rome was seized, as seized it must be, these would not
long endure his command. Castus rode at their head
and saluted, looking wistfully in the face of the
Thracian. And Spartacus saluted and made no other
sign.
Then came the Germans, with Gannicus also on
horseback, a great roan the size of the Strategos’s
stallion. He scarcely saluted, Gannicus, and went
by, his wild-haired tribesmen tramping behind him.
Kleon said, ‘I still doubt if our Sky-Republic can exist
secure without the blood-offering of Gannicus.’
Spartacus said, ‘This sounds like a worship alien
to that of—I forget the name of your God.’
‘He was no God, but a man, Plato, though men
called him divine.’
‘Were there slaves in that city he dreamt ?’
Kleon moved uneasily. ‘He lived in other times.’
‘Then his time will never be ours. For this is
our proclamation as we march on Rome : that we come
to free all slaves whatsoever, that in the new state we’ll
make even the Masters will not be enslaved. We
march with your Lex Servorum, but we do not march
with your Plato.’
(ii)
On the borders of Sabani and Picenum they halted
one night under the fringes of a great forest, a gnarled
growth of trees from ancient times. Here the Gaulish
ROME !
igi
velites of the Free Legions lay down to sleep, the main
slave army ten stadia to the north. All that day, a
great snake with crested head, that head the shining
spears of the Bithynians, the army had wound south
in the dust-wake of the velites. Shepherds fled from
their horrea and watched it from afar, or, with the
news that all slaves would henceforth be free, flocked
to join it at its halting-places.
Brennus and his brother did not sleep that night,
speaking of Gaul for long together, in a strange unease
one with the other. Brennus said, ‘I would that we
hadn’t turned back. There’s an aurochs follows me
in dream at night, down through this ill road we take
to the South. What can we do against the great city
of the Masters ?’
His brother grunted; but he also was sleepless.
Presently they both rose and put on their abollae,
and went through the lines of the sleeping velites and
stood in the starlight at the edge of the forest, looking
south.
As they did so, suddenly the sky rained fire. The
long white arc of the heavens, a pallor, an immensity
of stillness, was broken as though the stars were torn
from their settings about the belt of Hercules. The
two Gauls caught breath with fear.
The northern horizon flashed and winked. Then
a great star fell and flamed over the forest, southwards,
shedding a wan light on the countryside, rousing the
velites so that they stared and covered their faces,
those with Gods; and cursed, those without; and
turned to sleep, those weary of both Gods and the
godless. Brennus said, CI think that’s an ill thing to
have seen. I’d have done better to go through the
mountains alone than have looked on that, though all
Rome awaits our looting.’ And he brushed the sweat
from his brow with his withered left arm.
IQ2
SPARTACUS
The camp of Spartacus had seen the great star as
well. All Northern and Central Italy had seen it.
Kleon sat with his Greek scribes in his tent, he was
reading for their copying the military clauses of the
Lex Servorum when that light winked and flashed
across the night-stilled sky. He got up and watched
it, cold and secure, unmoved by the threat of the sky.
For the stars were bodies of fire circling about the
earth at a little distance, and had no bearing on the
fates of men. The literati with him muttered and
swore, till Kleon turned his cold eyes upon them, and
each sought his stylus and tablet.
It roused Gershom ben Sanballat in the bed of his
Judith, he muttered in her arms and she soothed him,
but terrified ; and they watched together that bright
thing torn from the sky and flung south over the
Gentile lands, some sport of the alien Gentile Gods
that had meaning for Gentiles—what meaning ?
And Judith whispered, ‘Sleep, sleep,’ with her breasts
warm under the head of Gershom of Kadesh.
Spartacus saw it, with lalo, on the limits of the
camp, making the round of the sentinels. lalo
muttered in fear and the Thracian stared long after
that gleam winked bluely to nothingness, south. And
a sudden spasm of fear went by, leaving his iron resolu¬
tion unshaken. ‘Our star leads us south to Rome,
he said, and lalo was comforted at that.
The long lines of the slave army stirred. Men
rose on their elbows to stare, the Bithynian women
moaned, here and there the sentries forgot their posts
and forgathered and whispered. But the. legions
were too weary to pay great heed, excepting the
southern men, who knew the Gods unsleeping and
fearful, and the Gauls, thinking of the sad Gods of the
woods and the ancient towers, the Gods of the verdant
Spring of Gaul who trailed the plague and death in
ROME!
their mists, death that was no resting at all, but only
the beginning of lives without end—in the flow of
water or a bright bird’s flight, unceasing, enduring,
undying in the wheel of macabre Law.
Gannicus slept.
Castus turned on his bed and thought of Spartacus,
and bit upon his wrists.
And the star fell and fell unendingly, lighting up
the countryside till it stood above Rome, and the
people came out, and the beggars stirred in the tene¬
ments, sleeping their hundreds in one room ; and on
Right Bank a wail arose from the pens of the slaves,
recaptured, awaiting the block on the morrow. And
they cried, ‘It’s the Gladiator coming J’
The lions in the Luda saw the star and howled.
The Senate sat in session over the news of Mutina
as yet unknown in the Forum. But the senators knew
that the Thracian had turned, had armed and re¬
armoured in Umbria, and was marching south with
Rome his objective. Could either consul do more
than snap at him as a cur at a lion ? What beast was
there to set against the lion ?
It was then they heard the howling of the lions in
the Luda, and a lictor cried the news, and they crowded
old and young, heated with debate, to watch from l
terrace that waning splendour above the City.
It seemed to wheel and wait, lighting the Seven
Hills on which the Gladiator marched. Then it fell
and flamed and vanished in the Tyrrhenian Sea.
# The augurs searched till morning in the vitals of a
slain sheep for meaning of that star. And at last
in the temple of Capitoline Jupiter, they slew a slave
and looked in his entrails. And the augurs’ words
were made known to the Senate, listening coldly, for
they were the words of its own secret instructions
returned to it.
N
194
SPARTACUS
‘The falling star is the Gladiator’s star. His
march on the City will fail.’
That night Marcus Licinius Crassus Dives was
chosen provincial praetor, to supersede both the consuls
in the field, a small man, renowned for his greed and
ability, wealthy with plunder from Sulla’s time,
hungering for recognition of his military prowess.
But even he, appalled with thought of facing the
slave hosts with the demoralized legions, advised the
Senate to summon Pompeius from Iberia.
Meantime, he set to fortifying Rome.
In Sicily the pirates saw the star as the galleys
wheeled out towards dawn to sail raiding down the
Messine straits. It fell and hissed in the sea as the
morning came, flinging the water high in a great spout.
And relentlessly, southwards, brushing defenders
from their path, the slave legions marched on Rome.
(iii)
They saw it at noon, from the Campagna, from
the Sabine Hills, shining below them, Mons Cispius
crowned with trees and the long-roofed Doric temples,
Mons Oppius shelving tenement-laden into the sun¬
rise’s place, Mons Palatinus splendid with villas, fading
into a sun-haze mist where the land fell down by
Boarium to the Pons Aemilius. Aventine lay south,
and north, high-crowned, the Capitoline Hill. Rome !
It was the first time most of the slave-host had
seen it, the legendary City of the Masters. And at
sight of its shining walls, and the wind that brought
its reek a fierce drift across the Campagna, a strange
sound rose from the legions of slaves—a growl like a
wakened beast that ebbed and rolled into the rear
ranks, where the Thracian had brought up the
ROME!
195
rearguard since dawn, fighting off the detachments of
light cavalry which Crassus had sent to vex their march.
Kleon stared at the City with cold, clear eyes if with
trembling lips, his thoughts sharp on weak points for
assailing, noting the cloud of cavalry gathered on the
Clovus Suburanus and the hillsides deep-trenched by
the guarding Tenth legion. In the air a lark sang,
shrilly, sweetly, so that the Germans raised their
matted heads to look, and even Gannicus forgot to
look at the City, staring instead into the sun in an
effort to see the little bird.
But that only a moment. From left to right flank,
where Castus and Gershom had halted by the swaying
machines of Hiketas, all stared at the City below them.
Rome !
Now a cloud had been over the City but that went
by, the sunlight came flowing by the Circus Flaminius
in long waves catching the sheen of the Tiber and from
there upfiinging pellets of light, dazzling, into the eyes
of the slaves. So for a time they were blinded, and
covered their eyes. In its sunlight, terrible, they saw
it afresh, the home of the Masters; and this time it was
no cry of anger that rose from the slaves, but a sound
like a vast, sighing moan.
Spartacus, helmeted, cloaked, mounted on his great
white stallion, sat and stared at the City of the Masters,
with a coolness at first like Kleon’s: but it changed
with that flare of sunlight. The home of the Masters,
the richest City on earth, where the Gods arose by
night and closed the gates and sharpened the swords
of war! Rome that had marched to uttermost
Thrace, that drew in a long black stream from the
shores of the furthest seas the fettered conquered to
slavery, that knew no mercy, no peace, no truth, that
loved pain and ruth as other men life, a squatting Beast
in the glare of the sun. And the Thracian looked
196 SP ART ACU S
round at his halted host, at the men near by him, by
his horse’s bridle, at their poor, starved, frightened,
lustful faces, their hanging mouths and their wound-
scarred limbs—and back again at the City—and back
again at his legions : and something like an icy hand
seized on his heart. These to conquer the City that
was unconquered !
And again over the slave army that vast sigh ebbed.
Black roof on roof, palace and tenement, the
Romans crowded to look at this terror at their doors.
Old men, patricians, were borne to their roofs to look
on the coming of the slaves. The Senate thronged to
look. Slaves peered from the sweating-dens by the
Porta Fontinalis across the shoulder of the Collis
Viminalis at that far halted massing of lines they had
heard were the Criminals of Capua. How long, O
Gods, how long ?
Then they saw a strange thing, a thing that Rome
might not believe, the army of the slaves in motion,
at first it appeared at the legionaries’ run upon the
City. Then they saw it halt and split again ; and then
—the lines wheeled round, flashing their stolen armour
in the sun.
The slaves were in retreat !
(iv)
That seemed in a day and an hour long past. Yet
only another night had come, though it seemed to
Kleon the space was bridged with days of fighting and
pleading since that moment when the slave legions
turned about, with a strange unanimity, and marched
away from the sight of Rome at their feet—marched
swiftly away, heart-broken and in despair, frightened
with a fear that had no name, marching and marching,
ROME! 197
the cloudy gathering of horse at their heels, the tribunes
riding to and fro the disordered lines, pleading, com¬
manding, even slaying here and there. But in such
places of killing the slave march broke and became
no more than a streaming rout, they kissed the hands of
Spartacus, of Gannicus, of Castus and even of Kleon
the eunuch, they cried that these were the greatest of
strategoi and that they would follow and obey them
for ever—but not against the City that no men might
take, where the Masters lay waiting to trap and
torment.
Only the Bithynian legion wavered and shook and
yet stood fast, Gershom of Kadesh riding its ranks,
smoothing with a cool hand now at his beard, cursing the
frightened in their Asian tongues, wary as a panther,
unfrightened at the shining Wolf below. Yet pres¬
ently when he sent a mounted messenger to bear the
news to Spartacus that the Bithynians stood fast and
so would stay while the other legions were reformed
from their panic, the answer came back that Gershom
was to march his legion in the wake of the slaves, acting
again as its rearguard.
And at that, seeking this venture less than most,
ill-omened of its success, hating and despising this life
of the sword in Gentile lands, something stirred black
to a tremendous anger in the heart of the Jew. For
a moment indeed he sat and looked down on Rome and
weighed the chances of seizing the City by himself—
ill-garrisoned, fearful, rich with spoil, of seizing it or
setting to it such a flame that it and its Masters would
empyre the world. Then he looked over the patient
troubled ranks of his legion, and tore at his beard again,
that he might not weep. ‘We march as rearguard,’
he told his tribunes.
Only then did he remember Judith and his son,
with the main body of the fleeing slave army.
198 SP ART ACU S
Only another night. Night indeed, Kleon knew,
riding to that night and their camp on the borders of
Picenum, to the dream that he and the Thracian had
dreamt, an end to the dream that the slaves would ever
march through the Forum of Rome, seize Rome and
build it anew. And he did not think that ever again,
such was the thought of his bitter despair, that dream
would be dreamt by men, they would cower in acquies¬
cence to the lash and mutilation till the world
ended, power and freedom put by as dreams, together
with dream of the Golden Age of which Hiketas had
sung.
Hiketas ?
But none knew of him as the night fell; and Kleon
rode hither and thither through the voiceless,marching
legions, seeking in vain for sight of the Greek, or his
sister and lover, or the great machines they had made in
and dragged from Umbria. Then at last he heard
from a centurion in the Bithynian legion that the
machines had been abandoned at the Halt on Rome,
and Hiketas had refused to leave them. He and the
woman and a dozen more Greeks had stayed and died
there, the centurion thought. And Hiketas had
cried a message that the Free Legions would have no
more need of machines since they had no need of the
greatest of Cities.
And how and when he had died none knew, nor
ever knew in the Spartacist host, nor of the eyeless
doorkeeper in a Roman cellar who lived into a time
when men spoke of the name of a general Caesar to
one witless who strove to tell, untongued, of the Halt
before Rome and the great machines amidst which
his sister and lover had died in the hands of the Roman
legionaries.
She had taken long to die.
ROME l
199
(v)
They flung up a hasty camp that night, the slaves,
and lay under the fall of the dew, over-disheartened to
set up even the tents of the tribunes. There was no
attack, though down in the south shone the watch-
fires of the Roman velites. A great ruined villa stood
near the camp, and here quarters were found for the
Strategos, he went in through a ruined atrium where
the faces of the broken Penates had been smeared with
cow-dung by the slaves a year before. His Gladiators
clattered in at his heels and lay in the atrium, while
lalo and Mella sought to stir life in the old fireplaces
abandoned to rust and damp in the narrow kitchen.
There were no stars that night. The General
of the slaves sat in his sleeping-room, awaiting the meal
that lalo prepared, looking out through a slit in the
walls at the land that rolled south to those watching
fires of the Roman scouts. And now he felt neither
the fear nor the wave of anger that had followed the
fear when panic had come on the Free Legions. He
felt again strong and sure, yet filled with the same
dark restlessness that had turned him at Mutina.
What next—where, whither, whence ?
He wrapped himself in his cloak and went through
the atrium and the lines of the sleeping Gladiators.
Two guarded the entrance. These would have
roused the others to go with him, but he motioned them
to silence, and went out in the dark to wander the camp
where the slaves slept in unease. In the section where
the Bithynians lay he heard the weeping of a wakeful
child and knew that Gershom’s son was crying for milk.
All about him rose the smell of sodden humankind—so
familiar to his nostrils it had seldom had meaning. Now
it had, a dreadful meaning—that so these would live
200
SPARTACUS
and endure as long as the Free Legions endured. No
houses or habitations, no huts they might call their
own, no mornings to see the same hills, the same skies,
remembered and near : but a constant marching to
and fro, and uncertain campings under alien hills.
Until 
He went back to the villa and found lalo awaiting
him. Only then did he know his own weariness and
allow lalo to unbuckle his lorica. He heard move¬
ments in his sleeping-room and asked who was
there.
‘MeHa,’ lalo told him. ‘Shall I send her away ?’
‘Let her be. Have you eaten ? Or she ?’
Neither had. At his order they ate with him, the
Thracian and the Sicel maid, in the flare of a torch
in the peristyle. On its plinth at the far end an
Aphrodite smiled on them with painted eyes. And
a strange fancy came on Spartacus, so that he looked
from that perfect face in stone to the starved and un¬
beautiful face of the little Sicel maid.
So looking, he caught suddenly her own glance
upon him. And he knew at once the hunger that
looked from her eyes.
But desire for women had long gone from him.
He needed no longer their presence to shut from his
memory the faces of Crixus and Elpinice. And the
strange compassion that touched his heart went by
without leaving an impress thereon.
So they ate and drank in the sputter of the torch¬
light, lalo and Mella glancing with still faces on the
veiled snake-eyes of the Thracian Gladiator who would
save them yet, and all the host. And it seemed to
Spartacus that he ate and drank with the slave host
itself; and again that strange feeling of identity with
them, of them, came upon him. And he stared down
into the future, as the three broke bread and drank
201
ROME!
wine, and saw for a moment an alien table, with alien
faces about the board. Then that went by, like a
shadow on the wall, and the present was at hand, and
its question : Whither ?
‘Where were you born, Mella ?’ he asked.
She stammered that it was in Sicily. She had been
reared on a slave-farm there, one of the greatest of the
farms, her father and mother both slaves. They had
been vulgares, and were long since dead,
He asked how they died and she told him they were
killed together in a pit by wild dogs. They had become
old and games had been declared because of the news
of some General’s triumph in Rome. She did not know
what General that had been, but she remembered the
pit and her father and mother, they had fought off the
dogs for a little while.
Neither Spartacus nor lalo asked for what crime
these things had happened in the pit. Slaves over-
old for toil—they had lent some amusement, in the
crunch of live flesh in the jaws of dogs, to the Master
and his friends ere they banqueted.
But Spartacus’s memory was roused.
‘I’ve heard of this Sicily. It is an island. There
are many slaves there ?’
She whispered, the little Sicel, gazing at the Strategos
in awe, that indeed there were many slaves there, many
thousands, they had risen in revolt many times. So she
herself had heard ere she was sold as a breeder to the
farm of Gaius Cassius. She had been brought from
Syracuse to Rhegium in windy weather, many of the
slaves had been flung overboard to lighten the ship
when pirates came in pursuit.
She told more of her life, in her soft, scared voice,
to that listener she found less frightful now, who
sometimes seemed to draw her heart from her body 
the body intended for breeding slaves in the kennels of
202
SPARTACUS
the Umbrian farm. His eyes were dark and remote as
he listened, though he smiled at her in the end.
Then he stood up and went to his room, and Mella
lay down and slept near at hand, lalo across the entrance
to the room.
Spartacus tramped that room in thought till the
day was near at hand.
He would march the Free Legions down through
the Peninsula, cross into Sicily, and seize it as a home
for the slaves.
ROME!
203
Mummius
"D UT next day he found that the whole of the army of
■^Crassus the Lean, emboldened by the slave retreat,
had marched out from Rome and now barred the way
to the south. From refugees who straggled into camp
he learned that Crassus had with him as legate one
Mummius, a seasoned soldier and a skilled commander,
and that the legions under their command fell little
short of the fighting strength of the slaves.
To Spartacus three courses were now open : to
retreat into Picenum, to march again on Rome, to
force a passage southwards to Rhegium, as he had
planned. But he might not attempt either of the
last two courses, the Free Legions demoralized as
they were. The slaves were in no condition to face
the legions of the Masters: accordingly, he sent
scouts forward into Picenum and prepared to with¬
draw into that country.
Titul the Iberian rode out at noon, commander of
the slave velites. He took with him Brennus and thirty
Gauls, and had orders to return before nightfall. It
was a day of wind and flying cloud, and the Gauls
loosened their braided hair and rode at ease.
In Picenum, hardly touched by the campaigns of
the slave-revolt, the Masters were again attending
their fields, long gangs of slaves at work on the land,
sheep thick on the pastures under the hills ; and up
the hillside the light fell dark on the olive-groves of
spring. But the land seemed to wilt at Titul’s advance,
knowing his following slaves at a great distance.
Nevertheless, they attacked none, for their orders were
definite. None attacked them, because of the terror
204 SP ART ACU S
of the Criminal’s name : and it was as yet unknown
in Picenum how the Free Legions had failed before
Rome.
Yet, twenty pace miles into Picenum, riding the
verge of a little wood, almost they marched into the
midst of a double column of legionaries. Titul stayed
his scouts with an effort, and the Gauls lay down and
watched, in the sun-dapple of the leaves, the columns
that marched south-east. Then they saw that two
full legions were passing, legions with cavalry, the
soldiers fresh and well fed. The wind had died away,
and still the legions marched by, a cloud came over
the sun, the legions marched without noise in the dust :
and it was to the slave-velites as though they watched
an army of the dead. Then the columns swung east¬
ward again, into a village in the hollow below, and
seemed there to form and halt.
Titul beckoned to Brennus and another.
‘I’d have the two of you go down to the village,
and seek out news of these Masters’ legions.’
Brennus was blunt. ‘Seek it yourself. Who’d
fail to recognize us as Free Legionaries ? And I, at
least, am unanxious to die on the cross.’
Then Titul remembered a field they had passed
but a little way back, where, unobserved themselves,
they had seen ten slaves and an overseer at work.
‘We’ll return and strangle the overseer and the
two of you can divide his clothes and go into the
village.’
Three Gauls rode back to the field and slew the over¬
seer, the terrified slaves standing and watching, unhelp¬
ful. But as the Gauls stripped the body and turned
to ride back to Titul and his company in the shadow
of the little wood, the slaves implored the Gauls to
free them. They were manacled one to the other, and
when they were discovered with their overseer slain
R 0 M E ! 205
they would undoubtedly be crucified, as a warning
to other slaves.
The Gauls listened and were moved a little. But
they had no time to unmanacle the gang, and the slaves
of it would encumber the scouts. So they left them,
hearing their cries for long as they rode round the
shoulder of the hill.
Then they brought the garments to Titul; and
Brennus and the other Gaul halved them, and went
down to the village while the rest of the company
hobbled their horses under the trees and slept with
one of their company for guard. In the failing of the
daylight lights began to spring up in the village, and
the slaves, awakening, could see that a stockade had
sprung up around the halted legions. Then, as the
dark came down, the Gaul who had companioned
Brennus returned.
Titul was the first to hear the strange, slobbering
sound down the track. He and another went forward
to look, and saw what seemed to be a bear crawling
upwards in the half-light. Then they saw it was the
Gaul who had gone with Brennus. But each foot was
a bloody pulp, and as they lifted him up his hands
spattered them with blood.
He whispered, ‘We were caught and crucified. Me
they nailed without care, one of my hands by the skin
only. _ I tore myself down when the darkness came.’
Titul asked, Brennus ? and the Gaul, slobbering
and biting at his crusted lips said, ‘He’s on the cross.’
For a while, as they held him up in the shadow of
the little wood, his lips broke into a meaningless babble.
Then he ground his teeth into them, for he had
crawled the dust and stones of the track to do more
than babble. ‘The legions are those of Mummius
the legate of Crassus the Lean. He is here to hold
the Strategos from marching into Picenum—not to
2o6 SPARTACUS
fight, but to retreat if the Strategos advances’ ;
and he slavered in wild pain again, though they gave
him wine to drink from a skin that a Gaul carried.
His hands and feet had begun to swell, but still he might
not die.
Then Titul took a knife from his belt and asked
the Gaul if he could kill himself ; and the Gaul tried,
but he might not. Then two others came and held
the knife and he drove it into his heart.
The slave scouts mounted and rode back in haste
through the coming night to the Spartacist camp.
And all that night, as the inflammation burgeoned in
hands and feet, Brennus hung from the cross. As the
morning came in a red flow of light, the Romans saw
his tongue hanging thick and swollen from his lips;
with the greater heat of the day flies came to vex him,
the legionaries passed by below, indifferently, paying
no heed to the humming clouds or the thickening odours
of blood and excrement. But by nightfall agony had
left the Gaul. And in the last of the light three legion¬
aries passing the cross saw his body stiffen ; and they
stopped, idly, to watch.
As they did so, far up in the hills, there came a
strange, agonized lowing.
‘What was that ?’ one legionary asked of another.
The other was an older man. He stared, puzzled,
into the gathering night.
T’d have known that had it been in Gaul,’ he said.
‘It was the lowing of an aurochs.’
(ii)
A Gaulish woman, heavy with child, awoke groan¬
ing as her man shook at her shoulder. It was still
night. Outside the nest of bushes and grass in which
ROME! 207
she lay she could see the stars pallid in the Italian sky,
waning into dead whiteness by the east.
^It s still night, she told him. (We must sleep.’
'The bucina, woman ! Can’t you hear it ? I
must run to the ranks. You’ll see to join the other
women ?’
She gave a cry of fear, but he did not hear it, in
the clatter of belting himself in his sword and seeking
his helmet, clumsily, with chilled fingers. He had been
a serf on an Apulian farm, she the bedwoman of an
overseer. Now she was with child, conceived in the
cold of those winter marches while the slaves tramped
into Cisalpine Gaul and dreamt that that child would
see birth in Gaul itself. He patted her shoulder and
she heard him run j and all around the stirring and
running of many feet. The horns blew up again. She
cried after the man—he would surely return.
Yet he did not return. A Negro swore over his brother
wounded in a skirmish of the retreat from Rome, and
shook him, and then laid him down with a groan. The
blind brother cried after him, as the Negro stumbled
into his rank, not looking back.
The bucinae were sounding March-all march.
Three German brothers roused in a pit they had
dug to shelter them from the dews. They groped for
arms and armour in the dark. One said, 'March '
Gods, to Germany, let’s hope!’ And another panted’
Not to Rome, anyhow, whatever the Thracian says ’
And the third said, 'Gannicus’ll see to that.’
. Gershom ben Sanballat hurried from the villa and
gained the quarters of the Bithynian legion just as the
bucina sounded. In his tent Judith slept with the
child, appeased with exhaustion if not with milk He
stared down at them and then shook them awake.
‘We march. The Free Legions are caught between
two armies of the Masters. It is cuneus order.’
208
SPARTACUS
She had heard of that order before. She caught
his sleeve. ‘But not for the wife of a tribune ?’
‘We take no women or baggage.’
She wrung her hands, staring at the child. Ger-
shom’s face seemed frozen as he girded on his sword.
Then a quietness came on Judith. She rose and
helped him, and they stared at each other. Then he
took her and kissed her, and did not look at the child ;
and ran from his tent, cursing the Bithynians to haste
as the bucina roared again.
The wolves lairing up in the hills heard it and
growled and turned in sleep. The Roman velites
heard it in the south, and stirred from sleep and stared
at the winking watch-fires of the slaves, and turned to
sleep again.
The morning came winged over Italy. The cities
left in the wake of the slave-passing stirred to a furtive
half-life. In the ruined fields and plantations the
birds were crying from a dimness now shot and sprayed
with the stippled arrow-hail of the sun. A low wind
blew from Campania.
The Roman velites rode north till they came to a
hill, and looked down on the camp of the slaves around
the abandoned villa. It seemed as on the day before.
There was nothing to report back to the main army
where Crassus the Lean was now stirring from sleep.
Since the failure of the attack on Rome, it was now
plain to the provincial praetor that the end of the slave-
revolt was imminent. He could wait for the Spartacist
army to disintegrate, and destroy it at his leisure. It
would never advance on Rome again; if it marched
south, he could hold it; if it retreated to the north
Mummius would fall back in front of it, as instructed,
giving battle under no circumstances but extreme
necessity.
The slave-revolt was near its end.
ROME! 209
The provincial praetor, the Dives, the Lean, sat
waiting for news from the velites. But none came.
At noon he sent a centurion of the Eighteenth legion
to report on the appearance of the slave camp. The
centurion was a grizzled Lucanian. Coming up with
the^ vehtes who watched the camp of the Spartacists
he looked across the ochre shimmer of the day at the
palisaded dykes; then he rode his horse three stadia
nearer.
And then he knew what trick the Spartacists had
played.
He returned to the velites, cursing them.
Send to Crassus at once. The slaves escaped
during the night. They have left only their baggage
and women.’
When Crassus heard this, the face of the Dives went
livid with anger. He commanded that the hundred
men of the velites be decimated. Then the whole
army stirred at the shouted orders of the tribunes and
marched north on the slave-camp.
All day the women in that camp had watched stupe¬
fied the dark hovering of the Roman scouts to the south.
Now they saw that the end had come. And some were
glad, wearied of this life of travail up and down the
Italian roads, rain in their faces, fear in their hearts,
their food the leavings of hungry men. Better all
ended : and for most their Gods had no terror of after¬
life for slaves and the simple, only death and long
rest, long rest. But there were still other women
of the slave-host, young, who looked at the nearing
army of the Masters with hope and not fear in their
hearts. Surely they would be spared, they were
still young and fair, too fair for the cross; and the bed
of a legionary better far than the bed of a rebel slave.
And they washed their bodies and braided their hair
and waited with trembling lips.
o
210
SPARTACUS
But the woman Judith watched that approach, she
and a little Jewish maid ; and they looked at each
other and then at the child, drooling and wailing for
lack of milk. And Judith knew it must be the child
first.
So she took a cloth and held it over the child’s
face, firmly, till the limbs ceased to kick; and there
came a strange heat from the small face, though her
own body was set with beads of frozen sweat. And
then the maid plucked at her dress.
‘Look, they are coming from the north as well!’
Out of the north were coming more Romans. But
it was a flying retreat of disordered horse.
(iii)
In the pace of the short trot, as near as half-trained
men might come to the step of the Roman legionary, the
slave army had moved north through the mists of dawn.
Spartacus rode in the van, Kleon beside him,Gannicus
a little in the rear. They had made their plans at the
council over-night when Titul brought back the news
of Mummius halted in Picenum with his two legions.
Now the Thracian pondered the alternatives if these
plans failed.
Once, speaking to the tribunes who rode about him,
he glanced back at that hasting march of the slaves, and
his heart rose high and glad. Kleon saw the Strategos
fling back his great head with the clouded, wild eyes;
and a queer pain held the cold heart of the eunuch for
a moment. This slave who led them, whom some
~T strange God had gifted with leadership—how he
changed and altered, he whom the Italian lands knew
only as the ruthless, sure Spartacus ! And he thought
how perhaps a time would come when historians told
ROME!
211
of this revolt, and figure the Thracian as a wild bar¬
barian, sure of himself if dim of plan. While instead 
‘The Bithynian and German legions will march
on the village where Mummius lies. But at sight of
Mummius5 camp they’ll pretend to fall into confusion.
Gershom and Gannicus will draw them back and
appear to make hasty entrenchments, with stragglers
stealing away to the hills. Meanwhile Castus and I
will hold round this hill of which Titul talked and
take Mummius in the rear.’
‘And if he fails to come out and attack us ?’ asked
the Jew.
‘Then I’ll fall on him and force him from the
villate. See to your men.’
Gershom ben Sanballat fell back to his legion, his
Bithynians staring at him eagerly. But he rode with a
twisted heart and mind : once he half halted to order
his legion to turn back and save the camp and Judith.
They would obey him, so readily ! He could yet save
the woman and his son, march on the sea-coast, and
capture those ships that troubled his dreams.
His major tribune, a little Syrian, ran to his stirrup
and trotted there. ‘Is it fighting ?’
Gershom growled at him. ‘No, no, we go for milk
baths to Picenum, a land of milk. Pfu !’
The little tribune grinned, and ran by his side. In
swinging strides the Gauls kept the pace. The cavalry
fanned out northwards. Panged with spears, the
shining march of the slaves advanced. By noon it
was not ten stadia from the village where Mummius
lay.
Here Spartacus divided his forces and marched
north-westwards on detour, taking with him Castus,
Oenomaus, and Kleon the eunuch. Genhom and
Gannicus eyed each other. Gershom curled a thick,
sardonic lip.
212
SPARTACUS
‘No doubt you’d prefer to take command ?’
‘That’s well. Now I’ll show you leadership,
Bithynian.’
‘That’s well, Scythian. I’ll watch.’
T am no Scythian.’
‘I am no Bithynian.’
It was an ill beginning. The legions straggled
undecidedly, the Germans fingering their slings, the
Bithynians their swords, the velites a straying pack.
Gershom fell back on his legion, composedly combing
his beard. Gannicus sent after him a message that the
Bithynians were to take the van.
‘This is leadership,’ Gershom growled to his tribune,
‘the essence of leadership.’
‘What ?’ the little slave tribune asked.
‘To see that another’s throat is slit in preference
to your own,’ the Jew answered. ‘As doubtlessly the
divine Plato said—but of him you never heard.’
Nevertheless, he took the van with his legion. The
velites straggled intentionally now, at Gershom’s
order, with the appearance of scouts who had little fear
of finding an enemy. They passed by the field where
the ten chained slaves had watched the Gauls of Titul
slay the overseer. Ten shapes lay very quiet there
now: already the spot was a-caw and a-crow with
ravens. Gershom glanced at it indifferently, and then
turned his eyes on the ochre limning of the little wood
where Titul and his company had spied on Mummius’
men.
So, about the time of sunset, they came in sight of
the village where the legate of Crassus the Lean sat
staring moodily up at that hill. A young man and
haughty, he was hated by his tribunes. Nevertheless,
they feared him, as did Crassus, for it was whispered
that the Vestal herself protected him, and shared his
bed on occasion as well. A slave brought him wine,
ROME!
213
passing under the place where Brennus hung on the
cross. The legate asked what had happened to the
spy.
The slave told him the spy was dead.
Mummius drank his wine, watching the dying day.
Then he looked up at the wooded knoll again, and there
saw halted and staring a great concourse of armed men.
For a moment he regarded them unbelievingly, then
leaped to his feet and cursed and shouted for the
bucinators to sound.
At the orders of a great, black-bearded leader on a
heavy horse, Mummius could see the armed slave-
rabble falling back in apparent confusion. His blood
raced at the sight and he forgot the orders of Crassus.
Calling for his horse, he determined to attack the
slaves.
They camped and began to throw up hasty entrench¬
ments. But fear was evidently upon them. From the
skirts of the camp Mummius could see small bands
stealing away to the hills. He resolved to assault the
half-made camp forthwith, and addressed his men.
They answered with stern shouts, and brandished their
swords.
Mummius forthwith led them against the enemy.
With his cavalry he attacked from the south, almost
veering into the line of march on which the slaves had
come. But the legions he commanded to attack the
slave-camp frontally, and this they did under a hail of
arrows from the slave sagittarii.
For a time the fighting was bloody and indecisive.
Then the Romans heard a shouting in the village and
looked back and saw there, sweeping round the northen
hills at a slow, untiring trot, the Thracian Legion of
the slaves, well-known now for their Greek helmets and
tunics. For the Thracian arrogated to themselves
the Greek name in the rebellion and took upon
214 SPARTACUS
themselves the avenging of wrongs suffered by Greece
at the hands of Rome.
Mummius, at the head of his cavalry, heard nothing
of the shouts, seeking the weakest place in the slave
defences. Into this, at last found, his cavalry rode,
opposed by kneeling ranks of slave-pikemen. Yet
scarcely had they engaged than a sweating centurion
from the Roman legions was at Mummius’ stirrup.
‘Legate—SPARTACUS !’
Mummius looked back and down the hill in the
fading light. There he saw his legions half faced
about to meet the wild forfex attack of a new slave
army—not the customary wedge attack of the Sparta-
cists, but one in shape like the closing claws of a
crab.
Caught in this claw as darkness fell, the Romans
broke and fled, such of them as the slaves did not hew
down. Spartacus took no prisoners. Mummius him¬
self rode hard to the south, almost riding into the camp
where the slave-women and baggage had been left.
But he and the rest of the cavalry rout swerved aside
from that, the slave horse at their heels, and so came
on the halted lines of Crassus.
The provincial praetor retreated and entrenched
himself strongly, showering Mummius with abuse and
ordering the decimation of such of his following as
straggled in during the night. Meantime, as the last
of the light went, the slave legions came marching
back and reoccupied their camp, miraculously saved
from the Roman advance.
Quiet came down on the hasting events of the day.
The Gaul woman laboured in the pangs of birth,
delirious, her man dead in the forfex charge by the fringe
of the little wood where Titul had waited. The Negro
found his brother and embraced him. The two
German brothers lay on the earth and keened the
ROME! 215
death-song for that other who had perished under the
hooves of Mummius’ horsemen.
Gershom ben Sanballat went to his tent.
(iv)
Reinforcements poured down from Rome to the
army of Crassus the Lean, for at length the senate had
recalled the legions from Africa. Daily the provincial
praetor sent out his velites to reconnoitre the slave
camp. The weather was now white-hot in the plains,
waving its mists down over Campania. In the noon
hours it grew so sultry that only Italians or Africans
might bear it, peering into the shimmer of the sun-
haze.
In the slave camp Spartacus had set the Free
Legions to regrinding the poor iron of their swords,
to raiding the surrounding regions for cattle, and to
making sandals from the hides so procured. Fore¬
seeing a long march in these preparations, the slaves
sang. The Germans set the horns of the cattle on their
helmets, hoping in this way to add terror to their appear¬
ance. The Gauls hung on their shields the tufted tails
of the bulls, and the women fed on the meat for the
moment so abundant. In the deserted villa Spartacus
assembled his tribunes and outlined his plan.
‘We’ll march south to Rhegium, seize ships or charter
them, and cross into Sicily.’
Kleon said indifferently that this plan might as well
be attempted as any other. He sat and stared with
cold, pale eyes into the sunhaze, and would say no
more.
Gannicus growled that they should retreat again
into the north. But he knew while he said the words
that his plan would find no hearing.
216
SP ART ACU S
Castus looked at the Thracian with eyes of love and
said nothing.
Gershom ben Sanballat pulled at his beard. ‘So
we fight again for a New Republic—but this time in
Sicily. It’ll fail again, Strategos. Let us scatter now
to the northern ports and seize ships, each to his own
country. We are faced by now with the unwearied
legions from Africa, led by one with the heart of a
hungry sow in an orchard. Crassus the Lean is no
mincing consul or swashbuckling legate.’
Spartacus looked from one to the other of his
tribunes. And they saw he had aged, the blue gloss
gone from his tended hair, the skin wrinkled about his
eyes, those strange eyes shadowed. But he himself
felt strangely little of this ageing, as though, a mirror for
them, and no more, he reflected their lives, but in his
inner self remained un-old. And he knew that with¬
out his leadership the slave-army would to-morrow
fall to pieces, at the mercy of the cross and the rack
and the whips of the Fugitivarii.
So long was he silent, standing there looking at
them, that they moved uneasily under his gaze. For
they might not forget him who had ravened like a
beast at the death of Crixus—that Spartacus still
shadowed their minds, though he was long dead,
and the gaze of the Strategos merely one of pity,
and, ’for a moment, a despairing compassion. Then
he said :
‘To-morrow we’ll march south. Unless Crassus
gives us passage we must meet him in the open. Here
is the road ’
He traced it with a stick upon the frescoed wall,
while the tribunes sat and watched. The fresco
chipped and showered in little flakes. The slave-
leaders watched the line as it wavered down through the
hills to the borders of Lucania,
ROME
217
‘We should reach Rhegium ere the month is out.’
But that night a quiver of apprehension ran through
the slave lines, it was Crassus the Lean himself they
would face to-morrow, Crassus of whom all had heard.
And even in the Bithynian Legion there was fear at
that knowledge, as though the small, lean man with the
bloated face and the hunger for wealth was staring at
each on the slave-block in turn.
Yet with the dawn they took heart, for Spartacus
was undefeated and undefeatable, as all knew. They
greeted him with shouts as, mounted, he watched them
march. All the camp marched out to the south, not
merely the desperate cuneus which had pressed north
against Mummius the legate.
Judith went no longer in her litter but with the
rest of the women who panted in the pace of the Free
Legions. She remembered how she had come to that
camp and the child that then lived, and the face of
Gershom that was now turned from her. The woman
who had been in childbirth stumbled with her new¬
born child, panting into the sweat of the south. Mel]a
tramped with happy, untiring limbs, loaded with the
gear that served the Strategos. And a great song arose
from all the Free Legions, a song that was sung in the
fields of harvest by the harvesting slaves.
Spartacus slowed the march to caution by noon.
Then they saw that Crassus would dispute their passage,
his army in battle array.
Spartacus disposed his forces, and then flung
forward his Bithynians, hitherto undefeated, the
terror of the legions.
But they broke and fled before the centre where
Crassus himself stood. At that, on the right, the fresh
African legions advanced through the arrow-hail of
the slave-sagittarii, and fell on the unprepared follow¬
ing of Gannicus. The Germans fled.
218
SP ART ACU S
As the night fell, Spartacus drew off from the
field, his Thracians covering in ordered retreat the
rout that streamed outwards, south, from the first
defeat the Free Legions had met under the command
of the Thracian Gladiator.
V. IN RHEGIUM
The Pirates of Sicily
(i)
J^UCANIA and Brittium lay undefended. The slaves
"^straggled southwards through these lands, the
Thracians taking upon themselves the brunt of the
retreat. Behind, Crassus and the winter followed at
their heels.
The news of the slave-defeat was borne to the
Senate and from thence abroad all Italy. It reached
about all the dun lands of the Mediterranean lying
on the edge of harvest, ripe with olives and the fruits
of the vine, the tale of the great slave revolt that at
last was nearing its end, brought to that end by Crassus
the Lean. In Calabria the old slaves of the farms heard
the news and shook their heads, knowing that always,
till the world ended, there must be masters and slaves.
In the mines of far Cyrene came the news, and the
slaves, chalk-dusted, whispered it as they strained at
back-breaking loads. It reached to Thrace and per¬
haps in the hills some hunter heard of the end of the
great attack on Rome that another hunter had planned.
Meanwhile, cool, watchful, defeated but un¬
routed, and never before so displaying his generalship,
Spartacus moulded the slave flight into ordered retreat;
twice, on the march, he turned about and flung the
Bithynian Legion into the Roman pursuit, the Bithyn-
ians hungering to avenge the disgrace of their cowardice
in the face of the Lean. The Roman pursuit slowed
down, for Crassus saw that the revolt still endured :
in despite that littered field where Kleon the eunuch
had seen the second of his hopes of Empire crumble to
dust under the wheeling attack of the African legions.
He rode south ahead of the main slave army, two
thousand men of the Gaulish legion with him. Coming
to Thurii, they found it garrisoned. It refused the
221
222
SP ART ACU S
slave-demand to open its gates, and Kleon, with a sudden
cold rage in his heart, ordered assault upon its walls.
It was taken after a day’s engagement, the slaves,
ferocious with defeat and retreat, clambered upon the
walls like madmen, they made of themselves living
tortoises that flung a last line of desperate men up on
the walls and over them, piling on the spears of the
Romans till these had no spear-heads left and must
needs take to the gladius, no weapon to use in such
desperate encounter. Kleon himself sat on horse¬
back and directed operations: at night Thurii fell and
he gave it over to the sack of his Gauls.
Presently it was alight, and the Gauls sought from
house to house, cutting the throats of the Masters
and driving out the slaves. The women, when caught,
were raped ere their throats were also cut; and Kleon,
riding to the Forum, heard about him shriek on shriek
from the patricians’ houses and saw blood trickle from
the steps of darkening atria. Then rain fell and put
out the gathering fires.
In the darkness such of the inhabitants of Thurii
as might fled out into the countryside. The Gauls
camped in the city and slept, drunken on wine and lust
and blood. Kleon lay down in a house in the Forum,
assured that no other city of Lucania or Brittium
would now resist without heed the passage of the slave-
army.
In the morning the Gauls awoke and turned in
beds where women shivered and wept, or lay still with
knives in their breasts. And a great weariness with
lust and slaughter came on the Gauls, and with it a
sickened disgust for the Masters, their houses, and their
women. They flocked out into the streets and yawned,
idle and fed, and curious for sport.
In the centre of the patricians’ quarter the house
of the Governor had resisted until nearly dawn. Now
IN RHEGIU M 223
it was taken, the Governor killed, and his women appor¬
tioned among apathetic Ganls who stripped and robbed
them, and then bade them go. But one of the women
was the Governor’s bride, newly wed, and the tale
went round among the slave soldiers that her bridal
was as yet unconsummated. Immediately, in a shout
of laughter, she was seized in a score of rough hands,
disrobing her, a tall, dark girl: when a drunken
tribune cried a better plan.
‘What of our leader, the little Greek ? Not his
fault that he lacks the means—he’s the suitable groom
for the Governor’s wife ! The woman to Kleon !’
It caught at the humour of the slaves. They had
the Governor’s wife dragged through the streets to the
house where Kleon sat : and had her sent in with the
tribune’s message. She was stripped and stood before
him, young and frightened and proud, dark, and he
saw in her eyes things he had seen too often to have
compassion for them. And he heard the cruel jest
with which she was delivered, and was unmoved by
that as well.
The woman saw a man, thin and tall, with a face
that held nameless memories: a cold face, alien in its
inhumanity. Then she understood the purport of the
jest, and reddened darkly upon her pallor. The man
was a eunuch.
‘What is your name ?’ Kleon asked, and remembered
how long before he had asked that of another Roman
woman, Lavinia.
She answered ‘Puculla’, staring at him, her hands
trembling. And then a strange thing happened. The
fear seemed to fade from her eyes. They looked at
each other a long moment, with the Gauls crowding
in the doorway to watch. Kleon turned to them,
passionlessly.
‘I thank you. I’ll heed to the woman.’
224
SPARTACUS
(ii)
The slave forces retreated slowly up through Brit-
tium. Spartacus saw the scene with both his own
eyes and those of Crassus the Lean. For himself,
Brittium was the road to Rhegium and Sicily. For
Crassus it was a cage in which to hem the slaves till
fresh legions could be brought or raised against them :
or they starved into submission. To attain Sicily the
slaves would need ships. If they did not attain it 
He gave orders to strip the country in their south¬
ward march. So it was done. Trees were cut down
and sawn and dragged in the rear of the army in the
Gaulish waggons. Anvils and all iron things were
taken from the smithies. Harvests were stripped as
by locust-plagues. Herds were raided and driven
together, a sea of tossing horns and humps, flowing in
advance of the slave-retreat. So, more like a nation in
transit than a moving army, the slaves came to the
Rhegine neck and passed it.
But there Spartacus left forces on guard, Gershom
and Castus with their legions ; and himself pressed
down to the sea-coast with Kleon and Gannicus.
It was late autumn. The sea flung long hands up
on the land, there were vine-lands through which the
army passed where the slaves rested and slaked their
thirst, crushing the grapes on their lips in a strange,
tender ecstasy. Here in Rhegium the slaves now rose,
and would have massacred the Masters, but that Spar¬
tacus forbade it. And he directed that no granaries
or houses be destroyed, nor women unwilling be taken
to the beds of the slaves. Then lalo found him an
empty house in the city that looked on the Messine
Straits, and he set to reorganizing the slave-hosts for
the coming invasion of Sicily.
IN RHEGIUM
225
All shipping had fled, and for hope of transport
they must negotiate with the pirates of Sicily. This
task was deputed to Kleon. But here, in the sound of
the sea, a strange restlessness seized the Greek. Like
a ghost long void of hearing and taste, yet remembering
a sound and a scent, he would wander the shores night
after night, smelling the sea and looking up at the
coming of the stars in the quiet of the Rhegine nights.
Then he would return to his room where the woman
Puculla awaited him, with downcast eyes and silent
lips.
And a strange relationship flowered between them,
dimming his hate of the Roman and Italian name, his
bitter memories—her loathing of a slave as an animal
with whom no patrician might consort. At first, while
Kleon slept, she would shudder at the thought that he
was no man, one mutilated beyond manhood, with no
lust of men that might injure her. And hate had
come in her heart, unaccountably, at that thought;
then it passed. In the days that now were come her
eyes lost hate and fear alike, looking on the eunuch
her master.
And Kleon, women-hated, women-hater, stirred
to a strange, queer pity as he looked at his slave. In
their third week in Rhegium, while still they awaited
the coming of the pirates and their ships from Sicily,
he told her she was free, she would be passed beyond
the slave lines and the Romans receive her, for she had
come to no harm. She bent her head and thanked
him, and went soft and barefooted from his room.
And Kleon stared after her with cold, green eyes, and
sighed at himself—what was the woman to him, he
to any woman ?
On the next night he had her mounted on a Rhe¬
gine pony and himself rode with her up to the Rhegine
neck, through the guarding lines of the Bithynian
p
226
SPARTACUS
legion. Beyond, far in the night, were the watch-
fires of the Masters. And they rode together and did
not speak, and a strange peace was with them, they
had laid aside master and slave. And Puculla said,
gently :
cPd have had such as you to share my bed in other
times, and my children as well, O Kleon !’
And Kleon said : ‘And Pd have had you, for the
delight of you, and your gentle heart. But this is not
to be.’
And she wept, and they kissed one the other ; and
Kleon saluted her and they said vale, and she rode
away. And she came back again and they kissed
again—with a ghost of passion, the mutilated slave ;
with a hungryhorror and pity and a weeping tenderness,
the Roman woman. Then she went out of his life,
he never saw her again, he went back to the Messine
town. But he went back strangely altered. For that
dull hopelessness that had come on him with the failure
of the March on Rome now passed. And with it there
passed, more ancient, he had thought it life-enduring,
that frozen hate that had girdled his heart since the
morning he had ceased to be a man.
(Hi)
He plunged into reorganizing the slave army with
a skill and hre that moved the Strategos to a look of
wonder.
‘You sleep seldom these hours, Kleon.’
The Greek laughed at himself. ‘It’s because
Sicily’s so near, no doubt—Sicily and Syracuse. It was
there that Plato went to found the New Republic.’
Of that the Thracian knew nothing, till Kleon
told him the tale. The great slave laughed.
IN RHEGIUM 227
‘I’d have liked to have known your Plato. Is he
dead ?’
‘Many years ago.’
‘Had he slaves ? There were slaves in this Republic
he planned ?’
Kleon looked away. ‘There were slaves.’
‘Then he was only as the other Masters. I know
nothing of the histories or plans of men, but there’ll
never be peace or the State unshaken, with women
suckling their children at peace and men at work in the
fields with quiet hearts, but that slave and master alike
is unknown in the land. These slaves we lead—would
they be better Masters than those we go to supplant
in Sicily ?’
‘They would be no worse.’
‘And it would come to the same. If ever we build
our slave state, there’ll be no slaves in it at all.’
The Greek was fired by that vision a moment.
‘We could do it in Syracuse—if we kept but strong
enough, lived long enough, you and I.’
The great slave-general laughed again, but hardly.
‘It is only the slaves themselves that can do that. Not
you or I alone. We are here to lead. We pass. But
they endure.’
And Kleon went back to his own lodging with a
strange twist to his thoughts. Would ever a time come
when men were so ? Would ever return that Golden
Age of which Hiketas had dreamed, men hunting and
living untrammelled and free, ere Cronos spun the
wheels of Time ? Would ever again the men of the
Golden Age stir in the blind, dull hearts of the great
slave-hordes ? Till Puculla and Kleon and Titul
might yet be one ?
They awaited the Pirates of Sicily.
228
SPARTACUS
(iv)
And at length a bireme brought the envoy of those
Pirates to treat with Kleon for the transport of the
Free Legions across the Messine Straits. He was an
Iberian, tall and scarred and lacking one hand ; and
Kleon sat and stared at him when the two Gauls brought
him in. And the pirate stared also, and then gave a
great cry, for he was Thoritos of the One Hand, once
the leader of Kleon long before, the Greek his lieutenant
in the pirate city that lay in the lee of the great White
Isles.
They cried each other’s names, and kissed. And
then the eyes of the pirate went pityingly to Kleon’s
middle, as though to gaze on his mutilation : for he
knew he had come to treat with a eunuch. And Kleon
smiled his old smile as of old, if with less bitterness in
it now.
‘So they did to me, Thoritos. But you still sail
the seas.’
The Iberian flushed, that his gaze had been under¬
stood. ‘You’ve paid back that mutilation to the
Masters, or the tales they tell of you lie.’
Kleon asked what tales they told, and the pirate
answered that of all men who companioned the
Gladiator, the Greek eunuch was known for cold¬
blooded cruelty, even as Spartacus for his incompre¬
hensible clemency. Kleon said :
‘If I save the slave-army the name of rapine and
cruelty, and take it upon myself, how better can I
serve it ? But this matter of the ships: how soon
can you take the Free Legions to Sicily ?’
So they fell to haggling on the great sum the Pirates
demanded, more (as was known to Kleon) than Sparta¬
cus had in his treasury. From that great sum Thoritos
IN RHEGIUM . 229
would not move. Such he had been commissioned
to demand : he was no more than a messenger. And,
looking out on the flying scud of the Messine Strait,
Kleon guessed that he spoke truly, and by some means
the sum of gold must be raised.
‘Then that’s agreed. Half the gold when your
admiral brings the fleet for embarking ; and the other
half when we reach Sicily.’
But neither to this would Thorites agree, demanding
half of the gold at the moment, the other half when
the fleet came. For to bring the fleet would mean
great preparation, the abandonment of lucrative raids,
danger from the Roman ships as never before. Kleon
said : ‘And what surety have we that you’ll indeed
bring your fleet for the passage to Sicily ?’
Thoritos smiled like a wolf, scratching at his face
with the stump of the arm an ancient sea-fight had
left him.
‘No surety.’
Kleon sent to Spartacus and told him the terms of
the Pirates. Spartacus had the Pirate Thoritos brought
before him ; and the Pirate saluted the tall, lonely
figure in the gilded armour. And something mocking
and indifferent went from his eyes, looking in the eyes
of Spartacus.
‘We’ve no surety to give but our word ; even as
we’ve no surety that once your slaves are in our ships
they won’t seize them, and take from us both our lives
and treasure.’
Now, that thought had been in the mind of
Kleon, for he knew the Pirates treacherous, holding
faith by nothing but gain. And how, Sicily once
attained, might it be defended for the New Republic
except by a great fleet ? But Spartacus shook his
head.
‘That I swear we’ll not do.’
230
SPARTACUS
The Pirate asked by what God he swore, and then
Spartacus swore by the earth and the air (for he knew
no other Gods), and by blood, for so Thoritos demanded.
And the Pirate was paid his gold and went back to his
bireme, and sailed into the haze of the Messine Straits ;
and a proclamation went through the slave camps of
the amount of gold that had been paid, and the amount
that must yet be raised.
Then the slaves stripped their women of gold, brace¬
lets and brooches stolen in loot : and all gave up the
gold they had treasured for the time when they should
be citizens, and free, in Italy, or in their own lands.
And Spartacus wore on his finger a ring Elpinice had
given him, long before, and that also was flung in
Kleon’s scales, Kleon standing with two literati at the
door of the house of Spartacus, while the slaves filed
past and flung their gold in the scales against the sum
for Sicily. When it came to the turn of the tribunes,
Gershom ben Sanballat flung in the scales a great rope
of gold that Kleon had seen around the neck of the
woman Judith. Titul the Iberian stripped from his
ears the rings that Petronia had worn two years
before. Castus and Gannicus each gave a great sum.
But Spartacus had nothing but the ring, and Kleon
himself, as he thought with a smile, sardonic still, but
less bitter than once, nothing at all, as befitted a no¬
man.
Yet at length the sum was complete, the scales
turning with the two talents brought by the Sicel
maid Mella who served the Strategos. She had kept
them in her breast against time of need : and the time
had come. A laugh arose from the slaves as she threw
them in the scales, and a shout as these scales turned :
and she looked at the Strategos, and he at her, and the
dark compassion was in his eyes. She went comforted
into his house to set his meat. And the slaves dispersed.
231
IN RHEGIUM
Still the Pirates delayed their coming.
M
Then a great rainstorm arose. Gershom ben
Sanballat, at the Rhegine neck, sent news of the Roman
lines closing down on the Peninsula, so that little traffic
came now from Italy, and fewer merchants than of old
tried to creep through when the news came how the
slaves had been stripped of gold. The army of Crassus
rolled inexorably down upon the Neck.
The storm passed. Days of late autumn sunshine
came. Still the Pirates delayed. From roof-top and
hill the slaves watched for the sails that never came,
seeing in flecks of cloud the coming galleys, seeing in a
fisherman’s boat, far off, scudding before the breeze,
the ships of Thoritos and his allies.
Yet they came not, day upon day. The birds
went south from the Rhegine land ; the sun went
with them, sun and swallows in long wavering flights
into the brightness of the Middle Seas while still the
slave host peered across the Straits. Mornings came
now in a cold white mist: one morning the slaves
found hoar-frost on the roofs. And still the Pirates
of Sicily delayed.
Then at last, no day, but in the dead of night,
Thoritos sent news in a little boat across the Messine
Straits. The envoys of Crassus the Lean had come to
the Pirates, bringing great bribes from the Senate
if they refused transport to the Spartacist army. The
Pirates had agreed.
Thoritos, that he might not offend the Gods, sent
back the sum that had been his share from the slaves’
first payment. But this the rest of the Pirates refused
to do.
232
SPARTACUS
The slave tribunes sought to keep secret the news,
but it ran through the camp like a hre. What next ?
And now ?
Where ?
Whither ?
Snozv in Rhegium
(i)
VV7INTER came. It came that year with unexampled
^ severity, so that many of the slaves, men of the
south, Africa, and the Egyptians, men of warm lands and
heat-grey skies, perished. Gershom of Kadesh found
his legion thinning in the unceasing frosts, the keen
winds that now rang down the Messine Straits; and
himself began to cough blood of a night when he woke
and heard near him the breathing of Judith. Winter.
And next ? Where ? Whither ?
They were hemmed in and trapped in Rhegium.
For the legions of Crassus had now set to the building
of a wall and fosse across the Peninsula, to hem in the
Free Legions from the rest of Italy and starve them into
submission. The Lean had had great hordes of slaves
driven down from Calabria, a quota conscripted from
every farm, bands brought from the mines of the north,
even—so the irony of the chance—galley-loads brought
from Sicily. Under the lash and the shouted commands
of the Roman legionaries these slaves toiled in thousands
raising the dyke against their fellows, trapped in
Rhegium, where already provisions grew scarce.
But for a little, in this situation, the slave army
knew an unwonted cohesion and unity of purpose.
The slave hosts looked out on a world of winter that
hated and feared them, they saw on every side the
gibbet and cross did they break or divide. The
mutterings of Gannicus ceased. Nightly he led slave
raids on the dyke, once beating back the Roman
guards and filling up the fosse for a great stretch.
The Romans retreated in disorder to the camp of
Crassus. Then to Gannicus was brought a score of
prisoners, one of them a tribune, captured by the dyke.
The German looked at them and brooded in the
233
234 SP ART ACU S
glare of the torches, his crested helmet blown in the
stinging wind. Then he laughed his great laugh and
gave an order ; and that night the Romans in Crassus’
camp, preparing an assault to recapture the dyke,
heard the sound of hammering and strange cries as the
darkness waned to morning.
And when the light came they found the slaves
had retired a mile away, to their own lines again ; and
high above the ruined dyke was reared a score of
crosses on which hung the Romans whom Gannicus
had captured. The tribune and one other lived when
taken down ; but by nightfall the others had died
from the swellings of inflammation. And the Roman
legions, who had thought the slave rebellion ended
but for a play like firing a fox from a hole, stared south
and felt little delight in the game they were here to
play. Only Crassus smiled as he sat in his tent and
planned the next step, the isolation of Rhegium by
sea as by land.
And Gershom ben Sanballat, coughing blood at
night, would think of the orange groves of Kadesh as
he heard the sleep-breath of Judith beside him, and
wonder in his dark, closed heart when the end would
come. For he knew it would come, and yet—and
yet—the Strategos had saved them before. Might
he not again ?
Such the hope that burgeoned through all the
slave army, even while it shivered and food grew
scarce. The Strategos would save them yet. And
about that hope there presently blossomed an insane
flowering of rumour—of his power, his plans, how he
had formed an alliance with the African princes, who
were sailing to his aid, the legions in Iberia had revolted,
Crassus would be summoned away to deal with them,
the Pirates had been won over again, and were sailing
back to transport the Free Legions to Sicily . . .
IN RHEGIUM
235
Gershom knew these fancies but fancies, striding
back at nightfall to the house on the sea-wall where
Judith awaited him. For he had taken the woman to
his bed again, in that wave of knowledge of a hostile
world that had come on all the slaves, in a sudden
loneliness such as he had known never before. Some'
times there came between them still the shadow ot
the dead child whom she had strangled in the Picene
camp, he would see it in the lamplight as he watched
her disrobe; and the Jew would groan, and she
come to him, thinking an old wound ached, as it did,
and look down on his tangled beard and tormented
eyes, and ask what she might do. And Gershom
would growl: ‘Sleep.’
But he thought of this son who might have prayed
by his side in the Temple, bringing an offering there
with him, where the sheen of the plumage of doves
was blue in the blue-tiled courts; who might have
made the last rites over him, dead ; who might have
known the winds of Levant, the cry of the Hasidim
bands in salute ; who might have endured the holy
ceremony of circumcision, consecrating him to God.
And to Gershom, who had never hated the Romans
as Masters, knowing there would be slaves till the world
ended, there came the cold Jewish fury in his heart
as he looked at the broken woman who had murdered
the fruit of her womb and his seed to save it from a
Roman spear. If ever the Strategos led them against
Rome again . . .!
Twice Spartacus rode out to see the great dyke
with which the Romans had hemmed him in Rhegium.
Castus went with him, riding wistfully beside him that
second time. But Spartacus was far in his own
thoughts as he halted his stallion. Wrapped in his
abolla, he looked on that line of earthworks driving
straight as a sword-cut across the Peninsula, the black
236 SP ART ACU S
earth piled high on the further side, the near side a
deep dyke, swimming with liquid mud, defended with
pointed stakes. Beyond, and on the parapets in the
cold winter light, gleamed the helmets of the Roman
sentries. On the wind came the smell of their camp,
the smoke and stench of a camp of the time. A little
Iberian, a leader of velites, one Titul, came riding to
where the two slave-generals sat, and pointed to a
group of Romans riding the further side of the
fosse.
cIt is the Lean himself,’ he said.
So, beyond bowshot of each other, Spartacus and
Crassus looked on each other for the first time. In
the wind Crassus’ cloak was drawn tight about his
mean body, his face, high and pinched, peered from
under his peaked helmet, the face of a merchant, his
tribunes said, cold and sharp, with clear eyes and the
avaricious mouth.
‘It is the Gladiator himself,’ a tribune murmured.
He was mounted on the great white stallion that
all Italy knew well. His abolla shook out in the wind
from the gilded armour that encased his body, a great
body that fitly matched the great horse it bestrode.
The Romans could see the blow of the uncut Thracian
hair in the wind, for the slave wore no helmet.
Crassus nodded.
‘We’ll yet have him on the cross. Bring a Sagit¬
tarius.’
So they brought an archer, and he bent a great
bow, the wind in his favour, but the distance was too
great. They saw the slave-general sit unmoved while
three arrows were loosed. Then he turned about
and rode back to his camp, and the Romans to theirs,
while the stratus clouds thickened in the sky. And
that night the frost began to loosen its grip on the
Rhegine land.
IN RHEGIUM
237
(ii)
Next morning the snow began to fall, at first a
fairy feathering of the greyed Italian sky. But as the
day increased the wind rose, driving the snow ever
thicker, in great gusts. Many of the slaves had never
seen snow before. They ran out of doors, the women
and children, and stared at it with astounded eyes and
palms extended to the sailing flakes. The Negroes
thought it salt and licked their hands, but it melted,
leaving a cold, brittle taste. The Gaul and Teutone
legions ceased their shivering. They knew this thing
and were unafraid, and played great games in the
piling drifts, rolling balls of the snow in effigies of
Crassus and pelting these effigies with filth, rolling
smaller balls with which they pelted the Eastern and
African slaves, who stared astounded from their
encampments at the antics of the Northern men.
But these were remembering the long winter nights
by the Baltic, forested dawns that came white in snow ;
and they hated Spartacus that he had led them to
perish in this little Neck when they might have crossed
the great mountains and by now have reached to their
own lands.
Kleon was strategos of the day. He rode the
Rhegine boundaries, with two Bithynians in attend¬
ance. On the Neck he came to the encampment where
Titul, the leader of the velites, crouched shivering
by a fire. The Greek smiled at him, contemptuously.
‘Do you fear a storm worse than the Masters,
Iberian ? This stuff is no more than the spittle of
Kokolkh.’
Titul shivered. ‘Mighty were the great White
Storms in the vanished Western Isle. Do you think
the God calls for a sacrifice ?’
238 SPARTACUS
c0f Roman hearts, without doubt,’ Kleon said,
and rode on. At the slave dyke he found the
Bithynian legion marched back to the town, and Castus’
Gauls replacing it. Castus himself lay idle in his tent.
‘The Romans won’t move,’ said Castus. ‘This
storm’s but begun.’
‘So Spartacus says.’
‘You’ve seen him to-day ? He’ll ride out to the
dykes ?’
Kleon shook his head, with a cold wonder over
this love of the Gaul for the Thracian Gladiator.
Many had loved him : but this was the strangest love
of all. And because in the ancient Hellas there had
been such loves, acknowledged and unashamed, Kleon
found the essence unamazing, if the constancy of
Castus inexplicable.
‘The Strategos has other tasks. Give up this
hoping for him, Gaul. He’ll never lie in your bed, or
you in his.’
Castus flushed red, his hand on his dagger. But
the eunuch merely smiled his dark, weary smile, and
rode away with wrapped cloak and head bent against
the bitter wind-drive.
In the camp of the Bithynians he found Gershom
ben Sanballat squatting over lists of gear and equip¬
ment, stores, all military supplies. Spartacus had
called for these lists, and Gershom pulled angrily at
his beard at sight of Kleon.
‘Your work, I suppose. What need have we of
these lists until Spring ? We can’t move until Spring
-—if then.’
‘Spartacus makes his own plans, seeking counsel
from none.’
‘Unless it be the shade of the divine Plato, doubt¬
lessly summoned from hell. Greek : Gannicus again
is trying to stir revolt among the legions.’
IN RHEGIUM 239
Kleon was unalarmed. He yawned. cWe’d feel
the Free Legions unhomely, were Gannicus not in
our midst, attempting to stir up revolt.’
The German lay on a couch in a rough wooden
shelter, drinking warmed ale, a woman on either side
of him, the look of a sated bull on his face. He
barely stirred at Kleon’s entrance.
“There’s nothing—nothing but snow and waiting
here while we stagnate and the Thracian dreams.’
‘And what would you have him do ?’
‘Drive out the Rhegine Masters. Cut their
throats or drive them into the Rhegine Dyke.
So we might have the food they now eat. Or
send again to Sicily, offering a greater sum to the
Pirates.’
‘Or send to Crassus, offering the head of Gannicus
as the price of a free passage. It is you who dream,
Scythian.’
Evening was falling as he rode back to the town :
with its fall the snow increased to a blind whirl that
made seeing a matter of chance. The sky cascaded
upon the earth, Rhegium was wrapped in white, its
hills and dales. In their houses, country and town,
the Masters, starving, crouched above low-burning
braziers and knew they might not survive until Spring.
Already there was famine and worse. And Crassus
(they knew) would not move until Spring.
Kleon found Spartacus asleep, and lalo and Mella
on tiptoe in the house. The Greek went and sat by
the brazier in the room where the Strategos slept,
covered with a cloth. Outside the wind whoomed
through the narrow streets of the Messine town.
Kleon sat and stared in the brazier, wearied with his
ride, his thoughts dulled by the buffet of the storm,
his eyelashes fringed with snow-rime. Once Mella
came and looked in, then drew away at the vacant
240 SP ART ACU S
stare of the eunuch. Spartacus slept in the half¬
dark, silent, as one dead.
Whither ? Where ? What thing could they next
attempt ? Spring would come, and over the dykes
that hemmed them in come the freshened legions of
Rome, trained and practised all the winter months for
its coming. The legions, with food and fresh-ground
swords—and the starved Free Legions to oppose them.
And galley-loads of Romans crossing the Straits,
assailing the town, undefended, for no engineer had
taken the place of Hiketas. Was this the end ?—or
might Spartacus waken again ?
Now he could feel the house shake in each icy
gust ; and he thought of the shivering encampments
where the slaves lay who could find no lodging in the
crowded town. The women and children would
perish first, that would leave more food for the men,
a better defence when the Spring at last came. But
in this weather even the men, the southern and
eastern men, were dying thickly enough out there in
the dark.
He heard Spartacus awake. The Thracian peered
at him in the half-dark.
‘Kleon ? It is still snowing ?’
‘Thicker than ever,’ the Greek said.
The Gladiator listened for a little to the sound of
it. Then he stood up.
‘We’ll leave Rhegium to-night.’
(iii)
It was three hundred stadia in length, fifteen feet
deep and fifteen feet wide, the Rhegine Ditch that
Crassus had driven across the neck of the Peninsula.
None might pass, north or south : and as the gale of
IN RHEGIUM 241
that night, snow-blind, set in, the centurions with¬
drew their men from the emplacements on the dyke,
for in the open no living thing might survive.
Presently the Roman camp was white-swathed, and
still the gale drove black, now sleet, now snow, south-
westwards in the dark. From their camp the Romans
presently heard the howling of wolves, and knew the
scavengers of the night were abroad, hungrier than
ever in the famine that held the Peninsula.
No living thing could live or endure long in that dark¬
ness and storm. Spring would come. Until then . . .
The slave-army marched from the Messine town.
Many perished ere they had gone ten stadia. Many
were lost in the blinding gusts of the wind, and strayed
into the hills and next day were surrounded and
massacred by the Masters. Yet the main body held
together, the horse moving at the pace of the women
and the loaded baggage-wains that creaked softly
forward, with muffled wheels, through the snow-
covered tracks. For, by the order of Spartacus, they
had swathed the wheels in straw that no noise might
be heard ; and all gear that might tinkle or clank on
slave-armour was swathed in cloth, and no light was
shown in all the length of the army as it moved up
through the night.
Sometimes a great gust of snow smote on the
marching ranks so that the whole army paused, gasping,
leaning against the wind, the Bithynians coughing and
choking, the Gauls and Germans grimly enduring.
Yet presently upon them all, even upon the women
who stumbled and gasped through the unending
darkness, a fierce hate and energy descended.
Weeping and cursing, the slaves still marched forward,
seeing but a hand’s-breadth in front of their eyes in
the snow-swirl, unaware whither they were led, how
it fared in front, or who were lost behind.
Q
242 SP ART ACU S
Titul led the van, Spartacus and lalo behind him,
surrounded by the Gladiator guard. The Thracian
lalo had his hand on the tail of Titul’s horse, the other
hand grasping a dagger that he might stab his fellow-
slave to the heart at the least sign of treachery. This
was the command of the Strategos, who rode composed
and silent, peering into the snow.
The snow fell thicker and thicker. Twice
Spartacus sent back a message, asking if all was well,
to Kleon who brought up the rear with stragglers.
It passed from mouth to mouth, the message, the
Gauls gasped the words in their clipped Latin argot,
the Germans screamed it in their guttural throats,
the Bithynians whispered it down the tracks, through
the lanes of stumbling feet in the dark, the flash and
glow in the snow of swaying shoulders and desperate
faces. Twice the message reached Kleon and he sent
back the word that all was well, though the message
lied. Then no further message came, for by then,
on the Neck, in the full pelt of the storm, the slaves
cursed and refused any message, believing at last the
Gods were to destroy them, that Spartacus had sold
himself to the Masters and now led them out to die
in the storm.
Titul drew bridle. ‘The Dyke.’
The Strategos rode to the verge and tried to peer
down and across it. Then he turned and gave the
order that it should be filled up.
It was impossible. But it was done. The slaves
fought and wept in the darkness, weeping with cold,
dragging up great stones to the Neck and hurling them
in the Roman dyke, piling earth and trees and baggage-
wains in the great dark gap. The roar of the storm
grew to a scream while they toiled and fought; and a
great moan went south on the wind through the
Rhegine night.
IN RHEGIUM
243
(iv)
The morning came. The wind had died away,
save ever and again an icy gust that flapped the soft
scud of the snow into drifting wreaths over the
shrouded hills. All the world lay storm-raped and
still, except for the howling of the wolves in the
woods, their hunger still unsatisfied as another hungry
day broke.
The Roman camp awoke. Crassus had slept in
his tent shiveringly, for he hated the south and the
cold. Yet when they brought him warmed wine they
found him already in his armour. He had resolved to
leave the Peninsula, leave his tribunes to hold the
slaves in their trap, and himself return to Rome and
heed to his own interests until the Spring came.
He gave his orders swiftly, and a murmur of relief
passed over the camp when the news was known.
The legions might relax a little at last.
The guards who had withdrawn from the dyke
marched back there shiveringly, and took up their
posts. But when the centurions came to the southern
sector they stared aghast.
Even the snow might not cover it. For a third of
the dyke had been filled in the night; and, winding
dark under the canopy of snow, a great black track
rose out of Rhegium like the trail of a snake, and
passed north, into the horizon’s whiteness.
The Free Legions had filled in the ditch and
marched unheard past the Roman camp in the storm.
Spring was awaiting their feet as they pressed north.
And once again all Italy lay at the feet of the Gladiator.
VI. THE MASTERS
Breaking-Poim
o
,T<HEY marched into Lucania and into the Spring,
‘L Crassus toiling wearily in their wake—despairingly,
his tribunes thought, out-generalled and out¬
manoeuvred. And the whisper ran through the
legions that he planned himself to retire on Rome,
leaving the war to other hands and the return of
Pompeius. Meantime, the Romans passed through a
land stripped bare in the famine-march of the slaves,
the Spring had wilted at their touch. Starving bands
of nomads and robbers who had once been free citizens
now roamed the land, with tales of the cruelties of
the black Jew leader and the Greek eunuch who
organized searches in houses and barns, looting every¬
thing that might be carried away, and destroying that
which could not. To ease his fear and fury Crassus
had numbers of these bandit nomads nailed to trees,
and followed on in the trail of Spartacus.
What was now his objective ? The sea ?—or
again to march north through Gallia Cisalpina, and
escape from Italy—not turn as once before, inexplic¬
ably, he had done ?
The Free Legions camped in North Lucania, near
the city of Pola. There Spartacus called a counsel
of his tribunes, a day of soft Italian sunlight, in the
space outside the door of his tent. While they heard
him speak the slave leaders lay about his feet on the
ground, and Spartacus looked at them with inscrut¬
able eyes : faces with which he had grown so familiar,
the bull-like brutality of Gannicus, the haughty Jew
face of Gershom, Kleon’s thin, sardonic profile, the
blond fairness of Castus. Oenomaus had died in
Rhegium.
In the slave-camp all around was a hammering on
SP ART ACU S
248
anvils and a sharpening of swords. Spring and war
on the Masters had come again.
Spartacus was short and plain in his speech.
‘To-morrow we’ll march on Rome.’
With many guesses as to their nature, they had
assembled to hear his plans. But none had guessed
this. For a little while they said nothing. Then
Kleon spoke in his thin, eunuch’s voice :
‘There’s no other course. But I thought I alone
saw that.’
Gershom of Kadesh looked from one to the other,
sardonically. ‘So ? We’ll go peep again at Rome,
and lick our lips, and scurry away—as we did before ?’
‘We’ll not run this time,’ Spartacus said. ‘The
Free Legions are of a different temper now.’
And this was true. They had been welded as a
blade in a fire in the months in Rhegium. But
Gershom combed at his beard.
‘But Rome ’
‘It is madness.’
This was Gannicus. He spoke not with his usual
heat, the bull-bellowing that Kleon and Gershom,
with their southern blood, found pitiful and con¬
temptible, but with the coolness of strength and
certainty. He said again, ‘It’s madness. And my
legions’ll have no part in it.’
Gershom looked at him. ‘You threaten the
council ?’
The German laughed. ‘The Teutones need no
threats to say what they will or will not.’
Then Castus spoke. ‘Nor the Gauls.’
At that all save Spartacus looked on him in
astonishment—he who had followed the Thracian
with such blind devotion, the c pen mock of the slave-
camps, good general though he might be. Spartacus
looked from one to other of his tribunes with the
T H E M A ST E RS 249
changing dark lights in his eyes—sombre and deep,
yet shining still like the eyes of a snake.
‘We’ll march on Rome.’ _
At that Castus flushed and sprang to his feet. His
voice rose in a sudden shrill scream which startled the
sentries and the surrounding slaves, so that they
gathered at a distance to watch and hear.
‘Rex Servorum ! We know the plan of yourself
and your eunuch bed-man, Spartacus. But we’ll
be no part to it. You plan to march on .Rome and
betray us to the Masters, in return for their gold and
a generalship in their legions. We 11 be no part to it.
These are the Free Legions, not your legions,
Spartacus. We march north, you 11 never see us
again. You hear ? Never again!’
A foam had gathered on the lips of the Gaul, and
Kleon saw his eyes roll like those in the head of a mad
dog. The council sat astounded. Then Gannicus
stood up beside Castus.
‘So I say also. Attack Rome if you will. You
do not do it with our legions.’
But Gershom ben Sanballat was now on his feet.
‘Your legions, you slave dogs ? Where would either
you or your legions be but for the Strategos ? Lead
your legions from Italy ? You’ll lead them to the cross!’
lalo had watched and heard. Now he went out
secretly and summoned the Gladiator guard. They
came running and surrounded the tent; and fear
came in the heart of Gannicus at sight of them. He
licked his lips, grown suddenly dry, bull-like in courage
though he was.
Spartacus said again: ‘We march on Ro.me.
There’s no other course open to the Free Legions
if they’d survive at all. And the Gauls and Teutones
march with us—with or without the tribunes who now
lead them.’
250
SPARTACUS
He had not risen. He did not look up. But the
blood quite went from Gannicus’s face, and even
Kleon, cold and imperturbable, felt a sting of fear
at that icy note in the voice of the Gladiator. None
spoke. Then Gannicus looked round the Gladiator
guard and licked his lips again.
‘You’re the Strategos. So be it, Spartacus.’
The Thracian looked at Castus. ‘And you ?’
Castus stared back at him. Had he never under¬
stood, could he never understand ? And perhaps
in that moment, if but for a moment, the Thracian
did. Some look came in his eyes that Castus read :
and at that the foam gathered afresh on his lips. But
he licked them clean. He said in a whisper, ‘You are
the leader.’
‘We march to-morrow,’ Spartacus said. ‘Crassus
is already on a level with us—our velites have sighted
him on the right. But he camps to-night and knows
nothing of our plan. Before he strikes camp to¬
morrow we’ll be on the road to Rome.’
But a great weariness took the heart of the
Gladiator that night. All the plans were made for the
march on Rome, and to-morrow drew near—to¬
morrow, to-morrows without end. What though
they marched on Rome and took it, and slew the
Beast of the Tiber and ended the rule of the Masters
for ever ? What peace or ease or delight might he
ever find in the midst of this bickering of slaves—be
they slaves in fact or but slaves by memory ? And he
remembered suddenly, so seldom he remembered
them now, they had grown thin shadows that came at
nightfall, Elpinice and Crixus, his dead loves killed
THE MASTERS
251
by the Masters—they with whom he had once found
peace and understanding in long silences, they who
could sit at meat with him and need no words to tell
their love or their fear. And Spartacus groaned
aloud, terrible in the darkness for the Thracian lalo
to hear.
He went and brought the Strategos wine, but
Spartacus told him to go, such agony in his voice as
lalo had never heard. The little maid Mella came
whispering to his side.
‘The Strategos is sick,’ he told her. ‘If Gannicus
has had him poisoned ■’
But the little Sicel maid saw more clearly than
that, dimly though she knew the mind of her master.
She said, ‘I’ll go to him,’ and so did, and knelt beside
him. And Spartacus stirred in the darkness at her
touch, and put out his hand on her shoulder, and hid
his face, and groaned again. And to lalo that was
still more terrible as the hours went by and the night
waned, to look in ever and again and see the Strategos
still gripping the shoulders of the maid. She knelt
unmoving, her fair hair falling on the dark head of the
Strategos, neither sleeping with the sleeping world out-
by, lalo looked at them with weary eyes as the earth
wheeled to morning. In the early hours there rose the
sound of a great tramping in the eastern camps, but no
horns blew, and the Thracian guard thought it but the
return or despatch of velites. Then Mella came from
the tent.
‘He’s sleeping now.’
So the Thracian saw that he did, and they covered
him with a cloth and left him ; and Mella lay down
and slept also; and the noise of men stirring in the
eastern camp died away.
Kleon heard it, in his tent by the southern
entrance. Neither had he slept, all night rolling and
252 SPARTACUS
unrolling the scrolls of that ponderous Lex Servorum
he had drawn up long before in Picenum, when they
turned back from the borders of Cisalpine Gaul to
conquer Rome. He had taken the scroll from a chest,
and he saw it already faded, the edges of it crinkled
in little folds from its journeyings to and fro in the
baggage of the Free Legions. And he read through
the night and dreamed over its clauses, and dozed a
little. And when the wind of the false dawn came
stirring the air he stirred from sleep, and smiled wryly
at the thought that his Lex should have sent him to
sleep. He looked out from his tent and watched the
breaking of the night; and heard, as did lalo, that
commotion in the east, and wondered that a body of
velites of such number should leave at such hour.
Then he lay down and slept again.
Gershom of Kadesh had heard the noise, awakened
from sleep by the side of Judith. His was nearer the
eastern camp than the tent of the Strategos or of lalo.
He rose and went to the entrance and looked out.
But there was no shouting, an ordered tramp, and no
attack on the camp. Also, a ground mist had come
down and patched the place of the encampment so
that he could see but little. He smelled at the air,
at the smell of the dawn in it; and went back to the
side of Judith, her warmth grateful, he put a hand
over her heart and she turned to him in sleep ; and he
remembered the dead child of her womb and turned
from her roughly, gruffly. Rome and to-morrow 
And the Thracians heard it, lying in their shelters,
line on line around the tent of Spartacus, dreaming
of the pits, the ergastula, some of Thrace and Greece,
some of Styria, where the winds played now with the
rising scents of Spring and the huntsmen trapped the
wild boar in greening thickets; and some, Scythians,
dreamed of their plains, bright with tamarisks, and the
T HE M ASTERS 253
neighing of wild horses at night; and some of women,
or lust or wine, tears and fears that their lives had
known. In a multitudinous stirring of dreams the
Thracians heard the noise in the east, a steady tramp¬
ling on the edge of dawn.
Titul the Iberian heard it. He lay with a Greek
slavewoman who had been a bedwoman in Thurii,
tall and white and comely. In her arms, her passionate
abandon, he found a form of sacrifice to his haunting,
shadowing God. And she would rise from his bed
weary and bruised, so used that the day would shame
her face at memory ; yet still she would return to him,
with a craving lust for that dark lust of life the Iberian
knew. And, her white limbs in his grasp, a shuddering
ecstasy would seize the lost tribesman.
Now he moved and listened, head alert, and freed
himself from the woman’s arms, and stole like a cat
from the shelter of boughs and sods whereunder they
slept together. Velites moving at this hour ?
The mist was passing. So was the sound of the
marching feet. But Titul ran swiftly through the camp
till he came to the Eastern Gate, running by the
parapet verge of the slave entrenchments. He found
the gate deserted, left over-night for the Gauls to guard;
and he stopped and peered about him, his gladius in his
hand. The light grew. The mists drew off. With
their passing a strange sight was given to his eyes.
The Gauls and Teutones had lain the night in the
north-east sectors of the camp. In the evening they
had flung up little turf houses, in the fashion of these
northern folk, in little circles about each centurion,
singing, and braiding their hair as the night came
down, the Gaulish women white-breasted, half-nude
in the flow of gold and flame from the lights of the
fires, the naked children about their feet, a scene
repeated a thousand times. Now 
254
SP ART ACU S
Now their camp stretched deserted under the early
sun and the wheeling cry of the scavenger birds. But
out to the north-east wound a track that vanished
unpeopled over the horizon.
Castus and Gannicus had withdrawn their legions
from the slave-army.
(m)
No cavalry went with them, yet their march was
unhindered by such bands of roving scouts as lately
had vexed the flanks of the slave-army. They found
all the country strangely deserted both that day
and the next. Halting the first night, they flung
up entrenchment against—not the Masters—but
Spartacus and the slave legions that yet remained
with him. Neither Castus nor Gannicus doubted
but that he would pursue : not to attack, but to
attempt winning over their forces.
At first, the morning they marched in secret from
the camp, they had given out that they marched under
the orders of Spartacus, they were to seize and hold a
town in Picenum for him. But now they let it be
known they were marching far to the north, marching
from Italy, beyond the Mountains, seeking safety from
the Gladiator and his legions, who had planned to
betray them to the Masters in return for their own
immunity.
Hearing this news, the Gauls held a council, the
Germans of Gannicus withdrawing apart while Castus
told his tale. Then a Gaul stood up, and they saw
it was the brother of Brennus, the rscared slave whose
ferocity towards the Masters had exceeded all bounds
that even his fellows knew. Now he said bluntly :
‘Of this quarrel with the Gladiator we’re told only
now. \fyhy not before ? If we’d desired to break
THE MASTERS
255
away we’d have done it under a different leader from
you, Castus. Perhaps under Crixus: he who trusted
the Gladiator. And who may now believe that
Spartacus would betray us ?’
But another stood up to address them, the chief
tribune of Castus. And he told how soon they would
gain the great White Mountains and the world beyond
them, honour and security in the stockaded cities and
the hunters’ cotes, in Gaul with its kindly sun and
fragrant rains, and the sleeping seas where never again
the Masters would dare to sail. And the Gauls
listened, and, as ever with them, were moved to tears
with the beauty of words in the mouth of a poet: and
they shouted that the matter be voted upon, in the
fashion which the Greek Kleon had taught them.
And each Gaul took a little stone and flung it into
one of two piles—one for return to Spartacus’s com¬
mand, one for marching to Gaul with Castus as leader.
And in a little while a murmur of laughter rose as they
saw the size of the heaps of stones. For barely a
hundred had flung their stones on the pile that voted
return to Spartacus’s army.
But the brother of Brennus flung his spear into the
centre of the great pile of stones so that the shaft
stood upright, quivering. And he cried a phrase that
troubled their minds, though they thought it the voice
of a madman.
‘Vae victoribus!’
Yet he and the others who had voted for Spartacus
marched with their fellows when the march was
resumed, in the rear of the horse of their tribune,
Castus, riding with bowed shoulders into the north.
Near evening of the second day they came through
a low pass in low hills, and far below saw the glister of a
wide sheet of water, bird-haunted, its shores fringed
with villages. This was Lake Lucania, and the joint
256 SP ART ACU S
legions marched down on it, land hitherto untouched
in the sway and flow of the slave wars across the
Peninsula. They marched up the near side of the
Lake, firing the villages, looting the granaries, and
killing such of the Masters as had not fled at their first
glimpse of the ragged slave standards, the hammered
wild boar of Gannicus’s legion, the nodding Mother-
Goddess of the Gauls. With the coming of night the
slaves camped in the ruin of a little village. Great
stores of wine had been found, and from these the
Gauls and Teutones feasted, their fires wakeful over a
great stretch of the countryside.
Castus, whose temperance had once been a subject
for jest in his legion, sat and drank with Gannicus, his
eyes red-rimmed with hate as he told of the shames
and slights he had endured at the hands of the Thracian.
And Gannicus remembered those things he himself
had endured. And they cursed the Gladiator and his
host till the curses slobbered foolishly on their lips.
Around them rose the sound of merriment under a
gibbous moon as the night went on. Then, presently,
the noise and the watch-fires began to die, except
where the brother of Brennus and his century of men
kept the far gate of the village.
The Gaul did not sleep, staring out from the
burned gateway over the stretch of water where the
night-birds cried, where long grasses rustled and moved
in the night-winds of Spring; and all the earth sent
forth a dry, growing smell that caught at his throat,
so that he remembered himself young, a boy, with no
tormented men with gouting wounds in his memory,
haunting him : but only the woods and the rnihet
patches of home, and play in the sun, and the grimed,
laughing face of Brennus, whom he had tended and
fought and loved, and the light dying from the forests
where the aurochsen lowed. And in that chill hour
THE MASTERS
257
on the morning’s edge the brother of Brennus wept,
sternly; and when he raised his head from weeping
listened, and called his fellows to listen.
It was the thunder of many feet at the legionaries’
trotting pace. Then the brother of Brennus saw by
the mere of the Lake the glint of helmets, for the
morning was near.
The army of Crassus was assailing the camp.
(iv)
There were nearly eighteen thousand men in the
Gaulish and Teutone legions of the slave army. At
first the shouting and the thrusting blades dazed the
slaves new-wakened from sleep, in a light still dim
by the shadowed lake. But they had lived too long
their lives in the slave revolt to sleep apart from their
arms, or not by this time to have learned the rallying-
cries of their tribunes. So in this place and that a
commander cried and his men came about him : and
they faced a ring of spears and long swords to the
gladius charge of the Romans. But Gannicus lay as
one dead, they had to dash water many times in his
face before he awoke : and then he muttered and
raved so that the slave tribunes knew there was little
help in him. They ran, each for their sector com¬
mands, now wilting under the full fury of the Roman
charge.
Crassus himself, as the day broke, watched the reel
and sway of the battle by the lake. He sat his horse
on a little eminence, watching with bright, avaricious
eyes. His velites had brought him on the second
day news of the departure of the Gaul and Teutone
legions from the slave army; and at first, thinking
them detached by Spartacus, he had made no move
R
SP ART ACU S
258
against them. Then a straying Gaul was captured
by the velites and brought to Crassus and put to the
question, and the provincial praetor learned that the
strategoi Gannicus and Castus had quarrelled with
the Thracian, and planned to march through Italy
and escape to their own lands.
Crassus saw these seceding slaves were in his hands.
Yet he followed them cautiously, unsure of the quality
of either Gannicus or Castus. And there was still the
Gladiator to deal with, and in greater force. What
if, as the Gaul slave had babbled through his breaking
bones, the Slave himself should march on Rome while
Crassus hunted the lesser vermin ?
But it was a necessary risk, and Crassus took it,
watching with cold, narrow eyes the burning of the
villages by Lake Lucania. Now he sat and watched
the roused slaves twice fling back his attack in a pelting
wave of routed men.
Twice. But now Crassus raised his eyes and saw a
low cloud of dust to the northwards that told him the
Fourteenth and Seventh legions had encircled the
Lake and were marching down to assail the slave camp
from a fresh angle. The slaves also saw that dust-
cloud and guessed its cause. Their tribunes—a
barber, a farm-slave, a circus-sweeper they had once
been—held a hasty council. Their decision was swift.
They must strike camp and fight out in cuneus forma¬
tion.
So, twice, as twice the Roman legions had assaulted
their entrenchments, they attempted to do. But
already a thousand or more of the slaves were dead.
And some cried for Gannicus, till the rumour spread
that he was dead; and men broke from the arrow-
headed cuneus march, and faltered at sight of the
Roman spears. Then Crassus gave the signal for
his cavalry to charge the slave camp.
THE MASTERS
259
Barely a third of it reissued from the tangle of
the slave entrenchments. But the charge had done
its work. The slave base was destroyed, and, like a
wounded beast, the cuneus attempted to fight its way
along the shore of the lake. By this time Castus
had taken command of his legion, and was cool and
quick, keeping the straying Gauls at the cuneus spear¬
head encouraged with shout and curse. He believed
Gannicus dead, and, himself planless, fought with a
fury in which there was little hope.
Behind, the depleted horse of Crassus returned
again to the assault.
And now at length, for the bitterness of three
defeats, the Fourteenth legion reaped its revenge.
At the thrust of the slave cuneus the legion deployed
in enclosing forfex: then, shields low, the small, dark
legionaries closed in at a rapid run, on the shaken
ranks of Castus.
The Gauls saw their leader a moment, young and
fairheaded and desperate, hewing with his sword.
Then a Roman sprang on his stirrup and seized him
by the hair, and while Castus swung round and
attempted to cut him down the Roman shortened his
gladius and plunged it carefully into the neck of the
Gaul. Then he withdrew the blade and, pushing
aside Castus’ hair, again stabbed him, almost severing
his head from his neck. So died Castus. Then the
forfex closed on the head of the cuneus, and the
Gaul formation fell to pieces.
Yet still they fought, in little wedges here and
there. But the Romans drew off after a little, and
their slingers and sagittarii shot their arrows and stones
upon the slaves, so that the latter fell in great numbers.
The women fought now by the side of their men, tall
and white-breasted and desperate, a great Gaulish
woman armed herself with a pilum and a Roman shield
SPARTACUS
260
and killed four legionaries before she herself was cut
down. Another, the mistress of the brother of
Brennus, was young and swift, with her child in her
arms, she ran through the turmoil of the battle and
escaped through a segment of the Roman forfex.
Almost she had reached the shelter of the village wall
when a slinger killed her with a singing pellet that
shivered her skull.
The Gauls knew nothing of the Death Ring that
the Germans could form in a desperate hour, and
formed now, the great schiltrouns of the forests.
Against these for a time the Roman attack broke in
vain. Then the pressure of sheer numbers broke the
circles, and the legionaries slaughtered at pleasure.
But even while Crassus wheeled in his horse to charge
the rear of the schiltrouns a shout arose and men lifted
their eyes and saw on the crest of the hills the shine
of fresh standards, the serpent standards of Spartacus.
(v)
Crassus faced about his legions, but the Thracian
flung the fresh Bithynians against them, driving a
wedge through the Roman ranks, himself leading the
battle, axe in hand. Crassus had his bucinators blow
the retreat, calculating to retire the legions still
unbroken.
But again his calculations missed the generalship
of the Gladiator. Spartacus sprayed fresh line on
line of slaves on the Romans, wheeling off each line
after it had engaged but a few minutes in battle.
No troops might withstand such onset or such tactics.
The Fourteenth legion broke and fled, pitilessly
pursued by the Thracians. The rest of the Romans
drew oft in good order.
26l
THE MASTERS
The battle was to Spartacus, as once to Pyrrhus.
But of the eighteen thousand Gauls and Germans a
bare three thousand survived. With these fell Castus,
as has been told, who loved Spartacus, and never
knew him ; and Gannicus, who hated the Gladiator,
and was killed in his sleep.
The Mountains of Petelia
(i)
/TiHE slave army was again encompassed by
mountains.
But this time it was summer and retreat, the
mountains the brush-hung slopes of Petelia, not the
passes of Mutina. In the dry air the withering
vegetation seemed sometimes to take fire and burn
before the wearied eyes of the marching slaves. High
overhead carrion birds followed the long, straggling
march that wound through the valleys, deeper and
deeper into Calabria. The slaves marched with
dragging feet and panting breath, the northern men
with a lurching weariness, their tongues licking parched
lips. In the rear the Thracian Legion beat forward
stragglers from the German and Gaulish remnant:
and themselves would pause and lean on their spears,
and peer up at the enfolding mountains with heat-
hazed eyes, seeking fresh-water springs where they
might fling themselves full length in thirst, lapping
at the water slowly, like exhausted dogs.
Spartacus pressed on, deeper and deeper into the
mountains that opened, deserted, before him. Crassus’
messengers had been ahead, at their orders the
inhabitants had fired the crops and driven off the
herds, and hidden their granaries under earth and
manure. Enraged, the slaves left in their trail a line
of blazing homesteads which lighted on the pursuit of
Scrofas, the quaestor whom Crassus had sent to follow
and keep touch with the slave retreat.
Kleon rode in the rear of the Thracian rearguard,
he had taken over that duty after the desertion of
Castus and Gannicus, no longer the secretary and
councillor of the Gladiator but (and he thought of
this with a wry twist of lips) a eunuch-general of the
363
THE MASTERS 263
Free Legions. Bithynians and Egyptians well able to
endure the heat rode with him a motley collection of
mounts—Italiot ponies, great heavy-limbed horses
from Cisalpine Gaul, a half-score light Arabs : all
spoil of this battle, that raid, or yon loot. Now and
again they would wheel about and stare back through
the westwards valleys. But Scrofas was a dull and
cautious commander, he marched many stadia in the
rear of the slaves, shepherding them forward into the
summer heats and famine of Calabria.
And Kleon, with his irony tempered now by the
adversity that ground upon it, wondered what plan
the Thracian had that he led them so, wondered while
he knew what the end of the venture would be. Twice
they had planned to march on Rome, twice failed.
The second time, even after the desertion of the
Gauls and Teutones, they might still have marched
on the City of the Masters, as he and the Jew had
urged Spartacus to do. Let Crassus devour the
deserters, and, while he devoured, the Free Legions
descend on Rome and devour a fenceless city.
But Spartacus had refused. ‘We’ll save what we
can of the Northern folk. They’ve fought beside us
long.’
So, in forced marches, they had come on the
scene of the second Battle of the Lake, made that
salvation that Spartacus had promised: and sold
Rome in the task. Then into the mountains of
Calabria.
Whither ? Where f
©
Spartacus halted his van that night around the
buildings of a great deserted plantation. Here in
264 SP ART ACU S
other days many hundred slaves had toiled at the wheat
harvests of Calabria, their kennels with their rusted
chains lay broken and deserted—but for one into which
the slaves peered and saw there a mouldering cadaver,
a slave abandoned to die of starvation, through neglect
or deliberate intention. Spartacus himself walked
about the plantation and looked at the kennels of the
slaves, then around him at the footsore, ragged army
he had led into those mountains—he had led to so
many strange ventures since that night when the first
of them climbed from the pits of Batiates.
Sun and wind and rain in their faces, battle and
wounds and hunger to endure, the snows of Mutina
and Rhegium, the blistering heats of the hills of
Petelia : yet that had been better than this once lived
in these mouldering kennels before the Revolt, this
life of stripes and despair and sodden hatred. And
again in the great slave leader there grew that feeling
of a passionate identity with the slave host that he led—•
the feeling that he was one with them, lived in their
lives, tired with their tiredness, exulted in their hopes.
His tribunes questioned his plans : the great host
never did—unless deserters like Gannicus or Castus
misled it with lies and rhetoric. And he knew now,
with a great faith, the reason for that. None of his
marchings and plannings had been his alone, but an
essence of the dim wills in the minds of the multitude,
in the Negro slave who had starved and shivered up
by the Rhegine dyke, the Thracian shepherd who
limped with a bloody heel, the Bithynian porter who
disputed with the Thracian land-serf the name for
victory and defeatlessness. He was but a voice for
many, the Voice of the voiceless.
And he knew that even in this march into Calabria,
when he had seen so plainly that never now might the
Free Legions conquer Italy, he followed as much as
T H E M A ST ERS 265
led the dim mind of the host. The Gauls and
Teutones were a remnant: the rest were men of
the Middle Seas, if they could reach and capture
Brindisium, suddenly, by strategy, they might find
there ships enough to take them from Italy.
And then the curtain closed down, he might not
see beyond that.
He spoke with Kleon and Gershom that night, the
three of them sitting at meat, corn and the flesh of a
kid, the while the maid Mella served them. There
was no sign of Scrofas: the Free Legions had yet
enough food : the air was blue with the smoke of its
fires, and sprayed with the warm stench of human¬
kind. Kleon looked at the other two.
‘We three alone to survive! Remember the
crowded councils in Nola ? Though I can remember
little but the crowd, what we said or did grows dim
already.’ He brooded for a little, and then laughed.
‘As this story will grow, dim and confused, in the ages
to be, the story of the slaves’ insurrection. They’ll
mix the marches and forget our names, and make of
Gannicus a loyal hero and of Gershom here a strayed
Gaul from Marsala ! Poets and the writers of tales
will yet tell it, perhaps, each setting therein his own
loves and hates, with us only their shadowy cup¬
bearers. All dim and tangled in the tales they’ll tell,
except their beginnings with that Spring when we
roused the slaves. And all the rest a dream or a lie.’
‘So they do not make me a Roman,’ said Gershom
ben Sanballat, ‘they may lie as they will.’
Then the Strategos told them of his plan to capture
Brindisium, and Gershom nodded, combing his beard.
‘This from the first was what I advised you,
Spartacus. And now you follow my advice, and once
I’d have rejoiced, pointing to my own wisdom, and
scorning your lack of it. Yet ’
266
SP ART ACU S
Kleon smiled at him his slight, dark smile.
‘And yet, Bithynian ?’
‘Yet the Strategos had the right of it, Scythian.
Once we might have conquered Rome, all Italy, we
might have built under Spartacus a kingdom of slaves
with the Masters underfoot. Or your Republic, with
neither Master nor slave. But that a devil was
against us.’
‘There are neither Gods nor devils. Only the
Fates, who are mindless.’
‘There is the One God,’ Gershom said, ritually.
‘But he is reserved for the Jews.’
Then Spartacus said a strange thing, his eyes
remote. ‘There’s a God in men. But an Unknown
God.’
And they fell silent for a little, till the Thracian
roused. ‘We march at dawn. How is it with the
Bithynians ?’
‘Ill enough. But they’ve food.’
‘So have the Thracians—a little. And your
Gauls, Kleon ?’
The Greek smiled that twisted smile once bitter.
‘They march astounded with a eunuch for leader.
I think I fail in some duty they’re too polite to name.
Perhaps the fertilization of the Mother Goddess
—for otherwise their women will be barren.’
Gershom growled, rising, ‘Then they’d need of a
eunuch tribune. Their women spawned litters like
dogs from the day the Free Legions were formed.’
And the Greek returned to the lines of the
Gauls and lay down with a light cloak over him ;
and the Gauls took him as their leader, for he had
wisdom, though mutilated to a no-man by the
Masters.
Gershom of Kadesh went back to his legion, to the
tent of Judith, again heavy with child. She woke
THE MASTERS
267
as he came and rose, stoopingly, to bring him wine.
But he made her sit and share the wine that he drank.
And he looked at her, big with child, with angry,
kindly eyes.
‘Rest, woman, for we march at dawn to-morrow.’
She asked where and he did not say. Then
Judith said : ‘I don’t think we’ll ever see Judaea again,
or our unborn son either, Gershom. Yet I’m glad
you have brought my womb to fruit, glad to have lain
with you, though no son may ever say the prayer in
the Temple when we die.’
Then Gershom saw there was upon her the fancies
of a woman with child ; and he answered nothing,
seeking sleep ; and the woman lay beside him, but not
to sleep, hearing long the crying of the night-birds
over the camp of Spartacus.
The Gladiator himself could find no sleep. And
again, a strange whim upon him, he went out alone
(for lalo had died by Lake Lucania and he had chosen
no other guard) and walked through the ruined lines
of kennels where once the slaves had lain; and in his
heart he felt all the bitterness and tears, and all the wild
stolen delight of a moment’s ease, that these other
slaves had known. And he cursed the Masters, yet
without hate ; and went back to his room in the house
of the plantation, and found the maid Mella waiting
him there, slight and brown, weary with her day’s
march up through the hills of Petelia.
But now, looking on her with seeing eyes for the
first time in many months, the Gladiator saw she was a
child no longer, but a woman in her few years. Under
the torn tunic her breasts pushed forth their buds,
red and sweet, and her throat had lost gauntness, round
and full; and he saw the cloud of her hair about her
watching face, and the cloud of wonder that dimmed
her eyes as she looked at him.
268
SP ART ACU S
He drew her towards him, she came with a wonder¬
ing sob, he forgot the Free Legions, his hands cupping
those flowers of Spring that had burgeoned in the
summer heats, the curving buds of desire that awaited
his coming. And the little Sicel maid sobbed again,
as though a God held her ; and Spartacus took her to
his bed, and she wept, kissing him, shuddering to a
wild ecstasy in his grasp. And all night she lay there,
the God with her, and knew fulfilment and agony
that merged in delight and so in sleep ; and they slept
together, his head on her breast, till the blowing of
the bucinas roused them at dawn.
(iii)
But Scrofas gave them no rest. It seemed to him,
cautious commander though he was, that this retreat
into mountains had developed into headlong rout.
Twice the slave army had wheeled so that, describing
three-quarters of the arc of a circle, it again neared the
outlet of the Petelian hills. Confident in his quarry
as a panic-stricken beast, Scrofas pursued at its heels.
The heat grew ever more intense, so that Gauls
and Teutones fainted in the strength of it, or straggled
by the way and were cut down by Scrofas’s velites.
But the Eastern and African slaves rejoiced in the
sun’s geniality despite their footsore weariness. March¬
ing through rugged defiles, they would lift their
voices in long, wailing songs, long columns marching
into the haze of evening. Spartacus would rein in
the great white stallion and look down at his men
march past, with a new twist of compassion in his
heart, hearing the voice of the Slave, a thing that it
seemed to Kleon also he would never forget.
They had not realized, the slave rank and file, that
THE MASTERS 269
double-twist back through the Petelian mountains.
But both Kleon and Gershom ben Sanballat knew of
it; and now at length learned the reason from
Spartacus.
Scrofas knew nothing of this reason. As the slave
march quickened with each day, so he hastened his
pursuit. Crassus lay still in Lucania, gathering
reinforcement to follow slowly and meet the Gladiator
when at length he was run to earth. But what if
the Gladiator should emerge from the mountains,
pass the camp of Licinius in the dark, and descend
on Rome in a last desperate raid ?
Sweat studded the plump yellow cheeks of Scrofas
at the thought. He despatched his cavalry to over¬
take and attack the slaves.
They vanished into the bright, crystalline air of
the afternoon. The mountains towered windless,
the sky unclouded, dust rose and played like a spume
about the feet of the smarting legionaries. Mean¬
time, the Thracian legion of the Spartacists, having
ambushed and dispersed the Roman cavalry to the rear
of a narrow and nameless defile, marched back and
garrisoned that defile and awaited the arrival of
Scrofas.
Spartacus detached Gershom in command, while
he himself waited in the rear with the Bithynians and
the remnants of the Gaulish and German forces.
The Jew had great rocks gathered in heaps about the
ledges of the pass. Then he commanded the Thracians
to lie down amid the rocks and await the signal of
the horns.
Now it was a little after noon when Scrofas and his
legions came to that pass that had no name, a low
defile in the mountains of Petelia. As they climbed
a wild shouting broke all around them, the rallying-
cry of the slaves:
270
SP ART ACU S
‘Libertas! Libertas!’
Scrofas’s horse was killed under him by a rock.
The mountains seemed vomiting rocks on the Roman
march. Through the dust of their descent the Jew
flung forward half his men.
Nothing might abide that charge. When the
slave horns summoned the Thracians to retire, half
the Roman force was in rout and disorder. Neverthe¬
less, Scrofas, remounted, had the legionaries lashed
into rank again, and sent forward his sagittarii in an
effort to dislodge the slaves.
But the rocks defended them. Then Scrofas
urged the wearied Fifteenth up against the slave
position. Twice they attacked, but the second time
more cautiously, for news had been brought to
Scrofas that a path wound round the rightward
mountain whereby he might assail the slaves in the
rear.
He despatched his Second legion on that mission.
The sun wheeled towards evening. Then, in the pass
behind the Thracian ambuscade, arose a wild sound of
shouting and battle. Scrofas’s Second legion had been
trapped by the waiting Gladiator in the valley behind
the pass.
It was the signal for Gershom ben Sanballat. His
Thracians rose, freshened, and charged on the hesitant
ranks of the Fifteenth legion. Scrofas saw that the
day was lost, and fled through the hills till he came
to the camp of Crassus.
All that night his routed legions straggled into the
camp of the provincial praetor, waiting beyond the
mountains and expecting to hear that the Spartacists
had been trapped. But instead he heard of the slaves
as victors in yet another battle, victors encamped on
the battlefield and devouring the flesh of the dead
THE M ASTERS 271
Roman horses. And once again a wave of cold appre¬
hension fell on Crassus.
The Gladiator was inconquerable. He might
march from the mountains against Rome itself.
Crassusjprepared to retreat.
The Stallion
(i)
/~pHAT night, for the first time in that hot Italian
■** summer, the rain began to fall, softly, a whisper and
wisp in the darkness, shining white veils, translucent,
through the slave-camp at the hither side of the
battlefield. The slave host stirred to its coming with
hungry lips, so slight its fall it might not dampen the
fires, men lay with open mouths and uncovered bodies
at that descent of the warm summer rain; and the
wounded, groaning, stretched out their hands to it,
raining mist from the summer night.
And the hills stirred, and the dying plants raised
their heads, and the earth moved and put forth new
smells, stirring to a fresh and unforeseen life, wakening
and moving in the raining dark. And a little wind
presently came with the rain, driving it east in the
track of Scrofas’s rout; and on that wind came some
scent that caught in the throats of the slaves, so that
they stirred to slurred speech, and a wild, strange
laughter, and moments of brooding that passed into
quick action, singing, and shouting, and declamation.
Beyond the passes the great army of the Masters lay
shielding Rome. The Masters ?
Who were the Masters ?
Who had bestridden Italy like a God these last two
years, what army abided undefeated the attack of the
Serpent standards ? And the slaves wept and cursed
with slobbering lips, tearing at the flesh of the dead
horses, peering through the raining night into the
unlighted east. The Masters •
They Themselves Were The Masters ! These
the slaves, the armies of the Republic they had beaten
from battle to battle. The Masters—these, who fled
whenever the Strategos turned upon them ! And a
THE MASTERS
273
wild pride came on the slaves, and they swore they
would march no more through the mountains. Italy
was theirs and lay waiting their taking. And they
sharpened their swords and licked hungry lips, with
the little wind in their faces that was kindling all the
hills.
And the women of the slave army felt on their
faces that same rain, in their hearts the same thoughts
as their men. They had tramped the length and
breadth of the Peninsula, it under their feet, it was
theirs, Theirs, bought in the travail of the unending
roads, in the travail of wounds and death and birth,
the horde of children that had been born in the snow-
smitten, sun-smitten camps of revolt. The Masters—•
they were the Masters, they who went ragged and
hungry. And they looked on their children crawling
out with little eager hands to grasp at the rain and
laugh at its touch; and a fierce, weeping tenderness
took the slave women. These should never endure
what they had endured, to them sun and security and
the citizen’s name when the Free Legions went down
on Rome.
It was said that the Strategos would retreat again,
retreat through the mountains to a port, Brindisium,
and there take ship from Italy. Retreat and leave
this land they had conquered, where they marched
unconquerable ? Some had never heard of Brindisium,
some thought it a great city that lay on the other side
of the world, remoter than Mutina, even ; and they
made it one with the hate that grew on them, gathering
and accumulating throughout the night, hate and a
horror of the great army Crassus had brought up
below the eastern mountains. Hate and no fear—
as a man turns at last on a winter road on pursu¬
ing wolves and slays and slays, heedless of tearing
fangs, with hate and rage for the beasts in his heart.
s
SPARTACUS
274
So it was with the slaves: they prepared for
battle.
And all that night the mad brother of Brennus
wandered the lines of the slave camp stirring the slaves,
crying that they be led against the Masters, that they
hide and retreat no more. Were they not unconquer¬
able ? And he told of Brennus upon the cross, and
called to their memories their dead nailed on trees,
caught in the rear of retreat on retreat. And the Gauls
shouted with anger, remembering the massacre by
Lake Lucania ; and even the Thracians, turning to
sleep, swore battle with great oaths.
And all the slave-camp slept, men drunk with a
nameless wine that stirred them awake in the hours
of the dark to grind their teeth and catch closer their
swords. They lay with their women in a hot unease
and a wild tenderness that night; and the night
drew on.
Kleon turned in his bed, the fever of the wet wind
upon him. He peered out in the silence of the camp,
his eyes on the lightless east. Crassus ? They had
defeated as great as him, they might do it again. And
the Greek got up and lighted a torch and took from a
box two rolls of writing, and looked at them with
unseeing eyes—The Republic of Plato and his Lex
Servorum. And desire came on him to read them
again, but his eyes glazed after a little while, with
weariness, and he put them away, and extinguished the
torch, and lay down.
They must fight. There was no return to the
mountains and a safe, easy road as the Strategos had
planned, planned while he lured Scrofas into his trap.
Fight, as men fought the rain and the sun, and the
greedy earth that tore at their strength. Hate, as
men hated the darkness and cold, the bitterness of
a in and dearth and death. And he thought for a
THE MASTERS
275
moment of his own past counsels, of caution, and now
they shrivelled up : and he turned to sleep with a
breaking heart.
And the rain washed on through the night.
Gershom of Kadesh heard it as he lay by the side
of the woman Judith, so close again to childbed. And
he combed at his beard with twitching fingers, thinking
with a hate and a mounting rage of that Beast that
waited beyond the defiles, that Beast that would tear
and devour the unborn, that Beast they must murder
ere it murdered them. Sleep now, but to-morrow . . .
And Titul slept but little that night, dozing, the
commander of the velites, at the far length of the
utmost gorge, his eyes on the watch-fires of Crassus’s
camp. And he thought of the Masters stretched in
death, in torture, of himself a high-priest of Kokolkh,
with reeking altars, in the city of Rome. And he licked
thick lips and waited the morrow.
And the rain held on, in a light, sweet sheet, over
Petelia and its hills till it reached the lowlands of
Calabria and the vineyards of Lucania ; and the earth
stirred and wakened to its coming.
And Spartacus slept unmoving, the sleep of utter
exhaustion.
(ii)
But about the coming of the day he awoke—awoke
suddenly, his body heaving in anger. In the darkness
of the tent his hands found the throat of the Sicel
maid, who had slept by his side, and she also awoke
with the torture of death in her throat, and cried his
name. His hands loosed off in the darkness, he sighed
and said, ‘I dreamt’; and they lay silent one by the
other, till they could see the darkness thinning a little.
And Mella slept again, but no sleep came to the
276 SP ART ACU S
Gladiator, watching that slow shine of the morning
down the passes of Petelia.
The ashes of the dream were still in his month ;
but now the fire had died away. The fury had
quietened from his heart. In the growing light he
looked at the head on his breast, and wound his fingers
in the hair of the Sicel maid ; and soothed her as she
wept in sleep, weeping, and knowing not that she wept.
So Spartacus waited the dawn.
And when Mella again woke, that was still closer ;
and Spartacus told her how he had dreamt, he had
thought her the Wolf of Rome.
‘And instead Pm the mate of the Serpent.’
He looked in her eyes and saw them clear, if sad :
sad with that fugitive sadness that backgrounded all
slave delight. But he saw her youth also, that had
flowered, that he had taken, that had not gone wasted,
he thought, for either. And he put her aside and went
to the entrance of the tent, while she rose and set him
meat and drink.
He had looked but seldom on the waking world
with eyes that saw it, the lost Gladiator. They had
looked below or beyond it all his life—in the days in
Thrace on the chance of the hunt, in the slave-pits of
Batiates, waking in chains, in the marchings of the great
Free Legions to and fro across Italy. But now, un¬
wonted, he looked on the breaking day : and something
caught him rigid at the sight, and held him still, the
play of colour in the sky.
Cold and pale and blue the sky and the world below.
But now that pallor was fading, flushing blindly in
red as he watched, on the heights the gold of the sun
overflowing the red, in the sky the blue still streaked
with blood. Quicker and more quickly came the day,
stirring little whorls of mist on the mountain-heights
of Petelia while the Gladiator watched. In those
THE MASTERS
277
heights the night still abode, but the shadows drew
back, with darkling spears, at the coming of the sun.
On the ground a little mist moved off, slowly, leaving
the earth, the rocks, the trees, the great gorges, sparkling
with the wet of the over-night rains.
And then, as he stood and listened, far off in some
deserted horreum he heard the crowing of a cock—
loud, shrill and piercing against the coming of the day.
Twice it crowed and then there was silence, except that
audibly the slave-camp stirred from sleep at that shrill
crowing up through the dawn.
But again the wet wind awoke, and the Gladiator
smelled it, and felt the unease of his dream return.
But was it no more than a dream ? To turn from the
road to Brindisium for a last account with the Masters.
Now, clearly and coldly, in the cold blue of the
morning, he saw that venture for disaster with his ex¬
hausted, depleted legions, weary and footsore, with
blunted swords, no horse to shield their flanks, the
slingers without pellets, the sagittarii without arrows.
Disaster.
But the sun came, and the wind; and again in
Spartacus there moved with a dark, wild passion that
mystic kinship with the slaves he led, the thousands
who stirred about him in the camp, who had held half
Italy these two long years, voiceless, but their unvoiced
passion moved in his heart. Exhausted, a footsore
army ? But the Wolf was there, they might never
now leave the Masters save as the victors of these
Masters.
The sky rained blood a tenebrous moment. He
looked up at it with dark, dreaming eyes, terrible, in a
cold, still wrath and sadness ; and then turned to the
Sicel maid as she knelt by the stool where she had laid
his food.
But when he turned some other change came upon
278 SP ART ACU S
him. She saw him, it seemed to her, seeing and think¬
ing dimly, in her passion of fear and love for him, young:
the Strategos who was the Strategos, neither young
nor old! And he smiled at her with clear, bright eyes,
moving like a hunter to her side, and sat by her and they
ate together. And she was troubled with the troubled
passion that had swept the camp, and would have asked
him what he planned.
But he was fey and strange, he spoke of his years
in Thrace, the sweep of the forests at morning, how he
minded now the light on their trunks and their tall
plumes as they marched into evening, north, marching
legions he had seen long before any other legions,
Roman or Free. And he asked if she remembered
such sights in Sicily, but she did not, it was all a cloud
and a blur to her; and she was too troubled to heed,
staring at him. And the dried corn choked in her
throat, so that she could not eat, while the Gladiator
sat with his head in his hands, silent. But when he
looked at her again, she saw again how young he was.
And then she knew without doubt that he was a God,
and shivered in fear, though she had been held by him
in desire, in the terror of his strength, and he smiled
at her now, and kissed her and rose and sought his
armour.
And he said, ‘I think this comes to a last pass, Mella.
If it’s so, you have your knife.’ And he thanked her,
and said she had served him well, and then looked on
the crumbs of the food he had eaten, and said slowly,
as if remembering, that they had forgotten, they had
made no libation. Nor ever had he done so before,
that she knew ; and she stared wide-eyed as he flung a
little of the corn on the earth, and spilled wine, to
whatever Gods there might be in these mountains and
in the world.
Then she buckled on his armour for him and would
THE MASTERS
279
have brought him his light shield that was a horseman’s
shield; but that he would not take, instead a heavy
Samnite shield, borne by such as fought on foot. And
he tested its straps and greased them; and Mella
brought a double strap that would bind it well on his
arm. And he took his axe in his right hand, and bound
a gladius under his left arm.
And Mella saw that already he had forgotten her.
Now, all about them rose a great shouting from the
slave host, the trampling of many feet, and the singing
of men who prepared for battle.
(iii)
As the day broke Crassus marched out his swollen
army to take the road to Rome, and straddle that road
in defence against the unconquered Spartacists.
Scrofas, in chains, marched in the rear, with Quintius
made quaestor in his place. The disgraced rout of
Scrofas’s legions marched in the centre, hemmed in
by the legions of Crassus.
The provincial praetor himself brought up the rear,
watching the dust of the legions cloud the roads as
they skirted the base of the hills and turned east.
Then a scout rode up to his tribune, and the tribune
swore and came riding to the praetor with the incredible
news. Crassus swung round in his saddle.
The slave army, a great thronging of men in
disordered, shouting bands, was debouching in pursuit
from the Petelian hills. The sun shone and scintillated
on their stolen armour, on the Serpent standards of the
Gladiators. And then Crassus saw midway the ad¬
vancing host the white stallion of Spartacus himself.
By the time the legions had halted and swung about,
the slave army was only a few stadia away—a great
28o
SP ART ACU S
shouting streaming horde, with wind-blown rags and
flashing weapons, the sour smell of them struck in
Crassus’s nostrils as he stared at them with keen,
avaricious eyes. Then he turned to his quaestor,
Quintius.
‘Make camp and raise palisades. Hasten.’
So it was done. The legions wheeled with the
speed of much practice into camp formation, and set to
throwing up an entrenchment, thousands working as
one under the cries of the decurions and centurions,
the brown men of the Isles, the Romans and Italiots,
the legions from Spain. The sun hid for a little while
in a blink of rain, and then came out again and remained
unobscured throughout the rest of the dap. All the
Calabrian countryside seemed to stand in a deathly
silence awaiting the outbreak of that conflict under
the shadow of her mountains.
The legions stared at the nearing enemy, and heard
their shouts and wild singing, the Harvesting Song and
the Song of the Serpent, for the madness of a God
was upon the slaves. Kleon and Gershom of Kadesh
rode cursing to and fro their ranks, seeking to form
them into the array that Spartacus had ordered as
never before—the cuneus with a schiltroun base. But
the women had marched with the men as well, they
laughed in the faces of the slave tribunes, shaking
their spears towards the Roman encampment that rose
in black earthworks higher and higher. A drunken
host, drunken with an insane hope, the slaves now
clamoured to be led against the Masters without
further halt. And they began to cry the name of
Spartacus in a great shouting that stayed a moment
the sweating Romans building their encampment
walls.
Then these saw a great white stallion ridden to the
front of the disordered slave ranks, and a whisper ran
THE MASTERS
281
through the staring legions: THE GLADIATOR.
He wheeled round the stallion, armoured with a great
Samnite shield upon his arm, and cried to the slaves
he would lead them without delay, but they must
obey their tribunes and marshal the formation he
ordered.
So at last they did, while the Gladiator watched, a
smile on his lips. And he felt the blood sing through
his great body, and once he looked away from the
changing wheel and march of the slaves before him
up at the mountains he had seen come pearl-blue.
Now they towered black in the sun, peering upon him.
And when at last his army was in array, Spartacus
dismounted from his horse, the great white stallion
captured at the Battle of the Lake long before; and
the beast snuffled at his shoulder and looked at him
with great eyes.
Then Spartacus stabbed the stallion to the heart,
and it fell and died, and a great groan of wonder rose
from the slaves. But Spartacus said that if they won
this battle, there would be many fine horses got for him
to choose from ; if they lost it, he would have no need
of a horse again.
And he ceased, and they knew then the meaning of
the foot-soldier’s shield that was double-strapped upon
his arm. And for a little they stared at him, sobered,
till the blowing of horns in the Roman lines kindled
again the rage through their ranks.
And Spartacus, seeing that they might not be
stayed, arrayed them in battle-order. In the van he
placed the Bithynians, hungry to avenge that first
defeat they had suffered from Crassus the Lean.
Gershom ben Sanballat had also dismounted, with
his tribunes by his side he ran up and down the ranks,
calling last orders. And he halted and waited.
Then the slave-trumpets sounded the charge.
282
SP ART ACU S
The air filled with the hum of pellets and was
darkened by a cloud of arrows from the half-built
camp. But under and through that cloud the charge
of the Bithynians held fast, they clove down the nearer
wall and swarmed in the ditch, and there the Romans
met them, and Spartacus saw the gleam of the Serpent
standard vanish around where the Jew led his legion.
Then Gershom vanished in a wave of men that Crassus
flung on that gaining point; and, hewing and stabbing,
sobbing with rage, the Bithynians fell back as their
horns sounded.
But they paid them no heed. Uncommanded,
they reformed their ranks and again assailed the camp.
Thrice they charged, and thrice were beaten back, but
at terrible cost. Crassus saw that the charge of the
Bithynians, men with blunted swords, would assuredly
fail: and he rode his horse up a little eminence midmost
of the camp, to watch the battle.
Then Spartacus flung the remnants of the Gaul and
German legions into the breach in the camp walls, and
saw Kleon at their head disappear in that fury of
stabbing swords and restless spears—saw that, and the
Gauls presently stream from the camp in headlong
rout. So he knew that the end had come, the spare
legions of the Romans advancing at a run outside the
limit of the camp to fall on the fleeing slaves. And
the Gladiator formed up his men in cuneus, about
him the Gladiator guard; and he looked at the knoll
whereon Crassus was halted, and tested the buckles
on his shield, and led the Thracians forward into the
breach.
(iv)
AND SPARTACUS MADE HIS WAY TOWARDS CRASSUS
HIMSELF THROUGH MANY MEN, AND INFLICTING MANY
THE M ASTERS 283
WOUNDS J BUT HE DID NOT SUCCEED IN REACHING
CRASSUS, THOUGH HE ENGAGED AND KILLED TWO
CENTURIONS. AND AT LAST, AFTER THOSE ABOUT
HIM HAD FLED, HE KEPT HIS GROUND, AND, BEING
SURROUNDED BY A GREAT NUMBER, HE FOUGHT TILL
HE WAS CUT DOWN.
The Appian Way
(>)
ThIVE thousand fled, making their way north from
the battle. These were met by Pompeius, returning
at length from Iberia, and cut to pieces. Wearied
with slaughter, the legions under Crassus at length
made prisoners; and Crassus had those prisoners
numbered, and they numbered over six thousand.
And Crassus marched his legions to the Appian
Way, and for three days his camp rang with the busy
sound of carpenters at work. Many trees were brought
to the camp and cut and squared while the slaves, bound
and unfed, squatted with no water to drink and the
pitiless sun on their heads. And through lighted
hours and dark they heard the clink and chime of the
carpenters’ tools, and smelt the fresh resin of the sawn
wood.
But at length all was ready. And Licinius Crassus
had the slaves brought forth, all through the heat of
a summer day as he marched his army slowly up to¬
wards Rome, and one by one nailed on the new-made
crosses. And at length even the men of the legions
turned in horror from looking back along the horizon
at that stretch of undulating, crying figures fading down
into the sun-haze. Some, nailed on the cross, shrieked
aloud with agony as the nails scraped through their
bones or splintered those bones so that ragged slivers
hung from the flesh. Some fainted. Some cried on
strange Gods, and now at last pleaded for mercy while
the legionaries drove the nails home through hands and
feet. Then each cross was lifted, and the body of the
slave upon it would bulge forth and the crack of the
tearing flesh sound as the cross was flung in the hole
new-dug. And the smell of blood and excrement
increased as the day went by, wolves gathered that night
284
THE M ASTERS 285
and clouds of carrion-birds, waiting. And at last the
last cross was flung in the earth, and the Romans
departed.
The night came, heavy with dew. And throughout
the miles of the crosses a groan greeted its coming as
the coolness revived fainting lips, and men lifted their
swimming eyes to the cool, watchful summer stars.
Few had yet died, for it was many hours ere inflamma¬
tion would yet set in on hands and feet, or the blood
drip away till consciousness left them. And to that
groan there succeeded throughout the night a babble in
many tongues, men crying to a God, men crying the
names of others dead or lost, men crying in a childish
clamour that was wordless. Yet presently even that
ceased, for the night grew almost as warm as the day.
And by morning on the long lines of crosses the slaves
hung with blackened tongues projecting from swollen
lips, and glazed eyes, and the drooling moans of stricken
beasts.
A great concourse came out from Rome to view
the crucified slaves. Merchants passing at last in
safety up that long road from the coast looked and
shuddered and went by, at the clouding of flies and
birds that now began to settle around still bodies that
still lived. And sometimes a shriek would rise, and
die, and the insects rise in a lazy hum. And the
sightseers saw the bodies twisted in many fashions, in
the last stretchings of agony ; and by another day those
who passed through the dripping lines saw that many
had been torn by the teeth of beasts.
‘None will live beyond the third night,’ they said.
‘There’ll never be a slave revolt again.’
And they returned to Rome and light and life and
their years, and the darkness that covers them from
our gaze.
286
SPARTACUS
(ii)
It was the fourth morning, and still Kleon lived.
When they stripped him to nail him on the cross,
the legionaries had shouted in mirth to find the slave
a eunuch. Then they had maimed him again so that
he had lost consciousness, and did not awake till hung
on his cross, and the Masters had passed on.
And then pain tore at him, and like the others he
babbled curses and complaints, and bit at his lips with
his teeth ; and something like a wheel that was spiked
with fire turned and turned in his brain; and he knew
that it might not endure, that death any instant must
come, because no agony like this could last. And he
fainted again, and awoke to the odours of his own body
and the snuffling mouth of a wolf at his feet—that,
and the pain, and the growl of the beast as it fled at
the shriek that came from his lips.
And the day passed, the sun swung its arc of bright¬
ness across the sky so slowly that he thought of it as
many days, long stretches of darkness and long stretches
of light; and his tongue swelled out between his teeth ;
and death would not come ; and the spiked wheel in
his brain grew and grew till it filled the sky, till it
burst from his head and he saw it the earth in torment.
And about him, in little spaces between his own agony,
he heard the last cry of men who died, and saw their
bodies bulge and shudder and pass to ease at last.
On the third night the insects left him and the
beasts came. But they found him still living, and all
that night he lived ; and they came not near him,
tearing at other flesh in the dark. And the last
time he awoke he found the morning in the sky, and
before his swimming gaze saw the world lighten, greater
and strange.
287
THE MASTERS
‘O Spartacus!’
It was a cry of agony in his brain and heart, but he
heard it only as a stifled grunt from his lips. Then
that agony of mind went as well, in a sudden flow of
memory, a glister and flash of imaged memories: the
first Bithynian camp, the horreum on the road to the
South, Papa in mist, the battle-games of Crixus, the
defiles of Mutina, Rome shining at dawn, the snows of
Rhegium, the passes of Petelia—he fought and marched
and debated again, heard cry in his ears the myriad
slave voices, heard the ghost of that Hope and Promise
wail away as the morning came upon the Appian Way.
And then again pain seized and tore at his heart and
passed again ; and wildly, a last wild moment, he raised
his eyes.
And he saw before him, gigantic, filling the sky, a
great Cross with a figure that was crowned with thorns ;
and behind it, sky-towering as well, gladius in hand,
his hand on the edge of the morning behind that Cross,
the figure of a Gladiator. And he saw that these
Two were One, and the world yet theirs: and he went
into unending night and left them that shining earth.
It was Springtime in Italy, a hundred years before
the crucifixion of Christ—-—•
THE END
