Vfe fif-B
National Library of Scotland
*8000653339*
THE LOST TRUMPET
By the same author
General :
Hanno, or the Future of Exploration, an essay in
prophecy ;
Ancient America, an Outline of Pre-Columbian history;
Novels :
Stained Radiance : A Fictionist’s Prelude
The Thirteenth Disciple : Being Portrait and Saga of
Malcom Maudslay
Ihe Calends of Cairo {Introduced by H. G. Wells and
Leonard Huxley)
Three Go Back
(See end papers)
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
THE LOST TRUMPET
JARROLDS Publishers LONDON
lAmited 34 Paternoster Row E.C.q
made AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
AT GAINSBOROUGH PRESS, ST. ALBANS,
BY FISHER, KNIGHT AND CO., LTD
TO
COLONEL GRIGORI SALIAEFF
ON WHOM I MODELLED SALONEY
AND
ARTHUR JOHN HALL
WHOM THE PORTRAIT PLEASED
CONTENTS
CHAPTER THE FIRST page
‘And desire shall fail, and the grasshopper become a
burden’ .... . . • • • • 15
CHAPTER THE SECOND
‘ “And, as the manuscript relates, the Trumpet . . .
had been stolen and carried away by a renegade
  2 5
CHAPTER THE THIRD
T had gone down to the Warrens then, as other lost
souls go down to Hell’ . . . • • 39
CHAPTER THE FOURTH
‘ “There are many slaveries,” I said. “Those of the lash
and those of the liquor ; and the little men who are
slaves of hope, and the bond-serfs of a creed of
hate” ’ 48
CHAPTER THE FIFTH
‘South we went towards Abu Zabel, past deserted
Helmieh and its lost block-houses in the sands, into
that quiet, pale country’ 62
CHAPTER THE SIXTH
T knew that voice. I had half-expected to hear it, yet
disbelieved I would ever hear it again’ . . . 77
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH
‘Aslaug Simonssen. I did not doubt her for a moment,
nor she me. With that name this could be no one
but Aslaug Simonssen’ ..... 84
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH
T think they will live with me always, those days’ . too
CHAPTER THE NINTH
‘ “Only, wonderful to be alive and see and smell. And
to touch you” ’ . . . . . . • 115
CONTENTS
CHAPTER THE TENTH PAGE
‘ “What can a modern of the twentieth century do, then,
to reach his essential self, and be that self?” ’ . . 128
CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH
‘Sweet to dance to violins’
142
CHAPTER THE TWELFTH
‘ “It is . . . a Levite ornament. We’re close on the
track of the Lost Trumpet” ’ . . . .161
CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH
‘ “Look, I’m a wandering intestinal worm trying to find
out the truth of things” ’ .
172
CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH
What would each of us do—if we found the Lost
Trumpet and it was as powerful as in the davs of
Joshua ? ” ’
CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH
‘He had turned aside into the entrance of the Wagh el
Berka. I caught his arm. “What, here ? ” ’ .
I95
217
CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH
Oh, yes ... I killed him that morning before I
left Rashida” ’ . . .
CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH
‘There could be no doubt of that Shape’
CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH
We will see if one of us can blow the Lost Trumpet” ’
CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH
She set the Trumpet to her lips’
CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH
Except the coming of that flash’
Epilude : Unending AJorning
230
243
258
270
278
284
THE LOST TRUMPET
THE LOST TRUMPET
CHAPTER THE FIRST
‘And desire shall fail, and the grasshopper become a
burden.’
Subchapter i
THE night before, passing through the terrace
of Heliopolis House Hotel, I had heard two men
refer to me.
“Who’s the old buffer with the beard ?” had
queried one, a gay youth, albeit chinless, and with
the adenoidal accent of some little university pant-
ingly in the tongue-tracks of Oxford.
And the other, whom I took to be an English
official of customs, had replied :
“Sh. That’s the posh dragoman. Saloney.
Russian. Was colonel in one of those freak little
armies the Reds chased out of the Crimea. Lived
the last ten years as a guide here in Cairo. Supposed
to know it better than the average Cairene.”
The chinless youth had shaped an eagerness into
his accent. “Might hire him to show me some of
the gay doin’s in the Wagh el Berka. Hwaw ?
Sporty ?”
15
16 THE LOST TRUMPET
“N.B.G.”
Then I had passed beyond the range of their
voices, a little angered, which was foolish, and
very wearied from a day in tramping the Ghizeh
sands, which was understandable.
‘Buffer.’
That was the word which gnawed at the blank¬
ness of my mind, wakening too early the next
morning. For a litde I lay and looked at it, and
searched for that philosophy ten years of Cairo had
taught me. But it seemed I had mislaid the thing.
‘An old buffer with a beard.’
I got out of bed and, while the kettle hissed above
the flame of the unchancy oil-stove, looked at my
reflection in the shaving-glass which I did not use
for shaving. Bearded (but there was a chin below the
beard, if I remembered). Old ?
At least not young. I saw a face netted
with wrinkles, some of the years and some of
the sun. A face pallid still, with that Russian
pallor that acquiesces not readily to sunburn. Eyes :
I had been told they were grey. Now they
seemed merely troubled. A kindly nose, a kindly
forehead . . .
Or perhaps they were merely weak.
That wry thought abode with me, drinking my
coffee, listening to the morning coming over
Heliopolis. Weak—of a surety what else ? Had I
made the seemly grab of wealth or women, lined my
soul with satieties or my stomach with the season¬
able oyster ? None of these things. I was a failure.
THE LOST TRUMPET
17
Once Adrian had said to me : “Only a man with a
bank-balance can afford to look at a sunrise.” And
I had no bank-balance.
But my sunrises !
I leant from my window, spendthrift yet, to look
on this new one. You know that stormy skyward
charge of pale hosts of videttes that daylight sends
across the Egyptian desert; these, and behind them
the dull-smocked storm-troops (foot-weary and
remembering their wives); then, bannered and in
chariots, the Immortals of the Sun . . .
‘Akh God/ I said to myself in some dis¬
gust. ‘You are becoming a little man of litera¬
ture.J
And thereat my past drew its head out of limbo,
brushed the dust from its hair, and regarded me
with surprise.
‘Dragoman and tout for the Pyramids ?—perhaps
you are. But once you were I—Anton Kyrilovitch
Saloney, Professor of English Literature in the
Gymnasium of Kazan.’
‘That was long ago/ I told my past, ‘and now
the chinless have inherited the earth.’
And, a little cheered at the puzzled look on the
face of my past, I divested myself of pyjamas and
rang my bell—no push-bell, but a sturdy instrument
once property of some Mameluke. It had acquired
notoriety in Heliopolis, this bell of mine, and it
was told me that neighbours set their watches by it.
They would set them awrong this morning.
After the surprised interval Annie Marie came
B
jB THE LOST TRUMPET
fleeting up the stairs and poked her small ferret face
round the door. I said :
“I shall want breakfast in half an hour. And
make it a seemly breakfast, Annie Marie, for it may
be the last that approaching senility will allow me to
appreciate.”
She said : “Gobblimey, kurnel, wot’s wrong ?”
I explained about the buffer with the beard. My
landlady’s Cockney face wrinkled in disgust.
“Aw, on’y some sissy-boy, kurnel. Don’t yew
worry. Yew ain’t old.”
And, nodding, she vanished to heed to my break¬
fast and the piercing howls of her infant. Of all
Heliopolis she was surely the inhabitant most incon¬
gruous—the widow of an English trooper who had
betaken to herself a Greek husband. Of poor
Nicolaos Anastassiou’s language she knew nothing ;
and despite much brow-corrugation over an English
text-book he had as yet been unable to identify a
single phrase that spat from the lips of his spouse.
Pursing small, shapely lips he would look upon her
with admiration and awe and remark “pif!” to her
many scoldings. Such scolding uprose to me now.
He had left the infant unattended. I turned to the
window and my dressing with a new twist to my
thoughts. ... If I had foregone the amorous
possessions had I not foregone the scoldings
also ?
‘ And desire shall fail, and the grasshopper become a
burden.’
So I had read in the English Bible, in those days
THE LOST TRUMPET 19
in far Kazan. I had loved that phrase, for the beauty
of it and the pity of it. I had not dreamt I would
sometime stand, a middle-aged tourist tout in a
shabby Heliopolitan room, and know it no mere
phrase. Depression came on me again and, clothed,
I sat in the early silence of the Sunday morning
regarding my shelves and the tawdry bindings of
their books. To-morrow and to-morrow and
to-morrow . . .
And then, for the first time in many months—
for it was long since I had risen at such an hour—
there came to me that sound first heard on a morn¬
ing in 1921, after night-long wandering the Cairene
streets. I had been starving then, when I heard it,
chilled with the long, dark hours, and it came to me
while I looked into the waters of the Nile from
Shoubra Bridge. I had started and listened then, in
that hasting light, and suddenly found myself weep¬
ing as I listened. Almost ten years afterwards the
sound brought again that tightness in my throat.
It was only the sigh of the morning wind. But
no such wind comes to any city but Cairo and the
little tourist-towns that squat at her feet on the
desert hem. It grew and grew, coming from the
sands—as a sleepy boy, roused in some desert lair,
uplifting a moment a sounding trumpet across the
sunrise roofs of Heliopolis. Once, twice, he blew,
and at that call of reveille I could see from my window
the marsh-birds wheel from above Zeitoun. Then
the wind had passed on to Cairo, which I could not
see, and day had come upon Egypt.
20
THE LOST TRUMPET
Subchapter ii
I ate a large and heartsome breakfast. I was old.
Very good. And a buffer. Good also. Shocks were
the lot of buffers. But I had still my chin and my
sunrises.
Midway breakfast Annie Marie brought up my
letters, and I sat and unfolded them while day
unfolded and brightened outside. A bill from
Sednaoui’s; some day I would pay the good
Sednaoui. A bill from Simon Papadrapoulna-
kophitos ; some day, were he not more careful, I
would cease to drink at the cafe of Simon in the
Khalig. Two other envelopes, one in Adrian’s
fertile scratch, the other in a handwriting unknown
to me and bearing an English stamp. I regarded
the half-obliterated likeness of the good King
George in surprise, and then broke open the enve¬
lope and found this news set forth :
‘Dear Colonel Anton,
‘You’ll have forgotten me, so I’d better re-intro¬
duce myself: I’m Roger Mantell.
‘And you do remember me now, don’t you ? All
of it ? That year that Dawn and I spent in Cairo
when you shepherded us around ? And Daybreak
House ?* (Who lives there now, I wonder ?) And
that night when you and I walked the Nile garden
and Dawn’s baby was born ? Can’t have forgotten
*See “The Calends of Cairo.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
21
any of it, unless youVe done so deliberately to
spite us for our failure to write you.
‘For that, we’re infernally sorry, all three of us.
The years like great black oxen tread the world,
and we’ve been so busy keeping out of their tracks
that it was only a month ago that Dawn, checking
her diaries, ejaculated: “Goodness, we haven’t
written Colonel Saloney for over three years !” And
we agreed that that was so bad we daren’t attempt to
re-open communications. But circumstances have
forced the agreement, and we’re aiding and abetting
them, and quite frankly sending you a request for
your favour and patronage. (Unless you’re back in
Russia by now.)
‘And, to make as little bones about it as possible,
the favour centres on Aslaug Simonssen.
‘Brief biography of said female : Born I don’t
know when, but somewhere towards the close of
the century’s first decade. Of Scoto-Norwegian
parentage. One of twins, the other being a male,
Carl. Lived in Bergen or Edinburgh, God help
her, most of her life. Pleasant-looking ; beautiful
upon occasion. Recently became acquainted with
Dawn.
‘Sails for Egypt in three days’ time; and when
she arrives in Cairo we want you to look after
her.
‘Her mission’s an unusual and I think a half¬
crazy one. (Not that Aslaug is crazy.) Brother Carl
went out to Egypt five years ago, it seems, to take
up a Government job; oil-prospecting or the like.
22
THE LOST TRUMPET
He seems to have done it for the fun of the thing,
the family being quite comfortably well off. Two
years went by, during which he moved from
place to place, sending home an occasional
letter to Aslaug. Then, at Rashida, while in resi¬
dence there, he was found one morning with a
slit throat.
‘Perhaps you saw in the papers something of the
fuss there was about the happening ? The mur- '
derer, however, was never caught. The Egyptian
Government sent its condolences and a handsome
cheque to Aslaug, and the matter was officially
dropped.
‘Aslaug, however, refuses to treat the matter
officially. She is going to Egypt to investigate for
herself. ‘Investigate’ is a mild word. She’s con¬
vinced the murderer can be found and intends to
find him. In fact, the conviction has become an
obsession.
‘Now, it’s only with diffidence that I’d try to
unload a monomaniac on anyone—let alone Colonel
Saloney. But Aslaug’s too good to waste on this
insane search—potentially too good. From what
little I’ve heard of Carl he was no great loss to this
planet in his untimely demise.
‘So what we want you to do—of course by way
of business—is to take Aslaug round the sights of
Cairo, if you’ve no other engagements. Show her
the Nile at sunset; show her Daybreak House;
and the pyramids and all the other oddities. Inocu¬
late her with Cairo, in fact.
THE LOST TRUMPET
23
‘Then she’ll forget and come back to England,
like a sensible being.
‘And now, my dear Saloney, I’ll retire from the
field quickly, rather scared at my presumption in
making all these staggering requests. Aslaug has
promised to wire you when she gets to Alexandria.
‘Love from us all, and do write, even though
Aslaug’s beyond your handling.
‘Yours ever,
‘Roger Mantell.’
I give this letter in full, because for unknown
reasons I did not destroy it and it is beside me now.
In the stillness of the Heliopolitan morning I remem¬
ber that I sat long in reminiscence of the Mantells
whom I had known and loved in Cairo, in days before
the grasshopper 
I started up half-angrily at that. The insect was
becoming more than a burden; a nuisance. And as
I started I caught sight of the remaining envelope,
that in the handwriting of Adrian.
Opened, it told me this :
‘Dear Saloney,
‘If you’ve nothing special to do when you receive
this letter—which will be at breakfast-time on
Sunday—come down to Shoubra and see me. Come
about eleven o’clock. I want to introduce two
people to you.
‘They’re Americans, both of them, and want to
engage you as a guide.
24
THE LOST TRUMPET
‘Now, don’t get bored. If they’re not exactly
folk after your own heart, they are at least mildly
interesting fauna in their way—monomaniacs out on
a search they believe portentously important. And
at least, they aren’t tourists.
‘Anyhow, come and see them.
‘Adrian.’
CHAPTER THE SECOND
‘ “And, as the manuscript relates, the Trumpet . . .
had been stolen and carried away by a renegade
Levite ” ’
Subchapter i
I RODE into Cairo on a tram-car, and, as we
swerved by the bend that leads to Abbassieh,
the Gift of the River, the City of Many Colours, the
Heart of Masr, lay revealed before us. There was
the dark bulking of Abbassieh, where English
soldiers lounge in boredom and dusty khald at
barrack-entrances and the little Greek folk of the
catering trades chatter over dank fruit in danker
alleys. There, dark-blue in the west, was Koubbah;
and in a shimmer far to the south, Manchiet el Sadr.
The day was shining like a burnished shield over
the strange city of Mansur in which for ten long
years I had guided the curiosities of the tourist and
restrained the curiosities of myself.
So I came at last, though not by tram-car, but
walking through the sun-haze of dust-ochred streets,
to the house of Adrian in Shoubra. I stopped outside
the house, I remember, in the hot flare of the sun,
thinking of the first time I had entered it—that
morning ten years before, when Adrian had found
3J
26 THE LOST TRUMPET
me starving by Nile bank and had brought me home
as his guest. He had been curt and brusque then,
being ashamed of himself and the human race because
of that look he had glimpsed on my face.
“Hungry ?” he had said, as he had stood beside
me upon the bridge where I listened to the passing
trumpets of the sunrise. I had turned round and
regarded him without enthusiasm, seeing a small,
slight man, dark-faced and pale-handed. The hands
had attracted me at once. They were the hands of a
surgeon—indeed, though I had not known it, of
Cairo’s leading gynaecologist.
He had repeated the question. I had nodded.
“But damnably.”
“Come on, then.”
So I had gone with him, wondering and a little
amused, in spite of the emptiness within me. And
Adrian had fed me and listened to me and comforted
me, and had been my friend in days that the locust
had eaten, leaving the remains to the grasshopper 
I swore a little to myself. The insects had now
doubled in number. I rang with unnecessary
vehemence upon the handbell that out juts from the
wall of Adrian’s house and stood in the dusty sun-
shimmer till his Greek servant opened the door for
me.
“The doctor is in the garden,” he said, “he and
the two millionaires.”
^Millionaires ?” I had been unprepared for that.
But certainly. They are Americans.”
With that he preceded me into the house, into
THE LOST TRUMPET 27
that unchanging, commingled no-smell of anti¬
septics and back-wearying scrubbedness. In the
rear of the house he abandoned me on the flagged
walk that led to the garden, and going down that
walk I came into the trim floral neatness where
Adrian paces in leisure moments dreaming of new
and paradisal combinations in the game of dominoes
—his life-passion. Or at least with such concentra¬
tions I had been wont to twit him. Now he was
otherwise engaged. In the shade of a tree under the
far wall he sat with two guests. The presumptive
millionaires.
Now of millionaires I have made much study the
while I have elevated their lean or bulging persons
up the steep slopes of the Great Pyramid. Either
they writhe the many hours each day in the agonies
of stomach-ache or their necks obtrude without
pleasantness from coloured collars and tight suits.
A millionaire departing from such canons would
be stared at aghast in the tourist-quarters of Cairo.
So I knew at once that Adrian’s servant had been
misled. These were no millionaires.
“Hello, Colonel,” said Adrian. “Allow me:
Colonel Anton Saloney—Mr. Huebsch, Mr. Marrot.”
Marrot I saw as a pale, thin, lithe man, a little
of Adrian’s appearance. He had the face of a saint
but faintly recovered from the austerities of a hair-
shirt. But that, I reflected, might be rather gastritis.
He stood up and held out his hand.
“H’m. . . . Militarist, eh ?”
That was surprising enough. But before I had
28
THE LOST TRUMPET
time to make comment on my supposedly warlike
nature the large bulk of Huebsch was slowly upraised
behind Marrot’s acidulous disapproval.
“Now, Marrot, soft on the propaganda pedal.”
His hand, large as two hands of an authentic mil¬
lionaire, enfolded mine. “Glad to meet you, sir.
You’ll have to excuse my colleague here. He’s a
communist in his off moments.”
“That is interesting,” I said. “I have known
other communists.”
Marrot raised his eyebrows at me as he sank back
in his chair. “You fought them, I suppose ?”
I shook a deprecating head. “Not at all. I ran
away from them.”
“All scoundrels, eh ?”
“On the contrary, I found them appallinglv
virtuous.”
Adrian had been regarding this by-play with a
school-boy grin. Now he said :
Sit down, anyhow. Colonel Saloney, I must
explain, was the only communist in the white armies.
He fought against his fellow-believers because they
maltreated the Russian alphabet and wore disorderly
ties. . . . Something like that. But I think the
three of you want to talk about something other than
politics ?”
“Sure we do.” Huebsch settled himself, largely,
spreadingly, weightily. The chair creaked below
im in frightened protest. He regarded me with
large, unwinking stare. I stroked the chin-conceal-
ing beard and made appraisal of him myself.
THE LOST TRUMPET 29
He was a Jew. I have been told that the charac¬
teristic features with which we associate the modern
Jew have no true Jewish associations at all; they
are later graftings from Mongoloid and Negroid
converts. But Huebsch made no attempt to slip
behind these apologetics of history. He was in
every detail of appearance the Jew of caricature and
controversy. With a large head, an ovoid head,
whence outbranched a great, curving beak of a
nose. So did his eyebrows curve also, and his lips,
which were thick and red. Almost had he the number
of chins seemly on the declasse order of millionaire.
He stood a good six feet in height and to the unwary
was apt to seem some six feet in breadth. Also,
which went not at all with the upmake, he had large
blue eyes, deeply-lashed and calm and beautiful eyes,
the eyes of a dreamer who was, of all things, a kindly
dreamer.
“Well, Colonel ?” he said.
“Very well,” I agreed, for I liked this flaunter of
the oddities Hebraic. He smiled slowly, absent-
mindedly. He brought out a large pipe, apparendy
rough-hewn from the bark of some tree, but which
I learnt was a corn-cob pipe. This he proceeded to
stuff with great waddings of tobacco. All three of
us watched him, as I noted, myself noting the other
watchers from the corner of an eye. It was very hot.
Adrian’s roses drooped dustily. Not so Adrian
himself, with his head a little to one side, like a cool,
sardonic fowl. Marrot tilted back his chair and
regarded the pearlment of the sky, for in the glare
THE LOST TRUMPET
3°
of the sun the true Cairene azure was now over¬
spread by a filament of heat-cloud. From the pipe of
Huebsch ascended now an impressive reek.
“Dr. Adrian will have told you something about
the expedition we’re planning, Colonel.”
“Not a thing,” cut in Adrian. Huebsch nodded.
“Well, well.” He turned his gaze, that was some¬
how vast, and smile, that was unbelievably slow,
upon me. Fascinated, I watched the patient convo¬
lutions ebb from his mouth across his countenance.
“Dr. Adrian’s still of two minds whether we’re
cranks or quacks.”
It was now Adrian’s turn to appraise the promise
of the weather. “I think you may be—a trifle over-
enthusiastic.”
Huebsch pondered this, heavily, but not dully;
as I was soon to note was his unvarying habit in
consideration of all things, great or small. “Well,
well, we may be. Anyway, Colonel, we want to
engage you as our guide and general direction-
finder-in-chief in a little archaeological mission that
has brought us to Cairo.”
I made speedy disclaimer. “I am no archaeologist.”
That’s one of the points in your favour.”
“So ?”
The great ovoid head swung forward slowly;
regained its customary elevation. “Yes. And now
we 11 cut the box-string and chew on the cake. If
you’ll have us, we’ll have you. That so, Marrot ?”
The sky-gazing communist lowered his head to
nod assent. “But hell—a colonel!”
THE LOST TRUMPET 31
My colonelcy vexed him. This but mildly sur¬
prised me. In my ten years in Cairo I had met
travellers and tourists by the dozen and in the gross
whom the most unexpected things vexed. I had
known a man who regarded the Sphinx as an insult
to his grandmother’s memory (he had also, as was
proper to an epileptic in Egypt, believed himself to
be Akhnaton); beside such obsession the militarist
dislikes of the thin, acidulous American seemed
negligible.
“The colonelcy need not worry greatly,” I said.
“And you may drop the ‘colonel’ when addressing
me. But I beg that you will not call me comrade.”
“Why not ?”
He was, I saw, if with a sense of humour in other
things, prepared to do battle in defence of even the
most minute curlicue on his political creed. I
explained, mildly.
“Because I’m not.”
Huebsch waved his colleague to silence. “Well,
well, and all that’s that. Colonel, we’re archaeolo¬
gists from Palestine. For the past three years we’ve
been engaged in excavation in the Jordan Valley—
ever been there ?”
I shook my head.
“Haven’t missed much—lice, liars and lizards.
We did nothing of great importance during the
first two years, but you may have heard something
of our work last September.”
Now, by a curious coincidence, I had. “Some¬
thing I read in the European journals,” I said. Then :
32 THE LOST TRUMPET
“Huebsch and Marrot—but of course ! It was you
two who uncovered the walls of Jericho which
Joshua overthrew.”
‘Tat. We discovered that Jericho had been
encircled by walls, just as it says in the Bible, and
those walls bore every appearance of having been
overthrown by some means not accountable on the
natural list of unfriendly phenomena—earthquake
or the like. In fact, they had the appearance of
having fallen just as it is related in the Bible that
they did fall.”
My interest waned. Two fanatics, it appeared ;
and I had thought them scientists. What did they
wish me to do ? Go search the upper Red Sea for
chariots from drowned Pharaoh’s army, probably,
I reflected. Probably, indeed, they were archaeolo¬
gists so overloaded with preconceived ideas that
their mission was to dig up only articles likely to
strengthen their preconceptions. . . . Perhaps envoys
of the Fundamentalist churches, hot on the track of
‘literal truth’ ! If so, they might bay their optimistic
pursuit without my assistance. But with such nose
I was disappointed in Huebsch. I had not thought
he was of the type to rat to the parvenu superstitions
of Christians and Nords . . .
And I regarded him with an amused regret.
He nodded. He seemed to have read my thoughts.
^Can’t help it. That’s as they seemed to be,
those walls; and, believe me, their appearance
surprised me as much as anybody. Now, I know
something of Jewish myth and legend in con-
THE LOST TRUMPET
33
nection with this event. You may have guessed
I’m a Jew ?”
“Not at all. He thought you were a Tasmanian
aboriginal.”
This was Marrot. Huebsch turned his head, con¬
sidered his colleague and the interpolation, smiled
slowly and vastly. “Well, anyway, Jew I am, and
was once pretty conversant with the legendary
stuff about the overthrow of Jericho. The result of
our excavation raised some fuss, both inside and
outside archaeological circles. We had about two
tons of letters from all parts of the world on the
subject of tumbling walls ”
Marrot chuckled reminiscently. “The best was a
circular addressed to a Mr. Wall from some kidney-
cure people—about taking pills if one suffered from
dizziness.”
“Yes. Well, a pretty mixed lot it was, and sent
by folk with all kinds of faddist notions. But there
was one letter which interested us both. It came from a
co-racial of mine in Bokhara—a Samarcand Jew whose
family has been resident there since the Dispersion.
“The letter was only an introductory to some¬
thing else—the copy of a lengthy sheepskin docu¬
ment extracted from his family archives. Well, to
make short work of a long story—and I’ll miss
you out all about my wrestlings to decipher and
transliterate bad mediaeval Hebrew—this document
purported to tell of the later fortunes of Jericho’s
conqueror and the magical rams’ horns which helped
to overthrow the Jericho walls.”
c
THE LOST TRUMPET
It was my turn to make interpolation. “But I
understood that, even if the Bible story were authen¬
ticated, what caused the overthrow of the good
Jericho walls were the not unheavy tramplings of
the marching cohorts about them.”
“And I always understood it was the Faith, not
the Feet, of the said cohorts.”
This was Adrian, eyes half-closed to the sun-
dazzle, head brightly cocked, making ironic play on
the capital letters. Huebsch considered both of us,
kindly, detailedly, massively.
“Well, it wasn’t the feet. The walls would have
fallen quite differently if it had been. We’re a bit
beyond the age which believed most things of anti¬
quity could be explained by the shoddy rationalism
of the nineteenth century.”
Marrot brought down his chair-legs with a bang.
“So they can.”
The immense Huebsch made a rather weary and
deprecating gesture. “We’ll leave Karl Marx out of
it. He was a Jew, anyway, and would probably have
agreed with me. ... To get back : if the walls
of Jericho were overthrown in any dramatic fashion
at all—as they were—all the evidence points to it
having been done simply through the agency of the
rams’ horns employed—or, according to this
Samarcand manuscript, through the agency of only
one of these rams’ horns, the magic Lost Trumpet
of Joshua.”
Nor was it apparently only the ancient and
gullible scribe of the manuscript who believed this.
THE LOST TRUMPET
35
Huebsch himself was quite evidently convinced. I
felt a little dazed, spite remembrance of the man who
had considered his grandmother’s memory insulted
by the Sphinx.
“An&jou believe this ?”
The eyes of the American Jew lost their lazy
good humour ; they made a fine snapping as of flint
and steel in parturition of a flame to uplight an inward
dream. “Why not ? It is a theoretical possibility in
acoustics that such an instrument could be made.
Variations in vibration. . . . Anyway, according to
this manuscript the Trumpet of Joshua was never
used again. It was kept by the Levites in sanctuary
against a great day of need that might come to
Israel. That day, says the MS, was Nebuchadnezzar’s
invasion of Palestine ”
But I could not let that pass. “Surely Jewry had
known many days of need—and desperate need at
that—before the time of Nebuchadnezzar ? This
Trumpet would have been a most seemly instrument
to blow against the gates of Gath and so have spared
the perspirings of the good Samson.”
Adrian stirred. “Who was himself an imported
Babylonian myth.”
“Being naughty in company with the pure
Akkadian sun-goddess Delilah,” completed Marrot.
Huebsch waited with monumental patience;
nodded to each of his interrupters ; resumed undevi-
atingly. “As the manuscript relates, the Trumpet was
desperately wanted at the time of Nebuchadnezzar’s
invasion. And the writer goes on to tell of the
36 THE LOST TRUMPET
desperate search that was made for it—this instru¬
ment that would have blasted Nebuchadnezzar’s
hosts from the face of the earth, that with three
blasts would have brought the everlasting hills
about his ears in powder and dust. . . . But no
Trumpet could be found.
“It had been stolen and carried away by a renegade
Levite who had gone to Egypt and become an
Egyptian, a worshipper of idols and a traitor to his
God and country (I’m precising the MS).
“He was followed—after Nebuchadnezzar had
passed away again. Three young men of Judah
journeyed into Egypt to track him down, kill him,
obtain the Lost Trumpet and return with it to
Jerusalem. And they came upon the renegade in
Heliopolis.”
“Heliopolis ?” For a moment I thought of the
tourist-city in which I myself lived and had vision
of the young men of Judah calling for refreshing
cocktails at the House Hotel bar. Huebsch nodded.
“The old city, of course, not the new. Well, to
precis a precis of what I was going to tell you, the
renegade learned that he was followed and was in
danger of his life. He knew it would be useless to
appeal to the Egyptians for protection; they would
have impounded the Trumpet. But he was also a Jew,
and knew that even though he surrendered the
Trumpet to the young men of Judah he would stih
be killed. He disappeared from Heliopolis for three
days during which the pursuers, who had been
setting their snares confident of success and were
THE LOST TRUMPET 37
at that happening greatly perturbed, searched for
him unavailingly. Then he returned abruptly to
his house, and they entered it that night, and slew
him.
“And there was no Trumpet.”
I was leaning forward in some interest by then.
Truth or an ancient fiction, this had inter spun in its
texture that glamour of wonder that could still
enthrall me.
“He had taken it away and buried it ?”
“Exactly. Or so they swear in Samarcand. He
buried it about twenty-five miles out from modern
Cairo.” Marrot had brought down his chair with a
bang; had stood up, and was regarding Huebsch
and myself with acid impatience. “Sorry to spoil
the next instalment, but we’ve a devil of a lot of
work to get through before to-night.”
Huebsch glanced at his wrist-watch. “Well, well,
and so we have. Didn’t notice that the time had
gone so quickly. An addendum to the MS explains
how the three young men found out that the Trumpet
had been buried. But, of course, they were unable
to do any digging in that hostile country, with some
mile or so of ground to choose. But they left this dusty
record and from study of it and the survey maps,
Marrot and I have narrowed down that once-
indefinite territory to a mile or so again. And we’re
going out to search for the cache of the renegade
Levite.”
“But—in a mile of country, you said ? Nearly
every foot of Egypt has already been excavated. If
THE LOST TRUMPET
38
such an interment ever took place, thieves or peasants
must have come upon the treasure long ago.”
Huebsch also had stood up. Now, looking down
upon me, he shook his great head.
“They haven’t.”
“How do you know ?”
“We’d all know. If they’d found it the Lost
Trumpet would have been used again in history.”
I had not thought of that. Used ? I think that I
mused aloud, Adrian and those two watching me in
that sunlit garden.
“Titus before Jerusalem—the Jews would have
swept his army from the earth.”
Huebsch’s great hand came on my shoulder.
But he was not looking at me. He was looking
nowhere, unless into the spiritual mysteries enshrined
in his colossal physical garmenture.
“So you will come with us ?”
I hesitated a moment. Remote in a garden neigh¬
bouring Adrian’s rose the shrilling of a cicada. In
my brain the grasshopper chirped response. Any¬
thing better than to abide in Cairo till that duet
drove me mad . . .
I nodded.
“I will come.”
CHAPTER THE THIRD
T had gone down to the Warrens then, as other
lost souls go down to Hell/
Subchapter i
THEY had gone. So had not I, for Adrian with
a twitch of his brows had signalled me to
remain. Straying round the garden paths the while
he saw the guests from the premises I put my hands
to my ears, and then laughed at myself, and dropped
them in some shame. If the shrilling of a garden
insect could drive me to this, I had better cease from
life altogether . . .
Adrian reappeared. Behind followed his servant,
tray-laden, with long glasses frostily bespeared.
Adrian sank again into the chair he had but lately
vacated.
“Here’s how, Colonel. Neither Huebsch nor
Marrot would look at a spot—prohibitionists in
fact as well as theory.” He held up his glass to the
sunlight. “I warned them as a medical man that
that was carrying things too far.”
“How did you come to know of them ?”
“They came to know of me. Fame. Marrot’s
occasionally troubled with the after-effects of a
perfectly devilish stomach-wound—war-relic, He
39
40 THELOST TRUMPET
went to consult Lugden as soon as he came down
to Cairo from Transjordania. Lugden’s in Alexandria,
so he came on to me. . . . Hell, to think that he
and Huebsch excavate into life and the pits of the
ancient dead on nothing stronger than lemonade !
You’ll have to lay in a private cellar when you go
down with them to Abu Zabal.”
“To where ?” I set down my glass, gently, I had
thought, but it reeled and rang on the tray.
Adrian looked up at me, eyes solemn and guile¬
less. “Abu Zabal. That’s the region where the sup¬
posed treasure lies. ... Is Princess Bourrin still
there ?”
The grasshopper and the cicada had both stilled.
Adrian sprang up. “What’s wrong, Saloney ? . . .
Sit down, man.”
“A poor plot, my dear Adrian. The Princess has
not been there these last nine months.”
He started a little at that. “Hell, I’m sorry,
Saloney. I thought I was doing you a good turn by
stealth. It was time someone did it. . . . No, don’t
go. Wait for a little plain speaking.”
I waited. He prowled to and fro under the tree-
shade for a little. Then :
“Curious chap that you are, Saloney. And plain
speaking isn’t so easy to you, after all. What is
wrong with you these days ? I’d thought it was this
confounded Princess of yours, but surely nine months
should have cured you. Or haven’t they ?”
I picked up my hat. “My cure has been a counter-
irritant. Listen }”
THE LOST TRUMPET
41
We listened, Adrian with his bright bird’s head
on one side. “Only a cicada. What has a
grasshopper to do with it ? . . . Where are you
going ?”
“A little walk in the footsteps of Dante.”
Subchapter ii
I was in the drained canal which is called the
Khalig el Masri. To this day one may see the tide-
marks on old houses. Brown men in dim shops
and tarbouches, drinking of arrack and deep in
interminable games of chess ; Jewesses, with imita¬
tion harem-veils pendent from brow to chin, slipping
in and out the throngs, encavaliered by red-lipped,
scented hes ; automobiles, with tourists and honk-
ings, out on a day’s sight-seeing ; a string of camels,
burdened and ill-smelling, snarling and stately, dun
hulks against the polychromatic drifts. . . . The
Khalig.
So I came at last to the cafe of the little Simon
Papadrapoulnakophitos. And there, at my wonted
table, I sat with my head between my hands and
heard the street-sounds die and pass and rise
again.
'The years that the locusts have eaten.’>
'And desire shall fail, and the grasshopper become a
bur den.’
I summoned the little Simon then, passing with
his worried, wrinkled face.
“I am plagued with insects, my good Simon,”
42
THE LOST TRUMPET
He made shocked motions towards my chair. I
restrained him.
“No, no, not fleas. Locusts and grasshoppers.”
“M’sieu’ has been out in the sun ?” He was
palpably startled, for he had an affection for me. “I
will bring him some brandy.”
He brought the brandy and I sat and drank it. A
prostitute, poor and painted and tattooed, went by.
A sakkah passed, trudging footsore. A party of
yellow-booted little Syrian men. Camels. A long
emptiness of street. A scowling gendarme. ... I
stared at the street through the brandy fumes.
The Princess Bourrin ?
I, the teller of tales, the romantic tourist-tout,
life’s spectator—-to sit in sick bitterness over a
story told and closed and hidden away on a dusty
shelf! Because of the chance words of a meddling
Englishman I must bring that story from its shelf
again, and scuffle the heat-warped pages, and hear
the clamour and cries of years that the locusts had
eaten . . .
The brandy, of course. Out of the years and out
of the Khalig, gay and unfaded as ever she came,
she who had then perhaps loved me almost as I
loved her—if eighteen may ever love as thirty-five.
The Princess Pelagueya Bourrin; absurdly clad as
were women in those days—though I had gone
unaware of the absurdity; tall and dark and white
and gold—all those, for somehow she had had gold
colour even in the blue blackness of her hair ; white
with our Russian whiteness, that somehow is not
THE LOST TRUMPET
43
pallor, though I would use that word but for the
later twist of meaning that it bears in English ; long
of limb—but even then she herself would have said
“leg”, loving to shock Kazan’s starched little circle
of the bourgeois-nobility; a wide mouth, with fine
and full lips and a little shading of dark down below
that seemly, shapely nose. . . . That had been
Pelagueya, lost from sight and hearing of me in the
blur and din of the October Revolution. And,
almost unchanged, almost thirteen years later, it had
been the Pelagueya who had accosted me in the hall
of Shepheard’s Hotel in Cairo.*
But if unchanged in appearance 
I drank off a second glass of brandy, sitting out¬
side Simon’s cafe in the dust and glare of the Sunday
afternoon, remembering then how Pelagueya had told
me she was leaving Cairo as the mistress of an
Englishman, Gault.
And Gault had been my friend.
Loved each other ? They had hated each other at
first, these two. She had sold herself to Gault in a
gay, callous desperation. As brutally he had bought
her; he, the explorer from Sahara, hungry for the
touch and sight of women. They had left Cairo
together, and together, by some queer accident, had
fallen in love—there, at Gault’s Turkish house in
Abu Zabal.
And then Gault had gone away again, the
explorer’s urge upon him; and he had been killed
by raiding Tuareg in the mountains of Mesheen,
*See “The Calends of Cairo.”
44
THE LOST TRUMPET
and Pelagueya, coming out of days of agony and
dazed disbelief, had turned to my friendship for
months, till I had remembered things older than
friendship——
Spectator unmoving on the fringe of life ! Fool
and renegade and dreaming traitor as I had known
myself. For, a morning three months after the death
of Gault, I had journeyed down to Abu Zabal with
but one intent and one purpose ; a winter day of
clarity and cold sunshine; and Pelagueya’s eyes,
questioning and clear. And I had looked in those
eyes, and suddenly had known myself old and sick
and tired, fit subject for the jeers of a tourist-tout
in a later day.
Love—I could not cease to love her though I
tried. And I found it a love as remote from life and
reality, the touch of her and the sight of her and
the sweet blood in her body, as the ghost desire
that haunted still the bones of Gault in wild
Mesheen . . .
Subchapter in
It was late that night when I left Abbassieh and
trudged out on the long lamp-lit road to Heliopolis.
And suddenly I found myself footsore and tired
enough from my long strayings in the Cairene streets
after leaving the shelter of Simon’s hospitable awning.
For an unreasoning urge had come upon me there
to revisit those streets and scenes across which the
locust had flown, devouring ten years of my life.
THE LOST TRUMPET
45
I had had the notion that if I went cautiously and
carefully, somewhere—perhaps after all I had drunk
too much of Simon’s brandy—I would find explana¬
tions and expiation. Even I, the frozen onlooker on
life’s hates and follies and loves !
I had gone down to the Warrens then, blindly,
as other lost souls go down to Hell. Down the
Khalig, in that late afternoon strong sunlight; out
through the dusty bazaars, by the Suq el Fahlamin,
cobalt and deserted, past the frowning walls of
Citadel, up and around and on to those walls on a
sudden impulse, so that all Cairo lay below me.
Cairo, Polis Polychrois, with no single colour of its
spectrum that for me, as other men, could shine and
abide and be mine . . .
Down dim dark lanes as the evening came on I
had wandered—lanes overhung with crumbling
balconies, lanes unknown even to me, dark corridors
where the poor and rejected—the maimed and
brutalized of this thing that East and West these
thousand years have called civilization—lived their
dark and fetid lives, and somehow found still the
courage to raise those bursts of laughter that I could
hear far in dim, stifling courtyards ; still to bring
with hope unlessened new life to add to that ferment
of pain and want, for children suckled at unshielded
breasts in almost every doorway; still to live and
lust and seek 
The Cairene woman of the Warrens has ever gone
unveiled ; there has been little enough for body¬
wrapping, far less the blinding of the face that so
46 THE LOST TRUMPET
shocks the Muslim God and stirs amorous passion
in the Muslim angel. So, in one doorway—and this
had been near to sunset, when wave on wave of light,
that somehow was not light but darkness with
ghost-foam of light on the fringe of each wave,
rolled and lapped with a soft hiss over the towering
khans—I had stood a long while and looked at a
woman who played with a baby in her lap. Only she
was no woman; she could scarcely have been
sixteen years old.
“What is he to become when he grows up ?”
I had asked, not idly, but in desperate earnest¬
ness.
She had smiled up at me then, already with a
face anxious and lined, this child already a mother,
prey and partner of that eyeless lust that haunts the
hovels of the poor. And suddenly she had smiled,
with the three-pointed tattoo-star below her nether
lip for a moment dimly symbolic.
“A man,,, she had answered, and smiled again.
Subchapter tv
And out on the Heliopolis road, remembering that
answer, I laughed. What hope or help for me in the
mindless hope of a woman of the Warrens ? The
days when either a word or a phrase could enslave
me were surely over. Reality or fantasy ? Truth or
delusion ? Like Gallio, I cared for none of these
things.
For me, the grasshopper. Sleep and retreat and a
THE LOST TRUMPET 47
clinging to safe friends and known places. For me
the dragoman’s whine and the dragoman’s patter,
and all the hum and the colour of Cairo wherein I
might have no time to think. This search of the
American archaeologists—to-morrow I would send
them a letter resigning from the expedition.
CHAPTER THE FOURTH
* “There are many slaveries,” I said. “Those of the
lash and those of the liquor ; and the little men who
are slaves of hope, and the bond-serfs of a creed of
hate.” ’
Subchapter i
NEXT morning, to counter-balance my early
stirrings on the Sunday, I overslept. Nor
did Annie Marie awake me until necessity beat with
urgency upon her door. In dream I heard the sound
and imagined myself back again in Crimea, watching
the bombardment of Perekop Fortress across the
Sivash Boloto. Presently, however, half-awake, 1
was aware that the barrage against Perekop had ceased
and that someone shook me ungently by the shoulder.
So I awoke to find my room filled by the dazzle
of Egyptian sunshine and the heated presence of my
landlady.
“ ’Ere, kurnel, two blokes in a car lookin’ f’r yew.
’Mericans.”
“Americans ?”
“Yers. Fat un an’ a thin. ’Ere’s yer breakfast. I
told ’em yew’d be down in a quarter of an hour.”
She peered at me anxiously, concernedly, knowing
that these were probably clients who awaited me.
“Yew will, won’t yew ?”
48
THE LOST TRUMPET
49
I remembered Huebsch and Marrot then. I sat up.
“Tell them I will be down in less.”
Dressing, my mind was firm in my resolve of the
previous evening. A month at Abu Zabal in company
with an incarnation of Joshua and a clipped avatar
of Spartacus—I had sooner go back to Russia !
Below, I found them sitting in an aged Darracq,
Huebsch at the wheel, the corn-cob pipe fast-gripped
between his jaws, Marrot lolling in the rear seat,
his feet upended on the prone girders of the hood.
I went out of the doorway and was greeted by them
and roar of the engine as it leapt to asthmatic life
under the force of the self-starter.
“Jump in, Colonel. Guess we want you to pilot
us through the Ministry of the Interior.”
“But—” I was about to make my resignation.
Huebsch shook a worried head.
“Jump in. I can’t hold her much longer. . . .
This is the first time I’ve driven an auto.”
So I guessed. We missed dismemberment of
Nicolaos’s eldest boy by a hair’s breadth, almost
scraped a yawning and early waiter from the steps
of Heliopolis House Hotel, yammered wildly amid
the ruts of the tram-tracks and then found ourselves
headed erratically for Cairo.
I had gained the rear seat by Marrot’s side. Now
he was sitting upright, shouting directions to the
gigantic worriedness of Huebsch. His hair was on
end, his pale face flushed. He gripped me at one
particularly lunatic lurch of the vehicle.
“Stick it. . . . This is Huebsch’s first go, but
D
JO THE LOST TRUMPET
he’s learning. . . . Oh, hell, not that knob ! That’s
acceleration. . . . With the right foot, man, the
right foot!”
Huebsch braked. The two donkeys, making
Cairowards laden with vegetables, swerved in panic.
The objurgations of their master melted away behind
us. Marrot leant back with a sigh.
“He’s never before had time to learn steering, so
I thought I’d put him on to it this morning.”
Like a schoolboy, my spirits were rising in the
wild exhilaration of the lunatic ride. I closed my
eyes as a tramcar rushed upon us, towered above
us, repented and flashed past. “He appears—an
enthusiastic pupil.”
“He’d learn anything, Huebsch.”
The ferocity of our career through the Cairene
streets gradually lessened in degree. By the time
we came to the Ministry the great face and neck of
Huebsch though beaded with perspiration were no
longer knotted with anxiety. He decanted himself.
We followed suit. The automobile groaned its
relief.
Huebsch smiled at me his slow, gigantic smile,
his curving nose outjutting from his face like the
beak of a benevolent vulture. “Say, Colonel, guess
I deserve a medal.”
Marrot was brushing the dust from his hair. “If
you’d asked that donkey-driver he’d have said you
deserved shooting.”
Huebsch pondered this; shook his head. “He
wasn’t in danger—much.” He turned again to me.
THE LOST TRUMPET 51
“And now—you’re coming with us to dig up the
Lost Trumpet, aren’t you ?”
I hesitated only a moment. “I had intended to
say no. But now—yes, I will come.”
“That’s good. Adrian rang us up yesterday and
said you were down in the dumps and likely to
resign. And we didn’t want you to. Colonel. So
Marrot and I plotted the little jaunt of this morning
to shake your cobwebs clear.”
Subchapter ii
So, through a schoolboy ruse—and on the realiza¬
tion of that with a shrug of indifference—I found
myself committed to a month’s contract to guide
these two on the desert fringe of Egypt, to engage
native labourers for excavation, to engage a cook,
to superintend the collecting of stores and the
granting of permits—“Everything, in fact,” said the
acid Marrot, “except lick Huebsch’s boots twice
nightly and once before breakfast—though that
would no doubt make your position a sinecure.
You are, my aristoemigre, a wage-slave. How do
you like it ?”
“There are many slaveries,” I said. “Those of the
lash and those of the liquor ; and the little men who
are slaves of hope, and the bond-serfs of a creed of
hate.”
He said to Huebsch : “By God, but I believe the
ex-militarist is sneering at me. Put him dowd, ■*
Huebsch. You’re his employer.”
52 THE LOST TRUMPET
This was at Simon’s cafe in the Khalig to which I
had taken them sight-seeing and to complete details
of the agreement. Huebsch withdrew his earnest,
enormous interest from the Street of All Egypt,
and viewed us with absent, titanic benevolence.
“I guess we’ll get on all right. Mustn’t mind
Marrot, Colonel. Now we’ve most of the necessary
permits from the Ministry of the Interior we can
start getting gear together to-morrow.”
I drew out my note-book, making notes of his
requirements. The Khalig voices cried around us
and over the roofs the sun was setting against a
background like a field of dandelions. So, pausing
in the list-making, I pointed out. Marrot, sur¬
prisingly, agreed. “Glorious. Fascinating city,
yours, Saloney.”
I had pointed out the sunset for the benefit of
Huebsch. And here, upsettingly, was a communist
with aesthetic appreciations ! I sought refuge in my
list again.
“And the cook ? Shall I myself select him ?”
“Sure,” Huebsch directed. I hesitated, for the
curve of his nose had suddenly suggested caution
to me. And, in the fashion which was uncannily
common to him, he knew at once that I hesitated.
“Can you manage that all right ?”
“Surely,” I said. “But—is there not a special
meat that your nation eats ?”
Marrot’s acid pipe of laughter rose. “Kosher,
b’God ! Oh, hell!”
Huebsch looked from one to the other of us, a
THE LOST TRUMPET
53
kindly, unmoved Gargantua. ‘Tm a Jew, but the
older type of Jew, y’understand.”
“Older ? You mean of the New Jews—the
Reformers ?” I suggested, helpfully.
Marrot explained. “Not a bit of it. Huebsch
holds that the olden Jews never kept the Mosaic
law in all its nonsensical details. They were merely
aware of the Levites and their rules as so many
handy ready-reckoners. But they themselves were
too much concerned with things of the spirit to worry
everlastingly over details of feeding and bedding and
genuflexion like the modern Orthodox Jew. . . . The
things of the spirit being David’s rape of Bath-sheba
and Solomon’s marrying of a thousand wives ”
Now, near to us, at the single other table which
the little Simon had placed outside the cafe that
evening, a young man had lolled in a chair, a great
flame of a red sombrero over his eyes, ever since we
had sat ourselves down. He had sat with the immo¬
bility of a sack and something of its appearance, a
bottle of the little Simon’s Greek brandy almost
empty near his elbow. Idly I had noted from the
corner of an eye that he had lately shown signs of
stirring. Now, abruptly, he did more than stir,
coming to life and his feet with a swaying deliber¬
ation. He clutched at Huebsch’s shoulder, steadied
himself, and peered down at us.
“Solomon ? Don’t worry over Solomon. Used
to have a spot of respect for him myself, but all that’s
gone. Not a spark of wisdom in the old fungus.
Listen” :
54
THE LOST TRUMPET
He threw back his head and, still clinging to
Huebsch’s shoulder, burst into a foolish scrap of
song :
“ ‘Old King Solomon had ten thousand wives —
And the damn fool slept with his fathers!’
“Mark that. Ten thousand of them. In gold they
were, Caucasian gold ; white Greeks and the lovely
things of Lebanon. The Shulamite was there, and
the Queen of Sheba. Love and loveliness like lilies
curled in a garden awaiting him. . . . And what
did he do ? Slept with his fathers ! He was no ancient
sage ; he was a soft-breeched little modern. Round
the door he’d peek of an evening and see them
waiting in battalions—all loveliness and all delight
and all pain and all fine-edged agony. And what
would he do ? Nip back and sleep with his
fathers ...”
He leered down at Huebsch. “Don’t take it to
heart, sonny,” the great Jew advised him, placidly.
For a moment the young man seemed a little taken
aback. Then : “Haven’t you any bowels of com¬
passion for your ancestors ? Slept with his fathers.
Fathers, mind you. In the plural. And his mother
—what must his mother have been like.”
Huebsch disengaged himself, still placidly. “Pretty
fast, pretty fast, I guess. Sit down, young man.
You’re a little bit snooted.”
The young man breathed heavily, swayed, and
stared at Huebsch. The three of us stared up at him :
THE LOST TRUMPET 55
Picturesque and amazing indeed was his attire—the
red sombrero, the Greek jacket, the flannel trousers
and rubber shoes. Below the hat was a wild swirl
of brown hair, and below that a face like a faun’s—
a faun meditating incarnation as a satyr.
“Snooted ? At this time o’ night ? D’you think
I’m a damn language-murdering Jew from
Volsteadia ? When I am snooted, to quote your
elegant jargon—oh, boy !”
“Well, well, well,” said Huebsch. “You don’t
like America ?”
The young man clutched at Huebsch’s shoulder
again, and stared round our table malevolently.
“America ! Banned my books there, blast them.
And why ? Because the fat and frothy Middle West
still believes that children come out of eggs. Exactly
that. . . . America ! Good God, and to think that
the continent where the intelligent Mound-Builders
and Maya lived gracious and seemly lives is now the
spawning bed of half the transported scum of
Eastern Europe, embedding its beastly jaws per¬
petually in the spoil of gum-forests and enunciating
its ghastly sentimentalities in what it believes to be
the tongue of Shakespeare ! Snooted ? It’s just that
the American boorzhoi stirs my bile, and I wanted
to watch the asinine amazement on your deplorable
faces. And I have. Faugh ! . . . May your blasted
continent sink !”
He swung uncertainly towards Simon (who bowed
scaredly), handed over an Egyptian pound note,
and swayed away down the Khalig, his sombrero
56 THE LOST TRUMPET
borne like a beacon of revolt. I had listened in some
considerable amusement, Marrot with acid con¬
tempt. Huebsch turned his immense head and neck
to follow the young man’s progress with kindly
commiseration.
“Well, well, your Cairo’s interesting right enough,
Colonel. What was the boy ? Scotch ?”
“English, I think.”
“Thought he might have been from the Northern
half and couldn’t touch anyone for a spot of the
home-brewed when he was over the Pond. Reminds
me. . . . More beer. Colonel ?”
“Please.”
He ordered more beer for me and had the glasses
of Marrot and himself recharged with a horrid mess
of bubbling, coloured waters. I drew my list towards
me again. It had grown intensely light, awaiting the
sunset.
“We had not settled about the cook. But if there
are no dietetic drawbacks, I think I might be able to
engage one here.”
“From this cafe ?”
I nodded and called to the little Simon. He came
in an ingratiating hurry to our table and his eyes
lighted at my request.
“If your cousin Georgios is still with you, will
you bring him here ? I might find him work for a
short time.”
“The job !” He threw up his hands. “Now Mary
Mother but grant him sense and discretion. I will
fetch him at once.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
57
Huebsch looked a question. Marrot put his in
words. “What’s happening ? We’ve no Modern
Greek, either of us. But the little man looked
mightily bucked.”
“It was at thought of getting rid of his cousin,
our prospective cook.”
Marrot raised sardonic brows. Huebsch con¬
sidered the matter with heavy, just deliberation.
“Well, well. But it doesn’t sound much of a
recommendation. ”
I hastened to explain. “Georgios Papadrapoul-
nakophitos was cook at the Pension Avallaire, so
you may have no doubts as to his culinary skill. He
was dismissed from his post but a month ago, and
has since then been wasting his talents in the kitchen
of the little Simon.”
Again, with that slow unhastingness that I was
beginning to admire, Huebsch bent over the matter
—like a Father of the Sanhedrin debating capitula¬
tion to the Army of Titus, said a flippant imp in my
mind.
“And why was he dismissed ?”
He knelt on the stomach of the manager, I
believe, and beat the manager’s head against the
floor.”
Marrot turned his head and surveyed his colleague’s
girth with interest. “Excellent. Just what you
require to tone you down, Huebsch.” But quite
evidently his interest had kindled in the Georgios
who was now doubtlessly doffing his apron and
brushing his moustachios. ... I shook my head.
58 THE LOST TRUMPET
“He did it with no hope or desire that the com¬
munist revolution would follow these activities.
The manager’s failure to appreciate music was the
cause.”
“Music ?”
“Here is Georgios himself. He speaks French.”
Simon piloted his cousin amid the tables to the
place where we sat. He was perhaps five feet in
height—or should I say shortness ?—with the large
head and serious eyes, no apron, and verily the
great sweep of moustache fresh brushed and glis¬
tening. He might have been forty years of age. He
bowed, sweepingly, astoundingly, favouring me with
a quick, commendatory smile. I looked a gravity
I did not altogether feel.
“Georgios, these gentlemen are archaeologists.
They and I are going out to Abu Zabal to dig in the
earth for ancient instruments. We want you to
come as cook—providing you will relate to MM.
les Americains your exact reasons for assaulting the
manager of the Avallaire.”
“Messieurs, he insulted my art!”
“Your cooking ?” Marrot, ever the quicker,
questioned with eyebrows and clipped French.
Simon’s cousin made a contemptuous gesture.
“Cooking! I could cook M’sieu’s hat and
the note-book of Colonel Saloney into a mess that
the three of you would devour with cries of delight.
Cooking—M’sieu’, I am the best cook in Cairo and
would long ago have been recognized as such but
for the jealousy and hatred of my skill among the
THE LOST TRUMPET
59
clown-like of the hotels. But my art—M’sieu’, I
play upon the silver bugle.”
He paused, looking at us not at all like a cook
seeking a situation, but like the great musician he
believed himself. I think all three of us kept grave
faces. He nodded again.
“The silver bugle. Messieurs. Music—it is my art,
my passion, my life. In every moment that is mine
I retreat to my room and seek to find the sum of
beauty in the long sweetness of some single note. So
I did at the Availaire, and they listened, astounded
and respectful, saying nothing. . . . Till the coming
of the new manager.”
“And what did he do ?” inquired Marrot.
“M’sieu’, he burst into my room the second day
he came, saying that I raised a hideous noise like to
crack the walls. When I understood I laid aside my
little bugle and answered that perhaps his head would
achieve the result more quickly. Then I took him
by the ears, Messieurs, and beat his head against the
wall, and beat it upon the floor, and might have
beaten in his empty skull but for the fact that his
screams brought him rescuers. Then I left the
Avallaire, I and my little bugle.”
He stopped. I looked at Marrot. Marrot, lighting
a cigarette, looked at Huebsch. The great Jew, it
was plain, was slowly and justly working out the
matter in all its details.
“Now, Georgios, we want a cook,” he said at
last, carefully, “and Colonel Saloney here recom¬
mends you. We’ll pay you a decent wage, but you
6o THE LOST TRUMPET
must understand that we’re going out to a place that
is practically a desert, so there will have to be certain
restrictions—even. I’m mighty sorry to say, on your
activities as a musician.”
The little Greek stiffened absurdly. Huebsch
nodded, ponderously.
“Now, I’m not like the manager of the Avallaire.
I don’t resent music. It’s just that I know nothing
about it. To be frank, Georgios, I’m so ignorant
in the matter that I would probably know no differ¬
ence between a boy tootling on a tin whistle and the
exquisite sounds which I don’t doubt you produce
on your bugle.”
The haughtiness was smoothed away from
Georgios’ face. He nodded commiseratingly.
“I understand, M’sieu’. There are such men—
and it is no fault of theirs.”
“Exactly. Now, I can’t answer for Colonel Saloney,
but my colleague here is exactly the same. Com¬
pletely unmusical. So, when we go to our camp at
Abu Zabal, and you find the time and inclination to
practise your art, you understand that it’ll have to
be done at some distance from the camp. Both in
our interests and in yours. We’d have no appre¬
ciation and would merely be distracted from our
researches ; while you yourself, if you practised in
our vicinity, would be constantly vexed by the
thought that you were wasting your genius on ears
both dull and indifferent.”
Georgios saw that. “M’sieu’, I thank you, and
will certainly comply with that condition. M’sieu’
THE LOST TRUMPET
6l
may be no musician, but he has the understanding;
heart.”
“Well, well. Then I guess Colonel Saloney’ll fix
you up about pay and so forth later. We start in
two days’ time.”
The Khalig was alive with hasting lights. Night
had come. The doorway of Simon’s cafe cast us a
dark, humorous wink as the form of the entering
Georgios blotted out its radiance a moment.
Marrot’s acid chuckle suddenly smote the air as we
rose to our feet to leave.
“You never know; a player on the silver bugle
—he might be useful in an allied capacity.”
“Eh ? . . . How ?”
“Why, when we find the Lost Trumpet.”
CHAPTER THE FIFTH
‘South we went towards Abu Zabal, past deserted
Helmieh and its lost block-houses in the sands, into
that quiet, pale country.’
Subchapter i
FANTASTIC as might be the nature of the search
on which we were setting forth, neither Huebsch
nor Marrot displayed impracticability. From morn¬
ing till night I was in constant activity here, there
and the many other places all over Cairo. They had
sold or otherwise disposed of their archaeological
equipment in the Jordan Valley, and fresh tools in
abundance had to be procured—spades, levels, sieves
and filters, casket-like crates wherein to bestow the
treasures buried so long ago by the renegade Levite
or other weak-brained ancient. With Marrot for
adviser I also engaged the native labourers and
purchased provisions.
There were ten labourers—Egyptian fellaheen, all
of them, immigrant countrymen who had found
the life of Cairo no great improvement on the
immemorial slavery of Nile-bank’s little fields. Marrot
would have offered them double the current rate of
wages, but I restrained him.
“That is far above the normal rate.”
62
THE LOST TRUMPET
63
“But how the devil can they live ?” he protested.
“It is a low wage. Yet they will consider it good
—at least, until the communist revolution.”
He nodded. “When I hope they’ll cut the throats
of all such parasites as ourselves.”
“I shall be pleased to watch Mr. Marrot approving
of having his throat cut for political reasons.”
So we would spar, yet we grew to a certain degree
of friendliness. With Huebsch it was otherwise ;
to me it seemed impossible that anyone could fail
to admire that immense, unswerving, unhesitating
devotion to clarity and justice and good sense that
was his. But Marrot added his footnote.
“The worst of Huebsch,” he remarked, while we
stood watching the Jew discussing with a salesman
the hire of a suitable lorry, “is that he’s got no sane
and believable purpose in the world—and knows
it.”
“No purpose ?”
“He’d give his life to know what the hell he’s
alive for.”
Subchapter ii
We set out for Abu Zabal at nine o’clock on the
Wednesday morning and arrived near eight at
night. Setting forth this record I am struck again by
that sad lack of the unexpected in Egyptian weather.
All mornings of those months are cloudless ; ours
of that day no less. In front of us, piloted by a
labourer who had affirmed to a knowledge of lorries,
64 THE LOST TRUMPET
the hired Leyland wobbled unchancily from the
Abbassieh yard. It was loaded with much gear and
stores, the nine other labourers, and, perched high
above all other burdens, Georgios Papadrapoul-
nakophitos, clutching in one hand two indignant
chickens in a coop and in the other a case that I
guessed to contain his silver bugle.
Our aged Darracq Marrot drove on this occasion,
Huebsch sitting greatly and placidly beside me in
the back seat. He drove with one hand, did the
thin, sardonic Marrot, and with that single hand
performed those prodigies of skilful steering and
retarding that is the genius of the born motorist.
Through Abbassieh, into the radiance of the sun¬
light coming down the road from Heliopolis. The
morning freshness had not yet quite gone. In the
air through which our Darracq sped, chasing its
own shadow, there was still the tang of night cool¬
ness. Bugles were blowing in the English barracks.
A train of donkeys ; a squad of native soldiers,
with thin, pipe-stem legs absurdly enwrapped in
those puttees imitated from the English; a hospital
matron on a motor-cycle; three camels swaying in
line, the little bell of their leader tinkling down the
road. ... We were following that route that
Pelagueya and her lover had taken two years before.
And the day brightened, and the sun climbed the
sky, and in front of us the lorry, emulating an
inebriated snake, curvetted Abu Zabal-wards.
But a little beyond Heliopolis, on the Helmieh
road, it came abruptly to a standstill, almost jerking
THE LOST TRUMPET 65
the little Georgios from his perch. His caged fowls
screeched. So did Georgios. Leaning down, cling¬
ing to an out-jutting leg of furniture, he cursed the
driver resourcefully. We drove up and stopped.
“What is wrong ?” I asked the driver, a labourer
who bore the heroic name of Kalaun. He had dis¬
mounted and was peering under the bonnet of the
Leyland. He grinned sheepishly, looking sideways
at the other two labourers who had occupied the
seat with him. There was silence until Georgios,
craning perilously over the front of the vehicle’
explained scornfully :
Messieurs, the man is a fool, as were doubtlessly
his parents—if ever he had any. They brought 
he and the others—the pail of tea with them, and to
keep it warm placed it inside the bonnet. Now it is
spilled and the engine refuses to function.,,
“Is this the case ?” I asked Kalaun. He grinned
again, exasperatingly. Huebsch, Marrot and I
descended and inspected the damage. I had cer¬
tainly seen a cleaner engine. Huebsch looked at it
carefully, looked consideringly at Kalaun, opened
his lips to speak, and was at once forestalled by
Marrot. 1
“No, you don’t, Huebsch. Cut it out. He didn’t
know any better. How the hell can you expect him
to ? Pay him starvation wages and expect expert
inechanical skill—!” He snorted angrily and took
oft his jacket. “Damn nonsense.”
Huebsch shook his head. “Well, well, I wasn’t
going to slate the boy, so what’s the fuss ?”
66
THE LOST TRUMPET
Marrot had turned his back on us. Huebsch con¬
sidered that back carefully, and, as it seemed to me,
compassionately. Mystified, I went to the assistance
of Marrot.
At length, after much expenditure of rags and
much sluicing with ill-to-be-spared water, we had
the engine cleansed and restarted. Kalaun and his
sheepish companions resumed their seats. We did
the same in the Darracq. The lorry jerked forward,
paused consideringly in a fashion that was somehow
reminiscent of Huebsch himself, and then, gathering
speed, fled in advance of us at such rate as caused
Georgios and his chickens to oscillate wildly.
Huebsch chuckled.
“Better get down to it, Marrot. Else we’ll not be
in time even to hear the dying wishes of your
protege.”
The Darracq fled in pursuit. I turned to Huebsch.
“This incident—Kalaun and his fellow tea-
drinkers. What did Mr. Marrot fear ? It would have
been well for Kalaun to be rated in the matter.”
The great Jew beside me sighed ponderously,
settling himself in a greater comfort. “I know.
Done the boy a power of good. But Marrot won’t
hear of that kind of thing—not even though it was
to save his own life five minutes later. You see, he’s
obsessed with the cruelty of employers to employed.
He had some pretty shocking experiences of it him¬
self in the war—he enlisted as a private in the army.
And he’s never forgotten that thin time. I’ve seen
him look murder at a man speaking sharply to a
THE LOST TRUMPET
6?
waiter. And up in Transjordan he punched the
head of a British sub who had hit an orderly. . . .
And I must say the orderly was only getting what
was coming to him.,,
I followed out this circumlocution, but it lessened
the puzzle of Marrot but little. I had not associated
such passionate humanitarianism with his cold,
sardonic being. “Surely this is no part of the
orthodox Marxian creed ?”
“Communism ? Oh, he’s a communist more
from sentiment than economics, I guess. Best
archaeologist in the Near East—if only he’d give
himself to the job in hand. His failing is that he
lacks a purpose.”
“Eh ?”
“A purpose. Colonel. If he could see through the
fogs of time and circumstance the real purpose he’s
intent on he’d make it bald-headed though it cost him
his life.”
Subchapter Hi
South we went towards Abu Zabal, past deserted
Helmieh and its lost block-houses in the sand, into
that quiet, pale country on the desert fringe, flat and
sad and steaming a little, with its squares of fields
vanishing to right and left in the haze, and the mud-
walled villages creeping up from each horizon in a
glitter of white mosque and dovecote. Near ’Ain
the lorry stopped to provide leisure for the labourers
to descend and lunch. We saw the halted dot two
68
THE LOST TRUMPET
miles and more off before we came up with it. A
mile away we did more than see—we heard. And it
was horrible—like the screaming of a lost soul in a
Sivaistic purgatory, I thought. Huebsch started
from sleep as though he had been knifed.
“What in hell’s that row ?”
And then I had it. “That, if I mistake not, is the
good Georgios making music at the lunch-halt.”
Nor was I mistaken. There he was, a little apart
from the canal-ford and the lorry, his absurd little
figure drawn up pursily, the coop with the chickens
at his feet, the silver bugle at his lips wailing in
dreadful anguish. Marrot stopped the Darracq and
appealed to him.
“For God’s sake fight fair, Georgios. Remember
your bargain with us.”
Our cook ceased from mortal metal strife, regard¬
ing Marrot with a chill hauteur. “J« the camp,
M’sieu’, there are certain conditions. But not before.”
“Quite right. But as a favour ?”
The little man polished the mouth of his ornate
instrument and returned it to its case, regretfully.
“I shall always be happy to oblige M’sieu’.”
^ Huebsch levered himself from the Darracq.
“Could you oblige us with a bite of tiffin, then ?”
“It is ready, M’sieu’.”
And there, miraculously, at the other side of the
ford, under the dusty drooping of a solitary
eucalyptus tree, was spread the small table-cloth,
flanked by three camp-stools. Napery and plates
gleamed. Cold chicken and freshly boiled eggs were
THE LOST TRUMPET 69
ready. Coffee steamed. There was a fine salad.
Georgios served us with skill and impressiveness.
We, the two Americans and I, sat and marvelled
humbly and ate greatly. Marrot said :
“Georgios, I have no soul for music, but I don’t
doubt after this meal that you are as great a musician
as a cook. No man with a soul Ikie yours could make
a poor show at anything he tried.”
The little Greek beamed upon him. “M’sieu’ will
have more coffee ?”
We lay beneath the shade of the eucalyptus and
spread maps, considering Abu Zabal and its features.
To the left of the road was the village, as I knew.
To the right a track wound down through a semi-
cultivated tundra waste to that Turkish house on the
desert fringe where Oliver Gault and Pelagueya
Bourrin had consummated their sad, mad love-
saga. Of other features in the district I was uncer¬
tain. Nor did I alone own to uncertainty, for the
maps seemed equally vague. But Huebsch and Marrot
had already the lie of the excavations plotted in their
minds.
“We’ll take this road turning down to the right.
We re then in the lands of Selim Hanna, who has
given us permission to dig up where we will,” said
Huebsch.
So he damn well might, considering what we’ve
paid him.”
“Well, well, down to the right. We can’t be
sure of the most likely digging spots until we get
there and attempt to synchronize the details of the
70 THE LOST TRUMPET
old MS and the modern contours of the land. Now
this house here. I’m told, belongs to the mistress of
an Englishman, Gault, who was killed in Sahara
eighteen months ago ”
“Is the harlot in residence ?” inquired Marrot.
“M’sieu’, the lady is a Russian princess—and my
friend.”
Both stared at me. Huebsch rubbed his chins
consideringly. Marrot said :
“Glad of it. But I seem to have offended you.
Why ?”
“Does that need explaining ?”
“Should think so. I said : Is the harlot in residence ?
Just as I’d have said : Is the plumber in residence ?
or : Is the married woman in residence ? Just as I’d
refer to any of them by their professions if I didn’t
know their names.”
“Your references are too glib. The Princess
Bourrin is not a harlot. She and Gault were lovers,
free and equal, in that sense which you communists
are supposed to approve very highly.”
“Then I am sorry. I hope I’ll meet her.” He
looked at me disgustedly. “And what the hell did
you mean by referring to her as a lady, then ? If
she s acted and lived like that she’s a woman”
I shrugged away from that ambiguous rating. It
was not a case in which I cared to argue matters of
nomenclature. It was not a case I had ever hoped to
discuss again.
Huebsch poised his pencil above the map. “And
is the Princess at the house just now. Colonel ?”
THE LOST TRUMPET
71
“She has been gone these last nine months.”
“Well, well, that’s a pity. But it can’t be helped.
She might have given us permission to dig over her
land as well, in case Hanna’s doesn’t cover the com¬
plete area we’ll have to excavate. Still, if she’s away
and the place locked up ”
“We’ll do the digging without asking,” said
Marrot, turning his pale, cold eyes on me question-
ingly. I shrugged again.
“I cannot imagine that she would object,” I
said. Nor could I. A picture of her, in that poise of
amused, indifferent insolence, arose before me and I
stared at it wearily, and through the bright stillness
of the day by the ’Ain ford-bank heard again
the .chirping of the grasshopper. . . . Huebsch’s
voice :
“Well, well. Then we’ll try her house for drink¬
ing water anyway, and camp over about here”—his
pencil came to smudgy halt in the midst of a little
field about a quarter of a mile from the Gault house
—“if it’s at all suitable. To-morrow you and the
Colonel can push out with the theodolite and make
preliminary surveys, Marrot. I’ll set the labourers
to digging up our camp.”
“Will that be necessary ?” I inquired.
“Absolutely. Once knew a young man up near
Damascus who prospected a site for close on five
months and then had a fine Roman pavement found
him by his cook—while the latter was baking a
chicken in the earth.” He looked over his shoulder
towards Georgios with massive affability. “And we
7^
THE LOST TRUMPET
don’t want our follower here to dig up the Lost
Trumpet by accident and startle us some morning
with its strains !”
Subchapter iv
Abu Zabal rose on the horizon half an hour
before sunset, still in the pale land, though there
were deeper shades of brown here from the stubble
of the fields. Windless country we found it, very
quiet but for the unending calling of doves from
distant cotes. The Leyland had halted uncertainly
by the branching of the roads, and we called to
Kalaun to turn to the right. He had better control
of the lorry by then and wheeled into the narrower
track without mishap. So before us lay the country
for our exploration and excavation.
In front, half a mile away, was the deserted Turkish
castle of Oliver Gault, a hideous thing of Parisian
baroque and gimcrack imitativeness that the wester¬
ing sun was tinting in unexpected austerity of line.
Left of us, the autumnal village lands, cut in their
narrow plots. To the right the three great fields of
Selim Hanna, intersected by a half-dried canal. Remote
beyond fields and house a blur, a brown metallic
shimmer that was the desert.
It had memories bitter enough for me, this region,
as I watched the house jut to view and vanish again
in the swayings of the frontward lorry. There Gault
and Pelagueya and I had listened to the tinkling of
that camel s bell that had lured him to his death;
THE LOST TRUMPET
73
there I had made fantastic journey to speak to my
princess, and left with my speech unspoken; there,
for the first time in my life, I had truly envisaged the
reality of the romantic middle-aged tourist-tout, had
known myself cursed with such clarity of intro¬
spection as no romantic dreamings might ever serve
to veil. ... So Pelagueya had vanished from Abu
Zabal and my life and wandered brilliant and
unresting—where ? Italy, perhaps, or the gay French
coasts. And how much or ever did she remember
of me or that Gault whom a raiding band of Tuareg
had killed and mutilated in the mountain-passes of
Mesheen ?
Oh, these old, unhappy, far off things !
Now, some quarter of a mile distant from the
house, Kalaun’s lorry halted again, as he had been
bidden to halt it, and then, brown and golden, like
an ancient dragon in the evening light, swung right
again, into the waste, moist fields of Selim Hanna.
Moist we in the Darracq knew them to be even
before we came on them; the Leyland wallowed
like a dinosaur distressed. But in the distance of some
ten yards or so it attained to a track of fair firmness
that ran by the brink of the neglected canal and in
this track we followed, the while the darkness, coming
over the shoulder of the village of Abu Zabal, waited
for us impatiently. And at length Huebsch, elevating
himself from beside me with startling creakings,
sent his immense shout down the still air.
“That’ll do, Kalaun ! Camp her there for the
night.”
74
THE LOST TRUMPET
The lorry halted. We squdged forward and halted
beside it. In a babel of sound the labourers set to
unloading stores, gear and Georgios. Our cook,
bearing chicken-coop and bugle-case, waddled stiffly
forward.
“In a quarter of an hour. Messieurs, I will have
dinner prepared.”
“You’re a miracle, Georgios,” said Marrot; and
added, generously, “We shan’t mind though it’s
twenty minutes.”
A little to the east of the canal was a slight eleva¬
tion—a natural one, said the archaeologists, both
intently aprowl—firmer and less green than the
surrounding flatness. To this our three tents were
transported and erected. Below, near the Leyland,
Kalaun and his men set up their marquee and Georgios
the store-tent. We plunged into the activities of
camp-making with some zest, Huebsch, ponderous,
a man of Heidelberg against the sunset, carrying
great loads from lorry and car to the tents, Marrot
beating in pegs with cheerful staccato blow^s that
echoed across the flat tundra lands to the desert edge
and returned, like flashing birds, and zoomed over¬
head to the dark cluster of Abu Zabal. ... We had
camped. To-morrow our work would begin, and 
And I had a sudden irrelevant thought, accosting
Huebsch midway the little eminence.
“This Lost Trumpet—if it were found and blown
—would it ?”
Huebsch breathed greatly, lowering a miscellaneous
burden of implements, considering me with his
THE LOST TRUMPET
75
slow smile. “Would it act as in the days of Joshua ?
Haven’t a notion. Colonel. But you’d better not
sound Marrot on the matter else he’ll preach you to
death on the materialist conception of history—
Joshua no more than a desert bandit and his Trumpet,
if found, a moderately interesting antique horn.”
He stretched himself, greatly. “Fine sky there.”
It was a very fine sky. Now the darlmess, giving
us up as impossible loiterers, had passed over our
heads, and the dusk came after it as a fine lace veil
trailed in the hands of that darkness. But still in the
east the sunset colours shone for a moment, very
gay and insouciant, like the lights of a palace ball
with revolutionists at the gates. . . . Huebsch
spoke again, musingly. “You never know. That
wall there”—he pointed to the bending sheet of the
horizon rim besieged by darkness—“The Lost
Trumpet might bring it crashing about our ears !”
That I found amusing. “ ‘And the heavens shall
roll up like a scroll—’. . . . The good Georgios
appears to be vexed.”
Gesticulating, he was ascending towards us from
amid the magical array of stoves and cooking impedi¬
menta that had shaped to swift being in the lee of the
lorry. “Messieurs !”
“Well, well,” said Huebsch, “you surely haven’t
served dinner already ?”
“But no.” Georgios almost wrung his hands. “I
had forgotten—this I had not anticipated. The
canal water is undrinkable, and there is no other.”
“That,” I said, “can be remedied easily. Send one
THE LOST TRUMPET
of the labourers to me with buckets and we can go
and fill them at the deserted house at the end of the
road.”
Georgios heaved a sigh of relief and turned away
nimbly. “Very well, mon colonel.” Then paused
and pointed. “Deserted ? It does not appear so.”
Lights were shining at us across the dusk from the
upper rooms of Gault’s Turkish castle.
CHAPTER THE SIXTH
T knew that voice. I had half-expected to hear it,
yet disbelieved I would ever hear it again.’
Subchapter i
THEY shone steadily, no chance glimmer from
the lamp of a raiding burglar, as the labourer
and I stumbled along the roadway in the dusk.
Drawing near, we saw the light streaming from
below a door in the courtyard. We crossed to that
door and I beat on it until we heard the sound of
approaching footsteps along a stone-flagged passage.
They were quick, light footsteps. A voice said in
French : “Who is it ?”
I knew that voice. I had half-expected to hear it,
yet disbelieved I would ever hear it again. I leant
against the wall and the labourer, bemused, stared
at me and clinked the handles of the buckets. The
question was repeated, impatiently, and then the
door opened.
So, after nine months, I saw Pelagueya again, in
silhouette, backgrounded by the light of the corridor,
tall and slight, with burnished, blue-black hair and
her face in shadow ; and, as ever, her gown seeming
to drape in over-affectionate admiration the lines of
beauty of her long, swift body. A scent of lilac came
77
•y 8 THE LOST TRUA1PET
out to the two of us, looking up at her. The burnished
head bent towards us. Unalarmed, half-impatient,
half-amused, she said again : “Who is it ?”
Now at that I took off my hat and stepped forward
into the radiance of the corridor light. There was a
moment’s silence, and then, without cry or greeting,
her arms were around my neck.
“Anton Kyrilovitch !” And I felt my heart almost
cease from beating at sound of the sweet Russian
syllables. “Oh, Anton, I thought Cairo had lost and
mislaid you ! Wherever have you been and how did
you know I came back to-day ?”
I found I was holding her in my arms, as I had
never done, and the burnished hair was a miracle of
fine metallic weavings against my cheek, and I was
dizzy with the smell of lilac, and the reluctant gown
had yielded to me, as if happily, and with a sigh of
content, that curving beauty of breast and limb that
was Pelagueya. So, while she jerked out the questions,
we stood a moment, looking at each other mistily.
Then I had dropped my arms and Pelagueya hers.
She drew back a step. She laughed.
“Still the same Anton ! And do come in. Who’s
that with you ?”
I looked over my shoulder at the labourer.
Foolishly :
“He wants water.”
She gave a characteristic gurgle of laughter. “He
may have wine if he chooses. I’m so glad to see you.”
She called aloud : “Ibrahim !” and a native servant
came hurrying down the corridor. She motioned
THE LOST TRUMPET 79
towards my labourer. “Give this man food and
drink. And now you’ll come with me, Anton.”
But I was emerging from my daze. “I should
love nothing better, but my employers are awaiting
their dinner. We have come for water to make it.”
She stared, with that haughty tilt of head and
brows that I knew so well. “ ‘Employers ?’ Oh,
then you are in that party of the automobile and
lorry that has camped in Hanna’s field ?”
I nodded.
She ^frowned; her decisions were as quick as
ever. Your man will go back with the water. But
I myself haven t yet dined. So you must stay with
me.”
(( Put hand on my arm, shaking me a little.
“Anton ! Pelagueya Bourrin or your employers ?” *
Subchapter ii
Book-cases of light native wood-work lined the
walls of the room. Two hacking knives of the
Tuareg, grisly things that it seemed to me Pelagueya
might have spared herself, hung crossed above a
stuffed ostrich head and neck. The paper was peeling
from the walls. The service was of silver
Gault s house I Still half of Gault—those straying
yellow-backed Tauchnitz editions that heaped the
dusty cases, those relics and trophies in tasteless
jumbles, those lumps of quartz and rock-crystal
crowding the glass-doored shelves. . . . We sat
8o
THE LOST TRUMPET
at dinner, his mistress and I, eating cooling and
cold and execrably-cooked viands, and looked at
each other, and talked unnaturally about unimportant
things—Pelagueya and her wanderings on the
French Riviera, in Italy, in America; Pelagueya
and her letters I had never received or answered
because of a changed address ; Pelagueya bored with
wandering, wandering back to this desert house of
Gault’s 
“But in a little while again you will be very bored,”
I said. She shrugged impatiently.
“Of course I will. But what else am I to do ? Oh,
living alone can never satisfy anyone, I think. Living
with too much money. I want to work and argue and
talk—politics and industry and the state. Lovely
and exciting things. I’d love to work in the minutest
sub-department of some government ministry. But
how can I ? How can any of us White Russians
except in our own country ?”
“And why not there ?”
“What—with the animals who killed my brother
in control ?”
Pelagueya’s face clearer to me now than at that
mazed doorway encounter. Unlined still, and fresh,
with that curl of lip that was like the curling of a
finely-moulded petal, and her eyes, great and dark
and gay and—as always they had seemed to me after
Gault’s death—haunted eyes. Nor had that haunted¬
ness yet gone from them, whatever the scenes and
encounters of the past nine months. The scents of
the tangled wreckage that was the garden came in
THE LOST TRUMPET 8l
to us as we sat at meat, and towards Abu Zabal I
saw a little stir of fires and a steady radiance from the
camp I had so unwarrantably deserted. Now
Pelagueya, with that burnished mop of hers bent
low in thought, raised it and looked at me, and opened
her lips to speak when there happened a thing that
I had waited for ever since the lorry and car made
camp.
Far up the Abu Zabal road there came the tinkling
of a camel’s bell. Pelagueya’s lips closed and her
eyes widened. She put her hand across the table.
Anton ! Does it still bring you as bad memories
as that ?”
I thought of that mutilated body long ago stripped
by vultures in the passes of Mesheen. “And
you ?”
“Poor Oliver! Unforgettable for ever.” She
looked through the window and then back at me.
“And not a man at all in my memory, Anton. Hardly
even a lover known in a dream. I think we were
just two wild, pitying desires that met and loved
and parted. She laughed a little, but I saw her hand
tremble and her head was bent again. “And you think
I’m heartless ?”
“I think women can forget.”
“Can’t men ? Can’t you, Anton ?”
And I knew the meaning of that question, and
suddenly the elaborate pretences we had kept up
since she had opened the door for me an hour before
shivered away. This was something we had never
talked of, but I found myself talking of it at last.
82
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Pelagueya, do you remember those days in
Kazan ?”
She nodded, her dear face mantling a little flush
across the clear pallor of her cheeks, under those
smooth cheek-bones. I heard myself go on, clear and
unincoherent at last in this business that had haunted
my life.
“I loved you then. You lived in my memory and
I loved you through thirteen long years, Pelagueya.
Why ? Because of your beauty, of course. Because
you have hair as you have it, and the way you smile,
and because even the loveliest clothes upon you
seem to me sacrilege, for the loveliness that they
alone know was surely meant for gladdening all the
world ”
Still that blue-black halo to my gaze, but her
voice very low and untremulous. “You might have
it to gladden you at least, if it would make you glad,
Anton, my dear.”
I flinched a little perhaps then, but it was my
moment and I held to it. “And the play of your
mind that seems to me a thing of beauty, because
even when I do not think as you yet I can under¬
stand your thoughts. And the fearlessness you
have, and the oh! stupendous ignorances, and
the sweet way your lips curl back, and the breath¬
taking thing it would be if you were the mother of
a child of mine. . . . All these things I could
remember in those twelve or thirteen years. They
came out of the darkness and lighted my saddest
moments, a fairy-tale and a fairy-princess remem-
THE LOST TRUMPET
83
bered. And then we met in that room at Shepherd’s
while we waited for Gault, and you told me you
were Gault’s mistress.”
“And because of that ?”
“Do you think that would matter if I had still
the faith to put my dreams to the test of reality—
and come to you and ask for their fulfilment ? You
are more dear and adorable than ever you were—
but, oh. I’ve grown old ! Twelve years. Princess.
Thirteen now. And I have seen so much in those
thirteen years. Beauty hunted and dreamt of and
followed ; achieved at last. And then—satiety or
smirching. ... So I may sit and love you here, or
when you are nowhere to be seen or heard, and you
are mine as never you’d be if I came round this
table and held you in my arms.”
She laughed, playing with a little pyramid of
brown bread-crumbs upon her plate. “ ‘The
Apologia of Colonel Saloney.’ ” Then raised her
head and looked at me again. “And me, Anton ?
Suppose that I do not believe a dream can be
smirched because it is realized ? Supposing I believe
this creed of yours is a coward’s creed ?”
“Even with that supposition,” I said, and halted
and stammered and then some anger came on me.
“Pelagueya, you have played with life all your life,
and it has given you prizes easily and readily. Me
you can forgo without heart-break. Queen Cophetua
and the Beggar-Man ! Do you think I would live on
Gault’s money ?”
“That is vile, Anton Kyrilovitch !”
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH
‘Aslaug Simonssen. I did not doubt her for a
moment, nor she me. With that name this could
be no one but Aslaug Simonssen.’
Subchapter i
WE were awakened in our tents at dawn by the
crowing of the diminutive rooster Georgios
had brought from Cairo. It crowed not only
piercingly, but with a shrill, petulant insistence there
was no denying. I heard the sound of hasty move¬
ment in the tent of Marrot, which was nearest to me,
and glanced out. Poising a boot, the noted Egyptol¬
ogist scrambled through the cords of his tent. The
projectile hurtled through the air. There came a
loud thwack, a startled giggle from the hen cooped
up with the rooster, and the rooster’s Growings
crescendoing into an outraged chirawk. Marrot
stood cursing unemotionally, yawned, turned about
and caught my eye.
“Hello 1 So you did come back. Thought we’d
mislaid you among your desert friends.”
I had been uneasy about that unwarranted absence.
“The Princess Pelagueya is an old friend of mine,”
I explained, and stared at Marrot, forgetting him.
Is ? That white-faced Pelagueya who had called
84
THE LOST TRUMPET 85
me vile and had not moved as I left her table and
house ? . . . I shook off the memory. What did it
matter to the middle-aged dragoman-employee
haunted by the chirping of the grasshopper of
futility ? This little man was my master, awaiting
explanations. “I should have secured the permis¬
sion of Mr. Huebsch or yourself before I made such
a lengthy absence.”
“Permission !” He snorted and stared at me con¬
temptuously. “Good God! Need w# be slavish as
well ?”
With that he disappeared back into his tent.
Oppressed and weary though I was I turned to
dress with a wry smile. I had made a faux pas. In
the ideal world of Mr. Marrot employees periodically
insulted their employers and lectured them on the
materialist concept of history . . .
The morning was unaware of all concepts
economic or religious ever fathered by men on
nature. Far in the dunness of the sands a bird was
crying, and there was a dimness-shielded flapping
of wings. Dawn came liquid, a soft flow and froth
across the still, pale lands. The house of Gault
stood black against it, then changed into a fairy
tower of beaten gold with its crazy arches and mount¬
ings the battlements of a fairy palace. Across the
neglected fields of Selim Hanna came flowing the
light, spun in spume amidst the impedimenta of
our encampment, shimmered and surged and over¬
flowed the banks of the disreputable canal, poured
in a mounting tide westwards upon the village of
86
THE LOST TRUMPET
Abu Zabal. . . . Kalaun, yawning, cfept from
beneath the marquee of the labourers. The others
followed him. Monotonously, mechanically, they
knelt and genuflected. Georgios, emerging from
the store-tent, regarded them with a pitying con¬
tempt, twirled his immense moustaches, and made
a dive towards the coop where the chickens were.
There arose a terrified squawk. The rooster was
without his mate and our evening’s dinner was
assured.
Going down to the canal, I encountered Huebsch
returning from it, a great bucket of water in either
hand.
“Well, well. Morning, Colonel. Going for a
sluice ? Guess there’s enough here for both of us.
I’m told the Princess Bourrin has come back ?”
“That was the reason why I did not return in
the evening,” I said. “I trust you were not incon¬
venienced ?”
“Not a bit of it.” He chuckled. “And for God’s
sake don’t apologize iri Marrot’s presence. He was
greatly pleased over your absence last night. He
thought it was a deliberate flouting of us and has
high hopes of you in consequence.”
I affixed myself to the handle of one of the buckets.
We laboured tent-wards in company. “Surely this
viewpoint of Mr. Marrot’s has occasional draw¬
backs ? Have not other employees taken advantage
of it before this time ?”
The great ovoid head was shaken very decidedly.
“Not one. You see, Marrot’s always at them about
THE LOST TRUMPET
8?
sticking up for their rights and to hell with capital¬
ists and employers—in the case in question, of
course, always himself. And they’re generally so
staggered that they treat him and their work with
scrupulous respect. Or they’re so enthusiastic at
finding themselves regarded as human beings that
they insist on working overtime—and vexing Marrot
into a frenzy. Well, well, it’s a mixed world.”
Georgios spread our breakfast on a camp table
unearthed from the lorry. It was crisp and fresh
and admirably cooked, as though he must have
arisen at two o’clock in the morning to set about
the work. Yet he had done no such thing. Huebsch,
eating immensely, rumbled forth, as if absent-
mindedly, a revealing remark.
“Fine breakfast, Georgios. How you managed
both to attend to it and carry Mr. Marrot an early
cup of tea is beyond me.”
Georgios retired in confusion. Marrot himself
coloured a trifle. Already, as I was to find, he was
hopelessly popular with labourers and cook alike.
He spread out the map towards Huebsch and myself,
brusquely.
“I’ll take an observation and then Saloney and
I’ll do the survey while you dig up the camp,
Huebsch. I’ve ringed round the probable area in
pencil.” He raised inquiring brows towards me.
“Can you sketch ?”
“I was once the Maps Officer of General Deniken.”
“Oh, were you ? The brigand who raided the
soviets in South Russia ?”
88
THE LOST TRUMPET
I shrugged. Huebsch interposed, immensely.
“Never mind the brigands. I was reading up that
MS last night and I’m almost sure that the area we’ll
have to tackle ultimately lies over there”—and he
pointed to the extreme Hanna field that verged on
the lands of the Gault house.
“Why ?” asked Marrot.
“Look for yourself. The land, I guess, is thinnest
there. There’s a shadow of a rock-ridge below the
top-dressing of soil.”
“But how does that make it a more likely place ?”
I asked.
“This was desert when the renegade Levite stole
out at night and buried the treasure from the Temple.
Or partly desert. Now, most of the land has been
dug and cultivated to extremes since then. Except
perhaps along that ridge, where I guess they were
never able to go very deep. ... So I calculate
the treasure must be somewhere in the lee of the
ridge, else it would have been found before this
time.”
I checked a remark that the finding might well
have taken place long ago. Huebsch would twinkle
immensely and retort that that was impossible,
otherwise the Lost Trumpet would have been found
and blown. . . . How much of that fantastic tale
did he himself believe ?
By noon Marrot and I had narrowed the possible
area of excavation to the ridge, the land east of the
canal-bank—there were perhaps two acres of it—
and the camp-site. This last portion was already being
THE LOST TRUMPET 89
put to the question, for as we returned for lunch
we saw a great criss-cross of black earth uprising
throughout the heart of the encampment. Two
trenches, intersecting at right angles near where the
lorry stood, had been scored through the soil under
the direction of Huebsch. The great Jew himself,
sweat-exuding, a Syrian Baal in the flesh, sat under
the shadow of his tent awaiting our arrival.
“Nothing doing here, though, of course, the
trenches aren’t absolutely confirmatory.” He searched
amid a pile of letters on the table. “Mail just out from
Cairo. One for you. Colonel.”
I looked at the unfamiliar, staccato lettering on
the envelope, broke it open, unfolded the single
sheet it contained, and read :
Alexandria.
‘Dear Colonel Saloney,
‘Roger and Dawn Mantell told me to write
to you as soon as I landed in Egypt. They
themselves were to send you a letter telling
you why I am here. I hope you’ve received
it and that you won’t think it too much trouble
to see me.
T shall be in Cairo about three o’clock the
day after to-morrow, and I’ll put up at Shep-
heard’s if you shouldn’t be able to meet me at
the Station.
‘Yours sincerely,
‘Aslaug Simonssen.’
9°
THE LOST TRUMPET
Subchapter ii
By half-past twelve I was on the road to Cairo
in the aged Darracq. Huebsch had assented with
disinterested kindliness to my request for an after¬
noon’s freedom, Marrot with scornful objurgations.
I had felt no great gladness either in making the
request or in accepting the permission. For the
truth was that I had forgotten Aslaug Simonssen
and her mission very completely and entirely,
and now drove to meet her with nothing to urge
me but the ghostly memory of a far-off friendship.
But I found the Darracq ran sweetly enough
after the first mile or so, when it had ceased to wonder
why the quick, nervous hands of Marrot were not
at its controls. We settled down into good parter-
ship and at half-past two I was going past Helmieh
in the fine cloud of dust. At ten minutes to three I
left the car near a little open-air cafe in the Esbekieh
Gardens, and hasted on foot to the station.
It was only as I stood at the end of the platform
watching the Alexandrian train steam in that I
realized this girl and I had no method of mutual
identification. Nor had I Roger Mantell’s letter at
hand to assist me—if any assistance it contained,
which I could not remember. There was nothing to
do but trust to a remote and unchancy chance.
Steam and clatter and a profound expiration of
breath from the engine, squatting somnolent and
exhausted upon the rails. Much banging of carriage-
doors and now the forward stream of passengers into
THE LOST TRUMPET 91
Cairo Station. I stood a little aside and considered
them. Three Jews—Egyptian Jews, not of the
Huebsch variety, with thin, Syrian faces and quick
eyes, and each a mistress hanging lymphatic upon
his arm. An English Army officer, his soldier-
servant panting dustily and with much sweat, baggage¬
laden, at his heels, following his master’s quick,
irritated stridings through the crowds with moist,
respectful eyes. How came it that the Anglo-Saxon,
the originator of so many things democratic, was
in the servant class of all nations the most abject
and easily cowed ? Now, a Russian servant of the
old days would have hailed his master: “O Alexander
Petrovitch,” or “O Anton Kyrilovitch,” and
declared himself dead-beat, and asked that master
to carry part of the baggage. And the master would
have cursed him and done so, in a manner matter-
of-fact. While of the new order in Russia 
But I had to make concentration again on the
train passengers. Two American women with
husbands greatly be-spectacled and cigarred and
blase—mid-aged, mid-prosperous exports of the
Middle West. A chattering mob of fellaheen. A
Greek. Another Jew, with a canary on his wrist,
like a falcon on the wrist of an old-time hunter.
Two French boys, with collars absurdly starched,
like small, dyspeptic calves agape above white-
painted gates, the herdswoman a governess. . . .
Aslaug Simonssen.
I did not doubt her for a moment, nor she me.
With that name this could be no one but Aslaug
THE LOST TRUMPET
92
Simonssen. A porter followed her with two suit¬
cases. She herself walked unladen and untram¬
melled. She held out her hand.
“Colonel Saloney ?” She smiled correctly, politely.
“Miss Simonssen ?” I also bared my teeth.
“Yes.”
She put her hand on my arm. I piloted her through
the throngs, outside the station, into the clamorous
greetings of taxi-drivers and gharry-men innumer¬
able. A gigantic Negro backed away in front of us,
genuflecting, his rear pointing invitation to his
vehicle. Aslaug Simonssen halted and gazed at the
scene capably, collectedly, a little heavily. It was
unbelievable that she was only eighteen or nineteen
years old.
“Which shall we take ?” I asked. “An arabiyeh or
a taxi ?”
“Are these arabiyehs ?” She scrutinized them
without enthusiasm. “Oh, I think we’ll take a taxi.
Much quicker. To Shepheard’s ?”
“How long are you to be in Cairo ?” I asked.
But that she could not say, as I knew. “I think
it will be simpler if at first you put up at some pension,
then.”
“Very well. Colonel Saloney. Do you know of
one ?”
I took her to the Avallaire and engaged a room
for her. Then I said :
“Now we must go and talk. Shall we have a
discreet and comfortable English tea—or go into
the real Cairo and talk there ?”
THE LOST TRUMPET
93
She hesitated. It was obvious that an English tea
and not too much dust and smell was what she
wanted. But it was also obvious that she had heard
of me from the Mantells, and had been properly
brought up, and knew that it was the correct thing
to please me.
“I would like you to show me some of Cairo,
please, and some place where I can have something
cool to drink/’
She had spoken to me, slowly and distinctly,
since we had met, articulating carefully each English
word, as to an idiot. In some little amusement I
attempted to put her at ease.
I understand English quite well, Miss Simonssen.
I was once a professor of English Literature. And I
still keep my diary in that language.”
Oh,” she said, stiffly. “I didn’t know.”
I hailed another taxi. So presently we entered
the Khalig-el-Masri, Aslaug Simonssen looking out
at afternoon Cairo with pale, attentive, incurious
eyes.
I have said that none who had heard the name
would fail to fit her with it. She was Scandinavian
in traditional style—almost, indeed, as though the
style had slightly bleached. Almost five feet ten in
height and built in proportion, not clumsily, you
understand, but indeed with a kind of gracious
heaviness that was not heavy, that for some reason
made me think of an active peasant woman plough¬
ing a hillside, her husband dead and the little farm
her care, and the cold streamers of the unsetting
THE LOST TRUMPET
94
Northern sun behind her. . . . Cool, with pale,
clear blue eyes, very fair hair and brows, a comely,
cleanly-moulded face with a rounded, barbarian
Viking jaw, a long mouth, even-toothed, small
hands and feet. And that heavy coolness. ... It
plagued me and piqued me. It is permissible for
any woman to look like a Valkyr. But no god or
code that ever existed has given authority for a
Valkyr to gaze and speak like a young woman of
the epoch Mid-Victorian, her mind a stubble field
stacked with dun and grainless cliches . . .
“And what do you think of Egypt ?” I asked in
some desperation, for I had been accustomed to other
types than this. She turned her strong-jawed face
upon me questioningly.
“Very nice. But the streets are very filthy, aren’t
they ? And the smell . . .”
Which was Egypt to the eyes of Aslaug Simonssen.
Cool and unsmiling of body and face and soul,
and fantastically woolly-minded, I appraised her
as we sat and ate the good Simon’s honey-cakes.
And there was something else about her, something
in those eyes unhealthy when matched with that
magnificent body 
Looking straight in front of her, I found she was
beginning to tell me about the murder of her brother
Carl.
“ if he had been killed as people are killed
in fights with natives we’d have known exactly
what happened. But it wasn’t that way, and I’ve
come to find out about it.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
95
“It was at Rashida that the tragedy took place ?”
I inquired.
Yes. Carl had a house there, and two or three
servants. One of them, I think, wasn’t a servant. She
was his mistress.”
Saying this, she turned away her face from me.
The blood welled in dark patches below her high
cheek-bones. I also looked away, pitying and a
little amused. She had done better to stay among
the frigid folk of Edinburgh if such a word could
make her blush.
“She was mentioned in the papers of the court of
inquiry—the Egyptian Government sent us copies
of those papers. She was blind.”
“Blind ?” I felt a sudden, sick distaste for the dead
Carl Simonssen.
Yes. That part of the matter did not appear
to shock her. “And they said that Carl had no
special enemies, even though he lived so wrongly.
But he was found one morning by one of his servants
—not the blind woman—with his throat cut from
ear to ear.”
She said it with no special emotion, that unfathom¬
able look still in her eyes. And then I saw that it was
no look at all; it was as though her eyes were thinly
and trimly glazed. Not, I commented to myself,
that they lacked health ; they merely lacked indi¬
viduality.
I roused myself to speak about this matter of
her brother’s murder. “Perhaps he committed
suicide.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
96
“No, he didn’t. Why should he, he was not
mad ? And besides, the knife was not found near
him.”
“That certainly rules out the suicide supposi¬
tion.”
“Then why did the Egyptian Government not
proceed with the case ? They did nothing. The
police officers were plainly in league with the
murderer. They never seem to have attempted to
seek out the blind woman—and I know that she was
the cause of his death.”
“Then what are you going to do ?”
The cool, glazed eyes of the Victorian Valkyr
regarded me unwaveringly. “I am going to the
Ministry of the Interior to tell them I am here and to
ask their co-operation for me to go down to Rashida
and make inquiries on my own.”
I thought for a little while. “I can help you
there,” I said. “I know one of the officials of the
Interior.”
I called for ink and a pen from Simon, who
brought a great Chian quill and a bird-decorated
Chian bottle. I wrote a short note to Peters, and
passed it across the table.
She read it. “Thanks very much.” She smiled
politely and stood up. “Would you mind taking me
back now, please ? I’m very tired.”
I also rose. Did she know what she was doing ?
“You know what will happen to your brother’s
murderess if they succeed in tracking her down ?”
“Yes. They will hang her.”
the lost trumpet
97
Subchapter Hi
Leaving Aslaug Simonssen at the Pension
Avallaire, I went down to Esbekieh to seek the
Darracq. And there, at one of the little tables of the
open-air cafe, sat Adrian, absorbed in a self-game of
dominoes. He looked up, unsurprised at my touch
upon his shoulder, and then swept aside the dominoes.
Hello, Saloney. Thought I recognized the
Darracq during my stroll. Beer ?”
We sat and consumed its bitter coolness through
long stalks of Syrian wheat. “Found the Lost
Trumpet yet ?”
efNot yet, I said. “Only the lost princess.”
“Eh ?”
“The Princess Bourrin returned to her house in
Abu Zabal yesterday morning.”
“Splendid ! She is well ?”
“So I think.”
He looked at me with his head characteristically
cocked to one side. He shrugged. “What a romantic
you are, Saloney ! If you don’t marry what the devil
are you to do ? You can’t remain a dragoman for
ever—not even the most handsome guide in Cairo,
as the dear tourist-ladies of the Continental call you!
For one thing, you’ll soon be too old.”
I shall set up a booth near the Pyramids and
dispose of antiques from Birmingham.”
“Quite. And tell every possible purchaser that
they were from Birmingham. . . . What’s wrong,
o course, Colonel, is that you’re an anachronism.
G
98 THE LOST TRUMPET
Out of date. Mediaeval and damned. This outlook
of yours on Pelagueya Boutrin—by the by, do you
realize I’ve never met her ?—and life generally; it
used to be called chastity ”
“But the good Freud would doubtlessly say that
my mind-garden is choked with inhibitions ?”
Adrian chuckled at that. He is no Freudian.
“Ascribe it all to the fact that you weren’t allowed
to bite your father in the ankle at the age of three,
I’ve no doubt. Romantic turned inside out, Freud
—and shiveringly concerned with the messy appear¬
ance of his inside. . . . No, the thing’s much
plainer than that.”
“Is it an explanation all-embodying enough to
account for a normal young woman having the
glazed eyes of a heifer over-fed and the mind of a
surly hangman ?” And I told him about Aslaug
Simonssen.
“Even for that.” He waved to a waiter that our
glasses might be refilled. “Ever heard of the DifFu-
sionists ?”
I shook my head.
“I’ve been reading them lately. New school of
historians and archaeologists. They say that all
this”—he motioned towards the streets beyond—
“and your reluctances and hesitations over Pelagueya
Bourrin, and A1 Azhar mosque there, and enjoyment
of cruelty and throat-cutting—all these things are
incidental and accidental.”
“They are mystics ?” I inquired politely.
“Lord, no. This is the point they make: that
99
THE LOST TRUMPET
none of these things—civilization and its viler acces¬
sories—are innate in human nature. You and I and
everyone else, owing to an accident here in Egypt
six thousand years ago when agriculture originated
civilization, go about with superimposed on our
minds and bodies a hideous swathing and garbing
of ideas and clothes that are quite unnatural to the
human animal—who is fundamentally a sane and
decent and plain-thinking animal.’,
“It is a fantasy. Man was originally a slavering
beast of the jungles.”
1 stood up. Adrian reassembled his dominoes.
Not a scrap of proof that he was ever any such thing
Mere theory. And scores of proofs to the contrary^
that he was once a kindly, golden-skinned hunter of
the Golden Age. . . . Keep that in mind, Saloney,
as I’m doing, and see how it works out explaining
yourself and other people. This girl you’ve met at
the station—try it on her.”
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH
T think they will live with me always, those days.’
Subchapter i
BUT the next morning banished Aslaug Simonssen
from my mind as completely as it banished the
grasshopper. So in the days that followed. I came
to know and share in the toils and perplexities and
the heart-breaking exactitudes of research with which
the archaeologist afflicts himself. Abu Zabal’s mosque,
a small blue dome brooding in the west; Pelagueya’s
house, affronting the eastern sky with the crazy
uplift of its baroque towers—these were the only
permanent objects on my horizon, seen mostly, as
it seemed to me, from betwixt my own legs as I
stooped over this or that or the next trench; or
impinging themselves on my eyes with a sudden
ache because of their sun-radiance at the same time
as I would unbend and another ache bite sharply
and efficiently between my shoulders.
For the rest, it was a world of flux. We moved the
camp further along the canal-bank; dug; dis¬
covered nothing; moved it back again. We went
out on more mensuration with a theodolite. Of
nights, dead weary, we made tracings of suspected
drainages on our sketch-maps ; sometimes we were
IOO
101
THE LOST TRUMPET
so weary that we did but scant justice to the excellent
food of the little Georgios. There was no time or
inclination, I found, to brood on the great Twin
Insects. For even though all things were a weariness
under the sun, yet now it was a physical weariness,
bringing a cheering glow of well-being to my body,
long pent in the soft airs and colours of Cairo.
I think they will live with me always, those days.
The heat and flare of the sun across the parched lands
of Selim Hanna—land that under our probings and
questionings steadily betook to itself the appearance
of a hard-fought trench-sector on the Western Front
in the European War; the gang-chanting of the
labourers, bent double as they trotted with bags of
earth up and away and down again in this or that
excavation now growing the deeper; the booming
of Huebsch s immense, considering voice ; sudden
view of his great ovoid head over a bank of earth,
with its stare of purple-blue eyes, the great red lips
slowly shaping to propound a new proposal or
demanding to know of the size and no-being of our
luck ; Marrot, energetic, tireless, yet at every possible
chance adjuring the labourers, Georgios and myself
to remember we were dupes of the capitalist system
and go slow, for the love of God, and act like men,
not helots; Georgios 
Georgios wailed the comic chorus of each day in
a nullah far to the east. It must have been twenty
minutes walk there, yet religiously every evening,
having served us our dinner, he set forth to practise’
an absurd little, proud little figure offset by a drooping
102
THE LOST TRUMPET
immensity of moustache. We would watch him go,
clambering and threading the wrinkled agonies of
the field, then growing to a dot. And presently,
remote from that direction which he had taken,
would arise a sound that seemed to me like the soul
of a stuck pig wailing its immemorial griefs by the
side of some porcine Styx. Marrot, with objurgations
inelegant but justifiable, would cover his ears.
“If only he’d be sick and have done with it!”
The great Huebsch would listen with his head
slightly leant towards one shoulder. “There’s a kind
of rhythm in it, though. Listen : So : Oh—ahee—
oo—ah ”
“For the love of Sabaios and all the other gods of
Jewry, give it a rest, Huebsch ! Georgios is bad
enough on his own, but an interpreter as well ”
“Well, well, well.” The huge Jew would con¬
tinue to listen with unabated seriousness. The dead
pig was being beaten over the head by Charon; it
was in flight; it had fallen into the brimstone lake ;
it was being flayed alive; it had lapsed into uncon¬
sciousness—blessedly re-dead ? ; revived again ;
remembering its wife and children 
I would rise. “I think I shall take a short walk.
I cannot abide this post-mortem torture of a useful
and harmless animal.”
“Pretty bad, pretty bad,” Huebsch would agree,
and would turn his great eyes, that were on occasion
so oddly restless, upon me. “Which way are you
walking, Colonel ?”
I would gesture towards Abu Zabal, conscious
THE LOST TRUMPET
103
that both of them were looking at me. Marrot would
put the question :
“Why not the other way ? Have you quarrelled
with the woman ?” And Huebsch add : “The lady
may be pretty useful to us. Colonel, if after all we’ve
to tackle that hog-back on her land.”
But the word hog-back would be too much in
conjunction with the distant wailings of Georgios’
silver bugle. “I have quarrelled with no one. And I
walk towards Abu Zabal to put the better distance
between myself and the ghost of the pig which
Georgios knew and slew and laments over.”
And I would walk away with Huebsch’s great,
slow boom of laughter following me, for he was
childlike in his appreciation of broad and open jests.
But walking the road to the village I would have less
certainty upon myself that this direction I took was
justified solely by the desire to escape from Georgios
and his pig. . . . And I would sigh, and hit at inoffen¬
sive bushes with my stick, and begin the hasty singing
of scraps of song, as a man does when he has no
wish to think or come face to face with that other
self who propounds alarming questions and refuses
lies for answers. So to Abu Zabal, walking in the
polychromatic flaunting of the many night-garments
with which the heavens beguiled the sun to rest.
There I would generally halt, and listen to the
unending coo of doves, and then, with darkness
treading at my heels, turn back and reach the camp
to find Georgios snoring in his tent and no one
about but the great Huebsch, smoking immensely
104
THE LOST TRUMPET
his pipe, with about his head great cloudings of
smoke as incense about the head of an ancient god,
his eyes fixed on the horizon.
And then I would remember that jest of his—
his threat to the horizon-walls when we had excavated
and blown the Lost Trumpet. The horizon ! There
were walls in our hearts that towered to infinity—
and ah, what things of horror or loveliness might
burst upon the world if those walls fell at the blast
of some magic trumpet!
Subchapter ii
Whatever the Lost Trumpet might have accom¬
plished in bygone ages it appeared on the fifth night
that Georgios’ un-lost bugle had already conse¬
quences in Abu Zabal. First, we gathered from
Kalaun, who had a sly sense of humour, that it was
popularly believed in the village that an afreet had
taken up its habitation in the desert nullahs and there
nightly devoured the souls of the unwary and the
straying. He told us this, newly-returned himself
from Abu Zabal, the while Georgios’ bugle brayed
faintly—on another note, it seemed to me, as though
his researches had been transferred from the porcine
to the asinine. Hardly had Kalaun finished when
Marrot, sprawling in some weariness in a deck-chair,
indicated the track that led from the Abu Zabal road.
“We’re having a visitor.”
We looked in that direction and saw a figure
which had turned, unhasting, into the fields of Selim
THE LOST TRUMPET
IOJ
Hanna and now approached us in the soft evening
light along the bank of the canal. “Probably a dele¬
gate sent to ask our co-operation in hunting the
afreet,” hazarded Marrot.
Huebsch took his pipe from betwixt his thick,
curling lips. “It’s a woman.”
Thereat I looked again. It was Pelagueya. She
had seen the three of us sitting on the little incline,
and evidently recognized me, or made chance of the
recognition. She waved her hand. We stood up and
I went towards her. She was in an evening gown and
cloak, with a froth of silk about her ankles. The
cloak was lined with scarlet and gold, and her head,
like the head of some dark flower, came out of
that colourful sheath.
“Anton, what is that shocking noise over in the
desert ?”
“That,” I said, taking her hand, “is our cook.”
“Cook ?”
“He is also a musician.”
“He is a horror,” said Pelagueya. “Every even-
ing. To-night I got out my revolver. But I have no
cartridges. So I came to borrow some.”
She glanced round interestedly at the camp, the
revolver dangling from her fingers; then up at
Huebsch and Marrot, standing politely not looking
at us.
“It is a shocking noise. But really, Anton
Kyrilovitch, I came because I was very bored, and
wanted to be friends with you again, and to meet
your employers. . , . Shall I say ‘sir’ to them ?”
io6
THE LOST TRUMPET
This was a sneer at myself. But I was too happy
seeing her to heed it greatly. “You may say what
you choose—looking as you do.”
“That is very sweet.” We climbed up towards the
archaeologists. “And have you found a lot of
treasure ?”
“None,” I said. Then : “Messieurs—the Princess
Pelagueya Bourrin. Princess, Messieurs Huebsch
and Marrot.”
“The noted performing illusionists,” added Marrot,
obscurely. Huebsch, bowing immensely, consider¬
ingly dragged forward a deck-chair. Pelagueya,
very sweet and slim and wonderful, sat herself in it.
Marrot looked down at her.
“Princess—exactly what of?”
She looked at him amusedly. “Of myself, at least.”
“Then we are all princes ?”
“Not at all. Some are kings.”
He grunted. Huebsch intervened, immensely
conciliatory. “We’re very glad to meet you.
Princess. For yourself, of course, and also because
it seems we’ll have to get your permission to dig on
that hog-back over there.”
Pelagueya brought out a little case. I shook my
head. So did Marrot. But Huebsch, laying aside his
pipe, accepted a cigarette, and lighted hers, and
smoked his own to uselessness in perhaps the half-
dozen puffs. She said :
“Well, I think you can. So long as it doesn’t
mean your cook comes and serenades the servants.
. . . It is really very dreadful.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
IQ?
Georgios was wailing the after-death sorrows of
all unlovable beasts again in the nullah hidden in the
east. Pelagueya listened. “But—I’ve noticed it
before—there is a kind of rhythm in the awful sounds.
As though he might do better if a miracle happened
—quite suddenly.”
“Or the Lost Trumpet was discovered,” I said,
and then halted, reflecting that I had had no per¬
mission to speak of that. Pelagueya said : “What
trumpet ?” and looked from one to the other of us.
Huebsch explained. The night came close. So,
a hasting dot across the furrows of our excavations,
did Georgios. Catching sight of our visitor, he halted
at a distance and bowed with impressiveness.
“Would messieurs—and madame—like some
coffee ?”
Huebsch nodded. “We’d be greatly obliged,
Georgios. You’ll have some, Princess ?”
“I’d love some. ... So that’s the Jewish relic
you’ve come in search of ? The Lost Trumpet!
What would it do—supposing you did find it and it
could be blown ?”
“It might bring down the horizon walls,” I said.
Pelagueya laughed. “That would be amusing.
. . . I’m going to Cairo to-morrow. Can I borrow
Colonel Saloney for the day ?”
Huebsch said : “Why, sure.” Marrot, who had
lain back in his chair unspeaking, staring upward
at the sky, sat up.
Don’t be so sure, Huebsch. Who’s Saloney that
we can lend him ? It’s up to the man himself.”
Io8 THE LOST TRUMPET
Pelagueya raised bewildered eyebrows at him. I
said : “I shall be very pleased to escort the Princess.”
Marrot, thwarted in his designs to up-stir the
proletariat, sank back again. Georgios brought us
our coffee—coffee of marvellous goodness, served
with the suave skill of a Cairene hotel, not a camp
in the desert. Pelagueya thanked him with that
cheerfulness that has always made of her the poor
aristocrat. Georgios shrugged.
“The coffee—the cooking—it is work that any
man can do, madame.” He sighed. “It is my ambition
to do other things.”
Pelagueya with charming heroism maintained a
grave face. “But of course. Your music.”
He stood beside the three of us, his small face
absurdly serious. “My music, madame. Every
night I practise—there. Perhaps you have heard me ?”
“I think I have.”
He sighed again. “And every night it escapes me.
I search for the chord that will give voice to the
beauty I know I can sound for the world—but it is
a search unavailing. Thus far.”
There was an uncomfortable silence. Marrot,
surprisingly, broke it. “We all, in our ways, search
for that chord, Georgios,” he said.
Subchapter in
“Anton ! Tell me a story.”
“What kind of story ?”
Behind us the lights of the camp ; in front, the
THE LOST TRUMPET 109
lights of Gault’s Turkish castle; overhead, neither
darkness nor light, the sky awaiting moon-rise. We
sat on a bank of turf by the side of the road. It was
very silent, the night world. Pelagueya turned a dim
face towards me. Her voice seemed to come from
very far away.
“Oh—any kind. ... A fairy-story. . . . Some¬
thing no one else can believe and you believe.”
I lighted my pipe. A fairy-story to suit the whim
of a moment—the whim of a princess. I went
searching back to my childhood. And then, slowly
up through the years of my own life, I saw a story
unfold. I heard myself begin to speak.
“This is the story of the Three Brothers. You
will not be cold ?”
There was a little laugh. “I hope I shall be
warmed.”
“Once upon a time, long ago, they set out on
their journey. But from where I do not know. Nor
in their lineage has the story any interest. They
were brothers, triplets, I think, but unakin, and with
no great respect for one another, as is the habit with
brothers. Setting forth, they went not together.
They travelled separately and apart.
“And the first of the brothers, as in all good
fairy tales, was the tallest and strongest, with a
handsome nose and proud, and garments gay and
costly upon his back. Round his middle he carried
slung a great purse—all the Brothers bore purses—
which fact is the central point of the story, and
which, like the ancient story-tellers, I give away
IIO
THE LOST TRUMPET
regardless of the surprise-losses to the plot. But
this Brother’s was the greatest purse : seemly, strong
and well-embroidered, with the seals and cunning
locks, I think. And greatly, like the belly of a stout
man, did it bulge. For within it this Brother had
laid up for the journey all things that were needful
to travel in comfort. And being a man with the much
luck and the gross appetite—albeit he was a kindly
soul enough when no footpads came near—these
purse-storings were many. For within those
embroidered folds he carried food and wealth, and
honour and fame and pride and achievement, sleep
and lust and laughter. In a sardonic moment—such
as is allowable in no real fairy-story—I have even
imagined him carrying therein a commissar-ship
under the good soviets. ... At the least, every-
thing needful was there, even—though how this
came about I do not know—tenderness and the love
of women and a litde pity.
“And he walked clear-eyed, if a little over-proud,
with a fine swing of his shoulders and, I think, a
mole on his left cheek. And on that journey much
he spent and acquired of appetites and satieties.
Till presently, climbing a mountain-pass, he rounded
a corner and saw in his path a giant figure, fronting
him as Apollyon fronts Christian in the pages of the
English Bunyan. And this figure was the figure of
a Robber—a Robber coarse and without much brains
and the no-respect, and a bored eye. And, with but
the briefest preliminary survey, and ere ever the
First Brother had cleared his eyes of dazement, the
THE LOST TRUMPET
III
Robber uplifted his club and smote the Brother to
the ground, and slew him, and pounded the contents
of his purse into shining drift-motes of dust.
“And then—for so he had done to many travellers,
and he was a very old and unprincipled Robber—
he yawned.”
“Go on.”
“And, by the different routes and by-paths indeed,
yet straight to that same mountain-pass where his
Brother lay slain, went on the Second Brother. He
walked hastily, and with jerking shoulders, and
frequently—for he had developed the corns soft and
painful—he stopped and rubbed his feet and cursed,
glancing about him with a wary, jaundiced eye.
His garments were not so gay as those of the First
Brother, though yet serviceable and respectable.
Nor was his purse of so great a bulge ; and this was
to him continually an anxiety and a vexation.
“For this purse had become not his servant, but
he its. Its condition had grown a continual source
of anger and confusion and astonishment. His was
the continual fear of lurking footpads—or rather,
the apprehension, for I think he did not lack courage.
Continually he would hasten forward to the next
city to refill the purse with this or that necessity,
only to find himself forestalled by some traveller who
had journeyed ahead. Or he would find that the purse
had developed a leak and strewn much of honour
or strength or satisfaction by the way. And once
he stopped and looked at the purse—at the time well
and comfortably filled—and made inventory of its
112
THE LOST TRUMPET
contents. And these contents seemed but the sum
of a grey nothingness because of the one article that
was missing. It had been crushed out, dropped by
the wayside, or forgotten long before. It was love.
“He sat down by a wayside pool and laid his head
in his hands in a surly dissatisfaction, knowing that.
But the journey had still to be continued. So, clutch¬
ing his purse, glancing right and left in search of foot¬
pads, he went on. He walked limpingly, and choleric
because of his corns and the hot weather, and so
walking, rounded a corner—and there, in front of
him, like Apollyon in Bunyan, he glimpsed for a
fleeting moment the giant Robber. And the Robber
yawned, and surveyed him, and lifted his club, and
pounded him, him and his purse, into little frag¬
ments indistinguishable from the little fragments of
his elder Brother.’’
Far out in the desert the rim of the moon had
uprisen, and there, a mere rim, seemed to halt, as
though the earth had ceased to rotate and the satellite
gazed down on a world as tideless and immovable
as itself. Pelagueya touched my arm.
“There was a Third Brother.”
“Ah, yes. Now, by yet another route—if route it
could be called—came on the Third Brother. Through
no such carefully mapped and planned country as
his brothers did this third one come. For long he
wandered in a land of flowering bogs with the gay
yellow of the poison flower a startling colour amidst
the tufts of green, and the calling of strange birds
heard across stagnant meres. Sometimes by moun-
THE LOST TRUMPET 113
tain slopes he had wandered and watched sunrises
and sunsets unearthly. Once, on the shore of a name¬
less sea, he had watched for weeks the rise and fall
on the horizon of a fairy island. And for a space of
years he had turned aside into the clamour and call
of city ways, into lives and loves and enthusiasms
innumerable. But now he was growing old.
“And, however had strayed his feet on this route
unplanned, straight towards that mountain pass at last
he walked. His clothes were the soiled vestiges of
ancient finery. His face had a hanging jowl after all
that journeying, and heavy pouches under the eyes.
But still in those eyes was a curiosity almost child¬
like. And, as he walked he sang, in a voice a little
cracked, a gay chanson of the road.
“About him was slung his purse—a purse fantastic
of shape, weather-beaten and be-patched. All the
journey, however he had used of its contents, he had
walked almost unconscious of the possession of that
purse. But now, sitting down to rest a brief while,
it flapped against his leg and he picked it up and
opened it—he, the roue-child, the rather stout figure
who sat and pursed his lips to the whistle of the
little chanson.
“And within the purse—was left of honour and
fame, wealth and food, pride and achievement, not
one little atom. Neither was love there; he had
spent it long ago—or sold it for a dream. He forgot
which. Long ago. And the dream ?
“Surely it was there ? But he was very tired by
then, and besides he had grown short-sighted. And
H
THE LOST TRUMPET
114
if indeed it lurked amidst the folds and crinkles of
the purse he could see of it no trace. And suddenly
he yawned, cavernously, displaying the teeth he had
had stopped with gold in the days of his wealth.
And he got upon his feet and climbed up the moun¬
tain-pass where the air, as he noticed, grew chill—
perhaps because of the great height.
“Upon his thigh flapped the gaudy, empty purse.
But it seemed to him that perhaps, somewhere,
somehow—some debt there was that he would yet
collect. He had never counted the contents. Beyond
the hills—perhaps some long-forgotten debtor
awaited him there.
“And at this thought, cheered, he began to sing
again, albeit pufflly, for his breath was short and the
path long. Singing, he rounded a corner, and there
in front of him, like Apollyon in Bunyan, burly and
broad and bestial, stood the Robber. Alone of the
travellers, before that last moment, did the Third
Brother glimpse face and yawn and club. And terror
gripped his heart and then passed ; and with a shaking
voice he stood and sang.”
“And—?” Pelagueya, tight-wrapped in her cloak,
was standing beside me.
“And that, of course, is the end.”
“Oh, Anton—a fairy-story and not one of them
lived happily ever after !”
I stood up beside her. “Assuredly one did—The
Robber.”
CHAPTER THE NINTH
Only, wonderful to be alive and see and smell.
And to touch you.” J
Subchapter i
IT was hardly dawn the next day when Georgios
came beating anxiously at the flap of my tent.
“Mon colonel!”
Dressing, I drew aside the flap. He thrust a hasty
cup of tea in my hand.
“Madame la princesse—she is waiting for you.
Twice she has made the hoot-hoot.”
And there, at the junction of Pelagueya’s road and
the track that led to ours, was verily a small auto¬
mobile. As I drank the tea it hooted again, urgently.
The air was crisp and cold and clear, but with already
a shadowy warmth. Against the far desert rim the
cypress trees of Gault’s castle stood as if caught to
a dark silence by the coming of the morning—
peering into the west, perhaps, to hear the wind that
sang their owner dead in far Mesheen. One leg
very much tucked up, an ibis stood straight and
stiff above its nest near the canal. A flight of cranes
passed overhead towards Abu Zabal. The klaxon
of Pelagueya’s automobile broke into a lunatic
yammer.
ns
Il6 THE LOST TRUMPET
I dropped the tea-cup into Georgios’ willing
hands, struggled into my jacket, and made haste
from the camp towards that quivering automobiline
impatience. Pelagueya I discerned ensconced at the
wheel and her laugh met me.
“Well run, Anton!”
She seemed very much amused. I leant, panting,
against the tonneau.
“What is wrong ?”
She opened the door for me. “Nothing. What
would be ? You promised to come up to Cairo with
me to-day.”
“But at this hour ? And with all this wild bleat¬
ing on your horn I had imagined ”
She laughed again. She moved restlessly. “Oh,
do come in and sit down. Sorry if I disturbed your
middle-aged slumbers. . . . But you’re always half-
asleep anyhow, aren’t you ? . . . And you can have
a nap as I drive.”
I had seen this mood once or twice before. I sat
beside her and snicked the door of the automobile.
“I think I had better drive.”
“Not if I know it.” Hatless, she glanced aside at
me, with a jerk of her head flinging back the cluster
of hair from her forehead. “We’ll all be in our
hearse-processions soon enough without acting as
though we were in them while alive. Hold tight.”
The dim morning cluster of Abu Zabal jerked
towards us in crazy bounds, attained momentum,
charged upon the car like a running panther, swerved
to the right, missed us by a hair’s-breadth, vanished
THE LOST TRUMPET Iiy
from the scenery. The Cairo road opened and closed,
opened and closed with the glister and screech of a
fast-run film. The browns and faint greens of the land
to either side were a blur of racing no-colour. “Do
hope these goats are active-minded,” said Pelagueya.
A straying dunness upon the road careered towards
us, swayed, broke, departed on either side with a
wild bleat and one elongated screech from a human
throat. I looked back. A doll with toy animals in
its charge waved miniature arms and vanished down
the edge of the horizon. I brought out a cigar and
lighted it and leaned back, turning my head and
shoulders so that I might look at Pelagueya, not at
the foolish antics of the landscape. And I forgot the
landscape, so looking at her, bending in that Nike
Apteros intensity of motion and purpose, with those
fine Greek arms of hers curving upon the wheel and
her hair back-blown in the rush of the wind, and a
spray of fine blood below her cheek-bones, and a
little vein beating in the pallor of her throat. And I
seemed to see then things of a breath-taking beauty
and wonder with which, foolishly, I had never made
myself acquainted. That little curve of nostril—a
second curve just where nostril met with cheek :
that was a wonderful thing. And a fine down—a
tracery that was Spanish—along that curved upper
lip. My God, I had never noticed it before ! Nor the
miracle of uptilted breasts beneath a thin dress 
I became aware of a gale that had ceased, of a
landscape that crawled, of Pelagueya, very white,
swaying at the wheel. I caught it from her in time
IlB THE LOST TRUMPET
and steered the automobile to the side of the road.
So we slowed down and stopped. It was still the
mere beginning of the morning. The car coughed.
I turned off the engine. Pelagueya leant her face in
her hands. I said nothing. Straight and blue, little
pencillings of smoke arose from a village far down
the Cairo-wards horizon. Pelagueya took her hands
from her face.
“Do you know what I intended to do, Anton ?”
I did not look at her. “You wished to make a
great speed, and did so.”
“I intended to wreck the car and kill both of us.”
I nodded. There was no point in pretending the
lie that I did not know that. “And why did you not ?”
She laughed shakily. “Because of that look of
yours. Anton—hadn’t you ever seen me before until
you realized . . .? That look, there was nothing else
could have stopped me. . . . Oh, God !”
She took herself from my arms after a little,
staring up at me. “Anton !”
I think it was I who was trembling then. I said :
“But even so I can still remember and believe
what I said at dinner a week ago, what I told in that
parable last night. . . . And I am going to drive
now.”
She laughed. “You can remember and believe
and drive what you will, Anton Kyrilovitch.” We
changed seats. I did it with elaborate rigidity. She
sank down in the place I had vacated, and ran her
long, slender fingers through the metallic miracle
that was her hair, and touched her flushed forehead.
THE LOST TRUMPET 119
“I feel much better now. Don’t start up yet, Anton.
I shan’t ask you to make love to me—I’d never
violate your dear scruples so. . . . Only, wonderful
to be alive and see and smell. And to touch you.
. . . Don’t let’s talk.”
Nor did we, sitting there in that increase of the
day. In a little all that tumult that had arisen in me
had died down into a foolish, unreasonable glow of
gladness, and that into perhaps as pringling an aware¬
ness as Pelagueya’s of the wonder of this day in which
we found ourselves alive—instead 
Perhaps neither of us would have been killed,
would have lain smashed and in quivering agony
in the wreckage of the automobile. Or died very
fully and quickly, going into that which, spite all
my romantic dreamings, I still knew for an end and
no beginning; have seen never again the miracle
of that soft tracery of down upon Pelagueya’s lip, or
the breathing swell, like quickening buds, of a
woman’s breasts . . .
I came away from that thought, moving sharply,
starting up the automobile, and starting Pelagueya
from a dream that seemed as deep as my own, if of
other content. “Already ?”
“We will now,” I said, “have neither a hearse-
procession nor a procession in quest of a hearse.
And why are we going to Cairo ? Or ”
“Or did I plan my suicide and your murder yes¬
terday ? Oh, no. It was an impulse that came on me ;
slept badly on top of that abominable fairy-story of
yours, I think. I wanted to smash up the world this
120
THE LOST TRUMPET
morning, Anton. But yesterday I wanted a holiday
only—in this world, not out of it. And I remembered
I’d never seen Cairo.”
I maintained an interrogative silence the while
the still landscape, sane again, moved past us. “No,
of course I never have—the Cairo of which you’ve
talked. Only Shepheard’s, and the places about
Esbekieh. I want you to take me to the Warrens,
and your Khalig, and the unmentionable places that
men snigger over when they believe themselves alone.
No need to drive so fast, Anton ! Hateful if anything
happened after—after the way you looked at me.”
But I had brought the automobile to fifty and left
it there. I said : “Nothing will happen. And I will
show you Cairo.”
Subchapter it
Great houses, their fronts dimly uplighted even
at midday, and shadowed now, reared themselves to
right and left. From a side-valley came the monoto¬
nous beat of music to the obscene posturings of some
hidden dancer. The air had a charnel-house smell.
And, unempty, there was no true being or sound in
that place : it was a place of fetid ghosts.
“This,” I said, “is the Wagh el Berka, the Street
of Prostitutes.”
Pelagueya nodded. She was very white by then,
but still carried her head erect. She looked round
now with lips that trembled, but yet voiced no
surrender. “I see,” she said.
THE LOST TRUMPET
121
That was in the late afternoon, and not until then,
looking at her in that moment, did I realize that I
also had been mad, that I had shown her things that
might scar her memory for ever.
Cairo—real Cairo without the colours and the
drapings. This she had demanded and this I had given
her ! Cairo in horror and Cairo in loveliness—lanes
and lost cul-de-sacs of the festering Warrens that
are cloven through the heart by the bright sword
of the Sharia Mohammed Ali, places where men
and women and children lived hideous lives far sunk
in such abyss of poverty and disease as no European
has ever experienced; places where children had
run after us with unclean demands and invitations ;
places no tourist had ever penetrated, dank, lost
courtyarded houses emitting screams of pain as we
passed; houses and dens where the harem-rule
remained intact and slaves were beaten with heavy
whips. . . . These, and the blaze of colour and
beauty unescapable in the wide khans of the metal-
smiths and the leather-workers and the place of the
fine mushrabiyeh work. . . . Food in a native
restaurant, behind the Tentmaker’s Bazaar, with the
cracked Mosque of Merdani blue and hot through
the sun haze and the strange, repulsive food barely
passing Pelagueya’s lips. But—she had eaten it,
only asking :
“Can I have some water ? And is there any more
sight-seeing ?”
I had said, without dramatics : “We have hardly
begun the sight-seeing yetA
122
THE LOST TRUMPET
Nor had we. I took her down through the Bab el
Zuweiya into that wilderness of abandoned khans
where strange trades, ancient and evil as the East
itself, are still plied; where the scum of Europe’s
dance-halls carry on in secret, lamplit rooms unclean
entertainment for the smuggled audiences. We had
passed through shrouded doors and down twisting
corridors and so through other doors, after the
making of passwords and signs, into one of those
lamplit theatres ; we had sat side by side watching
the Gomorrhan horrors enacted in the sweating
silence, with the light so low that others also present
—and we seemed the only white people there—were
dim and faceless. Twice Pelagueya had leaned for¬
ward to cry out; then stayed herself. Once she
had covered her face with her hands and then dropped
those hands again, for not to look would have been
to fail the bargain she had made with me. Perhaps
she was the only white woman who had ever seen that
vileness. . . . They led the woman and animal—
both bewildered, dull-eyed automata—off through the
musk-stenching curtains at last, and I rose to my
feet, and Pelagueya walked out beside me, the colour
drained from her cheeks, her eyes feverish.
“Anything more ?”
“But plenty.”
Yet I need give no record of that plenty here.
It had seemed to me that at last Pelagueya might
know something of the horror and terror of that
life she had but touched with tentative, amused hands
for so many years—that underpinning of cruelty
THE LOST TRUMPET 123
and blind hopelessness on which the gay lives of
such as herself were built, that refutation undying
of the ethical claims of modern civilization. Perhaps
there was cruelty enough in my uncovering of that
dark world; sadism even. But I could not forget
that bright road from Abu Zabal and the careless
pet in which she had been prepared to risk and end
both her life and mine—our lives which were sweet
and clean and pleasant things in comparison to these
tenebrous existences. So, under its dull, crumbling
balconies, past the bulky English military policeman
on guard, into the most shameful street in Cairo—
almost deserted at that hour, for the traffic is a night¬
time one; yet with here and there soft-stepping
couples of little Greeks on holiday or the saunter of
the tall, raw-boned American youth, looking incom¬
pletely detached and tourist. The smell of the street
was almost a visible miasma. . . . And Pelagueya
looking round it I shall not readily forget my
princess there ! I said, soberly :
Once I had a friend who said this was the
ultimate reality, this street. This is the place.
Princess, where the essential fact is that you are a
woman and I am a man, where the essential fact
between all men and all women is a thing without
disguise. ... It is a humorous place, the Wagh-el-
Berka, and they say it chuckles very loudly at night.”
She looked at me then, wide-eyed. “What about ?”
At love, and Dante’s ‘Vita Nuova’, and tender¬
ness, and the emancipation of women; and at the
love of children and the women who weep their
124 THE LOST -TRUMPET
unreturning lovers ; at that little vein in your throat.
Princess, and the sweet down upon your lip, and your
memories of Gault and your kindliness to me; at
me—at the thing I did this morning. ... At all
and every one of those pitiful veils whereneath we
guise the essential fact ”
“Anton—I know I deserve all this: for the
foolish things I said and did in the car near Abu
Zabal. And I haven’t complained. . . . I’ve said to
myself that I wouldn’t be a nuisance, that I’d wait
till I got home again and then kill myself, quietly
without fuss, after those horrors you’ve shown me.
. . . But I won’t now.” She laughed. I stared at
the colours returning to her cheeks. She put her
hand on my arm. “Oh, Anton, my dear—^0# to pose
as champion of this shoddy ‘realism’ 1”
She looked round her, almost gaily. “And do
take me further into this place if you want to. Only
—it won’t trouble me too much now. Pitiful and
dreadful. But—oh, Anton ! the romantic illusions
of all your life—if they are unreal, this is a lie also.
. . . I’ve never lived in the gutter but I know that.”
So did I, with a twinge of shame. “You need not
bother to forgive me,” I said—“all the things of
this afternoon. Some are unforgivable. But let me
take you out of this, back to Esbekieh.”
“Do, and we’ll have tea there.”
“Then ”
“My dear, what is there to forgive ?—unless it
is making me make love to you in the street of
prostitutes ? . . . Ugh !”
THE LOST TRUMPET
1*5
Subchapter in
I had pulled her aside, barely in the nick of time,
as the three figures, fighting and clawing, rolled out
of the doorway near which we stood, hit the street
with considerable impact, and in the gutter con¬
tinued the dispute with unabated vigour. Pelagueya
I pushed away and made for the combative trio as I
saw the flash of a knife. The point of my shoe and a
wrist came in sharp contact. A yell rent the air of
the Wagh el Berka. Encouraged, I applied the shoe
again, to call forth similar appreciation. The trium¬
virate split apart, Crassus, an old woman, cat¬
spitting and half-clad, her grey hair in a tangle about
her face, bolted back into the doorway of the house ;
Pompey, fat, a bloated Egyptian in a fez, abandoned
armaments and followed his fellow-triumvir pre¬
cipitately. Was left Caesar, sitting upright, touching
the side of his head with tentative fingers.
“B’God, it’s still whole !”
“What is ?” I inquired, staring at him half-
rememberingly.
“My skull, you fool.” He stood up, swayingly,
and set to beat from his clothes a cloud of dust.
Pelagueya I found by my side. I suddenly recognized
the evicted triumvir. It was the young man who
had informed Huebsch, Marrot and myself on the
authentic character of Solomon that night at Simon’s.
“I see,” I said, “that you have been emulating the
good Solomon.”
“Eh ?” He stood upright. He reeked of brandy.
iz6
THE LOST TRUMPET
His young haggard face jerked from me to Pelagueya.
“Solomon ? That one of his tarts you have with
you ?”
My nerves were not at their best after the mixed
experiences of the day. ... Pelagueya gasped. I
knelt down beside him. He had hit the ground like
a pole-axed heifer. There came the sound of running
feet. I looked up at the English Military Policeman,
burly, be-belted, a prideful hand upon his revolver.
“ ’Ere, wot’s all this about ?” he inquired, without
politeness.
The triumvir sat erect, slowly. I stood up.
Pelagueya, with something like a giggle, lighted a
cigarette. The boy in the gutter sought to rise,
failed, grasped at the policeman’s leg, and slowly
levered himself upright.
“Damn good hit. Knew it was going to happen.
Happen,” he added vaguely, and then caught my
look. His glazed young eyes brightened. “I’d like
to jam you up against a wall and eviscerate you—
just to see what you’re made of. . . . And what
the devil is this ?”
He had turned his astounded attention upon the
policeman. The latter coloured richly.
“Never you mind ’oo I am. I’m the military
policeman in charge ’ere, that’s ’oo I am.”
“Good God, thus spake Zarathustra. Take it
away. Cremate it—else it’ll smell.” He put his hands
to his eyes, forgetting all of us. “Oh, God, my head,
my head !”
The policeman grinned. But to me it was obvious
THE LOST TRUMPET 127
that the boy was in agony. He had been drinking
himself to death, I guessed, in the brothels of the
Wagh el Berka. Knowing the hopelessness of the
attempt, I could yet do no more than make it, with
Pelagueya standing there wide-eyed.
“Leave Cairo. Go away from this place. Other¬
wise you are finished.’J
He staggered, shaking off my hand from his
shoulder. He stared at me glassily. “Go away ? Go
where ?”
Anywhere out of Cairo. Go out to the desert.
Go a walking tour by Abu Zabal,” I added at random.
The boy dropped his hands from his head.
“Walking-tour. Out to the desert. Right. Sheik.
I’ll be a sheik. Right.”
And, catching every now and then at the street-
wall as he went, he turned and swayed away down
the Wagh el Berka. The policeman made a move¬
ment to follow, thought better of it, walked away
in the opposite direction. I turned to Pelagueya.
She was looking past me.
“He’s coming back.”
Out to the desert. Eight. I’m damn drunk,
else I d like to know you. Both of you. Look as
though you had guts. Both of you. Here, read this.
Book of mine that’ll make you sick. Write care of
my publishers and tell me how sick you feel. Right.
Out to the desert.”
CHAPTER THE TENTH
c “What can a modern of the twentieth century do,
then, to reach his essential self, and be that self ?” ’
Subchapter i
“yT seems,” said Pelagueya, “almost as insanitary
X as our afternoon’s tour.”
“The first few lines had told me that,” I agreed.
We sat at tea in the Esbekieh Gardens, with the
unauthentically cheerful hum of the tourist life about
us, and the greenery of the Garden, a litde tarnished
by the late sun, still a cool and refreshing panache.
And in front of Pelagueya, propped up against the
water-jug, was the book the mad triumvir had thrust
upon me in the Wagh el Berka. I had read a litde
of it and then had had it abstracted by Pelagueya,
who ate crisp cakes with coconut in them and drank
a cup of the horrid Cairene tea and inquired into the
outlook of Esdras Quaritch upon the world.
“You know, I’ve heard of him before.”
I nodded to that, recalling readings in belated
literary journals that had found their way from
Europe. “So have I, though this is the first book
of his I have met. And it, you will note, though in
English is printed in Italy. Another of his books
was banned in England, and for America the boy
138
THE LOST TRUMPET 129
appears to have a very bitter regard indeed”—and
I related the incident of his encounter with Huebsch,
Marrot and myself.
Pelagueya read on, a very lovely figure. I sat
and smoked and watched the tamed and clipped and
much bescrubbed Cairene scene—this part of the
life Cairene that for me has no attraction, this impinge¬
ment of the shoddy Western pleasure-seeker upon
the shoddy, imitative East. Pelagueya closed the
book and searched for cigarettes, and I made haste
to offer mine—the cheap native ones I had once
found so sickly and sweet. She made a comic moue
at them, shaking her head, and then reached for one
resolutely.
“Why shouldn’t I, I suppose ? They smoke worse
things in the Warrens—when they can afford to smoke
at all. . . . Anton.”
“Princess !”
“Strange how I love you to say that. . . . But
something else. You know that Oliver left me all
his money ?”
“I did not know it was all.”
“Every piastre—though I had to go to England
to settle some things. I’m a millionaire twice over;
so they told me.”
She fell into a muse, dark head down-bent, as
she told me that. And I also mused—on the twists
of chance. The money that the elder Gault had made
as a war-time profiteer in England—his son had
passed it by with a savage sneer on his dark, twisted
face, passed it by and gone restlessly and perhaps
THE LOST TRUMPET
130
knowingly to his death, though this money had given
him all that he had passionately longed for in one
month—freedom and ease and Pelagueya. And the
Princess Pelagueya Bourrin, descendant of boyars
from the low lands of Kazan, was sole controller
and inheritor, as Gault’s mistress, of the money
wrung from a feverish war-time English Govern¬
ment. . . . Pelagueya was talking to me.
“It will haunt me—oh, horribly ! and especially
at nights—all that you’ve shown me to-day. Anton,
will you help me ? We’ll organize some Central
Charity for the Warrens. I’ll endow a big fund—I’ll
give it a million—and we’ll place it in the hands of
some trustworthy native committee. People of the
Wafd, perhaps. And it will be for relieving destitu¬
tion—with no questions asked as to how any desti¬
tute came to be so. That for the essential condition
in endowing the Fund. No one has any right to
question the destitute—I never realized before the
horror of that ... We can save thousands yearly
in the lanes behind those khans. You will help
me ?”
It was a difficult thing to do, with her eager face
cupped in her hands, awaiting my consent. But I
did it. I thought of the starving miners in the English
coalfields and the long queues of the unemployed
there; the serfs on England’s green and pleasant
land. And were not the Gault monies invested
in France ?—France, with its rat-like peasant
life, its bitter strugglings as of rats in a sewer. And
no money in investments was static, these days of
THE LOST TRUMPET 131
International Banks of Settlements. In German
chemical works—who knew ?—there were pallid
young folk accruing dividends on that money of
hers; on tramps at sea, with guano from the
Peruvian islands; in Italy, with its comic State
ferocities and its hunger-line industrial workers.
... I saw these things, in picture after picture, and
Pelagueya lowered her head again, listening. And
suddenly she said something of which indeed I had
not thought.
“So in every country—except our own !—this
stuff that gives me pretty clothes and the memory of
Oliver and Colonel Anton Saloney for my escort on
pleasure-jaunts—it is the surplus of folk who live
on a hunger-line only a little above that of the
Warrens ?”
“That is so,” I said, and Pelagueya, with almost
the same gesture as the drunken boy in the Wagh el
Berka, put her hands to her head.
“Then there’s nothing I can do. Is there ? And
after all—even the making of my pretty dresses and
the taking of me on pleasure-j aunts : they provide
work, do they not ? I spend only the smallest fraction
of the Gault income. It is reinvested to make work
for more people. So ”
She looked at me, bright-eyed with hope, with
that horrific memory of the cheated of the sunlight
fading behind the easy, protective veils the mind can
self-drape at such moments. I said :
“There is nothing you can do, but even that does
not absolve you. Nor any of us. We have made of
132
THE LOST TRUMPET
civilization and life a cruel and bestial thing. In a
sane world this money of yours—this property of
yours—it would be controlled for the good of the
community by the responsible and efficient.”
“Am I neither ?”
“You are a Princess, and beautiful. And there is
no voice so lovely in the world, I think, as a Russian
woman’s. And your mind is ruthless and eager.
But it is no industrialist’s : it is the mind of a dream-
ridden Slav politician.”
“Oh, I know !” She flung aside Esdras Quaritch
—so impatiently that the book fell on the ground
and I had to stoop and retrieve it. “I am Russian to
the core, Anton. Lovely voices—think of all the
other lovely things they have ! Remember the Volga
and the roofs of Kazan in winter ”
“And the music, and the live, kind faces,” I said,
and she rekindled her torch at mine.
“—and the talk, so good and fine and understand¬
ing and desperately silly and desperately splendid.
And the selflessness—and the Asiatic fanatic and saint
in the most stupid face—and someone reciting
Lermontov ’ ’
We stared at each other, white-faced Pelagueya
as I think I was, and sick with nostalgia. Russia !
Around us the green and brown babble of Cairo.
If we took the road to a ship and Suez—to Istambul
—through the Black Sea . . . some morning the
quays and towers of Odessa would rise, kindly and
grey, and those beloved, foolish voices ring in our
ears again. . . . Pelagueya was laughing whitely.
THE LOST TRUMPET 133
gathering together the little impedimenta of her
handbag.
“We’ve forgotten the communists, Anton—no
more of that talk now, nor the pleasant socialist
pleasantly preparing to bring about Utopia. Instead
—a Georgian peasant in the Kremlin, trampling
underfoot everything clean and sweet, the clown in
the palace of the Tsars ”
“I cannot imagine that the palace will know much
difference,” I said. “And at least it is not dynastic,
the clownishness that rules now.”
“Anton—you’re a communist.”
Pelagueya was angry at last. And I could not
but smile at that emigre anger. I said : “I have ceased
holding to any ‘ism’, Princess.”
She stood up, still angry. “You have almost
ceased to hold to life !”
I stood up also, Esdras Quaritch’s book falling
open in my hand at a great freakish blob of illustra¬
tion. It caught Pelagueya’s attention also. She
craned over my shoulder, angry but curious, to see
it.
I think I have forgotten to say that the book was
not only written by the drunken boy of the Wagh
el Berka, but illustrated as well. And a certain eager
vividness and power of the macabre he certainly
did possess. Across the page sprawled a blind and
horrifying and proliferating object, something in
shape between a three months’ human embryo and
such monster as might have crept from a jar of
Paracelsus. Multilimbed, mindless, blind, this Thing
134
THE LOST TRUMPET
climbed with a dim suggestion of angry purpose
amid the blue and scarlet of a nightmare mountain-
range.
Below it was a scrawled inscription. Pelagueya
bent to read. “What is it ?”
“Life” I read, staring with some repulsion at the
filthy thing portrayed.
Then I raised my head. Our eyes met. The anger
went from Pelagueya’s. Twin armies with torches
and banners came dancing there. And suddenly our
laughter went echoing across the Esbekieh Gardens,
startling the neat tourists at their tables ; Pelagueya
clung to my shoulder and laughed, and the horrific
book of Esdras Quaritch slipped from my hand
and hit the ground again with a petulant, youthful
spite.
Subchapter ii
“Life was never quite so silly or unclean as that
—in its entirety.” Pelagueya had reclaimed the book
again; she was going to use it as a bed-book, she
said. She stood beside me at the Gardens’ entrance,
and gurgled again at memory of the illustration we
had just surveyed. “Poor boy—too horrifying to
be anything but funny. Anton !”
“Princess !”
“Still that ? My dear, you showed me all the
horror the world contained this afternoon. Real
horror—but even at its worst there were other
things ; memories of them only, perhaps, but these
THE LOST TRUMPET 135
things had been. . . . That woman and that
beast ”
I put my hand on hers. “I am sorry I took you
to that.”
“I am not.” But the laughter had gone from her
voice ; she quivered. “That woman—Anton, once
she must have been the loveliest baby. People loved
her. She was a girl. She ate nice things—oh, once in
a while, sometime. Once—if only once, one night
and one kiss—she had a lover who was a hero and
unbelievable and splendid. . . . That beast—-it was
once a foolish, braying colt, and people rubbed its
ears. . . . This book of the boy might have made
me sick if I hadn’t seen the reality. But I had. And
now—” she was wistful—“I know I don’t deserve
it, but can’t I see that other side—here in Cairo ?” ^
“It is easy to find the hideous and the dreadful.
But beauty is as incidental as happiness. Sight¬
seeing ? There might still be time to see the Citadel
in sunset ”
She shook her head at that. “I want to know
something of the essentials in human nature, not in
architecture. You have begun my education; and
Anton, you must go on with it.”
Now, some phrase of hers fitted with a little click,
as if it dovetailed in another I had once heard. And
suddenly I remembered that other—spoken to me
by Adrian the last time I had seen him. ... I waved
to a passing taxi.
“Now where ?” asked Pelagueya, as we sat
together and the taxi turned towards Shoubra,
136 THE LOST TRUMPET
avoiding with narrowness the slaughter of a vendor
who attempted to sell us packets of indecent post¬
cards, an umbrella, and a box of Turkish delight. I
leant back and looked at my watch, and then at
Pelagueya.
“To a physician. You have heard me talk of him
—Dr. Adrian, the gynaecologist.”
The armies with torches came hurrying in the
deeps of her sweet eyes again. “A gynaecologist ?
My dear, you don’t think I’m a suitable patient ?
. . . Oh, Anton Kyrilovitch !”
I made hasty disclaimer of that. “It is not his
gynaecology but his philosophy that is of interest.
If we can find him at home I will have him expound
it to you.”
He was at home. He was in his garden, deserted
of the sun now and over-brooded by the thought of
evening. He sat at that little table where I had first
made the acquaintance of Huebsch and Marrot, and
as the Greek servant showed us down the path he
looked up irritatedly.
“Didn’t I tell you I couldn’t see a soul to-night,
Trikoupi ? . . . Oh, it’s you, Saloney.” He caught
sight of Pelagueya by my side and stood up, with a
regretful frown towards the manuscripts that strewed
the little table.
“Dr. Adrian : The Princess Pelagueya Bourrin.”
My little Adrian’s eyes lighted. “I am very pleased
to see you at last, Princess.” He flapped dust urgently
from the two chairs where my employers had once
sat. Pelagueya nodded and sat down and took off
THE LOST TRUMPET 137
her hat and ruffled her hair, sitting with that long,
drooping line of figure and limb that the Attic
sculptors remembered, carving their Victories and
their Her as. Adrian scowled at her inquiringly and
she smiled at him.
“We’re neither of us visitors. Dr. Adrian. We are
patients.”
She speaks English more faultless than mine,
because more colloquial, but has still that slight
difficulty of the Slav when confronted with the
English “w”. But she made of it a musical difficulty,
so that the ooe” for “we” was a lovely mispro¬
nunciation—or so I thought, and sighed at that
reflection upon myself, for I found Pelagueya lovely
even at her most stupid and reckless. But Adrian
was regarding her incredulously, having no fine
appreciations in phonetics.
“Patients ? Neither of you look so.”
I said : “But we are. And our disease is serious,
m7 §ood Adrian. So if you will abandon the
so-urgent manuscript of ‘Fifty Years a Physician in
Cairo’ we will relate to you the symptoms.”
He coloured a little, pushing aside the papers in
fr°nt of him. Only some notes. . . .” He became
the physician, glancing from one to the other of us.
“Go ahead.”
“Our trouble is this little matter of human nature ”
“Eh ?”
“What we want to know is : Is there anything on
earth that will act as a measure of the Good Life,
and how may we find it ?”
THE LOST TRUMPET
I38
Pelagueya capped this : “And, providing there is
a Good Life, and it may be attained—why anyone
should want to attain it, or go on living it once
attained ?”
He looked, justifiably, considerably surprised.
We sat and regarded him with some amuse¬
ment. “Sure you haven’t both been out in the
sun ?”
“Both of us have been,” said Pelagueya. “At
least, such times as we weren’t underground—”
and she proceeded to relate, with unswerving fidelity
to detail, her eyes on the quietened expectation of
the garden, the horror-sights I had shown her that
day. Adrian, after the first few sentences, had sat
rigid. As her recital went on he relaxed, and as she
stopped he grinned sardonically, and then, looking
at neither of us, began to answer, apparently at
random :
“Seven thousand years ago, say the Diffusionist
anthropologists, man was a sane and happy animal.
There were no gods, no magics, no mystic hates or
hopes ; no patriotisms, no clothes, no communists
—no princesses and no Saloneys. There were no
savages and no pacifists, no tabus, no culture and
no cruelty.” He waved his hand over the garden-
wall. “And then an accident away to the south there
brought about the beginnings of agriculture and the
beginnings of civilization ; an accident, mind you,
no innate urge in human nature. From that acci¬
dental starting point it spread abroad the planet and
has ever since spread and grown and bloated, fungoid
THE LOST TRUMPET
i39
rash upon rash. . . . Now, if the Diffusionists have
divined the truth, that is your cure, Princess, and
yours, Saloney.” He paused and grinned at us. “I’m
about to have dinner. Join with me ?”
Pelagueya nodded, her eyes twinkling to his. “I
love fairy-tales; Colonel Saloney tells them. . . .
And supper. But please ”
“Yes ?”
“What is the That in the fairy-tale that can cure
Colonel Saloney and myself ?”
He had stood up. He walked half-way up the
garden-path and summoned Trikoupi and gave him
orders, and then turned about and came back to us,
his hands clasped behind his head.
“The cure in diffusionism—well, it is very simple :
Be jour essential self A
Now, I have learned a little of history and anthro¬
pology also, and this fantastic resurrection of
Rousseau which Adrian had lately achieved sounded
to me as so much out-dated nonsense.
“ ‘Essential self’—but, my dear Adrian, that would
not do at all. The world would fall to pieces about
our ears.”
He grinned at me, sidelong, still standing and
considering the two of us.
“Not the world would fall, but something else
might.”
“It would mean anarchy, murder, bloodshed, the
loosening of the beast in men—if each were his
essential self.”
“But if man were never a raving beast—except
140 THE LOST TRUMPET
the beast that civilization has made of him—how
could acceptance of his essential self loosen that
imaginary monster ?”
I shrugged aside the question. “We have discussed
this before. All the evidences of history point to
the slow evolution of man, by means of laws and
tabus, from a lawless savage.”
He was very cheerful. “Not them. Not a single
evidence. Like everyone else, you’ve been misled
by the theorizings of the evolutionists. Theories
aren’t evidence. . . . Think, Colonel! Does the
essential Saloney want to batter in my jaw, and
creep up behind Trikoupi and cut his throat for the
sake of smelling blood, and—you’ll forgive the
illustration. Princess—rape the Princess Pelagueya
Bourrin ?”
They both looked at me then. Pelagueya, her head
a little on one side, said :
“I at least feel very safe.”
Somehow that angered me—me who had here
heard the grasshopper but such a short time before !
“Yours is the least reason for composure—in a choice
of the three eventualities.”
Adrian said : “Even if that is the case, even if
you wanted to do all three, they’re not necessarily
acts of desire of your essential self. They’re prompt¬
ings, not of the inhibitions of the beast but of the
repressions of the tortured human animal—once a
kindly animal.”
Pelagueya had turned her attention from me after
that one feline stroke. But now, sitting very still,
clasping her hands about her knees in that attitude
that was characteristic, she said :
“Doctor—if these historians you talk about are
right, and their cure is the one to aim for—what can
a modern of the twentieth century do to carry out
that cure, to reach to his essential self, and be that
self ? What can I do ?”
There you have me. There is no magic way ”
“But ”
Adrian laughed. “Dinner is ready. I see Trikoupi
signalling. . . . Princess, Fm sorry. I can diagnose
your complaint with the aid of the Diffusionists : I
can diagnose the complaint of the world. But how to
effect the cure. . . . The trumpet-voice of human
sanity was stilled long ago. It is the great Lost
Trumpet of history.”
CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH
‘Sweet to dance to violins.’
Subchapter i
WE came out from Adrian’s into a Cairene
darkness made of velvet, hung with little red
jewels that were the street-lights, and very quiet
except for the whoom and clatter of the distant street¬
cars that held towards Esbekieh. I looked for a taxi,
but none was to be found, and we walked the rutty
streets towards the garage by Bab el Hadid where
Pelagueya had left her automobile. But less than a
score of yards from Adrian’s door Pelagueya took
my arm and said : “Listen !”
And then, remote to our left through the night, we
heard the distance-softened clamour of dance-music.
A violin dominated the sound and sank and rose
again. A ball was in progress in some place.
Pelagueya’s face was a dim red-ochred silhouette.
“Ed love to dance. Where is it, Anton ?”
In a moment I was sure. “No public place, I am
afraid. It is the Pension Avallaire. The ball of the
season for residents. Why !”
I had suddenly recollected Aslaug Simonssen.
Pelagueya threw away her cigarette.
143
THE LOST TRUMPET
M3
“A girl you know there ? Then she’ll take us in.
Let’s go.”
“These are sad hours for a middle-aged drago¬
man.”
She laughed mockingly. “I will find you a nice
basket-chair to sit in at the Avallaire.”
Now the glitter of lights begilding the usually
sombre frontage of the Pension burst upon us.
Another dance was in progress. I said :
“The good Oscar Wilde, you will remember from
my English classes in Kazan, was a favourite of
mine.”
“Who ?”
“Wilde. A not-so-clean little English genius.
And a verse of his says :
“ ‘ ’Tis sweet to dance to violins
When love and life are fair.
To dance to lutes, to dance to flutes.
Is delicate and rare.
But it is not sweet with dangling feet
To dance upon the air 1’ ”
“But I don’t want to dance upon the air !”
“Nor are you in any risk, Princess. But I was
only a moment ago. . . . For no doubt I should
have had the decency to go and hang myself had I
accepted your challenge at Adrian’s and put it in
practice in that dark street we have just left.”
“Why, Anton Kyrilovitch I” She stopped and put
her hands on my shoulders. We stood so, ludicrously,
and it was well it was night and not day, for even
144
THE LOST TRUMPET
Cairo would have gaped its astonishment at us. I
saw the white gleam of teeth from the sweetly parted
lips, and I bit my own at thought of that adorable
face so close to mine in the cord-velvet of the dark.
“If that is true—there might be no need for
violence.”
“You mistake me,” I said. “The thing that walked
with me in that alley-way we have just left was
neither love nor lust: it was merely that sporadic,
mindless cruelty essential in a man’s nature—or one
of civilization’s creations, if Adrian would have it
so.”
“Cruel, that, Anton.”
So I realized as she released my shoulders. I
turned cold looking at her shadowy, averted head,
and for once that supreme honesty in which we
had been wont to deal one with the other shook
and quivered like a crazy bridge of reeds spanning
a dark torrent. “Princess !”
She said, subduedly: “Nothing, Anton. Oh, I
understand.”
The music drifted out to us. So did a waft of
such perfume as never rose from terrestrial flower.
Abruptly Pelagueya giggled. “The Brazilians are
—I was once a nursery maid among them and
I can smell them miles off. Come along, Anton !”
In we went, then, dusty and un-festa-like, both
of us. The haughty French manager accosted us with
suspicion. I presented to him my card, asking for
Miss Simonssen, and in a litde the folding doors
through which seeped the music swung apart and
THE LOST TRUMPET
I45
through them, a brooding Valkyr, came also Aslaug
Simonssen. She halted and looked at Pelagueya and
myself, and^ then recognized me, coolly and slowly.
Why, it s Colonel Saloney. Sorry I didn’t write
you, but I’ve just got back from Rashida.”
I bowed. “Miss Simonssen: The Princess
Pelagueya Bourrin.”
They touched hands, Aslaug Simonssen reservedly,
Pelagueya consideringly, lightedly, and I looked at
them and though I was more than a litde weary with
all the upsets and downsets of the day, enjoyed the
contrasts and points of resemblance they offered 
Pelagueya’s dark flame of beauty, sheathed in dark
red, her face a Slavic pallor with encarmined lips ;
and Aslaug Simonssen’s blond Norse sandiness and
freshness and dazed youth. And then to my surprise,
and evidently to Aslaug’s, the two kissed, and
released each other, and the girl blushed slowly, her
polite gaze kindling a little.
“I am pleased to meet you. Princess. Will you
both come up to my sitting-room ?”
I looked at Pelagueya ruefully. But her eyes were
bright and her face turned towards the sound of the
music.
. ^ ^ould with pleasure,” I said, “but the Princess
insisted that we should come here and attempt to
filch from you invitations to the dance.”
She looked a little surprised. “Why, of course,”
she said, woodenly. She turned towards the ball¬
room. “Do come.”
But before we had gained the door the haughty
K
146 THE LOST TRUMPET
manager had insinuated himself between that desirable
entrance and the three of us. He bowed profoundly
to Aslaug Simonssen.
“Mademoiselle, but one guest is allowed at the
ball, as you know.,,
He was for some reason malevolent. Suddenly I
remembered. This was the man on whose chest our
cook Georgios had sat, and whose head he had used
so vilely to maltreat a wall. I said : “Do you know a
cook and musician, one Georgios Papadrapoulna-
kophitos ?”
The haughty Frenchman quite blanched. “But
certainly.”
I regarded him gravely. “He is of our party,
and is out in the night there with his bugle. If he
knew of any strict enforcement of rules I do not
doubt but that he would be pleased enough to stand
just inside the door and aid your orchestra.”
“The good God forbid ! Entrez, mesdames; entre,
M’sieu’ !” He flung open the door, casting the while
a terrified look towards the main entrance. As we
passed through we heard his voice shrill out an order
that the outer door should be closed immediately.
Aslaug and Pelagueya regarded me with surprise as
we stood in the glare of the ball-room and the per¬
spiring, unauthentic musicians beat and brayed with
their instruments, and, in a variety of dress, the
habitues of the Avallaire and their guests sailed to
and fro in the cataleptic measures of the fox-trot.
I explained.
The girl Aslaug smiled politely and unintelli-
I47
THE LOST TRUMPET
gently. The glow had faded from her face and eyes.
Pelagueya’s laughter was the chipping of a hundred
little hammers at the flood-gates of mirth, and the
falling of the gates and the coming of the dancing
flood. . . . No laughter so sweet as that.
Oh, Anton !” And then grew serious. “But,
you know, in a way Tm disappointed.”
“But why ?”
Because I don’t think I ever heard you tell a lie
before.”
“Nor did I this time.”
\X hy, didn’t you say Georgios was outside with
his bugle, ready to fall on the Avallaire ?”
“Not at all. I said he was of our party. So, at
Abu Zabal, and I trust in bed, he is. He is therefore
out in the night with his bugle. And assuredly if
he had known of the manager’s reluctance he would
have come to our assistance.”
Pelagueya shuddered. “Thank goodness there’s
no chance of that. I think he was one of the principal
reasons why I wanted a holiday from Abu Zabal.”
She looked round the room inquiringly. “They
don’t seem very enthusiastic about asking us to
dance.”
Aslaug Simonssen flushed at that. “You see, I
don’t know them.” Pelagueya twinkled at her,
mischief kindling in her eyes. I looked away. Now I
saw that the dancers were indeed of somewhat
different quality from those who usually frequent the
modern ball. True that they swooped and curvetted
and jigged like inebriated chickens; true that the
148 THE LOST TRUMPET
male clasped the woman of the moment in attitude
of such intimacy as mankind has hitherto left to
discreeter moments ; true there was neither rhyme,
reason nor restraint in each blared-out tune. But the
dancers, so far as was possible in these measures,
danced with a certain frigid restraint. Pelagueya had
noticed this.
“Most of them look as though they couldn’t forget
that death ooaits for each and all,” she said in her
easy English. “Ooat is wrong ?”
Aslaug explained. The Avallaire at the moment
was almost entirely filled by a party which had come
from Alexandria for a week and was rejoining its
steamer at Port Suez—a party of the United Church-
folks’ Social Guild which was touring the world.
“Poor planet,” said Pelagueya. And her eyes,
which had grown disappointed, suddenly brightened
again. She glanced at Aslaug again with that secret
flash of mischief. ‘T know ! And we’re quite justi¬
fied. Will you dance with me ?”
I made to intervene and then refrained. It was
plain that Aslaug, though doubtful because of its
unconventionality, saw nothing shocking in the
proposal. Pelagueya said: “I’ll play cavalier,”
and flashed a smile at me as I stood back, and
so in a moment they were in the measure of the
dance.
For a little their irruption went un-noticed. But
presently I saw a craning of necks above the dutiful
prance and undulation of bodies. Near the bandstand
two couples detached themselves from the dance.
THE LOST TRUMPET I49
And, as a surge reached towards where I stood,
another couple came to halt within a yard of me.
The man, who had the look of an over-eager plaice,
said : Say, guess we should see the management.”
The woman, possessed of puffy eyes and an unfor¬
tunate dewlap, said : “Disgusting.”
And, with myself, they watched Pelagueya and
Aslaug pass.
Pelagueya had entered the dance I think still with
the devil upon her. Aslaug’s face had assumed a
slow flush of surprise and pleasure as, held in those
lithe Russian arms, her feet caught the beat of the
tune and Pelagueya’s white, mischievous face bent
over hers. The churchgoing social plaice beside me
cleared his throat. “Guess they’re professional
dancers.”
“Guess they’re women off the streets,” said the
churchly female bloodhound, and at that moment
the dance ceased. Looking across the ebb of disen-
gaging and engaging partners for the next number—
for the most of the social churchfolks were but small
in stature I saw Pelagueya and Aslaug surrounded
in a twinkle, saw Aslaug flushingly consider a number
of suitors and accept a great raw-boned boy. But
Pelagueya shook her head and made her way through
the halted groups. The plaice and the bloodhound
backed a little towards the door, the bloodhound
whispering hoarsely : “Gene, you’re not to go with
her.”
“Next one with me, Anton ?”
I bowed. Charmed, Princess,” and had the mean
i5o
THE LOST TRUMPET
twinge of satisfaction at hearing a mingled canine
and piscine gasp from behind me. Then the band
struck up again a Negroid air to which it appeared
an alcoholic addict arrested at the cretin stage of
mental development had set words in pseudo-
English, and Pelagueya and I were dancing to the
strains of “A Night with YouT
She said : “Well, Anton ?”
I said : “Not well at all. If you were not a
princess and I not a dragoman, but two negroes in a
forest of the Congo, with a moon above us instead
of that lard-like face that conducts the orchestra ”
“Fun it would be ! Anton, I know! Let us go
there—to the Congo. Equip a caravan and set out
through the Sahara. Go south till we strike Timbuctoo
and then down that River ”
“All so that we may dance in the Congo ?”
“It would be great fun. You dance very well
still, if a little like a Negro who has been at a mis¬
sionary school . . .”
She stopped in that remark, for her words and
the tom-tom beat that underlay the frills and adorn¬
ments of the foolish music had made me for a moment
forget my self-admired composure. She looked up
in such fashion as I do not care to write of.
“Oh, Anton—sometimes you forget the mission
school!”
And at her words I instantly remembered it,
seeing the curious glances cast on us. We jogged and
dipped and stamped and slithered with decorous
seemliness. Pelagueya sighed, sweetly, whimsically.
THE LOST TRUMPET 151
“So there is to be no Congo. Anton, do you
think Miss Simonssen is comfortable here ?”
“She seems not greatly enamoured of the place.”
“I myself don’t think she is. Poor thing. . . . Do
you remember a horrible little English picture with
a legend : ‘ Where the brook and river meet ?’ ”
“I think so. Why ?”
“It is time this girl was pushed head first into the
river. Why ? Oh, don’t be so simple, Anton ! . . .
I’m going to ask her to come and stay with me at
Abu Zabal.”
I said I doubted if Aslaug would do that, and as
we passed round the room again I told her of the
reason of her coming to Egypt, and how she had
journeyed down to Rashida to seek out clues regard¬
ing her brother’s murderer.
“So that is it. Transferred interest. . . . That
glazed look— Oh, a horrible shame !”
I was justifiably bewildered. “Shame ?”
“Of course, this obsession of hers, cultivated by
her surroundings in England. A diseased thing. All
people who cannot forget deaths and wrongs are
diseased.”
“Then most of us White Russians are that.”
She said, absently : “No communist propaganda
now, Anton. I want to cultivate the Simonssen girl.
You must help me to persuade her. There she is.
Come along.”
Aslaug turned a comely, momentarily-transformed
face upon us. The raw-boned youth dithered unde¬
cidedly near her, with a mingled look of exhaustion
I52
THE LOST TRUMPET
and not over-clean desire upon his unhealthy face.
Pelagueya said :
“Let us all go and have ices.”
Aslaug nodded, and turned with Juno-like deliber¬
ation towards a far door. The pallid youth made a
step to follow her, and then, with a peculiar gurgle,
refrained. We left him and sat beside a small table
in the Avallaire courtyard and ate the moistly-warm
ices Pelagueya ordered.
Now, here we were lost from the full beat of the
dancing. It was a remote inharmonic noise. And
presently we heard something clearer and cleaner.
No doubt it came from some gardener’s outhouse of
the Avallaire—a man twanging on a single stringed
instrument and a voice uplifted in the strains of an
old, old Arab song. Down the dim night it came to
us, sitting in darkness and caught to attention :
‘ Ya a^i'z uu-u-uu eyni, w’ana biddi aruh,
Beledi!
Beledi, uu-uu beledi, rdana biddi aruh
Beledi:
Ya^mar! ’
It was very penetrating and eerie and sad. I heard
a whisper : “What is it, Anton ?”
1 Mar mar •%amani,ya ^arnani mar mar !
Tebla eynunu illi mayehibbak
Ya^mar! ’
“Oh Love, sing low of the homeland, sing! ... It is
some lost tribesman remembering the tents of Kedar?
Princess,”
153
the lost trumpet
“As we do—so often.”
Aslaug said, very slowly and looking at us, I
knew puzzledly : “You mean Russia ?”
I nodded. The dull voice went on : “It must be
awful your country in the hands of those murder-
ing Bolsheviks and criminals. I read it was just like
the people escaped from the lunatic asylums and
prisons in charge of a country.”
I waited, knowing what to expect. Never yet had
I heard the much-detested communists abused by an
alien in Pelagueya’s presence but she sprang to their
defence.
“You read—oh, my dear schoolgirl! What
nonsense then you have read ! The Bolsheviks like
that ? Instead—instead—you fought them, Anton.
Tell us what they are like.”
Titans storming heaven with hammer and sickle.
Miss Simonssen—Titans a little crude in method*
and purpose, and unforgiving either the cruelties or
the beauties of the gods. But the good Marrot could
no doubt tell you more about the communists than I
though I doubt if his communism is orthodox ”
“Marrot ?”
. ^e is one of the American archeologists employ¬
ing Colonel Saloney near my place at Abu Zabal.”
Pelagueya had remembered her intention. “I think
you must be very bored here. Miss Simonssen. Why
not come out to Abu Zabal for a fortnight or so 
unless you are absolutely bound to Cairo ?”
There was a moment’s hesitation. “I should like
t°? onl7—” The blonde head was turned towards
154
THE LOST TRUMPET
me. “I went to Rashida, you know, Colonel Saloney,
to find out about Carl’s murder.”
“And you found out ?”
“I think more than the Egyptian officials wanted
me to. I found out that all the evidence points to the
woman Huth Rizq as the murderess, and that she
was allowed to slip through the fingers of the police.
She disappeared—or so they said. But I followed
up things, and I know she came to Cairo.”
“And you have informed the police here ?”
“I spent all to-day at the Ministry of the Interior.
They’re going to comb the native quarters for her.”
That was a bigger task, I thought, than probably
either the police or this girl realized. How much
did this murderess-hunting mean to her ? Strangely,
Pelagueya must have been following the same train
of thought, for she spoke my question.
“And even if she’s caught and proved to have
murdered your brother—will it help him much ?”
“But—she must be punished. You can’t allow
murderers to go unpunished.”
“Are you a Christian ?”
I think she winced away from that question and
then pulled herself together, remembering that it
was a foreigner who spoke, one possibly ignorant of
the fact that in Edinburgh God and Christianity
were impolite topics. She said : “Yes, I think so.”
“Then you ought to forgive the murderess. But
I don’t suppose you will—yet. Sometime—^forgive¬
ness is such complete and obvious commonsense !
. . . But will you come to Abu Zabal ?”
THE LOST TRUMPET 155
Again a hesitation. The native singing had ceased.
The sound of the band was louder. Then :
Yes, thank you. They can easily let me know
from the Ministry when they’ve found the woman.
But, Colonel Saloney ”
“Yes ?”
I think you re an awfully good dancer. I saw
you with the Princess. Can we have one before I go
and pack ?” &
Subchapter ii
Twenty minutes later Pelagueya and I found our-
selves again in the dark streets outside the Pension
Avallaire. She took my arm.
It is nearly midnight. We’ll have to hurry and
brmg my automobile if we hope to get back to Abu
Zabal before morning. . . . What is it, Anton ?”
“Nothing,” I said.
Pelagueya laughed. “Miss Simonssen, of course
Were you shocked, Anton ?”
“I was a little surprised.”
You would be. Oh, all men are fools. But I 
I knew as soon as I looked at her that no one had
danced with her as she should be danced with. So I
set to awakening her.”
We stumbled in Cairene pit-holes. A dog growled
at us from the shadows. Cairo dreamed under a
great splendour of stars. I thought of Aslaug
bimonssen in my arms, in a fierce, shy abandon and
156 THE LOST TRUMPET
wistful terror that had amazed me. “There is danger
in some awakenings.”
“What ?—while she was with you^ Anton ?”
“I can let that sneer go by, Princess. But I am not
the only dancing partner she had—or is likely to
have. I understand now the hog-like gogglings of
the raw-boned youth.”
“Pfuu ! Loosen his inhibitions as well—and he’ll
be able to get them tied up nicely for five dollars or
so as soon as he gets back to America and consults
a respectable psychoanalyst. . . . Anton, what’s
that ?”
I had thought it a dog—mutilated as I have seen
many Cairene dogs mutilated, with the tendons of
the hind legs cut and trying to crawl out of the street
into some corner in which to die. Lighting a match,
I looked down on something that made Palagueya
shiver. Then the match-glow flickered out. The
thing mouthed at us in the darkness.
“It was a woman.” Pelagueya’s voice was the voice
of one sickened as we went on.
“It had been a woman,” I said. “And perhaps
she had over-indulged in the loosening of inhibi¬
tions.”
“Anton, you are puzzling me nowadays. Especially
to-day. Something is happening to you.”
“What ?”
She sounded troubled and impatient. “Oh, I don’t
know. Satisfactory change—and sometimes horribly
the reverse. . . . What a day it has been ! And I’m
tired.”
157
the lost trumpet
“I’ll drive back to Abu Zabal.”
“But no, you most certainly will not. To-morrow
you have work to do.” She looked up at the stars
Or is it to-day ?”
“To-day, I think. It is after midnight.”
It was after one when we brought Pelagueya’s
automobile to rest in front of the Avallaire. The
disharmonic clamour of the dance-music was loud
as ever. . Aslaug Simonssen stood on the Pension
steps beside a neat stacking of suit-cases. With the
aid of a Pension servant I had bestowed that luggage
about the exterior of the automobile in a moment
or so, bestowed its owner in the back seat, and stood
motioning to Pelagueya to descend from her place
at the wheel. 1
“But why ? I told you I’d drive.”
Her face came into the lamplight, peering at me
rebelhously. I still held the door open.
“Hurry, Princess.”
She sat for a little looking at me, and I suppose
Asiaug Simonssen, uncomprehending either our looks
or our barbaric Russian speech, wondered. Then
Pelagueya put out her hand, caught mine, followed
the hand, and swung into the back seat with the
pivoting of a single small foot.
“Comfortable, Miss Simonssen ? We’ll let Colonel
Saloney drive. He’s afraid I may go mad again and
attempt to kill us all—as I did this morning driving
into Cairo.” ° 6
Did you have an accident, then ?”
I closed the door and sat at the wheel, but heard
Ij8 THE LOST TRUMPET
Pelagueya’s voice answer, clear and composed and
casual.
“Oh, no. I tried to kill Colonel Saloney and
myself.”
“But why ?”—in a slow crudescence of horror.
“I was very tired of things this morning. It seemed
the best way out.”
“And you tried to kill yourself ?”
“Yes. And Colonel Saloney. But he looked at me
so nicely I couldn’t do it. . . . Just a moment. I
have two pillows under here. And there’s a rug in
that comer. So. And here’s a book you may like to
read, because I never talk on journeys.”
“Oh, thank you. . . . Esdras Quaritch ? Is it
a novel ?”
“Yes. Nice and old-fashioned. Comfortable ?”
Kasr-el-Nil and the River below, dark and warm
in its northward sweep. The roads were deserted
and Cairo slept dreamlessly but for the purr of the
engine. Northwards, over that age-old flowing of the
Nile, Sirius crept down the sky, the Dog Star, the
hunter of the morning. ... In front the scud of
the road. Behind the Nile.
How many men in the velvet dark of this and
that night had looked at and brooded on River and
Star ! From what drowsiness of bed-dreams had
heads lifted from pillows and looked north and east,
waiting for the coming of the morning and the Dog
Star loping on its trail ?
From more than pillows—before the world had
dreamt of pillows. Dark men of the Old Stone Age
the LOST TRUMPET 159
had seen these midnights and sky and waters—six
thousand years before the birth of Christ perhaps
some hunter had walked this very track, naked
spear-gripping, his kill upon his shoulder, back to the
reedy hut where his woman slept. And looked out
and up and wondered a little and thought that these
things would still be there when he and his woman
and all he knew were nothing. . . . Adrian's men
of the Golden Age, before in Upper Egypt they tamed
the first growths of corn . .
Helmieh by then. Into the rays of the headlights
shot a lurching figure, plodding southwards. Some
peasant—some labourer, rather, in that rag-tag of
European clothing. . . . Buildings uprising and
fading to right and left. ... The open road.
Had Man indeed once walked free and unhampered
of any laws—and been no raving brute of the nights
and dawns, but that child of whom the poets had
dreamt and sung ? Was this world of the last six
thousand years no more than a world diseased, a
torture and enslavement of the human spirit through
the chance of an accident ? And what remedy was
there if that were the case ?
Mile on mile of featureless road. The waning
glory of the stars. Silence behind me, though
Pelagueya, leaning forward to look at some object,
had forgotten to lean back, and remained there still,"
her hand upon my shoulder, her finger-tips touching
my neck. And I dreamt on with the purr of the engine
in front and the smooth glide of the wheel in mv
fingers. How ? Hon’ ?
160 THE LOST TRUMPET
Find our essential selves ? But could that ever
be done—even if I and Pelagueya and Marrot and
Huebsch possessed those essential egos ? To dig
down below the layers of prejudice and habit and
superficial like and hate and distaste and lust—to
find the essential human being and live with him and
be him 
Oh, God, if one could !
CHAPTER THE TWELFTH
‘ “It is ... a Levite ornament. We’re close on the
track of the Lost Trumpet.” ’
Subchapter i
IT seemed to me I had slept a bare hour. Yet I
awoke with the sunlight streaming in upon my
face ; and, lying in the disorder of my tent, knew that
I had very grievously overslept. For that beam of
sunlight was not due to make entrance until at least
ten o’clock in the morning.
This came of gadding around the Cairene scene
in company with an emigre princess and an anachron¬
istic sagawoman !
We had reached Gault’s castle at five in the
morning. There, having seen to the awakening and
decanting of Pelagueya and Aslaug Simonssen, I
had betaken myself, stumblingly, for sleep was
almost upon me, across the dimness of the Egyptian
night, on my way narrowly escaping a fall and a
broken neck from a new and unexpected traverse
the archaeologists had cut in my absence. The
speculations and queries of the journey from Cairo
trailed after me like footsore phantoms. But wher¬
ever yet were the philosophical agonies which over-
161
L
162 the lost trumpet
due sleep could not put to rout in one short, sharp
bout ? . . .
I got out of bed and looked from my tent-opening.
All the camp seemed engrossed on the tasks attend¬
ant the digging of the new traverse. There was
Huebsch himself, an archaic figure out of Semitic
history, a Shophet of Punic days in a stetson hat and
large boots, a-lean above the toiling back of Kalaun.
Marrot was at the remote end of the traverse : the
body of the labourers worked midway. From the
cook-tent a little stream of smoke, blue and shot
with silver, rose up and quivered questioningly on
the ghost of some breeze of the upper reaches.
Ascending the incline, laden tray in hand, eyes
protuberant and benevolent behind the luxuriant
foliage of his moustache, was Georgios himself.
“M’sieu’ has slept well ? It was the order of
M. Huebsch that he should not be disturbed.”
I made way for the tray. “I had thought such
order to be more in accord with the principles of
M. Marrot.”
Georgios chuckled. “But he is the slave-driver,
that one ! With the bitter kindness and the preach¬
ings of revolt does he drive ! . . . I trust M’sieu’
had an amusing day ?”
“Killing, Georgios,” I assured him in that con¬
temporary Romaic which has filled the City of the
Violet Crown with clamorous acceptance of the
latest in American colloquialisms. His small, absurd
figure padded away down the hill. I turned and sat
down to the fragrant invitation of the tray’s contents.
THE LOST TRUMPET 163
Sleep and food. Food and sleep and sex. How good
they were and how much of our lives they devoured !
Sleep—a third ; food—its eating only—a sixth ;
food—its gathering—a third ; sex, and all its conse¬
quences—another sixth. The sum total of man’s
activities. Yet somehow, in the corners and string-
knots of this mathematical mesh, he raped from time
those scared, idle moments in which to stare at the
stars and dream of fate and life and God and death
and the coming of the millennium and the cheese-
greenness of the moon . . . till the clamour of his
belly or his children or his sleep-weighted head
jerked him back to the concrete realities of concrete
desire !
If man had had a digestive system that preyed
not on his nerve-centres for drugging rest! No
sleep; and a third of his life saved. If he had but
followed some wise and seemly line of biological
evolution and remained heterosexual and self-satis¬
fying, budding off his children from his body as the
trees bud new branches—yet another third saved.
And with those two-thirds 
But my musings had not arrived at the point
where I could begin to catalogue the glories of talk
and smoking and wine-drinking and high adventure
in which men might indulge but for distractions of
sleep and sex—when I heard a hurried step come
up to the tent-door and the small, dark face of Marrot
was thrust into the opening.
“Hello, colonel! Sleep well ?”
Too well,” I said, and offered him a cup of
164 THE LOST TRUMPET
coffee. He accepted it hurriedly, standing and drink¬
ing as if the work at the traverse still claimed his
urgent attention. He banged down the cup and pre¬
pared to leave.
“I’d turn in again, Colonel, if I were you. No
need to start until the afternoon.”
“I am coming down with you now,” I said, rising.
“Why the devil should you ? You’ll get no more
thanks for it. . . . Right, then. Bring your geodeter,
will you ? You can take the middle section of the
new traverse and start two new side-cuttings from it.”
We had reached the day-old traverse by then.
The Punic Shophet straightened in the distance to
wave me greeting ; then re-bent to his work. Marrot,
admonishing me to go back to my tent and sleep
if I felt drowsy, departed in short, sharp strides
towards his section of the excavations. I myself,
with a smile after him and a moment’s wonder
whether or not his skill in making all of us so toil-
desirous were conscious or unconscious, paced out
two likely side-cuttings and set a labourer to each of
them; and found a spade and went to work myself.
The sun climbed. The sweat dripped down our
foreheads. There was no other sound than the
crunch of iron in soft, black loam and sandy shale.
One of the labourers, a great dark-pigmented fellah
from upper Egypt, dug beside me with the precision
and unintelligence of a machine, his eyes dull, his body
exuding that peculiar odour that seems the heritage
of all Asiatics, bathed or unbathed. He had a brutal,
prognathous jaw and his eyes when they glanced
THE LOST TRUMPET 165
towards me were shifty and hard and of no great
pleasantness. The other labourer, digging a side¬
cutting on his own, seemed small and oppressed and
overworked, for he panted and shovelled with a
desperate earnestness and his dirty trousers hung
slantwise and unimpressive from his meagre hips.
. . . Descendants of the Golden Men of the Golden
Age!
It was plaguing me again, that question. I cut
and hewed and kept a sharp regard upon the ground,
knowing that was my business. But mere mechanical
labour has never had power to prevent me thinking
of something widely different from the task in hand.
And surely here, in these two Egyptians, were
question-marks gigantic enough to set up against
the fine romance of Adrian’s theory. Men, kindly
and brave, splendid and free—and these their descend¬
ants ! Had civilization made that low, brutal brow—
that weak, foolish face and sagging body ? Surely
not!
And then I saw a side-twist to the argument.
Surely yes ! For without the resources of food-
cultivation the weak would certainly have died off
early in life. So perhaps also the brutal, who indeed
could seldom have made any success of the sim¬
plicities of existence. Brutality flourished on com¬
plexities. Two marks scored up for Adrian !
“Colonel !”
I looked up and saw Marrot, waving to me from
the far end of the traverse. Abandoning my two
labourers—who promptly dropped their shovels
i
i66
THE LOST TRUMPET
and impacted their buttocks upon the earth—I went
towards the mound where the archaeologist-com¬
munist squatted under the gigantic shadow of the
sitting Huebsch. Beside them, tray-laden again, a
Ganymede of the desert, was Georgios. As I
approached Huebsch held up something for my
inspection.
“Ever seen the like of this. Colonel ?”
I cupped my hand to enclose it with as much
care as he put it there. It was a golden brooch, two
inches by two and a half; so Marrot measured it
later. I knew it gold in spite of its earth-incrusta¬
tions. And I stared without much comprehension
at the intersecting triangles. Valuable, perhaps, but
certainly not Ancient Egyptian.
“What is it ?” I asked.
The Punic Shophet gave a great sigh and affixed
his rich lips to the edge of a tumbler handed him by
Georgios.
“It is the Shield of David ; a Levite ornament.
We’re close on the track of the Lost Trumpet.”
Subchapter ii
Kalaun had found it. I went and examined
the spot. There was nothing else. It had lain
beneath the black cultivation loam, on top of the
sand-levels. And for three feet around the sand
and loam had been gathered and riddled and sieved.
I returned to the two Americans.
“If there is nothing else ”
THE LOST TRUMPET
167
Huebsch. shook his great head. <<:I didn’t expect
anything else after the first few minutes. What
happened must have been this : The Levite in his
hurry dropped the brooch from his tunic or else
spilt it from the container holding the Lost Trumpet
and other treasures. It s a clue to the fact that we’re
on no wild-goose-chase, as Marrot here had begun
to think. The Trumpet itself may lie within a foot
Pof us. Or maybe it’s a thousand yards. But it’s here
somewhere.”
Marrot seemed to take the discovery coolly
enough. He stood up and yawned. “Exchange
sectors with you, Huebsch ?”
The immense ovoid head was moved negatively.
“I’ve a weakness for finding Levite treasures myself.”
He smiled slowly, gigantically, remotely. “Keep a
sharp look-out, both of you, and don’t damage the
Lost Trumpet with a spade-thrust.”
3 “If you hear me shout for Georgios you’ll know
I’ve found the thing and want him to blow it,”
retorted Marrot, flippantly, and we went back to our
traverse-sections. The news had spread from Kalaun
among the other labourers. The apparently
lunatic activities of the Yahudi and the Don’t-Worker
had borne a measure of reward. And Kalaun would
probably be rewarded. . . . My giant and pygmy
were sending the earth showering in the fashion of
dogs at the mouth of a rabbit warren as I approached
them. I restrained their enthusiasm a little and
resumed with my own spade. The loam Huebsch
had said we might now disregard. But every shovel-
i68
THE LOST TRUMPET
ful of the shale-sand might be with advantage sieved
and riddled.
This trebled the labour. I sent the pygmy for a
sieve and bade him abandon his side-cutting and
take to sieving the labours of the giant and myself.
Upwards climbed the sun. New Zealand-ward
descended our trench. And the smell of the earth,
upturned for the first time in many hundred years,
grew so pungent that at moments I had to rest and
breathe unchoked the hot air of the Egyptian mid¬
day. No further word of success came from either
Huebsch or Marrot, but, unbending once, I was
hailed by Georgios, crossing the riven lands yet
again towards the traverse.
“A letter from the Princess, mon colonel.”
So it was—a miniature, faintly-scented envelope
to which the grime on my hands added no attractive¬
ness. I broke it open and stood and read the contents ;
then handed the letter back to Georgios.
“Show it to M. Huebsch and then to M.
Marrot.”
Two minutes later Huebsch’s great voice boomed
down the windless air to me.
“Colonel!”
He stood with Pelagueya’s missive elevated in
his hand. I shouted back on a note of less
volume.
“Well ?”
“Eh ?”
I decided this was absurd and made towards
him.
THE LOST TRUMPET 169
“Can’t read Russian, Colonel. So what’s the
good of sending this to me ?”
He considered the missive, head on one side.
“But it’s a very fine and pretty note. And what’s it
all about ?”
“The Princess Bourrin would like the three of us
to drink tea with her to-morrow.”
“Well, well, that’s fine. I’m honoured.”
“You will go ?”
“Sure, I certainly will.”
I sent the anxious Georgios—who imagined he
smelt an overturned saucepan—back to his cook-
tent, conveyed the note to Marrot myself, heard his
hurried acceptance, and then wrote our triune accept¬
ance on the back of Pelagueya’s sheet of paper. Her
messenger—Gault’s house-boy of olden days—took
it, grinned at the condition of the paper; and
departed. I returned to my traverse, expedited on
the way by a hail from my giant.
“There is something here, khawaga ! Metal! My
spade has struck against it!”
The others heard the hail and collected around us.
Huebsch came, huge and earth-shaking as the beasts
of Pyrrhus, Marrot at a swift, perspiring run. We
cut and excavated with care. The find was certainly
of metal, cylinder-shaped, encrusted. I lifted it,
shook it free from its coatings of earth, stood para¬
lysed a moment, and then handed it to Huebsch.
“Unless the good Levite included a Ford car
among his possessions ”
It was a petrol can.
17° THE LOST TRUMPET
Subchapter Hi
We retired to lunch and siesta after that. But the
memorable events of the day had not ended with the
finding of the petrol container which Gault, perhaps,
had used to fill the tank of the great racer in which he
and Pelagueya had toured this desert fringe.
I went and lay down on my bed and read for a
little in Ulle des Pengouins. But I had read it too often.
Amongst my luggage was a worn Lermontov and
with him, till I fell asleep, I found greater kinship,
that Scots-descended Russian Learmont who some¬
how never sang the Russia he loved, but a Scotland
that a Russian might have created.
At three Huebsch’s whistle roused us and we
trooped back to work again. It was still a day of
blazing heat. The corn had ripened about the low¬
lands north of Abu Zabal and the radiance of the
harvest-quiet fields lay against the azure sky like the
light from a copper bowl. I looked towards Gault’s
castle and saw two women stroll from a doorway
down towards the nightingale garden—Gault’s mistress
who had tried to kill me, and Aslaug Simonssen
who seemed to dream of nothing but the killing of
her brother’s murderer. . . . Huebsch was calling
instructions.
“And if that boy of yours digs up any more gas-
cans, Colonel, tell him he can keep ’em.”
“Less levity and more Levite, in fact,” supple¬
mented Marrot, and went off, whistling, followed
by the slow, wide grin of the Jew.
THE LOST TRUMPET 171
So we held at it again. About four in the after¬
noon I stopped and climbed out of the trench and
was lighting my pipe for a moment’s blessed conso¬
lation when I saw a figure crossing the land from
the road that led towards Abu Zabal. I stared at it
a moment, speculating what villager was approach¬
ing with a fresh complaint—I have forgotten to
tell how there had been scores of these, though our
activities infringed hardly at all upon the village and
its rights and dignities. Then I saw that it was no
villager. It was European, fantastically garbed. It
was 
It was, in fact, no other than the drunken boy-
novelist of the Wagh el Berka.
CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH
‘ “Look, I’m a wandering intestinal worm trying to
find out the truth of things.” ’
Subchapter i
NO other. He had a rucksack slung across his
back. Hugely-sombreroed, slim-hipped, with
wide trousers and slouching shoulders he came
drifting across the field. He came in my direction
and, glancing along the line of excavation, I could
see the reason for that. Mine was the only back that
had unbent.
“Hello, it’s you. Thought it’d be you. Told me
in the village something like you was here. So’m I
now. In the desert. Right.”
He had halted, swaying a little as he regarded me.
I saw then that his boy’s face had an almost corpse¬
like pallor. His eyes smouldered like dull coals. He
nodded, vaguely.
“D.T.’s—just on the verge. And sleeplessness.
. . . Would you mind keeping still so that I can be
sure whether there’s one or three of you ? Right.
What are you doing here ?”
“We are excavating,” I said.
“Oh.” He sat down. His rucksack slipped from
his shoulders. He leant back against it; yawned
173
THE LOST TRUMPET
'15
cavernously, stretched himself widely and freely,
turned his cheek against the rucksack, and in a
moment was asleep.
All of which had happened so quickly that I had
remained standing still, staring astounded. But the
final movement of this surprising avatar I found too
much. I bent over the boy and shook him.
“You cannot sleep here. You are in the open
sunlight.”
He might have been one of the Seven Sleepers of
Ephesus. His body shook leadenly under my hand.
I shrugged and desisted, but uneasily. Ridiculously
and needlessly, I felt in some measure responsible
for this drunken youth whom Pelagueya and I had
seen being kicked from a door in the Street of
Prostitutes.
My two labourers had grown aware of him by
this time, had unbent their backs and were leaning
on their shovels. I set them to their task again.
Esdras Quaritch slept on, unmoving, scarcely breath¬
ing it seemed to me. I took a shovel and flung a few
fills into the shape of a little mound beside his head,
so drowning his face and shoulders in shadow. Then
I resumed work, and grew interested in that, and
drew some distance away from the sleeper, and
forgot him.
But half an hour later the voice of Marrot was
upraised nearby.
“What the devil’s this ?”
He had crossed from his sector and was standing
by the recumbent novelist. Quaritch had opened his
174 THE lost trumpet
eyes, but made no attempt to get up. Instead, he
replied in his quick, high-pitched voice :
“And what the devil has it to do with you ?”
The syllables lurched less intoxicatedly from his
lips after that brief nap. Marrot stood arms akimbo,
looking down at him. “My name’s Marrot, I’m an
archaeologist, and you’re lying about on land we’re
excavating.”
The boy turned over on his shoulder. “Excavate
till it blisters your soul,” he advised. “But don’t
come and afflict me with your ghastly accentuations.
Else I’ll strangle you with your own entrails.”
His eyes closed. Marrot pushed at him with his
foot. The novelist remained unperturbed. I walked
over and examined him myself. He was again asleep.
The American pulled at his lip.
“Who is he, Colonel ? Friend of yours ? I seem
to have seen him before.”
I reminded him of the incident in the Khalig and
told him of the previous day’s happenings. As we
stood regarding the camp’s recumbent and uninvited
guest, Huebsch came across to us.
“Well, well, given it up for the day, both of you ?
Think I will as well. . . . Hello, who’s the boy ?”
“The fat boy in Pickwick, by the way he sleeps,”
said Marrot. “But the Colonel here says he’s a
novelist and pimp from a licensed street in Cairo.”
“Well, well. Let him be. We’ll have a dish of
tea now, I think.”
We broke off for the day and went back to the
tents. Georgios was just setting the tea for us in
THE LOST TRUMPET
the usual place, outside Huebsch’s tent, when a
voice spoke startlingly near my shoulder.
The flesh-pots of Egypt, b’God ! Jews in front
of them, too. ... Can I, sir ?”
With that, a hand swept over my shoulder,
snatched up the cup I had been about to take, and
was rapidly withdrawn. I turned to see Esdras
Quaritch, deathlier than ever of appearance, lower¬
ing the cup from his lips.
“Damned sorry to pig it like that, but I’ve a
couple of blast-furnaces below my breast-bone.”
The cup dropped from his hand. That hand shot
convulsively to his brow. “Oh, hell, my head I”
Huebsch and Marrot, who had been bending over
a plan together, stared their astonishment. Huebsch
said : . Better sit down, young man. You’re the
authority on Solomon’s domestic affairs, aren’t you ?
I seem to remember you lecturing me about them.”
Quaritch sank into a deck-chair, still holding his
head. “Quite likely. I’ve lectured all kinds of fools
in my time. Quite unavailingly, too. . . . Sorry,
that was^damn rude. Still, I’ve no doubt you deserved
it. . . His hand clutched out towards me. “Do
pour me another cup, sir.”
I poured a fresh cup. We sat and looked at him
rink it, I at least idly etching on my mind the out-
ines of his portrait. Wild and young, with inex¬
plicable shynesses and unexpected courtesies of word
and demeanour emerging from a general flow of
speech and act that went unrestricted by any canon of
taste or decency. Drunken : Sure of himself, inso-
THE LOST TRUMPET
176
lent, a satyr, lewd and amusing enough. Half-sober :
Now like a pitiable boy, now an undergraduate,
now swaggering like a street lout. Sober—I had yet
to meet him that 
And all these within the compass (I guessed) of
some twenty-four or twenty-five years !
He put down the cup and surveyed the two across
the table with aching, defiant eyes.
“I want to sleep in your camp to-night. Any
objection ?”
Huebsch considered the matter, immensely, benevo¬
lently. “Even if we did object, we could hardly throw
you out. Though you’ll get no bed. Why, yes,
sleep here if you like.”
“You—any objection ?” This, sharply, was to
Marrot, whose eyes had returned to the map in front
of him. He glanced up an acid, contemptuous
moment.
“You may sleep all over the damned place if you
feel that way.”
“Nor have I any objections, Mr. Quaritch,” I
forestalled him.
“Thank you, sir.” He nodded to me, glazedly,
slung his rucksack again over his shoulder, rose, and
turned to go. Then he paused and regarded me over
his shoulder, shyly.
“Read that book of mine, yet ? You or the lady ?”
I smiled at him. “You must forgive us.
Neither of us has had any training in assimilating
garbage.”
He blushed, vividly. “That’s damn unkind.”
THE LOST TRUMPET 177
And, spite memory of portrayed and penned
indecencies in that book of his, I felt ashamed
of myself. Unkind I had been. He looked away,
the boy, the colour slowly draining from his cheeks,
and then flung up his head with a boyish sneer.
“Though I suppose it’s to be expected in the com¬
pany of Jews.”
“Well, well, an anti-Semite. And what’s wrong
with the Jews, young man ?”
He slewed round still further, nearly overbalanced,
and regarded Huebsch’s great figure with a loathing
that startled me.
“Wrong ? Their noses, their circumcised genitals,
their prophets, their God, their Temple, their greed,
their swinish lack of imagination, their treatment of
the Greeks, their crucifying of Christ, their ghastly
tabernacle, their fouling of every clean and sweet
thing in the world. . . . Not that there are any such
things. . . . Jews ! History vomits upon their name.”
He steadied himself. “Thanks for the tea, you men.
I’m—I’m going to sleep again.”
Subchapter ii
I had sat with my Lermontov two hours perhaps,
Huebsch and Marrot had gone to their tents, report
and letter-writing to the Chicagoan Institute which
financed them. The Egyptian night hesitated on the
fringe of the desert, waving dull, flame-shot wings,
pecking and uncertain, preening its eagle head now
this way, now that; and the lights in the heavens
M
il* the lost trumpet
flamed and fell and rose again as the great bird of
darkness waited there. Georgios had disappeared
to his bugle-practice, but I heard no sounds this
evening. From the camp-fire of the labourers, how¬
ever, arose thin shrieks of unwonted merriment.
I put down my Lermontov and sat and smoked and
watched the fire grow brighter and the surrounding
landscape duller; and once turned to look at the
house of Gault, pin-pricked in window-radiance
there against the hesitating darkness. With that
turning I became aware of the figure of Georgios
hurrying kitchenwards and realized with some satis¬
faction that supper-time was near.
For we had abolished dinner.
I must have fallen into a doze then, for the noise
of the arrival of the hunger-urged Huebsch and
Marrot was what aroused me. Georgios was laying
places and dishes, deftly, napkin draped across his
arm, neat and trig and trim. Huebsch, benevolently
expectant, levered himself into his seat.
“Well, Georgios, what is it to-night ?”
“Fish, M’sieuh Omelette. Coflee.,,
“Guess you’re a blessing right from Olympus,
Georgios. . . . Well, well, our boys are very bright
to-night.”
Another burst of laughter had arisen from about
the labourers’ camp-fire. Georgios, laying the final
dish and standing back with a flourish, shrugged
apologetically.
“It is the mad gentleman conversing with the
natives.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
I79
“Eh ?”
He is seated at the fire with them, eating their
food and smoking their cigarettes. When I ques¬
tioned him as to his right to be in the camp he
threatened to break my neck and then said he had
your permission. He is now drinking arrack provided
by the foolish Kalaun.”
That s bad. Ask him to come up and have supper
with us.”
Georgios departed. Marrot stared after him in
the direction of the camp-fire. “Strange tastes this
young fool has.”
I could not resist a thrust here. “Perhaps he is
a practical equalitarian, Mr. Marrot, and immersed
in study of the noble proletarian nature.”
Not it. If either of you knew the elements of
communist philosophy you’d be aware that the
communist s only interest in the proletariat is its
abolition. . . . H’m. Here’s Georgios; on his
own, too.”
The little Greek bowed to Huebsch. “M’sieu’ at
the camp-fire thanks you and says he has already eaten.”
Our Jewish leader considered the diplomat toler¬
antly. “Were those his exact words ?”
Georgios’ gigantic moustaches lifted and fell in
a smile as he turned away. We gathered that those
had not been the exact words of our uninvited guest’s
refusal of an invitation.
I went to bed with some speculation as to whether
the erratic youth would be either in camp or alive
next morning.
l8o THE LOST TRUMPET
Subchapter Hi
But he was both, as I discovered coming out of
my tent for breakfast. He sat at the open-air dining-
table, his tousled, youthful head glistening wet, his
face less pale than on the previous day though his
eyes were dark-ringed and bloodshot enough.
Huebsch emerged from his tent at the same moment
as I emerged from mine.
“Morning, Colonel. Morning, young man.”
“Morning. I like your camp. I want to stay here
and dig. . . . Morning, sir.”
I returned his greeting, and sat down. Huebsch,
engaged in placid consideration of the boy’s request,
also lowered himself upon a chair. “Well, you
can.
The tousled head nodded curtly. “Same wages as
the rest of your labourers ?”
The great Jew raised his brows. “Well, well.
You’re serious, then ?”
“Of course.”
It struck me he was more subdued this morning.
The arrack either had had some dulling effect, or he
was slowly recovering from the complete sum of
his potations. He sat with slouched, slim shoulders,
jerking out questions and replies, and staring over
the desert lands to the west. Huebsch stroked his
beard.
“Maybe you’d better tell us something about
yourself so that we can decide.”
“What is there to tell ?”
THE LOST TRUMPET l8l
“The Colonel here told me you were a novelist.”
“So I am. . . . Mind if I go and be sick for a
minute ?”
This was surprising enough. But he was back in
less than a minute. He sat down. Huebsch shook
his head.
“Guess you’re in a pretty bad way. I suppose
you want to go in for this digging for—‘copy’,
isn’t it ?”
“Not a bit of it. I want to work because it’ll tire
me, because I want to have my back and shoulders
ache like hell, because I want the sweat of clean
tiredness on my face. If I put that in a novel later it
has nothing to do with the job—except as a
by-product. . . . Sorry I’ll have to be sick again.
Sorry, sir. . . . All writing, all art, is merely the
excreta of physical emotion.”
“Well, well, you seem to have been pretty
emotional lately.” Huebsch waved to Georgios, who
had been standing by disapprovingly, to serve break¬
fast. “Like some food ?”
The answer was curt. “I’ll breakfast with the
other labourers.”
He rose and left us at that. Marrot came out and
we told him of the new addition to our staff. He
lighted up at hearing of the fact.
“Excellent. Now perhaps he’ll put some guts in
them.”
I thought this an unwarranted aspersion. “But
surely they are good workers, all of them, as it
is ?”
182
THE LOST TRUMPET
He snorted. “Of course they are—from our point
of view. Damned serfs. He’ll perhaps stir them up
to get shorter hours and more pay and look after
themselves a bit. . . . What the devil are you
laughing about ?”
Our laughter had indeed echoed down the clear,
tonic air so that Quaritch himself must have heard
it. Marrot ate his porridge, glared at us, drank hasty
coffee and caught up a tape-measure. Huebsch
protested.
“Quarter of an hour before the first shift yet.”
“Nothing to do with any of you. I’m off on my
own.”
We watched the result amusedly. No sooner had
he reached the traverse than we observed the
labourers trailing after him from the direction of their
marquee. Huebsch chuckled.
“Well, well, if that’s how they work the Five
Years’ Plan in your Russia, Colonel—good luck to
them 1”
So I myself thought, going down the hill to
measure out fresh side-cuttings from the traverse.
A multitude of these cuttings had been plotted on
the previous evening, so that presently the new
traverse would look like a herring-bone, with a fringe
of questioning excavationettes outsprayed on either
side. My giant labourer I found already at work.
But the little man stood aside, for his place had been
usurped by Quaritch, who was wielding his spade with
mathematical regularity. I called to him.
“Enough of that cutting. We are to make new
THE LOST TRUMPET 183
ones all along either fringe. You know what we are
in search of?”
“Metal implements, isn’t it, sir ? So those chaps
have told me.”
“Metal implements or any other archaeological
finds. . . . And why do you address me as ‘sir’ ?”
“Because I want to, I suppose, sir.”
I shrugged and turned away. It was doubtlessly
my antique appearance that was the reason. Marrot
came along half an hour later and stopped to watch,
without approval, the flying spadefuls of loam.
“Seems to imagine he’s a dredger,” he remarked to
me. I nodded.
“But I think he is dredging something other than
earth.”
The sweat was streaming down the face of the
young Englishman. His coarse shirt clung damply
to shoulders and chest. His long hair swept over his
face at every downwards bend, swept regularly up
again as he straightened to hurl aside each excavated
spadeful. Marrot rubbed his chin. “Keep an eye on
him, Colonel.”
“But why ?”
“Keep an eye on him. You’ll see.”
See I did very shortly indeed. A cry from the
little labourer drew my attention to Quaritch. He
had fallen into the trench and lay there in a dead
faint.
I pulled him out, laid him flat, and sent the little
man for water. That dashed over him, the boy
slowly opened his eyes and put me aside and sat up.
THE LOST TRUMPET
184
“Good Lord, did I go off ?”
“You did, very thoroughly.”
“Arrack on top of a touch of Greek brandy
delirium tremens. . . . Very fin-de-siecle; infernally
Beardsleyish. . . . What’s your name, sir ?”
“Saloney.”
He knit his brows at me. “Not English, are you ?”
“I am a Russian.”
“ Emigre ?”
I found this catechism faintly amusing. “Like
yourself, I have left my country for my country’s
good. . . . When you are able to walk, you had best
go and ask Georgios for some coffee.”
“Right. Thanks. I will.”
I left him lying there and with my depleted staff
resumed operations. The work was beginning to
have more than a deadening monotony about it.
There were no more Levite brooches; no more
petrol-cans, even. At eleven o’clock Huebsch, as
usual, came to inspect progress. He puffed disap¬
pointedly.
“Nothing to report, Colonel ?”
“Not on this front. And yours ?”
“Two sheeps’ briskets and what looks like a
fossilized pumpkin. Well, well, and what’s become
of the writer boy ?”
I looked round. Quaritch was no longer there.
Huebsch stood mopping his forehead the while I
told of my new assistant’s fainting-fit.
“Boy’s been on the ramshazzle a long while, I
suppose. Better not let him back at the work.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
I85
Subchapter iv
At noon I passed the labourers’ marquee, and,
seeing Quaritch lying there, told him of Huebsch’s
fiat. The boy lay flat on the ground in the shadow of
the canvas, with a stubby pencil in one hand and
an immense pad of paper, no doubt drawn from his
voluminous rucksack, under his wrist. His face was
still pale, but some of the marks of dissipation had
gone from about his eyes. He stared at me blankly,
coming out of far depths of thought.
“Resume ? I’ve no desire to. Thanks all the
same. I’m in search of realism, not sham romanticism
disguised as archeology. . . .” His glance grew
remoter. “Decent of you to direct me to this place,
sir. Just what I wanted for a spot of Nature splurge.”
I said I was glad, and turned and went up the
incline to where lunch and the archeologists awaited
me. Climbing towards them, I was conscious that
almost a fortnight’s fruitless search had passed in
this riven tract of ground. Had there ever been a
Levite ? Or a Lost Trumpet ? Or the burial of one
by the other ?
I voiced my doubts as we sat eating of that fare,
unfailing in excellence, provided by Georgios. Marrot
nodded, avoiding Huebsch’s slow, considering eye.
“Begin to think so myself. We’ve been led on a
wild-goose-chase from Transjordan.”
We awaited Huebsch. He showed no emotion.
“And the Levite brooch ?”
Marrot answered for that. “I saw you drop the
i86
THE LOST TRUMPET
thing in the ground a minute or two before Kalaun
found it.”
“What ?” I cried.
The two Americans went on with their lunch.
Huebsch glanced at me with great, smiling lips
twisted a little wryly. His slow boom was as even-
toned as ever.
“A process known as ‘salting’, Colonel. I believe
they practise it extensively in dud gold mines.”
I was still befogged. “But why in this case ?”
“Because Marrot here was fairly plainly begin¬
ning to believe the search a dud one also. I dropped
the brooch—old and genuine enough, by the way;
it comes from Hebron—to encourage him. Seems
to have had no great shakes of a success, though.”
He turned to his colleague. “How’d you know ?”
Marrot shrugged. “I know you of old. Remem¬
bered other places you’d salted—the Hittite camp
especially. Just at the end of the first fortnight it’s
come to be in the regular order of things. Yesterday
I had a hunch the usual dope was due. So I kept my
Zeiss on you at intervals.”
“Why didn’t you expose the fraud at once ?” I
asked, and had no answer to that, for all three of us
paused to hear the outbreak of a loud squabbling by
the marquee of the labourers. It rose into an agi¬
tated chatter. Abruptly there was the sound of a
scuffle and then a loud scream.
We had jumped to our feet, Huebsch and I, and
Marrot was a third of the way down the incline when
we saw the figure of Quaritch ascending towards
THE LOST TRUMPET 187
us. He was walking slowly, looking at something in
his hand. He came and halted beside Huebsch.
“Sorry to interrupt. One of your men had this
thing—dug it up and intended to take it into Cairo
and sell it. I thought you might have a better use
for it.”
Marrot had resumed his seat. Quaritch, his pale
boy’s face composed and indeed contemptuous as
he glanced at the two Americans, flung the “find” on
the table and turned away. I smiled. Marrot gave a
snort of disgust. The great Jew stared down at the
thing passively.
It was a Shield of David : a Levite brooch.
Subchapter v
“So that’s the object of the expedition ? Shouldn’t
have thought a Jew capable of it. Of course there’s
no Lost Trumpet, nor does Huebsch believe there is
one.”
And the pale young face nodded to me, confi¬
dently.
“Then why is he so intent on this search ?” I
sighed.
The boy with the pseudo-biblical name leant back
against the side of my tent and blew a long clouding
of silver-grey smoke from a short pipestem. “Pro-
bably gone mad as even a Jew is apt to do in this
muck-heap we call a planet. He’s like myself—in
search of reality. Like all of us, in fact. And he’s
come to the conclusion in his conscious mind that
i88
THE LOST TRUMPET
there’s no reality—nothing but foam and fleeting.
He must have thought out the whole thing up there
in Transjordan. And then a lesion occurred in his
skull. His conscious mind went wonk. And a dusty
ghoul or so from the subconscious came to his aid,
denying the evidence of his senses and providing
for him a refuge in this fairy-tale of a maundering
Levite and Joshua’s Trumpet. ... A purely sym¬
bolical trumpet, of course; Huebsch’s Voice of
Reality. . . . Occasionally the fairy-tale wears thin
and then your Jew, assisted by the wreck of what
was once his conscious, comes to the aid of the
fable and patches it up by salting the excavations.”
“An extract from the Gospel according to Dr.
Adler ?”
He flushed at that, boyishly. “Oh, I’m young, sir.
But that’s not a crime. Neither is Adler.”
“But certainly not,” I soothed.
It was stiflingly hot under the tent-walls ; scorch¬
ing without. The young Englishman had come to
borrow a pencil, and at my invitation had sat down
and heard the story of our quest. . . . Huebsch a
lunatic ? I found that idea amusing. And yet——
“This is very interesting, Mr. Quaritch. Especially
the new light on my old friend Reality.”
“Still leg-pulling, sir ?”
“But certainly not,” I soothed again, and lay
back in my chair and considered the canvas over¬
head. “Only curious. For thousands of years men
and women have been on this unfortunate and
malodorous planet of ours, Mr. Quaritch. They
THE LOST TRUMPET 189
have been bom, they have grown up, they have
loved, they have mated, they have begotten their
kind, they have died—all without any great fuss as
to realities and non-realities, truth or no-truth.
. . . But nearly all of the young generations seem
to philosophize on these things nowadays. What is
the explanation ?”
“The thing’s like my trick of blushing—obvious
but not easy to account for. . . . But I’ll try. Sup¬
pose that by some freak of the chemic interplay a
liver-fluke acquired a reasoning mind—developed
an intelligentsia of liver-flukes who manufactured
satisfactory theories regarding the high destinies and
moral purpose of all intestinal worms and the beauty
of their abiding place. And the majority of the
flukes, busied in feeding on decayed foodstuffs,
accepted these theories with complacence. Good.
But something occurs inside the liver—a breath of
poisonous gas sweeps down on our colony of worms,
and they sway and gasp and vomit into a shocking
awareness of the fact that the theories on which
they’ve been fed are nonsensical. They abide in a
sty, a charnel-house. No great Super-Fluke awaits
them in the Beyond, across the dark blood-streams,
in a palace of meaty layers of ordure. The liver itself
is unaware of the flukes, except as a prickling,
poisonous annoyance. . . . Consternation among
the flukes—especially the young ones. Anarchy of
thought and immorality of deed, according to the
older theories of flukedom. Actually, a search for
reality.”
190 the lost trumpet
The confidence and uncertain cruelty and the
bright, shining rebelliousness of youth ! I said :
“That is a very fine parallel, no doubt, with the
Great War the poisonous gas of clarity. But, after
all and though the poor flukes are unable to com¬
prehend it, there is a meaning; as we know. The
liver is part of a body, the body of some biological
species, the species of some social group ”
He shook his head. “That isn’t a meaning, it’s
merely a multiplication. Look, I’m still a wandering
intestinal worm trying to find out the truth of
things.”
“And with what measure of success ?”
He considered, pale face thoughtful; then smiled
at me twistedly. “None, of course. Except to for¬
mulate some rules and beliefs for guidance on the
quest.”
“And what are these ?”
“That I owe no duty to anything or anyone but
myself. That all the creeds and codes are lies or
mouldy rags and remnants. I don’t believe there is
a reality in man’s nature; nor is there any possible
voice to cry it. . . . Complete anarchy is the com¬
plete rule of life. Nothing else any thinking being
can accept. . . . Sorry to be lecturing you, sir.
You were made for better things. Not that there
are any. . . . Dirty thing, Life. Dirty tyke, Man.”
“And woman ?”
He grinned, his face ageing, growing a satyr’s and
old and unpleasant, as can the face of the young in
these days.
THE LOST TRUMPET 191
“I know her use and place, anyhow. In Cairo they
call me the Little Brother of the Brothels ”
Subchapter vi
It was evident that Marrot had abandoned any
real interest in the excavations. Throughout the
afternoon I could see him stroll from beside the
work of this labourer to the task of that, turning
over mounds of sand with an indifferent foot.
Occasionally he would stand, arms akimbo, staring
Cairo-wards; and for long, at the passing of a
southwards camel-train along the Abu Zabal road,
followed the dust and tinkling of that train with his
eyes and presumably his ears. ... So I saw from
an occasional glance in his direction.
Huebsch and his gang, on the other hand, seemed
to be working as in a mighty fever, and I could not
repress a smile at sight of that. After two bare-faced
“saltings” it was hardly to be expected that the
Jew s colleague would remain patient with the
situation.
Nor, indeed, did that patience outlast the after¬
noon. Presently Marrot passed my sector, walking
towards Huebsch with unswerving deliberation. The
murmur of their voices came to me down the hot
afternoon, Huebsch’s a booming under-murmur,
Marrot s like the crack of an irritably-wielded dog-
whip. Then presently there came a hail to me from
Huebsch.
I left my giant and pigmy to labour with slackened
192 THE LOST TRUMPET
muscles and went towards the Americans, finding
Huebsch seated on a mound above the excavations,
his great shirt rolled greatly upon his bulging fore¬
arms, his head ovoid as an ostrich egg, his beard
jutting forth like the beard of an Assyrian bull-god.
But Marrot had taken no seat. He was walking to
and fro, irritatedly, with Huebsch’s enormous,
benevolent gaze bent on him as one watching the
antics of a fretful but esteemed cockroach.
“Hello, Colonel.” Huebsch slowly took his pipe
from between his red lips. “Thought you’d better
come over. Marrot here wants to break up the
expedition, and I’d like your opinion of the business.”
Marrot snorted. The communist American had
evidently no great opinion of my opinion. I looked
from one to the other.
“My opinion is, I suppose, that of any other
employee who wishes to retain his employment. If
Mr. Marrot goes, do you stay ?”
“Well, well, that doesn’t come into it for the
moment. We want your opinion. Do you think we
should go on with the search for the Levite’s Trumpet
—and with some hope of finding that Trumpet ?”
“But I know nothing of the documentary evidence
on which you began the search.”
“You heard an outline of the document’s story.
We didn’t keep anything back.”
“Is it a question of money, then ?”
“No, we’re well enough supplied with Institute
funds for two more years’ digging in the Near East
—detail of locality to suit ourselves.”
THE LOST TRimPET
193
“In that case, I think I should continue the search
for at least another week.”
“Why ?” Marrot halted and shot this at me
aggressively.
I had worked out the matter from a new angle.
“Because, without some pressing certainty that there
was the hope of a genuine find, I cannot conceive
that Mr. Huebsch would have gone to the trouble
to salt the ground so religiously for our edification.”
“That’s precisely the point.” Marrot looked at
his colleague acidly. “One salt is permissible. Two
suggest things I won’t speak about.”
I was suddenly aware of an unusual tension
between the two. Huebsch had resumed his smoking,
but now, slowly revolving Marrot’s remark in his
mind, he again delivered the pipe-stem from bondage
betwixt his great, even teeth.
“You think, in fact, that if we found the Lost
Trumpet itself, it might prove to be another salt ?”
“You have said it, anyway.”
“Well, well. And how’d you take it if I told you
that I’d never before set eyes on that second Levite’s
brooch—nor do I believe anyone else had since its
original owner dropped it ?”
Eh ? Marrot had halted dead in his pacing.
I myself, almost as electrified, stared at the Shophet
bull-god. He stood up, and pulled on his jacket.
“Come over to my tent, the two of you, and look
at the thing and compare it with the one I dropped
in the excavations yesterday. You’ll see No. 2 has
never been cleaned and re-muddied. . . . Oh, we’re
X
N
194
THE LOST TRUMPET
on the track of the Levite all right, all right. The
thing knocked me all sideways myself; and I had to
save up the joke of it. Sorry, Marrot.”
“So you damn well ought to be.” But Marrot’s
eyes were blazing. “The Trumpet’s hereabout with¬
out a doubt.”
“Might be, might be. Meanwhile, when you’ve
had a look at the brooch, I guess we’ll want to clean
up. We’re going over to the house of the Colonel’s
Princess for tea, remember.”
CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH
‘ “What would each of us do—if we found the Lost
Trumpet and it was as powerful as in the days of
Joshua ?”J
Subchapter i
I BATHED inadequately in my tent and changed
into clean drill and came out into the waning
heat and sunshine of the afternoon and waited in
readiness for Huebsch and Marrot. Below me the
torn and gutted lands of our search; wider in
encirclement of our camp the semi-desert lands that
so grew on one’s consciousness in a little space of
time; the labourers sprawling by their fire, awaiting
the cooking of their evening meal; in the shade of
the cook-tent Esdras Quaritch, recumbent, chin in
hand, staring blankly desertwards . . .
I had one of those slow impulses that have
governed my life. I went down to him and he turned
his head and looked up.
“Hello, sir. Thought you’d disowned me after
finding my philosophy so unpalatable.”
“Unpalatable ? But I made no attempt to swallow
it. . . . You remember the lady who was with me
when we met in the Wagh el Berka ?”
195
196 THE LOST TRUMPET
“Rose-flushed and warm from heaven’s own
heart she came.”
“I beg your pardon ?”
“A quotation from Swinburne—or what
Swinburne would have written had he known her.
... Of course I remember her. Colonel Saloney.
You knocked me down because of her. In love
with her, sir ?”
“I am sorry I—knocked you down.”
“I am sorry you thought I was knock-down¬
worthy.”
“The lady was the Princess Pelagueya Bourrin.
She lives at that house over there, and has invited
Mr. Huebsch, Mr. Marrot and myself to drink tea
with her. I think you would like to come also.”
The boy shook his head. “After hearing my
opinion of women’s function ? Too indiscreet, sir.
My presence would profane any sacred love. . . .
Besides, you told me to come out and soak my soul
in the silences of the desert—not in the weak tea of
a bun-fight.”
“I believe even St. Simeon Stylites was wont to
find the foot of his pillar surrounded with oflerings
of farm produce.”
There are many types of laughter. The young
Englishman’s might have been a peal from the bell
of Pelagueya’s own mirth : the bell a little cracked.
He jumped to his feet.
“So he did. And, my God, I’ll bet he used to nip
down to the pile often enough in the small hours !
. . . Right, I’ll come. Thanks awfully. . . . But
THE LOST TRUMPET 197
I’ve no small talk, you know, or any ability to conceal
boredom when I develop it.”
“I have no doubt the Princess will have cordial
interest for both the fashion in which you wipe your
boots on the tablecloth and the view of your back
teeth when you yawn.”
“Good bowling for a Russian, sir ! Wait for me a
minute, then.”
He disappeared into the labourers’ marquee,
dragged out his rucksack, shook out from it a
heterogeneous pile, and made rapid selections there¬
from. Then, incontinently, he began to undress in
the open air.
“Guard my belongings from the proletariat, will
you ?”
In a moment he was mother-naked in the sunshine,
brown and golden and gleaming, narrow-hipped,
Greek, and indeed beautiful. Kalaun and his col¬
leagues turned shamed, grave faces from the sight,
with that horror of a nude body in an adolescent which
is so typically Eastern, and a product of the Eastern
religions. The boy flung back his hair and grinned
down at them sidelong.
“Hell, what minds !”
With that he went racing across the field, under
the amazed glare of Georgios, reached the canal-
bank, and vanished from our view. Presently there
arose distant sounds suggesting one of the larger
ungulates in a mud-wallow. Esdras Quaritch was
cleansing from himself the dust of travel and travail.
“Ready, Colonel ?”
I98 THE LOST TRUMPET
The Jew and the communist Gentile, both in very
white and seemly ducks, Huebsch more Shophet-
like than ever, were descending the incline. I
indicated the pile of belongings at my feet.
I am taking him with me. He may amuse a
little.,,
“And where is he now ?”
“Denuding himself of half the soil of Egypt, by
the sounds,” and I pointed towards the canal above
which was uprising the head of Quaritch.
In a moment it was more than head. He trotted
across to where we stood, snatched up a crumpled
towel, and was about to begin a vigorous berubbing
of himself when he caught Huebsch’s eye.
Thereat was magical transformation. He blushed,
angrily, hotly, almost from head to heel. Bending
down, he picked up various articles of attire and,
with a mutter, and his face downcast, retreated into
the labourers’ marquee.
“Well, well,” commented Huebsch, “and what’s
the boy all reddened up for ?”
“Maybe he was a sacrifice in a former incarnation,”
suggested Marrot, flippantly, “and your likeness to
Baal is too much for him in this.”
The marquee flap shot open. Esdras Quaritch,
fully dressed in the not uncomely flannels, was
beside us, knotting a colourful flare of tie. The great
Jew considered him amiably, immensely.
“Guess you’re the nearest thing to perpetual
motion that’s struck these parts so far.”
An unpleasant sneer—a look of hate, almost, I
THE LOST TRUMPET
x99
thought it—came on the boy’s face. He droned
through his nose in mimicry.
“Guy, you’ve said it.” He turned his back on him.
“You can now lead me to the baked meats, sir.”
Subchapter ii
“They are on the roof, khawaga,” said Pelagueya’s
butler, Ibrahim, as he admitted us.
“Then we will follow them there,” I said, and
led the way up the stone staircase, and so out on
the broad roof, parapeted, where once Gault and
Pelagueya 
Gault and Pelagueya—memory unescapable. Even
though the years had trodden over it, and the thing
was long past, and there was Pelagueya herself,
garbed in green from head to heel, with her hair a
metallic net glittering in the sun, and, as always,
with power to unfocus my eyes for a little. We
held hands, smiling at each other a little too long,
and I looked for that little hollow in her throat and
found it again with my refocused eyes, and she put
her hand up to it, still smiling. . . . Then we
remembered, and she was smiling, not mistily at all,
but very cheerfully and competently.
“Welcome, messieurs,” to Huebsch and Marrot.
And then with some doubt to Quaritch: “And
you, m’sieu’.”
“You have met Mr. Quaritch before, you will
remember,” I said. “And he gave us a copy of one
of his books to read,”
200
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Which neither of you did,” murmured the boy.
“Why, neither we did.” Pelagueya nodded to
him apologetically. “We were awfully tired of being
shocked that day.”
He was of her own mental period, I thought, with
a faint twinge of envy. “Some other time, perhaps ?”
Love to. Aslaug, this is Mr. Huebsch and Mr.
Marrot. They are Colonel Saloney’s employers.
And this is Mr. Quaritch, who wrote that nice novel
I loaned to you. Come and have tea. Anton, will
you shout down the staircase for the kettle and
muffins ?”
By the time I had withdrawn my head from
directing the ascent of Pelagueya’s butler, the rest
of the company was at the other end of the roof,
admiring Pelagueya’s view. At least, it was for that
reason she had led them there. But they had fallen
to three groupings when I crossed to them, thread¬
ing a sprawling invitation of bright-cushioned
basket-chairs. Marrot was standing looking back
towards the camp; he had forgotten he had come
to drink tea and was obviously considering the lie
of the excavations afresh from this high elevation.
Huebsch by the side of Pelagueya was turning his
slow, immense interest upon the desert-view to
which she was directing attention with that slim,
long hand of hers from which the trailing sleeves of
green fell away so reluctantly. Quaritch, white,
with kindled eyes and hands clasped behind his
head, was leaning against the parapet staring at
Aslaug Simonssen, a blonde, puzzled sagawoman.
THE LOST TRUMPET
201
“You are Esdras Quaritch ?”
“Why, yes.”
She was flushing with slow indignation, with shame.
“I—I don’t know how to talk to you. Or how it is
you aren’t in prison. That book of yours—I tried
to read it ”
His stare did not relax. “You didn’t like it ?”
“I thought—oh, one can’t talk about it. It’s the
foulest thing I have ever read. Why do you write
that kind of stuff?”
The boy stared at her, fascinated. It seemed to me
he spoke absent-mindedly. “Because it’s the truth.”
“Oh ! And those horrible pictures. . . . And
that couldn’t be true—that girl who died in hospital
after that shocking time ”
“She was my own mistress.”
But I was beside them then—Aslaug Simonssen,
horrified, the large bonde deer in an outworn
simile, Esdras Quaritch the snake. I said, with
unnecessary loudness : “Ibrahim and the muffins,
Princess.”
Pelagueya turned round then. “Thank you,
Anton. You will make a good muffin-man when
you finish working for Mr. Huebsch. ... Do sit
down, all of you. Aslaug will pour it out.”
She did, Huebsch and Marrot engaging her in
small talk, the boy still staring at her unbelievingly.
Pelagueya put up her hand and pulled me into the
chair beside her.
“Sit down, Anton. And please don’t look at me
as if I were a fragile statuette.”
202
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Statue you might be, but never in the diminu¬
tive.”
“Am I so gargantuan, then ?”
Quaritch had sat beside us. He turned round
eagerly, apparently having overheard the passage
between us.
“Colonel Saloney’s right, Princess. You’ve got a
good skeleton.”
Pelagueya stared at him a moment, brows upraised.
For answer the boy surveyed her from head to foot,
consideringly. Shook his head.
“Aphrodite mostly, of course. But too good
skeletal structure for that. Puzzle a sculptor a bit
if you were stripped. The Hera or Diana touch—I’m
not sure which.”
Pelagueya’s eyes twinkled. She made him a mock
curtsey from the depths of her chair.
“If ever I’m reduced to selling my skeleton, Mr.
Quaritch ”
He coloured furiously, hurtly. “I was serious.”
So he had been. Pelagueya’s mockery lingered
doubtfully about her lips. I said :
* Our young friend is a professional uncouth.
When he enters heaven he will doubtlessly poke
St. Peter in the ribs and tell him he keeps marvel¬
lously well-fleshed for an old man.”
“Whereas Anton will never enter the gates at all,
Mr. Quaritch. He will linger there with Peter,
politely hazarding the opinion that no great profit
would come from entering heaven and that, on the
whole, he had best search out Nirvana in order that
THE LOST TRUMPET
203
he may rest his poor, tired feet and have a long,
long sleep.”
All this she delivered sitting back in the depths
of her chair, which had a red cushion to sit upon,
but a green one at her shoulders—a green, I remem¬
ber, that blended with the tint of her dress. In such
wise was this that neck and head rose from and amid
a sheathing of soft green, and again there fascinated
me that likeness of hers to some strange hybrid
bloom of fantasy and Shiraz—a rose out of Ferdusi,
perhaps. She had looked at neither of us, speaking,
but, finishing, her eyes peeped for a moment at me.
I said :
“It is ill to stab an ally.”
“But, Anton dear, you’re such an uncertain
one. Never more than the bearer of an entente
cordiale.”
Quaritch emptied his cup. “Then—though I
hadn’t thought it—your Colonel Saloney must be a
fool. Princess.”
Amazingly, Pelagueya flushed—that flush I knew
so well, the flush of barbaric anger. “With a tithe of
his folly, Mr. Quaritch, you might cease to crawl in
your gutters and stand up as a man.”
My clumsily-held cup caused considerable startle-
ment as it hit the stone floor that was the castle roof
and sprayed a rain of brittle pottery fragments about
my feet. Fortunately, it had been empty. And the
Gault millions would purchase many more. . . .
As I bent to brush away the fragments Pelagueya’s
head came down a moment close to mine.
204
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Oh, my dear, do I require as much tactful handling
as all that ? Kick my ankle next time !”
Marrot had jumped like a criminal in the chair of
humane America as the volts of American justice
are propelled through the criminal body. He had
ejaculated, “Hell!” with much sincerity and then
had sought a cake from a stand in front of him. The
delicate chalice of conversation upheld between the
two others—I had overheard its mild grenadine
trickle as comment on the changelessness of Egyptian
weather—had fallen and smashed in sympathy with
my cup. So Pelagueya observed.
“Food—Mr. Marrot ? Mr. Huebsch ? I have lots
more of it, you know. How are the excavations ?
Have you unearthed anything yet ?”
Huebsch consumed a cream-lathered sweetmeat
with an immense skill that caught my respect. “One
or two discoveries, Princess. Some fake and one, we
believe, more or less authentic.’'
“What is the authentic discovery ?”
“I’ve brought it here to show you.”
It was the second of the Levite brooches, cleansed
in acid now. Laid across Pelagueya’s palm it glinted
dully—a dark, unfriendly ornament of dark,
unfriendly times. She turned it over and looked at
the block of strange, un-Arab, un-Egyptian char¬
acters graved on the base of the upper triangle.
“Some writing here. Do you know what it
means ?”
Marrot interpreted. “ ‘Jerusalem.’ ”
Huebsch amplified : “Most of such brooches had
THE LOST TRUMPET
205
that on them. Not that the ‘Jerusalem’ was a plain
reference to the city among the hills. It was more,
if you get me, an imaginary city ”
“It was, in fact, Blake’s city,” I said.
“Blake’s ?” The great Jew had lived unacquainted
with the English mystic. Pelagueya also cocked her
head questioningly. I waved my hand to the three
remaining guests.
“The Anglo-Saxons know the verse. They will
recite you it.”
Marrot shrugged away from the opportunity with
an acid smile. The novelist, staring at Aslaug raptly,
nodded to her.
“You do it.”
She flushed, and, unexpectedly, complied. She
was standing at the moment, tall and straight against
the sunset colours of the Egyptian sky. She put
her hands behind her back, like a school-child, and
recited with a school-child’s sing-song gravity :
“ ‘I shall not cease from mortal strife.
Nor shall the sword sleep in my hand
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England’s green and pleasant land ’
“It’s a hymn,” she finished.
Pelagueya’s lips twitched a little. So did Marrot’s.
But Huebsch remained as grave, immense, and
ovoidly benevolent as ever. “Well, well, and a very
pleasant one, I guess. Miss Simonssen. Thank you.
Yes, so it would have been something like the
Jerusalem of this Englishman they meant when they
graved those letters twenty-five hundred years ago.”
206
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Twenty-five hundred years ago!” Pelagueya
turned the brooch over on her white palm, staring
at its dark, earth-worn surface. “And all that time
men have been dreaming of the same Jerusalem.
And only a dream still.” She shook herself and
laughed and handed it back to Huebsch. “And
who had left this behind ? And when do you expect
to come upon the rest of the treasure ?”
“Treasure ?” Aslaug Simonssen, pouring tea,
regarded the Jew with polite interest: “Are you
searching for treasure, Mr. Huebsch ?”
He nodded. “Though not pieces of eight. You
see, all the business began ”
Marrot groaned, turning with crooked lips to
interrupt. But that proved unnecessary. We had
sat there late at this tea-drinking. The land below us
lay in still melancholy with the sun poised at the edge
of the world. That to the west. But now from the
east came that which smote all of us to silence.
It was a wailing like to that of a lost cat mourn¬
ing its dead in a backyard of hell. Across a pain-
wracked kaleidoscope of squawk it rose as the damned,
opening their windows, hurled boots and earthen¬
ware vessels at the vocal ghost. It grew fainter and
fainter ; choked abruptly to silence. The cat had been
caught and strangled with a barb-wire garotte 
In fact, Georgios, remote in his nullah, had
attempted and ceased from an air on his silver bugle.
Pelagueya, withdrawing finger-tips from her ears,
led the laughter.
“But, poor man, doesn’t he realize how horrible it is?”
THE LOST TRUMPET
207
Huebsch, immense, boomed the answer : “Guess
he hasn’t the faintest, Princess. Else he’d stop it.
Doesn’t strike me as a naturally cruel boy.”
“Sh!” said Aslaug Simonssen. “Is that him
again ?”
“Oh, Aslaug !”
Perhaps her ears were the slowest of any of us.
Quaritch at the first sound made an angry gesture for
silence, and crept to his feet and the edge of the
roof-parapet, like a cat, without noise, and stood there,
peering down. But presently the strain of his atti¬
tude relaxed. He was merely listening.
Huebsch cupped his great ovoid head in his hands
and stared at the floor.
Marrot half-wheeled round in his chair, and so, in
that twisted position, sat with his head flung back.
Aslaug Simonssen, puzzle 1, wondering, turned her
face from one to the other of us, an uncomprehending
Valkyr to whom at length the magic sounds gave
pause, so that she also stood rigid.
Pelagueya sat white-faced, her hands clasped about
her knees.
All this I noted, and then ceased to note as the
singing of the nightingales issued from the cypress
grove remote at the end of the garden and flowed
outward and upward to us, and changed from dun
red to a mistiness of purple, and was colour and line,
singing and music and poetry in one synthesis. It
swept up through the silence like the chorusing
from a night-time cave on the slopes of Olympus
when gods and men were young, and the world
208
THE LOST TRUMPET
pristine, and there was wonder and wild delight,
ceaseless and unsatiated, in that early earth. Youth,
it sang, and desire undefiled, consummated and
never-wearying, fairy and no illusion. ... So the
singing of Gault’s nightingales came and held us
and then stopped in perhaps less than a minute;
and when we shook ourselves awake we saw that the
night also had crossed the deserts to listen to that
singing.
In its coming we saw a figure trudging campwards
from the direction of the outlands. Pelagueya broke
the silence, indicating him.
“Poor Georgios !”
She laughed, and then, suddenly and shockingly,
was weeping.
Subchapter Hi
“Princess !”
Pelagueya shook off my hand, laughed again,
stood up.
“I’m all right.” She dabbed at her eyes with a
handkerchief. She walked to the edge of the parapet
and leant her arms on it, not looking at us. “Sorry,
all of you. It is long since I heard a nightingale.”
Huebsch, half in dusk, creaked in his basket-chair.
“Think I know what you feel, anyway. Princess. I
was mighty near to weeping myself.”
Quaritch turned back from where he stood, so
that he fronted Pelagueya. “Rot! It wasn’t the
nightingale only. It was because she saw the Greek
THE LOST TRUMPET
209
and thought of the contrast between his music and
those damned fowls’ as hysterically ludicrous. . . .
Wasn’t it ?”
“Of course. Or between what the nightingales
sang and what you sing in your books.”
I could not see his face, but I knew that he blushed
then, furiously, boyishly. “Do you think I wouldn’t
follow the first—the nightingale’s—if I could ?”
Pelagueya left her stance and strolled back towards
the chair beside me. “Both you and Georgios will
have to wait for the millennium—or the Lost Trumpet,
Mr. Huebsch ? . . . Anton, stop dreaming I”
I looked up at her. “I was dreaming,” I confessed.
“What would each of us do—if we found the Lost
Trumpet and it was as powerful as in the days of
Joshua ?”
“That will make a very pretty after-tea game.” She
sank down in the chair beside me. I held a match
for the cigarette she put between her lips. “You
first, please, Mr. Huebsch. What would you do if
you found the Lost Trumpet and a blast of it could
flatten out your enemies ?”
Like frogs under a road-roller,” supplemented
Marrot, helpfully.
The great Jew entered into the game. He flung
back his head, consideringly. “Well, I guess I’d do
one or two things. I’d clear the Arabs out of
Palestine and establish a real Jewish State. I’d bring
power from the mountains and the Dead Sea and
corn back into the lowlands. ... Yes, that’d be my
fairy-story. Princess. I’d build Jerusalem.”
o
210
THE LOST TRUMPET
“And you, Mr. Marrot ?”
“I’d pull it down again. Blast the militarists and
financiers from the face of the earth. End classes and
masses and all their dirty squabblings for ever. I’d
establish the World-State. And in the process pay
back a few scores for those starved East Anglian
ancestors of mine.”
Pelagueya was remorseless : “And Aslaug ?”
“Really, I don’t know. . . . Well, if it was mine
I’d—I’d make it help me find my brother’s murderer
and have her punished.”
Pelagueya quivered a little by my side. It was
with suppressed mirth. She said, in a strangled
voice : “And you, Anton ?”
For some reason the atmosphere of our idle tea-
table talk had acquired an unwarranted intensity. I
felt more than a reluctance to speak : it was a posi¬
tive distaste. “There is still Mr. Quaritch.”
“So there is. What would you do, Mr. Novel¬
ist ?”
“Really, shock you awfully. I’m afraid, Princess.
Like Marrot, I’d burst your damn civilization to
fragments. But not to bring in the soviets. To bring
instead the days of primitive anarchy, when each man
stood for himself and took what he wanted of women
and wine and life and lust, and there were weaklings
in neither top-hats nor top-boots. I’d restore the
world of 25,000 b.c.”
“You’d find it difficult to write your dirty books
then,” interpolated Marrot, acidly.
“In your soviet state I’d write nothing else.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
211
Huebsch boomed out into the midst of this puppy-
snarling, soothingly.
“Well, well, but what about you, Colonel ?”
“Me ? But nothing. I should not use it.”
“Eh ?”
“I should not blow the Lost Trumpet, having no
particular hate or love or frenzy to urge upon the
world. I should merely pawn it in Cairo, and build
a house in that field of Hanna’s that we are now
disturbing, and have tea every afternoon with the
Princess.”
“Good for you, Colonel.”
Pelagueya’s cigarette sailed through the darkness
and fell like a little star over the roof-parapet.
“Bad for him, Mr. Huebsch ! Tea every after¬
noon ”
She was quite speechless for a moment. So I
proffered her another cigarette. “And what would
be your play ?” I asked.
She said in that clear voice of hers, but with the
little stammer in it that comes if she is angered or
excited :
“I would blow it. I’d clear your beastly com¬
munist friends out of Russia—make it a clean and
lovely country again, with order and dignity, pride
and blood.”
Aslaug Simonssen spoke puzzledly. “But, Princess,
you said that night in Cairo that the Bolsheviks
weren’t beasts.”
“Oh, Aslaug ! . . . Merely bores—the most stu¬
pendous moral bores the world has ever
seen.
212
THE LOST TRUMPET
Except that he hasn’t got enough energy to attempt
boring, Colonel Saloney’s a good specimen.”
That, anyway, sir,” remarked young Quaritch
to me, casually and clearly, “is a damned lie.”
I think that Pelagueya, unused to such frontal
attacks from a mere man, was more astonished than
ever before in her life. Huebsch again saved the
situation with his tolerant boom.
“Well, well, Princess. Perhaps it’s as well none
of us have the Lost Trumpet to play about with,
and all the walls that hem us in are still standing.”
“Especially,” I thought aloud, “as not one of us
was sure that he meant what he said.”
“How’s that ?” The boy had taken me under his
protection. I found the others listening with unex¬
pected attention.
“Mr. Huebsch and his Jerusalem—more or less
he believes that that is what he would do. But he
would pause in indecision with the Trumpet in his
hand. So would all of us before we might blow the
Trumpet with the single-mindedness and faith of
Joshua. Saying : T, Anton Saloney, would do thus
and this,’ I lie—or at least may be wildly mistaken.
For, as none of you have ever known your real
selves, I have never known Anton Saloney. He is
hid behind walls of custom and use and reserve and
frustration that tower to heaven.”
“Dr. Adler, sir ?”
I think I was a little nettled at that, but I had
the grace to laugh. Pelagueya touched my knee,
and spoke idle words.
THE LOST TRUMPET 213
“Perhaps it is these very walls that the Trumpet
would overthrow! . . . People, it’s too late to go
back to your camp. You must stay to dinner, all
three of you. Like to come down and see mv
garden ?”
Subchapter iv
We had lost the others—Marrot and Huebsch
among the moonlight of the cypresses, intent on
both seeing and hearing a nightingale; Aslaug and
Quaritch abandoned in a ma2e and some argument
by the far desert hedgings. Now, under the lee of
Gault’s house, Pelagueya and I stood in the midst of
the rose garden.
Revived by the night, they poured forth their
smell. Like the darkness, it was a soft and kindly
smell. Pelagueya bent her head towards a dim
cluster, and closed her eyes, and felt against her cheek
the soft, shy curl of petals.
“Smell, Anton.”
The scent came up into our faces, our nostrils.
Pelagueya stood utterly quiet. Then as she stood
erect one of the roses broke and showered her with
petals. I could see them upon her, her face and neck,
ghostly sprinklings. She gave a little wriggle and
a strange, sweet laugh.
“Affectionate thing.”
“What is ?” I asked.
One of the rose petals had slipped into the bosom
of her dress 
214
THE LOST TRUMPET
We stood and listened in the silver fall of moon¬
light. Nothing to hear. The rose-scent rippled
over us in little wavelets. Pelagueya was very near.
That rose-petal 
Nights and days of weariness ; year on long drag¬
ging year, with ways and faces and bodies over¬
familiar, and the chirp of the grasshopper deafening
in the ears of both of us. I knew the tale, I knew the
tale! This was a moment’s madness, dead and
dreadful and a weary thing already in the womb of
to-morrow. Moonlight and a rose-leaf’s wander¬
ings—
I put Pelagueya away from me then. She laughed,
sobbingly. And then, as we stared at each other
mutely the banal clangour of the dinner-bell came
echoing down the garden.
Subchapter v
We went back to the camp across a stillness of
white, moonlighted lands. Huebsch and Marrot
walked in advance. Quaritch beside me, I remember,
had a face streaked and bedaubed with moonlight
shadow like a pen and ink sketch. It was that kind
of moonlight, caricaturing the earth and all things
that on it moved. Quaritch’s voice, snapping the
silence, startled me out of a dreary pondering. Which
the reality—the moonlighted world or the sun-
lighted ?
“That girl back there, sir—Aslaug Simonssen.
Why hasn’t somebody seduced her before this ?”
THE LOST TRUMPET 215
I had grown accustomed to him. I lighted my pipe.
“Perhaps she has no fondness for being seduced.”
The boy kicked at a stone. ‘Td leave Abu Zabal
to-morrow if it wasn’t that she’s here.”
“Why should that detain you ?” An obvious
answer came from his silence. I stopped. “Not ?”
“Not that I’ve fallen in love ? Nothing so com¬
plicated.” He gave his young satyr’s laugh. “My
intentions are much simpler and my plans don’t
envisage either a marriage service or a maintenance
allowance. . . . Look here, sir, keep your damned
hands off me !”
I dropped him to the ground. He got up and
dusted himself. Huebsch and Marrot were out of
sight, hearing nothing of this passage. The boy’s
hand was in the pocket of his jacket and that jacket
bulged forward in my direction.
“I wouldn’t do that again. Colonel Saloney. The
Wagh el Berka has taught me a trick worth two of
that. As for Aslaug Simonssen, she’ll come to me
to-morrow if I so much as snap my fingers.”
I dusted my hands. “She will not come to you
twice,” I promised. “Or at least on the second
occasion it will be merely in order to view your
corpse.”
“Look here, sir. You’re honest enough in most
things. Too honest. That’s why I like you. ... If
I want this girl—it’s my look-out. If she wants me
—it’s hers. D’you mean you’d try to prevent our
coming together because I’ve no intention of marry¬
ing her ?”
2l6
THE LOST TRUMPET
“I mean to say that I’ll prevent it for the simple
reason that you have no love for her. Marriage ? You
might live with her in a desert hut and father four¬
teen children and the two of you refuse all marriage
sanctions in the world—and it would be nothing to
me. This is a different matter.”
He went forward again. Perforce I went with him.
When next he spoke it was in the tone of a casual
acquaintance.
“What is she in Egypt for ?”
“Her brother was murdered at Rashida—by his
mistress, she suspects. She has come here to hound
on the gendarmes in search for the woman.”
“What was her name ?”
“The woman’s ? Some Egyptian name. She was
blind.”
“Blind ?” He stopped and stared at me. I halted,
impatiently.
“Yes, blind. Some Egyptian prostitute. ... I
remember the name Miss Simonssen told me. Huth
Rizq.”
“Huth Rizq ? Thought so. I know her.”
CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH
‘He had turned aside into the entrance of the Wagh
el Berka. I caught his arm. “What, here ?” ’
Subchapter i
HE would tell me nothing more. We came to
the camp then and he went to his place in the
labourers marquee. I, in my tent, tossed and turned
and found little sleep for many hours. Not that the
matters of either Huth Rizq s whereabouts or Aslaug
Simonssen s danger so vexed me. I was remember-
ing instead that scene in the rose-garden with
Pelagueya.
Getting up, some long time after midnight, I
saw a light burning high up there in Gault’s castle.
Pelagueya—wakeful like myself?
Or Aslaug Simonssen ? But that was unbelievable.
Pelagueya it must be. Why not then do the obvious
and shining thing ? Dress and go out across the
desert half-mile to her house and fling sand up against
her window and bring her down to me ? She would
stand a little back, her lips parted with surprise and
the haste of descent, and then laughter would come
in her eyes and her hands in mine would give them a
little shake, and she would cry: “Oh, Anton!”
and turn back with her hand in mine, into the indigo
2 I 8
THE LOST TRUMPET
shadows, and so up those stairs to the roof and the
stars and her touch and the secret journeyings of that
rose-petal 
Somewhere, out in the wastes, a jackal was baying
and I listened to that baying and smiled. Jackal.
The Death of the old Egyptians. No lion or eagle
or wild and tremendous, dark and sombre beast,
did they envisage it. Only carrion and a carrion-
grubber. So this desire of mine, as Quaritch’s. The
mean whining of carrion-starved animals under the
jeering indifference of the stars . . .
Quaritch. I switched my mind to that young
satyr face and the tale from its lips of knowing Huth
Rizq. What was to be done in the matter ? Tell
Aslaug Simonssen ? She would report the fact to
the Cairene police and have the woman arrested.
Provided Quaritch would reveal the refugee’s where¬
abouts.
Which, if I could prevent him, he would not do.
For that embodiment of heavy, unimaginative
girlhood had long ceased to rouse my sympathy.
How could it have aroused in Quaritch something
stronger ? She had better, and speedily, return to
her England or Scotland and there wed with some
bourgeois of her own type and class than stray in
Egyptian deserts in search of a clownish revenge
and in danger from such amoral possessive obses¬
sions as the young novelist’s 
I rose again, and searched for my pipe and matches,
and saw, looking out, a thing I did not expect. Some¬
one, clearly enough to be discerned, was approaching
THE LOST TRUMPET 219
the camp from the direction of Gault’s castle. He
came through the moonlight with a brisk enough
step, and I put my hand below my pillow and drew
out the revolver that lay there, standing and watch¬
ing him from the eminence of the tent. Then he
turned aside towards the labourers’ fire, and poked
that fire, and I saw his face.
It was Esdras Quaritch.
Sub chap ter ii
Huebsch called to me as I came from my tent
towards the breakfast table. He sat there himself,
not alone, but in the company of Quaritch. He said :
“You want to go up to Cairo to-day. Colonel ?”
I said that I had so far gone unaware of the want.
It was then that the boy looked up. He had been
drinking again, and was not yet sober. About him
was the sickly-sweet smell of arrack. He grinned
at me, heavy-eyed.
“Morning, sir. All right ?” He turned to
Huebsch. He sneered unpleasantly. “My God, the
Israelite brain ! How odd of God to choose the
Jews! Haven’t I explained that as yet Colonel
Saloney knows nothing of the business—except that
last night he told me Aslaug Simonssen was search¬
ing for Huth Rizq ? Now, I know Huth. Rather !
So after you two and the Colonel were in bed I went
back to that house that looks like a pepper-pot gone
wrong, and woke up the Simonssen girl, and made
a little bargain with her. . . . Blushing, sir ? Tut,
220
THE LOST TRUMPET
tut! . . . Well, by the terms of my agreement with
Miss Simonssen, I’m going in to Cairo to fetch Huth
Rizq down here. Huth’ll come, guilty or not ”
He would apparently have rambled on at length,
his over-bright, young, malignant eyes on the Jew.
But the latter interrupted him, slowly but decisively.
“And what has all this to do with Colonel Saloney ?”
“Oh, he’s her local guardian—Miss Simonssen’s,
I mean. And she insists the Colonel must accompany
me on this expedition. Believe she thinks I might
otherwise brutally maltreat Huth and drag her out
here tied to the auto axle. . . . Coming, sir ?”
I disregarded him and addressed my employer.
“If it is convenient for you, Mr. Huebsch, I would
like to resign my work here and leave to-day.”
He paused in the act of decapitating an egg, large
and smooth and oddly like his head. Marrot came
out from his tent and sat down, and poured himself
a cup of coffee. Huebsch was considering me with
immense intentness.
“Say, that’s a bit unpremeditated, isn’t it ? Don’t
we pay you enough money ?”
“It is not that,” I said. “Nor any question of the
work or the personality of either yourself or Mr.
Marrot. I like both of you—very much. It is a
private matter ”
Marrot handed me a cup of coffee. “In fact, it’s
the matter of the Russian Princess. Quite right to
go if you want to, Saloney. And why the devil
should you provide us with reasons ? Are you a
damned helot ?”
221
the lost trumpet
“Well, well. Colonel, we won’t keep you against
your will. But I thought you and the Princess
Bourrin were by way of being friends ?”
.“I I will go and pack my luggage now,” I
said. “Perhaps I can take it into Cairo in the pro¬
vision tender ?”
Huebsch had resumed in his egg. He did not look
up. “Sure,” he remarked.
So that, I reflected, turning away and disregarding
again the inane grin of the boy, was that. And I
felt a little disappointed. Their indifference made me
realize how little my going mattered—so far as
archaeological research went. Kalaun could take
my place at the head of the third squad and do my
work with enough competence. So, like myself,
my employers realized.
Now, standing in my tent, I stared with no
enthusiasm at my scattered belongings. I felt in no
mood at all for the agile manoeuvrings and hot-faced
bouncings of packing an inadequate suit-case over-
adequately. But there was now no other course.
Without pleasure I set to work.
Huebsch’s voice made me wheel round. “You
didn’t breakfast, Colonel, so I’m telling Georgios to
bring you some up here. And here is your salary
up to the end of the contract.”
I protested. “But that is too generous. I shall
require payment only for the period in which I
have been employed.”
“Well, well. Colonel, it’s your legal right. You’ll
have to take it.” He turned away heavily, and then.
222
THE LOST TRUMPET
a bull-god of the Semites, slowly levered himself
round again. “Of course you understand that Marrot
and I will sue you ?”
“Eh ?” I had not understood that at all.
“Why, sure. You’ve broken your contract and
landed us in a fix, and we’ve no other course. Well,
bye-bye, Colonel.”
I shrugged aside his proffered hand and kicked
my suit-case under the string-bed. I looked at him.
Something rippled about the lines of his massive
lips. I watched it, fascinated, comber to cheek and
chin. His jaw fell, his head jerked back. He laughed,
boomingly, like the salute of an ancient cannon.
There was nothing for me but to join in the laugh,
so thunderous and naive and pleased it was.
“Say, think we’re going to have you leave us
because you got out of bed grumpy this morning ?”
He shook the egg-shaped head in immense negation.
Then peered at me, a fatherly Baal. The camp was
already astir, Marrot striding down towards the
new excavations, Georgios singing at his work—an
improper song in the Chian dialect. From the west
there drifted a ghostly thing, extinguished in a
moment, the damp smell of the morning crops.
. . . It had grown to be home, this camp, I under¬
stood without amazement. Gault’s crouched there
in the sunrise. I should hate to leave before the
search was over. . . . Huebsch talking to me,
slowly and justly.
“. . . that talk of yours last night—never having
known the real Saloney. Well, well, I guess we’re
the lost TRUMPET 223
all like that, and it frets us at times, and we want to
pack and clear out and go blundering off somewhere
else. D’you know. I’ve felt like that in some of the
times that have been the best in my life—in that
Jericho discovery, f’r instance. And what more than
that could an archaeologist want ? . . . And it
seemed to me it was nothing at all and I’d never any
real interest in it. . . . Or Marrot either—Marrot,
the best man out East. But what else can we do
except forget and get down to the work in
hand ?
“Nothing else,” I assented. “Yours is the voice
of sanity, Mr. Huebsch. I think I wanted to act the
deserter. But there is no desertion from that unease.
I will resume with my gang.”
“Well say, take a day off. We’ll want our
permits restamped at the Ministry in a day or so
anyway. Take them in and have them restamped
now. You needn’t associate with the writer boy
unless you want to.” He indicated the waiting
tender below and the slim, slouching figure of the
novelist. “Riding the rum-wagon pretty fast, I
guess. . . Wonder what Jew he once fell foul’ of
—and can’t forgive me because of it ?”
I also had wondered that. Huebsch waved his
hand, called a last injunction about the permits, and
strode away Marrotwards. I changed my jacket,
went to the store-tent, secured the permits, and
walked to where the tender stood. Kalaun was at
the wheel, Quaritch already aboard.
“Ready, khawaga ?”
224
THE LOST TRUMPET
Subchapter Hi
Quaritch, who had obviously been drinking yet
again, sprawled opposite me as the tender jerked and
galumphed towards Cairo under the unskilful urgings
of Kalaun. For myself, I looked back at the camp
with thoughts wry enough. It seemed a far cry to
the Saloney who had wakened that Sunday morning
in Heliopolis and listened to the chirping of the
immortal grasshopper. Of late it seemed to me I
had taken to acting like the veriest tyro on the verge
of life, instead of the footsore Third Brother with
the greater stretch of that dreary plain behind him.
But, come what might, I would not see Pelagueya
again . . .
I found the eyes of the drunken boy upon me,
over-bright, mocking, reckless. “So you’ve left the
service of Solomon’s by-blow ?”
He had amused me; he had faintly shocked me;
even, perhaps, he had stirred me to some liking of
him. Looking at him now, I found all three emotions
sunk in an acute distaste.
“I am still in Mr. Huebsch’s employment, if that
is what you refer to.”
“What else ? And still a Huebschian ? You can
have no very high regard for elementary hygiene.
... I say— Sorry, I’m going to be sick.”
He was, composedly. He crawled back to his
former position, regarding me as brightly as ever.
“Where were we ? Oh, yes. By the by, sir, this
may interest you before we begin our talk.”
THE LOST TRUMPET 225
He brought an automatic pistol out of his jacket-
pocket and swung it idly to and fro on his finger¬
tip, presently, I think, a little piqued at my indiffer¬
ence and casual question :
“And why should this interest me ?”
“Because we’ve still details of this jaunt to discuss ;
and you might lose your temper again.”
‘I have no details at all to discuss with you.”
“Not even as Aslaug’s guardian ?”
I said nothing. He moved into a more easy position.
Like to hear what we arranged when I paid her that
visit last night ?”
I stared backwards, paying him no heed. He
began to whistle, and then to hum in a voice that
had lilt and youthfulness enough, spite the fact
that it was a drunkard’s voice :
“ ‘Oh, what’s the greatest pleasure
The tongue o’ man can name ?
’Tis to kiss a bonny lassie V
When the kye come hame !’
“My job to-night, Colonel Saloney. What a treat
for the Abu Zabal cows ! No more good material
going waste. What are you going to do about it ?”
I looked at him then. “Last night I told you
what would happen if you interfered with Miss
Simonssen. And that can still happen.” Abruptly I
took his right arm and twisted it behind him. He
struggled ineffectually. The Browning automatic
lay in my hand. An instant more and it had sailed
over the tail-board of the tender.
p
zzG
THE LOST TRUMPET
I released the young Englishman. He righted
himself, philosophically.
“More disarmament, eh ? . . . I think I’m going
to be sick again. . . . Thanks awfully. . . . Right.”
He breathed heavily, resuming his place, his
young face with the rigidity and un-fleshlike
seeming of a death-mask. “Always affects me that
way, booze. No stomach for it. And no liking
either. Right. Where were we ? Oh, yes. Going
to help me carry out my part of the compact—so
that Aslaug may carry out hers ?”
“Help ?”
“Quite. Come and help me induce Huth Rizq to
make a trip to Abu Zabal.”
“And what will happen then ?”
“Eh ? I told you in the camp. Aslaug will put
Huth to the question and hand her over to the Gyppo
gendarmes if she’s guilty of Carl Simonssen’s murder
—which of course she isn’t. Huth a murderess !
Really a great joke—and she loves jokes.”
“Very well. I shall come with you when you go
to this woman.”
“Splendid. Exactly what I wanted.”
“And I’ll question her myself. If it is obvious she
had no connection with the murder, she stays where
she is.”
“And upset my opera-plot. The Rape of the Valkyr,
complete with Wagnerian music ? Really, sir, it
can’t be done. I’m going to have Aslaug Simonssen
whatever happens.”
I considered him with the troubled amazement
THE LOST TRUMPET
Zl-f
one might bestow on a goat in a garden struggling
through a canebrake to reach at a distant flower.
“And what is this concern to possess Miss
Simonssen ? If it is a matter of simply serving your
appetites you can serve them—to satiety—in the
place where the Princess and I originally found you.”
“Colonel, you’ll move me in a moment to making
obscene jests. And I’d hate to do that. . . . Oh,
dammit. I’m going to be sick again !”
Subchapter iv
He had turned aside into the entrance of the
Wagh el Berka. I caught his arm. “What, here ?”
“Eh ? Of course. She’s an inmate of one of the
licensed houses.”
We went forward into the dun, evil-smelling street
under the cold and cod-like scrutiny of the English
military policeman . . .
Our tender awaited us at Bulaq. We had left it
there with Kalaun, the while Quaritch disappeared
on some errand of his own and I went to the Ministry
of the Interior to have the camp permits restamped.
Coming out, I had found Quaritch awaiting me.
“Lunch, sir ?”
“I have no great fancy for lunching with you.”
“All the better reason for you lunching with me.”
He smiled, a young satyr whom I could not hate.
“You can consider it the bridal feast.”
“Or Belshazzar’s.”
“ ‘Staggered by this allusive and literary repartee,
228
THE LOST TRUMPET
our hero maintained a grave silence. . . Come
along. In here ? Right.”
We had sat at the same table in the restaurant
without exchanging a word, had paid our bills
separately, and had emerged into the siesta-daze of
the afternoon. The boy had glanced at me mockingly.
‘Tm for Huth Rizq.”
“So, unfortunately, am I.”
Through the squalor and sin of the Sharia
Muhammud Ali, down the Muski with its little
inlettings of dukanin where the stout and bearded
slept and exuded perspiration, and tame pigeons
pecked and fluttered over spilt rice far back in the
deeps of unsavoury shoplets. Drowsy drivers of
street-cars nodded at their posts as they swept past;
in crevices and corners, sprawling even athwart the
sidewalks, beggars lay sleeping. It was an hour
and a city that seemed to hold no purposeful beings
but ourselves.
Through the Khalig and so at last to the Street of
Shame whereto I had once led Pelagueya that she
might read it a mighty stanza in the saga of life. Its
cobbles rose moist and slippery under our feet, and
rounding into the main stretch of it we saw it dusty
and deserted, with a foul haze brooding over it like
a miasma. I noted that we passed the house from
which Pelagueya and I had been witnesses of the
novelist’s abrupt evacuation. Here, it appeared, his
acquaintance was wide and varied.
I felt distaste in my mouth again, realizing that
and keeping pace with his slouch-shouldered walk.
THE LOST TRUMPET
229
This foul thing beside me and his straying, undisci¬
plined lusts that he crowned as expeditions in search
of reality ! Now it became obvious to me that he was
of a type fairly common in Cairo, and indeed in all
the towns of the Mediterranean littoral; the sex-
perverted adolescent who makes of such streets a
shameful necessity and of that necessity a shameful
jesting 
He had swung aside again, into an open doorway,
up dank stairs such as once I had climbed to the
room of the tragic Connan in the Khalig.* The
sunshine vanished. It was so dark, coming from its
dazzle, that I had to claw at the wall, blinded and
cautious, as I followed Quaritch’s footsteps. I knew
something of the structure of such houses and how,
frequently enough, the stairs had the merest wisps
of wood or iron for banisters, and sometimes lacked
them altogether.
“Tired, sir ?” Quaritch’s voice, mocking, but,
for some reason, friendly still, was caught and echoed
and re-echoed throughout the sweating tomb of a
house. He was a flight above me and had evidently
halted. “Or turning back ?”
“Neither. Is that the door ?”
“What else ? Journeys end in clients meeting,
how much to-night, my pretty sweeting ? . . .
Mind that beam there.”
He raised his hand in the semi-darkness, found a
knocker and knocked thunderously.
*See “The Calends of Cairo.”
CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH
‘ “ Oh, yes ... I killed him that morning before I
left Rashida.” ’
Subchapter i
METALLIC wash of sound-waves ebbed out
IT\>. from the knocker, flowed across our heads, and
fell down the foul well of the stair in a faint, thun¬
dering splash. The boy knocked again, and at that
we heard a shuffling on the other side of the door.
Then, to the right of the knocker, appeared a parallelo¬
gram of light: daylight. A small panel had been
slipped aside.
A face appeared in it—a small, Mongolian face,
with brooding brows and pallid cheeks and a small,
button-like nose. A Japanese face; the face of a
Japanese prostitute, the original brown of the skin
hidden under layers of porcelain powder.
“Kota—it’s Esdras Quaritch.”
He spoke in French. The eyes stared slantingly,
unwinking, levered from one to the other of us by
slow movements of the head crowned with dead black
hair. Then the button-like nose slowly ascended the
face and sank into position again. She had smiled at
us.
Suddenly the panel became a portion of the door
again. The door itself opened.
230
THE LOST TRUMPET
23 I
I followed Quaritch. The Japanese, squat and yet
slim, with demure gestures and heavy-lidded eyes,
closed the door and surveyed us, smiling blandly.
And then I saw the room.
It was a large room—as they go in houses of that
shameful street, a room longer than broad, with two
beds and by each bed a heaped and untidy table, a
chair, a screen. Mid-way the room was another
table, round and ancient, with claw-like legs pro¬
truding. A bowl of dusty flowers stood in the midst
of it. Near the door, to the left, was a large teak
cupboard. To the right an oil-stove. A heaping of
unidentifiable litter under the window. Nothing else.
Quaritch was shaking the girl’s hand. “Where’s
Huth ?”
The Japanese waved us to the chairs. Quaritch
caught them up and set them side by side near the
table. I knit my brows to follow a peculiar French
that both whined and purred.
“She has gone out—down to the sick woman in
room eight. Yes. But she will soon be back. But
yes. You want her ? And the poor girl in the far
end house—She is better ?”
Something like this she said, indifferently,
friendlily, her lips hardly moving. The boy, sitting
down, glanced sideways at me. It struck me, absurdly,
that he was flushing. Also, the peculiar French seemed
to have enticed his own tongue from plain articu¬
lation. He muttered unintelligibly.
The Japanese sat down on the side of the nearer
bed. Me she treated to a drowsy appraisal.
232 the lost trumpet
“And you are a friend of Esdras ? Then you
will know what we call him and what he has
done.”
Quaritch made a sudden movement. “Taisez-
vous!”
Inviting some recital of the unclean, I could not
stay my own questioning.
“What has he done ?”
She raised tired brows. “Then you do not know ?
He brings doctors here to tend the sick. Yes. Down
in the lowest house he himself nursed a girl who had
fever-madness. She tried to have him poisoned, the
patronne of that house. . . . And other things. He
brings his pistol into the Street every evening and
clients have learnt it is unwise to cheat or play the
beast too greatly when he is within call. For nearly a
year now, until the last week, this has been so.”
She turned those never-awaking eyes on Quaritch.
“Where did you go ? We were frightened you had
been killed. But the English policeman was with
Huth, and he told her he saw you pass out of the
Street unharmed.”
But I was holding my head. Here was something
inexplicable. “And he has done these things for the
women of the Street—why ?”
“To get copy, of course.” But his face was
flushed and uneasy. The girl lighted another cig¬
arette.
Why ? There are fools like that. Always there
have been these fools, is it not so ? Our Lord Buddha
—he was such. And the Christ of the Copti. . . .
THE LOST TRUMPET
233
Yes. There have been many like Esdras. Even
clients. Me, I do not understand them.”
I took Quaritch by the shoulders and swung him
round to face me. This boy of the obscene speech
and intention a Buddha or a Christ! “Then even
when Pelagueya and I saw you thrown out of a
house ”
“I had been sick-nursing a prostitute. Exactly.
Peculiar hobby. And I’d got half-drunk to help me
carry the business through. You might as well know.
What now ?”
“I should like to shake hands with you,” I said.
“No you wouldn’t, sir.” He thrust his hands
deep in his pockets. “Mind if we speak English ?
Right. ...” He thrust his pale face close to mine.
“There’s still Aslaug. Do you think because of the
accident of Kota blabbing I’m going to change my
intentions about her ? Not though the heavens fall!
She’s my surety that I’m alive, the one taste of golden
life that I’m going to taste before I come back again
to this leprous charnel-house crawl. Listen : Two
years I’ve had of this : London, Alexandria, Cairo.
. . . Hellish, Dellish stuff, isn’t it ? The Prostitutes’
Friend. . . . The Little Brother of the Brothel.
. . . I’ve never known a harlot in my life in the
sense that your Biblical crony Huebsch would under¬
stand the word.
“Nor any other woman but one. A girl. A student
in London. Younger than me. And she died before
my eyes in a hospital ward. Horribly, sickeningly.
Murdered by the lust of a filthy Jew who stole her
THE LOST TRUMPET
*34
from me. . . . Oh, damn, damn, why did I ever
start telling you this ? The shame that it is to be a
woman ! I’ve been haunted ever since. I’ll be haunted
all my life—and these streets are my life. . . . But
for that interlude out in the desert there, Colonel
Saloney, and neither you nor anyone else will rob
me of that.”
He shook off my hands, jumped up, and began to
walk about the room. “I looked at her up there that
evening—when was it ? Only last evening !—and
knew she was for me more certainly than I ever
knew anything in my life. She’s a guerdon for these
ghastly rooms and streets and sickening women.
Out of them for a moment, sir—and you’d deny me
that moment! I’m to live again—a minute, five
minutes, and then back to this. Do you think I’m
likely to forgo the only touch of clean lust and pain
and passion that’s ever likely to come my way again ?”
He stopped in front of me, glaring at me. The
Japanese girl removed the scented cigarette from
between her lips and regarded us incuriously, her
head cocked to one side.
“That is Huth coming up the stairs.”
Subchapter it
She was perhaps five feet three inches in height,
an Egyptian peasant woman with the peasant tattoo-
markings. So deeply black were her eyes that they
minded me of some animal’s, so steady and happy
their look that, holding her hand, I smiled politely
THE LOST TRUMPET
235
thinking she smiled at me. Then I remembered she
was blind and saw the gravity of her lips. She stood
still in that grey wrapping of hers and put out a
hand and touched my face.
“This is a man I know, Huth.” It was the boy’s
voice behind us. “Colonel Anton Saloney, a Russian.”
“And why have you brought him here, Esdras ?
Is he a client ?” She spoke French easily, effortlessly,
and now did indeed smile up at me, cheerfully. But
I dropped her hand as though it had been unclean.
“My goodness, no !” Quaritch pushed me aside,
flashed me a wry smile. “He is a gentleman, Huth.
Almost as though he were English. Believes prosti¬
tutes are wicked and filthy people who have taken to
their job for love of lucre.”
The woman crossed towards the bed. A prosti¬
tute. It seemed to me I had seen many gracious
women walk like that. . . . She sat down and put
up a hand to the shawl and so, free of that, turned
her head and smiled at us.
It was no longer the cheerful smile of the pro¬
fessional harlot. It was a smile I had seen on the
face of Pelagueya ... on many faces ... I drew
out my handkerchief and dabbed at my forehead as
she spoke.
“Then why bring him ?”
The boy stood easily in front of her, yet, it seemed
to me, with an odd respect.
“As a matter of fact, we’ve come to arrest you on
a suspicion of murder. Rather a joke, Huth. I’ll
explain it in a moment. You can help me.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
236
“Some woman, Esdras ?”
“How did you know ?”
“It is always either a woman or God.” And she
lighted a cigarette and curled her feet up beneath
her. “Tell me.”
He was telling her, succinctly. And I could not
take my eyes off this woman of the Wagh el Berka.
. . . Certainly I must be near to an attack of fever,
for it seemed to me, in despite her blindness, that her
glances in my direction were definitely the glances
of one who saw. . . . She was nodding to Quaritch.
“And you want me to help ? But I shall! What
is it you wish ?”
“This woman Fm going to take—it seems she
had a brother who lived at Rashida, a Carl Simonssen.
It seems some woman Huth Rizq lived with him.
Was it you ?”
“It was I.”
The boy’s laugh had a ring of triumph in it.
That s splendid. Listen. This man’s sister thinks
you were the murderess. That’s amusing enough.
But if I can find you and take you to her I fulfil my
part of the bargain. Will you come ?”
The prostitute picked up her shawl. She did it
without any of the tentative gropings of the blind.
“Yes, I’ll come.” She mused. “Carl Simonssen ?”
But I also had stood up. It seemed to me time to
end this mad conversation. “Carl Simonssen,” I
said, slowly and distinctly. “And this sister believes
you murdered him.”
She turned her head with its unwinking, laughing
THE LOST TRUMPET 237
eyes towards me. She nodded. “Oh, yes. I was
his mistress. I killed him that morning before I left
Rashida.”
Subchapter in
I think that was probably as strange a procession
as ever threaded the Warrens and came at length out
into the sunshine and the waning afternoon of the
Esbekieh Gardens—the Russian ^/gr/-dragoman,
the Egyptian prostitute-murderess, the English
novelist. I walked in front through the narrow lanes
and though I had believed I was far enough from
days of such prudery a ghostly, shamefaced self of
other years whispered at my shoulder. Once or
twice I glanced back. The boy, white-faced, was
engaged as he had been ever since we left the house
in the Wagh el Berka—in attempting to induce the
woman to return.
She seemed genuinely puzzled at his reluctances.
But you wanted me, Esdras. So I come with you.”
But you don’t realize—look here, you must go
back. Murder ! My God, I can’t believe that of
you !”
“But why not ? And it will help you. . . . Here
is the sun again, and the Esbekieh Gardens. I can
smell them. And the tall man has stopped. Have
you money, Esdras ?”
He jingled coins in his pocket. She sighed satis-
fiedly between the two of us, smiling up at him
gravely, her unwinking eyes merry. “That is good.
238 THE LOST TRUMPET
for I am very hungry. Abu Zabal ? It is a long
distance there.”
“You have been there before ?” I asked. She
nodded, her sightless eyes on the Garden.
“But often.”
I glanced at the boy, troubled and distraught
almost as was he himself. The woman moved
forward.
“There is a fine restaurant just here and I love
its honey cakes. Take me to it, Esdras.”
It seemed to me that she was guiding him, not
he her, up to the door of the Petrograd. At that
door stood the commissionaire, a Greek, portentous
and proud. Walking behind the two others, I expected
the inevitable. No street-woman was allowed in the
Petrograd. But the Greek made no objection. He
drew back, bowed, and swung open the door.
We went in. The restaurant was crowded, the
early dinner of prosperous Greek and Europeanized
Egyptian much in progress and evidence. In the
midst of the room stood one table unoccupied and
conspicuous. Towards it Quaritch steered our charge
and found a chair for her and himself sat down. Sitting
myself, I raised my gaze expecting to find a battery
of astounded eyes upon us. But except for a French¬
woman near at hand, who was regarding us with
the casual intentness of the absent-minded, not one
of the diners appeared to pay us any heed.
“Anything wrong, sir ? You don’t look well.”
I found the boy, his worriment over Huth Rizq
for a moment in abeyance, staring at me concernedly.
THE LOST TRUMPET
239
At that I pulled myself out of the mental fog that
threatened to engulf me and beckoned to a waiter.
“Nothing is wrong. What will both of you eat ?”
She sat between us and ate like a hungry child,
deftly, with none of the groping motions of the
blind, and talked of the sick girl in the first Wagh
house, and of a client she herself had had the previous
evening, and of one occasion when she had visited
Abu Zabal. “There was a block-house there, and
soldiers. One of them took me out to a nullah and
we watched all night the fires of the coming army
from the south ”
“But a block-house ? There is no block-house at J
Abu Zabal,” I protested.
“No ? It was long ago. ... Ah, listen !”
All the Petrograd was listening. In the distance
had arisen the monotonous beating of a native drum.
It grew in volume, drawing nearer. So did other
sounds—the voices of marchers uplifted unintel-
hgibly in some Eastern song.
Presently the first of the marchers came in sight.
It was no student procession, but a march of the
Cairene Labour Unions. Clerks and such-like folk,
in shoddy European garb and tarbouches, marched
side by side with labourers in breech-clouts and
soiled turbans, and the end of the procession was
brought up by a rabble without name or classifica¬
tion. Half-naked, half-human things, seldom seen
in the modern quarters, were there; maimed and
brutalized by disease and want, their faces unhealed
sores, they looked their hate at us who watched.
240
THE LOST TRUMPET
Abandoned of God and man these, the cheated of the
sunlight, parading through the streets the awful
indictment of their being.
Dourly all marched, spite their song. Overhead
flapped great banners scrawled with Arabic symbols.
In front, the drum beat out its threat through the
silenced street.
Scorn, disgust, fear; the looks I saw on the
faces in the Petrograd as the marchers went by.
Except on one face; the prostitute from the Wagh
el Berka who sat beside me was weeping.
“Huth !”
“Oh, Esdras, I heard them ! They have none
but me to help them.” She half-rose up. “I must
g°*”
The boy held her down, a hand on her shoulder.
“If you go, you can’t go with these chaps. There’ll
be rioting and the gendarmes trying to disperse them
in another street or so. . . . Look here, I’ll see you
back to the Street myself.”
“Ah, but I had forgotten. I am going with you
to Abu Zabal. Let us go now.”
I had finished. Quaritch had eaten hardly any¬
thing. Suddenly he shrugged and his face lightened.
“Let’s go then. It’s all part of the dirty insanity
of things to find you—a murderess. You ! Whatever
did you do it for ?”
“He was dirty, so I killed him. It was great fun,
until he began to scream. Then I was sorry for
him—a little. I thought I would stay and tell people,
but that seemed foolish, for he was not worth the
THE LOST TRUMPET 241
trouble, being so dirty. So I walked to the gendarmes,
and they let me go, for I was their friend. And I
walked away from Rashida and took a train to
Cairo. . . . Now I will come and meet his sister.^
It seemed to me either the patter of a maudlin
child—or something far worse. I said : “Please
listen. Quaritch does not seem to have made the
matter plain. If you killed Simonssen and you had
good reasons for doing so, why do you confess it
now ?”
“But what harm can it do ?”
“When Simonssen’s sister hands you over to the
police they will kill you.’,
“Kill me ?” She laughed with genuine amuse¬
ment. He is a droll, the tall man, Esdras.’>
I made a gesture of despair and summoned the
waiter. Quaritch, with an equally despairing shrug,
helped Huth Rizq to her feet and guided her out
of the Petrograd.
Subchapter iv
I sat beside Kalaun on the Abu Zabalward journey,
the while the Englishman and the woman from the
Street rode behind us in the body of the tender.
Occasionally the murmur of their voices would come
to us. Once I heard the woman’s laughter, clear
and joyous. But for the most part I kept my attention
on the erratic driving of the grinning Kalaun who
loved a scandal and scented one—if not two 
ensconced in the tender behind him.
Q
THE LOST TRUMPET
242
We rode through an evening that paced and
padded to the left of us, hesitatingly, like a black
panther, for mile on mile. The sun waited above
that West that Old Egypt believed the abode of the
dead—as indeed it had been, for on the Nile left
bank they had been wont to bury their dead. . . .
And succeeding years and generations had made of
that simple necessity and happening a mysterious,
symbolic thing, transplanting the dead to the western
sky out of the sand and shingly Nilotic loam. To what
effect and what gain ? Little enough, I remember
thinking wryly. If we had kept the ancient way of
Adrian’s Golden Hunters it had been better for all
mankind . . .
I think I must have sat dozing then, for an hour
almost. But it seemed only a moment later when
Kalaun shook me urgently by the shoulder.
“Look, khawaga 1”
CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH
‘There could be no doubt of that Shape.’
Subchapter i
I SAT erect. We were near to Abu Zabal. And in
the sky a strange radiance was blossoming. I
peered across the bent tip of Kalaun’s nose. Night
had quite descended and we slid along the yellow
canals of our head-lights. Meantime, that soft glow
persisted in the sky and then suddenly betook itself
to earth. While I stared towards it Quaritch’s voice
spoke from the opening above my head.
<{That must be the Princess’s house on fire, sir.”
“Eh ?”
Or something in the camp. Too far in the west
to come from Abu Zabal proper.”
He was right. I caught the wheel from Kalaun.
“Change places.”
He crawled behind me, squeezing himself into
small bulk to make the passage. I put my foot on
the accelerator. The light-channel through which
we rushed quivered itself into swifter flow. Little
stones pattered against the wind-screen, ping, pong,
slowly at first, but presently as a rattling hail. Ahead
grew the lights of Abu Zabal, and the dim markings
of the by-road that led to the camp and Gault’s.
343
244 the lost trumpet
And now the tme cause of the glare in the sky was
obtrusive. Three great fires burned amid the excava¬
tions.
“Must be the tents,” commented Quaritch from
over the heads of Kalaun and myself.
So I also thought. The great fires whoomed up
against the sky. What accident or series of accidents
had led to this catastrophe ? I demanded of myself,
foolishly, and swung the tender rightwards, down the
Gault road. The torn, fire-illumined lands of the
excavations rushed upwards at that move, and beyond
them steadier lights in Gault’s house swayed and
stumbled us-ward. I gave a sigh of relief.
It was not the tents.
They stood safe and unharmed, as we could see
now. The three great fires loomed nearer at hand,
amid the scene of the more recent excavations. One
was at either end of the great trench on which we
had left the archeologists engaged that morning;
the third burned near to Georgios’ cooking-shed,
which was also the store-tent. And between and
around the fires, silhouettes in copper against the
disturbed Egyptian night, a multitude of figures
engaged in mysterious activity.
_ I swung the tender out of the road and into the
field, and when we had come to a halt Georgios I
discovered panting by the side of the vehicle. I
shouted to ask the reason of the fires.
“Discoveries, mon colonel, and there is great
excitement. But with that I have no concern. You
will have dinner ?”
245
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Dinner ? . . . What has been discovered ?”
He spread out his hands and shrugged his
shoulders. “To me they appear as fragments of
utensils privy to the bedroom. But M. Huebsch—
he is in ecstasies. M. Marrot—he makes the cool
smile. They believe more discoveries will be made
and M. Huebsch had fuel borrowed from the
Princess’s house and all our petrol poured out to
make those fires. . . . But I have kept dinner for
you, mon colonel.”
“That was thoughtful of you, Georgios,” I said,
coming to the ground and treading into the light
of the bonfires. “I will eat it as soon as I have spoken
to M. Huebsch.”
But I was not at once to have speech with him.
As I hurried past the near fire one, whom I took to
be a labourer, and who was bent over a number of
dim, asymmetrical shapes laid on a piece of sacking,
called out to me.
“Anton !”
“Princess !”
She was clad in dusty overalls. Her hair fluffed
out above the neck of the absurd jacket. Arms
akimbo, she stood and looked up at me, smiling,
her eyes lighted either with amusement or the flame
of the fires that roared near at hand and were scaring
far-away jackals in Georgios’ nullah to voice hysteric
protests to the skies.
“Isn’t it fun ! Some discoveries at last—though
not the Lost Trumpet. What do you think of them ?”
I looked down at the fragments of painted earthen-
THE LOST TRUMPET
246
ware, as I then saw them to be, picked up one frag-
ment—and replaced it hastily. Pelagueya gurgled.
I dusted my hands and looked at her.
“I would not say it to the good Huebsch, but I
feel he has been indiscreet. But why are you
here ?”
“Am I such a vexing sight ?” She thrust her arm
in mine. “Why not ? Anything for a change. They
sent to borrow fuel for the bonfires, and I accom¬
panied it back.”
“When was this ?”
“Oh, an hour or so ago. And now I’ve been
deputed to guard the finds. So at last I’m a worker,
Anton, and you should smile at me and recite some
Karl Liebknecht—or is it Marx ?”
“But why ?”
“But obviously. I’ve been worrying over you,
Anton. Why ever did you leave Russia ? You’d
have enjoyed yourself there, making yourself miserable
in order that the future might be happy. Pfuu ! . . .
And do leave me a cigarette. And there’s Mr.
Huebsch calling to you.”
I lighted the cigarette for her and hasted towards
the far fire, and then remembered something and
turned to call to the guardian of the treasure.
“Is Miss Simonssen with you ?”
“Goodness, no. Fast asleep, I should think.
Much too proper to wander about archaeological
camps at night.”
Huebsch I found, his immense face glistening with
sweat, drinking water from a goatskin with sounds
THE LOST TRUMPET
*47
reminiscent of the Nile descending the Fourth
Cataract. He looked at me sideways across the
inverted skin.
Hello, Colonel! Get our passes restamped ?
Well, well. Not that we’ll need them now. We’re
on the trail at last.”
His great face worked with emotion. He flung
down the goatskin and caught my arm.
“Come and see.”
Now by the light of the near bonfire I could
indeed see something new. Near its eastern tip the
great trench had at length ploughed its way into the
midst of the treasure and there had halted and
broadened out and betaken to itself, it seemed to me,
the likeness of a volcanic eruption. Nearly all the
labourers were engaged here. Marrot, in shirt and
shorts and a pent-up energy, was toiling with sieve
and basket in the strongest light from the fire.
Others cut and hewed, and yet others, with faces
now familiar enough to me though I had never
learned their names, lifted small oblongs carefully
aside and peered into the holes thus excavated, and
all the while kept up a thin twitter of admonition and
excitement. I bent down and examined the stacked
oblongs and then turned to Huebsch.
“But what is it you have discovered ?”
“A house—a block-house, I guess, by the shape
of it.”
“A block-house ?” My mind went back to the
words of Huth Rizq. “Then it is modern ?”
“Modern ?” He stared at me. “Well, well, nothing
*48 the lost trumpet
so very ancient. Sixth or seventh century b.c. by the
shape and baking of its bricks.”
It was my turn to stare. “Then—but that is
impossible. I have just talked to a woman who
remembers the block-house here.”
“Well, well, she’s a long memory. Colonel.”
It was obvious that the matter did not interest
him. A block-house of the sixth or seventh century
of the last pre-Christian millennium ? I thought
aloud : “Then it was built after the Temple treasures
were stolen and hidden.”
“Long after.” His immense laugh boomed out
with a new, vibrant note in it. So one of those
curved-nosed, curved-sworded Semites might have
laughed as Jericho’s high walls toppled and reeled and
crumbled thunderously to dust. “And it was built on
top of the spot where the Levite buried the Trumpet.”
“But how can you know ?”
“A hunch of mine. Colonel—a hunch of all of us.
Look at us !”
I felt some contagion of his own confidence.
“And you have found Jewish relics ?”
“Not a darned fragment yet. Don’t expect any—
after the brooch. He wasn’t loaded with pottery,
that priest who stole and buried the Trumpet. The
stuff you’ve just seen is common Egyptian ware.”
He paused, frowning benevolently, looking towards
Pelagueya’s dim, slim figure. “Guess I’ll have to go
and catalogue it all the same.”
I took off my coat. “I will take your place in
charge of this sector.”
Subchapter ii
So I had done, working without result for many
minutes. While others hewed them out, I set the
oblong bricks in neat walls, keeping the while a
careful eye on each wielder of pick and mattock.
And presently that vigilance was rewarded. Some¬
thing in the deeps of the loam crackled under a heavy
blow. I jumped down into the excavation and put
the labourer aside and searched in the earth with my
fingers. The thing came out in my hand in two
pieces.
It was some three feet in length. I carried it
over towards Marrot and his sand-sievings by the
fire.
“Hello, Saloney. What’s that ?”
A statuette,” I said, and knelt down to put the
fragments together, upright, against a bank of earth.
Then I stood up and together we looked down at
the newly risen deity, as I supposed it to be. Marrot
knelt where I had been and nodded a confirmatory
head.
“Human-headed household Hathor. Very worn.”
Huthor, ’ he pronounced it. Some dim associa¬
tion of names jangled in my mind, vexing me. The
worn soapstone eyes of the goddess regarded us
unblinkingly. And suddenly I remembered the
reason for the familiar sound of the unfamiliar pro¬
nunciation. “Hathor ? The goddess of love ?”
“That’s the lady. Why ?”
“Nothing.” I shook myself. Absurdest of fancies
2JO
THE LOST TRUMPET
that which had been with me. . . . Marrot had
gathered up the statuette again.
“Send it over to Huebsch, will you ? And you’d
better get back to that bit of digging there—if you
want to. Damned if I know why you should at this
hour of night, on the starvation wages we pay you.
Damned if I know why any of these labourers are
such fools as to be out here at this time of night ”
“I think I could tell you,” I said, “so you seek
damnation unnecessarily. They are here for the
worst of reasons from the point of view of a good
proletarian ; because they like their employers, you
and Mr. Huebsch. But why are the excavations
going on ? Would it not have been better to wait
until the daytime ?”
“Of course it would. But that won’t do for
Huebsch. He’s possessed by one of the Semite demons
—laldabaoth, I guess. Swears we’ll dig and find the
Lost Trumpet to-night. Lost grandmothers. But we’ll
probably find something of interest in this late
Dynasty block-house. Keep a sharp look-out for
more gods and for the love of all their modern
manifestations try and get them unbroken.”
I went back to the excavating of the eastern wing.
We were down to hard sand level again, and for
minute after minute nothing of interest came from the
pits. I had straightened up after five minutes of brick¬
building when Pelagueya’s voice spoke at my shoulder.
“This is you, Anton ? Georgios was frantic, so
I’ve brought you your dinner.”
I turned to find her standing with a tray in her
THE LOST TRUMPET 251
hands. I attempted to take that from her, but she
backed away.
Sit down. See, I’ll put it here. Now you’ll see
what to eat. And I’ll have a cup of coffee, please,
though you haven’t asked me.”
She sat down beside me, in that sudden crumpling
of limbs and body that was so oddly child-like and
charming. I found my cigarette-case again and handed
it to her the while I ate of Georgios’ excellent chicken.
Pelagueya blew smoke-rings through her nose and
cupped her hands in the attitude she loved. “Anton,
I believe Mr. Huebsch is right. I have the same
feeling.”
“About what ?”
“About the Lost Trumpet—that it is going to be
found to-night.”
“Was there ever a Trumpet to lose ?”
Oh, Anton, don t be so prosaic and world-weary.
You are the oddest mixture these days. At one
moment—out of Lermontov ; at another—that
dreary Feodor. And once you were entirely Pushkin.
... I don’t suppose there ever was a Trumpet—
unless it’s that one that Dr. Adrian talked about.
Remember him ?—the voice of human sanity that’s
never been quite stilled. Perhaps we’re digging: for
that, all of us ” 8
She shivered. I put my hand on her shoulder, and
so on her uncovered neck. But she was warm
enough. I said : “You should go to bed. You are
dreaming awake. What has this lost Jewish relic—
even if it exists—to do with these things ?”
252 THE LOST TRUMPET
“Nothing at all, Anton. Or something. Let’s say
both. . . . Perhaps there was nothing peculiar in
the essence of the Trumpet that overthrew Jericho.
The miracle happened through the faith that Joshua
brought to the blowing of it.”
“I am very dull.”
“You are very dear. And this is fun—even if
nothing else comes of it. Oh, did you bring back the
English novelist with you ? What is the matter ?”
I had almost dropped my coffee-cup. I had only
then recollected the two who had ridden from Cairo
in the body of the tender. I explained to Pelagueya
and she stood up.
“A prostitute—and Carl Simonssen’s murderess !
Pfuu ! Still, she must be hungry, poor thing. Give
me your tray, Anton, and I’ll go get Georgios give
her some food. . . . And do shout to me if you
discover the Trumpet.”
The Trumpet! Turning to work, I realized that
my stay in Abu Zabal must now be short enough,
Trumpet or no Trumpet. And no doubt it would
be no Trumpet. Unless something of importance
was found under this block-house I was sure that
Marrot, at least, would close down the excavations,
and I be freed from the web and tangle in which I
had been drawn. And then 
I began brick-building again with unnecessary
speed. And then—why, I would return to Cairo as
a dragoman and tramp the sands and bazaars with
tourists and listen until the croaking of the grass¬
hopper had become a madness inside my brain.
the lost trumpet
*53
Subchapter Hi
Alidnight passed and still we dug and laboured
at removing the shattered debris of the block-house.
It had been built strongly and securely in those far-
off times. And then, in some convulsion of war or
riot, an enemy had entered it and burned it to the
ground . . .
“There was a block-house there, and soldiers. One of
them took me out to a nullah and we watched all night
the fires of the coming army from the south ”
Insanity to remember that. Were there such
things ? Such things that a modern prostitute had the
stony grace of an ancient statuette—aw that ancient /
statuette—and remembered back across such gulf of
years as seventy-five generations might not span 
Under layers of ashes our gang presently came
upon bones—the dismembered bones of a man who
had either died fighting, or else died even more
horribly, for Marrot said that these bones had not
mouldered apart in the years. They had been severed
from the trunk by the blows of heavy weapons,
maces or axes. And up out of that ashen pit rose
another thing that made me smile for that glamour
of the ancient historical world of which the little
novelists write—a smell of decay and death, dank
and vile and sickening. . . . Between one and two
o’clock in the morning Huebsch called a halt to the
labour of the gangs, and we sat and ate and drank
in the waning light of the bonfires. The enthusiasm
of most of us was waning in like manner.
254 THE lost trumpet
But not of Huebsch. His immense voice boomed
out across the excavations in instructions for replen¬
ishing the fires with all the spare camp-props that
could be gathered. It was obvious that he would
sacrifice tents and tender if that should prove neces¬
sary, and Marrot’s acid suggestion that the great
Jew might add himself as a supreme auto-da-fe
produced nothing more than a kindly, considering
stare and a maelstrom-ripple of smile. Then we
started again, tiredly, and at length the whole of the
block-house and its outbuildings had been cleared
away. It had been a very small block-house.
Below was the basic sand. Huebsch and Marrot
cleared the labourers off the ground of the pit and
then with level and tape marked out the lines of a
great St. Andrew’s cross. Along those lines Kalaun
and his companions were set to the digging of two
fresh intersecting trenches. I had had enough for the
time being, and sat to smoke a pipe and watch the
hasty stridings to and fro of the great Jew and his
tall, slim secretary. Pelagueya had elected herself to
this post and followed Huebsch everywhere, import¬
antly, notebook in hand, her clear voice, with a note
of excitement in it, raised in an occasional suggestion
towards which the ovoid head of her companion
would be readily inclined. Huebsch had found a
fellow-enthusiast.
Once, as Pelagueya passed and I looked after her
amusedly, I remembered my companions of the
journey from Cairo and called a question.
“They’ve gone,” Pelagueya called back.
THE LOST TRUMPET 255
“Gone where ?”
“Down to my house to arouse Aslaug, I suppose.
At least, Georgios says that the Englishman drove
e tender down there. We here were all too busied
to note.
Down to Gault s ? . . . I looked towards the
wo lights that had shone all night from rooms high
up in the walls of the house. What was happening
there now ? Aslaug Simonssen, her brother’s mui>
deress, her would-be seducer. . . . Had I better go
there and find out ? 8
Pelagueya s voice broke in upon my thoughts I
became aware of a hush in all the camp.
“Anton, come quickly!”
Subchapter iv
■ Hu,ert>sch knelt on the ground at the bottom of the
pit, Marrot peered over his shoulder, the feeble
earn of his electric torch directed into a jagged hole
newly opened. Pelagueya was at the other side of
r ^lt r , aun just withdrawn his pick. The
lights of the bonfires were dying and I stumbled amid
caps of earth as I made towards the grouping at
a r^aS 1 n0ted with a twinge of amusement.
What is it ?”
The groups of labourers broke apart as I jumped
do<yn- ^ Pelagueya caught my sleeve.
Huebsch had squatted above the dark hole,
lowered his immense, gorilla-like arms and inserted
THE LOST TRUMPET
256
his hands, and grappled with some hidden thing.
He pulled. The thing refused to budge. His legs
and arms straining and up-bulging in muscle, the
great Jew made another attempt. A dark, shapeless
mass was slowly emerging. Marrot backed away
and swung down his torch-beam upon it. A final
tug and the sand-stained, sand-preserved object was
lifted in Huebsch’s hands.
A great sigh went up from all of us ! A littie
early wind came shining through the dimness. Far
in Abu Zabal a cock began to crow. Huebsch,
breathing immensely, shook sand and mould from
his discovery and peered at it nearsightedly in the
light of Marrot’s electric torch. It was the latter who
spoke first, and in a voice strangely high-pitched.
“Leather: a leather sack somehow preserved.
Soaked in gums, perhaps.”
“That, and the sands themselves.” Huebsch’s
voice, surprisingly, was quite calm, even slightly
flat. “Thank God that’s done. You can dismiss all
the boys, Colonel. There’ll be nothing more to-night.
Nor, of course, to-morrow.”
I had come forward to look at the find. “But
are you certain this is the ?”
The near fire spiralled a final column of light.
Huebsch held up the leather sack and crumpled the
leather roughly into the curved shape of the object
hidden in its folds.
“Look.”
We looked, Pelagueya and Marrot and I, first at
the object and then at each other. It was impossible
the LOST TRUMPET 257
—a boy’s treasure-tale come true—but there could
be no doubt of that shape. . . . The fire fluffed down
into darkness. We began to shiver in the chill air,
and I put my arm round Pelagueya, and she stopped
shivering and turned her face, a dim, sweet face to
thank me. Then :
“We’ll all die of pneumonia if we remain here.
And your tents are too uncomfortable after such a
night. And you’ve no electric light with which to
examine the Thing. The three of you must bring it
over to my house and must stop to breakfast.”
. Hu^bsch slung the object under his armpit, turn-
ing his great, slow head upon his temporary secre¬
tary.
“That’ll be fine. Princess,” he agreed.
R
CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH
‘ “We will see if one of us can blow the Lost
Trumpet.” ’
Subchapter i
WE walked into the blow of that faint dawn-
wind, side by side, the three of us. Behind us
the night. But the day was not due for another hour
yet. A hasting shadow in front went Georgios on
his mission to rouse the Bourrin household with the
news of our coming, and himself to prepare break¬
fast in the Princess Pelagueya’s kitchen.
Pelagueya had abandoned the shelter of my arm.
She walked by my side and I saw her head dimly
downbent against the great moving shadow that was
the head of Huebsch. Presently Marrot began to
whistle underbreath, and broke off, and made a
strange sound that startled us all from reverie. It
was a portentous yawn.
“I could yawn my skin off and walk about in my
skeleton,” he confessed.
“So could I,” said Pelagueya. “Especially as I’m
told I have a good skeleton. . . . Horribly sleepy.
But I’m not going to sleep—yet. Waken up, Anton !
You’re stumbling in your tracks.”
ass
THE LOST TRUMPET
259
“In my sleep.”
Huebsch swung his burden under the other arm.
“Well, well. Emotional excitement. I guess that’s
what’s tired us. It kept us up during the search and
now ”
Marrot said : “Hell, listen to the jackals !”
They were moaning eerily enough ; a final chorus¬
sing away in the west before the day came. In that
hesitating hour it was an uncanny and fearsome
sound. In some mythologies there are beasts that
devour the daylight, and gods and culture-heroes
who slay the beasts. Unendingly, day after day.
And the little anthropologists have poked and
questioned and queried and made plain the meaning
of that ceaseless conflict, bringing it from dusty
legends of the outer world into its ancient birthplace
and lodging, the human brain. Day was God; the
beasts and night were Evil. The immortal struggle
in each human being. And how false alike mythology
and interpretation ! 
I had been again “stumbling in my tracks.”
Pelagueya’s hand came on my arm.
“Not ill, Anton ?”
“I was thinking out a new mythology.”
“Then you do want breakfast. I always think out
that kind of thing myself when I’m very hungry.”
Her teasing sounded as vivacious as ever. She had
indeed wells of vitality to unseal for every possible
emergency. “And now we’re here. You three
will want to bathe. I do. Ibrahim will see to
z6o
THE LOST TRUMPET
Subchapter it
Ibrahim did, his eyes still rimed with the frosts
of sleep. It appeared that Georgios, however, had
had no need to awaken the household. The “ymmg
khawaga” had seen to that some time earlier. And
where now was the “young khawaga” ? Ibrahim
did not know; perhaps on the roof still, looking
at the stars. It was there he had betaken himself.
As for the harlot, she was with the Sitt I-sloog 
I dismissed Ibrahim then and in company with
my employers in that very expensive bathroom set
to cleansing from my person the evidences of the
night’s toil—or at least such evidences as soap and
water and perfumed pumicestone might remove.
Huebsch had deposited the leather sack inside the
bathroom entrance, and even while, like a great
river beast, he plunged and swayed above his basin,
kept a close regard on that sack. Drying my face on
Pelagueya’s over-frilled towels I caught that stray¬
ing of his eye doorward. He smiled slowly, con¬
sideringly.
“Guess we’ll keep a sharp eye on it till we’ve made
sure of the contents.”
“But I had thought you were sure ?”
“Well, well. What was it the writer boy was
saying the other evening here ? That there’s nothing
so admirable as inconsistency. . . . Very human,
anyway. Pass me that brush and comb, Colonel.”
So, a little refreshed and I at least very hungry,
we presently betook ourselves to the room that
THE LOST TRUMPET 261
Ibrahim indicated—that same room where I had
dined with Pelagueya on the first night of the expe¬
dition in Abu Zabal. The table was set very gleam-
ingly with napery and cutlery and the essentials of
one of Georgios’ inimitable breakfasts. Pelagueya
was waiting for us, transformed, in a short skirt and
that article of attire which I believe is called, mys¬
teriously, a jumper. It was morning garb; and
indeed the morning was now undistant.
Through the eastward-facing window I saw the
darkness speckled with light as though a drizzling
snowstorm were passing across those winterless lands.
The long escarpment of light on the horizon had
broadened a little. Abu Zabal roofs were etched in
a broken sierra against that whiteness. Marrot went
to the window and peered out, and turned back and
grinned at us, acidly.
Came the Dawn’—a very good movie scene,
though a bit overdone.”
Pelagueya waved us to the table. She was less
familiar than I with transatlantic references. “Yes,
it will soon be morning. And I feel very excited!
Do you, Mr. Huebsch ?”
The great Jew levered himself ponderously into
the indicated chair. “Not too greatly to neglect
enjoying your hospitality. Princess, or Georgios’
cooking.”
Pelagueya was absent-minded. “Perfect jewel,
isn’t he ? I think I’ll engage him to cook for this
place when you people break up your expedition.
Unless ”
262 THE LOST TRUMPET
I made the obvious urging. “Unless what ?”
She started. It had been no designed pause.
“What ? I don’t know. Eat breakfast, Anton.
Coffee, Mr. Marrot ? Oh, we’re forgetting the
others. Ibrahim—go and find Mr. Quaritch.
He’s still on the roof; I smelt his tobacco. And if
Miss Simonssen’s awake ask if she’d like to break¬
fast now.”
The boy came in a moment later, slim shoulders
slouching, his face curiously flushed. He bowed to
Pelagueya’s gesture, smiled faintly at me, and sat
down and drank coffee and ate nothing, staring out
of the window but starting every now and then at
the footsteps heard outside the door. Then that
door opened and Aslaug Simonssen came in, so pale
that Pelagueya ceased to poke uninterestedly at the
fish on her plate.
“Aslaug ! What’s wrong ?”
“Nothing, Princess.” But there was something
very much. She sat down in silence, took the food
Ibrahim placed in front of her, and made a pretence
at eating. Quaritch never took his eyes from her.
Abruptly she raised her head and looked at him.
And I sat amazed. It was a glance of sheer fear that
each exchanged . . .
Pelagueya had finally desisted from her torment-
ings of Georgios’ carefully cooked fish; Marrot
was crumbling a roll over and over on his plate,
and scowling now and then towards that window-
scene that reminded him of a moving-picture caption.
I myself found my appetite had declined sadly when
THE LOST TRUMPET 263
brought to the test. Even Huebsch, eating immensely
and competently, seemed without enthusiasm in the
business. . . . And all of us had been so hungry
Humanity in little, I decided, this odd breakfast I
table company in an hour on the verge of dawn !
We had no leisure or appetite to eat or drink of life,
four-fifths of us, because to-morrow we were to be
killed or raped or have our mothers die of cancer.
Or God was to come shining from the clouds and
reveal a new and tortuous way of forgoing appetite.
Or wonder was to come and make appetite unneces¬
sary. Or we had fed all appetites to sickness and
satiety. Or we feared or loved too much that which
we longed to devour 
“Goodness, we are all very silent! And no one
is eating. It’s that Thing in the sack, Mr. Huebsch.
When are you going to bring it out ?”
Huebsch had finished. He tended this thick lips
with his napkin, and glanced towards the black
leather sack to which the sand and mould still clung.
“As soon as we’ve all finished and the table’s been
cleared, Princess.”
“Yes ? Ibrahim, get them to clear the table.”
Huebsch rose up from his chair and crossed
towards the leather bag. “And you might get them
to bring a knife, Princess. Or a dagger. Something
with a sharp point and an edge as well.”
Quaritch stirred a little, his boy-face wrinkled in
a questioning sneer as he looked at the Jew. “Found
the Temple treasures, eh ?”
“He is about to bring out the Lost Trumpet,” I
264 THE LOST TRUMPET
said, and only then realized that neither Quaritch
nor Aslaug Simonssen had heard of the discovery.
Both stared at Huebsch. The novelist gave a short
laugh.
“That so, sir ? Careful folk, the sheenies. Always
find what they’ve lost. . . . Let’s have a look.”
Huebsch was carrying the stained leather sack to
the table. He waved Quaritch aside.
“In a minute, maybe, young man. . . . Ah,
here’s the knife.”
It was brightly sharp-pointed and two-edged, a
Tuareg knife that had once belonged to Gault.
Even so, and even in Huebsch’s immense clutch, it
seemed to make little or no impression on the tough
and ancient leather buried these twenty-five centuries.
I remembered the Carthaginian breastplates that had
been made of rhinoceros-hide and steeped in gums
to make them arrow-proof. This leather also the
sands or ancient art must have treated in some such
fashion. We crowded round to look.
Finally, with a strong downward thrust, Huebsch
drove home the point of the knife, shortened the
blade, and then ripped a wide slit in the sack. Thereon
he dropped the knife, smiled benevolently at
Pelagueya, hostess and most faithful fellow-enthu¬
siast, and upended the sack upon the table.
Subchapter Hi
Something heavy fell out and rolled a little and
sh°ggled to a standstill. A minute brown powdering
THE LOST TRUMPET 265
sprayed across the table. There was a general intake
of breath; and we all stood motionless, looking at
the thing.
It was the Lost Trumpet. Huebsch’s faith and
enthusiasm had been justified. There was no mis¬
taking the antiquity of the instrument lying before
us—even as it was difficult to see in it anything
unusual. It was a ram’s horn, perhaps a foot and a
half in length, dark brown in colour, streaked and
scoriated in faint red lines. At either end it was
circled by a metal band. That at the mouthpiece I
knew was gold ; I had seen much of ancient gold
excavated from the gold-littered soil of Egypt. But
the larger circle was of other metal.
I think I was the first to move after the Trumpet
had dropped on the table. I bent down to examine
the larger circle, and thereat, like automata released
by the snapping of a thread, the others moved also.
So that s the Lost Trumpet,” said Pelagueya,
wide-eyed.
Marrot smiled at her. “Disappointed ?”
“Not so much as you are, Mr. Marrot.”
He flushed, surprisingly. Aslaug Simonssen bent
over the table. “Will it blow ?”
Before anyone could prevent him, the boy had
snatched up the Trumpet. “The planet to blazes,
they say. Let’s try !”
And, with a reckless laugh, he put the ancient
mouthpiece to his lips, and out-curved his cheeks,
and blew immensely.
A little puff of dust sprayed out, descending on
266
THE LOST TRUMPET
Marrot, who cursed vigorously and stepped aside.
But there was a more unexpected happening.
Quaritch dropped the Trumpet as though it were
alive. It clattered and rang as it hit the table again.
The boy had covered his ears with his hands.
“God, I’ve gone deaf I”
I caught his arm. “What is it ? Have you swal¬
lowed dust from the mouthpiece ?”
He peered at me exasperatedly; shook his head.
He was quite obviously deafened. Huebsch picked
up the Trumpet. The rest of us stood and stared at the
novelist, Aslaug Simonssen putting out a tentative
hand to him and then withdrawing it sharply. He
beat at his ears.
“What are you saying ? Really, this is quite
damnable. . . . Ugh ! it’s passing.”
It was most curious. He took his hands from his
ears. The look of apprehension still remained in his
eyes. He shook his head to our questions.
“Happened ? I don’t know. Just that I couldn’t
hear. My ear drums closed up.”
“You distended your cheeks over-much,” I sug¬
gested.
He sat down. “I feel damn rotten, anyhow.”
Huebsch, immense and grave, had carried the
ancient instrument over to the window, and, having
shaken more dust from its choked interior, was now
engaged in wiping the mouthpiece with his handker¬
chief. Pelagueya had sat down again and was looking
at him, head on one side, cheeks a little flushed with
excitement. Marrot was embracing the back of a
THE LOST TRUMPET 267
chair and regarding his colleague closely. Aslaug
Simonssen, a strayed daughter of the vikings, stared
at the Jew with her lips a little apart. It was Marrot
who broke the silence.
“Problem: What is the difference between a
white elephant and a Lost Trumpet found ? What
are you going to do with the thing, Huebsch ?”
“Well, well, read the inscription, I guess, so
soon as I can see it through this coating of grime.’,
Marrot was at his side in a moment. “Inscription ?
H’m. So there is.”
The window circle collected all of us, except
Quaritch, who still sat and rubbed his ears. Looking
through the window I saw the day very close by
then, and the cypress boughs waving in the coming
of the morning wind. Pelagueya’s shoulder touched
mine and I glanced down at her face, sweet and
eager as her body. ... It was pity Rodin had died
v/ithout knowing Pelagueya. ‘Eternal Spring¬
time’—she would have made a fine woman counter¬
part of that. . . . Huebsch was muttering to himself.
“Not much of it. And plain enough.”
Pelagueya shook his arm. “Then do read it.”
“Eh ? Sure. Something like this, Princess :
The Trumpet of God's Man."
Subchapter iv
The electric light had grown pallid, almost green.
Now that zone of daylight widened ever more
quickly in the sky. And I saw the roofs of Abu Zabal
268
THE LOST TRUMPET
caught and painted in a something that was not a
colour, but the ghost of cobalt. The curved block
lettering on the mouthpiece of the Lost Trumpet
winked up at us, rune-like, and I handed on the
instrument, and Aslaug Simonssen, the next to receive
it, bent her gaze on the runes, young and unintelli¬
gent. “God’s man ?”
Marrot’s voice was as cool and acid as ever.
“Then undoubtedly it’s meant for you, Huebsch,
seeing you’re the only Jew here—and an Ancient
Unorthodox one to boot.”
“No such thing.” It was Quaritch’s voice from
his seat beside the table. “God’s Man—obvious
enough.”
“Not obvious at all, Mr. Quaritch,” said Pelagueya.
“Instead, dreadfully dim. So enlighten us.”
“Pleased, Princess. God’s Man—who hasn’t
heard of all the ideal nationals as God’s Englishman,
God’s German, God’s Spaniard—maybe even God’s
American, though I can hardly believe that. God’s
Man is the synthesis of the lot.” He regarded us with
young, jeering eyes. “So which of you is going to
blow the thing ? And I shouldn’t think women are
excluded. . . . Like me to toss up for you ?”
Huebsch, reclaiming the Trumpet from Aslaug
Simonssen, considered the Englishman hugely,
benevolently, and shook his head.
“Guess you’re taking a fragment too much on
yourself, young man. I’ll stage-manage whatever
trifle of drama we decide on for our entertainment.”
He turned, a portentous bull-god, archaic and
THE LOST TRUMPET 269
Assyrian, upon Pelagueya. “That is, with your per¬
mission, Princess.”
“But granted ooith pleasure, Mr. Huebsch,” she
said, in that rounded uncertainty of the “w” which
assailed her English in moments of excitement.
“And what is the entertainment going to be ?”
We will see if one of us can blow the Lost
Trumpet.”
CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH
‘She set the Trumpet to her lips.’
Subchapter i
WE had, all of us, known that the thing would
be attempted. But, put in words, it was a
breath-taking proposal. The Lost Trumpet! What
would happen ? In the grip of fantastic imaginings
I glanced up at the ceiling. Pelagueya caught my
glance, and laughed, and glanced up at the ceiling
herself.
“Anton thinks you may endanger the architecture,
Mr. Huebsch. What you think will happen ?”
“Not an idea. Princess. But we’ll go outside if
you prefer it.”
Marrot spoke then, scowling at Huebsch and the
Trumpet, dully gleaming with either metal band.
“Anyway, there’s something in Saloney’s uneasiness.
It’s possible the damn thing has some twist of con¬
struction that may set up unusual sound-waves ”
“Well, well, that’s fine for a materialist. You
think that, apart from it being a genuine relic, it may
have genuine powers ?”
Marrot shrugged his shoulders contemptuously.
“Think what you like I think. Anyway, here’s some-
270
THE LOST TRUMPET
27I
one who’s an authority on trumpets, ancient and
modern. Try it out on him.”
There had been a knock at the door, and Georgios
Papadrapoulnakophitos stood bowing before us.
Subchapter ii
“The breakfast—it was satisfactory, madame ?”
Always polite, Georgios disregarded his employers
and stood questioning Pelagueya, who stared at him
remotely. Then, realizing that this was the visit of a
noted chef to a patronne, acted accordingly.
* It was admirable, Georgios. We were about to
send you our congratulations.”
The little Greek bowed, beamingly, and was about
to turn away when Marrot caught his arm.
“Wait a bit, Georgios. You’re a musician. Did
you ever see an instrument like this ?”
Georgios took the ancient shape of the Lost
Trumpet into his hands gingerly, consideringly. “It
is a horn, M’sieu’, and is very unclean.”
“It’s a Trumpet, we’ve been led to believe. One
that produced quite unique music in its day. Do
you think you could blow it ?”
“M’sieu’, I am the master of the bugle, the
trumpet, the fife ”
“Then just give a little toot on this thing.”
Just as the little Greek was about to obey, Marrot
snatched the Lost Trumpet out of his hands, angrily.
“No. Don’t. I’ve changed my mind. Sorry
Georgios.”
THE LOST TRUMPET
272
“It is very well, M’sieu’.”
Georgios retired, puzzledly. Marrot wheeled on
the rest of us. “Why the devil didn’t you try to stop
me ?”
“Stop you ?” I echoed.
“Of course. Oh, a damned dirty trick. Trying to
amuse ourselves at the expense of one we consider
a social inferior.” He glowered at Pelagueya. “Y0#,
anyway, might have told me it was a scoundrelly
thing.”
Pelagueya nodded. “It was. But I was like your¬
self, Mr. Marrot—a scoundrel who didn’t think.
Now you’ve made me. Thank you ”
“Well, well, it was a mistake,” said Huebsch,
pacifyingly. “And since Georgios is out of the
running I might as well try it myself.”
And so saying, he picked up the Trumpet, caressed
it for a moment, then set the worn gold band to his lips.
I looked away from him. My eyes were towards
the window. And suddenly, on the horizon, I saw
the flicker of sheet lightning, and realized the near¬
ness of a sand-storm because of that sudden oppres¬
sion in my head. Almost instantly the oppression
lifted. I turned back. Huebsch had lowered the
Trumpet and was looking at it queerly. Marrot was
wiping his forehead. On Pelagueya’s temples I saw
stand beads of perspiration. Quaritch prowled to
the window.
“Storm coming up. Anyone else see that lightning
flash ?”
“I’ve a headache,” Pelagueya said. “Unless ”
THE LOST TRUMPET 273
But she did not finish what she had thought to
say. Instead, she left my side and crossed to Huebsch,
and held out her hand.
“Shall I try ?”
He smiled at her. It seemed to me that a great
weariness had suddenly been imprinted upon his
face. “Well, well, why shouldn’t you play with the
toy. Princess ?”
She raised the Trumpet, and smiled over at me, a
smile I knew, and set the mouthpiece to her lips.
We waited, I with a quickly beating heart. There
came not a scrap of sound. Laughing, but white¬
faced, Pelagueya lowered the thing.
I m utterly useless. And I thought there was to
be some fun. What a bore—like everything else.
. . . Who is next ? Aslaug—catch !”
Aslaug disturbed another little cloud of dust
that settled on Quaritch. Thereat she stood staring
at him affrightedly, so that even Pelagueya noted the
stare and moved irritably, questioningly. But no
sound had come from the Lost Trumpet. I saw the
day near to breaking then. The promise of the sand¬
storm had not been fulfilled, and the lightning in
the sky had been but a solitary flicker. I turned back
again at sound of Pelagueya’s voice.
“The thing is a fraud, Mr. Marrot. . . . Eaogh !
Sorry. I’m sleepy. There, we’ve all tried now, so
Mr. Huebsch will have to take it away and sell it in
a museum.”
Marrot was withdrawing his lips from the Trumpet
though not his eyes.
274 THE lost trumpet
“The damn nonsense it is.” He muttered unin¬
telligibly. Then glanced round the room. “All
tried ? What’s the matter with Saloney ?”
“No, no. It will be useless.”
Marrot raised sardonic brows at his hostess.
“Well, if the Colonel’s useless, so are we all. See no
reason why you shouldn’t have a go, Saloney.”
Pelagueya spoke in a strained, queer voice. “Anton,
I beg that you won’t try.”
I stood with the Trumpet grasped foolishly in my
hand, myself absurdly troubled and undecided.
Pelagueya’s hands were clenched below her chin.
She shook her head at the question in my eyes, and
gave a little laugh.
“No, I’ve no reason. Only—Pfuu ! the thing is
both useless and uncanny. Put it away, Anton dear.”
Huebsch had been considering the two of us,
wearily benevolent. “Oh, Princess, I guess it’ll do
no harm. So if the Colonel would like to ”
Quaritch broke in impatiently. “Do go ahead,
sir.”
I know nothing of such wind instruments. But I
raised it to my lips as I had seen the others do and
set my lips against its cold, grained mouthpiece, and
drew a deep breath, and breathed in it, gently enough
at first and then with increasing force and volume.
And the thing against my lips resisted soundlessly,
with immense strength as it seemed to me. I tried
again, and at that, for the fraction of a second, that
resistance seemed to wilt a little. ... I took the
Trumpet from my lips, shakily. The others were staring
THE LOST TRUMPET
*75
towards the window. Huebsch swung round, weary
brows corrugated in thought.
“Nothing doing, Colonel ? See that flash out there
on the horizon ? There’s a bad storm coming up.”
“It’s stifling, isn’t it ?” Aslaug Simonssen brought
out a handkerchief and dabbed at her forehead. I
laid down the Trumpet. Outside in the garden an
early insect had begun to chirp, devilishly. I
shivered, and found Quaritch looking over my
shoulder with a strange intentness.
“Here’s your guest. Miss Simonssen.”
All our eyes went to the doorway then, I think.
And in the doorway stood the woman Huth Rizq.
Subchapter Hi
None of us spoke, but she had heard Quaritch’s
voice. She came forward into the room, walking
with an easy grace, her hands held in front of her.
She halted, touching the table with her finger-tips.
“You are here, are you not, Esdras ? And others ?”
Her head turned from side to side, the reckless
laughter shining in the blind eyes. “I grew tired
waiting for the girl to come back; I had told her
all about poor Carl and why I killed him. Now I
must go.”
Pelagueya said, coldly, from her stance by the
window : “A friend of yours, Mr. Quaritch ?”
“I have never denied her, Princess.”
He was sitting at the table again. I glanced at
Aslaug Simonssen. She was pale as death and kept
THE LOST TRUMPET
276
glancing from Quaritch to Huth Ri2q with the
strangest, most hunted look in her eyes. She spoke
at last, in a voice so low that I could hardly hear it.
“Mr. Quaritch brought this woman to see me.
Princess. She knows about how my brother was
killed. She—she works in Cairo.”
Huth turned her face towards the speaker. It was
evident that she understood English. “Why are you
so troubled ? I not only know about your brother. I
killed him, I tell you.” I saw the flicker of a little
smile pass across her grave lips. “And as for my work
in Cairo, I am a prostitute, and must go back because
my clients will come looking for me this evening.”
She began to walk towards the window. “There
is a window here, is it not ? I can feel the morning
air.”
Marrot drew back to let her pass. Pelagueya,
with a shudder, also drew aside. The Wagh el Berka
prostitute stopped and also turned her sightless eyes.
“Why did you do that ? And why do you not
speak to me ?”
Pelagueya said: “I—I have seen you before.
Where was it ? . . . And I am sorry I was dis¬
courteous. I am tired.”
Huth Rizq shook her head. “You are unhappy.
Weary and uncertain. Now when I have smelt the
garden wind I must leave.”
Pelagueya gave a sign and Marrot pulled open
the window, and the air flowed in coldly, as though
liquid, till the room was flooded with its coming.
Suddenly Quaritch reached across the table, as he
THE LOST TRUMPET
277
had done earlier in the evening, snatched up the
Trumpet, got to his feet, and in three strides had
crossed the room to the side of Huth Rizq.
“Here, Huth. Sound this.”
I think there were three of us who made move¬
ments to stop him, and then refrained. It did not
matter. Huth Rizq raised her head, down-bent as it
had been in sightless scrutiny of the thing in her
hand. And I clenched my own hands, seeing her in
that attitude, remembering the attitude of the soap¬
stone Hathor excavated from the block-house ashes.
She smiled at Quaritch. But it seemed to me that
the unconscious, reckless mirth had vanished from
her eyes.
“What is it ?”
“A ram’s horn trumpet. Blow it.”
“I will try. But only for a moment. It will soon
be morning, and I must go.”
Then, as each and all of us in that room had done,
one after the other, she set the Trumpet to her lips.
CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH
‘Except the coming of that flash.’
Subchapter i
IDO not know how I may tell of the thing that
happened then, how gather in any coherent recital
the multitudes of whirling plot-items that blew to
being in that crowded little room. For each of us
later had a different tale, or no tale at all, or a denial
of anything extraordinary—except the coming of
that flash.
Of the coming of that flash none of us had any
doubt. One moment we stood in the electric-lighted
room, with the day striding towards us from the
horizon and the form of the Wagh el Berka prosti¬
tute outlined against that pale, hurrying approach.
The next there was a blinding dance of arrowed
lightnings, a crash that seemed to shake to its founda¬
tions the Turkish castle of Gault, a drifting onrush
of fire-smell, then darkness dead and complete . . .
And because there is no other for whom I can
vouch, this is my tale. In the moment of that flash
and roar I heard and saw the Volga. Very clearly
and distinctly it came to me in vision. Autumn on
the Volga and morning among the tamarisks and a
kingfisher sliding across the grey ripple of waters,
278
THE LOST TRUMPET 279
and Pelagueya, hair wind-blown, backgrounded with
that green and grey. . . . That, and a sudden loosen¬
ing and freeing of the blood in every vein of my
body. I was neither blinded nor stunned. Instead,
suddenly happy and impatient in a breath. I stood
still, impatiently, and then the darkness that had
succeeded the flash and roar suddenly passed and the
room was flooded with the sunshine of the morning.
Not a yard from me stood Pelagueya, her hands
at her eyes. I caught those hands and she blinked up
at me as one slowly returning to the world.
“Princess—you are unharmed ? Pelagueya—only
now I’ve thought—what nonsense to call you
Princess, what nonsense I’ve always talked to you!
Often and always, never saying the things I have
wanted to say and was meant to say. But now—We
are going to be married. To-day, if we can.”
“Anton ”
“And not for romance or remembrance or honour.
Because I love you and desire you and have envied
every lost rose petal that ever knew you. Married.
But not for Egypt ”
Her arms round my neck then. “I know. It
came to me in a flash just now—in that flash. And
we’re talking our life-secrets to everybody, and what
does it matter ? . . . Back to Russia, both of us. And
I don’t care though they set me to cleaning latrines or
fighting provocateurs or polishing Stalin’s top-
boots. The fun of it—to work and talk and fight
for daylight and sanity ! Anton, why haven’t we gone
before ?”
28o
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Because I have been a deserter, a fugitive from
life. But I am going to live again. Kazan Gymnasium
—Lunacharsky has talked of me, Gorki—We’ll
work at anything. Give : I who have never done
anything but take . . .”
We were Russians again, speaking in Russian,
our faces flushed, Abu Zabal forgotten. Pelagueya
laughed at me.
“You have never done anything but give. It is I
who have done the taking. But that’s over. Back
to Russia with not a piastre-piece we’re going,
Anton—and I’ll kiss the slimy streets of Odessa when
we land. The fool I’ve been ”
“Dear fool.”
“ Anton, what happened to that woman and the Lost
Trumpet ?”
Subchapter it
The shielding flame of excitement dropped from
about us. We turned to look at the room.
Our movement started others to life. Marrot,
nearest to us, not looking at us, but window-ward,
sprang towards that window.
“My God !”
We went forward and looked in silence. Huth
Rizq lay crumpled on the floor, face dead and calm
and content. There could be no doubt as to how she
had died. The breath of a great fire had smitten and
killed and stripped her. She lay in the window-fall
of sunshine. She had gone home with the morning.
THE LOST TRUMPET 281
... I knelt and put my hand upon her heart and
found no movement there, and had a sudden thought
and glanced round the room.
“The Lost Trumpet—where is the Trumpet ?”
It was nowhere near Huth Rizq. But the others
fell back and I saw midway the room a little heap of
powder and dust and charred metal. Marrot was
speaking in a strange, strained voice.
That flash of lightning must have fused the
thing utterly.”
“"Lightning ?”
“Of course. What else ? Lightning. Didn’t you
see it strike through the window the moment she
lifted the Trumpet to her lips ? . . . Murdered to
make an archeologists’ holiday. We killed her,
Huebsch and I, playing with those damned toys
on which I have wasted my life. But it’s the last.
I’ve finished with archeology. I’m going back to
America to do real work, to fight all the insane
cruelties of ignorance and folly that murder such
harmless folk as this. . . . God, why haven’t I gone
before ? Afraid of sneers and laughter, afraid of my
reputation. . . . Huebsch, I’m going. I’ll help you
clear the camp and the Institute’ll soon send you
another assistant ”
Some words like these poured from him. And
then we became aware of Huebsch. He stood beside
us and looked down at Huth Rizq, his face singu¬
larly clear and expressionless and unexcited. At
Marrot s words he smiled, gently, amusedly, no
longer weariedly.
282
THE LOST TRUMPET
“Well, well, there’ll be no need for an assistant.
This is my last venture as well, Marrot. I’m going
back.” 8 g
“What—to America ?”
“America ? No. Remember that little colony up
from the Dead Sea ? I’m going there, to my own
people. Always wanted to, I think. . . . Jerusalem.”
He turned away with dreaming eyes. “They can build
that everywhere, I suppose. But I’m going to help
the job in its original country. . . . What was that
poem. Miss Simonssen ?”
“Look at the morning,” I said. “Who ever saw
it so clear ?”
Something disturbed the dead woman at our feet
—the woman we were so strangely and yet uncal-
lously disregarding. “A moment, sir. She is mine
to look after.”
It was the boy. Flush and pallor alike had gone
from his face. He picked up the body of Huth Rizq
and laid it on a couch, and knelt by it. And suddenly
the grip of Pelagueya’s fingers tightened on my
wrist.
Aslaug Simonssen stood mid-way the room, look¬
ing at the prostitute and the poet. Such look it was
as I shall long remember—such look as once I would
have turned my eyes from, such look as a day before
would have shocked the soul of Aslaug Simonssen
into self-horror and disgust. So for the barest
moment she stood and then was at the side of
Quaritch.
“Esdras !”
THE LOST TRUMPET 283
He looked up at her remotely, and smiled. Her
tongue stumbled among unaccustomed sincerities.
“Esdras, I want you to ! I’m not afraid of the
bargain. Always I’ve lied to myself. . . . This
woman said you were to go back to your work in
the streets of Cairo, but I—oh, you cannot leave me
either !”
He stood up then. “Aslaug !”
They were quite unconscious of us. The boy
held her and smiled down into her eyes. “I’ve
searched so far for reality, but I think I’ve heard it
this morning ”
“Listen !” I said.
It was only the sigh of the morning wind. But
no such wind comes to any city but Cairo and the
little towns that squat at her feet on the desert hem.
It grew and grew, coming from the sands—as a
sleepy boy, roused in some desert lair, uplifting a
moment a sounding Trumpet above the sunrise
roofs of Abu Zabal. Once, twice, thrice, he blew.
Then the wind had passed on to Cairo and day had
come upon Egypt.
EPILUDE: UNENDING MORNING
I COULD not sleep these last two hours. It was
after midnight when I awoke, finding myself
very sharply awake, trailing no little mists out of
dreams, which is unusual with me. I lay long then
in the darkness, seeing the moonlight deep in the
great embrasures of the window, for these walls
have the thickness of castle walls. My left arm was
cramped and for a little I lay and rubbed it to bring
back the blood. But I moved it gently because of
the sleeper beside me. And then, on that instant, I
heard a camel’s bell on the road to Cairo.
It was a sound that came through the waning
moonlight, unloosing such trooping host of
memories as set my mind quivering as one quivers to
the sound of marching men. So I knew then that
for me to-night there was no possibility of more
sleep, albeit, as I came from the bed, I found myself
still drowsy. Only here, in this room next door,
did that drowsiness pass. For I found myself at the
window, looking out at the sheen and play of moon-
mist, listening. At the bend of the road I would
hear it again.
And presently so I did—that faint, austere tinkle
of the journeying caravan. If Gault could hear it
now from his grave in the lost mountains of Mesheen !
Below the window I could smell the last of the
284
%
THE LOST TRUMPET 285
roses. A faint, shy phantasma of a wind moved the
green cloaks of the garden plants ; in the moonlight
I saw the cypress grove rise and pause, as though
startled, looking desertward, it may be, on that last
road its owner took. Gault—who also perhaps had
heard the Lost Trumpet.
I have sat here at my desk since then, waiting for
the morning, re-reading scraps of the record I have
made in my diary-English, pausing in indecision
over the telling here and there. Were indeed things
so and thus ? The Lost Trumpet—a Jewish relic
that a flash of lightning destroyed, or ?
Huth Rizq—how, after all, might anything but the
most fantastic dreaming associate a peasant prostitute
with the Hathor of Love, sounding a lost clarion-call
in a house in the desert ?
Huebsch, Marrot, Quaritch, Aslaug, Pelagueya and
myself—surely it was only the horror and startle-
ment of the accident that swept us all to actions and
decisions we had long premeditated ? The camp
below this house lies bare and deserted now and
those others have scattered on their missions and
lives as that morning revealed them. And to-day
Pelagueya and I leave for Russia—we, the aristos,
who know that our lives will lack meaning and
sweetness till the day of our deaths if we return not
and share in that dream against which we struggled
and fought, believing it a nightmare . . .
Very near to morning now. In a moment I shall
hear Pelagueya awake and go to her—she, who has
been so miraculously, intimately mine that I have
286 THE LOST TRUMPET
surely known the beating of her heart in my own body
—and she will put her arms on my shoulders, half-
asleep, yet excitement-quivering, and cry: “Oh,
Anton ! To-day !” And all my dreaming life in this
most ancient of lands will cease and pass and I be
gone : into life and reality.
But I know that the Lost Trumpet was blown. I
believe it lies unblown in every troubled human
heart. I believe that that morning we heard it there
rose in each of us the golden ghosts of ancient times
of whom Adrian talked, who lie chained and prisoners,
but undying and unslayable, simple and splendid,
kindly and gracious, behind the walls of pride and
race and creed.
THE END
J. LESLIE MITCHELL
AN APPRECIATION*
by
John Lindsey
q I came across the work of Leslie Mitchell entirely by accident and I
was struck immediately by its authenticity and realness.
His first novel. Stained Radiance”, was avowedly destructive An
orgy of destruction ran through the whole book. His characters des¬
troyed one another mercilessly-they destroyed God, society, sex.
And Leslie Mitchell let them do it. They seemed to horrify him as
perhaps all mankind had horrified him by its unimaginative lusts and
frightful, unthinking cruelties, and its appalling hypocrisy.
The book wept and raged with pain so that one felt that here was a
man who had indeed been down into the pit, who had seen all the
baseness of which man is capable, the poverty, degradation, the wound¬
ing laughter : man crucifying man. It was the cry of the over-sensitive
artist against the wrongs of the world.
Time and again I wanted to put the book down. I felt that I could
not go on : that the pain it engendered in me was too intense too
excruciating to be borne. But I did not put it down. I was forced to
continue : even, as it seemed, against my will; because here was some-
thing real, that compelled my attention.
And somehow, out of all the pain and suffering in the book there ^
emerged another thing for which I could find no name for the moment.
It was too small, too flickering a light for hope
Stained Radiance had many faults. It was over-written. It was ^
restless, allowing the reader no respite; set at too high an emotional
pitch, so that one thought, “This cannot go on” ; but it did go on
and something else happened ! A new idea or thought had to be brought
in, thrown before the reader for consideration, snatched away only
that another might take its place—another thing that the author was
forced to say 
q But in his second novel, “The Thirteenth Disciple”, he has definitely^
found ^at something that flickered in “Stained Radiance”. His new
* Reprinted from Tie Twentieth Century.
characters have found something too : they are in the round, instead of,
as in the first book, appearing as flat drawings. The pain is still there,
but it is not so intense. The rage is still there, only now it is suffused
with pity. The wild anger has gone. There is still anger, but this time
Mr. Mitchell has not set out to destroy only. He wants to construct,
and, in a large measure, he succeeds.
In “Stained Radiance” he is horrified by sex, it has got muddied like
everything else. He hates “strange and disgusting changes in her body”.
In “The Thirteenth Disciple” he is no longer horrified, except in so far
as people make sex cheap and pornographic by clothing it with rose¬
buds and soft-coloured lights.
The form of “The Thirteenth Disciple” is different: a friend writing
the biography of a friend, having had access to certain documents, but,
inevitably, restricted in his knowledge of that friend’s mentality and
emotions. I have read the book through carefully twice. I cannot find
that in any single instance has the author stepped beyond those things
of which he was allowed to know.
Then again, the book is filled with an amazing “sense of place”. To
confine oneself to those chapters dealing with Leekan Valley, one is
struck by the author’s ability to recreate not only the actual scenery of
the place, but the implied scenery : the undercurrent of feeling and
sensitiveness which this bleak country engenders.
The book is sub-titled “Portrait and Saga of Malcom Maudslay in
his Adventure through the Dark Corridor.” And I suppose that the word
Tragedy would be used to describe it. But it is more than Tragedy in
the sense that the book has fulfilment, that Maudslay himself is fulfilled.
Out of the “agony in stony places” something new is bom, and the
whole book is illuminated in the light of this fulfilment.
In his third book, “The Calends of Cairo”, a story-cycle, he has deserted
—only for a holiday, I think—the urgencies of the Western world.
Here is the Modem East: the whole book saturated in a strange, wild
spirit—a spirit of unrest and yet tranquillity in the midst of that unrest;
full of colour and a noble searching after meaning.
On these three books alone it seems to me that Leslie Mitchell has
justified his inclusion among the very few people—men or women—
writing to-day whose work we cannot spare. The work is individual:
perhaps almost annoyingly so. It demands a certain mental adjustment
on the part of the reader. But, granted that adjustment, it is important
work, indicating a certain line of thought that is too seldom treated of:
a certain freedom from preconceived notions of what is right and wrong. And the-
explorer along that line of thought is, I am sure, a writer who will have
an influence, and that a very definite one, on the thought and literature
of the twentieth century.
